









Printed for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS.
Vol. IV.
PART 1.
(February 1838 to March 1849. )
Printed by order of the Vajiranana National Library.
BANGKOK
<
1 1) 1 a.




Fort William 14th March 1838.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire,
Secretary to Government of India
Secret and Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward you, for the infor-
mation of the Honorable the President in Council,
copy of a translation of a letter to my address from
the Ministers at the Court of Siam. The portion of
it relating to Burmese affairs is deserving of notice in
as much as it proves the Siamese Court to be anxious-
ly watching the state of our relations with the Court
of Ava, and may perhaps be construed into a hint that
they would not object to join us, should we eventually
be obliged to have recourse to hostilities.
I have &ca.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commr. in the Tenasserim Provinces.
Maul mein
the 23rd February 1838


Translation of a letter from the Ministers of Siam
to the Woon Gyee of Moulmain.
That in the year of Hare last Khoonsee Kheet
Pretcha, Khoon In Punya, Paya Phon mo Chak, Mone
Tchawink Tcholathan, Moone Thodsenawee Tchann,
conveyed a letter and also went to visit their relations
in the Country of Maulmein. The Woongye was kind
enough in giving provisions and allowing them to
go about visiting and purchasing stones for the King
as they liked without any hindrance and when they took
leave the Woongye gave them a letter to bring to Siam,
everv part of the contents of which letter have been
understood. Thanks to the Woongye for having acted
in the way of friendship in aiding and beholding the
people of Siam and Raman.
That Saming Thamoo Chack, Saining Pholyothas,
Saming Phollasit, Mone Tchamnih Tchalathan being
Talaeng officers and followers 38 men are desirous and
ask permission to go to visit relations in the country
of Maulmein —seeing that the rainy season is past
and dry season is come on —Khoon weesoot same
officer and followers, 10 men, ask permission to go to
purchase articles in the country of Maulmein. The
total number of people going out this time including
officers and followers are 48 men, Siamese and Taliens,
to visit relations and to purchase goods in the country
of Maulmein. Let the Woongye behold them in the
way of friendship and allow these people to go about
visiting relations and purchasing goods as they like
and to return to the kingdom of Siam freely.
Hunter the Lord of the Weapons received a letter
from the Woongye, the ruler of the Country of Maul-
mein, stating a wish to send merchants of the country
of Maulmein to go and trade in the kingdom of Siam
Fort William 14th March 1838.


and merchants in Siam to go and trade in the country
of Maulmein, and that the ruler of Maulmein would
see and take care of them, the contents of which
have been explained to us. But perceiving that
should the merchants go by land trading the cost
of hire of Coolies and elephants would come to more
than it would by sea, and the ruler of Maulmein
also wishing to send people to purchase elephants,
bullocks, buffaloes in the country of Kanbooree and
in the country subject to Kanbooree, but having
learnt that the merchants of Kanbooree are afraid to
sell them, and that cattle of all kinds in Maulmein
having died to a great number—being much in want of
cattle to cultivate paddy fields and wish order to be
given to the merchants of the country of Kanbooree,
and country subject to Kanbooree to sell elephantsf
bullocks buffaloes to the merchants of the country o
Maulmein freely, it will benefit the merchants of both
countries. All this has been made known to us.
Cattle of all kinds being animals tised amongst
people here we will not interfere with them in selling
and purchasing the same for use in this country, but
to take away to outer countries like other merchan-
dize, we Siamese believe it to be a great sin, being
animals having lives we would not sell them to be
taken to other countries. The Rajah of Kanbooree
gives information that the cattle in the country of
Kanbooree this year fell sick and died. The Woongye
wishes to allow merchants to go and come trading.
On both sides this is much approved of but the route
being difficult for merchants to carry merchandize
which prevents them from going to the country of
Maulmein, but by sea being easier, the merchants of
the kingdom of Siam prepare boats and load with rice,
salt, oil and sugar being the principal cargo and ex-
port the same to the countries of Singapore and
Penang, every season without ceasing. The King of
the Kingdom of Siam never prevented or interfered
in any way. The English merchants also bring va


rious kinds of articles to the Kingdom of Siam barter-
ing, selling and buying with the merchants of the
Kingdom of Siam for the benefit of both countries in
a friendly manner.
That on the 12th Month the Rajah of Quedah gave
information that the Burmese wanted to break the
friendship and to make war with the English but this
news is not quite certain. On hearing this the Faya
of the Saiyoke wrote a letter and sent it by Loang
Thookarat to Tavoy, being the nearest country to
ascertain the news. Macfarquhar, the ruler of the
country of Tavoy, sent 8 papers printed in the Burmese
character and also a letter to the Kingdom of Siam
which having been translated we learn the matters of
Ava in different lights; but in one place it states that
Woongye Moung Nya, the former ruler of the coun-
try of Rangoon, the King of Ava has ordered to the
Country of Toungoo for the purpose of collecting
men from Toungoo and Kingsaa when required in
War. The country of Rangoon formerly was a great
country but now the King of Ava has made it a small
country. About the Woongye Moung Nya contem-
plating to prevent the Siamese from coming and going
trading with Maulmein we cannot comprehend his
right to do so, because we do not know how the boun-
daries are divided between the English and the Bur-
mese and where could the Burmese act * the route to
prevent Siamese going and coming to Maulmein. The
Burmese and Siamese are enemies of a long duration
and if the people of Siam who frequent the country of
Maulmein shall be seized by the Burmese we should
lose our honour. About this matter let the ruler of
Maulmein let us know. Should the Burmese come to
stop the roads towards the English boundaries and
station men to prevent our passing we would not
care. We will prepare and send out troops and fight
and annihilate them and never allow them a post.
Macfarquhar, the ruler of the country of Tavoy,


sends a letter to Mr. Hunter saying the English men
are very fond of eating Siamese Mangoes and that
Siamese Mangoes are not to be had in the country of
Maulmein and in the country of Tavoy and that the
ruler of Tavoy would be glad to get some trees to
plant on the country of Tavoy, and we have conse-
quently sent by Paya Singha Chukaphat Raman 30
young trees. Considering it as a mark of friend-
ship also we send to the Woongye 30 Mangoe
Trees.
Letter dated Monday the 2d Month and 6 days
of the Waxing of the Moon in the year of Fowl, an-
swering to the 4th December 1837.
( True translation)
(Signed) D. Smith.


India Secret
Consultations,
Vol. 10.
No. 24.
Fort William 18th July 1838.
To the Secretary to the Government of India
Sec. and Pol, Department,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward you for the informa-
tion of the Honble. the Deputy Governor of Bengal
copies of letters either received fiom or addressed by
me to the Chiefs of some of the neighbouring states
during the last two months.
******
4>. Number 9is a letter addressed to me by the
head man of a caravan of Chinese traders, who had
arrived at Zirnmay with the intention of coming on
lie re. Their not having done so is ascribed in this
letter to their not having been met by a messenger
irom hence as had been promised them by Captain
McLeod. No doubt this circumstance may have in
some measure influenced them, but the reports of our
iiative traders concur in stating that the authorities
at Zirnmay refused to allow them to come on to this
place, though from what cause remains unknown. I
fear we shall not succeed in obtaining an unmolested
passage to Maulmain for these people without the
assistance of the Court of Bangkok. The messenger
to whom the Chinese letter alludes was duly sent to
meet them, but unfortunately he never reached them ;
neither has he ever been heard of since his departure.
It is supposed he has been either drowned or carried
off by wild beasts.
5, Numbers 10 and 11 were addressed by me to
the Court of Siam on the occasion of the return of the
people whom they annually send here : 1 deemed it
advisable to take advantage of my correspondence with
this Court to represent the case of the unfortunate lady


Mrs Briesley, who is supposed to be in the hands of
the petty Rajahs on the Gulph of Siam. In my last
letter also I stated that I will send a party with a letter
to Bangkok after the rains which I was induced to do
knowing the anxiety which exists at that Ccurt to
learn particulars regarding our relations with the
Court of Ava.
Should His Honor be pleased to approve the teno.i
of my replies to the several communications above no-
ticed and particularly my promises to send an officer
to the different quarters enumerated, I have the honor
to suggest the following Sketch of a journey to be un-
dertaken by an English Officer which would prove
beneficial in many respects.
To proceed from hence as soon as practicable af-
ter the close of the rains, to the capital of Siam on the
plea of imparting the most correct information rela-
tive to the affairs of Ava and of soliciting the inter-
ference of the Court towards a free and unmolested
passage to Maulmain for the Chinese caravan through
their dependent Shan States. Should instructions to
that effect be obtained and the requisite permission to
be himself the bearer of it to the Chiefs of those States,
that he should proceed up the Menam River to Labon
and Zimmay and there make the necessary arrange-
ments for the future journeys of the Chinese and trans-
act any business that may have arisen in those places
consequent on our present intimate intercourse with
them.
###♦**
I have &ca.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Maulmain
The 19th June 1838.


No. 10.
Copy
Letter from the Commissioner of the Tenasserim
Provinces to the Ministers of Siam.
I have received and thoroughly understood the
letter you have sent me by the hands of Saining
Thanoochak, Saming Pholyotha, Saming Phollasit,
Moone Tchamnch Jolathan. I have given orders
that they be lodged and fed and allowed to go where
they like and see and hear every thing that takes
place in Maulmain. The Siam Ministers are desirous
of learning all that has taken place between the
English and the Burmese and for this purpose I have
written a long English letter to Mr. Hunter and re-
quested him to make known the contents of the same
to you. Whenever Saming Thanoo Chak &ca. send
any of their followers back to Bangkok I shall write
in the same way to Mr. Hunter and then the Siam
Ministers will be kept constantly informed about
the Burmese. The object of addressing this letter to
the Siam Ministers by the first of Saming Thanoo
Chak’s followers who return to Bangkok who are
accompanied by 5 people from Maulmain Vizt.
Mounggya, Nga P yoe, Nga Waing, Nga Loung, Nga
Moung, is to make known to the Siam Ministers that
information has been obtained that two English
Female subjects are now in confinement at Sonkra and
made the slaves of the Chief of that place. These
women were wrecked on the coast near Poongah and
the husband of one of them was an Englishman named
Bresley, who commanded the vessel, and who was
murdered by his crew, while the women were carried
into the interior. Once before, many years ago, the
Siam Ministers gave an order to the Rajah of Sonkra
to deliver up these women, but he did not obey it,
Fort William 18th July 1838.


and said what is false, that he knew nothing of them
and that they were not at Sonkra. The justice and
humanity of the Siam Ministers is known every where
and they will be very angry to hear that two English
subjects are retained as slaves in the country of Siam
and that their orders to send them back to their own
country have been disobeyed. But I beg the Siam
Ministers not to believe what the Rajah of Sonkra
may say but to obtain the great King’s orders to the
Rajah of Sonkra to deliver them up and send some
one of rank and of power to cause the order to be
obeyed, because to keep two English women in slavery
is contrary to the great friendship between the coun-
tries, and the Rajah of Sonkra ought not to do such a
thing. If the Siam Ministers cause the early release
of these two unfortunate women then the great
English Ruler of India who has heard of these two
women being at Sonkra will be very much rejoiced.
Dated 27th February 1838.


No. 11.
Copy.
Letter from the Commissioner of the Tenasserim
Provinces to the Ministers of Siam,
The Officers Saming Thanoo Chak, Saming
Pholyotha, Saming Phollasit, Moonee Tchamnih,
Jolathan, Khoon Wesootsanee, who brought me
your letter dated 6th December 1837, have reported
to me their intention of returning to Bangkok. They
have been treated with the usual civility and attention
and have been allowed to go about wherever they
like, according to the friendship between the coun-
tries. They will make known to you all that they
have heard about Burmese affairs and that because
the English are uncertain whether the King of Ava
desires to break the friendship between the countries
the Governor General of India has ordered some
troops to be sent to Moulmein which are daily
expected. When the English feel satisfied that the
King of Ava desires to continue the friendship be-
tween the countries, then these additional troops will
be withdrawn. The English do not desire to go to
war but if the new King of Ava breaks all the
treaties entered into with the former King then it
will be his fault, not that of the English, if war takes
place. The Ministers of Siam are very wise men who
know that trade always benefits countries. The Chin-
ese traders from Table and Moula are very desirous of
visiting Maulmain but they say that the authorities
at Zimmay put obstacles in the way to prevent them.
If the Ministers will send orders to Zimmay, these
impediments will be removed, and both the English
and the Chinese will be very thankful. In a letter
which I sent by the hands of Nga Shwa-gya dated
Port William 18th July 1838.


27th February 1838 I brought to the notice of the
Ministers the fact of two women English subjects,
who are kept in confinement and slavery at Sonkra.
I hope the Ministers will have caused strict enquiries
to be made by sending some person of rank and
authority to Sonkra to ascertain if what I write be
true and to release two unfortunate women kept in
confinement by one of their own officers in defiance of
the Ministers’ orders, who are known to be very desirous
of continuing unbroken the friendship between the
two great countries. When the rains are over I will
send a few men with a letter to the Ministers to
inform them of the state of affairs in order that they
may receive the earliest intelligence and by these men
1 will send some trees and seeds of English flowers as
the present is not a good time to send them. I am
very thankful for the trees and seeds which the
Ministers sent me. I send an English letter to Mr.
Hunter, Lord of the Weapons, who will explain to the
Ministers all that I have said to him.
Dated 23rd April 1838.


Fort William 28th November 1838.
To the Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
******
4. , . . You will make it your particular
study to cultivate friendly relations with the Siamese
and other bordering nations and tribes and for this
purpose it may be expedient to give a more important
character to the missions contemplated by you, of an
officer to Bangkok and other places. It seems to His
Honor in Council expedient that Dr. Richardson, your
assistant, who is well acquainted with the character of
those people should be employed on this mission, and
that he should be the bearer of a letter from myself to
the Phraklang and Ministers of Siam declaring the ob-
ject of the Mission to be to cultivate existing relations
of friendship and communicate certain intelligence, and
announcing Dr. Richardson to be an officer in the
confidence of Government. You are hereby authoriz-
ed to supply yourself with any articles of European
manufacture of the value of about 2,000 Rs. you may
think appropriate as presents, sending in the bills to
this department to be charged in the Durbar accounts
and these presents being conveyed with you to Mou 1-
main may be sent with the letter under Dr. Richard-
son’s charge to be presented on the part of the
Government to the King of Siam. It must be Dr.
Richardson’s principal object to secure the good will
of the Government and officers of Siam so that the
resources of that country in supplies, in carriage cat-
tle and elephants may be available to you in case of
the necessity arising of moving the force in your
quarter. In like manner, if Dr. Richardson should
obtain the permission of the Government of Siam to
make the tour prepared* among the North Eastern


tribes, their conciliation with a view to obtaining
similar facilities must be his principal object.
#**#*#
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to the Government
of India.
Fort William
23d Novr. 1838.


Letter from H. T. Prinsep Esquire, Secretary to
the Supreme Government of India, to the Praklang
and Ministers of the Court of Siam.
I have received the orders of the Great Ruler of
India to write you this letter, and to say that he is
very desirous of conveying to the Golden Majesty of
Siam the expression of his thanks for the kindness and
attention which have been invariably shown by His
Majesty’s orders to all British subjects of Maulmain who
have proceeded into the countries under His Majesty’s
happy rule for purposes of trade. For this purpose
the great Ruler of India has directed Mr Richardson,
one of the assistants to the Commissioner of Moulmain,
to proceed to Baugkok and convey this letter to the
Ministers. Mr Richardson is already well known by
name to you, as he has on several occasions visited
the states of Zimmay, Labaung and Layang for the
purpose of cementing the good understanding which
exists between the Chiefs of those places and the Eng-
lish authorities in Moulmain.
Mr Richardson is well acquainted with all matters
connected with the Burmese, and will inform you how
matters stand at present with the Court of Ava. Mr
Richardson is also well acquainted with the sentiments
of the Great Ruler of India on this subject, and as it
may be agreeable to the Ministers to be kept constant-
ly informed of everything that may occur, Mr. Richard-
son has been directed to remain at Bangkok, if the
Ministers desire it; otherwise to return to Moulmain.
While conveying to you, to be laid before the
King, the expression of th*» sentiments of great and
sincere friendship of the Great Ruler of India, I take
the opportunity of expressing my respect and admira-
tion of the Ministers of Siam, whose conduct has rais


ed the renown of the Siamese nation throughout all
countries.
I remain &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to the Government of India.
Fort William
23d Novr. 1838.


Fort William the 8th May 1839.
E. A. Blundell Esqr.
(Demi-Official.)
My dear Mr. Prinsep,
******
I take the opportunity of forwarding to you a
few Extracts from a letter I have received within
these few days from Richardson at Bangkok. As he
has not sent in any official report of his proceedings
1 have preferred sending you these extracts in a demi-
official form to making them the foundation of an
official letter from myself. He appears to have
managed his affairs with prudence and discretion, hut
has evidently imbibed the impression that the Court
of Siam distrusts our power. If his Majesty of Siam
has really compared Moulmein to his own frontier
town of “ Sonhia ” I trust he will not carry the com-
parison still further in his Royal mind, for Sonhia has
long since fallen to the Malays.
There does not appear to be any thing in Dr.
Richardson’s letter calling fcr immediate instruction s
and I shall not forward another dispatch to him till I
hear from you whether Government desire that any
orders should be transmitted to him.
Yours very truly,
(Signed) E. A. Blundell.
Maulmein,
10th April 1839.


We reached Hank ole 9th February about 4 o’clock
in the morning. I found a small house had been erect-
ed for mo just in the front of the British Factory, the
back part of the floor of which rested [against] the
wall of the enclosure and a ladder to go down into the
compound. The front of the house opens a few
feet from the river. Beneditto, the head of the
Portuguese and native Christians here, Pedadie the
Port Captain and Pascal an officer in His Majesty’s
Artillery (all gentlemen of Portuguese descent) were
waiting to receive me. Mr. Hunter also came down
to the boat a few minutes after I arrived. Two rooms
were also prepared for me in a brick house within the
compound. Mr. Hunter’s house had just been pulled
down. The Goung Keluk had heard from the Telains
that the temporary house had been built of old materials
used at the funeral of the King’s mother. As I con-
sequently refused to enter it, the walls were pulled
down and new mats put up by the Pra Klang’s orders.
In the morning after my arrival the Pra Klang sent
for Mr. Hunter to his house from whence he sent me
a note to say the Pra Klang wanted to see copies of the
letters if I had no objection. As I saw none, I sent
them, and Mr. Hunter on his return said the Pra Klang
was much pleased with them and w r ould be glad to see
me in the afternoon. Just as boats were reported ready
and as I was about to start, a message w r as brought
from the King that though the letters were not addres-
sed to him, such was his friendship for the English
that he would receive them as if they had been so.
An officer of some rank in one of the stare boats
gilded and having a platform in the middle and high
cloth such as used by the Royal family, accompanied
the messenger, with a proper tray and gold cloth for the
letters. I placed both the letters in the tray, and
carrying it down to the boat my r self covered with the
Fort William the Bth May 1839.


red Chatta acknowledging the favor awarded by the?
King, gave them over to the messenger, who placed
them in the centre of the boat and covered [them] with
the chatta, and, escorted by three or [four] other
boats, bore them off to the Palace. My visit to the
Pra Klang was put off till the evening when my recep-
tion was cordial and friendly. 1 explained the reason
of my visit, and at his request gave him a short ac-
count of our misunderstanding with the Barmans.
As the impression was removed that I had come to
demand the Talains, I have no doubt they were
delighted with my communications. The King how-
ever still thinks I have a great deal of gold for distribu-
tion among the Talains. On the 11th I visited the
Pra Klang again and after waiting in vain for some
proffer of assistance, I requested him to send orders
to the Laos Chiefs not to interfere with the cattle
traders. I asked also for an order to effect the free
trade in cattle and elephants to be sent to the Chief
of Chumpon and other officers on the South West
frontier, and that I may be furnished with a copy
for transmission to De Castro who had been waiting
upwards of a month at Chumpon to purchase cattle
which the Chief refused to sell without orders
from the Court. I demanded the Thugs who are at
Kanburi and that an order might be furnished me to
the Laos Chiefs to permit the Chinese Caravan to
proceed to Maulmain without let or hindrance, of
which and the order for the sale I wished myself
to be the bearer to Zimmay and other places in Laos,
and that if the Siamese Government had any wish
that I should do so I would return here, as in case-
of a rupture with the Burmese, which might be ex-
pected, the Governor General thought it would be well
to have some one here to keep this Court aware of the
differences with the Burmese, by keeping messengers
going between this and Maulmain, instead of trusting
to the absurd and exaggerated reports of petty trad-
ers and ignorant people. To the last part of what 1
said, he answered first to my surprize—said at once


I may go any way I pleased, that he would furnish
•me with all I wanted and as to my returning here,
that it would not be friendly to tell me not to come
■and would not be right to tell me to do so. In that
also I might do as I pleased, intimating pretty plainly
that they did not want me. On the other subject he
must consult Ohow Khoon, the Chief Minister. He told
me that I was to have an audience of the King on
the 17th. I repeatedly called on him and sent the
Port Captain Pedadie and Beneditto to him in the
interim to hurry on the orders and letters about the
cattle, but it is impossible to get any thing done here
without the most provoking and unnecessary delays.
1 need not give you any details of those meetings and
messages. I hoped that after my audience we should
progress more rapidly. Suffice it to say, that I in-
terred from all that passed that we shall obtain a
conditional order for the export of cattle, that the
Thugs would be given up and Chinese allowed the
passage to Moulmain. On the 17th, as had been
■arranged, 1 had my audience. It was long [and]
friendly, and I was said to be highly honored by
the unusual style in which I was received. At 10
■o’clock, the King’s boats having arrived, accompanied
by Mr. Hunter, Captain Brown of the ship W. T.
Hamilton, Messrs. Smith and Hayes of Mr. Hunter’s
house and an officer of Captain Brown’s ship, we
started and were met by some Portuguese officers in
the Siamese service at the landing place. Myself and
Mr. Hunter had each a sort of swinging convey-
ance like a hammock, and horses were furnished for
the other gentlemen ; a small detachment of cavalry
and elephants, and 2000 foot soldiers were drawn out
in line on the occasion, through which, after entering
a gate (which we did as usual by circuitous route), when
we got off the conveyance, we passed to the Praklang’s
Hall of Justice. Outside the Palace at this place we
waited 45 minutes, with some Siamese officers till the
Princes had all arrived, when we proceeded to the


Royal presence. An immense crowd of people were
collected who were quiet and orderly throughout.
Outside the gilt door which was shut, and where we
waited just long enough to have it opened, the people
who accompanied us prostrated themslves as often as
they had time. When the door was opened we walked
in and seated ourselves behind the presents which had
been sent a day or two previous, on a carpet which
covered the floor. The King called us to come nearer
him and we went before the presents and sat down
again, making three salaams to His Majesty. The
interpreter had been taken ill just before we entered
the Hall, and Mr. Hunter, whom they look [upon] as
a Siamese officer, was obliged to officiate. The usua
questions were put and answered at His Majesty s
request. I explained the terms on which we [were]
at present with the Court of Ava. At the close of the
Audience the King said if I had any thing to say on
business, Chow Khun Bodin and the Praklang would
attend to me and so strong was his friendship for the
English that any wish of the Governor General should
be considered the same as if the wishes were his own.
The audience lasted about 1 hour and 40 minutes.
The questions were put in the usual round about
way. The King spoke to Phia Pipat, the second
Praklang, and he to Radsithi, who again communi-
cated with Mr, Hunter and he with me. The titles
were repeated before sufficient answer and I could
understand that they were modified a little to meet the
Royal ear, though I believe no change was made in the
meaning of what was said. The Hall is about 100 feet
by 60, and except a small space in the centre, was,
crowded with the officers of the Government in their
robes of state. The King was seated in his highest
gold or gilt throne, raised about 15 feet above us. The
lower stones on which he has usually received missions
from the neighbouring states had been removed. In
his personal appearance His Majesty is exceedingly
stout and is said by every one to be the most intel-


ligent and sensible man in the Kingdom, all the busi-
ness of which he himself attends to. He often surpri-
ses the Government officers with his knowledge of
transactions it was not supposed necessary to acquaint
him with. After the curtain of heavy cloth of gold
which crosses the hall before the throne was down
Coontsist, the Pra Klang, who speaks English intelli-
gibly and whom I had often seen, came over to us and
introduced me [to"j the Chow Khun Bodin, who said he
would be happy to see me at his house. This Chief, who
is the First Minister, sat on the King’s right in the
Hall and the Pra Klang on the left, the Princes of the
Blood before them near the foot of the throne. Not
one of the numerous assembly till after the curtain was
down ventured to raise his head from close to the
ground, where their grovelling position on their elbows
and knees placed it. After the audience —we went the
uaual round of the boats (some of which were very
splendid and costly) and white elephant, which is a good
deal like the one at Ava, except that this one from
vice has broken his tusks almost off. From the
elephant shed which is in the bank of the river we re-
turned home a little past two; from that day I have been
using my endeavours to expedite the preparation of the
letters and orders. I have called on Kroma Mung Rack,
the head of the Princes, the Chow Khun Bodin the
Prime Minister, and Chu Ta, the King’s brother and
second legitimate son of the late king (you know the
present King is the son of an inferior wife, his elder
brother is in the Priesthood) and have been well
received by them all. As I hope in a short time either
to send or bring ( depending on my return here ) my
journal, in which the conversations at each visit to the
different Chiefs is detailed, it may not be necessary
further to draw out this letter which I hope in a day
or two to dispatch, as until 1 have seen the letters and
orders to the different Chiefs T cannot, of course, with
any approach to certainty say what will be the terms on
which the trade will re-open.


March sth. After repeated promises, on which I
perhaps too credulously relied, that I should have the
letters to-day, I have been again disappointed and
though I have detained your messengers thus long,
very much against my inclination, knowing that it
was impossible to judge with any certainty from their
conversation what they were likely to do and wishing
to see the letters and orders that I might give you
positive information as [to] the terms on which the
cattle trade would be re-opened, as should the prospect
be of obtaining an insufficient supply, early measures
might be necessary to secure a supply from other
quarters, I have determined to send off the messen-
gers at once, as it may still be some days before I
receive them (they have already to-day been detained
here ten days). On the 26th ultimo 1 sent to the
Pra Klang to say that I wished to see him ; he put me
off till the 28th, when I saw him and gave a more
detailed account of the circumstances under which
the people's cattle had been seized, and pressed him
to get the letters and orders finished, as I was anxious
to start before the season for doing any thing was over,
and more particularly I wished to dispatch the messen-
ger who had come from you. I could get no definite
answer and was obliged to be content with the assur-
ance that all possible dispatch should be made. On the
Ist March an express arrived from Songora, informing
the Ministers that the Malays were within a few miles
of that place with 3000 men (the Patani people had
joined the other insurgents), that the Rajah of Li gore
was still quietly remaining at Ligore and begging that
immediate assistance might be sent to Songora. All
was instant bustle to complete the equipment of 7000
men under Pya Sipuput, the Praklang’s brother, who
had been ordered 10 months ago to reinforce the Raja
of Ligore, and such is the uncertainty of all the move-
ments of this court that the equipment of this force
has been two or three times given up and lesumed
again. Their present active preparations have put a


stop to all other business, the finishing of my papers
amongst others. On the 2d I again sent to [the] Pra
Klang to say I wished to see him. He excused him-
self as his time was fully occupied in preparing the
troops for service, but promised that in three days
I should have all the documents, and as the force
was about that time to sail he would be at liberty to
attend to me. On the 4th I sent Pedadie, the Port
Captain, again to request a meeting. A civil message
was sent excusing himself on account of pressure of
business from seeing me, but promising that I should
have the letters to-day and stating that the answer to
Mr. Prinsep was finished. About 4 o’clock however a
message was again brought from the Pra-klang beg-
ging for two days more. As there is not the least
certainty that I shall then receive the letter, I have
'determined that rather than you should be longer
•detained without information, to dispatch the mes-
senger at once, and 1 hope about the end of this
month, say the 26th or 28th, to have an opportunity
of forwarding letters from Yahine, which may reach
you ten days after the receipt of this; this is however
more a speculation, as in this kingdom it is impos-
sible to calculate on [ any ] one’s movements with any
certainty. I have nothing more definite to say than
what I have stated in the first page of this letter
viz; that the Praklang has promised that the cattle or
the money shall be returned to the people who had
bought them—the cattle if possible; that the trade
shall be re-opened under some restrictions and limits
of which I am not yet made acquainted; and that I
shall have a copy of and be the bearer of the orders on
this point. Orders are to be given that the Chinese
Caravans shall not be impeded in their way to Maul-
main. It is at present left to myself whether I return
here or not; a half promise has been given that
the Thugs shall be sent back to Tavoy, and the
orders to the Chief of Chumpon, under what restric-
tions I do not know, are said to have been sent with


a letter to yourself and one to De Castro, which I gave
to be forwarded with them. The most hearty assu-
rances of friendship have been given by the King and
every member of Government I have visited. They
are by no means certain that we shall beat the Bur-
mese should war be declared ; though of course they
have formed a somewhat more Just opinion of our
power than they had before the late war. The King
with all his sagacity has expressed doubt on the
subject; in particular, he is by no means satisfied we
are safe at Maulmain, and compares our situation
with that of the Siamese at Singora. Chow Khun Bo-
din expressed his doubts to Mr. Hunter (when buying
some sticklac from him). He said, Ava is a large king-
dom and they have a great many good fighting men, we
had better let them alone. From all that I have
heard there are certainly some doubts entertained
here of the issue of the approaching contest, though I
cannot believe that they are so ill informed as to
suppose vve shall not ultimately be successful, but the
length of time that has elapsed has very much in-
creased their doubts as to the event.
In conclusion I am sorry to say that I slightly
suspect the cordiality of this people towards us ; their
professions are as warm as could possibly be wished
for but there is hollowness that will more decidedly
show that we have both the will and the power to
punish the Burmans for their insolence and broken
faith. This opinion I have slowly and cautiously
formed and the bearing of the Praklang last night
tended a little to strengthen [it]. Mr. Hunter is con-
vinced that the belief is general that we are afraid,
and with good reason, of the Burmese. Chow Khun
Bodin spoke most decidedly, almost insultingly, to
him on the subject the other day. He says that he is
almost convinced that within the last four months
there has been some communication to this Court
from that of Ava. I do not believe it, but give you
the surmise, for it is no more, quantum valet.


Fort William 12th June 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India
Secret and Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
. . . I have the honor to state for the infor-
mation of the Honorable the President of the Council
that 1 have received a communication from Captain
McLeod acquainting me with the nature of the call
made on us as the supposed guarantees of the peaceable
conduct of the Siamese towards the Burmese.
2d, I regret my inability to furnish any infor-
mation regarding the complained of invasion of the
Burmese territories by the Shan States tributary to
Siam, as none has reached this place direct from that
quarter. I can only conjecture that it is the result
of a determination on the part of the Siamese Shan
•Chiefs to afford assistance to the Chief of the Kayen
Neo (Red Kayen ). If this be the case the Burmese
cannot assert that their territories have been invaded,
as the Red Kayens have always been independent, but
it may be that advantage has been taken of the rebel
Kayens seeking assistance from Burmah and presen-
ting a maiden to His Majesty, to consider that part of
the country held by them as an integral portion of the
Burmese dominions.
3. I trust to receive in a few days from Doctor
Richardson a report on the state of affairs on our
■northern frontier. That gentleman quitted Bangkok
in the latter end of March for the Shan States and
informs me that he expects to return to Moulmein in
the ensuing month. It may be however that late
events in that quarter may have induced him to pro-
long his stay there and I have written to him acquain-
ting him with the report made by Captain McLeod


and authorizing him to remain among the Shan States
for the present, provided he be of opinion that his
doing so will be advantageous to the public service
both in procuring draught and slaughter cattle for
this force, and in watching and reporting on the
movements that may take place on the part both of
the Burmese and Siamese. I trust His Honor in
Council will approve of this measure as the demand
made by the Burmese Court renders it desirable that
we should obtain full and correct information on the
subject. At the same time that I wrote to Doctor
Richardson I addressed a short letter to the Chief of
Zimmay, the Superior of the Siamese Shan States, from
whom the invasion has proceeded, acquainting him of
the threatened retaliatory invasion of his country and
expressing disapproval of his act if really done by his
authority. I hope this short note will meet the ap-
proval of his Honor in Council.
******
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Moulmain
The 27th May 1839.


[ Continuation of Dr, Richardson’s Journal.]
April 16th.
My last to you by your messenger gave some
account of my proceedings up to, I think, the 9th of
March, when I proposed as soon as I could get the
letters from the Ministers and orders to the Laos
Chiefs to start by the land route to Yahine and Laos.
1 then mentioned my belief that this Government was
not at heart so friendly to us as their professions would
lead us to suppose and nothing I have since seen has
caused me to alter that opinion. There is little doubt
but that our forbearance towards the Burmese has been
set down to a supposed want of power to punish the
breach of treaty.
I got the order to the Yahine and Laos Chiefs
and answer to letter &c. and left Bangkok on the 19th
ultimo. The order to sell us cattle, after stating that
we are great friends, goes on to say that cattle is very
scarce, and not to be bought and sold at any time like
other merchandize, but as I had come about them
they are to sell a few ( 2 or 3 ) that we may not be
“ grieved in spirit ” is the translation the interpreter
gives of the expression. The originals of these
orders are given to a Chief who is sent up expressly
on this business and I got, after repeated requisition,
copies of them. You may be sure I said every
thing in my power to get something more satis-
factory, not forgetting the very suspicious time and
way the trade had been stopped, and the appearance
of identity of council with the Burmese. Chow Pya
Khoon Bodin, under whom that part of the Kingdom
more immediately is placed, told me it was no use talk-
ing as no alterations in those orders would be made
unless war was declared with Ava. I pointed out the
Fort William 12th June 1839.


absurdity of such assistance, as if war was declared it
was too late to commence preparations, and by the
time we could send up for the cattle the war would be
over. He g r ave a grumble of dissent, and I could get
nothing more from him that than we are to procure 2
or 3 at different places to keep us from being too much
grieved in Spirit.
The Ministers gave me an order to all the Chiefs on
my route to give me provisions and any thing I wanted
and 1 innocently supposed all was right. They sent a
petty officer with me Nakon tahathee, where I had left
the elephants (and to which place I sent a dozen of pe-
ople overland by an excellent road) where four others
were to join me in return for the presents brought, and
a' second officer sent with me to see me to the end of
the district of Nakontahathee. From Bangkok to this
place we were 3 days, and 4 more to the end of the
district. Here I found they were playing me false. I
sent the Minister's order to get boats and could find
no one who would acknowledge to be head of the vil-
lage. When the officer from Nakontahathee came up he
told me he had done his duty in bringing me to the
end of his district and was about to return. There is
a nasty muddy stream which we could not cross
without boats. I told him I should not let him go till
he had put me in communication with the Authori-
ty of the village. He was kept crossing and recross-
ing all the afternoon to no purpose —no one would
have any thing to say to me, though the Ministers'
order had been read by the man who turned out to
be the Thoogyee. In the morning I made another
attempt to get some assistance in which failing 1
sent some of my people back with the Siamese Officer
with a letter to Mr. Hunter, begging him to tell the
Praklang how I was situated. About a mile from our
camp the officer slipped away from our people and they
never saw him again. I sent the people back on the
27th March and did not see them again till the sth
April, though they were only three days on the march


each way. This I was not surprized at. The Siamese
cannot do anything off hand. The second order was to
the same effect as the first. On the receipt of this the
Thoogyee came over ( not an individual had come near
ns during the absence of the people ) and promised us
boats to cross the nullah and provisions, but declared
there was no road this way to Yahine. I might go
any road I pleased but he could not show me any as
none existed. I however got some directions from
an old woman in the village and my people had seen
the road when out with the elephants. We started on
the 7th and on the Bth reached Soaphan [from) which
place to this we have travelled along a road by which
a mail coach may be driven, through an alluvial
country nearly as level as the sea in a calm. The
country is thinly populated, the soil generally poor,
the plains for some days bare of trees and the road the
whole way exposed to the unmitigated blaze of a most
powerful sun. We seldom got to our halting place
till noon or after and the tent is generally as late as
2 or 3 P. M. The Thoogyee of the last village
was civil and the Myowaon of the place quite what
I have been accustomed to. He has furnished us
with all we wanted in the way of provisions and
promised a guide unasked so that I hope our difficulties
■as regards the roads are at an end. We are one day
[from] the May nara, which we will I trust reach
to-morrow and thence 7 or 8 day to Yahine from
which place I shall write you more fully.


Fort William 24th July 1839.
To E. A. Blundell Esquire,
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
******
5. His Honor in Council trusts that you will have
received some official reports from Dr. Richardson and
that either through him or from other sources you will
have ascertained the real state of affairs between Siam
and Ava consequent upon the outrages alleged by the
Burmese to have been committed by Siamese from
Tinnay. Dr. Richardson should however be warned
to avoid mixing in any way in the disputes referred
to or even approaching the neighbourhood.
* * * * * *
I have & ca.
( Signed ) H. T. Prinsep
Sec. to Govt. of India.
Fort William
the 24th July 1839.


Fort William the 28th August 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esqre.,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Secret and Political Department,
Fort William.
Sir,
#*####
2. I regret to state that I am still unable to
afford any authentic information relative to Dr. Rich-
ardson and his proceedings. The sole report that has
reached me regarding him is contained in the enclosed
translation of the statements of a native of this place
who was last month at Yahaing (the nearest of the
Shan States) for the purpose of purchasing buffaloes.
The individual Moung Nau alluded to in this state-
ment as having excited the anger of the King of Siam
was one of the Talain Chiefs who headed the insurrec-
tion against the Burmese at the conclusion of the last
war, and who, having taken refuge here with nume-
rous followers was granted a pension of 50 rupees by
Government. This person obtained my permission in
December last to visit the site of an old town named
Mya Waddee on the N. E. frontier of this province,
with a view of settling there if found worth his while.
He went up with a few followers only and returned
in about 3 months with violent fever. Whether du-
ring his stay in that neighbourhood and in his com-
munications with the half wild tribes of Kayens,
thinly scattered about there, he may have given cause
for umbrage to the Court of Siam and induced them
to imagine he was sent there in order to entice away
some of the refugee Talain population in Siam i know
not, but should he have done so, the consequent
proceedings of the Court, as reported in the enclosed
statement would scarcely be warranted, unattended as
they are by any remonstrance or representations


against this Moung Nan’s supposed misconduct, I
shall of course prohibit this person from again visiting
the place, if his doing so be found really offensive to
Siam. I am utterly at a loss to account for Doctor
Richardson’s silence and feelings considerable anxiety
regarding him I have dispatched a small party to
Yahaing to obtain some authentic intelligence regard-
ing him with instructions that if on their arrival there
they learn that Doctor Richardson has proceeded to
Bangkok they are immediately to return here. If they
learn that he is in any one of the Shan States, one
half to return and give me the information, the othe
to join Doctor Richardson with my letter.
3. In your letter of July * you say “ Doctor
Richardson should however be warned to avoid
mixing in any in the disputes referred to or
even approaching the neighbourhood of Zimmay.” I
am inclined to think there may be some mistake in
this sentence. The original instructions to Doctor
Richardson were to proceed from Bangkok to Zimmay,
which place he in all probability reached some time in
May last, Zimmay is the chief of all the Shan States
tributary to Siam and must be the seat of any in-
trigues going on, whether directed against us or
against Burmah. To prohibit Doctor Richardson from
visiting that place ( supposing the prohibition could
have reached him in time to be attended to ) would
exclude him from all chance of learning what is actually
going on in that direction, while the visit of a British
officer to a Siamese State and one with which we have
been for years in constant communication can afford
no umbrage to the Court of Ava. Perhaps it was
meant that Doctor Richardson should be prohibited
from visiting the scene of any actual warfare existing
between the Shans tributary to Siam and those
dependent on Burmah.
4. That some prohibitory orders similar to those
mentioned in the statement of my informant have


been issued by the Court of Siam appears to me ex-
tremely probable from the fact that during the last
three months not a single head of cattle of any descrip-
tion has come down from the Shan States and what is
'extraordinary not one of the numerous traders who
have proceeded from hence to Zimmay have returned,
a circumstance which inclines me to infer that the
communication from that place may have been stopped
in some way or other. I trust however that in a
very short time all doubts on this subject will be
cleared up.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Moulmein
the 9th August 1839.


Statement of Gna Hotmg taken on the Bth day
of the evening of 2d Moon Watso 1201 (or 2nd August-
-1839 A. D.)
On the 10th of the waxing Moon Kutsonn of the
present year ( 22d April 1839 ) I with Gna Than, Gna
Po, Gna Pein and Gna Han, five men, proceeded to
Yahain to purchase buffaloes. At the distance of a day s
journey from Yahain we waited Doctor Richardson, who
was on his way from Bangkok to Zimmay. A Kareun
having informed us that Doctor Richardson had arrived
at Yahain we went on but did not find Dr. Richardson,,
he having proceeded on to Zimmay after sleeping one
night at Yahain. While we were remaining at Yahain
about 10 days without getting either buffaloes or
bullocks, we met 4 messengers who had been carrying
a Royal order to Zimmay. These men told us, Iwo
other parties of messengers have gone to Doctor
Richardson. When the King asked if it was true that
Moungnan was to establish villages in the district of
Mya Waddee, Doctor Richardson replied that no
written authority having been given to Moungnan to
erect villages he would not be allowed to do so But
on the King’s sending the people to see and hearing
that Moungnan was actually building houses His
Majesty said, as Doctor Richardson has told me a
falsehood let not a single head of cattle be exported to
Moulmein. Let those who have sold return the money,
which Royal order wd conveyed to Zimmay.” they
further told ns that Dr. Richardson was within two
days’ journey of Yahain on his way back to Bangkok.
It is 10 days since we returned. The above com-
munication was made to us by the messengers in the
presence of the Governor of Yahain. The price of the
bufaloes for which we had bargained was returned to us.
(A true translation)
(Signed) L. de la Cardemond
Senior Asst. Commissr.
Fort William the 28th August 1839.


Fort William 9th October 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Secret and Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose copy of a report made
to me by Dr. Richardson, on the subject of the in-
vasion of Burmese territory by the Chief of the Shan
States of Zimmay.
His Honor in Council will perceive from this
datef that the King of Ava has strong ground of
complaint against those Siamese, as a more wanton
and uncalled for act of hostility has seldom been
perpetrated.
I have forwarded copy of the report to the Acting
Resident at the Court of Ava as the intelligence con-
tained in it will clear up all the doubts on the subject
which he naturally entertained.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) B. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Maulmain
the 6th Septr. 1839.


To. E. A. Blundell Esquire,
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
In compliance with your request to be furnished
in a separate form, with the information I may be in
possession of regarding the late unprovoked outrage
committed by the Laos Shans on the Birman frontier,
I have the honor with the following short account of
the whole affair, to forward extracts from my journal,
of conversations at various times, with different Laos
Chiefs relative to the subject.
In 1837 in the absence at Bangkok of the Chow
Huana or Heir Apparent of Zimmay, who has always
opposed our wishes as far as he could venture, and
certainly against the secret wishes of most of the other
Chiefs of that place, Captn. McLeod succeeded in
reaching from thence Kien-Hong (on the Chinese
frontier ) by the way of Kien tung, which is the first
large town on the route, subject to the Birmans, and
inhabited by Meir Shans, differing little or nothing
from the Laos people.
It is scarcely necessary to remind you that for
many years, till within the last 50 years, the Birmans
possessed the whole of the Laos country as far south as
Yahine, or about 150 or 160 miles south of Zimmay.
At the time when the Laos people threw off their
allegiance to Ava, and placed themselves under the
protection of Siam, and at various periods previously,
the Birmans had suceeded in carrying off a large
portion of the inhabitants of the country. In revenge
for the treatment they had received from the Birmans
and to enable them to establish their towns which had
become the lair of the tiger, the seven brothers who


had rebelled against Ava, carried on a predatory war-
fare for 20 or 30 years with their Northern Shan
neighbours, tributary to the King of that country, and
in that time succeeded in carrying off a large portion
of the inhabitants of Kun thin (a large town on the
banks of the Cambodia river), of Kintung (the town
already mentioned), Mein Moung, Mein Poo (one of
the towns now laid desolate by them ), and many others,
extending their inroads as far as Kin Hong with im-
punity from the Birmans, and as the people so carried
off form the greatest portion of the present inhabitants
of the Laos States, they view w r ith great jealousy any
attempt to establish a communication with the North-
ern Towns, greatly dreading a return of the captives
to their former homes.
Soon after the Chow Huana returned from Bang-
kok, (probably before Captain McLeod reached Maul-
main) he sent and seized Benj 7 a Pat, his own frontier
officer towards Kun-taung (a follower of Chow Rajavong
the third Chief of Zirnmay ) and accused him of an
intention to go over to Hein taung, put him in jail
and threatened to send him to Bangkok. His im-
mediate Chief stood security for him that he might
be allowed to bring his wife and family from the
frontier, and he then did go over to the Birman side.
The Chow Huana sent after him a body of 200 men,
but failed in taking him. Such however was the un-
safe state of the country between Kein taung and
Zirnmay, that the Isoboa of the former town who had
himself attempted three or four years ago to send a
party to Maulmain, who were stopped at Zirnmay, and
is no doubt anxious to open the route (his brothers
a nd many of his people being in captivity at Zirnmay),
was afraid to allow a party of our traders, who had
been left by Captn. McLeod, to return by that route,
and perhaps also secretly wishing to interest us more
in the business, obliged them to take a circuitous route
by Monay and the Red Karian Country, then just
opened.


From Mein Twoon to Mein Poo
80 days, Mein Poo to Mein Tsat 3
days, from Mein Twoon to Mein
Tsat 2 days, and five or six days
from Mein Twoon to Kein Taung.
From that time, the jealousy which seems to have
been smothered since my first visit, gradually rekindled
in the Zimmay Chiefs, though there was still a con-
siderable traffic carried on, and no doubt that to Mein
Poo, which the Chow Huana himself monopolised, and
which was very profitable, prevented his sooner put-
ting a stop to the intercourse altogether.
About the middle or beginning of last year, the
Myosta, or as he is commonly staled, the Isoboa of
Mein Poo, sent his son with some people to re-
establish Mein That, and some others of his people to
re-establish Mein Twoon, two deserted towns within
his jurisdiction, but nearer to the Siamese frontier than
his own town of Mein Poo, situated the one, Meintsat,
on a large river (the Maykote) which falls into the
Cambodia river below Kein thin, and the other on a
small stream which falls into the Salween, below the
oob to Mein Poo mouth of the May Poo, on which Mein
»to Mein T ®* t 3 p u0 stands. Mein Twoon which is
Twoon to Mein
five or six days nearly north of Zimmay was reached
to Kein Taung. the force in 8 days.
This excited the suspicion of the Chow Huana
of Zimmay and perhaps of some others of the Elder
Chiefs, who have the most lively recollection of the
Birman rule. They supposed or affected to suppose
(for the true reason of the attack was the fear of losing
the northern people already mentioned as forming so
large a portion of the population, added to the hope
of obtaining slaves and plunder) that the measure was
preparatory to an invasion of their country, as soon
as a point of assembly and depbt of provisions could
be formed at the new towns. The Chow Huana there-
fore determined to attack and carry off the people,
and towards the end of the year sent 70 elephants
and 200 men under Chow Faon to rise on the inhabi-
tants, when he should attack the places from without.
These people went as traders, eight or ten at a time,
some before and some after Chow Faon, who left


Zimmay in November, and was some months in the
Birman towns.
In March or April five lied Kareens, in whose
country a civil war is raging, came from one of the
contending parties to request assistance from Zimmay,
under cover of which application, the Chow Huana
commenced raising troops. In April a party of 29
men arrived at Zimmay, with a present of Horses,
Patsos, Betle boxes, &ca., and two elephants of their
own, and three which had strayed from Zimmay tra-
ders, which they brought to return to their owners
and bearing a letter to the effect that by orders of the
King of Ava, conveyed to the Mein Poo Isoboa through
the Chief at Monay, the present mission was sent to
perpetuate the friendship and good feelings now so
happily existing on the frontier, and render permanent
the gold and silver road lately opened by the English
The day after their arrival, they had an interview with
the Chiefs. The Chow Huana ridiculed them, and said
it was absurd in the people of a little insignificant
town, who rode on goats, to offer friendship to the
Chief of a large place like Zimmay, where they rode
on elephants, and at the end of the interview he told
them to come again next day, when he would talk to
them more fully. When they had left the Yeum,
where the interview took place, there was a short
consultation amongst the Chiefs. Chow Huana said
that the Mein Poo people must be aware of their
intentions, and had merely sent this mission to see how
matters really stood, and proposed to put
them in confinement. Chow Pimathan objected, said the
English had a party, sent b} r you to purchase cattle there
and to confine a friendly messenger on mere suspicion
would not tell well in other countries. He proposed
to affect a desire to meet their wishes, but being under
Bangkok, to refer them to the King, and ( in the
apparently friendly way they so well understand) t°
oblige them all to go there, Chow Huana, who is a
most obstinate person, stuck to his own opinion, and


flialt evenin'g surrounded their house with a guard.
Not wishing to seize them then, as three of their
party were out in the villages trading, the guard told
them they must confine themselves (as their audience
was not finished) to the small space round their
quarters.
The three people who were out trading, got an
intelligence from their friends amongst the Zimmay
people, of what was going on, and departed at once
for Mein Poo. In the morning Chow Huana seized the
remaining 26, deprived them of all their property,
and put them in confinement. Six days after this
( the Kareens having been told the force had another
destination had departed in high indignation) the
force marched under the Chow Huana of Zimmay,
Chow Huana of Labong, and other Chiefs of these
towns (Lagon refused to join) consisting of 7,506
men, of whom Zimmay furnished 5000 fighting men,
1000 Cattle and provisions, and Labong 1500. The
force was was so large that resistance was hopeless.
The Isoboa of Mein Poo and many of the people of
that town escaped, but his son at Mein Tsat, with
most of the people, and a large portion of the inhabit-
ants of Mein Twoon,in all 1815 people, with 500
cattle, were captured. They found the Mein Poo
people had, on the return of the three men of the
deputation who had escaped, seized some of Chow
Faon’s people and sent them prisoners to Monay.
Many of the houses were unfinished, some just begun
in Mein Tsat and Mein Twoon, when the attack
was made.
The people of these towns, on seeing the over-
powering nature of the force, may have made a virtue
of necessity, and offered to come in. It is on this
plea at least, that those taken in the towns, in a body,
have been declared only subjects of the state, and are
to have villages appointed for their residence ; others,
those taken in the jungle, or attempting to escape,


have been either kept by those who took them, or
divided amongst the captors, but though the Zimmay
people make a wish on the part of the Mein Poo
people to come over to the Siam side the grounds on
which the expedition was undertaken (unjustifiable as
the act would be then, ) there is every reason to
suppose that the outrage was unprovoked and
uninvited by the Mein Slums. The general feelings
of the people certainly, and I believe of most of the
Chiefs also, was opposed to the act. The Priests
waited in a body on Chow Huana begging him to
refrain from so wicked a deed, but this, as is often the
case, with wrong headed and obstinate people, both of
which qualities he possesses in an eminent degree,
only made him more fixed in his own determination,
and to him chiefly may the outrage be attributed. I
did hear once at Zimmajq that the intention of at-
tacking these towns was not unknown at Bangkok,
and at Yahine, I heard, that the Chow Huana, who
had only recently returned from the capital, had there
reported to the Government that the Birmans were
coming down nearer the frontier and proposed attack-
ing them, that the King had said he would give no
orders on the subject, that he did not see any neces-
sity for attacking them, but that the Laos Chiefs were
the guards of the frontier and must be guided by
circumstances, I have however generally heard, and
believe the King’s orders were, on no account to dis-
turb the existing quiet of the frontier, and the Lagon
Chief distinctly said, it was the absence of orders from
Bangkok, added to what I had said to the late Chief
of Lagon on a former visit, when they had something
of this kind in contemplation, that had deterred him
from joining in the foray.
When your letter was delivered at Zimmay, the
Chiefs expressed themselves as unconcerned regarding
what the Birmans could do to them, but anxious to
know, if the British Government would take any fur-
ther notice of the affair. They think we have a right


to be offended on the ground of their having shut up
the road so closely opened to Kein taung by Captn.
McLeod, and more than once I have been told that if
we ordered the captives to be restored to their homes
it would be done. With this preface, I may proceed
to lay before you the extracts from my Journal.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) D. Richardson.
Maulmain
August 31st 1839.


Extract from the Journal relative to the invasion
of the Birman frontier towns by the Laos people.
May Bth. Moung Lee, five days from Labong. A
report which has been gaining strength for some days,
was here confirmed. It is said that Chow Pimathon,
son of the last Isoboa of Zimmay, who has lately
returned from Bankok, and appears to hold some
anomalous appointment in the military department
connected with the Chow Huana and Rasoon of Zim-
may, has marched with a force of 100 men or more
against Kein toung, the first of the large towns on the
Burman side. 1 have hitherto disbelieved the report,
and even now, hear no reason assigned for the inva-
sion ; this village furnished 20 men,
14th. Reached Labong to-day; find all the Chiefs
but the Isoboa Chow Normon Nio Kamoun, and
Moung Lik gone to the foray, wdiich is not, as 1 be-
fore heard, against Kein toung, but Mein poo, a small
town S. W. of this, some days’ journey nearer the
Salween river.
May 15th, Labong. Called on the Chief, and
after telling him of the Malay insurrection, enquired
about the expedition to the northward. He told me,
they had placed some of their own people in a village
on the frontier and having information that they in-
tended to go over to the Birman side, had sent a force
to bring them in ; he was however not at all inclined
to be communicative, and evidently did not approve
of the step; he said he was the youngest of these
Chiefs and least in authority; his town also being the
smallest, he was obliged to obey the orders from
Zimmay. He also told me Chow Pimathon was
averse to it. The Chow 7 Huana of Zimmay appeared
to have been the prime mover in the affair.


20th. Chow Moung Lik, a captive here, brother
of the Isoboa of Kein toung, who is also a captive
here, returned ray visit. In speaking of the period
tranquillity this frontier has enjoyed since our occupa-
tion of the Province, I led the conversation to the
present attack on Mein Poo, the Myo Tsa of which
place was in Monay in 1837 when I was there.
1 said it was a very easy matter to light a fire,
but if inflammable materials were at hand, it was
not so easy to put it out again, or to know when
the conflagration would cease. He said it was true,
and regretted the measure, which he attributed to
the Chow Huana of Zimmay. He said he had intend-
ed attacking Kein Toung, if an opportunity offered,
hut his courage had failed him. They had, however,
succeeded in capturing the majority of the inhabit-
ants of Mein Twoon, and Mein Tsat, late offsetts
from Mein Poo, in the Moung territory, the former
seven, the latter eleven elephant's marches from
Zimmay. These places had been so recently estab-
lished, that the people had not finished their houses :
the captives he told me amounted to 1300 and young:
the Chief of Mein Poo had sent a friendly deputation
to Zimmay in the beginning of April, with presents
and a letter, expressing a wish to establish a friendly
intercourse, The Chow Huana told them they were
subjects of the King of Ava, and under the Isoboa of
Monay, that he did not believe their intentions were
friendly, that any Mission that was sent ought to be
from the King of Ava to the King of Siam ; he then
put tine messengers in confinement, and seized the
presents they had brought, and also their elephants ;
and issued orders for the immediate assembly of a
force. Zimmay and Lagon were originally to have
furnished 3000 men each, and Labong 1500, but in
consequence of the Lagon Chief refusing to proceed in
tire matter without orders from Bangkok, he, the Chow
Huana, levied 5000 men from Labong, left this in the
middle of April, to the attack of Kein toung (this


report has not been confirmed by what I have
heard in any other quarter) if a good opportunity
offered, if not, they were to content themselves with
the three small towns of Mein Poo, Mein Twon and
Mein Tsat. Intelligence has been received stating the
seizure of 1200 captives, and 500 bullocks. A party
•commanded fey a brother of Chow Pimathon is the
only one said to have met with any opposition. It is
not known whether there [were] any casualties.
May 22d. Called on the Isoboa of Lagon, who
arrived here yesterday on his way to Zimmay: he
asked me what the British Government would say to
the marauding expedition of the Zimmay people. He
told me he had been called on to furnish his portion
of troops, but that [he] refused to have anything to
•do with it, for these reasons: that on my former
visits I had told them not to attack the Burmans,
whilst they were quiet* that they had not the orders
of the King, and having orders to furnish a large
quantity of timber to the King, he was not prepared.
1 said the British Government had no wish to inter-
fere in the affairs of its neighbours, further than if by
friendly means it could prevent rapine and bloodshed
■and promote kindly feelings amongst them. That in
•accordance with these views, I had on my former visits
recommended peaceable and friendly intercourse with
the Burmans, if they were not averse to such inter*
•course; but that I could only recommend the course
I knew the British Government would approve of, and
which 1 thought most beneficial to themselves. If Zim-
may could not see, not only what was just, but what was
ultimately most for her own advantage ( for what was
the acquisition of a few hundred men, when they could
not show more beyond their own frontier) that however
much the British Government might disapprove of such
acts, and be grieved at the ruin which followed, I did
not think our Government would interfere, but that
1 thought the King of Siam had cause to be much


displeased at a small place on his frontier assuming a
power he only should exercise, and involving him in
a war, which this act must do if the King of Burmah
did his duty by his subjects, without knowing whether
he (the King of Siam) was prepared for it or not ; and
that I knew he had had some difficulty in fitting out
a small expedition against the Malays. He said
he perfectly agreed with what I had said and
that whoever bore the blame, and from whatever
quarter it came, he ought to be held free, as he had
nothing to with it. I tried to get at the cause of the
war, but he was not more communicative than his
brother of this place.
May 23d. Left Labong for Zimmay. Met just
outside the town the Labong part of the force, returning
from the attack on the Birman frontier towns. There
were about 300 men, and I counted 109 elephants.
There were about 60 or 70 miserable captives some
of them children not more than 10 or 12 days old ; re-
gretted I had not felt authorized yesterday to use
<r>
stronger language to the Chief (who is a sensible man)
on this brutal outrage.
May 27th. Amiter, the son of a man who is
himself prisoner here, who took the account of cap-
tured property, told me to-day, there were 1815 miser-
able captives of all ages, from a few days up to 70 or
80 years old, and about 500 cattle. He also stated
that some 30 years ago, about the time his father
was made prisoner, the Zimmay people had destroyed
these towns in the same way they had done now.
June 3d. Called on the Chow Huana, and on ask-
ing him in case we were driven into a war with Ava, to
what extent we might expect to procure carriage
bullocks or elephants, he said they had but few, and if
we went to war with Ava, they would make war on
this side on their own account, indeed whether we
did or not, they could never be friends with the


Burmans; that they (the Burmese) had begun to
extend their villages in this direction, and sent people
here to establish a trade, but that the Shans in old
times had been too often taken in, in that way, and
were not such fools as to believe them ; and when
they knew that some of these towns were strong-
enough for a rallying point, and would answer as
depdts for provisions, they would invade this country ;
consequently they put their messengers in confine-
ment, and went and carried off the people from the
new towns. I said that though they had been
enemies formerly, I could not see that was any reason
why they should not be friends now; that they had
no evidence of an intended attack, and it would not
tell well in other countries, that on suspicion of an
attack from Ava, they should put a friendly messenger
in confinement, and do the very 1 hing they expressed
so much hatred of the Birmans for intending. Oh!
he said, it was not mere suspicion. Had not the)"
sent a friendly messenger with presents, and was not
that proof sufficient that the false Burmans intended
to hill them into security and attack them ; he said,
never trust a Burman, and having given them as bad
a character as he could do for duplicity, he changed
the subject to praise of the captured cattle. Called
also at Chow Piraathon, where 1 met Chow Moung
Lik from Labong. He came to complain of the unfair
division of the captives taken in the late inroad.
Labong had only received 100. Chow Pimathon
complained of the obstinacy of Chow Huana, and said
however well inclined, he could do nothing, as he had
no influence.
June 4th. Returned to Labong this day. Chow
ne non Lungi, the Isoboa of Mein neoung, an old
friend, who had been absent with the marauding
party, called in the evening. He told me that the
whole country to the northward is in arms ; that the
old system of rapine and murder adopted by the


Borman Shans before our occupation of the provinces - ,
is again in full operation. Keiu toung, and Kin
thoung are now, or have been, within the last month,
at war, if such a system may be called war. Thinee
has destroyed Zaygia, the most flourishing, industrious,
and well governed of the Mein Shan States, and is
at this moment burning the villages, and carrying off
the people from that principality. He gave me some
account of the foray, and promised to give a detail at
some future visit.
June the sth, Called on Chow ni noicam, a
native of Lagon, and one of the old Chiefs, by whose
exertions in marauding under Chow tcheweet these
towns were peopled with the inhabitants from the
Burman side. He asked me what the British Govern-
ment would say to their late expedition. I said,,
however much the British Government might wish to
see all their neighbours living in friendly terms, the
matter rested between the Kings of Ava and Bangkok,
and I did not think we had anything to say to it. He
told me the Burmans had made four attempts to settle
these towns before this, that they had as often saved
them as they had done now, without the King of Ava
resisting it; and if they settled them ten times more,
so often would they destroy them \ that they were
only intended as rallying points and depdts of pro-
visions, in a meditated attack on these towns. I
blamed the Zimmay Chiefs for seizing their mes-
sengers. He said they had no right to send mes-
sengers. If they wanted to be friends the King of
Ava should send a mission to the King of Siam, as he
had done ; that the Burmans always sent messengers
in that way when they intended an attack, but the
Shans were not such fools as to believe them.
June 22d. Called on Chow ni nan tung for an
hour or two.* He told me Mein Poo is situated in a
valley of a river of the same name, which falls into


the Salween, from which the town is distant about
one day; it is 10 or 11 elephant in * North, a little
westerly from Zimmay, and is a place of some size
and very considerable strength. Mein Twoon is a
small place, on a stream which also falls into the
Salween a short way below the May Poo. It is 8
elephant marches from Zimmay, in the same direction,
and two from Mein Too Min which is larger, about
2 days north, a little westerly of Mein Twoon, and
three days south easterly of Moyrnboo, situated on
a large river, the Moy kote which falls into the
Cambodia river just below old river then. The Min
Too Isoboa’s son, a young lad, was in charge of this
place, which he had settled last j 7 ear with people from
Mein too (Mein Twoon had been settled from the same
place shortly before', after the return of Captain
McLeod, with whose Mission the Chow Huana of Zim-
may, on his return from Bangkok, appears to have
been much displeased, and has ever since sought an
opportunity of interrupting the communication to the
northward, fearing the Kein toung Prince here would
getaway. Immediately on his return he seized Benya
Tot, his own officer, on that pretence, who, on regain-
ing his liberty on the security ofOhowpymon, had just
done that of which he was accused, vizt. gone over the
river to Kein-toung. The Chow Huana sent 200 men
after him, which was the interruption to the quiet of
the frontier. He had for some time meditated an at-
tack on Mein Too, and the unsettled towns, and had
sent Chowpyrnon, in November, to have a party of 200
men with 70 elephants which had been sent in small
parties as traders, at different times, who were to rise
on the inhabitants when he attacked the towns, and a
proper application of one of the Chiefs of the red
Kareens for assistance has given a pretext for raising
the force, and a friendly mission of 29 men from the Min
Too, Isoboa, (in April) the members of which except
three Chow Huana put in confinement [and] hurried on
the march of the force, which took place six or seven


days after their imprisonment. He told me what I
had before heard from Chow ne non Maha jiwit of
Zimmay, that the people taken would not be personal
slaves of individual Chiefs, but merely subjects of the
State, and would have villages assigned for their re-
sidence, under their own Chiefs. He gave many other
details not necessary to note.
July 23rd. Before leaving Labong to-day, called,
amongst others on the wife of Chow no non con (he
is himself in the country ). She begged me to tell
her if we intended to order the Mini Too people to be
sent back to their homes, as she had a poor little or-
phan girl taken there, whom she would have sent back
to Zimmay or perhaps just when she had become as
much attached to her as one of her own children, she
might be called on to part with her.
July 26th. Ban Tan—four days after leaving
Labong on my return home. Met here the proprietor
of the village, Chow ne non Moh jiwit, brother in law
of the Chow H uana of Zimmay, who paid me a visit of
three or four hours in the evening. He enquired the
the contents of my letters from Ava, and when I men-
tioned that the King of Ava had wished to make us
take up the affairs of Mini Too. he said if we took it in
hand, and ordered the people to be sent back, they would
be returned. No doubt the probability of such an in-
terference on our part had been discussed amongst the
Chiefs, for he said the young Isoboa of Mini Too
had said, “ if such an arrangement were to take place
he would come to us, for he dare not return to the
Birmans, who will kill him for coming over to the
Shans without resistance,” i said it was absurd to sup-
pose he could resist 7000 men ; if the attack had been
made with 200 the case might have been different (he
evidently wished me to infer they had of their own accord
come under the protection of Zimmay, which I have
heard stated before, though without a shadow of


foundation). I told him also, I believed that should
the British Government interfere it would only be by
mediation, to prevent further misery, and bloodshed,
that the matter rested between the King of Ava and
Bangkok. I asked him if the priests had not inter-
fered to prevent the invasion. He said they had
gone to tire Chow Huana in a body, begged him not to
proceed and told him though he would gain the town
he would bring misery on the county. He said he
himself was only an inferior person and must go where
he was ordered, but he thought the Chief must have been
mad ; all that was said to dissuade him appeared only
to have the effect of fixing his determination to pro-
ceed, though they had the orders of Bangkok not to
disturb the peace of the frontier. Though I had given
the same advice for the last two years, and though
the Lagon Isoboa had refused to go, nothing would
change his determination, and he had in a few months
shut up the gold and silver road of trade and friend-
ship, we had been years in opening. It is on this
grtund they think we had a right to interfere.
August sth. Yahine. The Pilot [Palat] as he is
here called, the second Chief of the village ( Tsetkar )
called on me in the afternoon ; he had a great deal to
say for himself, and appears to take the principal
management of affairs. He returned from Bangkok
just before I did. He told me he had heard that
the Chow Huana of Zimmay had reported to the
Min sters the re-occupation of Mein Twon and Mein
Took, and asked leave to carry off the people, or
drive them out, and that the King had said, he
did not see the necessity for attacking them, but
would not give any orders. The Laos Chiefs were the
guards of the frontiers, and [ought] to be guided by
circumstances, on which Chow Huana had commenced
preparations as soon as he returned home.
visitor did not seem at all disposed to view the matter


as the treacherous and unjustifiable act I represented
it.
(True Copy)
( Signed ) E. A. Blundell,
Commissioner.


To H. T. Prinsep Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India
Secret and Political Department,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acquaint you for the infor-
mation of the Right Honble. the President of the
Council, that Doctor Richardson returned to this place
on the 23d ultimo, from the mission on which he has
been employed.
I have the honor to forward copy of an abstract of
his proceedings,* of which the more detailed account,
contained in his journal, will be prepared for transmis-
sion by some future opportunity.
It appears from this report that Doctor Richard-
son had no ground of complaint against the Siamese
authorities in as far as his personal reception was
concerned, but as respects the chief object of his mis-
sion, that of ensuring continued supplies of cattle, it
is to be feared that he has ’ materially failed. The or-
ders obtained by him from the Court at Bangkok ad-
dressed to the Chiefs of the Shan States were to the
effect that such catttle as had already been pur-
chased by Maulraain traders should be allowed to be
taken away, but that the future export should be
limited to two or three only from each state. Doctor
Richardson ascribes the impediments to the cattle
trade altogether to the Chow Huana ( Heir apparent
and virtually the Chief) of Zimmay, the present par-
amount Shan State, and he is of opinion that the
Chiefs of the other States are all personally well in-
clined to leave the hade open and unrestricted. Judg


ing however from the nature of the orders obtained
by Dr. Richardson from the Ministers of Siam, it would
seem that the impediments, such as they are, ori-
ginate with them, and Dr. Richardson is inclined to
ascribe this unfriendly spirit to the idea which seemed
to prevail among them that we are unable or unwilling
to withstand the power of the present King of Ava.
Indeed on one occasion, the Minister in whose depart-
ment the affairs of the Shan States lie, candidly told
Dr. Richardson, when he remonstrated against, the
orders that had been given, that no others could be
expected unless we declared war against the Burmese.
It will be seen that about 1400 head of cattle,,
which had been purchased by our traders previous to
to Dr. Richardson’s arrival in the Shan States are on
their w’ay down to this place, and if they reach us in
tolerable condition will ensure supply of fresh meat for
some few months. Beyond these, however. Doctor
Richardson is of opinion that the supplies will be
very limited.
The long absence of any intelligence from Doctor
Richardson proceeded from his being in daily expecta-
tion of taking his own departure for Mauhnain, when
he thought it unnecessary to send on messengers
ahead, as he had every reason to suppose he should
reach Maulmain before them.
The report brought to me regarding subsequent
orders issued by the Ministers of Siam, appears to
have been without foundation.
I have the honor to forward copies of the trans-
lations of the letters addressed by the Ministers of
Siam to you * and to myself f in reply to the letters
delivered to them by Dr. Richardson. The original to
your address has been delivered to the charge of the
Commander of the Steamer Enterprize. I have also
the honor to forward copy of a translation of a letter


addressed to me * by the Chief of Zimmay, in reply to
that which I wrote to him in May last.
Doctor Richardson was unable to bring away
with him the escaped convicts who had been seized
and kept in confinement at the frontier town of Cam-
buri, as he had not the means of guarding them. I
propose sending a small party for the purpose as soon
as the rainy season has passed.
I have the honor, &ca.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Maulmain
the 9th October 1839.


To E. A. Blundell Esquire,
Civil Commissioner in the
Tenasserira Provinces.
Sir,
I have the honor to report my return this day
from my mission to the Court of Siam and Northern
Shan or Laos States, and to forward the following
short abstract account of my journey to and from those
places and proceedings in these countries.
December 18th [IB3BJ left Maul main, and pro-
ceeding up the Atti'an river in a south-easterly direc-
tion, through a rich alluvial country, landed on the
20th at noon at the Kareen village of Nat Kyeeing r
on the 21st six elephants which had left Maulmain
on the 17th joined us, and on the 22d we commenced
our march through the splendid teak forests on the
banks of the Zimmay. On the 3d of January we
reached the three Pagodas, our boundary with Siam,
through a perfectly uninhabited, but rich and level
country, and the names of numerous cities and towns,
the sites of which we frequently passed, but of which
now not a vestige remains, testifying to the former
populous state of the country. The inhabitants were
Talines and Lowas, which last races have been all but
absorbed by the surrounding tribes, their name being
only kept up by some wild tribes in the hills to the
North East of this ; what remains of the Talines have
removed either voluntarily or by force into the Siamese
territory. Their number also has, by various causes,
been very much diminished—many of the later
emigrants are said to have died of starvation in cross-
ing this desert space between the Taline and Siamese
countries. On the 4th of January we 1 jst one of the
elephants which, alarmed at some one running up behind
Fort William 9th October 1839.


kim, broke away from his mohaut on the march. We
halted three days on the banks of the Thaung Kala river,
which we reached that evening, and sent the other
■elephants to look after him, but without success, the
jungle being full of wild ones. On the Bth we reach-
ed N mng Ben, [a] village of Kareens, the first we
had seen since leaving Nat Kang. As up to this time
we had no guide, we were obliged to find our way the
best way we could, taking the most promising looking
path of many wild elephants tracks; ray progress was
of course slow, and for three days the whole party,
which consisted of about 80 people, had no food but
fern leaves and a root something like a yam, but long,
and running straight down into the soil a depth of
three or four feet.
At Naung Ben we hired an elephant, in room
of our lost one, and a guide. On the 10th passed
Sadideng, a Kareen village, and on the 12th another
small village, also of Kareens. On the 18th reached
Maynam noi, which is nearly due west of Tavoy,
the distance said to be not more than five marches
by well travelled but mountainous paths, though but
few inhabitants. Here we found six Thugs, escaped
10 or 15 days ago from the jail of Tavoy. They
were sent by my request to Camborree, whore there
are ten or twelve others, as I wished to get them all
sent back to Tavoy. The Siamese officers at this post,
in a very civil [manner], furnished us with a guide
and a boat in which I sent two of the sick, and some
of the heaviest of the presents to Camborree, which
place we reached on the 25th of January. Here I
was obliged to halt a day, and although the Myo
Woon was exceedingly civil in his professions I could
not prevail on him to send back the thugs without an
order from the Ministers, and though there is a good
road (about which they did their utmost to deceive
me) from this by which Bangkok is easily reached in
five or six days, notwithstanding my strong remonst


ranee, I was civilly forced to go by Pra Free which
is south of Bangkok. On the 30th of January we
reached the last place, where the governor of the town
was equally civil, but wished to send me by boats
still further out of my way. I however insisted on
going across the country here, and reached Nakon
Tchaisee, not however without an attempt of the
guide to push me down into the morasses near the
sea. 3d of February: From this it is one day’s
march by a good road to Bangkok; the old chief of the
town assured me he had no idea of the distance by land,
as no one could possibly go that way, being perfectly
impossible from swamps that would swallow up an
army. As boats had arrived from the capital for my
conveyance, I did not contradict the old gentleman.
On the 6:h we left Nakon Tchaisee (!) in three or four
boats; on the 7th, having pulled nearly all night,
reached Tha Chin where we halted till the Bth, em-
barked in two fine large boats with accommodation
cabins, pulled by twenty men each, and reached
Bangkok at 4 p.m. on the 9th of February. We
brought to close off a Mat House, Mr. Hunter, a
British merchant residing here, had, by instruction
of the Ministers, erected for me between the British
factory (where he himself resides, and in which
two good rooms were provided for me) and the river.
Two Native Portuguese were waiting to receive me,
one the Captain of the port, the other the Command-
ant of Artillery. About 7 a.m. Mr. Hunter was sent
for by His Excellency the Pra Klang, and at his re-
quest sent to me for copies of the letters to the
Ministers, which 1* sent. The contents of the letters
wex-e so much approved of, that His Majesty sent in
the four men to say, his friendship for the English
was such, though the letter was not written to him, he
would x’eceive it as though it had been : a State boat
with forty rowers and ten guard boats accompanied the
messenger, and i sent the letters over at once to the
Palace. In the xnorning 1 waited on the Pra Klang,


where my reception was kind and friendly, but nothing
was said as to the object of my mission, further than
that it was a friendly visit. On the 17th 1 had an
audience of the King, on which occasion 1 was ac-
companied by Mr. Hunter and three or four other
English gentlemen at the time in Bangkok. I was
received with much state, more I am told than was
displayed on former occasions. His Majesty made
strong expressions of his friendship for the Governor
General, and said any wish of His Excellency was the
same as if the wish were his own ; on retiring, after an
audience of 1 hour and 20 minutes, he referred me to
the Ministers for any thing I might have to say on
business, and the curtain was let down on a signal
from himself before the throne. After the King had
retired, the Pra Klang’s son pointed out to me
Kroma-luang Rack, the head of the princes, and Chow
Khoon Bodin, the Prime Minister, under whose im-
mediate jurisdiction the north and Eastern frontier of
the Empire is. He returned my salam, and said he
should be glad to see me and hear all 1 had to say.
On the 19th I waited on Chow Khoon Bodin, the
Prime Minister, and was received with flowery
and strong expressions of friendship. 1 was however
unable to obtain a definite answer respecting any of
the objects of my mission which I brought forward.
He said the southern frontier where George De Castro
(the person sent from Mergui) was waiting to pro-
cure cattle and elephants, was not under his jurisdic-
tion, nor was Camborree where the Thugs were ; that
cattle and elephants must be considered as part of the
defences of the country, and that as the Laos people
were only tributary to Siam he could not order them
to sell their cattle, though 1 pointed out to him that
we only wanted the Ministers to order that no obsta-
cles might be thrown in the way of our people pur-
chasing the spare cattle that their owners wished to
dispose of; he persisted, though I assured him to the
contrary, that the Chinese caravan had never been


interrupted in any way but had of themselves declined
proceeding to Maulmain, as the market did not suit,
their goods. He however agreed that 1 should go to
the Laos countrj, and return here by any route, and
at any time I pleased. In the evening I called on
Chow Fa, the legitimate son of the late King, and half
brother of the present King, who was the son of an
inferior wife. He is a remarkable person, reads and
writes English, and is rather a good practical astrono-
mer. His house is furnished in the European style,
and he has a small collection of good English books,
amongst which is an encyclopedia. He is, I believe,
expected to succeed to the throne, but at present does
not take the least share in the government of the
country. My reception was here also very civil and
friendly. A supper was served by a Madras servant
he has, and his own servants, many of whom were
dressed in white jackets and trousers, stood up and
waited ; tea and coffee were served also, and musical
entertainment afterwards. The whole entertainment
was in good keeping, without any of the ridiculous
make shift imitations of European customs so often
seen in entertainments of the kind. On the 23d of
Februarjr called on Kromaluang Rack, the King’s uncle
and head of the princes. This was altogether a visit
of ceremony, and though the Prince appeared to me
friendly and affable, Mr, Hunter, who kindly accom-
panied me in all my visits, and who sees him often, says
he was distant and reserved. These were all the
Chiefs I saw; Kromaluang Rack I did not see again ;
he declined seeing me when I sent to propose taking
leave of him before starting, Chow Khoon Bodin I
saw again to take leave, and the Praklang, who was
very friendly and affable, I saw very often, as all my
business was with him. Nothing could be more
friendly from first to last, than the professions of all
from the King down.
My instructions pointed out the propriety of wait-
ing till the Ministers should offer their assistance, as


from the tenor of their late letters there was little
■doubt they would do, and rather point out the way
they could be useful to us in our expected contest with
the Birmans than make any request from them, but so
vague and general though unbounded were their pro-
fessions of goodwill, that it was necessary to make a
direct request on every point on which we expected
any thing from them ; and although on the request
first being made either for orders to the Chiefs to the
West and South, near Tavoy and Mergui, to allow the
sale, or to the Laos Chiefs not to interfere with the
sale of cattle, they appeared anxious to meet our wish-
es, yet when the orders were given, they were worded
in such a way as to be all but useless. Of this the
letter to the Laos Chiefs, of which I enclose a copy. *
is a specimen. On my pointing out to Chow Khoon
Bodin, the Prime Minister, under whose more im-
mediate authority the Shan States are, the unsatis-
factory nature of the letter, he said it was no use
saying anything more about the letter now, that it
would not be altered till we declared war with Ava,
when all the assistance they could command should
be at our disposal. I was told the order to the Chiefs
to the South was sent, but the copy I applied for to
send to Mr. De Castro, though promised me, I never
obtained. I pointed out to the Prakiang that as I did
not return by Camborree, I could not take charge of
the Thugs who had escaped, and whom they had
promised to give up ; after some conversation he
agreed to keep them in confinement, and give them
up to any authorized person sent to receive them.
With regard to the Chinese caravan the Pra Klang
assured me that after receiving your letter on the
subject, he charged the Chow Euana of Zimmay in Mr.
Hunter’s presence (this Mr. Hunter confirmed) on no
account to interfere to prevent their proceeding to
Maulmain if they wished; yet he would not insert a
clause to that effect in the letter.


I left Bangkok on the 19th of March. An iiW
-ferior Siamese officer was appointed to accompany me
to Nakon Chaisee, where 1 had left my elephants. He
delivered over four elephants as return present? from the
King and Ministers ; and on the 23d I started by land
for Zitmnay, accompanied by an officer from this place ;;
on the 26th we reached the end of the district, which
is separated a steep muddy nulla from the next.
Here the Thurgha (altho 7 1 sent over the officer from
the last town with the Ministers’ orders that we should'
be supplied with everything we required and not inter-
rupted in our way to Zimmay ) refused to give us boats
or supply us with provisions and I was obliged to-
send back some of my people to Mr. Hunter, and re-
quest him to explain to the Praklang, that we had
Been detained here, and request him to send such an
order as the people would attend to. On 6th of April
I received the second order, a long and friendly one
to all heads of villages and towns, to supply us with
every thing we wanted, and to point out the road
to us. This I sent at once over to the Thageen. He
with a very bad grace gave us boats and provisions,
but declared that no road existed, that the swamps
made it perfectly impossible in that direction to
[reach] Zimmay;- that the thing had never been done.
During ray detention for the second order, 1 had as-
certained the existence of a good road and was not a
little astonished at his assertion, which would have
staggered any one who did not know them. He how-
ever persisted' and refused to give us any guides, as
the order was only to point out the road ; the only
road he knew was by Camboori. J now suspected the
Ministers of double dealing, and no doubt was left
when I learned that a boat had come up quietly to-
watch us. As I had however the Ministers’ pass, and
orders to the heads of villages in strong and friendly
terms, to assist us ; and having been repeatedly and
publicly assured by them that I was at perfect liberty
to proceed by any route most agreeable to myself, and


believing, that could they have found any the least
(plausible pretext either to refuse now or to complain
thereafter of my travelling through the country, they
would themselves have Jet me know it in some ways,
and as the land route is at this season travelled in 12
-or 2(J days less time than that by the river, without
including the time I should lose by returning, I deter-
mined to proceed, and as our Mahouts had seen the
road in the direction which had been pointed out
privately by the villagers, I started on the 7th. The
ffirst two days, till we reached Soophan, tlm principal
■town of the district, there was only a footpath with one
or two nullahs, but from this there was a cart road all
•the way through a level country, by which a carriage
might be driven to Yahine. The Thooghees furnished
■us ( and refusing payment ) on the sight of the order,
with all the provisions we required, and were generally
•civil, though they persisted in the declaration that
there was no road that way to Zimmay, till the 18th,
when we reached Bankan, on the Maynam river, where
the secret orders had not I supposed reached, for the
Thooghee there believed the order to be “ to furnish
guides” as one of my interpreters had done. He ac-
■cordingly furnished me with guides, after which we
had no further difficulty, they were regularly furnish-
•ed from one village to another. We reached Yahine,
which is the first of the Laos towns, on the 28th
April. I omitted to mention that a Siamese officer,
Bra Sooren was sent up vrith the original of the letter
to the Laos Chiefs, of which I found a copy. He
started the day after I did from Bangkok, came by
boat to Kontsauron ( 1 ), and thence by land up the left
bank of the river. By ray detention he was enabled
to reach this place before me, and left two days before
I arrived. He had however communicated the Minis-
ters’ orders that the buffaloes of the people you sent
■after me with the petition to Bangkok, should be
given up; of this however I was not informed by the
wily old Chief of the place till 1 had fought the battle


myself. When he found he was not likely to get any
advantage, I was informed that they were ordered to
be given up. Notwithstanding the repeated assurance
of the Ministers to the contrary, 1 was here told in so
circumstantial a manner that it is difficult to doubt it,
that a special officer was sent up from Bangkok to
enquire into the numbers of cattle that had been sold
to us, that it was by this person’s orders, who was
present at Yahine at the time and took away the
people’s passes to Bangkok, that the buffaloes were
detained. On the Ist of May I left Yahine and re-
ceived, as I have always done from the Laos Chiefs and
people, the greatest kindness and attention throughout.
The monsoon set in heavy on the 2d, which made it
trying for the people who had no cover but leaves.
We however reached Labong on the 14th without any
sickness amongst them. In the afternoon, even be-
fore 1 had called on the Chief, I had visits from
several old friends, all of whom seemed glad to see me.
In the afternoon Bra Sooren arrived from Labong.
On the 15th I called on the Isoboa, who was as friendly
as ever, and expressed himself as determined to follow
his father’s advice and be our firm friend, and there
can be no doubt of his sincerity. He is the son of the
late Chow Chiweet and has been raised to the dignity
of Chief since my last visit. He was then third. The
Chow Huana has been removed as Isoboa of Lagon, and
the Chow Kajawan has died. On the 17th I called on
him again, after he had seen the Pra Sooren’s orders,
which he said were quite enough, for him, that we should
have no difficulty in procuring cattle there as far as
their means would allow. Called also this da} T on
Pra Sooren who assured me that the Government of
Bangkok were most anxious to be on the most friendly
terms with us, and nothing that he could do should be
wanting on his part to forward these wishes. On the
21st of May the Lagon Isoboa arrived here with a body
guard of 600 men and forty elephants on his way to a
conference to be held at Zimmay on the cattle trade.


The house he had here as Chow Huana still belongs to
him and he went into the fort at once where I called on
him, on the 22nd. His friendship and good feeling
towards us was not at all diminished since his elevation
to the Yazalatten of Lagon, he assured me he con-
sidered himself to have two lords, the King of Bangkok
and the English. He acknowledged the great benefit
the intercourse and trade with us had been to this
'country., and said he would use his endeavours to
.prevent interruption, a/nd of his sincerity there is as
little doubt as that of his brother-in-law, the Chief of
this place.; indeed the Chow Huana of Zimmay and
three of his Binyas or officers, who conduct the judicial
business of the country, are the only exceptions I am
aware of throughout Laos to the friendly feeling en-
tertained towards us, and as the advantage they derive
from the trade to the Coast is very great, the interest
■of the whole country is in favor of its continuance.
flVa Sooren started on the 18th for Zimmay, but as all
the influential Chiefs were absent in the invasion of
the Burmese, I put off my departure for that place till
I should hear of their return, intelligence of which
reached us ou the 22d. I left Laboung on the morn-
ing of the 23d of May, and reached Zimmay at noon
the same day. Pra Sooren and an officer from Lagon
were in sheds between the town and the river, and
I occupied one I supposed was intended for me close
to them. I sent the interpreter as usual to Chow
Huana to report ray arrival, and the people of his
house told him to go to the town where they attend
business of that kind. In the evening some mats
were brought me, and about 7 o’clock the Chow
Hnana’s son called, a lad of one or two and twenty. In
the morning Chow Maha Nient, Chow Huana’s brother-
in-law and some of the Youm officers called from Chow
Huana to know what our people complained of, though
this was unusual before I had seen the Chiefs. I told
them a number of their cattle had been detained in
tlie country five months after the} 7 had been ready


to start ; and that they had then been obliged to
give a bribe of 300 rupees for a pass, and to pay a
higher duty on each bullock than had been formerly
fixed by the Chow Huana, and that many of their cattle
had died, both here and on the road. I said money
unjustly obtained should be repaid, and cattle they
had lost in consequence of their unjust detention here
replaced by others. They acknowledged they had
made a mistake, but begged me to make further
enquiries as to the real losses of the people, which
[ promised. On the 20th I met all the municipal
officers at Chow Huana’s house I repeated what I had
said to Chow Maha Nient, and further requested to
know what footing the trade was to be on in future
and what numbers of cattle we might expect for car-
riage in case of being involved in a war with Ava. It
is unnecessary here to give the long discussion which
followed ; it is enough to state, that all Chow Huana
said was in the same unfriendly spirit and decided op-
position to the trade with us which he uniformly dis-
played. He said the traders refused to give up the
names of the people from whom they had bought the
cattle, and were consequently detained, and a pass at
their own desire had been given for the route they had
taken, and the duty was always what had been charged
them ; also that he did not see the probability of their
being able to spare any more cattle, that they now had
not enough for themselves. Chow Pima Then was
evidently annoyed with him, and said the Siamese
King and the English were friends ; that they were
under the Siamese and consequently looked on them-
selves as under the English, that the trade and friend-
ship had existed too long to be broken off in that way ;
that what I had said was very just, and that if I should
wait till the 31st, when they had consulted together, they
would let me know how long the trade should continue on
its present footing, and what prospect there was of our
obtaining cattle afterwards. 1 agreed to wait, and in
the mean time proposed to call on the old Isoboa,


which I did that day; he is 86 years of age, re-
tains all his faculties, but takes no share in
public business : On the 31st by appointment 1
again met at Chow Huana’s house all the municipal
■officers of the town, except the old Isoboa, the Iso-
boa of Lagon, several officers from that town, and
3 or 4 of the officers of Labong—the Isoboa of
which town refused on the plea of ill health to attend;
several Chiefs who have nothing to do with the busi-
ness were also present. Chow Huana asked what was
the probable amount of property belonging to our
people now in the Shan Country, and appeared a good
j_deal] surprised when I told him there was upwards of
50,000 Rupees, although the value of each party’s
investment is marked in the pass which is shown at
the Youm; he made several proposals quite incompa-
tible with any degree of freedom of trade, to which I
objected on that ground, and as being contrary to the
stipulations in the Treaty of Bankok. At last, after
some consultation amongst themselves Chow Pima
Than, as on the former day, took the lead, and said
what I proposed, viz., that the people who had now
their property embarked in the trade, who had come
here on the faith of [a"j positive agreement by Chow
Huana with myself, should be allowed to continue the
trade on the old footing without let or hindrance, and
if they had any difficulty in obtaining payment for
their goods, they should apply to the Youm for assis-
tance; that with regard to future traders coming from
Maulmain, he could not promise that they should
obtain cattle; he appealed to Chow Huana who con-
firmed what he had said. 1 said I was obliged to him
and satisfied as far as those now engaged in the trade
were concerned, but wished to know if the trade in
-cattle was prohibited to people in future coming from
Maulmain, as in that case I would want time to warn
the people not to entertain the hope of procuring
■cattle. He said no, they might come, and if cattle
are to spare, they might purchase them. There was


then some discussion about the duties which were at
last left as they had been hitherto, but they wished
to collect them on the frontier instead of here, to-
which I saw no objection. I then made the demand
as above stated on behalf of the people whose cattle'
had been detained here, and after a good deal said by
Chow Huana in his spirit of opposition, Chuw Pimothan
again interfered, and requested a day to consider the-
subject, to which I agreed after some friendly conver-
sation, in which the Chow Huana joined. I expressed
my wish to start on [the] 2d. as the monsoon was
daily becoming heavier. Chow Huana objected in
friendly manner to my leaving so soon, and said he
had sent out for an elephant as a return present, which
he feared would not be ready so soon. I agreed to
remain till the fourth. I had to-day a warning from a
friend ( the second I here had ) to be on my guard as
some foul play was intended towards me. Though
this person ought well to have known what was going
on, I have never had the least apprehension of any
thing of the kind. On the 2d Chow Ho non Keo, the
president of the Yura stated, all I had demanded on
behalf of the people whose cattle had been detained
was acceded to, 150 cattlle, one half of the total lost,
was given them and duty overcharged returned. The
300 Rs. bribe, as the people were not very anxious to
press it, and as I thought referring to that might
cause soreness and irritation which might urge them
( having it in their power ) to do more than that small
amount of damage to the trade by vexatious restriction,.
I did not insist on.
In the evening I received the elephant by a
deputation of the Youm officers, in the name of the
whole of the officers of the town with many good
wishes. On the 3d being to start on the morrow,
called on the principal Chiefs, and as the only point
that remained was to ascertain what assistance in
carriage cattle vve might expect from this, in case


of a war, I asked Chow Huana if Pra Sooren had de-
livered the Ministers’ orders on that head, and if so,
what elephants he thought We might calculate on
obtaining. He said Pra Sooren had delivered the
orders, but there had been a great mortality amongst
the cattle and elephants, he did not think they coujd
sell any and Moulmein was a long way off and Ava
further. If we hired cattle he did not see the prospect
of any of them ever finding their way back, besides
the people would not dare to accompany our force. I
told him the Ministers, particularly Chow Khoon Bo-
din, had positively promised that if war was declared
with Ava, they should assist with all the cattle and
elephants in their power. He said yes, if they could
spare them but he did not think there would be any to
spare, as if we went to war, he would attack the Bur-
mans here on his own account.
At Chow Pimathon’s 1 mentioned in detail what
had passed at Chow Huana’s ; he said he was junior here
and had not much weight with him, but that the
ministers’ order must be attended to, and as far as his
power extended, he would do all he could to keep up
the good feeling now existing. 1 thanked him for the
assistance he had given me in the late discussion.
At the houses of the other Chiefs nothing else was
said except taking a friendly leavy of them. On the
4th, before leaving, called on Pra Sooren and request-
ed him to press on Chow Huana the furnishing of
carriage cattle and elephants in case of a war was not
optional, as the sale of cattle was with the Chiefs
here, but a positive order from the King. He promis-
ed to do so, and I started for Labong on my return
to Maulmain. On 6th called on the Lagon Chief who
said be did not think much of what had been said at
Zimmay, that there was no trusting the Chow Huana.
He had a claim against him which he had not been able
to get him to settle. He assured me that our relations
with Lagon would continue as they had been for the


last ten years* On the Bth when T was on the point
of starting, a deputation from the traders here waited
on me to say the Chow Huana had demanded 3 cattle
for each driver who had . been last year employed by
our people, and one from each mahout, which had so
frightened the people of the country that they could
not obtain a single driver. I sent them with my salam
to Chow Pimathon to tell him the state of the case,
and ask his assistance, as he had publicly pledged him-
self at a general meeting to assist the people, I also
called on Pra Sooren, who has also returned here, and
intended to start to-morrow for Bankok. I requested
him to put off his departure, as Chow Huana virtually
put a stop to the trade by the proceeding just men-
tioned. He agreed to stop and in conjunction with
the I 'hiefs of Lagon and this place, wrote to Zimin ay,
complaining of the proceedings. On the 14th an ans-
wer was received from Zimmay denying their having
broken in any way any agreement entered into. 1
pointed out to Pra Sooren that although no stipulation
had been broken, yet the people were virtually depri-
ved of the power of taking away their cattle by this
unjust tax of the Chow Huana's preventing the people
w ho were anxious for the employment from hiring
themselves to the traders ; he said he could do nothing
more and should start to-morroW ; if Chow Huana now
broke his faith after what had taken place it was on his
own responsibility. As our people had succeeded in
getting one or two drivers, and as I believed they
would shortly get as many as they wanted, I deter-
mined also on starting ; and on the 13th had commenced
loading the elephants, when a Shan arrived from Maul-
main and told me there were letters on the road for me
from yourself which would be here in a day or two. I
was unwillingly again compelled to put off my departure,
as in case of war having been declared, I wished at
once to ascertain what carriage and other cattle we
had to expect from them ; after waiting two days and
it being still uncertain when the men with the letters


might arrive, I determined to send some people to
meet them, and on the 18th dispatched five people.
Should they not meet them, however, to go as far as
Meinhinghee, 6 days off, where he had been left by*
the people returned, having met the man (who had no
letters) a day and a half from Meinhinghee. Two
days from this however they fell in with a Chinaman
who had the letters, which they brought on. As war
had not been declared, the contingency on which alone
the Siamese Government had promised to order the
Chiefs here to furnish us with a larger supply of cattle,
I had again the prospect of a speedy return to Maul-
main, but as your letter authorized me, should the
exigencies of the case, political and commercial, render
it necessary to remain for a time in these States,
■and as our people still made but little progress in
obtaining drivers, and as the Shans are still afraid
they will be fined again on their return, I had reluct-
antly determined to retrace my steps to Zimtnay,
where I did not expect to be detained more than a
day or two at most when 1 was attacked with severe
inflammation in my eyes, which confined me entirely
to my darkened tent, from which I did not recover
till the 9th of July. In the mean time your letter,
which the Chinaman refused to give to my people,
had reached the Zimmay Chiefs, intimating that the
Birmans intended to punish them for the attack on
their frontier towns and that the British Government
•disapproved of such acts of treachery in profound
peace. This I suppose had made him think it as well
to have friends, at least on one side of him, and pains
had been taken to convince the country people that
the cattle had only been taken to restore to our people
the 150 lost., which they had been obliged to make
good, and that it would not occur again. As drivers
had in consequence been obtained nearly sufficient for
about 1500 cattle, all that were collected, I determined
'as soon as the first batch had started to return to
.Maulmain, as the necessity of my visit to Zimmay was


obviated. On the 16th the first portion of the cattle,
amounting to 2 or 300 started, and I had the elephants
tied up at night to start in the morning. The heavy
rain in the night loosened the earth, so that three of
them drew the stakes they were tied to and one of
them I had not r-ecovered on the 23d when I determined
to start on my return and leave a mahout in charge of
the Chief of this town, from whom by the by, I had
received the lost elephant as a return present. The
second and third batch of cattle have started and there
are now a few I believe in the hands of other dealers ;
confidence seems gradually returning, and cattle are
slowly obtained. From the universal friendly feeling
of the Chief here and the great profit they have derived
from the cattle trade, though Chow Huana being just
now the [blank] and most anxious to put a stop to the
trade altogether, I have no doubt that we shall be able
to obtain a considerable supply of cattle, perhaps three
or four thousand head annually or perhaps more, but
from the Chow Huana we must constantly expect a
recurrence of difficulty and losses to the traders of a
similar nature to the present, but I very much doubt
his ability to stop the trade altogether, though I have
no doubt he would be borne out by the Siamese
Government if it was done in a less unjust way
than in the last instance. They are said, and I be-
lieve with truth, to be jealous of our influence in these
States. On the 23d I left Labong, and travelling
a short distance from the route I followed in the way
up, reached Yahine on the 4th of August, from whence
I crossed the hills, and reached Meahwadil on the 14th
and from Mee Kaloung over to the Houng Aro on the
20th, where having procured boats embarked all the
people and reached Maulmain on the night of the 23d.
We suffered of course much exposure and fatigue from
the state of the roads, and the heavy rains of this
country; but as I hoped would'be the case, when the
monsoon was once fairly set in, we had no sickness,
except one case of fever, from which the poor boy


died five or six days after we left Yahine, where we
were obliged to leave him.
I must beg your indulgence for my long silence,
which proceeded entirely from expecting daily to be
able to start in so short a time, that I should reach
this as soon as any messenger I could have dispatched.
I trust the foregoing abstract which I am sorry is less
B uccinct than I could have wished will give some idea
of what has been done, till I am enabled to forward
my journals, and a sketch of my route which shall be
prepared, and sent in with the least possible delay.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed.) D. Richardson.
Maulmain
the 24th August 1839.


Order addressed to the Chiefs of Zimmay, Labong
and Lagong, by the Ministers of Siam.
According to the friendship existing English
Merchants coming into Siam by land or water, with
a pass, are allowed to buy and sell. Mr. Richardson
has brought presents to the Golden teet from the
English Ruler, and made known every circumstance.
He says that merchants coming to purchase elephants
at Zimmay, Labong and Lagong are prevented by
Zimmay, and requests that they may be allowed to
purchase. This is the order. Mr. Richardson says
he wants elephants and cattle, because preparations
are making in his country for war, and also for
agricultural purposes. According to custom elephants
and cattle cannot be taken out of the country. Hith-
erto numbers of cattle have been taken out of Zim-
may, Labong and Lagong. At that time elephants,
buffaloes and cattle were abundant, and were allowed
to be taken out of the country according to friendship.
Now they are become scarce. Elephants, buffaloes
and cattle are not like other merchandize. There are
not sufficient in the country for its own purposes.
Mr. Richardson has brought letters from the English
Ruler, and says he has come to procure cattle. That
he may not be vexed let him have two or three from
Zimmay, Labong and Lagong. Mr. Richardson hav-
ing reported some dispute about the money paid for
cattle in Zimmay, Labong and Lagong, we have taken
His Majest3 r ’s orders and have sent two officers to
Zimmay, Labong and Lagong, with orders that Mr.
Richardson may have two or three cattle that he may
not be vexed.
(True Translation )
(Signed) D. Richardson


The letter of Chow Khun Praklang, Minister of
State to His Majesty the King of Siam, to Mr.
Blundell, Governor of Maul main, Tavoy and Mergui.
You sent a letter by Doctor Richardson, inform-
ing me that the Right Honble. the Governor General
had selected him to be the bearer of a letter from the
Honble. Mr. Prinsep, Secretary to the Supreme Go-
vernment, to the Minister of Siam ; Doctor Richardson
being an officer of much intelligence, having visited
Chengmie, Lackon, Lampoon and various other
countries, and you desired him to say how thankful
you were to the Ministers of Siam for the kindness
they had shown to the Maul main merchants and that
you hoped the Ministers would continue to show them
the same favor, for such friendship existing between
the two countries makt-s the people friendly and
happy because it causes trade to flourish, whereby the}'-
become rich ~d will bless the wise rulers who give
them the opportunity of becoming so. That also you
had received the letters concerning Mrs. Brisley and
that you were very thankful to the Ministers for their
exertions in her behalf, and that the information from
Penang respecting her must have been incorrect. All
the other parts of the letter are fully understood.
On Dr. Richardson’s arrival in Siam he was
properly received, and attended to, and through the
assistance of the Ministers had an audience of His
Majesty the King of Siam, and delivered the presents.
The King was previously aware that the Right
Honble. the Governor General had ordered the
Honble. Messrs. Prinsep and Blundell to write
letters of friendship to the Ministers of Siam. His
Majesty has already thanked the Right Honble, the
Governor General and Mr Blundell.
Fort William 9th October 1889.


Mr. Blundell asked the Ministers to preserve the
road of existing friendship open; that the merchants
of the countries may go and trade together, which
will be good for both countries, and all people will
bless such wise rulers. The Siamese and English
must take care that their friendship be strong, and
that such friendship being cemented will last as long
as Heaven and Earth.
Doctor Richardson mentioned to the officers that
the Governor of Maulmain had sent George de Castros
to Chumpon to purchase elephants in a friendly way.
Doctor Richardson also stated that the merchants from
Maulmain had gone yearly to buy elephants and cat-
tle, but that now the Governor of Cheng Mie had
prohibited the sale of elephants and cattle to the
Maulmain merchants, and the people that sold cattle
had money belonging to the Maulmain merchants.
The Ministers here having consulted see that elephants,
buffaloes and bullocks are for the use of the country;
that in case of war elephants and bullocks are used for
carrying provisions ; buffaloes are used by the people
to assist in all agricultural purposes, which is the
strength of the country ; therefore to sell elephants
and cattle like other merchandize to foreign nations
few would remain, not enough for the use of the
country. Because the Governor of Maulmain sent to
buy elephants to Chumpon, telling him to spare some
elephants to George de Castros on account of
friendship, that he might not lose that business he
came upon. Dr. Richardson mentioned that in Cheng
mie, Lackon and Lampoon the exportation of cattle had
been prohibited.
I have enquired of the officers from these coun-
tries, who brought the duty to the King, and they say
that the Governor of Cheng Mie, seeing that every
year the merchants of Maulmain came and bought
cattle, and that only few remained, he prohibited the
sale of them. That is what the officers of these coun-


tries state. Now the money belonging to the Moulrnain
merchants [is] in the hands of the owners of the cattle,
the Ministers. see that the money or the cattle must
be delivered up to the proper owner according to true
justice. Letters have been sent to the Governor of
Cheng Mie, Lackon and Lampoon respecting the
belonging to the Maulraain merchants in the hands
of the sellers of the cattle and that if they do not get
the cattle the Governor mast see that the Mauimain
merchants must get their money all back, telling him
that the friendship between the Siamese and English
is strong and sincere, and that by no means let any
disturbance occur.
The people with writing on their foreheads who
came from the direction of Tavoy without a pass,
orders were given to the Governors of Kanburree to
put them all in irons, 18 in number, imagining
that they were runaway convicts. Two of them were
taken ill and died, the remaining 16 Doctor Richard-
son asked for, and the Ministers gave them to go
along with him. Mr. Blundell sent letters of friend-
ship to the Ministers to take care to preserve friend-
ship. The Ministers therefore have the highest con-
sideration of Mr. Blundell and thank him very much.
Written in Bangkok, 11th March 1839.
Translated from Copy furnished by the Ministers,
by R. Hunter Esqre., of Bangkok.


The letter of Chow Phya Praklang, Minister of
State to His Majesty the King of Siam, to the Honble,
Mr, Prinsep, Secretary to the Supreme Government,
India.
By the orders of the Right Honble. the Governor
General you sent a letter stating that British subjects’
were allowed to trade to all Siamese possessions with
all facility, for which the Right Honble. the Gov-
ernor General is sincerely thankful, and that he had
selected Doctor Richardson, one of the Assistants to
the Commissioner of Maulmain, to bring presents to
His Majesty.
You also state that Doctor Richardson had resided
a long time in Ava, and knows all the Burmese count-
ry, and what are the intentions of the Right Honble.
the Governor General respecting the Burmese and if
the Siamese wish to know all that occurs in Burrnah
let Dr. Richardson remain in Bangkok, but if the
Ministers do not wish it, he is not to remain. All
other parts of your letter are fully understood.
On Dr. Richardson’s arrival in Bangkok he was
properly received and attended to, and through the
assistance of the Ministers had an audience of His
Highness and delivered the presents. His Majesty
was informed that you had the instructions of the
Right Honble. the Governor General to write a letter
of friendship to the Ministers of Siam and that the
Governor General had selected Dr. Richardson to be
the bearer, for which His Majesty returns his sincere
thanks to the Right Honble. the Governor General.
Your further state that if the Siamese wish in-
formation respecting the Burmese, they can ask Dr.
Richardson, because he is well acquainted with the
Burmese country and also with the Governor General’s
intentions towards that country.


The Ministers have consulted with Doctor Rich-
ardson, and he supposes that this year there will be
no war, as the Resident had continued at Ava two
months, altho’ the Burmese had not properly respected
him, nor a Imitted him to an audience of the King
Ava, that the Resident was still at Ava and on his
departure war will commence.
The Governor of Kanburree sent letters here stat-
ing that 18 people without a pass, and written on the
forehead, had arrived tiiere. The Ministers here, on
receiving this intelligence, concluded that they had
run away from the English territory and sent orders
to put them in irons at Kanburree to see if the Eng-
lish would claim them; two of them sickened and
died Dr. Richardson asked for the remaining 16 and
the Ministers have given them up to hin.
The Ministers here have sincere friendship for the
Right Honble. Governor General of Bengal, the Hon-
ble. Mr. Prinsep, Secretary to the Supreme Govern-
ment, and all the great English officers connected the-
rewith, because they all wish to continue friendly
with the Siamese. The Ministers ask that all the
great officers in Bengal may have long life and great
prosperity, honor and dignity bestowed upon them,
and that their names and deeds may be handed down
to the latest posterity.
Written in Bangkok 11th March 1839.
Translated from copy furnished by the Ministers,
by R. Hunter Esqre., of Bangkok.


Fort William 27th November 1839.
To Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
I am directed by the Resident in Council to
acknowledge the receipt of your two letters dated 6*
and 9* September, reporting the return of Dr. Ri-
chardson and submitting communications received
through him from the Government and officers of
Siam and also communicating the particulars of the
attack made by several people on Burmese Settlements
ascertained by Dr. Richardson.
2. The letter of the Minister at *Bankok to my
address in reply to that conveyed by Dr. Richardson is
satisfactory in [the] professions of friendship it con-
tains. An impression seems to exist on the minds of
the Siamese Ministers that war with Ava will ensue
on the withdrawal of the Resident from the Court.
But it appears from the wording of their letter that this
impression has not arisen spontaneously in their
minds, but may be traced to their communication with
Dr Richardson.
3. His Honor in Council is averse to any formal
explanation, but relies upon your taking advantage of
any opportunity that may occur in the course of your
own or your assistant’s intercourse with the Siamese
authorities to correct the error into which they have
on this subject been led.
4. His Honor in Council does not deem it neces-
sary to remark upon any other point connected with
the result of Dr. Richardson f’s mission ] which seems
to have been successful and of good effect in partially
restoring the intercourse with the Shan tribes.
5. With respect to the Siamese affair with the
Burmese you have rightly forwarded copies of all Ihe
papers to the officiating Resident in Ava.


6. His Honor in Council does not consider that
the proceedings reported call for any specific orders or
instructions from him at this juncture.
7. His Honor in Council waits the full report
upon the geographical and other details of the journey
of Dr. Richardson which is promised by that officer.
8. His Honor in Council considers him to have
displayed much temper, firmness and discretion in the
novel situations in which he was placed by the dupli-
city and varied treatment he experienced from the
different Siamese officers
9. The successful accomplishment of a journey
over this hitherto untravelled country reflects great
credit on the energy and resources of Dr. Richardson.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secy. to Govt. of India.
Fort William
27th Novr. 1839.


Fort William 27th July 1840.
To the Secretary to the Government of India
Secret and Political Department,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to request you will lay before
the Right Honble. the Governor General of India in
Council the following circumstances connected with
the Southern Frontier of these Provinces.
No line of demarcation between these Provinces
and those dependent on Assam* has ever been dis-
tinctly laid down, owing to the circumstance of the
uninhabited wastes of the interior having hitherto
precluded the question from being raised, but from
our first possession of this country it has always been
considered that the river “ Chan ” having its mouth in
Lat: 10' 10" and a S. W. course to the sea, bounds
these possessions to the south. From the period of
the conquest of Mergui and Tenasserim from the
Siamese by Alorapra, the Burmese have always con-
sidered the river “ Chan ” as their southern boundary,
though it must be owned they never kept up any
establishment on that river, nor did their outposts ever
extend to within many miles of it. At the same time
the Siamese outposts were never brought to the,
northern side of the river, and the intermediate
country was left utterly uninhabited. Well defined and
recognised boundaries could never exist between two
countries such as Burmah and Siam, carrying on
against each other a constant uninterrupted system of
plundering, devastating inroad, and the safety of each
rendered it necessary that a wide tract of county
between them should be left an uninhabited jungle.
It is seldom either that Burmese Historical Records
specifically define the boundaries of their possessions,
it being considered sufficient to give the name of the
towns, provinces or districts forming the boundaries


in certain directions. For instance, in defining the
boundaries of Tenasserim as gained by Alompra from
the Siamese it is merely stated that on the S. E
lies the Siamese district of Moundaong, without
giving the line of demarcation between them.* It is
not until circumstances call for our forming establish-
ments at the limits of our possessions that the
question of boundary between ourselves and the
Siamese will be raised, and it is such a circumstance
which now induces me to bring before Government
the subject of our Southern frontier.
The country on both sides of the Chan river is
rich in tin. On the left or Siamese side is Renoung,
formerly, I believe, celebrated for its tin, and which
within the last 8 or 10 years has been re-established
by the Siamese Government, who have a few hundred
men there engaged in collecting the tin. On the
right, or our side of the river are the sites of
several deserted towns or villages where tin was
formerly collected and where it is known to exist
in considerable abundance, though less so perhaps
than on the Siamese side. A few months ago, a party
of Malays applied to the officer in civil charge of
Mergui for permission to establish themselves in one
of these sites, which was granted to them, but on
their arrival they were warned by the Headman of
Renoung that he considered them within his jurisdic-
tion, and would not allow them to collect tin there,
except on his own terms. This alarmed them and they
quitted the place. When at Mergui, the circumstance
being reported to me, and also that the Headman of
Renoung has subsequently established his own people
on our side of the river, I furnished these Malays
with a lettter addressed to him, informing him that I
considered the right bank of the river to belong to us,
and desiring him, if he disputed it, to report the cir-
cumstance to his Government, Several applications
were made to me, especially by some highly respect


able Chinese at Mergui, to the effect that if I would
ensure their protection in the country on the left bank
of the Chan river, they would immediately employ
their friends in working the tin there, at the same
time informing me that they have received frequent
communication from the Chinese (about 70 families)
employed by the Siamese Government at Renoung,
to the effect that they are highly dissatisfied with
their treatment and are ready to come over in a body
to join their countrymen on our side of the river, and
that were it not that they have been brought up to no
other profession than that of tin collectors and
smelters the} 7 would quit at once, but are fearful of
not meeting with employment.
I informed the Chinese at Mergui that I hope to
be able to settle the question of boundary during the
ensuing fine season, and I would now respectfully
request His Lordship in Council to empower me to
assert our right to the left bank of the Chan river.
That we possess the right may be inferred from the
following points.
1. The oldest and most respectable inhabitants
of Mergui all assert that the country dependent on
Tenasserim and conquered by Alompra from the
Siamese extended to the Chan river. 2. That though
we have not hitherto asserted our right by any direct
act of possession, yet from our first conquest of these
Provinces we have always assumed the Chan river to
be the southern boundary, and 3. That though the
Siamese have now for some years re-established
Renoung on the left bank of that river, they have
never, until the last few months, formed any establish-
ment or fixed any post on the right bank.
As there appears no doubt of the existence of tin
in large quantities on the left bank, the advantages of
our working it need not to be detailed, and from all
the enquiries I have made, supported by the remarks


of the late Doctor Heifer who visited the spot, I feel
confident that, were due protection afforded, the
station would in a few years become of much im-
portance.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed. ) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces
Maulmein
The 19th June 1840.


To Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,.
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter under date the 19th instant/ regarding the
definition of our boundary on the Southern frontier
of Tenasserim.
2. The Chan river has been marked upon the-
maps, and generally understood to be the boundary
line between Siam and Tenasserim, and His Lordship
in Council has no hesitation in so recognising it.
3. But as from circumstances the population
subject to the British Government has not until lately
desired extensively to occupy land in the wild country
to the south of Mergui, I am desired to remark that
the assertion of our rights of possession on the left
bank of the Chan river should be made with caution
and forbearance.
4. The immediate establishment of an incon-
siderable settlement on the left bank of that stream
within our own territories, but on grounds on which
encroachment has been made by Siamese miners,
might lead to a collision which it is of course inex-
pedient to provoke, but which would be the more
likely to ensue should any emigration take place
of Chinese settlers from the Siamese side of the river
to our own on the formation of villages by us.
5. His Lordship in Council is, at the same time
that he desires me to inculcate the necessity of pru-
dence, far from inclined to forego the rights of the
British Government, or to consider the advantages
offered by the rich crop of tin procurable on the banks
of the Chan, as inconsiderable.
Fort William 27th July 1840.


■6. You will immediately write to the Siamese
Governor of Moundaong, and desire him to restrain
the encroachments referred to, and inform him that the
King of Siam has been addressed with a request that
he will issue orders to his officers to abstain from such
trespasses upon the British territor}^.
7. Your letter to the King of Siam requesting
him so to instruct his officers, and pointing out the
danger of collision from such encroachments be-
tween the subjects of the two allied nations, will
o 1 course be framed in terms of perfect friendship
and moderation.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) H. Torrens
Offg. Secretary to Government
of India.
Fort William
27th July 1840.


Fort William 11th January 1841.
To T. H. Maddock Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose for the information of
the Right Honble. the Governor General of India in
Council copy of a letter addressed by me to the Minis-
ters at the Court of Siam* on the subject of the
southern boundary of these provinces. This letter
I forwarded from Tavoy, in charge of a small party of
men, the route from thence being considerably shorter
than from this place. I availed myself of the oppor-
tunity to request the Minister would give orders to
allow the people of Tavoy to purchase cattle within
the Siamese territories, as, I regret to state, that
owing to a violent epidemic, nearly the whole of the
cattle within that province have been swept off, and
the unfortunate people now possess few or no mejins
for carrying on their usual grain cultivation.
I have the honor &ca
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Moulmain
The 24th Novr. 1840.


From the Commissioner, Tenasserim Provinces,
to the Ministers of Siam.
In accordance with the great friendship that has
always existed between the two great countries of the
Siamese and English, I write this letter to the Minis-
ters to acquaint them that the Mjm Sangyee of Re-
noung, on the south side of the Chan river, interferes
with British subjects on the north side of that river,
and saj r s that he possesses authority on both sides of
that river. Now it is well known that the Chan river
is the boundary between the English and the Siamese
and consequently the Renoung, Myo Songyee, has no
right to exercise any authority on the English side of
the Chan river, and I request you will issue orders to
him not to do so in future, according to friendship,
because little men should not be allowed to do what
may injure the friendship between great countries.
Owing to a great sickness nearly all the buffaloes and
cows in the country of Tavoy have died during the
past year and the people of Tavoy are in great dis-
tress and have no means of cultivating paddy. 1
request of you to allow them to purchase buffaloes in
your country and to bring them to Tavoy. If you
will give an order to this effect the Tavoy people will
be very grateful and will take money to buy buffaloes
and the great English Ruler of India will be very
much pleased at such an instance of your great friend-
ship. I send this letter by the hand of Nga pazee and
5 men who will wait to bring back your reply.
(Signed.) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.


Fort William 21st February 1842.
To T. H. Maddock Esquire,
Secretary to the Govt, of India Political Depart-
ment,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to report to you for the infor-
mation of the Right Honble. the Governor General of
India in Council, that I have lately visited the Chan
river, forming the southern boundary between our-
selves and the Siamese, and which, as such boundary
is at present a subject of some dispute.*
I arrived at the mouth of the river on the even-
ing of the 21st ulto. and anchoring off the entrance
of the creek leading to the small Siamese settlement
of Renoung, a person calling himself the head man
of that place came off, whom I desired to send notice
to his Superior at Pakchan (about a tide and a halt
up the river) of my arrival in a steamer and of my
wish to confer with him on the subject of our landing,
if he would come down and meet me, as the steamer
could not proceed so far up the river. This he pro-
mised to do immediately.
On the following morning (22d) I proceeded up
the river in the steamer and anchored about a couple
of miles up the Malewan branch at the spot marked
A. on the accompanying sketch. My Assistant, Mr.
Corbin, who accompanied [raej, proceeded at once to
the settlement formed by some of our people at Ma-
lewan where he obtained a fast pulling canoe, which
was sent up that evening to Pakchan with another
message to the head man of that place, acquainting
him of my arrival and of my wish to confer with him,
if he would come down the river.


On the 23d 1 visited our people’s settlement at
Malewan which I found to contain about forty decent
huts inhabited chiefly by Malays with a few Siamese
and Chinese. They have cleared some extent of
jungle, have raised sufficient grain for their subsis-
tence and are preparing to collect tin during the
ensuing rains. It does not appear that they are in
any way molested by the Siamese of Pakchan but they
have “been warned that their right of establishment
there is not recognised by the Siamese Government,
who may eventually call on them to abide by the
monopoly of tin as it exists in the district under
Siam. I told the assembled villagers that they would
be considered as British Subjects, that they would be
visited occasionally by Government officers, that if
force was used towards them by the Siamese they
might resist it and that they would be succoured if
necessary from Mergui. At the same time I let
them know that the interest felt in them and the
desire to assist and protect them would depend
greatly on the value they might affix to the Settle-
ment by the quantity of tin they might collect and
dispose of. They promised to work hard during the
ensuing rains when the running streams are full, and
I trust they will succeed, as from all I could learn on
the subject, there appears no doubt that stream tin is
extremely abundant in that neighbourhood.
On the 24th, having been then three days in the
river, and no return of any kind having been made to
my messages to Pakchan, I quitted and returned to
Mergui.
I beg to state that as a harbour and running stream
this Chan river is perhaps one of the most eligible
within the British Indian Dominions. Easy of access,
sheltered from winds and the sea, the largest line
of battle ship might beat up it a distance of nearly


20 miles. At present, however, like many other noble
rivers and harbours on this coast it is of no use to us.
The country from Mergui downwards ( and the same
may be said of nearly the whole peninsula ) is one
mass of dense jungle untenanted by man. It is
however a splendid tract of country, possessing a rich
and fertile soil and a temperate climate, both adapted
to every species of cultivation. lam unwilling as yet
to raise any strong hopes of much tin being procured
in the neighbourhood of the new settlement. That it
exists there, 1 can entertain but little doubt, and the
people have settled on the spot solely to work it. In
another year or two all doubts on the subject will be
cleared up. The assurance of protection will, 1 know,
induce some Chinese with a little capital to expend it
there, and if they meet with adequate returns, their
operations will be extended and this noble river may
ere long see ships arriving in it to carry ofi the
produce.
I beg to enclose copy of a letter* which 1
purpose addressing to the Ministers of Siam on the
subject of our southern boundary. In this I suggest
that an officer should be deputed by them to meet me
on the spot, though I doubt whether they will assent to
it, or, if they do, whether it will lead to any good
result. The subject is so far one of difficulty that the
whole country is and has been for many years, since
the conquest by the Burmese, an uninhabited wild-
erness in which neither Burmese nor Siamese possessed
any permanent posts. The real objection of the
Siamese to our occupation of the right bank of the
Chan must proceed from the knowledge that a per-
manent settlement there on our part will immediately
draw off all their people from the left bank to the
enjoyment of security and comparative wealth with us.
Beyond this, the measure does not affect them, inas-
much as we claim no country in which they have made


any attempt at settlement since our possession of thi-s
•coast.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed. ) E. A. Blundell,
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces,
Maulmein
The Ist February 1842,


From the Commissioner, Tenasserim Provinces,
to the Ministers at the Court of Siam.
In the month of December 1819 I received the let-
ter addressed to me by the Ministers on the Chan river
and have understood its contents. What the Ministers
say in this letter is very true, that the Burmese and
Siamese are enemies by long standing and therefore-
could never have fixed the boundaries between them
and that all the country between them was overgrown
with jungle. Now the English and Siamese a.ie and
always have been friends. Since the English have
taken the countries of Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim
from the Burmese, they have never carried off the
people Of Siam, neither have the Siamese ever carried
off the people of the English. The people of both
countries are protected and happy and they spread over
the country as the jungle did when the Burmese and
Siamese were always at war with each other. Con-
sequently it is necessary to fix how far the English
people shall spread and how far the Siamese shall
spread. Ever since the English have possessed this
country they have understood that the river Chan for-
med the boundary between them and the Siamese and
all the people of Mergui say that such was the boun-
dary when the Burmese held it and that thej/ never
heard of the boundary which is mentioned in the
letter of the Ministers. Being desirous of seeing the
Siamese officers at Pakchan, I went down there in a
fire ship and arrived at Renoung on the evening ot
21st. I desired the Songee of Renoung to acquaint
the Myowoon of Pakchan of my arrival and of my
desire to see him if he would come down and meet
me. On the 22d I went up to Malewan where the
English have villages and I sent up a boat to Pakchan
with another message to say I wished to meet the
Fort William 21st February 1842.


Myowoon if he would come down. I waited till noon
of the 24th, but as no one came to meet me, I went
a way again. I do not know whether the Myowoon
was at Pakchan, but if he was he ought to have an-
swered my messages. The English have a village on
the north side of the Chan river, the Siamese have
none. If the Ministers will send an officer of rank
fully empowered to settle this matter I will go and
meet him in the Chan river at such time as the
Ministers will fix, in order that the limits of the two
.great Countries may be fixed. The English and the
Siamese are great friends and this is a small matter
that ought not to interrupt friendship, therefore it
ought to be settled quickly and to do this, officers
appointed by the English Ruler and the King of Siam
should meet on the spot and fix the boundary between
the two great countries according to friendship.
( Signed ) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Manlmain.


To Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
Your report on the Chan river dated the Ist inst.*
has been laid before the Governor General in Oouncih
and on the subject of the settlement which you pro-
pose to form on the right bank of that river, I am
directed to enjoin the necessity of great caution in
your proceedings towards that end.
2. Ilis Lordship in Council is not convinced of
the necessity of raising any formal discussion on a line
of boundar}?’ between our possessions and those of
Siam at the southern extremity of the Tenasserim
province, and he is apprehensive that the protection
of a new settlement on the border would prove embar-
rassing unless military establishments were kept up
there for the purpose and this would be a measure
for which the Government is in no way prepared.
3. On the whole the Governor General is of opin-
ion that the tim3 is not yet arrived when we ran pru~
dently hold out encouragement to settlers to fix them-
selves at a spot so distant from British Authority, and so
much exposed to aggressions of their neighbours as the
place in question and if the Siamese have not at once
accepted your invitation to send an officer to meet you
on the spot His Lordship in Council would not repeat
it or press the question of boundary to an immediate
settlement.
1 have the honor &ca.
(Signed) T. H. Maddock
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Fort William
The 21st February 1842.


Fort William the 24th August 1842
To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Officiating Secretary to the Govt, of India,
Secret and Political Department,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose for the information of
the Honble. the President of the Council of India
translation of a letter* received by me from the
Ministers of the Court of Siam,
The first part of this letter is in answer to mine
acceding to my request that they would depute an
officer of rank to confer with me on the spot relative
to the settlement of the southern boundary of these
Provinces and intimating that they will abide by the
decision I may come to.
The second part contains an offer of assistance in
the event of our being attacked by the Burmese, and
expresses their apprehension of such an event in
consequence of learning though Mr. Hunter (an Eng-
lish merchant residing at Bangkok ) via Singapore,
that the King of Ava was about to return to Rangoon
with a large body of men, and that our force at Moul-
mein had been withdrawn.
The letter concludes with the request that the
messenger to whom it is entrusted may be allowed to
o *
reside at Moulmein in order to forward intelligence to
the Court of what is taking place here. This
messenger is the same individual who came here last
year and who returned to Bankok in April last with
my letter above alluded to. it appears that he was
only three days at Bankok when he was ordered to
return here and contrary to their usual practice, no


intimation of his return was given to Mr. Hunter
in order to his writing to me.
I always have felt and still do feel great confid-
ence in the pacific disposition of the Court of Siam as
regards us, but 1 deem it my duty to bring to the
notice of Government the ground that exists for some
suspicion that this confidence may be misplaced.
Ist. It is not impossible, nay not improbable,,
that the Court of China may have called upon those
of Siam and Burmah to effect a division in its favor.
Siam is more subject to Chinese influence than
Burmah, but Burmah would be far more influenced
by hostile feeling towards us.
2dly. In my last letter to your address I reported
the circumstance of some priests having come here
from Han goon and obtained a pass to proceed over-
land to Siam and the suspicions that then existed of
their being emissaries from Burmah. It has since
been reported to me that on their way, after quitting
this Province, four of these persons threw off their
priestly garments and assumed those of Court officials.
These men could not have arrived at Bankok previous
to the departure of the messenger just arrived thence,
and on ray questioning him on the subject he said he
had not heard of them, and volunteered the assurance
that they would be immediately seized and imprison-
ed by his Court.
3d. This messenger from Bankok has been dis-
patched with the greatest haste at a most unusual and
inclement season of the year for travelling. His
departure was kept a secret from Mr. Hunter, which
has never been done before, and he brings a letter
more yielding and more liberal than the occasion
seems to call for, inasmuch as when thej first heard
at Bankok that the King was coming down last
year with a large army they dispatched this same
messenger with a decided denial of the Pakchan river


as our boundary and without any allusion whatever to
the King of Ava’s movements.
4. From a paragraph that appeared in the Sin-
gapore Free Press under date 19th May last it would
appear that a formidable armament directed by Siam
against Cochin China had been withdrawn without
effecting anything and that it was uncertain whether
any thing had been even attempted by it. It is
possible that this war between Siam and Cochin
China may have been put an end to by the influence
of China.
5. I have received a note from Mr. Brown, the
temporary agent at Rangoon for Post office purposes,
under date the 28th ultimo in which he says “Within
these few days letters have been received from Amara-
pura up to the Bth of this month and I learn from a
party in whom 1 have the greatest confidence that
he is privately informed that it is the intention of this
Government to enter into hostilities with that of
China. He enters into no details concerning this
seemingly extraordinary report and I mention it to
you as it has reached me. The information has been
given so pointedly as to lead me to believe that this
Government either intends to make war on China or
that they wish such an opinion to have credence.”
This report of a contemplated war with China has
also reached me from other quarters. Granting that
the report be correct, I cannot for a moment think
that the King of Ava would venture on any such ex-
pedition. In the first place he would have an immense
tract of thinly inhabited mountain and jungle to pass
over ere he attained the Chinese frontier, carrying
with him provisions and munitions of war, while in
the second he must be apprehensive that we might
avail ourselves of such an opportunity to place our re-
lations with him on a different footing. We are not
aware of any ground he may have for a war with


China and it is certainly most unlikely, after all that
has occurred that he should suddenly resolve on assist-
ing us in our operations against the Chinese. I must
naturally therefore come to the conclusion that if the
King of Ava is collecting trops nominally to attack
China they will in reality be directed against us.
I beg to be distinctly understood as in no way
desirous of creating any present alarm. The reports
of the Burmese arming nominally against China
require more confirmation, and the suspicions 1 have
brought forward against Siam are as yet of no great
weight. Still both are worthy of attention. We
know the Burmese Court to be most hostilely disposed
towards us. We know the Court of Siam to be greatly
under the influence of that of China and we know that
the most exaggerated reports of our defeats and
disasters are greedily listened to at both these Courts*
We must be prepared for all contingencies and as
amongst them is that of the King of Ava assembling
an army and appearing on the frontier before the
end of the rains, I feel anxious about having the
means of rapid communication with the Presidency
and must entreat that a sea going steamer be attached
to me. I would also ask for at least one river steamer,
but 1 fear there are none remaining in India to send
to this coast. It is needless to point out the great
value of such a vessel in the event of our being
threatened with an attack.
As connected with the reports of the Burmese
arming I may mention that the granaries erected at
Rangoon previous to and during the King’s late visit
to that place, continue to be kept full of stores and
provisions of all kinds, though we do not hear that
any such have been prepared more in our immediate
neighbourhood. The continued residence at Martaban
of the Governor against whom we have had such
frequent grounds of complaint and the nonappoint-
ment of the former Viceroy of Rangoon as at one


time announced, and who is known to be most averse
to any collision with ns, are also in some degree
i idicative of the entertainment of hostile designs
towards us.
I am perhaps to blame in thus bringing forward
a mass of mere crude suspicion of the formation of a
confederacy against us in those regions, acknowledg-
ing as I do, the claims to our confidence possessed by
Siam. She is the inveterate enemy of Burmah, she
is weak and unwarlike, her capital lies exposed to us,
and her Ministers have just offered through me her
assistance against the Burmese if needed. Still there
is nothing irrational in the supposition that the in-
fluence of China may prevail in her councils, and any
indications of it, however remote, should be noticed.
That Burmah should be open to any suggestion hostile
to us, coming from China, is indeed extremely pro-
bable, and should we be satisfied that she is again
collecting a force I presume Government will think
fit to prepare reinforcements for our defence in these
Provinces.
1 have of course acceded to the request contained
in the letter from the Siamese Ministers that their
messenger should be allowed to reside in Moulmein
and forward them intelligence of what is going on
here and as he is about to send back some of his fol-
lowers with letters. I have the honor to enclose cop} 7 of
my reply* to the communication from the Ministers
herewith forwarded.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner Tenasserim Province
Moulmein
12th July 1842


Letter from the Ministers of Siam to the Com-
missioner of the Tenasserim Provinces.
Khoon Wesoot sanee and Saming Thanoo chak
having returned from Moulmein to the Kingdom of
Siam brought with them a letter from the Commis-
sioner of the Tenasserim Provinces in which it is
stated (Copy of this letter was enclosed in the Com-
missioner’s dispatch to Mr. Secy. Haddock, No. 62,
of Ist February last*). The contents have been fully
understood.
The Thoogyee of Krah also sent in a report in the
3d Moon in the year Kan stating that the Com-
missioner having arrived in the vicinity of Krah in a
steamer, anchored off Eanoung and sent people to
inform the Thoogyee of Krah of the same. After
which the vessel moved up to the mouth of the Moul-
mein river, when the Commissioner dispatched a boat
with some Malays bearing a message to say he wished
to see the Thoogyee of Krah. When this intelligence
reached the Thoogyee he prepared boats and provi-
sions and proceeded to wait on the Commissioner,
but officer had taken his departure before the
Thocgyee arrived.
Formerly when the towns of Mergui, Tenasserim
and Tavoy were under subjection to Siam, people
journeying to or from Tavoy to the capital of Siam
proceeded by the Tatakoon route, and those from
Mergui or Tenasserim went by the Thain Koon road.
The towns of Tavoy, Mergui Tenasserim and
Krah are at a distance from each other and the ter-
ritories belonging to them were formerly well popu_
lated. The Governors of Krah were called “ Paya
Kro Koross.” (!) The large Bay of Pakchan forms the
mouth of Krah river. Eanoung is under the autho


rlty of Krah and lies lower down the river. The
Siamese village lies at the mouth of the Lamon River,
directly opposite the mouth of the Malewan river on
the northern side.
As to what the Siamese and Burmese residents of
Mergui told the Commissioner respecting the Burmese
boundary being from the northern bank of the river
Pakchan it is not even near that town, but on the
contrary close to Krah. If such was not the case at
what place did the/ Burmese post their men to guard
their boundary ? as higher up the river Chan there
are several Siamese towns and villages on both banks.
Moung at and Moung yeat with some Siamese
established themselves at Moulmain long before Che
Song’s party came there.
As to what the Commissioner observes in his
letter that the Siamese and Burmese have long been
enemies and never had any defined boundary between
them, this is perfectly correct. The Commissioner
has himself visited the places and must be aware to
whom they belong, and where the proper boundary is.
We therefore request the Commissioner will consider
the matter and judge fairly.
The Commissioner proposes to have a Siamese
officer sent to Moulmein and that he would proceed
thither and meet him so that the boundary may be
settled in a friendly manner, and that the existing
friendship between the two nations may not be
darkened by matters of small import. This is very
satisfactory indeed, but as the rainy season has set in,
it would be difficult and dangerous for any party to
proceed now to the place through the jungle, but after
the rains are over we will depute an officer on this
duty and will convey information of the same to the
Commissioner. Khoon Wesoot Sanee and Pay a Tha-
noo Chak have informed us that some Talains who
had proceeded from Moulmain to Rangoon in a tmffick


ing expedition had returned prior to their quitting
the former place and reported that the King of Ava
had taken his departure from Okulabut (Rangoon) for
Prome, that His Majesty would not continue his
journey to Ava but return on the 7th Moon to cast
the bell, and that orders had been issued to the
Governor to have eight granaries erected at Okulabut.
Mr, Hunter has also informed us that he has received
letters or newspapers from Singapore stating that the
Burmese were going to attack the English and that
the King of Ava had come down to Okulabut with an
army of 40,000 and that the Governor of Bengal had
sent down troops and ships of war for the protection
of Maulmain. The King of Ava finding that he
could not effect any thing left Rangoon, giving out
that it. was his intention to return to his capital, but
instead of doing so went to Bassein. The English
troops have also been withdrawn from Moulmein. It
is further positively stated that the King of Ava will
return again. The Commissioner has also written to
l o
Mr. Hunter mentioning that the King of Ava had
returned to his capital but that it was reported he
would again visit Rangoon.
We are in doubts as to whether the Burmese
intend to attack the English or pass the borders of
the British territories and attack the countries tribu-
tary and belonging to Siam. The Burmese and
Siamese are enemies, but the English and Siamese are
friends. Moulmein separates the Siamese from the
Burmese and the two nations have not in consequence
been at war for a long period. Should the Burmese
go to war with the English, the Siamese are prepared
to march and help their friends the English If on
the other hand the Burmese intend to make war with
Siam we shall have to send out troops to fight them.
Our business is to protect and preserve our country.
We should be careful to watch the movements of our
enemies. We have therefore sent Paya Thanoo Chak
with followers, in all 11 men, an 1 we request the


Commissioner in consideration of our existing friend*
ship to permit him to reside in Moulmein to transmit
to us intelligence from time to time, until the rumours
•of war have abated .
Dated Thursday the 18th day of the waning of
the 7th Moon in the year 1204.


From the Commissioner in the Tenasserim Pro-
vinces tathe Ministers of Siam.
The letter brought by Saining Thanoo Chak has-
been received and its contents understood. In this
letter it is said that a suitable officer.will be sent in the
fine weather to confer with me about the boundary
between the English and Siamese, and that an array is
prepared to send to our assistance against the Burmese
if the English require it.- This letter will give great
satisfaction to the Ruler of India to whom it will be
sent for orders and for permission to the bearer of
the letter. Saming-Thanoo-chak having applied for
permission to send back twenty of the men who
had accompanied him with letters for the Ministers-
ft has been granted and he will be allowed to reside
here pending the orders ot the Ruler of India. The
men now returning cany a packet addressed to- Mr..
Hunter, which I request may be delivered to him.
Moulmein
The 12th July 1842.
( True Copy )
E. A. Blundell
Commissioner.


Fort William 21st December 1842.
To G. A. Bushby Esqr.
Officiating Secretary to the Government of India
Secret and Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to my letter to your address of
12th July last* and to its enclosed translation of a
letter from the Ministers of Siam, 1 have the honor to
enclose copy of a letter which 1 have this day
addressed to the Ministers by some messengers about
to be dispatched by their officer residing here.
His Honor in Council is aware from former cor-
respondence that a disagreement exists between the
Siamese and ourselves relative to the southern bound-
ary of these Provinces, which it is desirable should be
settled as soon and as quietly as may be practicable.
It appears to me that the best mode of effecting this
object is that of meeting a duly authorized Siamese
officer on the spot, and the time I have fixed will
allow of the Ministers deputing such an officer. The
settlement of this question is yearly becoming more
urgent in consequence of the attraction held out
to settlers on what we now call our side of the Pak-
chan River, by the beds of Tin ore.
I have the honor &c.
( Signed.) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Moulmein
7th Deer. 1842


To Their Excellencies
The Ministers of the Court of Siam.
In the letter of your Excellencies dated the lOilt
day of the waning of the 7th Moon in the year 1204*
it is said that after the rains an officer should be sent
to meet me at Pakchan and in reply dated 12th July
1842, I stated my gratification at such an arrange-
ment. It is very desirable that a meeting should take
place between myself and a Siamese officer of rank at
Pakchan, this season, if possible, and I therefore now
write to inform your Excellencies that I ™*ono«e being
in the Pakchan river on or about the Ist day of
March next, when if you will direct some officer
of rank to be there to meet me, we may discuss-
and settle the boundary between the English and
Siamese countries.
I am happy to inform you that the King of Ava
has not come down to Ilangoon as he did last year
and that there is no appearance of his doing so this
season. The officer Saming Thanoo chak, whom you
have sent to reside in this place and to give yon
intelligence, conducts himself with great propriety and
is allowed to go where he likes.
(Signed) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Moulmein,
7th Deer, 1842.
Fort William 21st December 1842.


Extract Political Letter to India
Dated 18th January 1843.
Para. 100. The Chan river is believed by our
local officers to be the true boundaiy between our pro-
vinces and the Shan territory belonging to Siam; but
the Siamese allege that the boundary line is further
north. We approve your instructions to Mr. Blundell
not to urge our claims in opposition to de facto
possession of any considerable duration. We hope
that his approaching visit to that part ot the country
will facilitate an amicable settlement of the question
in dispute.


Fort William the 17th February 1844.
To T. R. Davidson Esquire,
Offg. Secy, to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that a party of
the Siamese inhabitants ot the Tenasserim district have
settled themselves at a place in our territory, and have
sought and obtained the protection of the Siamese
frontier officers. These people have been driven to
this step by heavy revenue exactions and other oppres-
sions on our part which will be duly reported to the
Sudder Board of Revenue. The frontier officers of
Siam have given them a written paper of recognition
as Siamese subjects,' and authorize them to receive
other settlers from us. They pay revenue to Siam and
have threatened to resist by arms its demand by us.
This has gone on for two or three years, and there is
no doubt the Court of Bangkok knows and authorizes
it, though it will as certainly disavow its officers if it
finds such a course convenient.
I have resolved to take no notice of the matter for
the present because I have redressed the grievances
complained of, and I-have every hope the people will
return to their homes as soon as confidence is restored.
In fact the} 7 have had an agent here since my arrival
to watch the result of the complaints against Mr.
Corbin. Should I be disappointed, I shall again
report on the subject.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed. ) G. Broadfoot.
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Mergui
12lh December 184-3.


Fort William the 16th March 1844.
To T. R. Davidson Esquire,
Secy, to the Govt, of India
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
i have the honor to inform you that the Annual
Mission from the Court of Siam has arrived here, and
that I* have directed the envoys and their attendants
to be entertained at the public expense.
2. Besides the usual complimentary letters the
Ministry of Bangkok have this year sent a long and
separate communication regarding our frontier. To
prevent mistakes they have sent two copies in differ-
ent languages, one in Siamese and one in Talian or
the language of Pegu, that is of this part of the Pro-
vinces. They have moreover expressed much anxiety
that some final arrangement should be come to.
These letters are under translation and 1 have of
course not entered on any discussion.
3. It has of late become important to settle de-
finitely the frontier between these provinces and Siam
because certain changes in the revenue administration
and in other respects lately made have caused along
the frontier a great desire to be recognised as our
subjects even when some abuses of an oppressive
nature had, I grieve to say, driven the people to seek
Siamese protection, and complaints are now arriving
of Siamese incursions into our territory. The true
boundary is a good one but by ignorance and en-
croachment some confusion has arisen which if not
now set right will probably lead hereafter to jealousy
and collusion. At present the feeling on both sides
is friendly and I shall endeavour to keep it so, and
if possible shall avoid giving any definitive answer on


any point till I can receive the instructions of the
Honble. the President in Council.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) G. Broadfoot
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces
Maul main
Commissioner’s Office
The 6th February 1844.


To Major G. Broadfoot
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter, dated 6th ultimo, reporting the arrival ot
the annual mission from the Court of Siam and adver-
ting to the necessity of settling definitely the frontier
line between the Tenasserim Provinces and Siam.
2. In reply I am directed to inform you that the
Governor General in Council desires that you will use
your best endeavours to settle a good and natural
boundary about which there may be no dispute and
which may really define the [boundary] of the states
alluded to
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) F. Currie
Secretary to the Govt. of
India.
Fort William
The 16th March 1844.


Fort William the 18th May 1844.
To F. Currie Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
In consequence of a report from Captain Moore,,
the Assistant in charge of Mergui, copy of which 1 do
myself the honor of enclosing for the information of
the Right Honble. the Governor General, I have re-
solved to visit the southern boundary and proceed
thither in a day or two.
2. As I deem it of importance to have the opin-
ion of Captain Smith of H. M. Ship “Siren” on certain
points connected with this boundary and the best
method of protecting the trade with the Straits, I have
with this view addressed him a letter, copy of which 1
also beg to enclose.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) G. Broadfoot
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Commissioner's Office,
Moulmein,
The 15th April 1844,


To Major G. Broadfoot, C. 8.,
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
1 have the honor to report that Chinaman Atchen
returned from Malaywan on the 23rd Instant, and
reported that one hundred Siamese had left that place,
and that the Siamese authorities threaten to come
and compel the Siamese to return to their own
country. He also reported that the Siamese have
established a post of a few men on the English side
of the river about Malaywan.
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. Moore, Bt. Captain
Assistant to the Commissioner
Tenasserim Provinces.
Mergui
28th March 1844..


To Captain Smith, R. N.,
H. M. Ship “ Siren.”
Sir,
Having lately received communications from the
southern provinces as well as from the Court of Siam
which cause me some anxiety with reference to our
southern frontiers, I am about proceeding to the
Pakchan River in the Honble. Company’s steamer
“ Enterprize/’
As the protection of that frontier and the whole
of the Mergui Archipelago from pirates is a measure
of primary importance to our position here, and
especially to the trade in grain, which there is reason
to believe will soon be immediately established
between this coast and the Straits of Malacca and
China, I am anxious to avail myself of some advice
and sentiments as to the best mode of fulfilling the
objects in view. I should therefore be glad if you will
accompany me on this duty.
On my return I propose requesting you to convey
my Reports to the Government of India on the subject
in order that they may be able to derive from you any
further information they may desire.
I have &ca.
( Signed. ) G. Broadfoot
Commissioner.
Moalmein,
The 11th December* 1844.
Fort William the 18th May 1844.


Fort William the 8th June 1844.
To F. Currie Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Foreign Department.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward copy of my answer to
the letter from the Ministers of the Court of Siam, as
well as of a letter regarding some apprehension of
some of our people trading with them
2. The former is intended chiefly to gain time
for inquiry, and after my return from the south I shall
ask for definite instructions on this matter. It is one
of some present and more future importance as the
irritation seems to be very great on the subject both
at the Court and on the frontier.
I have &ca.
( Signed. ) G. Broadfoot
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces
Maul main
Commissioner’s Office,
The 29th April 1844.


From
MAJOR GEORGE BROADFOOT, Companion of
the Most Honble. Military Order of the Bath, and
Commissioner on the part of the Governor General of
India for the Tenasserim Provinces vizt. the 22 cities
and 6 zahs of Martaban in the Talain country east
of the Salween River, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim
and the Cities to the South of Tenasserim.
To the Ministers of the THEE TYOKE tunah
Hoyawaddee Shoay MyoThga MahaTha-na dee pu dee.(!)
1. The Commissioner. Major Broadfoofc, has re-
ceived the letters of the Ministers of the Court of Siam
dated the 13th of the Waning Moon Mat-taw 1205
and written in duplicate, one copy being in Siamese
and one in Talain.
2. Both copies have been read and the contents
Understood.
3. They relate to the boundaries between the
British and Siamese territories in the south and to the
settlement of the British subjects on the Kra River.
The Commissioner has read with great attention the
friendly letters of the Ministers and assures them the
friendship between the British and Siamese Govern-
ments will always be remembered and the Commis-
sioner hopes the friendship will endure for ever and
increase every day.
4. The matter of the boundary between the
States is a very weighty matter and boundaries should
be carefully settled in order that disputes may not
arise, and that the bad men of both countries may be
restrained. But it is not only the boundaries on the
Kra River that require consideration—the boundaries
in the North and East between the Talain country be-
longing to the English and the Siamese countries of
Fort William the Bth June 1844.


Zimmay and Yahine, along the range of hills called
by the Talains Day Krine, require the deep con-
sideration both of the Ministers of Siam and of the
Commissioner.
5. With this is sent a paper given to the British
subjects in the British territory bearing the seal of
Siamese Officers and some bad people have in various
parts of the British territory claimed to be rulers over
British subjects, falsely using the name of the Gov-
ernment of Siam. The Commissioner thinks it right
to make this known to the Ministers, who he is sure
will prevent the foolish acts of bad people.
6. These matters of the boundary are such
weighty matters that time is necessary for inquiry and
reflection before any thing can be said. But the
envoys Byeen Myah Danoatset, We Cheet Soong
Khuun, and Moon Puckeedee being in haste to
return to Siam, the Commissioner will answer the
friendly letters of the Ministers on the return of the
envoys from Siam to Maulraein, or by sending the
answer to Bankok. In the mean time he takes the
opportunity of assuring the Ministers of his entire
confidence in the friendly disposition and love of
justice of the Government of Siam and of the continu-
ed desire of the British Government in India to
preserve the ancient friendship between the two
nations.
7. This letter is sent in English but for infor-
mation a Burmese translation has been made and
sent.
(Signed) G. Broadfoot,
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Maul main
26th March 1844


Fort William the 21st December 1844.
To. F, Currie Esquire,
Secretary to the Govt, of India
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
In the absence of the Commissioner f do myself the
honor of transmitting [news] . . • regarding the
intended occupation of a portion of the Karennee
country by an armed Burmese force in connection with
one of the Karennee Chiefs . . .
2. The end of September and beginning of
October is the time mentioned as that in which the
Shan force { for I hear that no troops but those of the
tributary Shan provinces near the frontier are to be
employed ) will enter the Karennee country.
3. Though the time to send any notice to our
traders of what was in contemplation has already
passed, yet I have deemed it expedient to dispatch
messengers with letters to the authorities at Zimmay
and Laboring . . . with a view of intimating to
them what is going on immediately beyond their
frontier and to notify the same to our traders in their
territories . . .
**** • * *
7. Some of the older i ihabitants of the place
view the present movement as the first step towards
the invasion of the Siamese Shan States. It is not
improbable that the King of Ava may have some
, ulterior view of the sort. Enclosure No. 7* details a
most wanton and cruel aggression committed in 1839
by the Siamese Shan States on one of the frontier
towns tributary to Ava, and their carrying away as
captives 1,000 of the subjects of Ava, as well as
detaining certain messengers sent by the Chief of the
above State to establish a friendly communication


between them. This unjustifiable insult the King of
Ava never resented. He attempted to involve us in
the question, but was distinctly given to understand
that the Siamese were an independent nation in no way
under our control and redress must be sought from
themselves.
******
13. That the Shans tributary to Siam have laid
themselves open to chastisement there can be no
question, for nothing could have been more barbarous
than the attack before alluded to, but how far it would
be our policy to allow the King of Ava to appropriate
to himself any part of the territories belonging to
Siam or its tributaries is a question for grave con-
sideration, being one of importance as relates to our
political position here and to our trade generally.
1 have &ca.
( Signed ) W. C. McLeod
Principal Assistant to the Commissioner
Tenasserim Provinces.
Maulmain
the 18th October 1844


From Captain Henry Marion Durand
Commissioner on the part of the British
Government in India for the Tenasserim Pro-
vinces viz: the 22 cities and 6 zahs of Mar-
taban in the Talian country east of the
Salween River for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenas-
serira and the cities to the south of Tenas-
serim.
To the Ministers of the
Thee lyoke-turrah Doyawaddee
Shoay Myo Dan Iga Maha
Thana Dee-pee-dee. (!)
A letter has been brought from the Court of Ava
in which reference is made to the existence of a cause
of misunderstanding on the common frontier of the
kingdoms of Burraah and Siam.
The reply made to this communication is to the
effect that the British Government is of course wholly
ignorant of the alleged cause of misunderstanding and
that it would regret if, out of any such cause of
misunderstanding, a rupture took place between its
two friends and allies, the Courts of Ava and
Siam.
The reply further proceeds to remark that it is
customary amongst great and wise nations to end-
eavour to adjust such boundary questions by friendly
negotiation between the two States, and that failing
to succeed in thus adjusting frontier differences, rather
than plunge their countries into the miseries of war,
the arbitration of a third power, a friend and ally
of both parties is frequently invited to mediate.
The British Government would willingly, if invited,
exert its good offices iii preventing, by its mediation
as an umpire, any rupture between its friends and
allies.


The friendship which has always existed between
the Court of Siam and the British Government is the
reason that this intelligence is communicated to the
Court of Siam.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Moulmain
16th November 1844.


Fort William the 14th March 1845.
To F, Currie Esquire,
Secretary to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to report that information has
been received of the success of the Burmese forces in
the occupation of a portion of the Karennee Country.
2. No satisfactory details have been received of
the extent or exact nature of their conquest, which by
some of my informants appear to have been accom-
panied with severe measures towards the conquered.
The information is, however, scanty, indistinct and
incomplete.
3. The Siamese authorities are stated to have
assembled two separate forces in observation on their
Northern frontier.
4. A messenger from the Court of Siam bearing
letters arrived here on the 6th, and he had an interview
with me on the 9th instant, in which after stating the
result of some judicial enquiries, having reference to
cases in which subjects of the British provinces were
concerned, he intimated the desire of the Court that
the boundary question should be definitively settled.
5. The letters, three in number, have taken a
long time in translating, and I scarce hope before my
departure for Mergui to be able to report upon their
contents. I shall however endeavour to do so.
6. I purpose starting tomorrow on board the
“ Ganges ” for Mergui and the Pak Chan, staying on
my return at Tavoy. I expect to be absent six weeks.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand.
Commissioner Ten. Provs.
Maulmain
The 14-th February 1845.


To F. Currie Esquire,
Secretary Foreign Department.
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward copies of the letters
from the Siamese Court; the one refers to enquiries
of a judicial character, the order to the question of
boundary. A copy of my reply is also appended.
The readiness of the Siamese Court to assent to
that which they knew to be the proper boundary of
the British Provinces on this coast is satisfactory, and
may be attributed in addition to am' sense they may
have of the reality of the British right, to the alarm
which the Court evidently entertains, and on very
sufficient grounds, regarding the ulterior views of the
Burmese Court. The late operations in the Karennee
country have made the Siamese feel uneasy for the
security of their Shan States and Northern frontier,
and they naturally are desirous of meeting the wishes
of the British Government, dreading that a contrary line
of ’policy might lead the latter to countenance the
projects for extension of empire now in course of
development on the part of the Court of Ava.
The steps lately r taken to assert the rights of the
British to the right bank of the Pakchan as the
southern boundary of these provinces, no doubt preci-
pitated the measures of the Siamese Court. The visit
of a man of war to that river was a new and unusual
event, and the conclusion naturally enough drawn
was . that henceforth British boundaries had better be
respected.
Accordingly in a long conversation which passed
on board this vessel in the course of yesterday, between
the Siamese envoy and myself, he expressed, after
hearing my opinion as to the proper boundiry, the
Fort William the 14th March 1845.


entire readiness of his Court to abide by whatever the
Commissioner of these provinces settled to be the
boundary of the British Provinces ; that the Siamese
Court were anxious to have the question so determined
that all chance of collision or misundei standing on the
frontier should be avoided, but particularly on the
Southern or Pak Chan frontier where, from its nature,
there was rather more difficulty in so defining it as to
preclude occasional misunderstanding.
I dismissed him directing him at once to inform
his Court that I should shortly be in the Pak Chan,
and, in communication with the Siamese Authorities
would, on the spot, finally determine the boundary of
the southern extremity of the British Province.
This 1 shall endeavour to do in as satisfactory a
manner as circumstances permit and with the strictest
attention to Siamese as well as British rights.
I trust that the Bight Honble. the Governor
General will approve of the reply made to the Siamese
Court.
The envoy was made acquainted with my intention
of causing a line of road to be made up the Laing Booe
to the Northern frontier, and when that is finished a
line of road through Meerowaddee to the Eastern fron-
tier. It was intimated to him in order that his Court
might take no needless alarm at a measure adopted
purely for the advantage of facilitating traffic and ren-
dering both lines of road secure and convenient to the
Shan and Siamese traders whom I am anxious in every
way to encourage.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commr : Tenass : Provs :
H. C. S. Ganges,
Off Somerset Town
The 16th February 1845.


The great Egga-Maha-Tha-nah-deepaclee of the Gol-
den Royal City Thee-a Yoke-tara-dwah-ya-wadee ( ! )
writes to Major Broadfoot, Commissioner of
Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the Talian cities on the
east shore, acknowledging the receipt ot the three letters
which were sent by Major Broadfoot in consequence
of the existing friendship regarding Gna ya, Gna Tsan-
dah, Gna Tsiat tee and Gna Wara’s property being ta-
ken away from them at the Siamese States and confined
for about one month until they paid some money to be
released; and informs that these three letters were read
and well understood, and that a letter was sent to the
Thain city to inquire into the matter ot these indivi-
duals. The report received from the Thain Myotsa
regarding the case ot Gna Tsanda is as follows on
enquiry it is found that Gna Tsan-dah purchased one
female elephant from Moen-thait for 100 rupees,
which elephant was kept by Gna Tsan-dah in charge
of M ah-Noay-Thong and a musket was left to one
Khana-money and went out to trade; that before his
return the elephant made its escape from the hands of
the said Mah-Noay-Thong. Consequently he is made
to pay to Gna-Tsan-dah the sum of Rupees 100, being
the value of the elephant and the musket is taken
charge of by the Myotsa from Khana-money. Gna
Ya states as follows that Gna Homloochain’s elephant
was purchased by him at Baw-thoon village for Rupees
415. This elephant is taken away from him by the
Myotsa of Yahine. The Tut Myotsa after enquiry re-
ports that the elephant was never taken by the Yahine
Myotsa. A Karen Gnako is questioned who states
that when the watchmen went out they saw with the
Maycha-louk Tsokay Gna-Moonthee one elephant with
tusks, on which Gnakan asked the Tsokay to whom the
elephant belonged, who replied that he and his brothers
purchased it for 415 Rupees at Baw-thoon village and
Fort William the 14th March 1845.


Gna Kaw having suspicion took the elephant from the
Tsokay and kept with him for upwards of two months
and it ran away from him. Gna-Kaw not having
reported the circumstance to the authorities, the
Myotsa orders that Gna Kaw is to pay the value of the
elephant, Rupees 415, the original amount. The Myot-
sa of Tat and the Thain cities forwarded to the Thee-
a-yoke-tra-duah-ya-wadee (!) city the amount received
on account of Gna-ya T s elephant, Rs. 415, and 100 Rs. on
account of Gna-Tsain-dah’s elephant with one musket,
Gna Tsait and Gna Warah complains that they pur-
chased 20 buffaloes for 200 Rs. at Lagoon and on their
arrival at Yahine watching place, Phea-tseng-thong
took possession of the 20 buffaloes and kept the people
in confinement and were released after spending 120
rupees. The value of the buffaloes was not given
them.
Phra-tseng-Thong states that in the year 1205.
Gna-Tsait-tak, Gna-warah, Gna-theen-Khun, Gna-Than
Lureen and others in all 102, came to Lagoon for the
purpose of purchasing cattle, and on their return with
cattle they touched at the Tat City and the watchmen
of which place asked them if they had obtained a pass.
They replied “No.” On which they were prevented
by the watchmen for the purpose of taking them up to
the Myotsa. Of this prohibition they (Gna Tsait-tah
and Gna Warah) took no notice but drove on their
cattle beyond the watching place. They and their
people were therefore seized and on being told that it
was against the existing rules, two of the principal
men went back to Lagoon and brought a pass to Phra-
tseng-thong, when they were set free, and no buffaloes
nor any money were taken from them but that Gna
Tsait tah left three buffaloes with the watchmen as
they were unable to walk. The traders of the two
friendly nations should observe the rules of the place,
when only all will be at peace. The Myotsa of Tat
and Thain Cities having found the correctness of Gna


Ya an 1 Gna Tsen dah’s case, they sent the sum of Ru-
pees 515 and musket to Bankok, which are now given
in charge of Byeen-nyah-dunoo-tsek Khoom-wee-tseck
thoon Khrom-Moon-Pak-dee (!) to be delivered to Major
Broadfoot in consequence of the great existing friend-
ship.
Regarding the Kra River, the Chinese of Mah-
lee-one vizt, Gna-Sway, Gna Dee, and Gna Gna Noon
assembled the other Chinese and with a letter written
in their own language went over to the Kra City
armed, where they read the letter in which is men-
tioned that Lueng Anoorat is to deliver up the bad
man who murdered Gna Tsoon ; in failure he is to pay
the sum of Rupees 280 for the relations of the deceased
Gna Tsoon, and should he not be able to pay in
Rupees, 280 bundles of tin is to be taken from him,
which is equal to 280 Rupees ; this was given to them,
Lueng Anoorat is not to be blamed. These Chinese,
without any cause forcibly took away from him the
280 bundles of tin. All relating to this affair is men-
tioned in the last letter. Major Broadfoot will be
pleased to enquire into this matter justly, in considera-
tion of the great friendship which exists between the
two nations, English and Siamese.
Two letters sent one in Talians and the other in
Siamese on the subject.


Dated Nutdan waxing 13th 1206. [l3 Nov. 1844 J
The great Egga Maha Thana-dee Puddee ot the
Thee-Ayoh dwah-yah madee (!) Golden Royal City, in-
formed Major Broadfoot, Commissioner in the Tenas-
serim Provinces, that three letters sent by Major
Broadfoot in the hands of Byeen Nayah da moo-tset,
one of which is a petition of Gna Ya and the other
of Gna Tait tah and Gna Warah and one from Gna
Tsandah, in all three, are received; one ot the three
letters contains [remarks] regarding the boundaries
of the English and Siamese territories, the people of
the south bank of the Kra river having come over
to the English side. The English and the Siamese
are in great friendship up to this day. Major Broad-
foot having the inclination of continuing the existing
friendship is desirous of settling the boundaries be-
tween the two extensive territories so as no disputes
may arise in future. Major Broadfoot being the sole
controller should not only consider about the Kra
River, but should also consider of the boundaries
which existed in the ancient times between the Talains
and Siamese territories, and the Talains cities on the
east side of the river of the upper parts now owned by
the English and the Burmese of Zimmay and Vahine,
a long range of hills called by the Talains thoo Makree
to cousult with amicability and peace. As regards to
the people belonging to the English side being pre-
sented by the Siamese Chiefs with a written papei,
the sealed paper which was given to them is now
received back. Some bad men after using the name
of the Siamese Chiefs threatened to do things in the
English territories. For the purpose of putting a
stop to all these a letter was plainly written to
us, which is duly received. The Siamese Chiefs are
inclined to do justice, and the English Chiefs are also
desirous of doing justice in consequence of the existing
Fort William the 14th March 1845.


great friendship and not to discontinue it. Proper
consultation regarding boundary has not as yet been
made with each other. On the return of the bearers
of this, vizt. Byeen Nyoh danoo tset, Khoon-Y eetset-
toon, Khian and Moon Pack-dhee, on the last coca's ion
of their being in haste to return for the purpose of
avoiding the rainy season, should Byeen Nyah danoo
tset be unable to come down a letter would have been
sent mentioning all the particulars, but now as Byeen
nyah danoo tset is sent and a letter also written
mentioning all the particulars clearly*—the reasons
of the English and Siamese nations having an occasion
to speak about the boundaries are, on account of the
people who belong to the Siamese Territories living
on the South bank of the Kra river and now removed
to the English territories —Siamese and the English
nations being in the state of great friendship, and as
Major Broadfoot being the sole controller and being-
desirous of continuing the existing friendship has
written a letter regarding the settlement of the bound-
ary in amicable terms, the authorities of Theeayoot
taradwahyawadee (! ) golden royal city are also
to have the boundary decided No boundary was ever
settled between Mergui and the Kra cities in the
ancient times on account of the Burmese and the
Siamese having a war. All the particulars are men-
tioned in the last letter between the British subjects
who live at Maylee-wan and the people of Kra being
too near to each other. Between the cities of Mergui
and Kra there are many jungles, hills and streams.
Katseenlah Creek is also near to the Tlia-lahr-green
Island, which place and where will be the boundary ?
and have the British and Siamese subjects to leave*
far from each other, otherwise many disputes will
arise, and there must be some reason in those people
moving from one side to the other. The people of the
English side speak well to the English authorities andi
those of the Siamese side do the same to the Siamese
authorities, all of which are liable to cause some bad


feeling beteen the two great friendly nations. Request
that Major Broadfoot will take into consideration and
settle justly and fairly which is to be the boundary.
The Chiefs of the Theeayoke tayadwayawadee, (!)
golden royal city, are desirous to agree- The boun-
dary between the Tallin cities on the east bank now
owned by the British, and Zinmiay and Yahine is the
long range of hills called Tae-May-Kree which existed
from the ancient times and that guards were always
kept since the Burmese time to keep them off from
trespassing on Siamese side.
The sealed papers which were given to the Karens
are brought to Bankok. On inspection it shows it to
be a paper given by the guard officer, Lueng-Eng-
Kamanoon. In the years 1204 and 5 the Kareen
Tsokays Gna Patsa and Gna Fatah went to the Myotsa
of Doan-Kata and asked for permission to allow them
to reside on the frontiers for the purpose of cultivat-
ing, on which a written order was given them by
Lueng-Eng-Kamanoon, Guard Officer, mentioning
that no Siamese are to oppress them, the} being his
people he has sent them as guards on the frontier.
No order is given to make any prohibitions on the
English side. The Kareens wander from one place
to the other and during the time they stay on the
English side they call themselves English Kareens.
This cider was intended only to be used in Siamese
territories and not elsewhere. If any took such orders
to the British side they are to be blamed.


1. Usual Complimentary address.
2. The two letters from the great Egga Malta
(titles) intrusted to Danoo Tset for delivery have given
the Commissioner of the Tenasserim Provinces great
satisfaction, and they will afford the same he is sure
to the British Government which is anxious for the
continued welfare and prosperity of their ancient
allies the Court of Siam.
3. The Commissioner having lately been along
a portion of the North Eastern frontier was enabled
on the spot to satisfy himself as to their ancinet
boundary line in the Burmese time, which, as truly
remarked in the friendly letter under reply, was the
long range of hills called Tae-May-Kree. The bound-
ary has always been, and will in future always be
the line of water shed, that is to say, all ground which
is drained by streams falling into the Thoung yeen
river and into the Attran, the Ye, the Tenasserim
and Lanya Rivers belongs to the British: All ground
which is drained by streams falling to the eastward
and joining the rivers on the Siamese side of the line
of mountains belong to the Court of Siam. In other
words the line of water shed or the crest of the
ranges of mountains which forms the lines of separa-
tion between the waters falling into the British rivers
and those falling into the Siamese rivers is. and shall
in future always be, the boundary line between the
two states.
4. This line of boundary is that which nature
has formed and it possesses the great advantage that
as the crests of the steep mountains are never selected
for the position of towns or villages, a considerable
tract will exist between the towns and villages under
Siamese and those under British rule.
Fort William the 14th March 1845.


5. This line presents the further advantage of
being clearly defined the whole distance from north to
south and leaves only one point for adjustment vizt.
the Pakchan frontier.
6. The river Pak Chan flows through from the
Siamese side to the British side of the chain of hills
or high ground, and it is therefore requisite to decide
upon the intersection of the foregoing line of clearly
defined boundary with the right bank of the Pak
Chan, and this the Commissioner will do on the spot
in communication with the Siamese Authorities on
the Pak Chan,
7. When in the Pak Chan River the Commis-
sioner will institute careful enquiries with respect to
the conduct of the Chinese from the British side of
that river, and will not fail not only on this but on all
occasions to pay attention to such representai ions.
The British Government will hear with pleasure of the
friendly and cordial co-operation which exists between
the Siamese and the British authorities in bringing
to justice those wicked men who take advantage of
being on the frontiers of the two great nations to
commit acts of violence and the Siamese Court may
feel assured that the orders already given on this point
will be carefully repeated to the British authorities in
charge of the Province of Mergui. There is no great-
er sign of friendship between two states than cordial
co-operation in showing their respective subjects uhat
acts of violence whether performed against their own
fellow subjects or those of a neighbouring friendly
state will be severely punished.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
“ Ganges ”
Off Amherst
The 16th February 1845.


Fort William the 16th May 1845.
To F. Currie Esquire,
Secretary to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
1 have the honor to forward a copy of the letters
which will be taken by the messenger Benya Dhunnoo
sent to the Court of Bangkok regarding the southern
or Pak Chan boundary of the British Provinces.
2. The letter and the map which accompanies it *
sets forth clearly what that boundary is to be.
3. After an examination of the sources of the
Pak Chan 1 am not surprised at the Siamese Autho-
rities evincing some jealousy with reference to this part
of the frontier. The communication between the eastern
and western coasts of the Peninsula rs here perfectly
easy, and the Siamese have a road from Kra to Chum-
phon and the east coast. In ascending to the sources
ofthe Pak Chan proper no ground to any considerable
elevation had to be crossed, and a good road might
without any difficulty be made as far as I went.
4. Under these circumstances it did not appear
to me advisable to excite unnecessary alarm by propos-
ing that the boundarj' line should cross the Kra. The
only object in my visit was to ascertain the line which
should offer the best and clearest natural boundary.
The Kra in the upper part of its course, though
narrow, has precipitous banks. It is not a good but
at the same time it is not a very bad boundary and
it leaves to the Siamese a tract of country they must
naturally wish to retain, and which the British
Government has neither the inclination nor any clear
right to consider its own, though perhaps ns much


go as the Siamese who only crossed over the water shed
line to establish themselves on the western side of it a
few years ago, and who have therefore only the right
of prior occupancy to the British. In the time of the
Burmese Government in these Provinces the boundaries
there as elsewhere were constantly fluctuating accord-
ing to the temporary success of an ever-living border
warfare.
5. The messenger during his long stay at Moul-
mein will have enjoyed full opportunities of observing
and cannot but return thoroughly convinced of the
entire neutrality maintained between the Burmese and
Siamese Courts by the Local Authorities.
6. I have directed a w r ood depot for steamers to
be- collected at the mouth of the Mylewan Biver.
7. The inhabitants of Mylewan, consisting of
Chinese, Malays and Siamese, I found in great disorder
the three classes at enmity with each other, and
some atrocious crimes had been committed. I have
warned them that any well grounded cause of corn-
plaint preferred against them by the Siamese Authori-
ties will meet with the same attention and be punished
with equal if not greater punishment than if the
offences had taken place within our own frontier and
jurisdiction.
8. The chart, a copy of which accompanies this
fetter* was made by Mr. Crawley of the H.C.S. Ganges,
who surveyed nearly to the sources of the Kra.
I have &ca.
( Signed. ) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten: Prov:
Moulmain
The 7th April 1845.


From Captain Henry Marion Durand, Commis-
sioner on the part of the British Government in India
for the Tenasserim Provinces vitz. the twenty-two
cities and six zahs of Martaban in the Talain Country
East of the Salween river, Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim
and the cities to the south of the Tenasserim.
To the great Egga-maha-thay-Nadn-pudee of the
Thee Ayohe tura Dwah wadee Shway Myo-duru. ( ! )
1. In consequence of the representation made
in the letter from the great Egga maha-thay-nadu-
pudee entrusted to Benya-Dhunnoo Set, the Commis-
sioner, when in the Pak Chan river caused the Assis-
tant Commissioner, Captain Moore, to institute careful
enquiries into the case.
2. The depositions of the witnesses, in accusa-
tion and in defence were taken, and the matter
carefully examined.
d. One of the witnesses, the head man of Re-
noung, was not able to come, which formed a subject
of regret.
4. After an attentive enquiry it appeared that
there was no violence proved against the Chinese.
The relatives of a murdered man applied to the head
Siamese authority at Renoung for redress, and the
head Siamese authority after making full enquiry was
unable to do more than levy a fine upon the person on
whom suspicion rested. But the whole transaction
appears to have been carried on by and through the
the head Siamese authority of Renoung, and not by
open force on the part of the Chinese. An original
document, copy of which is appended, written at the
time, sets forth the events clearly.
Fort William the 16th May 1846.


5, The people of Mylewan have been cautioned
against committing any offences towards the Siamese
authorities or people, and that they would be severely
punished if they afforded the Siamese authorities
grounds of complaint which on enquiry should prove
well founded. They are aware of the strict and cordial
friendship between the Siamese Court and the British
Government, and they will carefully observe the Com-
missioner’s instructions.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten. Prov.
Moulmain
The sth April 1845.


From Captain Henry Marion Durand, Commis-
sioner on the part of the British Government n India
for the Tenasserim Provinces viz: the 22 cities and 6
zahs of Martaban in the Talain country East of the
Salween River for Tavoy, Mergui and Tenasserim, and
the cities to the south of Tenasserim.
To the great Egga Maha Thay nah dee puddee of
the Thee Ayoke tara Dwah yawaddee Shway Myodaw. (!)
2. The Commissioner having returned from the
Pak Chan river is glad to find the Messenger Benya
Dhunnoo set still here, and has therefore entrusted him
with this letter to the great Egga Maha Thay nah dee
puddee of the Thee Ayoke Tara Dwah Yawaddee
Shway Myadaw.
3. During the time that the Commissioner was
in the Pak Chan river he caused the course of the Kra
and the Pak Chan to be carefully ascertained —that of
the Kullee River was already known. The Southern
boundary of the British territories is the Kra or Pak
Chan River from the sea as far as the junction of the
three forementioned streams, but beyond this point it
was undecided, and it was in order to determine with
precision this question that the Commissioner took
steps accurately to ascertain the course of the Kra and
Pak Chan rivers.
4. The accompanying map* will show clearly
the line of boundary and the course of the rivers.
5. The Commissioner stated in his former letter
that the proper boundary line between the two friend-
ly powers is the watershed line, that is, that all
ground which is drained by streams falling into the
Thoongeen, the Attaran, the Yah, the Tenasserim and
the Lenyah Rivers belongs to the British. All ground
which is drained by streams falling to the eastward


and joining the rivers on the Siamese side of the line
of mountains belongs to the Court of Siam.
6. The high ground along the west of which the
boundary line runs extends to the Pak Chan and
Kullee streams, tributaries of the Kra or great Pak
Chan, which are separated from the streams flowing
to the eastward upon the Siamese side by a ridge of
ground of no great elevation.
7. It is very desirable that there should be
one uniform rule as regards the boundary line from
north to south, and that by adhering to that rule
all causes of misunderstanding should be for ever
removed.
8. At the same time it is desirable that the
line of road, made by the Government of Siam and
which forms an easy communication between the
territories on the eastern side of the Peninsula and
those on the western side south of the British Pro-
vinces should be not only wholly in the hands of
the Court of Siam but also free from any possible
interference by the too great proximity of the fron-
tier line,.
9. To combine these two objects, viz : adherence
to the general rule that the water shed is the line of
boundary, and the avoiding interference with the line
of high road along the Kullee Stream to Chumphon
the proper line of boundary is as follows.
10. The southern boundary of the British Pro-
vinces is the Pak Chan or as it is called by the
Siamese the Kra river, from the sea upwards to its
source. The eastern bank belongs to the Siamese,
the western to the British Government. The free
navigation of the river is common to both nations.
11. The Commissioner has fixed upon the Kra
instead of the Pak Chan for the boundary above the
village of Kra because it is not the wish of the British


Government to hold a tract which may be of great
convenience to the Siamese in consequence of the
facility of communication between the eastern and
western sides of the Peninsula. The ground between
the Kra and the watershed line fron whence flows the
Pak Chan rises to a very moderate elevation and offers
no serious obstacle to easy communication between the
eastern bank of the Kra and the Siamese sea coast.
It may therefore as before remarked be of some im-
portance to the Siamese Government to have this
tract their own.
12. British Authorities on the Kra or Pak Chan
have been ordered carefully to avoid all interference
with the Siamese authorities on the opposite bank.
13. It is advisable that the Court of Bangkok
issue strict orders along their frontiers so that all
subordinate authorities may clearly understand the
line of boundary between the British and the Siamese
territories. Corresponding orders will be issued to the
subordinate British authorities, and the long con-
tinuance of uninterrupted friendship between the two
powers be thus maintained.
14. The boundary is clear and mistakes must in
future be inexcusable. The water shed line from
north to south as far as the source of the Kra, that is
all waters flowing into the Thoongeen, the Attaran
the Yeh, the Tenasserim, the Lenyah and the minor
rivers between the Lenyah and the Kra or Pak Chan
drain ground belonging to the British Government,
the southern boundary of whose provinces is the
western bank of the Kra.
15. Within this boundary no Siamese authorities
are to exercise any jurisdiction, levy any revenue, and


beyond this boundary no British authorities are to
exercise any jurisdiction or levy any revenue.
( Signed. ) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten : Prov :
Maulmain,
The sth April 1845,


To F. Currie Esquire
Secretary to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to report that on the 14th in-
stant I informed the bearer of the letter from the
Court of Bangkok that the replies were ready and
that he was at liberty to return whenever he pleased
2. His departure has been delayed in consequ-
ence of some proceedings he instituted in the Police
Magistrates’ Court. He will however shortly take his
departure.
3. He has been directed to inform the Court of
Bangkok of my intention of commencing a road up
the Loung Baee to the frontier, and that when that
shall be completed a road to Meewuddee will be be-
gun. That the object for forming these roads is en-
tirely with the view of facilitating commerce, and that
the Court of Bangkok are not to entertain groundless
apprehensions in consequence of any rumours which
may originate in misrepresentations regarding this
measure.
4. He has likewise been instructed to inform
his Court that I have ordered a wood depdt to be for-
med in the Pak Chan river in order that our steamers
may be able to supply themselves with fuel when that
river is visited, and that these visits will be compara-
tively frequent.
5. It was often repeated to him and much dwelt
upon, that the Court of Bangkok might rely upon the
continued friendship of the British Government, and
need, unless themselves give the cause, entertain no
apprehensions that the existing good understanding


would be disturbed. That the most satisfactory me-
thod of clearing up any doubts which in future migh t
be entertained in consequence of rumours was to send
to the local authorities at Maulmain to enquire and
that there would be no hesitation in communication
to the Court of Bangkok the exact truth of any
circumstances from which an erroneous rumour should
happen to arise.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand,
Commissioner.
Maulmain
16fch April 1845.


Fort William the 25th October 1845.
To F. Currie Esquire,
Secretary to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Governor General in Council that on the 24th
ultimo a messenger from Rangoon arrived at this
place.
3, The letter evinces an unaltered resolution on
the part of that Court to engage in hostilities with
the Court ot Bangkok. No allusion is made to the
slow progress of the Burmese Army in the conquest
of the Karenee country, nor does the letter advert to
the late rebellion under the General Moung Taring Bo
which evidently had the effect ot paralyzing the
exertions of the Burmese Forces and distracted the
attention of the Court from the Shan frontier to a
theatre ot disturbance of more immediate importance.
4. Before the rise of this rebellion the Burmese
Forces on the Shan frontier had obtained some suc-
cess. Pa Pair, a subordinate Karennee Chief who
joined the Burmese, is said to have been instrumental,
though his knowledge of the difficult country in which
the operations were conducted, in enabling the Bur-
mese Forces to attack a Karennee Chief of the name
of Ka Doh under such advantageous circumstances
that that chief and many of his men were slain, and the
half of his district remained in the hands and under
the power of the successful force. The whole of the
tract under Pa Pau had also as a matter of course come
under the rule of his allies the Burmese. Many en-
gagements are stated to have preceded this defeat of
the leader Ka Doh. Skirmishes would however be a
much more proper expression to denote the affairs in


a mountain warfare not pushed forward with any
remarkable vigour. So much the reverse indeed that
the Karennees do not appear to have lost heart in
consequence of their defeat.
5. A war on a distant frontier, from the first not
prosecuted with energy, of course smouldered as soon
as the rebellion rendered it imperative upon the Court
of Ava to crush as rapidly as possible an immediate
danger, and diverted troops and resources which might
otherwise have co-operated in furthering the schemes
of conquest entertained by Tharawaddee.
6. Scrupulous attention to the 10th article of
the Treaty of Yandaboo was however a respectable
cloak under which to cover the real causes of the slow
development of the hostilities avowedly contemplated
by the Court of Ava against the Court of Bangkok.
7. There is doubtless some uncertainty on the
part of the Burmese Rulers as to the view in which
the British Government might regard the prosecution
of his ambitious schemes and some anxiety clearly to
ascertain whether a rupture of peace between Ava and
Siam involves the consideration of war with the
British Government. Hence this repeated reference
to the 10th article of the Treaty.
8. The Court of Ava appears in some measure to
have become acquainted with the tenour of the com-
munication from Bangkok in which the friendly offices
of the British Government as an umpire between the
two states was declined, and judging that offence might
possibly have been taken in consequence of the letter
from Bangkok, the Court of Ava seem to have con-
sidered the opportunity a favorable one for urging
that the disinclination of the Siamese Ruler to listen
to the advice of the British ought to annul any render-
ing of the 10th article favorable to the Siamese. The
messenger from Rangoon on the occasion of a late
interview asked whether he might obtain a copy of


the letter from Bangkok. He. was told that such a
step was not customary, and that his request could
not be acceded to. The request was probably in-
tended as a blind, for the tenour of the letter from
Rangoon indicates in its last paragraph a tolerably
correct knowledge ot the nature ot the reply from
Bangkok.
9. The messenger further asked that the subject
should be noticed in the answer given to the letter
which he brought.
10. The subject has been noticed in the reply
which 1 have directed to be given fully as much
as seemed requisite, for it did not appear expedi-
ent to confirm any intimation the Court of Ava
may have received by a candour not demanded by
the occasion.
11. As the uncertaint} 7 under which the Court
of Ava labours is, so far as of any avail, favourable
to the continuance of peace, I have not been studious
in replying to do more than reassert the wish of the
British Government to see peace undisturbed, and to
maintain a strict neutrality between the two Courts,
without however admitting that any article of the
Treaty of Yandaboo could be involved by boundary
disputes between the two Courts.
12. To the allusion made regarding a road
through these Provinces by which it was usual to
attack the Siamese I have thought it sufficient to
make no direct advertence, but to leave the Court
to draw its own inference from the manner in which
the power of the British Government is recalled to
its memory.
13. It is my intention to intimate to the Court
of Bangkok the nature of this communication from the
Burman Court, the use which the latter has endeavoured
to make of the refusal of the Siamese to entertain the


suggestion of a pacific adjustment of existing dif-
ferences, and the tenour of my reply. The Court c.f
Bangkok will have their attention drawn to the dexter-
ous use made by the Burmese of the unwillingness of
the Court of Bangkok to listen to pacific suggestions,
and the advantage that they would derive from a con-
trary course will be dwelt upon.
14. I shall at the same time request the atten-
dance of a proper officer from the Court of Bangkok to
meet on the frontier of the Thoonyeen an officer whom
1 shall in the dry months depute to carry out in con-
junction with the Siamese officer the establishment ol
a clear understanding along that whole frontier of
what is and what is not British territory. The ques-
tion is settled so far as the admission of the Court of
Bangkok is concerned, and it is very desirable that all
should be permanently arranged before Burmese
Forces enter the Shan States.
15. I have not deemed it necessary to dispatch
the steamer to Calcutta with the view of conveying
intimation of the communication now submitted for
the considei’ation of the Governor General in Council.
The good understanding between the British and the
Burmese Local Authorities is on a very satisfactory
footing and I apprehend no disturbance of this most
desirable state of harmony and good feeling.
16. I trust that the Governor General in Council
will approve of the manner in which the communica-
tion from Ava has been met. Every endeavour shall
be made to maintain, if possible, peace between the
two belligerent Courts, and failing in that to maintain
a strict neutrality on the part of the British Authori-
ties.
I have &ca.
( Signed. ) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Prov:
Maulmain
The 6th June 1845.


Fort William the 24th January 1846.
To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Offg. Secretary to the Government of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward copies of thx-ee
’ letters* from the Court of Siam,
2. One letter has reference to the conduct of
some Siamese within the boundaries of the British
territory, a subject upon which the Court of Bangkok
was addressed.
3 The second letter relates to the threatened
hostilities on the Burmese and Shan frontiers, and is
also in reply to a communication from hence.
4. The third letter has reference to the settle-
ment of the boundary question and requires a reply.
The timid jealous policy of the Siamese Court would
prefer keeping the matter in its present state of un-
certainty, but there are urgent reasons for not yielding
to a dilatory course pregnant with future evil.
5. The letter alludes to the circumstance of a
Goung Gyouk and a few of the men of the Local Corps
being stationed cn the Pak Chan. lam happy to say
that the result of this measure not only in repressing
atrocious crimes on our southern frontier, but also in
imparting a feeling of security both to person and
property has been decided. The inhabitants within
the British boundary have entered upon the cultiva-
tion and the manufacture of sugar with such marked
success that the Chinese of Mergui have turned their
attention to the subject and were, when 1 was at
Mergui, making enquiries preliminary to embarking
capital in this promising adventure.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten. Prov.
Maulmain
the 20 Nov. 1845.


First Letter.
A communication from the High Officers of the
Court of Siam to Captain Henry Marion Durand'
Commissioner on the part of the British Government
in India for the Tenasserim Provinces, viz. the 22
cities and 6 zahs of Martaban in the Talain country.
East of the Salween River, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenas-
serim and the cities to the south of Tenasserim.
Your dispatch forwarded by Phya Tanu Chak
states that a subject of the Siamese Government,
ignorant of the existing customs and regulations has.
created disturbances in the English territories \ that
not knowing his own boundaries he had passed into
the English territory and undertaken to exercise the
functions of his office there and thus rendered him-
self liable to punishment by the English, and exposed
to the displeasure of the Siamese Government also.
Further that the letter of Mini Cham Nan, head
man of the Chokey at Nong Boa, sent to the de-
puty Governor of Mergui was a violation of all
propriety.
Your communication accompanied by the docu-
ments of the Governor of Tak, the deputy Governor’s
answer to the Governor of Tak, and the letter of Mtin
Cham Nan headman of the Chokey at Nong Boa,
forwarded by Phya Tanu Chak, has been received
and understood, and an investigation instituted.
Phra Sunthon Borirak, the Governor of Tak, has
sent down the following statement. That persons
indebted to him and to the Assistant Governor and
many others had run away and taken refuge at Maid-
main viz :
One family consisting of the man Chai the
Fort William the 24th January 1846.


Woman Pan and a daughter indebted in the.
eum of ------ 200 ticals.
One Family Ghhang and Ta - 120 „
~ Seum and Mun - - 296 „
One Woman Khu - 80 ~
One Man Mun - - - - 80 ~
Total - - 776 Ticals.
The Governor of Tak, Phra Sunthon Borirak, had
seen that when Toung thu and other traders subject
to the English had outstanding debts * and at Tak,
Major Broaifoot sent a communication to the High
Officers of the Court and requested that Phra Sunthon
should investigate and settle affairs, transmitting the
money and property to the Capital of the Court and
that the High Officers of the Court intrusted them to
Phya Tanu Chak to convey to Major Broadfoot. But
when debtors fled from Tak and took refuge at Maul-
main Phra Sunthon the Governor gave a letter of
Commission to Phra Soothat Tham to go out and make
settlement of the debts himself. This course of Phra
Sunthon Borirak cannot be approved of. If there are
debts or matters of business requiring attention at
Maulmain, the proper course would be to communicate
the whole matter to the Court at Bangkok, that they
might send a communication regarding the matter
consistent with the subsisting friendship.
We give thanks to you for the information you
communicate in regard to a subject of the Siamese
Government’s raising disturbances in the English ter-
ritory, thus rendering himself liable to punishment
from the English Authorities.
As for Phra Soothat Tham whatever may be the
offences he has committed in the territory we beg his
offence may be overlooked since he is a Laos man, and
unacquainted with the existing customs and relations.
Since debtors have fled and taken refuge in a
friendly country, it is suitable that we should give


you information of the matter in the confidence that if
these debtors should be lurking in Maulmain or its
vicinity you would use your friendly office in investi-
gating and settling the business —that if you should
not deliver up the debtors, you m’ght forward the
amount of the debts conformably 10 the existing
friendship.
Regarding the statement that Mun Chamnan,
headman of the Chokey at Nong Boa, sent a letter to the
deputy Governor of Mergui in violation of the rules of
propriety, it appears from the commencement of the
letter transmitted to us, that it was addressed to some
person of distinction at Tenasserim and not to the
deputy Governor of Mergui, but the matter is ex-
pressed in the language of a common person and not
conformable to the subject. Mun Chamnan spoke as
he thought; Phra Pollasongkhram his master knew
nothing of it. Mun Chamnan and his deputy who
sent the letter are not good men. At first he dwelt in
Baugatapan, one of the southern towns. Thence he
fled with his family to a village called Ta Ket, subject
to the Chief of Tenasserim. Subsequently he returned
and took up his residence at Nong Boa, as a subject of
Phra Polla Songkhrarn, the Agent of the Siamese
Government at Petchaburi, and now has gone back to
live in the Province of Mergui again. If any punish-
ment should be inflicted on him, let him be sought out
and apprehended.
This communication is sent in triplicate as
follows viz :
In Siamese One Oopy^
In English One Copy > All of the same purport.
In Peguan One Copy )
Monday
September Ist 1846.
Court Seal.


Second Letter.
A communication from the High Officers of the
Court of Siam to Captain Henry Marion Durand, Com-
missioner on the part of the British Government
in India for the Tenasserim Provinces viz : the 22
cities and 6 zahs of Martaban in the Talain country
east of the Salween River, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenas-
serim and the cities to the south of Tenasserim.
Your letter informs us that a communication
from Ava has been received by the English in Maul-
main, purporting that the Burmese have refrained
from doing any [? injury] to the inhabitants of Chieng-
mai (Zimmai) who have created disturbances on the
Burman frontier because that the English had a Treaty
of Friendship with the Burmese, and that as the
English were on terms of friendly alliance with the
Court of Siam, it was necessary that the Burmese
should regard that friendly alliance also. For this
reason they have withdrawn their forces. Also that
the Siamese should have done as they have, was an
infringement of their Treaty with the English and
would render it void. Your letter gives us this in-
formation and expresses the wish of the English that
the Siamese and Burmese should not engage in hosti-
lities with each other, and that you have written to
Ava to the same purport, urging them to consider well
the evil consequences of a war, not to engage in a
war with the Siamese, but dwell together on peace-
able and friendly terms. That if the Siamese and
Burmese have any disagreement regarding the mutual
boundaries, the English cannot take any part in the
controversy; they only wish the Siamese and Burmese
to dwell in peace and amity together, as the wisest
course. That if the Siamese fight against the Burmese
or the Burmese against the Siamese on the matter of


their boundaries, it is not a matter that concerns the
Treaty of the English with the Burmese. That both
countries are allies of the English, and hence the
English wish them to be at peace among themselves.
That the Kingdom of Siam has been a friendly ally for
a long time and hence you have sent them a letter of
information. All this is fully understood.
What the Burmese say in regard to refraining
from doing any thing against the inhabitants of
Chiengmai, who have created disturbances on the
frontier—that they refrained out of regard to the
Treaty which the English made with the Burmese in
which the Siamese and Burmese are placed in relations
of amity with each other—that the English made a
Treaty with the Burmese more than 20 j 7 ears ago.
WII3 7 they should have included the Siamese in that
Treaty the Court of Siam does not understand. From
the time that Treaty was formed till now, neither
Burmese or Siamese have sent or received any friendty
communications from each other on any occasion what-
ever. The Burmese have for a long period been in a
state of hostility against the Siamese and no confidence
has subsisted between them. Whatever guard they
have been accustomed to keep on their frontiers is
incumbent still. The case is different with the
English and Siamese. Being faithful allies, traders of
both countries have come and gone by land and sea
without impediment, and when any occasion has
demanded it, communications have been freely ex-
changed.
That the Siamese should maintain such friendly
relations with the Burmese as with the English is
very difficult; confidence is wanting, we cannot trust
them, for on former occasions they came many times
with friendly professions and every time they made
these professions they made ravages on our
towns and cities. The Burmese are not honest and
therefore friendly relations with them cannot be
maintained.


As for the Burmese statement that the Chiengmai
had created disturbances on the frontiers among the
Laos Provinces, Chiengmai has indeed attacked and
taken some of them, and some of them have come
themselves and tendered their allegiance, and Ohieng-
mai has sent forth a portion of her population to
occupy the banks of the streams; but how can the
Burmese call this creating disturbance on their fron-
tier? It is the same as in relation to Mergui, Tavoy
and Tenasserim. The Burmese took them and they
became Burmese, so with these Laos Provinces, who-
ever takes and holds them, to him the}" belong.
The matters contained in your letter sent bv
your messenger Ma Khon tai are fully understood.
That you should send a communication dissuading
both your allies from war was very suitable and con-
formable to the existing friendly relations. We thank
you much. The Siamese also are persuaded that war
is expensive and calamitous. Peace is preferable.
But if the Burmese insist that the inhabitants of
Chiengmai have transgressed their boundaries and
become incensed and assail our towns and villages,
what can we do? We must do as we can. But if
they will listen to the suggestions which you made
to them, and refrain from assailing our towns and
villages, then all things will move on smoothly and
happily.
This communication is sent in triplicate vf z:
In Siamese One Copy
In English One Copy the same
\ purport.
In Peguan One Copy J
Thursday
the 28 August 1845.
Court Seal.


Third Letter.
A communication from the Court of Siam to
Captain Henry Marion Durand, Commissioner on the
part of the British Government in India for the Tenas-
serim Provinces, viz. the 22 cities and 6 zahs of
Martaban in the Talain Country, East of the Salween
River, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities
South of Tenasserim.
Your letter forwarded by Makhontai informs me
that an English Officer will proceed to the Northern
boundary to examine and ascertain the true locality of
said boundary. The Commissioner desires that said
officer be met by an officer from the Court of Siam
who shall be well acquainted with the boundary, that
they may settle the same with precision, said officers
to proceed to the boundary line simultaneously in the
month of January next, it being the second month
according to the Siamese reckoning, there to consult
together and come to a final decision.
As to the boundary in the Kra Country, the Com-
missioner forwarded a letter by Praya Anuchak saying
that rhe Commissioner had been to the Pak Chan and
examined the River Kra, with the river Pak Chan, to
ascertain the course of said river from the sea to the
junction of the three rivers Kra, Pak Chan and Yalit,
with the desire of knowing the true location of the
English and Siamese boundary. The Commissioner
having seen, drew a map of these rivers and forwarded
the same, giving us to understand that on one side of
the water shed line belongs to Siam, the other to the
English.
Formerly there was a letter forwarded concerning
the borders of the two countries from the River Kra
and Pak Chan to the river Fungui Attaran, the coun-
try of Ye and Tenasserim, to the river Luya, saying


that the rivers and streams flowing from the moun-
tains on the west side belong to the English, and
those flowing to the east belonging to the Siamese
the boundary line consisting of a continuous range of
mountains reaching to the river Chan.
We said formerly that the boundary should be
fixed at the river Pak Chan. The Commissioner
thinks the river Kra should be the boundary. That
the English should take the whole of the territory
in question is not proper. It is proper that a part
belong to the Siamese. Thus there will be a good
mutual river road both to the east and west, there
being a distinct mark, viz. water flowing from north
to south.
The Commissioner desires the Court of Siam to
issue orders to its officers who rule the Kra Country,
that they cause all the inhabitants of said country to
know the limits of the Siamese and English territories,
that there be no trespassing on either side.
The subject matter of your two communications
we fully understand.
With regard to what you say of the streams on
the frontiers of the two countries from the River Kra
and Pak Chan to the Fungui and Attaran, in the
country of Ye and Tenasserim to the river Luya, viz :
that those streams whose waters flow to the east belong
to Siam, and those flowing to the west belong to the
English, because the boundary consists of a continuous
range of mountains reaching to the Pak Chan—by
whatever names the places and streams may be called
by the English or Burmese.
The Court of Siam does not fully understand the
locality of said places, because the names do not agree.
Formerly the boundaiy between Siam and Burmah
consisted of rivers and ranges of mountains whenever


there were roads or passes employed by travellers,,
there were built watch houses for the protection of
said roads and places that there might be no mistake. *
On the north, from the junction of the river
Memei with the river Hong eastward to the river
S’asongyeng, was the boundary of Chiangmai. From
the river S’asongyeng onwards was the boundary of
Siam.
The country Tak exercised jurisdiction along the
eastern bank of the river Memei to where the source of
the Mei Samne enters the mountains. There are a
number of streams flowing from the mountains into
the Memei on the east side viz: the Tan, Pa. Ohalan,
Mang, Ngau and several other small streams. Be-
tween these streams are teak forests in the jurisdiction
of Tak. The Burmans and Peguans from Maulmain
have been accustomed to go and cut teak wood in
these forests yearly, paying for the privilege a certain
sum for each tree to the authorities of Tak.
The country UPaitani joins Tak and exercises
jurisdiction from the mountains from which the river
Me Mei flows, following the river Mesang to its
junction with the Songpo, the east bank of which is
the boundary as far as the river Sito. In this region
are the Mesang, Mekorom, Menang-dat, Me-Saleng,
Meacham, Me Kraior. These rivers flow from the
mountains into the eastern side of the Songpo.
The country of Sisanat joins Utaitani and exercises
jurisdiction from the river Tito to the river Huetilea-
lam-pa at a place called Sangkalumlang-ka at Muddy
Water pond.
The countiy of Tongpapum joins Sisawat and
exercises jurisdiction from Muddy Pond, where are
three pagodas, to the source of the Ramongsue where
are two Maprong trees and mountains upon mountains
to the pond Hue-sa-kra-bue.
* Many of the names in the following paragraphs
are in this form not recognisable.


The country of Saiyok joins S’ong-po-pum and
exercises authority from the source of the river
Kamongsue at the two Maprang tree, to a place where,
there are three heaps of stones thence to the river Si
which is the source of the Kamong Sue.
The country Tatakua joins Saiyok and exercises
jurisdiction from the three heaps of stones to the
source of the river Kop where is a large mountain
extending to the junction of the Kop with the river
Buang.
The country Lumsum joins Tatakua, and exercises
jurisdiction from the source of the Kop in the great
mountains to the space between the white Elephant
and the Nong rivers.
The country Kanburi joins Lumsum and exercises
jurisdiction from the space between the-sources of the
Mong and the White Elephant to a heap of stones at
the sources of the Mekami, Amla, and the Bangyakap
and extends out to the junction of these streams with
the Buang.
The Country Ratchaburi joins Kanburi and
exercises jurisdiction from the service of the Bongya-
kap to Takopittong, the rivers Me-ten, Little Mepra
and the Great Mepra, the country Thongchatu and the
river Targu.
The country Petchaburi joins Ratchaburi .and
exercises jurisdiction from the river Tarju to the
mountain Monchan and river Inong extending to
Singkon.
The country Kamnetnoppakan joins Petchaburi
arid exercises jurisdiction from the river Inong to
Mt. T’ong, and extends to Mt. Moncham and Singk’on.
The road to Tenasserim starts from Petchaburi.
The country Rase joins Kamnetnoppakan and
exercises jurisdiction from Mb. T’ong to T’u-martai, on


the road Langkea, having mountains for its boundary.
The country Kra joins Rase and exercises jurisdic-
tion by land to Napran and Chang-uya by sea to the
island Salangin, and on the sea coast to the river
Krachengla, This is a correct description.
The forests on the borders, from the large moun-
tain at the source of the Memei, in the jurisdiction of
U’taitani, to the boundary of Kra, are valuable, some
for the honey they afford, others for sapan wood, others
for teak, and others for rattan ; also as places for
catching elephants. Our people range these forests
collecting honey, cutting sapan, teak and rattan, mak-
ing torches, resin, and cultivating fields, buying and
selling, thus obtaining a living. It is now twenty
years since the English took possession of the country
between Burmah and Siam. During this time those
who seek a living in this way on the frontiers of the
two countries have not trespassed on one another.
The names of rivers, mountains and trees we have
used in this description of the boundary are those
used by the officers on the frontier. The Karens on
the Moulmain side, who live near the boundary, know
the places by the same names.
As to the proposition of the Commissioner for
a meeting of officers on the northern frontier, we re-
mark that the boundary from Tak to the Kra country
consists of many parts and is of great extent. Should
officers be sent from the Court of Siam who should be
of such rank as to be able to make a final decision, and
who should properly examine all the places, many men
would be required. There are already a Governor and
under officers, men of rank, in each of the provinces,
we have named from Tak down. Whatever place it
is desirable to examine the Governor and under officers
of that province will point out the extent of the Sia-
mese boundary there. Let them speak uprightly and the
matter can be decided. But if they speak as when Mr.
Blundell and the Governor of Petchaburi went to consult


together in the Kra country, no decision can be ar-
rived at; Mr. Blundell said that the people ot Mergui
informed him that the boundary line between the
Province of Mergui and that ot Kra was the Pak Chan
river, the west bank belonging to the English and the
east to the Siamese. The Governor of Petchaburi
replied that in the war between Bunuah and Siam
the Burmese conquered Mergui. but that the boundary
was never decided upon. The Siamese have been
accustomed to exercise jurisdiction by sea to the is-
land Salangin, on the sea coast, to the river Kraehe-
ngla, and inland to Napran and Changnya, Should
the boundary line [be] fixed along the Pakchan river,
this would be exceedingly close to Kra. On the other
hand, should it be fixed at the limits within which
the Siamese have been accustomed formerly to ex-
ercise jurisdiction, it would still be far from Mergui.
There should be a just decision, so that the inhabi-
tants of the two countries may live at some distance
from one another.
The Governor of Petchaburi and Mr. Blundell
came to no decision. Mr. Blundell forwarded a com-
munication saying it was proper that the Pakchan
should constitute the boundary line. To this it was
replied that the Court of Siam cannot consent that
the river and Bay of Kra be the boundary, this being
too near to Kra. When our letter reached Moulmain
Mr. Blundell had left, and (Mi-. Brcadfood, Mechicho-
parobat) the Commissioner received it, and forwarded
a reply by Paya T'am-Cliak, saying, the question of the
boundary is one of importance and should be settled.
That besides the question of the river Kra, it is neces-
sary to come to a decision concerning the north east-
ern boundary in the Peguan Country, between the
English possessions and Haheng and Cheangrnai, the
region of country which the Peguans call Tekari.
While this correspondence was in progress, Michech-
oparobat (Mr. Broadfoot) left and Captain Henry
Marion Durand was appointed Commissioner for Ten


asserirn. The Governor of Mergui raised a flag at the
town of Kra, on the opposite side of the river, saying
that was the English boundary, and Masaruk with ten
soldiers to protect the boundary on the opposite side
from Kra, at the distance of only about 60 yards.
As to the request that the Court of Siam should
issue orders to the officers of the Kra country that
they inform all the inhabitants of said country as to
the boundary between Siam and the English Territor-
ies, that there be no trespassing, we cannot yet come
to final decision that shall accord with this request.
Please let this matter rest awhile, as this is not
the only place where the boundary is to be settled.
There, are yet several other places. When a final
decision is had, let it be respecting all the places,
from Tak through to Kra. The Court of Siam can
agree to any proposition that does not break over the
former boundary. Having come to a decision let
there be a written agreement concerning every part
of the boundary line, which shall be final. Thus
there will be, in future, no trespassing on one an-
other. Let each place be called by one name. We
request that each place in the boundary be called by
the name given it by those who have the care of
said boundary. Using the same names the matter
will be well understood—using different names we
shall not know the places spoken of.
This communication is prepared in Siamese, English
and Peguan, the subject matter being the same in all.
Dated Thursday, 9th month, 11 day of the Wan-
ing Moon in the year 1207, the year of the Little
Serpent ( viz. )
Augiist 28: 1845
Court Seal.


To Major W. C. McLeod,
Principal Assistant to the Commr: Ten: Prov:
Sir,
I have received a report that a Chief deputed by
the Court of Bangkok is now on the Thoungyeen with
orders to await the arrival of the officer which in
accordance with my letter of 6th June last* waste
be on the Thoungyeen this cold season for the pur-
pose of determining the boundary on the N. K
frontier.
2. You will immediately dispatch an express
with a letter informing the Chief in question that you
are on the point of proceeding thither to place your-
self in communication with him.
3. As soon as you are conveniently able to do
so you will proceed from here with a suitable escort
and such tentage from the Commission tentage as
you may deem it advisable to take with you, and will
meet the officer in question wherever he may be
encamped, which at present appears to be on the left
bank of the Thoungyeen in the neighbourhood tf
Atseen.
4. The first step will of course be to ascertain
whether the deputed officer be duly authorized and
fully empowered to confer with you, that is whether
he be a properly accredited Agent from the Court
of Bangkok.
5. In the event of his being so and there ap-
pearing no objection to the credentials and rank of
the deputed officer you will proceed to explain to him
what the boundary of the British frontier is, and in
so doing you will be guided by my letter 16th
February 1845 to the Court of Bangkok.
6. The only part of the frontier about which
there is any doubt is that where the Mailongee River


joins the Thoungyeen; although that river Joins a
tributary to the Thoungyeen River it cannot be con-
sidered that the territory drained by the Mailongee
belongs to the British Government and yon will pro-
bably find that all territory draining directly into the
Mailongee River is separated by marked features of
ground from that draining into the Thoungyeen, and
that therefore a good termination to the N. E. boun-
dary of the Provinces can be selected.
7. As the relations between the Court of Siam
and the British Government are of the most friendly
description you will take care to conduct the negotia-
tions with the utmost amity and in such a manner as
to satisfy the deputed officer from Siam that the
establishment of a boundary which shall render it im-
possible for misunderstandings in future to arise is the
only object of your mission.
8. You will report the progress of your negotia-
tion from time to time, and will endeavour to avoid
any unnecessary delay in the fulfilment of-the objects
of the mission.
9. Should the Chief not prove a properly ac-
credited Agent you will dismiss him, and will demand
an explanation of his conduct in crossing over into
British territories without making any report to Maul-
main of his intention of so doing
10. You will in such a case nevertheless proceed
to examine the water shed line between the waters
draining into the Thoungyeen and those draining into
the Mailongee River and will invite the attendance
of any border authorities in order that the object of
your mission may be seen and understood.
11. You will report upon the portion of frontier
line in question after a careful examination.
12. If the Chief be a properly accredited Agent
you will from the water shed line between the


Thoungyeen and Mailongee tributaries proceed along
the Thoungyeen as far as its S. E. sources, in order
that any doubts which may arise along that line
may be on the spot the subject of enquiry and ex-
amination. The watershed line is so marked a
boundary that there , ought to be but few or no
difficulties.
13. With the Siamese Agent you will be firm
in all your communications —these should be as few as
possible, and though in all things your tone with him
should be perfectly amicable yet I strongly recom-
mend a reserved manner and conduct.
14. As the tentage and guard is more for the
sake of your mission assuming a form which shall
command respect than from any real use which either
may prove, you will bear this object in mind.
15. I shall direct such a party of mounted men
from the Local Corps as can be spared to attend you.
in order that you may have the means of maintaining
an easy and rapid communication with Maulmain.
Your Guaid may be either from the Local Corps or
from the Native Infantry according as you prefer to
have the one or the other. If from the Native In-
fantry a European officer should be in command of it.
I have the honor &c.
(Signed) H. M Durand
Commissioner Ten : Prov :
Maulmain
the 19th January 1846.


Fort William the 25th April 1846.
To G A. Bushby Esquire
Officiating Secretary to the Govt, of India
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
The season favorable for the prosecution of
Military operations on the Shan and Burman frontier
is now closing without any extension of the Burmese?
on quests in the Karen-nee country and with no pro-
bability of the present occurrence of hostilities between
the Shan and Burmese forces. The late revolution in
the Court of Ava has, as was easily to be anticipated,
afforded sufficient occupation to its successful origina-
tors, who have been employed in strengthening their
own position. Foreign aggression has therefore been
put off until a future period.
2. The same envoy who was sent last by
the Court of Siam arrived on the 14th ultimo and
brought the letter of which a copy* is appended. The
object of the frequent dispatch of the messenger in
question is of course as much to ascertain what the
British Authorities may be doing, as to watch the
Burmese. A similar messenger is sent annually to
Tavoy, nominally with the view of favoring mercantile
intercommunication, but in reality for the purpose of
ascertaining the state of that Province. I found the
messenger there during my late visit at Tavoy.
3, In my letter of the 20th January* I reported
that Major McLeod had been ordered to proceed with-
out delay to place himself in communication with the
officers from Siam on the N. E. frontier and he was
also directed to dispatch an express with letters an-
nouncing his immediate arrival on the frontier.
4. A message was returned that the Chiefs
awaited Major McLoed’s arrival. That officer reached


JM yawadie on the 3rd February and found that the
Chiefs had departed on or about the 30 January.
5. In my letter to the Court of Bangkok, dated
the 16th February* 1845, I stated that a British
officer would be on the frontier in the month of Janu-
ary. According!}" the Chiefs informed Captain Guthrie
that they could only wait until the end of the month
of January and that they would then withdraw. It is
to be regretted that Major McLeod did not reach
Myawaddie before the expiration of January, for the
♦Siamese Court will probably make use of the circum-
stance as an apology for the conduct of their deputed
officer in withdrawing from the frontier.
6. Major McLeod found that the Chiefs had,
prior to their departure caused a post to be put up as a
boundary mark. This he very properly pulled down.
Not only had no such boundary mark ever before
existed, but moreover it was placed on ground acknow-
ledged by the letter of the 13th November 1844* from
the Court of Bangkok to be far within the British
boundary.
7. From Myawaddie Major McLeod proceeded
to Atseen, a small tributary of the Houndran River,
at which place the Chief of Doung Kodat and other
minor personages had been for some time encamped.
The day previous to their departure these Chiefs pro-
ceeded to the Meekene, another small tributary of the
Houndran, eight miles north of the Atseen ; there they
collected a small mass of stones and declared the
southern bank of the stream as the boundary of their
territory. This novel claim, one wholly preposterous,
seems to have been determined upon with a levity,
which the absence of the long expected British officer
can in no way excuse, and which will doubtless
much alarm the Court of Siam.
8. It was my purpose to have sent out to Major
McLeod the messenger from Siam in order that that


confidential officer of their Government might himselt
see the proceedings of their frontier authorities, but on
the 18th February Major McLeod returned by forced
marches to Moulmein, assigning as his reason for so
doing that one of the Subordinate Siamese officers,
who had been at Atseen, had proceeded to Maul main.
As Major McLeod’s camp was left to follow after, and
did not reach Maulmain until the 2d Instant, 1 did
not think it advisable to direct him either to return
with the Siamese Envoy to Meekwe and Myawaddie
or to proceed to Mylomgee, but have caused it to be
notified to the Zimrae and Labong Authorities that
the British Officer’s visit to the northern extremity of
the frontier is unavoidably postponed until the close
of the rainy season.
9. In m} T letter of the 16th February* 1845 writ-
ten upon the receipt of the Court of Bangkok’s assent
to the proper boundary of the British Provinces, 1
noted some of the causes which operated in inducing
them so clearly and satisfactorily to meet the wishes of
the British Authorities at Maulmain. There were
others however which aided in bringing the Court to
so decided a step. The destination of the Admiral and
his squadron in the Straits was a secret, and the
Siamese King was so suspicious of the intention of the
British that measures for securing the Biver approach
to his Capital werO adopted and considerable alarm
was entertained.
10. When the destination of the British squad-
ron had become generally known by the events which
followed, and when at the same time the Court of Siam
was relieved from the fear of the Burmese by the slow
progress of their military operations in the Karen-nee
country, it became no longer so desirous of having the
boundary question settled, and the letter, a copy of
which accompanied my letter of the 20th November
1845,* was written. It is natural that the Court of
Siam, which at one time held nearly the whole of


these Provinces except the island of Beloogyon, should
be loath by a formal settlement of the boundary
question distinctly to resign its claim upon our terri-
tories, the conquest of the Burmese from the Siamese,
and accordingly they will studiously defer such defini-
tive arrangement as long as they can ; but the delay
is pregnant with danger, and evil consequences might
under existing circumstances at any time arise.
11. The Court will be alarmed when it receives
from its messenger the account which he will not fail
to give of the incautious conduct of their frontier
authorities. The letter calling for an explanation
of the conduct in question will [prove] to the Court
that the pending boundary question must be set-
tled, and that the levity and presumption of its
frontier subordinates must be controlled. This they
have hitherto always been ready to do when they
found that such conduct was not allowed to pass
unnoticed.
12. I have whilst writing this letter received
a report from Captain Guthrie the Superintendent
of Forests that on the Houndran the Shan Author-
ities have been demanding revenue from the Karens
under British Authority and protection, I shall in-
quire into the details of the demands made and
shall take measures to impress upon the Court of
Siam the absolute necessity that such events shall
not recur.
13. As soon as the rainy season is over, and the
forests can be entered with safety, I shall depute an
officer to the N. B. frontier and shall make every
endeavour not to leave the boundary for another
season in its present unsettled condition.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner T. P.
Maulmain a
the 21st March 1846.


The High Officers of the Court of Siam, To Cap-
tain Henry Marion Durand, Commissioner of the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Dear Sir,
Whereas the month of December is the commence-
ment of the dry season, the season for warlike opera-
tions, and as the Court of Siam cannot place confidence
in the Burman Government; therefore, desiring to
learn particularly the state of things in Burmah we
send the bearer of this letter, Phaya Thanuchak
Saining Phatapa Raman with 37 men to learn what
they can concerning Burmah at Moulmein. When
the above mentioned persons shall arrive we beg that
Captain H. M. Durand will treat them according to
the customs of countries at peace with one another.
If Phaya Thanuchak shall desire to visit his
relations and friends (the Peguans) please let him do
so whenever he shall desire. And when he shall
desire to return (to Siam) please give him liberty so
to do without hindrance.
This letter is prepared in Siamese, English and
Peguan, all of the same import.
Bangkok December 18th, 1845, being the first
month, sth day of the Waning Moon 1207.
Fort William the 25th April 1846.


To the Ministers of the Court of Siam.
After Compliments,
The bearer of your letter of the 18th December
1845 Phajra Thanuchak has been allowed in compliance
with your request to remain at Moulmein, and he is
now permitted to return to Siam without hindrance.
(Signed) H. M. Durand,
Commissioner in the Tenasserim,
Provinces.
Moulmain Commissioner’s Office
The 4th March 184(1.
Fort William the 25th April 1846.


To the Ministers of the Court of Siam.
After Compliments.
The Chief of Yahine and of Kammopot, deputed
by you to meet the Officer whom in my letter of the
6th June 1845* I informed you should be sent to the
frontier to point out the British boundary, did not
await his arrival. They received his letter and stated
that they hoped to see him soon and would await his
coming, but they went away after having put up a
square post on British territory as a boundary mark.
This post was pulled down by the British Officer.
1 write for a reply and explanation of the conduct of
these Chiefs and to know whether they acted under
orders from the Court of Bangkok.
2. The Chief of Doung Kadat advanced into
British territory as far as the Atseen, a small tribu-
tary of the Houndran. He did not await the arrival
of the British Officer, but on the Meekwee, another
small stream of the Houndran, he erected a heap of
stones and gave out that that was the Siamese boun-
dary. Had the Chief of Doung Kadat placed the
boundary mark in the centre of the town of Moulmein
he would not have acted in a more exceptionable
manner than by placing it on the Houndran. I write
for an explanation of the conduct of this Chief and
to know whether he acted under orders from the Court
of Bangkok.
3. Ido not think it probable that such conduct
has been sanctioned by the Court of Bangkok, but I
wish to have a distinct reply upon these points.
(Signed) H. M. Durand,
Commissioner in the Tenasserim,
Provinces.
Maulmain Commissioner’s Office,
The 4th March 1846.
Fort 'William the 25th April 1846.


To Commissioner, Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated the 21st ultimo,* and in reply to state
that the Honorable the President in Council approves
generally of the proceedings reported therein.
2. His Honor in Council observes however with
reference to the 4th and sth paragraphs of your letter
that it is much to be regretted that Major McLeod
was not in time to meet the Siamese Commissioners,
who were led by a communication from you to the
Court of Bangkok to expect him on the frontier in
the month of January, and who accordingly waited
for him till the end of that month.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. A. Bushby
Offg. Secy, to the Govt, of India.
Fort William
The 11th April 1846.
Fort \Villiam the 25th April 1846.


Fort William the 30th May 1846.
To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Offg. Secy, to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
In consequence of a report from the officer in
charge of the province of Mergui that a Chief with a
party of Siamese had crossed over into the British
territory and given out that he would levy revenue
upon a district in the upper part of the Tenasserim
River, it seemed necessary to address the Court of
Bangkok, and I have therefore forwarded the letter of
which a copy is appended.
2. It appeared equally advisable to forward the
news of the victories achieved by the British Arms on
the N. W. frontier, and of the measures adopted by
the Governor General towards the Sikh Government.
I have therefore together with the letter of which 1
append a copy forwarded the Proclamation of the 22d
February 1846.*
3. The subordinate Siamese Authorities having
effectually prevented the ingress and egress of cattle,
merchandize and peaceful traders on this frontier, and
such conduct being entirely different from that pursued
on the frontier of Province Amherst, the opportunity
appeared favorable for requesting the Court of Bang-
kok to issue orders to their subordinate authorities on
this frontier, so that uniformity of system may prevail,
and the interference and prohibitions of petty Chiefs be
curbed. I accordingly addressed the Court as will be
seen by the Appendices upon this subject, lam not
sanguine that these restrictions will be removed for*
this frontier in consequence, of* the facility of inter-
communication is viewed with extreme jealousy by the
Siamese Court.


4. I have dispatched the letters by the acting
Goung Gyouk on the Pak Chan, who has orders not
to delay, but after delivering the letter to return to
his post immediately. From Pak Chan to Tchumpaon
is one day’s march, and from thence to Bangkok the
time taken in a boat is about four days ; his absence
need not therefore be long. Communication with
Bangkok is more expeditious from this point than
from any other in the Tenasserim Provinces and
it will be advantageous that the Siamese Court should
receive when necessary, dispatches by this direct
route.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten : Prov:
Pak Chan
the Bth April 181(5.


To the Court of Siam.
( After the usual Compliments. )
It is reported that a Siamese Chief came to the
northern part of the Tenasserim River, and set up
a flag there, and threatened to levy revenue upon
British territory.
The flag is ordered to be struck, and all indivi-
duals on the Tenasserim River and the tributaries to
the Tenasserim River will be made to pay revenue to
the British officers.,
I send duplicates of the letters lately despatched
from Maulmain, one of which had reference to similar
acts on the part of Siamese officers on the Thongeen
and Houndran Rivers.
1 write for a distinct reply. I do not suppose
that such acts have had the cognizance of the Court
of Bangkok but I wish to be clearly informed upon
this point.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten : Provs:
H. C. Steamer Proserpine
The 4 April 1846.


To the Court of Siam.
( After the usual Compliments.)
I take the opportunity of sending by this mes-
senger a copy of the General Order issued by the
Right Honble. the Governor General of India on the
22d February last, from which the friendly Court of
Bangkok will learn with pleasure that the Governor
General of India has gained four great victories, oc-
cupied Lahore, and punished in a signal manner the
unjustifiable aggression of the Seiks upon British
Territory.
( Signed ) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten : Prov:
H. C. S. Proserpine
the 4th April 1846.


To the Court of Siam.
( After the usual Compliments,)
The friendship which exists between the Siamese-
Court and the British Government has already produced
a mercantile intercommunication between the Shan
States and Maul main advantageous to the subjects of
both Governments.
2. Such friendly intercourse might be still fur-
ther most advantageously increased were the Court of
Siam to issue orders to their subordinate authorities
at Tchunpaon and in its neighbourhood not to check
and hinder the free intercourse of peaceful traders,
and to permit the free passage and sale of all cattle
and merchandize as is the case in the British territory
and as is done by the subjects of the Siamese Govern-
ment to Maulmain and Tavoy.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Ten : Prov:
Pak Chan River
8 April 1846.


To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Offg. Secy, to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
%
Sir,
I have the honor to forward the copy of a letter
from the Chief of Zimmay respecting the boundary
question.
2. In the office there is no copy and no cogni-
zance of any such bonds or agreements as are alluded
to in the letter from Zimmay. 1 shall feel obliged
should any such exist in your office, by your favoring
me with a copy of them.
3, The Court of Bangkok when it acknowledged
the proper boundary of the British territory on the
frontier did not appear to be aware of any separate
•agreement with the Zimmay authorities which affected
the question.
4. The matter is of some importance in as much
as the tract in question is calculated to lie able to pro-
duce annually a very considerable quantity of good
teak timber, more indeed than can be obtained
from the corresponding tract on the left bank of the
river, and the inconvenience arising from spurious
passes and permits said to be obtained from the Shan
Authorities is very favorable to the malpractices of
dishonest traders and proves a frequent source of con-
fusion, loss of property, and inextricable cases in the
Courts.
5, I shall, as stated in the letter to Zimmay,
submit the agreements entered into, supposing they


exist, when they are received, with such remarks as
they may seem to call for. '
I have &ca.
( Signed. ) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces
Maulrnein,
the 20th April 1846.


Translation.
The Owner of the Gold Palace of Zimmay informs
the Assistant Commissioner, Captain McLeod, that
with reference to the letter sent by the hands of
Sannud Alley, which contained that “the authorities
of Tenasserim having consulted with those of the
Court of Bangkok regarding the boundary between
Maulmain City and the cities of Yahine and Zimmay,
I, Captain McLeod, am ordered to proceed and see and
will therefore proceed without delay to Yahine and on
my return I will come along the Thoung Yeen River
and I wish you to consider the existing friendship and
come down soon to meet me at Win Wee,” and after
this on the sth of the Waning Taboung (17th March
1845) Assistant Commissioner Captain McLeod sent
a letter in the hands of Moung Koondine with 5
others accompanying him which contains “ I have
examined and fixed boundaries in two or three villages
within the jurisdiction of Yahine, and as the monsoon
is close I will return to Maulmain and come again to
the Thoung Yeen after the wet season is over, con-
sequently I wish that a letter may be sent mentioning
the spot where you wish to see me.” The contents of
these two letters are known, but with reference to the
boundaries, Dr. Richardson came to Zimmay in the
year 1196 ( 1835) and in making friendship he re-
quested that from the west of Thoung Yeen River as
far as Salween River may be made and considered as
the jurisdiction of the Maulmain City. In consideration
of the friendship which existed and in consideration of
that which is to be in future we have complied with the
request made by Dr. Richardson, to which both parties
agreed and settled. Another paint which was agreed
upon was, that if any one went from Zimmay to Maul-
main for the purpose of working and trading there, duty
or tax will be levied from those in lividuals according to
Fort William the 30th May 1846.


the customs at Maulmain and the same will he le’\ led
from those who go from Maulmain to Zimmay, ac -
cording to the customs at that place. The duty on
timber was agreed and settled as follows. Tor timber
of 8, 9 and 10 fists the duty to be 1 rupee; for 11, 12
and 13 fists 2 rupees; for 14, 15 and 16 fists 3 rupees.
When individuals wish to go from Maulmain to Zim-
may they are to be allowed to do so with Detunhats
( passes ) mentioning distinctly the number of male
and female. The same will be done for those who go
from Zimmay to Maulmain and when anyone who
goes from Zimmay to Maulmain commit crimes and
be liable to be killed a letter must be written and
sent. The same is to be done for those who go from
Maulmain to Zimmay. With reference to lawsuits
the authorities of the place where it arises must
decide. To these terms both parties agreed and made
a written bond in the Royal Gold Palace. At which
time the parties present and witnessed, on the part of
Dr. Richardson were the Interpreter Moung Rain and
Nga Tah, besides the Chiefs and poor men who were
all present. After which the Assistant Commissioner
Captain McLeod came to Zimmay and again on enter-
ing on the same subject in presence of all parties, the
terms agreed on the former occasion were acknowledg-
O
ed and strictly confirmed by all parties. Consequent-
ly another bond was made out and now to speak
again regarding boundary—we do not know to listen.
This we inform.
12th Waning Taboung 1207
(24th March 1846)


Fort William the 25th July 1846.
To G. A. Bushby, Esquire
Officiating Secy, to Government of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that the Goung
Gyouk, Moung Bhong Shwey, dispatched from the
Pak Chan River, as reported in my letter of the Bth
April 1846* with letters to the Court of Bangkok,
finding himself detained at Chumpohun until orders
should be received from the capital, did not (in
compliance with my instructions) deem it advisable
to be so long absent from his post, and has for-
warded the letters with which he was entrusted to
Moulmein.
2. In forwarding them from hence to Bangkok
I have addressed to the Siamese Court the letter of
which I append a copy.
I have &ca
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Provs:
Moulmain
10th June 184 G.


From CAPTAIN HENRY MARION DURAND
Commissioner on the part of the British Gov-
ernment in India for the Tenasserim Provinces
vizt. the 22 cities and 6 Zahs of Martaban in
the Talien Country East of the Salween River
for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities to
the south of Tenasserim.
To The GREAT EGGA MAH A THAYNAH DEE-
PUDDEE (!) of the Thee Ayoke Taradwah Yah
Waddee Shway Myodaw (!).
The Commissioner informs the Great Egga Maha
thaynah deepuddee of the Thee Ayoke Taradwah '» ah
Waddee Shway M3 T olaw that on the 10th April 1846,.
he dispatched the accompanying letters from the Pak
Chan River, being desirous that they should reach
the Court of Bangkok without delay.
The Siamese Frontier Authorities did nob however
see fit to forward the messenger and dispatches on his
journey, but wished him to await the receipt of orders
from Bangkok. The messenger, Goung Gyouk, on
the Pak Chan, was therefore under the necessity of
returning to his post and duty, which did not admit of
such protracted delay, and the letters were returned to
the Commissioner.
In the meantime the Governor of Bengal having
been informed of the nature of the communications
made by the Commissioner to the Court of Bangkok
from the Pak Chan has written to ascertain what
reply has been given to the letter regarding free
intercourse and communication. He will regret to
learn that owing to the system pursued on the Siamese
frontier not only has no answer been received, but the
letters are not even as yet admitted in the Siamese
territories.


There could not be a stronger instance of the
necessity for the attention of the Court of Bangkok to
the existence of a system so contrary to that adopted
on the British territories with regard to Siamese mes-
sengers and traders, and which admits of such speed}’
remedy by the Court of Bangkok adopting that wise
policy with respect to messengers and traders which
is common amongst civilised nations, is in accordance
with treaties, and the .-trongest indication and bond of
alliance and friendship.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
[9 June 1846,
Maulmain.J


Fort William the 31st October 1846.
To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Offg. Secy, to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward the copies of six let-
ters lately received from the Court of Bangkok.
2. They are in reply to the various communica-
tions which I had occasion to make in consequence of
the encroachment on British territory and conduct
of Shan and Siamese subordinates on the British
frontiers.
3. The letters are chiefly remarkable in conse-
quence of the definite expresssion of the wishes of
the Court of Bangkok contained at the close of the
letter marked No. 1, in which it is stated “ When
a Siamese and an English officer duly appointed, and
together at the boundary, consult, advise together,
and let this matter be settled from the country of
Krah to that of Tak, and a treaty be made betweeii
them, the matter will then be ended and there will
be no further cause of difference between them.”
4. It appears advisable to take advantage of
this clear and positive expression of the wishes of the
Court of Bangkok, and to take steps for such ar-
rangements as will bring to a conclusion the long
pending question of boundaiy, one which may if left
longer unsettled prove fertile in future difficulties and
embarrassments.
5. Instructions will be requisite for rny guid-
ance and with reference to the shortness of the dry
season, during which alone anything can be done,
the less the delay in furnishing such instructions the
greater the probability the measures undertaken will


have of being brought to a successful termination in
the course of the ensuing season, instead of being
necessarily spun out to future years, when the Court
of Bangkok may not perhaps feel equally well dis-
posed as, under the influence of the late successes
of the British arms on the north-west frontier, it now
appears, to an amiable arrangement by Treaty.
6. It may be a question whether in order that
the measure may have a better chance of being
brought to a rapid and favorable conclusion the im-
portance which the Government attaches to it would
not be best evinced by the deputation of an officer to
Bangkok either by land or sea, to arrange prelimi-
naries. The Court might however be brought, as
the matter is in reality a simple one, to come
to a conclusion at Bangkok, and if it could be so
induced a very great deal of trouble would be
avoided.
7. The proper British boundary from Krah to
the most northerly point is, as I have frequently
repeated, the crests of the ranges of mountains form-
ing the water shed line which separates country
drained into British from country drained into Siam-
ese rivers.
8. The admission that Krah is the southern-
most point of the British boundary is remarkable,
for by reference to a former letter from the Court it
will be observed that they urged instead of the Pak
Chan the Salangeen as the British and Siamese boun-
dary. Practically however they have long acknow-
ledged the Pakchan at the source of which is Krah,
as the British southernmost boundary.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Durand
Commissioner in the Ten: Prov:
Maul mein
28th Septr, 1846


The letter of the Than Aka Maha Senah Budee,
Phu Yai, in the city of Phra Maha Nakon Sia-
yuthia.
To Captain Henry Marion Durand Commissioner
on the part of the British Government in India for
the Tenasserim Provinces viz; the 22 cities and six
zahs of Martaban in the Talien country east of the
JSalween river for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the
cities to the south of Tenasserim,
A letter* was received here brought by Phya
Thanojchack on the 30th April 1846 written in both
the English and the Burmese languages, each of the
same tenor. The contents of the one in English
states that an officer of the country of Pingpet and
an officer of the country of Tak, were sent out to
meet the English officer according to the letter sent
by Captain H. M. Durand on the 6th June 1845,*
to point out the English and Siamese boundaries.
That the Siamese officers did not remain to meet
the British officer, only receiving the letter of the
said officer. That the Siamese officers had said they
wished to meet him, but that they did not wait until
he came, and took a square post and placed it in the
British territory, and gave out that it was the boundary.
That that post was pulled down by the British officer,
begging tor a clear answer, whether the Siamese
officers in thus doing had received orders from the
city of Phra Maha Na Kon Sia Yuthia or not.
That a head Siamese officer in the country of
IJtaitanie went into the British territory and went
to the Attseen River, a small tributary of Houng
Kiang River. That the Siamese officers did not wait
to meet the English officer but gathered a heap of
stones at the Mekwee river, another small tributary


of the Houng Kiang, and said it was the Siamese
boundary; That the officer of Utaitani, in placing
the boundary on the Meekwee or placing it in the
middle of the city of Moulmein, it would have been
equally exceptionable. The letter in the Burmese
language is of the same tenor differing only in the
following.
It states that at first Houngkro was the boundary
of the British territory, since they took possession of
Moulmein, that the Siamese had not gone to keep a
frontier post or boundary there, but that now the
people of Utaitani have advanced the Siamese bound-
ary until it reaches Houng Kro, at the Bay of the Meek-
wee and other small tributaries of the Hong Kiang, that
they have erected a heap of stones there, and changed
the name of the Meekwee into that of Habing and
said it was Siamese boundary. Would it not be better
for the Siamese of Utai-tani to go and place the bound-
ary in the middle of Moulmein, than to put it at the
Houng Kro, as then there would be no occasion for
further controversy.
The letter which Nakon Thai brought at the
time, in the English language, and that sent by Phya
Tanoo Chak previously are exactly of the same tenor,
and are fully understood.
There was a letter sent by Nakon Thai stating
distinctly where the boundary of the Siamese reached.
A letter of appointment was received here, stating
that in the month of January, which is the 2nd
month of the Siamese year, an officer on the part of
the Siamese should go out and meet an officer on the
part of the English, that they might consult about
the boundary and let it be settled.
An order was therefore given to Phya Kampeng
Pet, Phya Utai-tani and Phya Tak to proceed out
and meet the English officers about the period men-
tioned in the letter of appointment, and that if at tha


end of the 2nd month of the Siamese year, being be-
yond the period appointed, the English officer did not
come they were not to linger or delay, but to come
back, to look after and put in preparation soldiers and
troops to be in readiness in case of any tumult, that
being the (dry) season for war, and no confidence
could be placed in the Burmese; fears being entertain-
ed that they might come and cause a disturbance, it was
deemed necessary to be duly prepared to fight the
Burmese in case of need. Phya Kampeng Pet and
Phya Tak went and waited for the British Officer at
Sam-ma maie, on the eastern side—Phya Utai-tani
went and waited at Mai Salueng, on the Ist day of the
second month and waited there until the 14th day of
the waning of the Moon of the same month.
Nakon Thai brought' a letter to Phya Tak which
stated that Captain H. M. Durand would come and
meet the Siamese officers and wished them to wait.
Phya Kampeng Pet, Phya Utai-tani and Phya Tak
therefore waited until the 6th day of the waxing
moon of the third month, and the period being then
past they came back.
What is said about the officers of Kampeng Pet
not waiting to meet the English officer, but took a
square post and placed it in the British territory, say-
ing it was the boundary, which post the English
officer pulled down, and that the Officer of Utai-tani
went into British territory to the Atseen River, a
tributary of the Houng Kiang River, and did not wait
the English officer but gathered a heap of stones at
the MeKwee, another tributary of the Houng Kiang
River, saying it was the Siamese boundary, thus much.
The Siamese officers who went and waited the
English officer, when they came back did not state
that they had put a post down or had erected a heap
of stones as a boun Inry, but stated that they went
and waited for the English officer but that he did


'not come, and therefore they had not consulted about
the boundary question.
When the matter contained in the letter brought
by Phya Tanoochak was known, a person was sent
np to question Phya Kampeng Pet, who it appears
shortly after his return from the jungle had sickened
•and died. Phya Tak, who went with Phya Kampeng
Pet, was questioned, who stated that Phya Kampeng
Pet had given no orders to plant the post. The
person at the guard house had put it up merely as a
mark for their own people to show where the guard
was relieved, how far they were to guard, between
that place and Utaitani.
Phya Utai-tani and Khun Cha Sok of the Gosia
House say the heap of stones together with a small
wooden house for religious purposes on the top of
them, at the Meekwee River, was erected by the
Talien people who stop at the guard house of Utai-
tani merely as a mark to show the people of the guard
that they might guard as far as that.
The English officer order ng the post to be
taken down, according to the custom of the city of
Phra Maha Nakon Siayuthia, no notice can be
taken of it.
It is not as it any thing had been definitely set-
tled regarding it, or that a Phia Che-dee had been
erected as a boundary mark as is the custom. The
Burman translation of the letter states, that for-
merly Houng Keo was the boundary of the English,
ever since they took possession of Moulmein, that
the Siamese had not gone to keep guard on, or
look after the boundary, but that now rhe people
of Utai-tani have advanced the boundary until it
lias reached Houng Keo, and have changed the name
of the Meekwee to that of Habing saying that it is
the Siamese boundary.


Khun Cha Sok, the officer of the Guard House,
says they did not guard as far as the Houng Keo, it
being too far from the Meekwee River, the journey
being one of three days. Formerly they used to guard
as far as the Meekwee Ma Acheen, Ma Saoloung, Ma
Nong det, Ma ta rong and the Ma Sang rivers ; in
saying they have advanced the boundary as far as
Houng Keo, and have changed the name of the Meek-
wee and have given it that of Aibing—the name has
not been changed nor have they advanced as far as
Hang Kio.
As Captain H. M. Durand is as yet uncertain
about the matter, it is proper that he has sent a letter to
enquire about it, as there exists the strictest friendship
between the Siamese and English. Thanks are due to
him for the information given regarding what has been
done on the part of the Siamese officers in these
matters, and therefore a letter is written to inform him
on the subject, and to do away with any doubts he may
have. If enquiries are not first made in such matters, it
would tarnish the present existing friendship through
the proceedings of petty officers and people stationed
at the frontier boundaries of either country. When
Siamese and English officers meet, consult and fix a
period for pointing out the boundary on either side
and a Phya Chedee has been erected as a mark at
the meeting of the boundaries, then the matter will be
definitely settled.
Three copies are sent in the Siamese, English and
Raman languages, all of the same tenor and date.
Dated in Bangkok this 9th day of August 1846.


The letter of the Than Akamaha Senahbudee,
Phn Yai, in the City of Phra Mahanakon Sia-
yuthia.
To Captain H. M. Durand, Commissioner on the
- part of the British Government in India, for the
Tenasserim Provinces viz: the 22 cities and six zahs
of Martaban in the Taken country East of the Sahveen
river for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities to
the south of Tenasserim.
A letter has been received stating that the
English and Siamese are in the strictest friendship;
that traders under the jurisdiction of the cities of
Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia and traders under the
jurisdiction of Moulmein have been in the habit of
trading backwards and forwards for a long period
past, being a source of profit and advantage to both
sides; that if the English send persons requesting
to purchase cows, buffaloes and other merchandize at
the country of Chumpon, to allow them to do so,
and requesting to have an order sent from the
city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia to that effect,
that traders may buj' and sell with facility, that if
the Siamese do not interfere traders would find a
profitable result. This is thoroughly understood.
The English and Siamese are in the strictest
friendship and treaty, and all cities, towns and vil-
lages under the jurisdiction of Phra Mahanakon
Siayuthia are aware of this. In Avhatever comitry
traders see there is profit to be made, trade is carried on
backwards and forwards; on the sea coast to the east-
ward the countries of Chantabun, Ohantaburi, Trat, Na-
kon, Soucha (!), Chiya have merchandize which is ship-
ped to Singapore for sale. On the sea coast to the west-
ward Junkceylon, Pungah, Takooa, Trang, Tuckooa
Pa, Puket, Khra, Ran on g have merchandize which is


shipped for sale to Penang. The Surat and Chines©
merchants of Penang and Singapore, when they see
an opening in any country under the jurisdiction of
Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia where they can trade
with advantage, come in, settle and trade both in the .
city of Phramaha Siayuthia and elsewhere, and they
trade without hindrance. The persons who are in Gov-
ernment authority in any of those places do not interfere
or prevent them from trading, but in Chumpon there
are only jungle productions, and traders seeing there
is no profit to be made do not go to trade there them-
selves. Countries which are in friendship and treaty
will not interfere with the merchants of any country,
Chinese,Musselrnan or English, trading backwards and
forwards with honesty and good faith. The guard
houses merely prevent those who introduce opium,
which is an article which must be prevented from
being brought in for trade in any place or country.
Siamese being bondsmen, debtors, those who have
creditors, who trade transgressed against the laws,
absconded into the territory of the British, and then
return and enter into combinations with persons in the
place to steal elephants, horses, buffaloes, cows, per-
sons* constantly roving, drunkards, troublesome
persons and vagrants, brawlers and rioters.*
Such persons going to complain to the English of
things which are actually of no importance, but which
they strive to make a feud of, might cause a breach of
friendship. These are the only people who are inter-
fered with by the guard people. The buffaloes and
bullocks at Chumpon are only sufficient for the agri-
cultural purposes of the place. There are times when
disease springs up amongst them and they fall down
and die. This is frequent. The buffido is an useful
animal, and the Siamese are not in the practice of
buying and selling it as a commodity at any place.
They only purchase and dispose of them amongst
themselves in their own country.


In 1833, thirteen years ago, the Governor of
Mergui sent Khun Meng Sating, Khun Moung Sang
Kiah, Khun Moung Bo Kean and Khon Sadek beg-
ging to purchase some cows and buffaloes at Chuni-
pon. They brought a letter written in the Siamese
language to Phya Chnmpon, stating in the letter,
that as there were a large quantity of these animals
at Chunipon, they begged to purchase them at such
prices as were considered equitable between two
friendly nations. Phya Chunipon was at the time in
the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia, and there
was only Luang Balat in authority there. He sent
in word, and an order was given for him to send an
answer to the letter. The answer stated that there
were not so many buffaloes and cows as was stated
in the letter sent in by the Governor of Mergui, being
only sufficient for the agricultural purposes of the
place. But as the Governor of Mergui had sent in
begging to purchase these animals they allowed Khun
Satire, Khun Moung Sang Kiah, Khun Moung Bo-
Keah, and Khun Sadak to purchase some few, in
accordance with the friendship existing.
Hereafter, traders coming to purchase buffaloes at
Chunipon may be disappointed, as at Chunipon they
do not trade largely in them.
This subject was spoken of before and it was beg-
ged that Captain H. M. Durand entertained no further
feelings of regret on this head.
Three copies of this letter are sent, in the Siam-
ese, English and Raman languages, all being of the
same tenor and date.
Dated in Bangkok this 9th day of August
{ Seal )


The letter of the Thau Akaraaha Senahbudee,
Phuyai, in the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia.
To Captain H. M. Durand, Commissioner on the
part of the British Government in India, for the
Tenasserim Provinces viz ; the 22 cities and six zahs
of Martaban in the Talien country East of the Salween
river, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities to
the south of Tenasserim.
A letter has been received stating that a Siamese
officer went and planted a flag on the northern part of
the Tenasserim River, and gave out that he should
levy duties in British territory; that an order had been
given to take the flag down, and that all persons
living on the Tenasserim River and provinces shall
pay the duties to British officers. Formerly Captain
H. M. Durand sent a letter, stating that the Siamese
officers had done likewise at the Thangyeen and
Ilongkoo Rivers ; that whether the Siamese Govern-
ment were aware of this or not he did not know, but
wished for a clear answer on this point and therefore
sent a letter in to that effect.
The Burmese translation also states that a flag
was planted on the northern part of the Tenasserim
river, being of the same tenor as the English. In
speaking of this affair—at what place a Siamese
officer went and planted a flag or at what time no
stated period is mentioned. All about the Tenas-
serim River, up to the northern part, which the
Siamese call the Ting Chatree River, and on the
eastern side, where the guard houses of Petchaburi,
Ratchaburi and Kanburi are connected, all have been
strictly interrogated and investigations have been
made in all those places, but none of them have


planted a flag or given out that they should levy or
exact duties in British territory.
At the country of Ratburi it was stated that in
the 4th month of Pee Marong (March in the year 1844)
three head Taliens of Mergui came to levy duties on
the Taliens who live at Teng Chatree.
A Talien named Boorooie being there, told these*
three men that the Taliens living there were under
the cognizance of the guard of Ratchaburi, and that
therefore they would have to inform their master first.
Both parties consulted and advised amongst them-
selves, and the three Taliens of Mergui did not levy
an}’ duties but went back.
This affair took place two years ago, and no notice
has been taken of it since. At Petchaburi it was
stated that on the 2d day of the first month Peo
Moung Sata Sok (30th November 1845).*
A Talien named Mun Pitak living at Chong Row
Phia in Petchaburi went up, following the course of
the river, visiting his relations and friends, and went
and stayed with the I alien Boouvie. Boorooie is
under the erg lizance or jurisdiction of Ratchaburi.
They saw an English and a Burmese officer together
with 8 Talien come in a boat, who stated that they
were going to collect duties on the paddy fields in the
country cf Muta, and they anchored their boat at a
place called Bang Nang Yee. Booroie called upon
the English officer, and Mun Pitak went with him.
o 7
The English officer asked Booroie if he was well
living there ? that if he was not so, to go and live in
the British territory. Booroie stated that he was well
there, and took his leave.
The English officer remained at this place for
three days and then proceeded to the country of Muta.
Mun Pitak went about visiting his relations and
friends amongst the Taliens until he reached the house


of Chang Wang Loosa Phung, who is under the cogni-
zance or jurisdiction of Tavoy, and then went and saw
Ka 100 po. Ka 100 po informed him that an English
officer had been there to levy dut} T on the paddy
fields in the country of Muta, stopping about 14 or 15
days and had then left.
Mun Pitak left Muta, and went to visit his
Talien friends who were under the jurisdiction of
Ratchaburi. Seven families followed him, and in the
sth month of Pee Ma Mea atta Sok, they were
clearing ground at a place called Sowan Peng.
It is against all rules and customs of the Siamese
to send and plant flags and point out boundaries.
The Siamese never sent any person or persons to
plant a flag. The people about the jungle and close to
the boundaries are all Taliens, and are an unsettled
race, clearing ground here and there, going backwards
and forwards, and changing eveiy year.
They have the name of being under the jurisdic-
tion of the guard of Ratchaburi, as in going about
from one post to another he frequently stops and lives
amongst them, but that the Taliens pay any customs
or duties or that such is exacted from them is not the
case. The Siamese have no wish and are unwilling to
interrupt the course of, or to cause a blot on the
friendship now existing.
Instructions were given at every town and guard
house about the boundary, to the effect that where
they had been in the practice of keeping guard, and
of taking care formerly, so far and no farther were
they to take charge, and on no account to advance
into the country of Moulmein, Mergui or Tavoy, so as
to leave a cause for difference.
When a Siamese and an English officer, duly
appointed, meet together at the boundary, consult,
advise together, and let this matter be settled, from


the country of Krah to that of Jak, and a treaty to be
made between them this matter will then be ended,
and there will be no farther cause of difference
between them. Three copies of this letter are sent, in
the Siamese, English and Raman languages, all being
of the same tenor and date.
Dated in Bangkok the 9th day of August 1846.
( Seal)


The letter of the Than Akamaha Senabudee Plm
Yai in the CR3 7 of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia.
To Captain H. M. Durand, Commissioner on the
part of the British Government in India for the Tenas-
serim Provinces viz : the 22 cities and six zahs of
Martaban in the Talien Country East of the Salween
River, for Tavoj 7 , Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities
to the south of Tenasserim.
A letter has been received, stating that in the
year 1846, on the 10th of April, Captain H, M. Durand
sent a person from Pak Chan with two letters to the
city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia, with instructions
to use dispatch in the delivery.
The officer in charge of the guard house would
not allow him to pass, telling him to wait first until
he had sent word to the city of Phra Mahanakon
Siayuthia and received an order for him to proceed ;
the bearer of the letter being in authority at Pak
Chan, named Geer Gneeak, could not wait, and was
obliged to go back to Pak Chan and the two letters
were returned by him back to Captain H. M. Durand,
together with a letter stating that the officer of the
guard house would not allow him to pass. That
copies of both these letters had been forwarded to
Bengal j’ that the Governor General of India had
sent a letter to Captain H. M. Durand, asking whe-
ther an answer had been receive:! yet or not. That
the Governor General of India was waiting to hear
what answer would be received from the city of Phra
Mahanakon Siayuthia ; that when the Governor
General of India finds that the two letters were not yet
received there, and therefore no answer had been
received to them, he will regret it much ; that it is
necessary for the Government of Siam to enquire into


this, and proper means taken accordingly to send
orders to the officers of the guard house and inform
them that be it messengers or be it traders,
when the business is of importance or otherwise,
to allow them to go and come with facility and
without hindrance, as should be the case between two
nations in treaty and friendship, as is the case with
other civilized nations; that such a petty matter
might be easily remedied by the necessary orders
being duly sent so that parties might go and come
with facility. All this has been understood. The
case is thus : When Nai Boon Choon brought the
letter to the country of Chumpon, on the 14th April
1846, Phya Chumpon received him and hospitably
entertained him, giving him the Sala Klang as a place
of residence.
Nai Boon Chooie stated that he waited to be sent
into the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia, and
that if he was not sent in he would go back. Phya
Chumpon and Phia Chakra Rachamontree said the
customs of places were different, and wanted him to
wait until he sent in word according to the customs
of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia, and then they would
send him in.
Nai Boon Chooie would not remain and returned
back, Phya Chumpon and Phia Chakra Racha
Montree could not help this as the custom of
the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia is when any
countries in the world send persons bearing letters to
any country under the jurisdiction of Phra Mahana-
kon Siayuthia, that country has never been in the
practice of forwarding it, but must first send in word
to the Senah Badhee. When the order is given, the
bearer is allowed to act according to instructions.
This custom has been brought down from the earliest
period. Thus Phya Chumpon and Phia Chakara
Racha Montree did not dare to send Nai Boon Chooie
in without first sending word, and thus it was that


Nai Boon Chooie returned the letters back to Captain
H. M. Durand, and also sent a complaint stating that
the officer of the guard house would not allow him
to pa'B.
Captain H. M. Durand would naturally feel regret
as it was different to the customs of the English.
Nai Boon Chooie is a man from the Island of Junk
Ceylon. Captain H. M. Durand sent him to be the
bearer of a letter here. Nai Boon Chooie knows the
manners and customs of the Siamese. It would have
been right for him to have waited first, but he would
not, and went back, and there was no resource left.
It is begged that Captain H. M. Durand entertains no
further feeling of regret on this head.
Three copies of this letter are sent, in the Siam-
ese, English and Raman languages, all being of the
same tenor and date.
Dated in Bankok this 9th day of August 184 G.
( Seal )


The letter of the Than Akamaha Senah Bodee
Phu Yai in the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayu-
thia.
To Captain H. M. Durand, Commissioner on the
part of the British Government in India for the Tenas-
serim Provinces viz: the 22 cities and six zahs of
Martaban in the Talien country East of the Salween
Hiver, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities
to the south of Tenasserim.
A letter has been received stating that Captain
H. M. Durand was about sending a person bearing a
letter to the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia,
and that he availed himself of the opportunity to for-
ward a copy of the General Orders of the Governor
General of India dated the 12th day of the waning
moon of the 3d month; that the British army had
been victorious in the Punjaub and that the Governor
General had invested the city of Lahore; that the
war had been brought on through the people of the
Punjaub having entered into the British territory
and committed aggressions there; that for this the
English had collected their forces and humiliated
them.
That as the Siamese and English are in strict
friendship and treaty the former will be glad to learn
this.
The General Orders of the Governor General ot
India forwarded by Captain H. M. Durand have been
fully understood.
In the year Pee Maeeng Satta Sok ( 1845 ) the
Siamese know that the Governor General of India
had collected forces and advanced towards the Punjaub
for the purpose of making war with the Sikhs belong-
ing to the country.
Fort William the 31st October 1846.


The Siamese under the existing friendship were
anxious to hear news of the progress of this war and
all vessels trading from Bombay and Singapore were
severally interrogated regarding it on their arrival,
and the Siamese were therefore kept duly informed on
this subject.
The officers of the Siamese Government are
pleased to hear that the British army, under the direc-
tion of the Governor General of India, has proved
victorious in the Punjaub, and beg to compliment the
Governor General of India upon his successes and
trust he may attain to still higher honors.
Three copies of this letter are sent in the
Siamese, English and Raman languages being all of
the same tenor and date.
Dated in Bankok this 9th day of August 1846.
( Seal )


The letter of the Than Akamaha Senah Bodee
Phu Yai in the city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia.
To Captain H. M. Durand, Commissioner on the
part of the British Government in India for the
Tenasserim Provinces viz : the 22 cities and six zahs
of Martaban in the Talain country East of Salween
Elver, for Tavoy, Mergui, Tenasserim and the cities to
the south of Tenasserim,
A letter has been received stating that in 1846
Phya Tanoo Chak, a Siamese officer, was the bearer
of a letter to Captain H. M. Durand begging that
Phya Tanoo Chak might be allowed to remain at
Moulmein, and that Captain H. M. Durand had
allowed him to do so, in accordance with that letter
and that when he required to return back here he was
allowed to do so without hindrance. Phya Tanoo
Chak on his arrival here mentioned Avith pleasure the
great kindness and hospitality he experienced from
Captain H. M. Durand whilst in Moulmein, that Avhilst
there he \A r as left nothing to Avish for.
Tha Tanoo Chak, in going and coming had done
nothing at variance with the customs of the English ;
when coming away he had paid his respects and
recei\ r ed a letter as formerly.
Thanks are due to Captain H. M. Durand for the
kindness and hospitality shoAvn to Phya Tanoo Chak—
it is in accordance Avith the friendship existing.
Makon Thai, the bearer of letters into Phra Maha
Nakon Siayuthia, has been treated in reciprocal
manner here. As he is noAv returning back a letter
has been given to alloAv him to go on his path in
friendship and without hindrance.
Fort William the 31st October 1846.


Regarding the boundary the Siamese express a
wish that officers on both sides meet and consult upon
the matter and settle it definitely at once.
Three copies of this letter are sent in the Siamese,
English and Raman languages, being all of the same
tenor and date.
Dated in Bank ok this 9th day of August 1846.
( Seal )


From G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Officiating Secy, to the Govt, of India,
To the Commissioner in the Tenasserirn Provinces.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your dispatch dated 28th ultimo,* submitting copies
of letters from the Court of Bankok in reply to various
communications from you on the subject of the en-
croachments on British territory and the conduct of the
Shan and Siamese subordinates on the British frontier.
2. In reply I am directed by the President in
Council to instruct you to address a letter to th&
Minister of Siam stating in clear and precise terras
what is understood to be the boundary between the
Tenasserirn Provinces and the territories of Siam, and
after noticing briefl} r the apparent encroachments
which have been attempted to be made by inferior
officers of the Siamese Government, to express the
desire of the British Government that in a conference
between British and Siamese officers near the boundary
the limits may be defined and acknowledged on both
sides, and that with this view you will, on being ap-
prized of the resolution of the Government of Bangkok
to depute an agent of its own for this purpose to
the frontier or any place within the territories of
either party which may be deemed most convenient
for both, depute an officer to attend and arrange for
the final settlement of this question.
3. His Honor in Council leaves it to you to
point out to the Siamese Court the place of meeting
and the date on which it is to take place, and to
select a competent officer to represent the British
Government on the occasion.


4, There is not time even if it were desirable
to attach so much importance to the question at issue
as such a measure would cause, to send a mission
from Singapore to Bangkok in order to induce that
Government to adopt the course now recommended,
but if Lieutenant Colonel Lutterworth, the Governor
of the Straits Settlement, has an opportunity of un-
obtrusively communicating to the Siamese Govern-
ment the wishes of the Government of India on the
subject* he will avail himself of it.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. A. Bushby,
Offg. Secy. to the Govt. of India.
jPort William
the 31st October 184(5>


Fort William the 7th March 1847.
To G. A Bushby Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter under date the 31st October last, * transmit
ting the copy of a communication to the address of the
Commissioner of the Tenasserim Provinces, relative to
the boundary between those Provinces, and the ter-
ritories of the Siamese, and requesting me to avail
myself of any opportunity that might offer of intimat-
ing to the Court of Bankok the desire of the British
Government to have the question settled. I lost no
time in addressing a communication to the Prime
Minister of His Majesty the King of Siam, Chow Phya
Praklang, by a vessel which was on the eve of starting
for Bangkok, and at the same time I requested a
British Merchant, through whom my letter was for-
warded, to urge the speedy settlement of the question.
I adopted this course, in consequence of there
being no person here who writes Siamese sufficiently
well to be entrusted, with a communication of this
nature, and in the expectation, which has been realized,
that the said merchant, Mr. Hayes, in whom I have
confidence, would be requested to translate it, whereby
the interest and purport of my communication would
be more fully apprehended.
Mr. Hayes’s reply, together with the letter therein
referred to in English from the Prime Minister at the
Court of Bangkok, Chow Phya Phra Klang, copies of
which are enclosed, have just reached me, and will I
trust, prove satisfactory to tho Honble. the President
in Council.


Under the impression that the letter in Siamese,
with the envelope in which it was received, may be
novel, and therefore acceptable, I have ventured to
transmit them by this opportunity.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
13th February 1847.
P: S: I am given to understand that it is in the
contemplation of the British Government to appoint
a Consul in Siam, with a view of furnishing Certifi-
cates of the produce of sugar exported from thence.
If so I would respectfully desire to direct attention
to Mr. Hayes as a person in every way suited for the
office and likely from his knowledge of the language
and manners of the people to prove generally useful.


Fort William the 27th March 1847.
To His Excellency
The Chow Phya Praklang
Prime Minister to His Majesty
The King of Siam.
My Friend,
The excellent understanding which has at all
times subsisted between the Siamese Government at
Bankok and the British Authorities in these settle-
ments induces me to write a few lines to your Bxcel-
ency in furtherance of the maintenance of that good
understanding to other parts of the British possessions
in the east.
In a recent communication from the Government
of India, I observe some allusion to the difficulty which
has obtained in settling the boundary between the
Tenasserim Provinces and the Siamese territories, and
that definite instructions have been given by the
British Government to the Commissioner for the early
final arrangement of this matter.
I conclude that my friend will have received inti-
mation of the views of the British Government on this
head through the Commissioner of the Tenasserim
Provinces, and I only write, as one friend would do to
another on such an occasion, to recommend my friend
the Praklang to advise His Majesty the King of Siam
that the British Government are desirous of having
the said boundary question settled without delay.
I think this would be readily effected by the de-
putation of a Superior officer from my friend’s
Government to meet the like deputation of a British
officer from Moulmein to the boundary of the two
countries, previously fixing the time and place, with
instructions then and there to come to a final settle


ment of the question. This would, lam persuaded,
afford satisfaction to the British Government, and I
should be happy to hear that my friend’s Government
have so determined to act when I will communicate
the same for the information of the Governor General
of India.
With every consideration and sincere friendship
I remain,
Your Excellency’s &ca. &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth.
Governor.
Singapore,
30th Deer. 1846.


To James Hayes Esquire,
Siam.
My Dear Sir,
I have written His Excellency the Praklang by
this opportunity touching the boundary between Siam
and the Tenasserira Provinces, because I have learned
that the British Governmefit have sent positive in-
structions to the Commissioner at Moulmein to have
this matter settled without delay, and I think a word
in season not prove unacceptable.
You will probably find a fitting occasion to re-
commend our friend the Praklang, for whom I have
a sincere regard, to advise His Majesty, the King of
Siam, to send a party high in office from Bangkok
with full power to act, intimating the time and place
at which the said functionary may be found on the
frontier, with a view to a similar deputation being
ordered from Moulmein to make a final arrangement
of all matters connected with this question. I know
that disappointment and dissatisfaction have been ex-
perienced on both sides relative to this question, but
in the way 1 propose, and I believe the Government
of India have directed, every thing can be finally and
satisfactorily settled.
Believe me &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth.
Governor.
Singapore
29th Deer. 1840.
Fort William the 27th March 1847.


To the Honble. Lieutenant Colonel Butterworth, C. 8.,
&ca. &ca. &ca.
My dear Sir,
Your letter regarding the boundary question be-
tween the English and Siamese in the Tenasserim
Provinces I duly handed to His Excellency the Prak-
lang, to whom I also translated the contents. He
received it in a very friendly manner, and appeared
to appreciate the motive which dictated it.
1 subsequently recommended His Excellency, in
a private interview which he granted me the following
day, to endeavour, by using Ids influence with the
King, to have an efficient officer of high rank sent
over to the Boundaiy, invested with full power to
treat on this question, and have the matter adjusted
without delay.
A translation of your letter the King also saw,
who immediately ordered two noblemen of high rank
to hold themselves in readiness to proceed to the
boundary as soon as letters are received from the
Commissioner at Moulmein, appointing time and place.
His Majesty expressed satisfaction at the contents of
the letter, and ordered an answer to be returned by
the first vessel leaving for the Straits Settlements.
On the whole I think the Siamese appear anxious
to have the matter settled, and although I am not
personally acquainted with the noblemen appointed
to proceed there, I am led to believe they are clever
and are inclined to adopt all pacific measures.
I remain &ca.
(Signed) James Hayes.
British Factory
30th January 1847.
Fort William the 27th March 1847.


The letter of His Excellency the Chow Pliya Phra
Klang Senah Bodee Phu Yai in the city of Phra Maha
Nakon Siayuthia.
To the Honble. Lieutenant Colonel Butterworth,
C. 8., Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore
and Malacca.
A letter has been received stating that the good
understanding, which has at all times existed between
the Siamese and English authorities induces you to
write this letter in furtherance of the maintenance of
that feeling, and that the same might be more firmly
extended.
It also states that in a communication from the
Secretary to the Government of India making allusion
to the boundary question between the Siamese and
English at the Tenasserim Provinces, definite instruc-
tions had been given by the Governor General of India
to the Commissioner of those Provinces for the final
arrangement of this matter without delay.
It further states that you conclude the Commis-
sioner of the Tenasserim Provinces will have forwarded
a letter containing full information on this head, and
that 3 r ou forward this letter, recommending to advise
His Majesty the King of Siam that the British Govern-
ment are desirous of having the matter adjusted with-
out delay.
That if the Siamese would send out an officer in-
vested with full powers in this matter to meet the
English officer at the boundaiy of the two countries,
previously fixing the time and place, then and there
to come to a final settlement of the question, it would
be a source of much satisfaction to the British Govern-
ment, and that you would communicate to the Gov-
ernor General of India, that the Siamese Government
had determined so to act.
Fort William the 27th March 1847.


The contents of this letter are thoroughly under-
stood, and many thanks are due to you for your atten-
tion in sending this letter, and is in accordance with
the rules of nations friendly and near to one another,
and is therefore duly appreciated.
At the boundary on the western side, where the
question lies, the boundary before joined with Burmah.
On the northern side, from the Gaes country, Chin
Mai of Mueng Tak was the Siamese boundary, all the
way down as far as ’Muang Kra at the southern
extremity.
The officers of the guard houses kept watch there
regularly, taking care of the country, of which facts
letters have been sent over informing the English
officer in charge of Moulmein from the time of Com-
missioner Blundell’s appointment to that of Captain
Henry Marion Durand’s, and up till the present day.
In the year Khan, Chatawa Sok (1842) Mr Com-
missioner Blundell sent in a letter stating that he in-
tended coming in to see the boundary, where the
countries of Kra and Mergui joined, and begged a
Siamese officer to go out at the same time to Pak-
chan that they might discuss the matter and let it be
settled. His Majesty gave instructions to Phya Phetr
chaburi, the Governor of Muang Kra, and who was
perfectly acquainted with the boundaries of Muang
Kra, and of Mergui previously, to proceed there,
point out the boundary, and settle the matter with
Mr Commissioner Blundell
Phya Petchaburi went and waited at Muang Kra
several days until the time of appointment was passed,
when he came back to Chumpon. When Mr Commis-
sioner Blundell arrived at Muang Kra and knew that
Phya Petchaburi was still at Chumpon, he instructed
Mr Richardson to go in and see him there, and Phya


Pefcchaburi went back and met Mr. Blundell at Muang
Kra. [He] then stated to Mr. Blundell that when
Mergui still belonged to the Burmese, the Siamese
had a boundary and kept guard there, on shore as
far as Nar Praso, Chang Gnoo and Hak Ka Tak on
the coast, up to Luang Phra Cheng, which are the
boundaries joining each other. Mr. Blundell did not
make any answer or observation to this but gave
Phya Petchaburi a letter to forward, and then returned
back again.
Jn this letter it stated that if the boundary was
made at the river of Kra, each country taking one
side of the river it would be well. This was the
contents of this letter, Phya Petchaburi and Mr.
Blundell therefore did not settle the matter definitely
and it was left as before.
Major Broadfoot, the Commissioner who supersed-
ed Mr. Blundell’s place on his return back, in the
first month of Per Marong Chow Sok (December 1844)
an officer of Mergui came and planted a flag on the
western side of the river there, distant from Muang
Kra about 120 or 130 feet.
In the year Ma Seng Sapa Sok (1845) Captain
Henry Marion Durand was appointed Commissioner
at Moulmein, and sent in a letter regarding the boun-
dary, stating that on the northern boundary the
question must be discussed and settled, and begged
that an officer, invested with full power, might be sent
out to the boundaries joining eaeh other during the
month of January 1846 (Pi Maseng Sapa Sok)
and that Captain Henry Marion Durand would come
at the same time and discuss and settle the mat-
ter. His Majesty hearing this gave orders for Phya
Kampeng pet, one of his High Officers and Governor
of Muang Tak, to go (invested with full power) to
confer with Captain Henry Marion Durand as


requested and timed in the letter sent in; that if on
his arrival there the English officer did not make his
appearance during the whole of the Siamese month,
of duan Yi, he was to return back again and collect
the servants, men and officers, as there was a report
that the Burmese intended making a descent on the
Province of Chiengrai, which is under the jurisdiction
of the Province of Chieng Mai, so that in case the
report proved true, they might be in readiness to
make war with them,
Phya Kampeng Pet, Phya Tak, and Phya Ootai-
tani went out therefore to confer with the English
officer at the place where the boundaries joined, on the-
second day of duan Yi and waited there 28 days.
Captain Henry Marion Durand sent a letter by a
Raman named Ma Khon Thai, stating that he would
come and meet the Siamese officers and wished them
to wait. The above three officers waited therefore
until the 6th day of duan Sam, the following month,
and finding that no English officer came, Phya Kam-
peng pet having pressing business to collect forces
<&ca. to be in readiness to fight the Burmese in case of
need, left and returned to his Province. Captain
Henry Marion Durand then forwarded in a letter by
a Raman to the city Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia,
stating that the Siamese officer sent out did not wait
to see him, but that the officer had taken a square
post and planted it in English territory, and had also
erected a heap of stones at the Mergui river, and gave
out it was the Siamese boundary, requesting to know
whether the orders to do so had been issued by the
Government officers, and stating that placing the
boundary at Mergui could not have been more excep-
tionable than if it had been placed in the middle of
Moulmein.
When Phya Kampeng Pet came back, he did
[not] state that he had planted a post, or erected


a heap of stones, and therefore as soon as it was
known here a message was dispatched up to Pliya
Kampeng pet, who it was found had died after his
return from the jungle. Phya Tak, who accompanied
Phya Kampeng pet, was then questioned, who stated
that Phya Kampeng pet had given no instructions to
have this done, but the guards living at the frontiers
had done so merely as a mark for the officers of the
guard house to keep watch as far as the post was
planted. On the part of Ootaitani province—Phya
Ootaitani and Khun Cha Sak, the officer of the
guard house, stated that the stones were erected by
the Khariens, who guard the frontiers of the Province
of Ootaitani, and they put a small house for. religious
purposes upon it. They told their comrades to keep
their watch as far as that, the boundary not being
yet settled, and that guard was to be kept where
they had been in the habit of keeping it hitherto,
until officers from both sides had gone out, met and
discussed the matter and settled the boundary, and
Phra Chedee had been erected as a mark according
to the ancient customs of the Siamese. If an advance
had been made beyond the boundary, it would then
be a matter of wrong and error. A letter was sent
back to Captain Henry Marion Durand stating the
matter, in charge of the Raman who brought his letter
in. Since the ninth month of Pee Mamea Sok
(July 1846) until the present Duen'Sara Captain
Henry Marion Durand has not sent in to appoint
either a time or a place to meet and discuss the
matter. The city of Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia
wishes to have this matter properly adjusted, and
amicably settled, and thus leave no further cause for
difference. Whatever time English officers have hi-
therto appointed, the Siamese have in every instance
punctually attended to.
But it is a very long distance, and the Officers
have not as yet been enabled to meet each other.


These are the circumstances in detail, and this
letter is forwarded for your information. Should yon
meet the Commissioner of the Tenasserim Provinces,
who would come and appoint a place and time, an
officer on the part of the Siamese shall be sent out
at the same time as the English officer and they shall
discuss the question finally and adjust the boundary
matter on both sides satisfactorily. Petty officers and
people living on the frontiers near the boundaries will
then have no chance of making such a small matter
the cause of any farther difference or dispute for
the future.
Copies of this letter are sent in the Siamese and
English languages, the contents of each being of the
same tenor.
Dated in Phra Mahanakon Siayuthia, this 30th
day of January 1847.


Fort William the 31st July 1847.
To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Officiating Secy, to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department.
I have the honor to state with reference to your
letters of May 9th* 1846 and 31st Octobert 1846, and
to the other correspondence which has passed in regard
to the boundary between the British Possession® on
this coast and the country subject to Siam, that a
further search in the records of this office has brought
to light important papers connected with the ques-
tion, which have led me to suspend the execution of
the instructions contained in the second of your letters
above mentioned.
2. A letter from Major McLeod of the 19th
Novr.* last, copy of which with its enclosures is now
submitted, forwarded a letter from the authorities of
the Shan State of Zimmay, tributary to Siam, repeat-
ing their former assertion that an agreement had been
made with them by Dr. Richardson, and afterwards
acknowledged by Major (then Captain) McLeod, dis-
tinctly recognising the Thoung Yeen River as their
boundary with these Provinces. The letter professes
to send the agreement itself, bat was in fact only
accompanied by a paper purporting to be a recital of
the contents of the agreement, and of the subsequent
confirmation of it b} r Major McLeod. Major McLeod,
in forwarding to Captain Durand the translation of
these documents did not however, in any way con-
tradict the statement that such agreements had been
made, and the person, a man of respectable rank who
was the bearer of it from Zimmay, positively asserts
that the agreements, having Dr. Richardson’s signa-
ture, exist there.
3. An exact copy of any agreements has now
been again applied for from the Chief of Zimmay, and


Major McLeod ha'* been addressed in order to procure
his statement in regard to such agreements and to
any material circumstances within his knowledge con-
nected with them.
4. A reference however to the instructions of
Mr. Blundell to Ur. Richardson, of December 20th*
1834, to which and specially to his previous letter
to Government of the 18th August* 1834 and to the
orders of Government in reply of the 23rd March*
1835 I would particularly solicit the attention of the
President in Council, will place it beyond doubt that
Dr. Richardson was fully empowered, if not to execute
a written agreement, yet distinctly to admit, or more
correctly according to the state of things at that time,
to claim the Thoung Yeen River, and that only,
as the boundary between the British and Zimmay
Territory. That Dr. Richardson held this language
on his Mission to Zimmay in the beginning of 1835,
is clear from all his reports and journals, in which
he speaks of the Thoung Yeen River as the clear
British Boundary,
5. Again in 1837, when Major McLeod proceed-
ed on his Mission to the Shan States and to the
frontiers of China, Mr. Blundell gave instructions of
the 23rd Novr. 1836 sth para: in a part of which
he expressly referred to the Thoung Yeen as the
boundary with Zimmay,
6. That Mr. Blundell never changed his opin-
ion or declarations on the point while he remained
Commissioner is further evident from his report to
Government of October 20th* 1842, in which he pro-
posed to obtain from the Zimmay authorities the
superintendence and management of the forest tract
across the Thoung Yeen, by an amicable arrangement
based on mutual concurrence and providing for a
money payment by us to Zimmay.


7. The first mention I can find of our claim up
to the crest of the range of mountains, which divides
streams flowing in to. the Thoung Yeen from those
flowing down to the eastward and joining the rivers
which have their course through Siam proper, is in
Major Broadfoot’s letter to the Ministers of Siam of
March 26th 1844,* in which replying to a letter that
had reference solely to the southern or Mergui bound-
ary he said generally “ But it is not only the bound-
aries in the Kra River that require consideration ; the
boundaries in the north and east between the Talien
country, belonging to the English, and the Siamese
country of Zimmay and Yahine, along the range of
hills called by the Taliens Day Krine, require the deep
consideration both of the Ministers of Siam and of the
Commissioner.”
8, On this, followed the letters reported O/n in
Captain Durand’s letter to your office of February 16th*
1845, and November 20th* 1845. in the first of which
the Court of Siam admitted the crest of the range ot
mountains as the boundary, and in the second claimed
the tract westward of the range to the Mi Moae or the Me
Mei, which is the Siamese name for the Thoung Yeen.
9. 1 cannot find on record a single ground of
proof on which to claim for our government the
country eastward of the Thoung Yeen and which
could be opposed to the arguments recorded by Mr.
Plundell in his letter of August 1834 before referred
to, and to the admissions which may be shown to have
been made bv our own officers at Zimmay. It is true
that the most convenient and natural boundary is the
range of mountains, and that it was probably the
ancient boundary between the Taliens and the Shans
or Siamese. It is true also that at one time, but not
that I can find any trace of near the period of our con-
quest, the Burmese had jurisdiction eastward of the
Thoung Yeen. But these circumstances can give us.


T think, no title to disturb the present possession of
the Shan Chiefs.
% 10. "Whatever, therefore, the advantag-e to us r
(and it would be considerable), of obtaining the pos-
session and sovereignty of the tracts which yield large
quantities of teak (almost entirely cut and brought
down by capital and adventure from this place) lying
Eastward of the Thonng Yeen, I cannot further pur-
sue our claim to those tracts without fresh instructions
from Government.
11. The Government has not certainly made
known, or authorized to be made known to the Court
of Siam its admission, in the letter from the Political
Department of the Government of Bengal of the 23d
March 1835,* of the Thoung Yeen as the boundary.
Nor has it signified a subsequent approval of any
agreements or declarations which Dr. Richardson may
have made at Zimmay. But it may be thought that
under all the circumstances which have been stated
we should not be justified, unless upon fresh informa-
tion of facts, in urging any claim to deprive the
Zimmay Chiefs of the country actually held by them
eastward of the Thoung Yeen. We must in that
event await some favorable opportunity of obtaining
the management of the teak forests across the Thoung
Yeen in the Zimmay country, perhaps an arrangement
of the kind which Mr. Blundell suggested in his letter
of the 20th October 1842.
12. I should sajr that the actual jurisdiction
along the eastern bank of the Thoung Yeen is divided
between the two Shan States of Zimmay (North) and
Yahine (South) and that no agreements or admis-
sions of their rights tc that river as the boundary
appear to have been made to the Yahine Chiefs by any
British Officer, but we have no better general argu-
ment that I am at all aware of, or can learn after enquiry


here, to claim as a right the tract across the Thouug
Yeen from the Yahine than from the Zimrnay ter-
ritory. The limits of the possessions of these two
small states on the Thoung Yeen appear to be at
or close to the point which will be seen in Major
McLeod's Map of the Tenasserim Provinces, publish-
ed, I believe, in the Bengal and Agra Gazetteers, *
where two parallel lines begin to be drawn, bending
round along the hills to the Southern Point marked
the three Pagodas.
13. The statements contained in this letter will
probably suffice for a report also on the subject of
Lieut. Latter’s letter regarding the country of the
White Kareens, forwarded with your dispatch of the
17th October* last. There is as yet an entire absence
of proof that when these provinces were ceded to us
by the Burmese, they exercised any authority beyond
the junction of the Thoung Yeen and Salween Rivers ;
and the country above that point, between the range
of mountains and the eastern bank of the Upper Sal-
ween, has been actuallj - considered by us, as will be
seen, from Major Pemberton’s general map, as under
the power of the Shans tributary to Siam, and Dr.
Richardson in his brief account of the Kingdom of
Siam appended to his report of his mission to Bangkok
in 1839, distinctly speaks of the Siamese frontier in
that quarter as extending to the westward and to the
Kareen country subject to Ava.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) J. R. Colvin
Commissioner Tenasserim Provs :
Moulmein
12th April 1847.


To Captain H. M. Durand
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward yon translations of
two letters received from Zemrni.
2. The bearer is the same person who waited on-
you before he left this for Zemmi.
3. I have directed the messenger to be enter-
tained in the usual manner.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. C. McLeod
Prinl: Assistant Commissioner.
Moulmein
19th November 1816


Title of the Tsambwa and Chiefs and 32 Court
Officers of Zernmi having assembled inform the Com-
missioner of Moulmein and his Assistant Captain Mc-
Leod and other officers of the Courts, that Dr. Richard-
son was sent with presents as an Agent by the former
Commissioner and on the 6bh of the waning moon of
Tahadway 1195 political matters were spoken of and
Dr. Richardson applied for the territory to the west-
ward of the Thoung Yeng River and to the eastward ot
the Salween, when they informed Dr. Richardson that
that locality first belonged to the Taliens and Burmese
and that the Shans had afterwards fought and conquer-
ed it, and that they are now governing it. They how-
ever gave that locality to the British in consideration
of the existing friendship. After which on the 2d ot
the Waning Moon of Taboung in the Era 1207 Major
McLeod sent four Burmans with a letter informing
that he had looked at two or three villages on the
boundaries ot the British and Shan sides and that he
would now return as the rain was approaching and that
in the month of Thaden Gyoot he would come back ami
see respecting the boundaries, and requested to know
at which place they were to meet together. Respect-
ing the boundaries they have already spoken and
settled with Dr. Richardson and after this also they
have spoken with Major McLeod. The Commissioner
having sent a message by the Tsheng Gine Woon
Roon, that he wishes to see the Agreement made with
Dr. Richardson with respect to the boundaries between
the two countries, they send the Agreement so that it
may be known. As they wish to know of the death,
prosperity and appointments of authorities at Ava, they-
hope that if intelligence is received by the authorities
at Moulmein they may be informed of the same.
A true translation from the Burmese
(Signed) W. C. McLeod,
Prinl. Asst. Commissioner.


Formerly in 1190, on Wednesday the Gth ol the
Waning Moon of Tabodma, Dr. Richardson arrived
at Zemmi, being sent by the Commissioner with
presents. Dr. Richardson with his interpreter and
the owner of the Golden Palace with the Chiefs (whose
titles are given) and the Court officers, thirty two in
number, co-operated and consulted with each other
agreeably to the existing friendship, and that it may
stand in force, of which the following are the parti-
culars.
On Dr, Richardson's arrival, so that the two states
may be one, he applied for the territory to the west-
ward of the Thoung Yeng. The owner of the Golden
Palace and the 32 Court Officers accordingly, in con-
sideration of the friendship, granted [it]. It was set-
tled that should any of the Karens, Tha Nhieng Shans,
Toung Thor, Kalla, Burmese or Talieng (Inhabitants
of Moulmein) cultivate gardens and fields in the juris-
diction of Zemmi, and work for their livelihood, revenue
will be received from them, in accordance with the
custom of the country, and if Lavva Shans or Karens
(Inhabitants of Zemmi) cultivate gardens and fields in
the jurisdiction of Moulmein, they are to be taxed ac-
cording to the custom of the country. If any of the
inhababitants of Moulmein wish to take any wood and
bamboo from the Shan States, they can do so, likewise
the inhabitants of Zemmi, in the jurisdiction of Moul-
mein ; be paid to the Government entitled to it.
The duty on wood of 8, 9 and 10 fists is 1 Rupee ; of
of 11, 12 and 13 is 2 Rupees ; and of 14, 15 and 16 fists
is 3 Rupees. When the inhabitants of Moulmein or
Zemmi proceed from one country to the other, as
hawkers or merchants with elephants, ponies, buffaloes
or bullocks, they are to obtain a stamped permit
-according to the custom of the Land, specifying the


sex of the persons and the quantity of goods. This
is to be strictly done, without which the persons pro-
ceeding from one place to another will be apprehended.
Those who are proceeding are not to pass on, so as to
be out of the sight of guards. If any leave without
reporting [to ] the guards, they shall be punished
agreeably to the rules of the country. On the arrival
of any one in the country, it is to be reported to the
ruler of the country. In violation of these rules the
offenders will be punished according to the laws of
the country. It is to be hoped that no Burmese,
Taliengs, Tha Nhieng Shans, Toung Thoo or Mo Nai
Shans (who are not inhabitants of Moulmein but of
Ava) may come to Shan States deceitfully together
with the inhabitants of Moulmein, They do not wish
those people to come to their country as they are
their enemies. If any inhabitants of Moulmein com-
mit crimes at Zemmi, they are to be dealt with
agreeably to the laws* of the country, likewise at
Moulmein, the inhabitants of Zemmi. Should any
be deserving of death, the prisoner being first well
secured, a reference to be made in a letter to the Court,
and after being agreed to by both the authorities, the
man is then to be put to death. The above was spoken
in the Golden Palace and both parties agreeing
made the Agreement. After which again in the
year 1199 on the arrival of Captain McLeod at Zemmi,
he said that he was proceeding to China, but not
having effected li(js intentions returned to Zemmi ;
repeated what had passed with Dr. Richardson to
to Captain McLeod, who said that it was very well,
and another Agreement was made again,
Agreements were made twice.
A true translation from the Burmese.
(Signed) W. C. McLeod,
Prinl. Asst. Commissioner.


Additional Instructions to D. Richardson, Esquire.
It having been reporlel to me by Captain Win.
Warwick, who has lately been employed in cutting
timber on the banks of the Thoung Yeen River, that
the Shans of Zimmay have been in the habit of exert-
ing authority and levying tribute from the Kayens
who, residing south of the Thoung Yeen, are conse-
quently under our jurisdiction, and it appearing that
Captain Warwick has taken upon himself without any
authority or instructions from me to that effect to pro-
hibit them from so doing, and as I am unaware of the
degree of authority which that gentleman may have
exerted, I request that on your way to Zimmay you
will make yourself acquainted with all the circum-
stances that have transpired on that frontier.
You will lay down most explicitly the Thoung
Yeen River as the boundary between ourselves and the
Shans. You will point out to the Shan Officers the
danger they will incur, both to their own persons
and to the good understanding between the two coun-
tries in attempting to exert any the slightest authority
on this side the Thoung Yeen. You will also explain
that their side of the river is equally inviolate to our
people and warn our wood cutters, whoever they may
be, that they have not the right of cutting on the
other side and can only do so with the permission of
the Shan authorities and on payment of such tax as
they may impose.
Should you find that Captain Warwick has entered
into any arrangement with the local Shan Officeis
which you may see good ground to disapprove of, you
will not hesitate in cancelling it. I do not anticipate
that those local officers will give you much trouble or
annoyance on the subject, considering that you are on
Fort William the 31st July 1847,


your way to the sea* of their Government, and of
course you will enter with them into no arrangement
on the subject of duties, which you will reserve till
your arrival at Zimmay, and confine yourself merely to
explaining both to the Shans and to our people the
respective limits of the jurisdictions of the two
Governments.
You will forward me a detailed statement of your
proceedings in this business before proceeding on your
journey.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) E. A. Blundell
Commissioner Ten : Provinces.
Moulmein
The 20th December 1834.


Extract from a letter from E. A. Blundell Esquire,
Officiating Commissioner Provinces, dated
Moulmein 18th August 1831, to C. E. Trevelyan
Esquire, Secretary to Government, Secret and. Political
Department, Fort William.
Para: 5. Having directed Mr. Richardson to
ascertain as far as practicable the feelings with which
a post on the Salween, as proposed in Mr. Maingy’s
report of 31st July* 1833, be viewed, I take
this opportunity of laying before His Honor in Council
the result of my enquiries on the subject of our
claim to territory on the east bank of the Salween,
north of the junction of an inconsiderable stream called
the Thoung Yeen with the Salween, which has hither-
to been commonly considered our boundary in that
direction.
G. This junction is at the highest in Latitude
18°. 30' whereas Mr. Maingy recommend that a post be
established in Latitude 19° or still higher if deemed
advisable. Mr. Maingy’s proposition was grounded
on data respecting the Burmese former possessions in
that quarter, which were afforded him by Lieut. Coll.
Burney, but as the territory north of the Thoung Yeen
is now and lias been since our war with the Burmese
in the possession of the Shans of Laboung and
Zimmay, I deem it my duty to bring to the notice of
Government all the arguments for and against the
measure before adopting the important step of depriv-
ing our neighbours of their territory and perhaps
turning their present kindly feelings towards us into
jealousy and fear of our future encroachments.
7. Ido not presume to dispute the accuracy of
Lieutenant Colonel Burney’s information as to the
eastern boundary of the Burmese dominions, once
extending beyond the Salween to the chief range of


mountains running north and south throughout the
Peninsula, or of their possessing a slip of territory on
on the east bank of the Salween connecting their
possessions bordering on China with those on this
coast. Their historical books show this to have been
the case, and it is admitted by all from whom enquiries
have been made, but it is at the same time admitted
that about 60 years ago, the town of Meinloagyee
(then called Yoongalien) in which resided apparently
t he chief authority east of the Salween, was abandoned
and the Chief with the whole population withdrawn to
Martaban, in consequence of the then superior forces
of the Siamese in that direction. The country appears
to have remained waste for nearly 20 years after this
event, when the Siamese from Zirnmay attempted to
re-establish the town of Mein Loon Gyn, but were
driven out by a force sent from Martaban. A few
years after this the Siamese appear to have succeeded
in their objects of establishing a town on or near the
site of the old one, and from that time forward to have
held undisputed possession of the whole strip of
territory in question on the east bank of the Salween.
8. In conversation on the subject of boundaries
Avith the Chief of Laboung and Zirnmay he asserted to
Dr. Richardson that their present possessions extend
some distance on the the west bank of the Salween,
and that they levy a revenue from Kayens or wild
Tribes residing on that side. At all events since the
conclusion of the war the Siamese have occupied and
levied revenue on the east bank of the Salween, north
of the junction of the Thoung Yeen. Their claim to it
lias never been disputed by us, and there is no evidence
forthcoming of the Burmese being in possession of it
immediately before the war, far less at its conclusion.
9. That a Post, as recommended by Mr. Maingy,
on the banks of the Salween, would be highly advan-
tageous there is no doubt, but under the circumstances
above detailed I am very unwilling to establish it


without the express sanction of Government. lam
inclined also to think that the chief object of such a
post, that of attracting the caravans of Shans and
Chinese traders into our territory, may be accom-
plished by negotiation with the Chiefs ot Laboring and
Zimmay, and with a Chief of a race of Independent
Kayens who hold a tract on each bank of the Salween
to the northward, who have never yet been visited by
Europeans, and who have sent me messages requesting
I would depute an officer to their country. Should
it meet with the sanction of Government I am
desirous of sending officers to explore the country north
of us on each side of the Salween, which I conceive
may be done at a very trifling expense and that bene-
fits arising from it would be more than commensurate.


To E. A. Blundell Esquire,
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
1 am directed by the Honorable the Governor of
Bengal to acknowledge the receipt of your two letters
dated the 18th of August and 10th* of February last
together with their respective enclosures.
2. The Governor is happy to find that Dr.
Richardson’s Mission to the Shan Chief of Ziminay
and Laboring has been productive of such beneficial
consequences, and he trusts that further benefit will
result from your having directed that gentlemen to
proceed again to the same quarter.
3. Dr. Richardson may be permitted to prolong
his stay among the Chiefs if invited by them, and if he
should anticipate an} 7 advantage from his so doing,
and your authority to him to expend the sum of GOO
Rupees in presents and to take 50 muskets with him
for the same purpose is sanctioned.
4. Without meaning to express any disapproba-
tion of your proceedings the Governor is of opinion
that missions into Foreign Countries ought not to be
undertaken except on emergency without the previous
sanction of the Government.
5. The question of establishing a post on the
Salween need not for the present be considered. it is?
evident from the information furnished in your letter
of the 18th August that we have no right whatever to
adopt such a measure to the north of the junction of
the Thoung Yeen. The Governor considers that in-
formation to be most valuable and entitled to his-
thankful acknowledgments as without it we might


have been led to commit an act of injustice highly
injurious and ofiensive to friendly neighbours.
(Signed) H. MacNaghten
Secretary to Government of Bengal.
Fort William
23rd March 1835.


Extracts from Additional Instructions by Mr.
Blundell to Lieut. McLeod, dated Maulmain the 23d
November 1836.
Para. 5. “ You will mention that the Kareans
residing south of the Thoung Yeen still complain of
the Shan officers calling on them for tribute money.
You will not bring this forward as a subject of official
complaint, but represent it as a disobedience of orders
on the part of their officers which may some day sub-
ject those subordinates to serious consequences as
these Kareans have been instructed to resist all such
payments and to apprehend and send to Moulmein any
one that may demand them.”


Extract from a letter from E. A. Blundell Esquire,
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces, dated Moulmein,
20th October 1842, to G. A. Bushby Esquire, Officiat-
ing Secretary Government of India, Secret and
Political Department, Fort William.
Para : 8. A new channel of trade has within the
last year or two been established between this and the
Shan states, and it is one of considerable importance
to the British nation at larges and which calls for
immediate attention. Teak wood is known to exist in
very great abundance in various parts of the Shan
Territories on the streams tributary to the Thoung
Yeen and Salween Rivers. No regular understanding
lias been entered into between the two Govern-
ments relative to this timber finding its way into
the Moulmein market further than that a certain
trifling duty should be levied by the Chiefs on each
tree that is cut. This was sufficient in the infancy of
the operation in these forests, when but few people
resorted to them, but now that a great number of our
subjects are engaged in working these forests, and
large sums of money are embarked in such operations,
it becomes incumbent on us to form some permanent
arrangement to encourage them as much as possible
and to protect our subjects who may embark in them.
9, To render this trade of real utility to the
British Governmt nt and to purchasers at large, and to
guard the Shan Government from loss, various minor
arrangements are absolutely necessary to be made by
the two states. These points can of course only be
settled in communications with the Shan Chiefs or
Tsobwas when their sentiments are clearly ascertained.
10. I may mention that the agents of the Court
of Siam residing here, appear to be endeavouring to in-
terfere with these forests and probably that Court may


design to appropriate the revenues derived from them.
In any disputes between Siam and their tributaries on
this point, it may be imprudent in us to interfere ;
but it becomes an object of importance to ascertain
how far such disputes are likely to affect our interest
and to endeavour to secure the good will of the States
to whom the forests actually belong and by whom, so
long as we are assured of such good will, the impedi-
ments or restraints that may be attempted by the
distant though paramount power wifi be evaded.
11, With reference to a former correspondence
on the subject of teak timber and to the probability
of Her Majesty’s Government deciding on forming a
building yard in this place, these teak forests within
the Shan States possess great value, and it is most
desirable on this and various other accounts that
arrangements should be made for working the forests
economically and if possible for providing for theii
renewal in the course of time. These forests are only
rendered valuable to the Shans by the demand for
timber in the Mculmein market. Without such a
vent they are wholly unprofitable to them, and conse-
quently I should not anticipate much difficulty in
effecting some arrangement regarding them. We
have reason to know that the Ohiefs are constantly de-
frauded of the dues leviable on the trees cut down
within their forests. Their establishment for collect-
ing it is insufficient and corrupt and the timber is
r> • i i
mostly brought away by our people clandestinely and
I am of opinion that the offer of a certain sum pei an-
num, secured by us would induce them to allow us to
survey the forests and keep up establishments within
them for preservation and renewal. Should His Honor
in Couneil agree to my deputing an officer I request to
be favoured with his opinion on the subject of secur-
ing to the Shan Chiefs their fair annual revenue and
obtaining a local jurisdiction within the forests solely
for the purposes of preservation and economy in
working them.


12. The trade in piece goods is extensively
carried on with the States of Zimmay, Laboring and
Lagong. Many of our subjects have settled in those
places. Some of these men are however persons of
bad character, who having goods on credit here to a
large amount proceed to the Shan country and there
squander the proceeds of their investments, when
litigation takes place and the authorities of those
places have endless troubles and are obliged to make
constant reference to me. It is much to be feared
that the same state of things exists to a great extent
in hitherto unvisited States. It is therefore obviously
to our interest to have this subject properly in-
vestigated and these traders and settlers placed in
such a position that our trade may not suffer but be
turned to a good account. The consumption of our
produce thoughoub these countries is considerable
and I think much benefit will arise by the mission
to the respectable traders and further ensure a greater
demand for the articles themselves.
13. Another object, and to my mind one of most
importance to our commerce, is the overland trade
with China. I have already frequently touched on
this subject in my reports. When Dr. Richardson was
at Zimmay in 1835 and Captain McLeod proceeded to
the Chinese frontier in 1837, the numerous caravans
of Chinese traders fallen in with, and the authorities
on the frontier, expressed a considerable desire to
visit Moulmein and there open a direct traffic with
us. In 1836 a few of the traders belonging to
tiie caravans which visit Zimmay extended their
journey to this, where finding the market most en-
couraging they promised in spite of the hilly nature
of the road to revisit us. Circumstances prevented
their performing their promise the following year.
In 1838 I had selected a Chinaman who had accom-
panied Captain McLeod as Interpreter to the frontiers,
and dispatched him for the purpose of escorting the


traders down as they had requested, but unfortunately
neither he nor his two companions ever reached
Zimmay, nor indeed were ever heard of after quitting
this province. The consequence was, the traders in
in a letter expressed their disappointment at not meet-
ing a person from this and have never since made any
attempt to reach this.
Id, It is suspected that the authorities at Zim-
may have indirectly thrown obstacles in the way of
caravans coming down. It will be the object of the
officer sent on this mission to remove all objection on
the part of the Sharis and to endeavour to persuade the
Chinese to come on. Should this not be feasible he
will report on the practicability of forming a fair at
some centrical place near the frontiers or even at
Zimmay itself, and at the same time the road will be
reported on and the portion of it within our territories
may be put into a proper state of repair. I have
already on previous occasions stated the advantages
of this trade to us ; these I shall not repeat but merely
observe that I consider it a most desirable thing to be
regularly established if possible.
15, The utmost caution will be observed in no
way to excite the jealousy and suspicion of any of the
States themselves to which the mission proceeds, or
of the Court to which they are tributary. The ex-
penses will be trifling considering the important
objects in view. Carriage can be supplied generally
from the Government Establishment here, and indeed
beyond the prices of the presents which I would re-
commend to be proportionate to the advantage we
hope to obtain, and the value of which would probably
be covered by that of those received in return, the
pay of some Coolies and of the Establishment allowed
the officer so deputed, and his expenses, would be all
that Government would have to disburse.


To J. R. Colvin Esquire,
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated the 12th April * and enclosures, respecting
the undetermined boundary between the British ter-
ritory and Zimmay, tributary of Siam.
2. As at present informed the President in
Council is of opinion that the British cannot claim
more now than was claimed by Mr. Commissioner
Blundell and Dr. Richardson, the latter of whom is
stated to have agreed with the authorities of the Shan
State of Zimmay to recognise the Thoung een River
as their boundary with the British possessions on th&
Tenasserim Coast. All further proceedings regarding
the boundary shall be suspended, but before passing
final orders in reply to your present letter, the Pre-
sident in Council will await an inspection of the
agreements referred to in para : 3d, and Major Mc-
Leod’s reply to your application to him on the subject
of them.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. A. Bushby
Officiating Secy. to the Govt.
of India.
Fort William
Secret —Foreign Depart ment,
Ist July 1847.


Fort William the 28th August 1847.
To G, A. Bushby Esquire
Offg. Secy, to the Govt, of India
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have had the honor to receive your letter of tho
Ist instant* on the subject of the boundary between
these Provinces and the Siamese territory, and submit
with reference to it copy of a letter to my address ot
this date from my Principal Assistant Captain Pliayre,
forwarding a copy of a letter to that officer from
Major McLeod.
2. It will be seen from Captain Phayre’s letter
that no answer lias yet been received from the Chief
of /iimmay to the request from this place for a copy
of any Agreement relative to the boundary that Im
may have bearing Dr. Richardson’s signature. There
would be nothing remarkable in this dekiy, as the
correspondence of these petty Chiefs is always irregu-
lar and protracted, but it appears to be now most pro-
bable from the statements in Major McLeod’s letter,
that no such formal agreement, as was formally
alleged to be at Zimmay really exists.
3. Any further communication on this point,
which may be received from Zimmay, shall be duly
forwarded to you. But it does not appear to me, with
reference to the other parts of Major McLeod's letter,
that the absence of such a formal agreement can
substantially weaken the claims of the Shan Chiefs to
have the Thoongyeen recognized as their boundary,
after the repeated declarations or admissions to which
1 referred in my letter to your address of the 12th*
April last, and of which Major McLeod now speaks so
strongly.


4, Independently of any particular admission
the weakness of the claim which has been raised for
the British Government in regard to this boundary is
the absence of any distinct or ostensible proof that I
can find of recent possession by the Burmese of the
tract referred to, previously to our conquest of these
provinces. I need not remark that we made war
against the Burmese in conjunction with the King of
Siam, as our fiiend and ally, and we could therefore
with the less propriety, sustain any pretensions as
against him to territory over which he has exercised
sovereignty without any [?hindrance] till this late
dispute on our part, ever since the peace of andaboo,
and to which we have, as far as I am aware, no other
right to plead than such as may rest on some remote
and general historical assumptions, and on arguments
of supposed clear and natural boundaries, which can-
not of course be urged as practically decisive of the
limits of territory between states.
5. I take this opportunity of acknowledging the
receipt of your letter of the 27th March last* in con-
nection with this subject.
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. R. Colvin
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Maul main
The 19t h of July 1847.


To J. R. Colvin Esquire
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces
Sir,
Herewith I have the honor to transmit cop} 7 of
a letter dated the Ist instant from Major McLeod, late
Principal Assistant Commissioner Tenasserim Pro-
vinces, relative to the document regarding the boun-
dary between the British possessions and the Siamese
Shan States which the Zimmay Chief said he possess-
ed, signed by Dr. Richardson and Major McLeod.
2. No answer has ever been received to the
letter I, by your directions, addressed to the Zimmay
Chief on the 19th April last requesting an exact
copy of the above alleged document.
I have &ca.
(Signed) A. P. Phayre,
Principal Assistant Commissioner.
Maul main
The 19th July 1847.
Fort William the 28th August 1847.


To Captain A. P. Phayre
Principal Assistant Commissioner, Maulmain.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 14th April last; it came to my
hands only a few ago, when passing through Berham-
pore to which place it had been sent by some mistake
to await my arrival.
*
2. To the best of my recollection I never before
heard of the existence of, nor have 1 ever seen the
documents asserted by the Chief of Zimmay to have
been signed by the late Dr. Richardson, but 1 am
quite certain that I have never affixed my signature to
any document of the import stated.
3. 1 beg that it may be understood that the
denial above conveyed has reference to any formal
agreement as regards the boundary. The journals of
the late Dr. Richardson’s Missions and my own, and
the records of your office, will show that we and the
Chiefs of Zimmay and Labong in letters, and in
personal discussions, have invariably spoken of the
Thoung Yeen as being the stream which divided the
British possessions from those of the Siamese Shans.
The documents above alluded to and others, both in
the Commissioner’s Office and your own, will, I think,
satisfy the Commissioner, that his predecessors up to
the period of the boundary question being mooted by
the late Major Broadfoot, when Commissioner, re-
cognized that river as separating the territories of the
two States from each other. Per my own part 1 was
Fort William the 28th August 1847.


always impressed with the belief that such was thu
line of demarcation fixed by authority,
I have &ca.
( Signed) W. C. McLeod
Late Pr : Assistt; Comr; Ten: Prov:
Maulmain
Hussul Oondah Ist July 1847.


To J. R. Colvin Esquire,
- Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces,
Sir,
I am directed by His Honor the President in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
dated 19th ultimo, with enclosiire, relative to the
boundary between the Tenasserim Provinces and the
Siamese Territory, and to inform you in reply that
whenever the subject of the boundary comes under
final discussion with the Siamese authorities the
Government is prepared to fix the Thoung Yeen as
the proper boundary.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. A. Bushy
Officiating Secy. to the Govt.
of India.
Fort William
the I4th of August 1847-
Fort William the 28th August 1847.


Fort William 31st March 1848.
To H. M. Elliot Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to the subject of the proper boun-
dary between the northern portion of these provinces
and the Siamese territories, on which the decision of
Government was communicated b} r the dispatch from
your Office of the 14th August* last, I have the
honor to forward copy of my instructions of the sth
November last to Lieut. Latter, Superintendent of
Forests and of his report in reply of the 17th instant,
with sketch accompanying, on the determination of
the stream, among those which belong or are near, to
the upper part of Thoungyeen River, that is fairly to
be taken as forming the first main current of that
lliver, and therefore as marking the correct boundary
between the two states from the source of the Thoung-
yeen downwards.
2. Lieut. Latter’s report appears to me to be
satisfactory and conclusive on the point in question,
and 1 propose, with the approbation of Government,
to adopt the opinions stated in it as the basis for
finally settling the recognized proper course of the
Thoungyeen lliver from its source, in any future
communications with the Siamese Authorities.
I have Aca.
(Signed) J. R. Colvin
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Maulmain
The 19th Febry, 1848.


To Lieutt. T. Latter,
Superintendent of Forests, Ten : Pro ',
Sir,
I have the honor to request your attention, oil
your approaching visit to the Thoungyeen forests, to
the tracing of the Thoungyeen river up to what may
fairly and properly be considered the source ot it&-
main stream,
2. Some observations on the subject are con-
tained in the extract (paras. 8 and 9) from Mr.
Salmond’s letter of the 13th September last, which is
appended for convenient reference to the present
communication.
3. You will furnish a separate and special report
upon this subject, accompanied by a sketch, showing
what may appear to be clearly the course of the first
channel of the Thoungyeen, with the position in
distances of any neighbouring streams, villages or
hills, by which, taking the proper current of the
Thoungyeen as the boundary, the limits ot the British
and Shan country in that quarter may be readily
distinguished.
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. R. Colvin
Commissioner Ten : Prov :
Maulmain
sth November 1847.
Fort William 31st March 1848.


Extract from Mr. Salmond’s letter to the Superin-
tendent of Forests dated 13th September 1847.
Para. 8. The question of that portion of land-
lying between the Meglai and Thoungyeen (which
latter some persons have designedly called the Oung-
tine Choung) being on the tapis permit me to lay
before you all the information that I have gleaned
during my visit to the spot. First, a Karen, b} T name
Pho-Ka-la, witness for Pho Kaneaton, said that his
village always paid revenue to the Shans ; this is true,
because his village is situated beyond the hills on the
Outine Chong, a tributary to the Bankok River. The
Thoun gyeen takes its rise from the same range of
mountains, and from its source to its junction with
the Paupee Choung it is called the Gna-lai Choung.
9. There have been for the last three years two
villages not visited by the Goung Gyouk—one at
the source of the Oong-Krain-Choung, and one on the
eastern bank of the Meglai River. These villages
have paid revenue to neither State, but they tell me
that demands were made upon them by the Shans
for their annual tribute, but were invariably refused
on the plea of being British ground. Nga P3 T an, Nga
Nga and Mr. Maling in 1845 worked these forests
without any molestation from the Shans. No obsta-
cles were thrown in the way of British subjects work-
ing there this year either Shan Chief or Tsokay,
and I am led to understand that the Oungtino
Sobwab directed his people to render no vexations
interferences about State boundaries, but confine then-
labours wholly to making Toung Yat.
(A true Extract)
(Signed) Thos. Latter
Supt. Forests Ten : Fro:
Fort William 31st March 1848.


To J. R. Colvin Esquire,
Comjnissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for your information
that agreeably to the instructions conveyed in your
letter dated sth November 1847, I visited during my
recent tour in the forests that portion of the frontier
lying near the sources of the Thoungyeen River, trac-
ing the river up towards its source as far as I could
possibly proceed.
2. On arriving at the point where the Meglai
falls into the Thoungyeen, I was particular in observ-
ing the appearances of the two streams, as the Shans
declare that the Thoungyeen loses its name at this
spot ; that the western stream (the Meglai) is the
principal one, and that the other is called the
K voungmagy ee.
3. There is a marked difference between the
appearance of the banks of the Thoungyeen River for
several miles below the point where the Meglai hills
into it, r lhe British bank marked red on the map is
low and shelvy—whereas the Shan bank is high and
precipitous. This marked difference continues above
the point of junction, the low type of bank crossing
as it were the mouth of the Meglai, and continuing
along the left bank of the eastern stream, and the
high and precipitous bank continuing unbroken as
represented by the yellow on the map. This is a fact
showing that by the physical appearance of the
country, the easternmost is the principal or main
stream.
4. The breadth of the two streams at their junc-
tion is about the same, with this marked difference.
Fort William 31st March 1848.


The corresponding point of the other stream is so
deep as to oblige an elephant to swim in passing it.
5. I have already observed that the Shans de-
clare that the Thoungyeen loses its name at the point
where the Meglai falls into it, and that the eastern-
most stream is called Kyonngmagyee. This fact is
denied unanimously by the Karens resident on the
spot. They declare that the easternmost stream con-
tinues to bear the name of Thoungyeen and does not
lose it for some distance higher up, namely at the
spot marked on the map as the junction of the Gauley
and Paupee Kyoungs. Indeed the name Kyoung-
magyee is a sufficient refutation in itself of the claim
of the Shans, seeing that it implies “The main or
principal stream.”
6. Crossing the mouth of the Meglai, I pro-
ceeded up the course of the stream, and arrived at the
Ong Krine Kyong. This is a very minor stream
taking its rise in the tract lying between the Meglai
and Thoungyeen. From thence I proceeded to the
Paupee Kyoung, of which the same remarks may be
made as of the Gang Krine Kyoung. At this point
the Thoungyeen loses its name, the principal stream
continues to be the easternmost, and is called the
Gauley Kyoung. I proceedel tracing the river some
distance up the Gauley Kyoung, but the road soon
became impassable for men or elephants, and it would
have taken me a very long time to have cut down
the jungle, I was obliged therefore to take the in-
formation of those Karen residents who had visited
the spot. It appears that the Gauley Kyoung pro-
ceeds in a nearly easterly direction, when it receives
the waters of a small mountain torrimt called the
Ouhoo Kyoung. From thence it suddenly trends to the
northwards, and after a course of about 5 miles it is
lost in the huge precipices of the Toungneo or llills
of Gloom.


7. The Toungneo Range of hills fills the corres-
ponding position on the Shan side that the Donan
range does on the British. The Donan range runs
about Northwest for some 200 miles when it grad-
ually dwindles away leaving an exit for the Thoung-
yeen.
8. The Toungneo range has a more northerly
course; its termination is not known in our present
acquaintance with the geography of the neighbouring
states. These two ranges join as shown on the map
forming a sort of cul-de-sac, at the bottom of which
rises, and through the whole extent of which flows
the Thoungyeen River.
9. The yellow marks the Shan boundary and the
red the British.
I have &ca.
(Signed) Thcs. Latter
Supt. of Forests Ten. Pro.
Maul main
17th February 1848.


To
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
1 have received and laid before the Governor
General in Council } r our dispatch of the 19th ultimo,
submitting copies of your instructions to Lieut. Latter
and that officer’s report with a sketch marking the
correct boundary between the northern portion of the
Tenasserim Provinces and the Siamese territory from
the source of the Thoungyeen River downwards.
2. In reply lam directed to inform you that the
Governor General in Council approves of your recom-
mendation for finally settling the proper course of the
Thoungyeen River, and .sanctions the adoption of it
accordingly.
3. lam desired at the same time to remark that
it does not appear whether Lieut. Latter has placed
on record the evidence of the Shans and Kareens in
regard to this matter. This ought to have been done.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. M. Elliot
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
Fort William
10th March 1848.
Fort William 31st March 1848.


Fort William the 24th November 1849.
To F. J. Halliday Esquire,
Officiating Secy, to the Govt, of India,
Foreign Department, Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to submit copies of my prede-
cessor’s instructions of the 29th Deer. 1848 to Capt.
H. Berdraore, in temporary charge of the Forest De-
partment and the latter officer’s report of the 31st
March 1849, with the depositions of the Kareens taken
by him on the spot the course of the
Thoungyeen River.
2. From this report and the evidence furnished
there can be no doubt that the Gaulee stream is the
boundary between the British and Shan States, and
not the Meglai,
I have &c.
(Signed) A. Bogle
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Moulmein,
the 20th June 1849.


India Secret
Consultations,
Vol. 161.
No. 27.
* From Commr. to Lt. Latter
of 5 Nov. 1847.
From Lt, Latter to Commr.
of 17 Feb. 1848.
Dispatch from Secy, to
Govt, of India of 10 March
1848.
(See rul. 14. 5 of this series .)
To Captain H. Berdmore,
Assistant to the Commissioner
Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
With reference to my letter to you of this date it
may be as well that I should now place on record my
intenticn of deputing you, after the completion of
your enquiries respecting the Attaran forests, for the
execution of various duties remaining to be performed
iii arranging for the future management of the teak
tracts on the Thoungyeen River.
2. Instructions bearing on the bu-
siness of the Forest Department will be hereafter
given to you. In the mean time I would wish you to
peruse the correspondence referred to in the margin*
to Lt. Latter respecting the delineation of the particu-
lar stream amonef these to ihe head of
sr to Commr. °
the Thoungyeen, which is fairly to be
m secy, to t a i ien as being fhe main channel of that
f 10 March n
river from its source, and as constituting
his series.') therefore the boundary to be declared
and maintained on our part as dividing the British
from the Siamese territory in that quarter.
3. On this point the Siamese frontier officers,
after apparently tacitly relinquishing their claim to
substitute the Meglai stream from the proper upper
course of the Thoungyeen, which lies considerably to
the east of the Meglai, would seem from a petition
from the forest Goung Shaugalay, of which a transla-
tion is annexed, to have recently attempted to revive
their old pretensions.
4. You will carefully go over the same ground
that was examined b}' Lt. Latter, and extend minute
enquiry on the subject as much further as may be
Fort William the 24th November 1849.


practicable. Should you see reason to differ in any
respect from Lieut. Latter’s conclusions, you will, of
course, explain the grounds of such opinion in your
report. You will, however, under any circumstances
take and record the evidence of the Kareens within
our limits on the spot, as desired by the letter from
the Secretary in the Foreign Department, of the 10th
March 1848, and you will distinctly warn the frontier
Shan officers that we will permit no interference beyond
which we may be ourselves satisfied is the proper
course of the Thoungyeen. Until adequately strong
counter evidence be adduced on the subject, the chan-
nel as explained in tLie report of Lieut. Latter must
be respected as the British Boundary.
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. R. Colvin
Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Maul me in
the 29th Deer. 1818.


To Captain E. H. Impey,
Officiating Commissioner Tenasserim Provinces.
Sir,
With reference to the letter from your office
dated 29th Deer. 1848, I have herewith the honor to
forward the evidence of the Kareens regarding what
lias been always considered the proper source of the
Thoung Yeen River therein called for, and in
obedience to the instructions contained in the above
letter to observe that I carefully went over the ground
examined by Lieut, Latter. I extended my examination
about 20 miles further'up the Gaulee, but I see no
sufficient reason to differ with Lieut. Latter s con-
clusions. The eastern stream as it will be seen by
the evidence of the Kareens has been always con-
s’dered as the source or main stream of the Thoung
Yeen River, although geographically speaking there
is no feature that would clearly point out either
stream as the main source. Ihe western stream oi
Meglai is the wider stream of the two at the mouth,
being 130 feet, whilst the eastern stream is only 88
feet, but this stream is a little deeper and more rapid;
both streams have their rise in the same range of
mountains called the ( l oung Net) or Black Mountain.
1 traced up the Gaulee to where it runs out of one
hill and passes un ler ground directly through another
about 30 miles from its source in the Toung Net.
I understood from the villagers and travellers I
met, that a Shan Chief from Zimmay had been in the
vicinit} 7 of the junction of the two streams to meet me
but had returned fo Zimmay before 1 reached the
Toung Yeen, and I n gret to say that I was not


fortunate enough to meet any of the Shan Authorities.
I have, &ca.
(Signed) H. Berdmore
Asstt. Commr. Ten: Prov:
Maul main,
the 31st March, 1849,


Evidence regarding the proper Source of the
Thoung Yeen River.
Panpopah Tookay of the village of Pumpopah,
about 4 miles below the mouth of the Meglai or west
bank of the Thoung Yeen River, age about 40 years*
states, I have lived for the last 10 years on and near
the Bank of the Meglai Choung. I came many } r ears
since, do not remember how many, should think about
fourteen years from the Shan States. 1 have never
heard the Meglai River called by anj 7 other name.
The Thoung Yeen River ceases to be called Thoung
Yeen at the point where the Paupee Choung falls into
it, above which point to its source in the Thoung
Net ( Black Mountain) it is called the Gaulee Choung.
It has been so called ever since I have known it, for
the last 30 years: the Shans have lately called the
Meglai the Thoung Yeen, and the Thoung Yeen
Choung from the mouth of the Paupee to where the
Meglai meets it, they have lately called the Paupee
Choung.
2. Yee Law (Ayine Kareen) age about 30 years,
inhabitant of the same village as last witness, states
that 1 have lived near the Meglai Choung for the last
9 or 10 years, and came from the Shan States, i
have always heard that the Thoung Yeen River ceases
to be called Thoung Yeen at the point where the
Paupee Choung falls into it; above that point to its
source it has always been called the Gaulee Choung.
Lately the Shans have come over and stated that the
Meglai River is the proper Thoung Yeen River and
that the Thoung Yeen below the point where the
Paupee falls into it, to the point below where it meets
the Meglai, is called the Paupee, and they ha\e
forbid the people of the village from cutting teak
timber east of the Meg'ai River.
Fort William the 24th November 1849.


3. Tsan Thee, inhabitant of the village about a
* O
day’s journey from the month of the Paupee Cheung,
age about 40 years ( Ayine Kareen ) states I left the
Biian States where I lived in the village of Paukls oti
the banks of the Melania Choung, upwards of *4 years
since. I have known the Gaulee Choung for the last
20 years. It has always been called the Gaulee. I know
the Paupee Choung at the junction of the Gaulee and
Paupee Choungs is called the Thoung Yeen, and alwayj
has been so called b} 7 the people who reside on either
bank. Lately six Shans came to the village of Paupee
and said they have been sent a Shan Chief to tell
the people residing in the village that they should
not cut timber east of the Meglar River as that was
the boundary of the Shan States and if they did so
the Shans would seize and carry them off to Bangkok.
Two ytars Shans have come and demanded tax of the
village which was refused, as the people of the village
have been told by Goung Gyouk Shauglay that the
village was in the English territory, as being west of
the Gaulee, since which time no tax has been demand-
ed by the Shans from the village.
4. Ivy an Phoo, inhabitant of the same village
(Ayine Kareen) age about 30 years, states about 3
years since 1 came to reside in the village of Paupee.
Shortly after coming to reside in the village Shans came
to the village and demanded tax which was refused them
as the village paid tax to the English ( to Lootsaw )
since which time the Shans iiave not dt manded tax
from the village : 1 have lived near the west bank of
the Thoung Yeen since I was born, I know where the
Gaulee and Paupee Choungs meet, below the Choung
takes the name of the Thoung Yeen. Lately the Shan
Authorities have called the Meglar the proper Thoung
Yeen and have forbidden me to cut timber east of the
Meglar. I was seized some time since by the Shan
Authories and carried to the Shan States for not
paying duty for timber I had felled under Schubat*


from the Superintendent of Forests. I was reh ased
by Goung G} T ouk Shouglay : Five or six days since
six Shans came from the village of Laukey and stated
they had been sent by the headman of Laukey named
Pea-soon-toun, to warn the people of the village not
to cut teak timber east of the Meglar Choung and
that the Shans would seize and carry them to Bangkok
if they did. My brother the Tsokay of the village is
gone to Maul main to report the circumstances. When
the Shans seized me, they said that from the mouth of
the Paupee to point where the Choung meets the
Meglar is properly called the Paupee ; previous to this
it had always been called by every body the Thoung
Yeen Choung.
5. Gna-thee-nee (Ayine Kareen) age about 28
years, states I came two years time from the Shan
States to reside at the village of Paupee. I have
lived all my life on the bank of the Gaulee and Thoung
Yeen Rivers. The Thoung Yeen takes its name from
the point where the Paupee falls into it; above the
mouth of the Paupee to its source it is called the
Gaulee Choung. I know the Meglar Choung. Lately
six Shans came to the village and said that the proper
source of the Thoung Yeen was the Meglar Choung,
and they warned the people of the village not to
cut teak timber east of the Meglar, as they said the
Meglar Choung was the boundary between the English
and Shan States. I did not myself see the Shans as I
was at the time absent from the village in the jungle.
(Signed) H. Berdmore
Assistant Commissioner Ten. Pro.




Printed for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS.
Vol. IV.
PART 2.
(March 1841 to December 1846.)
Printed by order of the Yajirafiana National Library.
BANGKOK
1913.




ai Political Department.
d,
To the Honorable the Court of Directors
of the East India Company.
Honorable Sirs,
We take this opportunity to lay before your
Honorable Court copies of a dispatch from the Gov-
ernor of the Straits and of Minutes recorded by the
Right Honorable the Governor General and by Mr.
Amos, with other papers in connexion therewith,
regarding the case of Tauiikoo Mahomed Saad (a
relative-of the Ex Ruler of Quedah) who your Honor-
able Court may remember was one of the leaders in
the enter prize for regaining possession of that country
from the Siamese in 183-8, and who on the failure of
that insurrectionary movement escaped, and appears to
have subsequently entered on a career of predatory
violence of the most atrocious character.
2, Taunkoo Mahomed Saad was captured in the
•month of July last year, and arraigned before the
Supreme Court of Penang on a charge of piracy com-
mitted on a vessel belonging to a subject of our
Government. The prosecution having failed on the
plea that as a descendant of the Ex Rajah of
Quedah the prisoner was at war with Siam and conse-
quently with the British Government, the all} 7 of that
State, and therefore that the act with which he was
■charged, if proved, was not the act of a pirate but that
of an enemy, Mr. Bonham considered it his duty,
'under these circumstances to send Taunkoo Mahomed
Saad, as a State prisoner to Calcutta on board the
Diana steamer, to be dealt with as might seem ex-
pedient to the Supreme Government. On the arrival
of the prisoner we took into consideration the question
as to the course proper to be pursued in regard to him,
and the result of our deliberations was as follows.
3. We were of opinion that although Taunkoo
Mahomed Saad had been acquitted of the charge of


piracy on the plea adduced, his release from confine-
meat might again expose the subjects of the British
Government and those of other friendly powers in the
Straits to his depredations, and we conceived that it
was a duty imperative upon us to provide against
such a contingency. Entertaining this view of the
matter we decided that Taunkoo Mahomed Saad, with-
out being subject to rigorous restraint, should be
placed under such restrictions as might prevent his
leaving Bengal without the knowledge and consent of
the Government. In pursuance of this determination,
it was resolved that he should reside at Moorshedabad
under surveillance of the Magistrate, a monthly allow-
ance of about 50 Rs. being assigned for the support of
the prisoner and his followers.
4. Before concluding this letter, we may men-
tion that some time after the arrival here of Taunkoo
Mahomed Saad and while the Diana was within the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, a writ of Habeas
Corpus was issued in favor of the prisoner on the
motion of one of the Barristers of that Court.
5. Our resolution however regarding the pri-
soner having been taken and his removal at his own
request from the Diana into the vessel which was to
convey him to Moorshedabad having' been effected
anterior to the serving of the writ, the Government
and its officers were placed under no legal obliga-
tion arising from the process of the Court to induce
a departure from the course which was thought
best for the public interests to pursue in this
case.
6. Taunkoo Mahomed Saad, accompanied by his
son, has reached his destination and has been taken
charge of by the Magistrate of Moorshedabad,
We have &ca.
(Signed) Auckland
&ca. &ca. &ca.
Fort William
the 18th of March 1841


[To the Government of India, Fort William.]
India
Political Department.
1. We now reply to your political letters dated
18th March 1 * and 9th May* 1841, respecting the case
of Tuanku Mahomed Saad.
2. This individual, a nephew of the Ex-King of
Kedah, was the leader of the expedition which in 1838
temporaril} 7 expelled the Siamese from that place. After
his expulsion from Kedah, Tuanku Mahomed Saad
engaged in a course of depredation by sea, which
terminated in his falling into the hands of the British
Authorities, and being brought to Penang, when on
the prosecution of an inhabitant of Penang, whose
boat he had plundered, he was put on his trial for
piracy before the Recorder, but was acquitted on the
ground that he was an alien, in a state of war not
only with Siam but with the British Government, and
in committing depredations on British subjects had
exercised the rights of acknowledged warfare.
3. We are not called upon to express any opinion
on the correctness of this decision, which has been
passed by a Court of competent authority. The
accused being placed by it in the position of a prisoner
of war, Mr. Bonham, without previous reference to
you, sent him to Bengal, as a place where his safe
custody could be provided for with less hardship to
himself than in the Straits, and although this should
not have been done without your previous sanction,
we are inclined to think that the arrangement is a
beneficial one, and we approve of your having placed
Tuanku Mahomed Saad under the surveillance of the
Magistrate of Moorshedabad, with a small monthly
allowance for his support and that of his followers.
4. If any relative or dependant of the Ex
Rajah should hereafter engage in similar courses,


lie' will of course on the principles laid down by the
Recorder, be treated as a public enemy, and when taken,,
as a prisoner of war; unless the case should be such as-
under the following passage of the Recorder's address-
would afford a prospect of a conviction for piracy.
“ He by no means intended to say that every
“ Malay inhabitant of India who could contrive to fit
“ out a prow was at liberty to- cruize about and cap-
“ ture any property belonging to subjects of Siam or
“ of this Government which might fall in- bis way,.
“ without fear of incurring the guilt and punishment
“of piracy. In every such case a piratical intention-
“ must necessarily be presumed until the contrary was-
“ shown by the clearest evidence of a combined national)
“ object, and an authority or commission from some
“ person or persons who had an indisputable right to-
“ grant it.”
5. We hare received an elaborate paper from
Lieutenant Colonel Burney containing a review of the-
entire history of our connection with Kedah. We
transmit to you a copy of this valuable paper, and of
a communication which we have recently received from
Mr. Anderson, formerly of our Civil- Service.
6. We observe that you hare called upon the
Governor of the Settlements to report his opinion on
the possibility and expediency of effecting an arrange-
ment for the return of the Ex Rajah to Kedah, and we
shall be anxious to hear your further proceedings on
this subject.
7. There is one further point of which it is im-
perative upon us to take notice. Captain Stewart,
the officer to whom Tuauku Mahomed Saad surren-
dered himself a prisoner, being interrogated as a wit-
ness before the Recorder’s Court, as to the inducements
by which that individual was led to give himself up,
made the following statement.


“ I told him that if he would come to Penang
‘‘the Government would protect him from all his
“ enemies. ”
“ What! did Mr. Salmond authorize you to make
“ that promise? ”
“ Yes, I was instructed to do so by Mr .Salmond.”
******
8. We feel much surprised that you should not
have required Mr. Bonham to call upon his subordi-
nate Mr. Salmond, the Resident Councillor at Penang,
for an explanation of the statement thus made upon
oath by Captain Stewart, which is calculated to give
the painful impression that at least a constructive
breach of faith has been committed towards Tuan-
ku Mahomed Saad. The assurance which Captain
Stewart represents himself to have given by Mr.
Salmend’s authority that the Government would “ pro-
tect” Tuanku Mahomed Saad “from all his enemies”
would have been most improper even to an avowed
belligerent and was in the highest degree censurable
when given to a person who was regarded as a pirate.
It was by no means an easy question what was the
least objectionable interpretation which could under
the circumstances of the case be put upon the general
terms of such a promise, but we have Captain Ste-
wart’s own impression as stated by himself, that the
promise as understood by the person to whom it was
given, has not been kept.
9. We desire that these sentiments be imme-
diately communicated to Mr. Bonham and that any
explanation which that gentleman or Mr. Salmond
may have to offer be transmitted to us without delay,
that we may understand the real character of the
proceedings connected with the capture and custody
of Tuanku Mahomed Saad; and if those proceedings
were of the character represented by Captain Stewart,


we direct that Tuanku Mahomed be set at libert}?-,
and allowed to return to Penang, and that you ad-
monish him to abstain hereafter from predatory cour-
ses, and not to renew hostilities with the British
Government or its allies.
We are
Your affectionate Friends,
(Signed) G. Lyall
&ca. &ca. &ca.
London
31st December 1841.


Fort William 1st March 1841.
To T. H. Maddock Esquire,
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
Adverting to ray letter of the 30th of July* 1838,
and to the reply received from your office under date
the 20th September* following I have now the honor
to advise you that Tuanku Mahomed Saad was cap-
tured by a gun boat on the 2nd July last and brought
to Penang.
2. Shortly after his capture lie was committed
by the magistrates to take his trial on a charge of
piracy, the result of which was an acquittal, the pri-
soner having pleaded in bar to the indictment that as
a descendant of the Ex Governor of Keddah he was at
war with Siam and in consequence with the British
Government, the ally of that Power, and therefore the
act with which he stood charged, if proved, was not
the act of a pirate but that of an enemy. This plea it
appears was considered to be proved and sufficient, and
he Court of Judicature permitted him to be taken
from the bar by the Executive authorities, who had
been previous!}' instructed by me to demand him as
an enemy of the British Government.
3. The Learned Recorder having presided at the
trial it is not my desire at present to animadvert on
the proceedings of the Court more especially as I shall
shortly have the honor to submit a report of the trial
which has been promised me by the Recorder but
which I have not yet received, but I think the deposi-
tions will afford tolerable proof of the nature and
character of Tuanku Mahomed Saad’s proceedings.
These have however been declared by a competent
authority not to amount to piracy, but in my humble


judgment it would with the proceedings before me be
highly imprudent to release him.
4. The Government will be aware that in 1821
the Siamese invaded and captured Keddah and at the
same time some of the family of the Ex Raja at
present at Malacca. Among them was this very indi-
vidual, Tuanku Mahomed Saad, and he and some others
of his relations were afterwards released by the Siamese
Government through the intervention of Captain
Burney, who was sent on a Mission to that Court
shortly after the capture of Keddah, the British Gov-
ernment in return stipulating “ that the former Gov-
or (the Ex King) nor any of his followers should not
attack or disturb Keddah.”
sth. This Treaty has always been much disap-
proved of bj' the British inhabitants of this Settlement
of which the Malays are fully aware and after the
proceedings which have taken place in Court, wherein
it has been endeavoured to make it appear that Tuanku
Mahomed Saad’s acts, instead of being even of a
questionable nature, were highly praiseworthy and
patriotic, I have no doubt whatever that were he re-
leased he could immediately, under the pretence of
making war on Keddah, again commence on the same
system of pillage which he has pursued for these past
three years.
6. Under these circumstances therefore, seeing
that in all probability Tuanku Mahomed Saad is
alive through our intervention alone, which he has
repaid by making war on the British Government and
and on its ally, and that there is no reasonable ground
to suppose were he released, that he would endea-
vour to obtain a livelihood by honest industry, and
lastly that it is desirable to show others of the Ex
King’s family and the inhabitants of Prince of Wales
Island generally, that though Tuanku Mahomed Saad
has been acquitted of piracy, the British Government


lias the means and power to punish him for plundering
Her Majesty’s subjects, I have considered it my duty
to send Tuanku Mahomed Saad -to Calcutta as a State
prisoner to be dealt with as may appear proper to the
superior judgment of the Right Honorable the Gover-
nor General in Council.
7. I should have preferred deferring to send
Tuanku Mahomed Saad to Calcutta until I could for-
ward the Recorder’s account of the trial, but as an
opportunity offers of doing so hy the steamer Diana I
have thought it advisable to do so at once.
8. 1 may as well remark that had I been person-
ally at Penang it is probable that Tuanku Mahomed
Saad would not have been tried, as 1 was not unaware
of the difficulties likely to arise to prevent a conviction,
but as will be seen by the depositions a clear state-
ment of an act of violence said to have taken place
only a short time before his apprehension was made
out against him, and the aggrieved party having made
his complaint to the magisterial authorities, it was not
unreasonable for those authorities to put him on his
trial, which though it has ended in an acquittal on the
score of piracy has yet by the plea of Tuanku Mahomed
Saad himself put it beyond doubt that he was in arms
ao-ainst the Siamese and the British Governments.
O
Oth. 1 have been further induced to send Tuanku
Mahomed Saad to Calcutta out of some consideration
for himself and his family. As regards himself if
detained in the Straits, ho cannot but be kept in
close confinement, while in the interior of the
country in Bengal no further restriction will be
necessary than what can ordinarily be bestowed
on him by the police, and as regards his family
some attention is due to their feelings. The Ex King
himself is very desirous that Tuanku Mahomed Saad
should be removed from the Straits and if he had his
will be w r ould send otheVs of Tuanku Mahomed Saad’s


followers also, for he informs me he is not altogether
without hope that he may be eventually permitted to
return to Kedclah and he conceives, and with some
justice, that these constant outbreaks of his family
and dependents, arising whether from patriotic or
predatory motives cannot prove otherwise than pre-
judicial to his interests.
10. Tuanku Mahomed Saad is accompanied by
his child and two attendants, the latter can either be
returned to the Straits in the Diana or be set at large
as suits their convenience.
I have &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island,
,26th January 184 J.


Fort William the 7th Jane 1841.
Political Department.
To T. H. Haddock, Esqr.
Secretary to Government,
Fort William.
Sir,
Adverting to my letter of the 20 ultimo* wherein
I promised to forward a Report of the Trial held in
the Court of Judicature at Prince of Wales Island in
the Cause of the Queen vs, Tuanku Mahomed Saad,
for piracy, I have now the honor to submit a pamphlet
containing an account of the trial.
2. When Tuanku Mahomed Saad was tried for
this piracy I was not at Penang, and the Recorder
immediately on the close of the Session proceeded to
Singapore. Oh his arrival at that place I asked him
for a report of the trial, and he referred me to the
public prints, and as soon as they reached me I re-
quested him to say if their contents were, generally
speaking, sufficiently accurate for public purposes, and
having been informed that the contents of these papers
are substantially correct, I venture to submit them
in a condensed shape for the information of the Right
Honorable the Governor General of India in Council.
3. The prisoner, Tuanku Mahomed Saad, having*
been tried and acquitted of piracy, I am not aware
that it would be either useful or politic to pursue this
matter any further, but I confess 1 fear from the
unusual manner in which this trial appears to me to
have been conducted, the abuse and declamatory in-
vective-the agents for the prisoner were permitted to
indulge in, and other circumstances which will appear
in the papers themselves, that it is not improbable
that another outbreak on the part of the Malays may
take place.


4, The country of Keddah has however been so
ravaged by the Malays, who while it was in their
possession, laid waste the whole country, taking from
it elephants, cattle, grain, indeed every thing, that was
removeable to a ready market at Penang and Province
Wellesley, that I do not think there is at present any
inducement for such an aggression, but it cannot be
concealed that so long as the doctrine that it is highly
praiseworthy for the nephews ot the Ex Rajah to
attack our ally of Siam from our own shores is upheld,
it is impossible to say how long so tempting a means
of enriching themselves by spoliation and rapine will
be allowed to pass unheeded ; tor if Tuanku Mahomed
Saad, who is the mere nephew of the Ex Rajah, has
a right to make war on Siam, and in so doing to
capture and plunder vessels and boats belonging to
the Siamese or English and is considered not to be
liable to any punishment save that of an enemy, all
the other nephews and relations of the Ex Rajah have
a similar right to embark in the same cause ; which
any person who is at all acquainted with the Malay
character will be perfectly aware will only be a cloak
for rapine and bloodshed.
5. In the summing up of the learned Recorder
he appears to have said, “ that even if Tuanku Ma,
homed Saad had acted in opposition to the will of
the Ex Rajah in the attack on Keddah, he was
authorised to do so,” and hence it follows that any
others of the nephews of the Ex Rajah, when they can
collect a couple of hundred vagabonds, may also pro-
ceed against Keddah for the same purpose, where under
the cloak of patriotism they may commit all sorts of acts
of violence as were indeed committed by Tuanku Ma-
homed Saad, as will more fully appear by reference to
the depositions and other papers forwarded in my
letter of the 26th idtimo. To ascertain if such was
really Sir William Norris’s opinion, I asked him in
my letter of the 23rd December, whether should such


persons hereafter act as Tuanku Mahomed Saad has
acted and proceed from hence to attack Keddah they
would not. in Ids judgment, come within the operation
of the provisions of Act X of 1839, and to which the
learned Recorder had alluded in his summing up;
and had stated it to have been passed with refer-
ence to the contest existing between the Siamese and
Malayan inhabitants of the British Settlement. This
question however he was evaded answering directly,
but it is one that manifestly ought not to be left in
doubt, more especially as it is well known here, that
the result of the trial, the invective that has been
levelled against the Government, and the congratula-
tions of the Recorder to the prisoners on their acquit-
tal, have conjointly induced a belief that Tuanku
Mahomed Saad was not only perfectly justified in
Ids proceedings, but that they were highly praise-
worthy.
6. For many nonths before this trial took place,
the local press at Penang was teeming with the en-
ormities said to have been committed by Tuanku
Mahomed Saad and specimens of which 1 enclose.
The third paragraph of the learned Recorder alludes
to this circumstance and attempts to explain it, but
1 must respectfully record my opinion that the many
instances of depredation imputed to Tuanku Mahomed
Saad, were true; the fact is, Mr. ißalhetchet, the pri-
soner’s Law Agent, was formerly a partner of the
present Editor, over whom he is understood to have
complete control, it was therefore very easy for Mr.
Balhetchet to induce the editor to give to this
transaction any colour that suited Ids, Mr. Balhet-
chet’s views. I must apologize to His Lordship for
intruding on Ids valuable time with comments on the
editorial productions of the Straits Press, but the
•
circumstance may tend to throw some light on the
subject, and why so suddenly one who had heretofore
been branded with all sorts of infamy should, so


suddenly, be converted into a patriot.
7, I may as well in justice to the Ex Rajah
state that he positively denies all participation or
concurrence in Tuanku Mahomed Saad s proceedings,
in fact he was fearful that from the evidence of
Mahomed Shakeeff, his sons might on his decease bo
excluded from the benefit of the pension he himself
personally enjoys, and Tuanku Abdoolla, the eldest son
of the Ex King has informed me he was not in Court
when Mahomed Shakeeff gave his evidence, or he-
should have corrected him.
8. The Recorder added the postscript to his
letter * in consequence of my informing him, after
seeing his reply, that I did not consider the prosecu-
tion of Tuanku Mahomed Saad a Government prosecu-
tion more than any other criminal prosecution, and that
had I done so I should have moved the Court either
for a special Jury, or that the trial might be held at
Singapore, where there was less chance of bias than at
Penang from whence it is admitted Tuanku Mahomed
Saad was supplied with arms and ammunition which
were paid for by bullocks and grain and other move-
ables plundered from the Siamese and Malays of
Keddah indiscriminately.
9. As I have some papers by me which I
collected when the hostilities adverted to in this trial
were going on, I enclose them* for the information of
Government, as declaratory of the opinions of the
Indian administration under the Earl of Minto and
the Marquis of Hastings, respecting Keddah, and of
its being tributary and subject to Siam.
1 have the honor &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham,
Governor Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
27 February 1841.


To the Honorable Sir W. Norris, Kt.
Recorder &ca. &ca. &ca.
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
Adverting to the personal communication that 1
had the honor of holding with j'ou when recently at
Singapore on the subject of the trial of Tuanku Ma-
homed Saad, which took place at the last Session held
at Penang, I have now the honor to enclose for your
inspection the Penang newspapers to which you re-
ferred me for an account of what had transpired on
that occasion ; but as in my report to the Supreme
Government of India relative to this matter, it will
be expected that I should furnish information more
to be relied on than what is usually to be obtained in
an ordinary newspaper and more especially so, should
that high authority by accident ever have noticed the
very different description the editor of that paper now
gives of Tuanku Mahomed Saad and his proceedings
from what he has done on former occasions, I have the
honor to request that you will do me the favor of say-
ing if the evidence of Mr. Salmond, Mahomed Shakaff,
Che Huang, Tuanku Abdullah, Mr. W. T. Lewis, Mr.
J. Rodyk, junior, Sandagar Poof eh and Captain
Stewart, who were it seems produced on the part of
the defence “in special plea in bar is substantially
correct,
2dly. If the summing up of the Court through
yourself is also substantially correct.
ddty. If any witnesses were called for by the
Court, or offered by Government or Imaum Hadgee
Hussain, the prosecutor under the Crown, to disprove
or explain the statements made by the prisoner’s
witnesses.


4thly. Whether the Court saw fit to call on the
executive authorities at Penang for an explanation as
to the situation in which the British Government
stood in relation to Siam and to the state of Keddah
(in the same manner as the Supreme Court in Cal-
cutta called on the Supreme Government in the case
of the Mala}* pirates, and the Court of Judicature
here, in a similar manner in the case of lllanoon
pirates,) if not, whether the acquittal by the petty
jury was grounded on the evidence produced by the
prisoner himself solely, and
sthly. Whether should Tuanku Mahomed Taib
and Tuanku Snawee, who are at present at large and
residing at Penang, forthwith proceed to again attack
'Keddah, it is to be understood that the} r will not be
amenable to the Court of Judicature for acts of vio-
lence, if committed on Penang-born or other British
subjects while in the execution of that enterprise, and
if not, whether as foreign Princes residing at Penang,
they can be considered as liable to be indicted under
the provisions of Act X of 1839.
I must apologize for what may appear, and un-
doubtedly would be under ordinary circumstances, an
uncalled for intrusion, and had I the means of procur-
ing the information from any authentic source other
than yourself I should undoubtedly do so, for as far
as I can judge the Government officers at Penang
appear to have considered the prosecution against
Tuanku Mahomed Saad of the ordinary nature and
not one in which they were particularly interested;
at all events I have been unable to procure any report
of the trial beyond that it did take place and that the
prisoners were acquitted.
The last question which I have taken the liberty
of asking originates in a desire to submit the whole-
question to Government, that should it be told that
the descendants of the family of the Ex King may.


though residing at Penang (as was the case when the
late predatory attack was made on Keddah by Tuanku
Mahomed Saad and others), still continue to wage war
against Keddah in contravention of Act X of 1839,
with impunity, and that persons of this description are
not considered as comprised under the general head
“ Whoever” which I have marked in the Act, the
Supreme Government may, should it see tit to do so,
pass such explanatory act as may appear necessary to
carry into the effect obvious intentions of the Act
above-mentioned.
’As 1 am not aware that any of the descendants
of the late King have been engaged in civil suits at
Penang when you were present, I think it right to
inform you that when you were absent the witness
Tuanku Abdullah, against whom process had been
taken out in the Court, was concealing himself from
his creditors for fear of being apprehended for debt,
and further that with the exception of the Ex King
himself, all the family have heretofore been considered
and made amenable to the Court of Judicature in its
ordinary Civil Jurisdiction.
I have &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Singapore
23d December 1840.


To the Rouble. S. G. Bonham Esqre.,
Governor &ca. &ca &ca.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 23rd ultimo,* enclosing for my in-
spection the Penang Newspapers to which, when at
Singapore, I took the liberty in the absence of my
manuscript notes, to refer you, as being likely to con-
tain a more detailed account of the trial of Tuanku
Mahomed Saad than 1 had then the means of affording
you.
Since my arrival here I have compared the report
in these papers with my own notes, and have now the
honor to inform you, in answer to your two first-
queries, that the printed report of the evidence of Mr.
Salmond, Mahomed ShakafF, Ohe Buang, Tuanku Ab-
dullah, Mr. W. T. Lewis, Mr. J Rodyk, junior, Sauda-
gur Pooteh and Captain Stewart, witnesses for the
defence, as also the report of the summing up of the
Court through myself, are with one exception, viz. that
the words “March 1840” in Mr. Rodyk’s evidence
should be “March 1839,” substantially correct. 1
should observe, however, that what is reported to have
fallen from myself after the acquittal, as to the restora-
tion of the prisoner’s property, is not quite accurate, for
I expressed a doubt whether as a prisoner of war he
was in a situation to make the demand ; but on this
point I must beg to refer you to my correspondence
with the Rouble, the Resident Councillor.
With the comments and opinions of the editor I
have of course no concern and cannot be supposed to
feel personally much flattered by commendations from
a quarter whence, in common with yourself, 1 have
occasionally received a sufficient share of abuse; nor


should 1 have thought it necessary to advert to the
subject but for your observation, which I believe to bo
perfectly correct, as to the very different “ account
which the Editor now gives of Tuanku Mahomed Saad
and his proceedings from what he has done on for-
mer occasions,” and my impression that the executive
authorities were thereby unjustly prejudiced against
him, (more especially as the editor has subsequently
intimated that he had himself been made the dupe of
interested parties) and might possibly, but for such
exaggerated reports, have doubted the expediency of
committing him for trial.
in returning an answer in the negative to your
third enquiry “whether any witnesses were called for
by the Court or offered by the Government or Emaun
Hadgee Hussain, the Prosecutor under the Crown, to
disprove or explain the statements made by the pri-
soner’s witnesses,” I have only to observe, that the
Government and the prosecutor were at perfect liberty
and had ample time and opportunity to have done so
had they seen fit, but that the Court saw no occasion
to do so, judging [by ] the depositions before the
Magistrate that the evidence for the Crown must ra-
ther have tended to confirm than to invalidate the
defence, evincing as those depositions do, that the
object of the prisoner was to obtain warlike stores for
the renewal of hostilities against the Siamese Govern-
ment of Keddah, and not to carry on such a system
of indiscriminate plunder as could properly be termed
piratical.
With regard to the former part of your fourth
enquiry, viz. whether the Court saw fit to call on the
Executive Authorities at Penang for an explanation
as to the situation in which the British Government
stood in relation to S'am and the state of Quedah
(in the same manner as the Supreme Court in
Calcutta called on the Supreme Government in the
case of the Malay pirates and the Court of Judicatiire
here in a similar manner in the case of the lllanoon


pirates ) I have no hesitation in acknowledging that,
had there existed in the present instance the same
reasons which suggested in those cases the cautious
and humane proceedings referred to, the Court would
ill have understood its duty in neglecting to pursue a
similar course of enquiry. But 1 cannot, I confess,
perceive the analogy which you seem to have though*
discoverable between the case of Tuanku Mahomed
»Saad and those of the pirates referred to. In both
the latter cases, each the first of its kind which had
come before the Courts, considerable doubt existed in
the minds of the judges as to the popular notions and
habits of the half savages who were brought up for
trial, regarding the description of crime laid to their
charge, the degree of countenance and support afforded
to their predatory adventures by their respective so-
vereigns, and the actual relations of war or peace exist-
ing between the respective nations or communities of
the prosecutors and the accused. These considera-
tions, combined with the extreme ignorance of the
accused in respect both to our laws and forms of
procedure and the mode of bringing forward even
had they possessed (which they could scarcely be
supposed to do ) the means of establishing a possibly
good defence, suggested the urgent expediency of
making the enquiries referred to, not merely on
grounds of humanity and justice to the accused, but as
a necessary preliminary to the safe and proper exercise
of the Court’s jurisdiction in those and future cases
of the same description. But in the case of Tuanku
Mahomed Saad no such considerations presented them-
selves. The prisoner was ably defended, and the
main point of his defence viz. his possession and actual
government of Keddah for many months, his expulsion
from thence by the British and Siamese authorities,
and the continuation of hostilities between him and
them up to March last, if not to the very moment of
the capture charged in the indictment, were proved
by the evidence of Captain Stewart and others too


clearly to leave a doubt upon the subject. Neither
for its own satisfaction, therefore, nor in justice to
the accused did the Court feel itself called upon to
seek further information from the executive authorities
on the points you mention, and scarcely would it
have been justified in volunteering to call upon the
Government, especially in a government prosecution,
as this essentially was, for evidence to rebut or explain
away a defence, the substantial truth of which there
was no apparent reason to doubt.
The concluding portion of your further enquiry,
viz. “ whether the acquittal by the petty jury was
grounded on the evidence produced by the prisoner
himself solely ”is already, j 7 ou will observe, in part
answered by my reply to your third query, but as
the question seems to convey an implied imputation
upon the Court for allowing a supposed undue advan-
tage to the prisoner, it becomes indispensable to enter
a little more into detail. With one exception, cer-
tainly, which I shall presently mention, the acquittal
was grounded on the evidence produced by the
prisoner himself solely; but that exception was a
remarkable one. I mean the letter from the Ex King
to yourself handed in by Mr. Lewis, by your own
desire as alleged, and accordingly received in evidence
against the prisoner. It is moreover worthy of
especial observation, that one half and by far
fhe most important of the eight witnesses, though
called by the prisoner himself, were government
functionaries, and precisely those functionaries who
might be supposed from their situations to have been
best qualified to give all needful information as to any
circumstances, had such existed, tending to disprove
or explain away the defence, or to disabuse the minds
of the Court or Jury of any undue prejudices which
they might be supposed to have imbibed in favour of
the prisoner, nor can it be said that they were taken
* See N. B. at the end.


by surprise, the subpoenas having gone out many days
before the trial, and the nature of the defence being ful-
ly disclosed in the plea filed and the arguments urged
on behalf of the prisoner an entire week before. But it
may be said perhaps, that the special plea in bar ought
to have been disallowed and the prisoner compelled to
plead the general issue, by which means the evidence
for the prosecution would, in the first instance, have
come before the Court and Jury, who would thus have
been better enabled to decide whether the act charged,
if committed at all, was done with a piratical intention
or by way of hostile reprisal. And it may, possibly,
be further urged, with reference to certain observations
of my own in my charge to the Grand Jury, that, by
this means, evidence of other imputed acts of the same
description might have been let in as further illustra-
tive of the prisoner’s piratical intentions. Now as to
the last suggestion, I shall content myself for the pre-
sent with observing that, although when the three bills
against the prisoner were sent in together to the Grand
Jury, I thought myself justified in informing them
that they were not precluded in my opinion from jud-
ging of the intention in each case by the cumulative
evidence on the whole, I am by no means satisfied as yet
that the witnesses for the prosecution in one case could
have been legally called upon [at] the trial in support
of another one distinct charge, though of the same
description. But even had such evidence been legally
admissible, it was not likely, in my opinion, to have
been of any avail; the Grand Jury having thrown out
one of the three bills, and the prosecutors in the re-
maining two (as well as in the one thrown out) being
both British subjects, on whom the prisoner was justi-
fied in making reprisals. It may still, nevertheless, be
contended, perhaps, that the evidence for the prosecu-
tion in the particular case before the Court ought at
all events to have been called. Even this, however,
I am not prepared to admit as a general rule (for the
authorities are not clear upon the subject) nor were


there, in my opinion, any special circumstances in the
case to justify the Court in compelling the prisoner to
plead the general issue. And finally, upon this sub-
ject, I may add that even had the general issue been
pleaded, and the evidence for the Crown in this case
heard, it is my conscientious belief, as 1 have already
intimated, that so far from impugning, it would (unless
itself invalidated by materially varying from the depo-
sitions) have only corroborated the defence.
With regard to your last enquiry, as the proper
answer to it would depend upon the particular circum-
stances of the case, should it ever happen, and there
does not appear to be any immediate necessity for
my deciding a question which may never come into
practical operation, or, if it does, would in all probabi-
lity be brought before me judicially, I trust you will
excuse my declining for the present to express any
opinion upon the subject.
I thank you for your information regarding the
descendants of the Ex King of whose situation and.
apparently distressed circumstances I was not before
aware.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) W. Norris
Recorder
Penang
25 January 1841.
N.B. In describing the above case as a “ Govern-
ment Prosecution ” I refer simply to the interest which
the Government must necessarily have had in the
political questions involved ; not that this more than
other criminal trials was directed or carried on by the
Government.
(Signed) W. N.


Fort William 1st March 1841.
Resolution.
Read a letter from the Governor of Prince of
Wales Island Singapore and Malacca of 26th ultimo,*
• adverting to former correspondence and reporting that
Tuanku Mahomed Saad, having been captured on the
2d of July and brought to Penang, was arraigned be-
fore the Supreme Court of that Island on a charge of
piracy and acquitted on the plea that as a descendant
of the Ex Governor of Keddah he was at war with
Siam, and in consequence with the British Govern-
ment, the ally of that State, and therefore that the
act with which he was charged if proved was not the
act of a pirate but that of an enemy ; that the Court
then permitted the executive officers to take the pri-
soner into their own custody and that the Governor
considered it his duty to send Tuanku Mahomed Saad
as a State prisoner to Calcutta on board the Diana
steamer to be dealt with as may seem proper to the
Supreme Government.
The arrival of the Diana steamer with the priso-
ner on board having been this day reported, the secre-
tary is directed, with reference to the proceedings of
the late trial at Penang, to draw up a statement of
the .past transactions of the British Government with
the former rulers of Keddah for transmission to the
home authorities, and in the mean time the Governor
General in Council considers that although Tuanku
Mahomed Saad has been acquitted of the charge of
piracy on the plea adduced his release from confine-
ment might again render the subjects of the British
Government and other friendly powers in the Straits
liable to his depredations, and that it is the duty of
this Government to provide against such a contingency.
The Governor General in Council does not however
think it needful to place Tuanku Mahomed Saad under


rigorous restraint. It may be sufficient that he should
be placed under such restrictions as may prevent his
leaving Bengal without the knowledge and consent of
Government. If the station of Berhampore is selected
for his residence and a monthly allowance of about
50 * is granted for his support and that of the fol-
lowers who have accompanied him, little more surveil-
lance will be necessary than that he should show him-
self once ever} 7 day to the magistrate at that station
and that the magistrate should report to Govern-
ment any circumstances regarding him calling for
special notice.
I have &ca.
(Signed) T. H. Maddock
Secretary to the Government
of India.
Fort William
Ist March 1841.


Fort William the 7th June 1841.
To the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
S. G. Bonham Esquire.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch dated the 27th February last,* containing
your observations on the late trial at Penang of Tuanku
Mahomed Saad, with several papers connected with
that subject.
2. The particulars of this case, as gathered from
your letter of the 26th of January* and other sources,
have already been reported to the authorities in
England, and the Governor General in Council would
desire to postpone any observations which it may
appear to call for till the sentiments of those autho-
rities shall have been ascertained.
3. 1 am further directed to transmit for your
information a copy of the letter to my address from
Mr. Anderson,* with its enclosure in original,* being
a letter from the Ex Rajah of Quedah, and his Lordship
in Council requests to be informed what probability
exists of the Siamese Government permitting the
return of the Rajah to Queda, on terms which would
enable him to carry on the government with advantage,
with your own sentiments on the expediency of our
encouraging such an arrangement, and on its probable
effects on our own possessions and those Native States
in that neighbourhood.
I have the honor &ca
(Signed) T. H. Haddock
Secretary to Government of India.
Tort William
the 3i May 1841


Fort William 23d August 1841.
To T. H. Maddock Esquire,
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 31 May* with its enclosure, being
a letter in original from the Ex Governor of Keddah
to Mr. W. Anderson of Calcutta, and desiring to be
informed of the probability that exists of the Siamese
Government permitting the Ex Governor to return to
Keddah and to the expediency of encouraging such an
arrangement.
2. la reply 1 have the pleasure to observe that
previously to the receipt of your communication 1 had
received numerous applications from the Ex Rajah to
be permitted to proceed to Penang for the purpose
of being nearer to the Siamese authorities, whereby
in his opinion, opportunities would be afforded him
of carrying on with greater facility than from
Malacca certain negotiations, by which he appears to
think he would be enabled to make arrangements for
being permitted to return to Keddah. To this appli-
cation I gave no encouragement, and he was simply
informed that agreeably to the Treaty between the
Siamese and English Governments, he could not be
permitted to reside at Penang, and he was further
referred to a communication which he had received
from the Right Honorable Lord William Bentinck
on this subject, in reply to a similar requisition
which he had on a former occasion made to His
Lordship.
3. The Ex Rajah then proposed to depute one of
his sons to Siam for the purpose of laying his claims
before the King, alleging that he had been recom-
mended to take this course by the Rajas of Ligor and


Singora, which places form a portion of the Siamese
Kingdom, and are districts adjoining Keddah, and re-
quested me to afford him pecuniary aid for this pur-
pose. Not being altogether satisfied that the result
of such an application would be successful, I declined
making this advance, but it appearing to me from
your letter of the 29th March last,* which reached me
subsequently to my refusal, that it is in the contem-
plation of Government to restore to the King and his
son Tuanku Dye, the full salary of the former, vizt.
10,000 dollars per annum, I, previously to the receipt
of your letter now under acknowledgment, promised to
advance 500 dollars as an outfit for Tuanku Dye, to
enable him to proceed to Siam, and for this purpose I
further procured him a passage in the King of Siam’s
ship “ Success ” which left this port yesterday.
4. Had I received your letter previously to hav-
ing made a promise to the Ex King of pecuniary
assistance to enable him to send his son Tuanku Dye
to Siam, I assuredly without the sanction of Govern-
ment should not have done so. Nevertheless, lam
not aware of any other more desirable means of ascer-
taining the fact, whether the Siamese will permit the
Ex Rajah to return or not, to Keddah than those
which have been taken, for if the Siamese Government
accede to the Ex Rajah’s proposition, the terms on
which such permission will be granted will, I have no
doubt, be made known to me, and the details can be
arranged under the orders of Government at Penang.
5. The result of direct negotiations at Bankok
by envoys vested with authority from the Right
Honorable the Governor General in Council did not
in the case of either Mr. Crawfurd or Major Burney
prove very successful, and I personally have very little
doubt that any similar attempt, should it again be un-
dertaken, would fail, unless indeed Government was
prepared to say that it would place the Ex Rajah again
in Keddah, and that any attempt to interfere with his


authority would be considered as an insult to the
British Government and resented accordingly. Such
a step I presume however cannot be taken so long as
the present Treaty between Great Britain and Siam
exists, and 1 confess, I am not aware of any proceedings
on the part of the Siamese Court that would justify
the measure.
G. Whether the prosperity of Keddah itself would
be best consulted by its being under the Siamese or
Malay rule is to me problematical. The province is
no doubt at present badly managed from its distance
from the Capital of the country and from perhaps a
moiety of its inhabitants being Mussulmans. Until the
late outbreak and attack on Keddah by the Malays, I
have no reason to believe that the inhabitants were in
any way open to more ill usage or oppression than un-
happily exists in all Native Eastern Governments, in fact
it is well established that unless when Keddah has been
the theatre of dispute between the Siamese and Malays
the country has been in a thriving condition, so much
so as to De able to export rice in considerable quanti-
ties. In 1819/20, when in possession of the Malays,
it was estimated to export 500 coyans annually, while
in 1836/37 under immediate Siamese control the ex-
port was estimated at 757 coyans. During the time
of war and intestine revolt the people of Keddah leave
the country and fly to Province Wellesley and Penang,
but nevertheless a considerable portion return after
quiet and peace have been established. On the other
hand Keddah has for upwards of centuries been under
the immediate government of a Mohamedan Chief and
the larger moiety of the inhabitants are followers of Is-
lam. Hence there is no doubt that the majority of the
population would prefer a Mussulman to a Buddhist
Government, and of this the Siamese are fully aware
as they have lately placed Tuanku Aunoon and Tuanku
Hossan, two Malay Chiefs, in charge of the province.
But as regards under which of the two Governments


it is most eligible to live, it is difficult to decide ; for
in reality little is now remembered of the system of
the Government and of its workings when Keddah was
under the control of the Ex King, but if report speaks
truth, he was by no means a merciful ruler, nor does
it appear that the country under his administration
was in a more flourishing condition than it was pre-
viously to the late predatory attack on it by Tuanku
Mahomed Saad.
7. The return of the Malay dynasty to Keddah
would no doubt in some degree diminish the popula-
tion of Province Wellesley, for the prestige of a Court,
however insignificant, would call together a few Malay
Chiefs or probably be the cause of bringing a few into
existence, who would be accompanied by some follow-
ers and to the extent of their numbers, of course, our
population would decrease. To these may be added
a few needy adventurers and others of a more active
turn of mind, who with the hopes of bettering their
condition by any means whatever might be induced
to quit the British for a weak Malay Government,
where they might enjoy more power and procure more
wealth than could be safely used or gotten under a
Government where they would be subject to laws more
stringently and impartially administered.
8. At the period of Mr. Crawfurd and Major
Burney’s Missions to Siam comparatively little was
known of the history of that country, and the
Siamese knew less of England and her Indian
resources; since that period however both nations
have probably become better acquainted with each
others resources and I think I may sa}q were it not
for the present disturbed state of India, that we have
as little to fear from the hostility of the Siamese as
we have to hope for in the way of co-operation
against the common enemy, the Burmese, should it
be ever our fate again to be at variance with that
State—in fact, a very considerable trade is now car


ried on between Singapore and Bankok, in which no
less than six square rigged vessels, averaging upwards,
of 400 tons belonging either to the King or some-
members of the Royal Family, are engaged, which of
itself would always afford us an opportunity of punish-
ing them —but with a couple of ships of war and a
steamer, Bankok, the capital of Siam itself could be
taken and destroyed, and by the blockade of the Me-
nam the trade of the country be entirely annihilated,
and of this the Siamese themselves are not unaware.
On the other hand, we have as little to expect or to
fear from any of the Malay States on the Peninsula,
which from some cause or other appear to be crumb-
ling away into entire insignificance, still I cannot
help remembering that we hold Prince of Wales Is-
land from a Keddah Rajah, who, to a certain extent,
in former days, was treated as an independent Prince,
and that it is that Rajah’s son whose interests are
now' the subjects of consideration, and it certainly
would be gratifying to all in any way connected with
Malayan countries, as well as to the Malajxm States
themselves, to see the old Rajah restored to a situation
from which he appears to all Native States not only
to have been unjustly removed, but with the concur-
rence also, if not with the active assistance, of the
English.
9. In considering also the expediency or other-
wise of attempting the re-instatement of the Ex'
Rajah of Keddah, or some of his descendants, it
ought to be remembered that so long as Keddah,
after -what has passed recently at Penang in the
case of Tuanku Mahomed Saad remains under imme-
diate Siamese control, there is no security against*
the recurrence of another outbreak on the part of
the Malayan population at Penang for the purpose
of plundering Keddah, so soon as that country may
have in some degree recovered from the ravages to
which it lately has been subjected. This is a state


of things obviously not only highly detrimental to the
interests of Keddah itself, but as it tends to keep the
minds of the people distracted from their ordinary
avocations, so it tends to the disorganization of the
poorer classes of the Malayan population, on the Island
of Penang, over whose minds it exerts a most baneful
influence.
10. Until the return of Tuanku Dye it will be
out of my power to state the prospect that exists of*
the Siamese allowing the Ex Rajah to return to Ked-
dahjbut he may be expected in about 3 months, when
this part of the question will be finally set at rest. As
regards the effects that the return of the Ex King of
Keddah might have on our own possessions and on
those of the Native States in the neighbourhood, I am
of opinion that for many years no change will be per-
ceptible though, as already observed, it would tend to
raise the British name among the Malays.
11. I enclose copy of a letter* I furnished to
Tuanku D} 7 e on his proceeding to Bankok to the ad-
dress of the Praklang, who is one of the King’s princi-
pal ministers, which will, I trust, ensure the Tuanku’s
personal liberty, and 1 hope tend to promote the ob-
ject of his journey.
I have the honour &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
The Ist July 184-1.


To His Excellency The Chou Phya Praklang
Prime Minister to His Majesty
the King of Siam.
I have before brought to your Excellency’s notice
the subject of Keddah, and in a letter dated the 15th
September last, * agreeably to instructions received
from Europe, I communicated to you for the informa-
tion of the King that should the Malays again seize
on Keddah that the Siamese Government must not
look to the English for further assistance in recaptur-
ing that country. I also stated that the Siamese
Government appeared to attach little importance to
possessing it, and therefore recommend that the
Siamese should permit the old Governor to return to
Keddah in the same position that he held before he was
driven out in 1820; to this letter I have as yet re-
ceived no reply.
1 now write to inform your Excellency that the
Ex-Governor has sent down his son Tuanku Dye and
Nephew Tuanku Mahomed Yacob to Singapore as the
bearers of a letter to your Excellency and I have
obtained a passage for them in the Ship “ Success,”
Captain Triggs. The purport of that letter is to
request that he and his family may be permitted to
return to Keddah and to govern that country as it
was governed by him previously to his removal in
1820.
At present the country of Keddah is managed by
two Malay Chiefs, Tuanku Annoon and Tuanku
Assan, who, I understand, are distantly related to the
old Governor, and under these circumstances, seeing
how useless Keddah is to so large a kingdom as Siam,
that it is very remote from Bankok, and inhabited
principally by Malays, I think it would be hi
Fort William 23d August 1841.


advisable for the King to permit the Ex Governor
and his family to return, as thereby all further trouble
and expense in the management of Keddah will be
avoided.
Tuanku Dye and Tuanku Mahomed Yacob wish
to return to this Settlement as soon as possible, and I
beg of your Excellency to protect them while in Siam,
and to send them and their followers back in any
vessel that may sail for Singapore.
With every consideration &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
30th June 1841.


Fort William 13th September 1841.
To T. H. Haddock Esquire,
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
In continuation of my letter of the Ist ultimo* I
have the honor to enclose a copy of a letter that hae
reached me from Captain Triggs, commander of ths
Siamese Ship Success, in which vessel Tuanku Dye,
the son of the Ex Raja of Keddah, proceeded to Siam.
I have &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
14th August 1841.


The Honble. S. G. Bonham Esquire.
Sir,
The Success arrived at this bar on Friday night
last, making a passage of seven days. On my arrival
I immediately wrote the Praklang acquainting him of
the arrival of the son of the Ex Raja of Keddah.
It being neap tides and blowing hard from the south,
I had no answer till this morning when he sent a
verbal message, saying he had sent orders to Paknara
that if the winds lulled they were to fetch him from
the ship in an accommodation boat, but that if it
continued to blow so hard he had better remain on
board until the springs and come in with the ship.
He also sent an assurance that he would be well
received at Bankok, and I have not the slightest
doubt but that every thing will accord with your
wishes. |
I see Hunter's cutter coming out and will get
him to write to you.
I am &ca.
( Signed ) J. P. Triggs.
Success, Siam Bar,
11th July 1841.


Fort William, 23d August 1841.
To Governor, Eastern Settlements,
Singapore and Penang.
Sir,
I am directed by the Governor General in Council
to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of Ist July.*
2. I am desired in reply to state that the Gov-
ernor General in Council approves the advance made
by you to Tuanku Dye, the son of the Ex Chief of
Quedah, to enable him to proceed with his cousin to
Bankok there to petition for the restoration of the
District of Quedah to the family.
3. The Governor General in Council concurs with
you in thinking that the Court of Siam will be glad to
receive the submission of the exiled family, and that
an arrangement may not improbably result from the
son’s visit to the capital, which will prevent dis-
turbances of the kind twice experienced under the
attempts to govern Quedah by Siamese officers. It
will be a source of much satisfaction to the Governor
General in Council to hear that the Ex Chief so
obtains restoration to the ancient possessions of his
family; and it seems to His Lordship in Council that
the end will be more likely to be attained by not dis-
playing on the part of the British Government any
unnecessary anxiety on the subject, or offering media-
tion or the guarantee of any terms.
4. The Governor General in Council thinks you
acted quite right in refusing to accede to the Ex
Chiefs request for permission to proceed to Penang,
to be more near the territory to which he desires to be
restored. Such a movement would have been more
likely to excite suspicions than to assist the negotia-
tion which it is desired to promote.


5. The fact that the Siamese have found it
necessary to place Quedah under the management of
Malay Chiefs is a circumstance rightly deemed by sTou5 T ou
favorable to the views of the Ex Chief, as it shows the
disposition of the Court not to be adverse to the prin-
ciple of governing the Malays by their own Chiefs.
But it may be necessary to caution the Ex Rajah
against opening correspondence with the Malay ad-
ministrators, taking any step likely to bring them
under suspicion of collusion and to cause their removal
and a change of system. His Lordship in Council
trusts soon to hear from you of the reception given to
the two Chiefs sent to Siam.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) T. H. Maddock
Secretary to Government of India.
Fort William
the 23d August 1841.


Fort William the 22d June 1842.
To T. H. Maddock Esquire
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to,my letter of the Ist July* last
and your reply of the 23d August* it now affords me
great satisfaction in being able to forward for the in-
formation of the Right Honorable the Governor Gener-
al of India in Council translation of a letter to my
address from the Praklang, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs for Siam, by which it will be seen to a certain
extent, the object of the visit of Tuanku Dye to Ban-
kok has been successful.
2. By this opportunity a box containing a letter
on the same subject from the Praklang to the address
of the Honorable Mr. Prinsep * is also forwarded to
Calcutta. This letter is not quite so comprehensive as
that which was sent to me. In the letter to Mr.
Prinsep the Praklang says, the King has given his per-
mission for the Ex Rajah to return to Kedah. In the
letter to my address it is stated “ The great Emperor
has therefore directed that the country of Keddah shall
be divided into three parts and that the Government
of these shall be bestowed on such Malays as His
Majesty shall deem worthy of his confidence. This
resolution has been communicated to Tuanku Dye,”
the Ex King, “ and also in a letter to the Chou Phya
and also that the mighty Emperor has been graciously
pleased to permit the Chau Phya to return to Keddah
and reside there.” In neither of these letters therefore
is it distinctly stated that it is the intention of the
King of Siam to place the Ex Rajah in charge of
Keddah, but from Tuanku Dye, who proceeded to Siam


to negociate for his father’s return to Keddah, I am
informed there is nc doubt of the Ex Rajah being
reinstated after his arrival in that country.
3. The Praklang proceeds to observe that from
the altered circumstances under which Keddah will
now be placed in consequence of the King’s deter-
mination to sanction the Ex Rajah’s return to his
country, the 13th Article of Captain Burney’s Treaty
of June 1826, ratified by the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council on the 17th January
1827 will be inapplicable and requests therefore that
it may be expunged. It is the particular article in
the treaty that has caused so much confusion, as from
its provisions the British Government has considered
itself bound to assist Siam whenever Keddah has been
attacked by the Malays under the auspices of the Ex
Rajah or any of his family, while the corresponding
stipulations in our favor, however necessary they ma}’’
have been at the time the Treaty was concluded, are
now and for many years have been entirely useless in
every respect.
4. I have just received from the Ex Rajah the
letter addressed to him from Bankok already adverted
to. In it it is stated that the Siamese Government
intends to divide Keddah into four parts, giving to
the Ex-Raja that portion which is by far the most
valuable and which includes the fort and town of
Keddah. where the Ex Rajah resided to his
being driven therefrom in 1821. The letter also
states that the Governor of Singora will be dispatched
to fix the boundaries of the division to be thus
allotted. In these letters there are obviously con-
siderable discrepancies, but from them all it is certain
that the Siamese Government are desirous of expung-
ing the 13th article of the treaty, which, as already
observed, has been on many occasions found incon-
venient to us and that it is intended that the Ex
Rajah shall be permitted to have at least by far the


anost valuable portion of the territory over which he
formerly presided.
5. Under these circumstances 1 venture respect-
fully to report that I conceive the propositions of the
Praklang should be forthwith complied with and the
article XIII of the Treaty be declared void.
6. In my former letters I have declared it my
opinion that Siam will never be of any avail to u? in
any dispute in which the British Government may be
involved with Burma, and that at no time can there
•beany reasonable cause of alarm from her; at this
time in particular, by reason of the position of affairs
in China, she is more than ever in fear of our Govern-
ment, and it would therefore, if the Government con-
sider it expedient to do so, be a fitting opportunity,
when acknowledging the Praklang’s letter to enforce
generally on the Siamese Government that as the
Keddah country has always been in alliance with
Prince of Wales Island, the British Government ex-
pects that Keddah will in future be treated precisrly
in the same way as are Salengore and Perak, with
the exception that the Rajah of Keddah shall invariably
every three years send to Siam the Boouga Mas as
has heretofore been invariably the custom, and to this
arrangement I have little doubt the Siamese Govern-
ment will at once accede, at all events by its silence
if not directly.
7. Presuming that there can be no doubt of the
Right Honorable the Governor General of India in
Council approving of the Ex Rajah returning to Ked-
dah I shall forthwith write to him that he has the per-
mission of Government to proceed to Prince of Wales
Island, where he can remain . until the necessary
preliminaries have been adjusted for his return to
Keddah.
8. I should at this particular juncture wish to be
at Penang, as my going over to Keddah and giving to


the Rajah’s restoration a little eclat might possibly
tend to prevent any minute interference with the
Rajah hereafter, but from this I am precluded until I.
can ascertain if the means will be afforded me of pro-
ceeding to Borneo, as it appears to be in the contem-
plation of the Government that I should do; as also
from expecting the arrival of the reinforcements for
China from England and India, at which period, if
possible, 1 am desirous of being here.
9. The necessary communications on the subject
will be made to the Resident Councillor at Penang,,
and I feel satisfied that arrangements for the reinstate-
ment of the Ex Rajah in that portion of Keddah
which the Siamese have allotted to him will be effected
without any trouble or inconvenience.
10. The expense incurred in procuring a passage
for Tuanku Dye and his followers from Bankok on his
return to the Straits amounts to 500 dollars, a sum
that he was totally unprepared to meet, and as he went
with the knowledge and sanction of the British Gov-
ernment and his mission has proved tolerably success-
ful, I have caused this sum to be paid from the public
treasury, to which disbursement I have respectfully to
solicit the sanction of His Lordship in Council.
1 have the honor &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
18th March 1842


Translation of a letter from the Chow Phriya Phra
Klang Senabodi, High Minister at the Court of Phra
Maha Nakhon Sri Ayodia, or Siam.
To the Honorable Mr. Bonham
Governor of Pulo Penang, Singapore and Malacca.
With friendly greeting.
A letter has been received by the presence from
Mr. Bonham which was transmitted b} r Mr. Hunter
regarding Tuanku Dye * Dali for whom Mr.
Bonham expresses very friendly feelings. It also
appears from the letter that Mr. Bonham had learned
that Tuanku Anoon had gone to Siam to negotiate
regarding the Keddah affiirs, and Mr. Bonham request-
ed that so soon as the consultations were over Tuanku
Dali might be sent back quickly. It was further sug-
gested (by Mr. Bonham) that since the Keddah coun-
try is small, the (Ex Rajah) Chow Phrya should be
restored to its government to remain there, as of old,
so that friendly relations may remain between the two
great countries England and Siam.
Further it was stated in that letter that in the
preceding year a Cochin Chinese vessel trading to
Singapore had been seized by the (English) Comman-
der of a Siamese vessel, for which proceeding no reason
had been assigned, and it was requested that in
future no vessels trading in the same manner should
be seized, because should they be seized the Cochin
Chinese might molest English vessels trading to their
country in retaliation, and that the Siamese might
thus be suspected, and be involved in disputes. It
was also requested that the Chinese who were in the
above vessel should be released to return to their
families at Singapore and that the same proceeding


regarding Chinese might be attended to on all future
occasions.
There are many other matters also to be discussed
in this letter.
The Chow Phriya of Keddah has submitted to the
Court a humble petition to be allowed to stay in Ked-
dah. The first letter was transmitted via Songkla
(Singora) and another vda Ligor. When letters were-
received by the Ministers, they could not produce
them before the presence until the relations of the
Chow Phriya should have arrived to supplicate in per-
son. Since then the Chow Phriya has sent Tuanku
Dali and Tuanku Mahomed Akil with a supplication
Letter to the presence exhibiting submission and with
many protestations of grief and regret for the past,
begging to be again received under the gracious pro-
tection of his Majesty of Siam, and to be allowed to
return to and live in Keddah and further promising to-
pay to Siam the Gold and Silver flowers according to
former usage.
The Ministers at the capital taking all these
things into consideration have gladly presented to the
Emperor the letters of Mr. Bonham and of the Chan
Phriya, and have also presented Tuanku Dali and
Tuanku Mahomed Akel, These two persons have
prostrated themselves at the feet of the great Emperor,
the munificent. Thus the Emperor has been acquaint-
ed with every thing.
The Emperor accordingly instructed his Ministers
to take the Chau Phriya r s affairs into their considera-
tion.
The Ministers accordingly held a Council and
they brought under their review all that bad happened
regarding Keddah affairs from the year of the Large
Snake 1182 upwards.
At the above date the Chau Phriya of Ligor went


to the presence and reported that the wild tribes of the
frontiers had informed him that the Burmese intended
invading Lower Siam.
His Majesty then directed the ChauPhriya of Ligor
to proceed and assemble the forces of the Lower Pro-
vinces of Siam to defend them against the anticipated
aggression, and that Chief did as he had been ordered,
and all these countries with the single exception of
Keddah were prepared for defence, which country
could not be depended on but was refractory and not
to be trusted.
In the year of Hare when the gold and silver
flowers should have been sent from Keddah to
Siam they were kept back, and the Chau Phriya of
Keddah had left Keddah Fort and had gone to reside
at Mirbow River and would not return to Keddah.
At this time Tuanku Mom behaved deceitfully (in
regard to the Ex Rajah) and insinuated to the Court
of Siam that the Chau Phriya of Keddah was not well
disposed towards it, and not to be trusted, and fur-
ther that he had dispatched the Chief or Nakodah Si
Amang to Ava with overtures to the Court there, and
requesting that His Majesty of Ava would detach a force
to invade the territory of Siam. Further that the peo-
ple of Keddah would not join the Chau Phrya of Ligor
against the Burmans on account of the above negotia-
tions with Ava. Further that should the Burmans
actuall} r invade Singora and Ligor and other places,
the Chau Phriya of Ligor would have great difficulty
in resisting at all points. Thus the Chau Phriya of
Ligor, finding that he could not depend on the Chau
Phriya of Keddah, solicited that the Emperor would
allow him to go to Keddah, and settle affairs there,
and this particularly because, as he represented,
this province is bounded by the sea on the west
and its coasts lie very conveniently for descents
on it by the Burmese, while on the other hand
its ports are equally convenient for the fitting


out of fleets of Siamese boats to oppose Burman arma-
ments. So the Chau Phriya of Ligor was sent back
from the Court to Ligor. From this place he in the
year Maseng 3 tri sok proceeded to Keddah, which
was then in confusion. The Chau was
residing at the River Mirbow and (on learning the
approach of the Siamese) he fled to Pulo Penang.
Such being the state of affairs, the Chau Phriya
of Ligor was constrained to put his own sen Phra
Phakdee Borirak in possession of the part of the
Government of Keddah. This happened in the } 7 ear
of the snake (Trisok),
In the year of the monkey (Chosok) the great
Emperor of Siam died and was succeeded by one of
the Royal family.
Now the Ex Chau of Keddah being found
obstinate and disrespectful, he would not submit to
the wishes and orders of the Emperor, nor would he
transmit any written acknowledgments of his submis-
sion. Instead of doing all this his sons and adherents
and relatives invaded Keddah on three several occa-
sions. The first invasion was that of Tuanku Abdul-
lah, the second was that of Tuanku Long Puteh,
and the third armament went under Tuanku Kudin.
When the Chau Phriya of Ligor heard that the Chau
Phriya of Keddah was collecting forces or concerting
to assemble forces from the countries of Perak and of
Salengore to invade Keddah, he sent intelligence to
the Court of Siam, and requested instructions how to
act, and to be allowed to prevent these forces being so
collected.
In the year of the Monkey (Chosok) the English
invaded Ava, and took possession of Tavoy and Mergui
and Tannao (in Tenasserim), At this period the
Chau Phriya of Bengal (the Governor General) directed
Captain Burney to visit Siam as Envoy to treat with


the Court there. That officer first arrived at Penang,
where he was informed that the Chau Phriya of Ligor
was then in Keddah, with the intention of punishing
Perak and Salengore by invading them. Upon this
he, Captain Burney, accompanied by Mr. Maingy of
Penang visited the Chau Phriya of Ligor at Keddah,
and expostulated with him regarding his projected
invasion of these countries as they said that the
Penang traders would be thereby annoyed, at the same
time saying that the Chau Phriya of Keddah would
not be allowed to molest Keddah.
After three years had passed the Chau Phriya of
Ligor found that the Chau Phriya of Keddah would
not go and with due submission humbly sue for pardon
(of the Emperor).
The English agreed that the Chau Phriya of
Keddah should not molest or invade Keddah.
The Rajah of Ligor therefore brought Keddah
directly under Siamese management just as Mergui
and Tavoy are wholly English.
So Phra Phakdee Borirak was fixed in the
Government of Keddah according to Siamese custom,
and the projected invasion of Perak and Salengore
were given up.
The Chau Phriya of Ligor and Captain Burney,
after the consultations at Keddah, proceeded towards
the capital of Siam and the latter touched at Ligor in
the way to accompany the Chau Phriya of Ligor.
At the Capital Captain Burney concluded a
treaty betwixt the Siamese and the English nations
which contains fourteen articles. There are six other
subsidiary articles regarding the trade of large and
small vessels.
As before noticed the Chau Phriya of Ligor had
installed Phra Phakdi Borirak in vthe Government


of Keddah. This was in the year of the Fowl (Sattasok).
This Governor administered the Government of Keddah
for six years and until the year of the hare (tri sok).
Then Tuanku Kudin invaded Keddah where he died.
The Chau Phriya of Ligor came to the assistance of
the Siamese with an army and the Governor of
Penang sent a war vessel to blockade the mouth of
the river and peace and order were restored. Six
years after these events and while the Siamese
Government above named was yet in authority
Tuanku Mahomed Saad conspired with the Keddah
people and invaded that country with an army. Upon
this Mr. Bonham sent again a vessel of war to
blockade the mouth of the river and all the people
there became distressed for provisions and supplies,
and there was much fighting and loss of life amongst
the Malays. Desperation ensued, and the country
suffered devastation. Thus frequently have the Malays
of Keddah conspired to expel the Siamese and restore
their own Chiefs. After Keddah had been again freed
from rebellion the Emperor of Siam came to the re-
solution of governing it by means of Malayan officers
as the best mode of preventing a recurrence of such
scenes. For it appeared to His Majesty that the
religion, the laws and the customs of Siam were quite
distinct from those of the Malays, and that like oil
and water they could not be amalgamated. Besides
it seemed that Keddah had almost reverted to jungle
which could not be desirable. •
His Majesty has also been ever desirous that his
people who inhabit the outskirts of the Empire
should be freed from anarchy and live in peace. His
Majesty therefore directed his General, Si Phiphat ,
and also the Chau Phriya of Eigor to confer together
and to select Malays of respectability and ability and
who might be trusted in order that they might be
placed in authority in Keddah. But before the
conferences could be concluded the Chau Phriya died.


This His Majesty directed to be done because the
Malays knew eacli others customs and therefore there
would be less chance of rebellion.
Subsequently the above named general went to
Keddah and placed Tuanku Annoom in authority over
it as the Emperor reposed confidence in him and
Tuanku Hassain was appointed to assist him in the
Government. Now the Chau Phriya ( the Ex Ilajah )
has sent Tuanku Dali and Tuanku Mahomed Akil
with a submissive letter begging to be restored to
the Government of Keddah, and promising to
present the gold and silver flowers as tokens of his
submission according to old usage, so that by means
of the Emperor’s power he may enjoy repose ; and
Tuanku Dali has acquainted the Emperor that the
Chau Phriya is now residing in the Company’s terri-
tory, and is unhappy and in difficulties.
The Ministers moreover have represented in the
presence that the Chau Phriya has become contrite
and has become of another mind, and that he has sent
his son and grandson to explain all.
His Majesty’s Ministers have therefore solicited
him to compassionate the Chau Phriya of Keddah
and to allow him as of old to go and reside there, and
that under the circumstances adverted to that a letter
should should be sent to Mr. Bonham to acquaint him
with what has been detailed in this letter respecting
past events.
The great Emperor has therefore directed that the
country of Keddah shall be divided into three parts
and that the Government of these shall be bestowed
on such Malays as his Majesty shall deem worthy of
confidence. This resolution has been communicated
to Tuanku Dali and also in a letter to Chau Phriya ;
and also that the mighty Emperor has been graciously
pleased to permit the Chau Phriya to return to Keddah.
and reside there.


Moreover the 13th article of the Treaty of Bankok
runs thus (there the article is copied in, but with the
following omissions and mistakes. Where the Siamese
engage to remain in Keddah the words “ and to take
proper care of it” are omitted. “Pry” in Province
Wellesley is written “ Chrai,” which signifies Keddah :
instead of Siamese, Chinese, and other Asiatics, it is
written Siamese Malays and Chinese.)
This article His Majesty of Siam hopes may be
expunged so that both of the great countries of Siam
and of the English may be for ever united by friendly
relations.
A letter has been transmitted to the Governor-
General of Bengal regarding the 19th* clause which it
is requested Mr. Bonham will obligingly forward.
Tuanku Dali and Tuanku Mahomed Akel have
returned in Lining Pathel’s vessel on Wednesday the
15th of the third month.
In regard to the request of Mr. Bonham that
captains of Siamese vessels may be prevented from
seizing trading vessels returning from the new country
(Singapore) to Cochin China* are enemies of the
Siamese, and as the English and Siamese are on snch
friendly footing that the conduct of them both may be
misrepresented and the Siamese be suspected. Now
his Excellency is ever cautious to give no cause for
umbrage to the nations with whom he is in amity.
When any country is offended with another country or
has cause to suspect it then enquiries are made, and it
these do not prove satisfactoiy that country is attacked.
The Emperor ordered the Commander of the ship
Chinda Doung Kea to overhaul all Cochin Chinese ves-
sels and to enquire as to their affairs, destination &ca.
In the 4th month of the year of the Hat the
captain of this ship seized a Cochin Chinese vessel
at the Island of Oolooleay off the coast of Sai Nejon.


and took prisoner eight Cochin Chinese and four
Chinese, and the Captain reported that at the time the*
wind was strong so that his people only took a few
loose articles which were lying about the deck and
then set fire to the vessel and returned.
in the 6th month of the year of the bull (tri sok>
the same Captain fell in with a Cochin Chinese vessel
off the coast of Calantan in which were some Chinese-
and two Cochin Chinese and that after detaining them
some time for the purpose of making enquiries she was
dismissed without molestation.
This His Majesty considered the proper mode of
proceeding betwixt the two countries.
Mr. Bonham desires that trading prahus or
vessels passing from Singapore to Cochin China may
not be molested because the English might possibly
impute blame to the Siamese.
If the captains of Siamese vessels do not detain
Chinese vessels for the mere purpose of making en-
quiries regarding the Cochin Chinese affairs, as to
whether the intentions of that nation be warlike or
otherwise, then Siam would not be prepared if neces-*
sary for the defence of the mouths of the rivers against-
any invasion by the Cochin Chinese. Such vessels
therefore should be brought to as heretofore.
Further the Commanders of Siamese vessels have
been ordered not to detain anj r vessels which they
may meet within the English bounds.
When English vessels fgo] to Cochin China they
should be provided with English papers so that should
they meet with Siamese ships there may be no hin-
drance to their voyage.
The four Chinese who were seized opposite to Sai
Ugon were a man of Hok Ean, one Khe and two of
Canton.


These men had gone to reside at Singapore and
went afterwards on a trading voyage to Cochin China.
One of these men was drowned at Bankok, the remain-
ing three have been at Mr. Bonham’s request sent back
to Singapore.
This letter has been written in duplicate, one
copy being in the Siamese and the other in the
Malayan language, upon Wednesday, in the third
month, on Ihe 15th day of the month in the year of
the Bull (Tri sok) and of the Siamese Era 1203
{corresponding to the 19th January 1842.)
A true translation by me from the Siamese Copy.
(Signed) James Low,
Major,
Assistant Resident.
♦Singapore
The 9th March 1842.


Note by the Honorable Mr. H. T. Prinsep.
The accompanying letters were yesterday delivered
at my house in a packing case containing the wooden
trays or leaves enveloped in silk which are the usual
covers of a state letter from Siam.
The Prah Klang of that Court has been in the
habit of addressing all his letters nominally to me
since I signed the letter carried to Bankok by Mr.
Crawfurd in 1823. But Mr. Bonham has apparently a
special reason for sending them in this derai official
form, rather than with an official report to the
Secretary, because it would seem that he regards the
favorable issue of the negotiations which the Ex Rajah
of Queda sent his son to Bankok to institute for a
restoration of his country to be owing in a great
degree to the good offices of Mr. Hunter, an English
trader, who has long resided at that capital, and is
possessed of much influence at the Court.
Mr. Bonham refers to a demi official correspon-
dence that passed between himself and me in 1837/38,
at a time when the last Malay rising against the
Siamese was recently suppressed.
That rising was occasioned by the oppressions and
mismanagement of the Siamese administration and
ended in this Government’s authorizing the Governor
of Singapore to communicate to the Court of Siam its
resolution of not again to assist actively in suppressing
revolts that might have their origin in similar causes.
It was during and at the close of these transac-
tions that Mr. Bonham represented demi officially that
the Siamese were beginning to be aware of the cost
and difficulties they must encounter in the attempt to


convert Queda into a province of Siam and were dis-
posed to change their feeling and appoint Malay
Governors more or less connected with the old family.
He thought this opportunity a good one for an attempt
to procure the restoration of the Ex Rajah on his old
terms of fealty and asked me whether the Government
were disposed to hold out to Mr. Hunter the prospect
of some personal remuneration if the object could be
effected through his influence. I was authorized by
the President in Council to whom I of course com-
municated this correspondence to write to Mr. Bonham
that the Government would consider the sum of two
or three thousand dollars well laid out if so important
an object could be brought about at such a cost, and
that he might freely assure Mr. Hunter of remunera-
tion to that extent in case of his being able to procure
the Ex Rajah’s restoration to Quedah. The Governor
General, Lord Auckland, who was then in the North
West Provinces approved and confirmed this measure,
participating entirely in the wish to see the affairs ot
Quedah brought to such a consummation. Mr. Bonham
did in consequence enter into correspondence with Mr.
Hunter, but nothing it was found could then be
effected, the fblankj of the Courts of Siam requiring
that the Ex Rajah should make his submission nncon-
ditionall} 7 as a preliminary to any terms with him.
The change of policy however in the administra-
tion of Queda did take place, and in the course of the
past year when the Siamese vessel Success came to
Singapore, the Ex Raja, thinking the disposition of
the Court of Siam to be favorable, sent up his son
and nephew to Bankok with the full assent and some
pecuniary aid from Mr. Bonham, whose proceedings
are entirely approved by this Government. That
[blank] has it seems resulted in the propositions to
our Government contained in this letter of the Phrah
Klang to my address, and in the arrangement by which
the Ex Rajah is to be restored to part of his old ter


ritory, the rest being placed by administration in the
hands of his relatives who are now in power there.
The letter of the Prah Klang contains a distinct
renunciation of the 13th article of Captain now
Colonel Burney’s treaty with Siam, which article has
been the subject of much discussion and the deliverance
from the obligations of which has been much wished.
The long and able paper of Colonel Burney re-
cently received from the Court of Directors* will fully
explain the circumstances under which this article was
agreed to. That officer will however himself be re-
joiced to hear that its abrogation is about to take
place through the unlooked for event of the Ex Rajah’s
restoration to the country of his ancestors.
With this question however I have at present no
immediate concern. I write this now merely to con-
firm the statement of Mr. Bonham as to the authority
given to him in 1837/38 to offer remuneration to
Mr. Hunter for the purpose of procuring what has
now been happily effected and therefore to support
his proposition that the acknowledgment then offered
shall now be given, since it appears that the success of
Tuanku Dye’s mission has been mainly owing to Mr.
Hunter’s influence and exertions in its favour.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Calcutta
23d April 1842.


To
Lt. Col, Burney.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the President in
Council to transmit to yon the enclosed original
despatch* from the Governor of the Eastern State-
ments respecting negotiations now in progress for the
restoration of Keddah to the Ex Rajah, and as a con-
sequence of that event the cancelment of the 13th
article of the Siam Treaty of 1826 concluded under
your superintendence, with the request of His High-
ness in Council that you will be pleased to favor
me, for the information of Government with any re-
marks of yours upon the subject.
2. You are requested to return these documents
with your reply.
1 have the honour &ca.
(Signed) G. A. Bush by
Officiating Secretary to the
Government of India.
Fort William
the 27th April 1842.
Fort William the 22d June 1842


To G. A. Bushby Esqr.,
Officiating Secretary to the
Government of India, Political Department.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter under date the 27th instant,* transmitting
to me an original dispatch from the Governor of the
Eastern Settlements dated 18th ultimo,* respecting a
negotiation now in progress for the restoration of
Keddah to the Ex Rajah, and I lose no time in sub-
mitting, for the information of His Honor in Council,
such observations as occur to me upon this subject
and on the proposition made by the Court of Siam for
cancelling the 13th article of the Siam Treaty of 1826
which was concluded under my superintendence.
2. I beg to remind His Honor in Council that
this is not the first time that the Siamese have pro-
posed to the Ex Rajah to return to Keddah. In the
year 1824 he received a formal invitation to this effect
from the Rajah of Ligore, but he wisely determined
upon not accepting it unless the Government of Prince
of Wales Island became a party to it, and on that
Government taking up the matter, the Siamese drop-
ped it, exciting a strong suspicion at the time that the
invitation was only a Siamese stratagem to allure the
Ex Rnjah into their power.
3. The present invitation however in all pro-
bability, an honest one. Those who were most interes-
ted in the direct occupation of Keddah by the Siamese,
the Wang-na, or Crown Prince at the capital, and his
uncle, the Rajah of Ligore, are both dead, and Keddah
has been so laid waste and destroyed by repeated
attacks of Malays that the Court of Siam must be


sensible its only chance of deriving any benefit from
the country will be by allowing the Malays to govern
it again. Yet I should think promises and engage-
ments must have been made by Tuanku Dye to the
Siamese Court, before it would agree to restore to its
confidence his father, the Ex Rajah, and perhaps the
Government of India will require more information on
the point before it adopt Mr. Bonham’s recommenda-
tion and openly becomes a party in this negotiation,
by making arrangements for conveying the Ex Rajah
to Keddah, and for his proper reinstatement there, in
such portion of the country as the Siamese may have
allotted to him.
1
4. There is no doubt that if Mr. Bonham’s re-
commendation be adopted the British Government will
gain in reputation among the Eastern States. But
His Honor in Council will perhaps consider that any
such interference on our part may not end with the
pleasing ceremony of escorting the Ex Rajah to
Keddah. We may be made responsible for his future
safety and good conduct, and in fact committed to
ulterior procedures. Before we act therefore, we
ought to take care to ascertain clearly and precisely,
the terms and footing on which the Ex Rajah is to be
replaced in Keddah.
5. The present Bugis State of Salengore is
wholly independent of Siam, the Chief never having
acknowledged her supremacy or sent her the Boonga
Mas. The State of Perak has also been relieved from
every kind of Siamese interference or connexion since
the year 1827. When therefore Mr. Bonham pro-
poses that we should “ enforce generally on the Court
of Siam” that the British Government expects that
Keddah will in future be treated “ precisely in the
same way as Salangore and Perak ” with the exception
that the Rajah of Keddah shall send, triennially,
the Boonga Mas to Siam, he means, I presume, that


in spite of the well known token of subjection and
dependence on the part of the Rajah, the Siamese shall
in future on no account nor in any manner, interfere
with the government of Keddah or the conduct of the
Rajah, nor derive from them any advantage whatever,
beyond a gold or silver flower triennially, of the value
of about 100 Spanish dollars.
6. 1 do not believe that the Court of Siam has
the most distant idea of allowing the Ex Rajah to
return to Keddah on such terms, and I think if the
Government of India intend that he shall be replaced
in this manner, it will be but just and will prevent
future misunderstanding, to make a communication to
this effect to the Court of Siam, in more clear and de-
cided language than Mr. Bonham proposes to do. It
is not on the side of Siam that I should anticipate any
difficulties or inconveniences likely to follow such a
step on our part. He is too well aware of our
superiority to attempt to dispute or counteract any
determination of the British Government and there-
fore we might go farther and put a stop also to the
transmission of the Jloonc/ci Mas from Keddah. But
in adopting such a line of proceeding we must be
prepared* to take an active part in the interior affairs
of Keddah, and to such interference I must own
objections have been shown, particularly in a letter
addressed by Mr. John Crawfurd to Mr. Secretary
Swinton on the 31st May 1824.* Besides the
arrangement now proposed by the Siamese of subdi-
viding Keddah may entail other evils : the Rajah will
naturally enough endeavour to recover possession
of the whole of his former territory. He and the
Chiefs placed by the Siamese over the other two or
three divisions of the country will differ and intrigue
with each other and with Siam, opening a door for the
interference of the latter. Onr reputation will require
that the Chief whom we had the edat of reinstating
shall be protected and maintained in his territory.


But admitting the force of all these objections it
cannot be denied on the other hand, that the Straits
Government since the year 1830, have been interfering
in Keddah, and with military operations to a great
degree, quite ag much, perhaps, as it could be neces-
sary under any arrangement we might make for the
benefit of our old ally, the Malay Chief of Keddah.
7. As the proposition for cancelling the 13th
article of the Treaty of 1826 has emanated from the
Court of Siam, I suspect that it contemplates some
advantage to itself from such annulment, and I am
coufirmed in my suspicion when I observe that the
Siamese Minister, in reciting this article in his letter
to Mr. Bonham, omits the clause which stipulates that
Siam shall take proper care of Keddah and its people,
and which gives us the right of interfering at any
time to prevent the adoption of any measures we may
regard as injurious to Keddah or its inhabitants.
The circumstances of the Ex Rajah being restored
to Keddah will of itself annul the only clause
in that article from which any inconvenience has
been experienced by us; that requiring us not to
permit the Rajah or his followers to go and attack or
molest Keddah, or any other territory subject to Siam.
But this inconvenience arose entirely from an errone-
ous construction which the Government of the Eastern
Settlements put upon that clause. I shall not trouble
His Honor in Council with a repetition in this
place of the history and purport of that clause,
as I have already explained them and pointed out
the misapprehension of the Straits Government in the
83d, 98th, 99th and 100th paragraphs of a letter which
I addressed on the 31st July last* to the Secretary of
the Honorable the Court of Directors, and a copy of
which I understand has been forwarded to the Govern-
ment of India.
8. I conceive however that if the Rajah returns
to Keddah under the authority of Siam, all the other


clauses in the 13th article of the Treaty ought to con-
tinue in force. The Rajah will no doubt be accom-
panied or followed to Keddah by a large portion of
the 25,000 or 30,000 of his former subjects, who
emigrated into our territory of Province Wellesley,
and the several clauses binding Siam to govern Ked-
dah properly, stipulating for a perfect freedom of trade
and intercourse between Keddah and Prince of Wales
Island, and an unrestricted exportation of provisions
and supplies from the former to the latter places, re-
quiring fair and proper import duties to be levied in
Keddah, without any of those injurious monopolies at
the mouths of the different rivers which the Rajah
formerly maintained, will all again become useful and
necessary.
9. Strong arguments may certainly be adduced
in favor of the Government of India now assuming a
high tone in order to give peace and tranquillity
to Keddah and the Straits of Malacca, and benefit
our old ally the Ex Rajah, and the admissions in
the letter of the Siamese Minister himself to Mr.
Bonham may furnish us, I think, with grounds for
insisting upon the Siamese Court now adopting the
proposition we made to it in the year 1825. But
the Government of India will decide whether the
advantages will be an equivalent for the inconve-
niences likely to attend such a humane and popular
course of policy, or whether the inconveniences will be
greater than those which we have already experienced
through a misapprehension on the part of the Straits
Government of the clause in the 13th article of the
Treaty of Siam. If the Government of India decide
against dictating to Siam a proper adjustment of the
affairs of Keddah, I still think we should not afford
our sanction to this injudicious subdivision of the
country, nor become a party to replacing the Ex Rajah
over a portion only of his territory, in the loose and
indefinite manner now proposed by the Siamese Court;


and in this view of the case our best course will per-
haps be the following. His Highness may be told to
accept or otherwise, on his own responsibility, the offer
now made to him by the King of Siam to return and
reside in Keddah, and the Straits Government desired
to take no part in the matter beyond advancing the
Rajah a small loan of money and some military stores,
if he requires them. At the same time, the Govern-
ment of the Eastern Settlements may send a reply to
the letter from the Siamese Minister, stating that the
Ex Rajah is at full liberty to proceed and accept the
King of Siam’s offer whenever he pleases, and that the
circumstance of his now having been restored to the
favor of the King of Siam and invited to return and
reside in Keddah does of itself annul that clause in the
loth article of the Treaty which required the British
Government not to allow him and his followers to go
and attack or disturb Keddah, but that there is no rea-
son why any of the other clauses in that article should
be annulled, and that accordingly, the British Govern-
ment will consider all these as still in full force.
10. I beg to return the original documents en-
closed in your letter.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) H. Burney.
Lieut. Col. 68 N. I.
Calcutta
30th April 1842


To T. IT. Maddock Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India
Fort William
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your despatch of the 28th February* and its enclosures
from the Honorable Court of Directors relative to the
capture of Tuanku Mahomed Saad, and in reply I beg
to forward copy of the correspondence which took
place between Mr. Salmond, the Resident Councillor
at Penang, and Mr. Stewart on the subject, previously
to the gun boat Diana being sent in search of that
marauder, together with a letter from Mr. Salmond.
explaining the circumstances attending it. I also
forward a paper containing the examination of Mr.
Stewart* touching the subject matter, and which I
thought it advisable Mr. Church, the Resident Coun-
cillor at Singapore, should conduct.
2. It appears that immediately after the details
of the trial were published, Mr. Salmond, on seeing
that portion which the Honorable Court have con-
sidered it desirable should be enquired into, called Mr.
Stewart and questioned him in the presence of Major
Low, at that time stationed at Penang, on the dis-
crepancy between the evidence he had given before
the Court, and what was really the fact, when Mr.
Stewart in Major Low’s presence made a statement
which was taken down and sent to me by Mr. Salmond,
in a demi official shape, but as Mr. Salmond’s note
was written under some excitement I did not think
it necessary to forward it for the information of
Government, especially as I felt personally satisfied
from the instructions issued by Mr, Salmond, and Mr.
Stewart’s statement, that Tuanku Mahomed Saad had


not been inveigled by any false promises to give
himself up, but has been induced to do so solely because
he could not escape, the Rajah of Perak, in whose
country he had taken refuge and who had been written
to on the subject, having directed him to remove from
the Perak Territory, which he could not do in conse-
quence of the Government gun boats being at the
entrance of the river for the purpose of capturing him.
A memo of Mr. Stewart’s statement made in the
presence of Major Low is herewith enclosed* and bears
the signature of that gentleman, the general accuracy
of which has, within a few days, been admitted in my
presence by Mr. Stewart.
3. Mr, Church in his letter to me says that he
has examined Mr. Stewart both in the English and
Malayan language. This became necessary from its
being clear that Mr. Stewart’s knowledge of the
English language is imperfect. Mr. Salmond in his
letter makes a nearly similar observation, and as Mr.
Church has not seen Mr. Salmond’s letter, there can
be no doubt that Mr. Stewart cannot express his mean-
ing very clearly at any time, and he is not unlikely to
have been more than usually embarrassed by the
Counsel engaged for the Tuanku at his trial who
appear to have taken and to have been allowed more
than ordinary freedom of speech on the occasion.
4. The papers themselves will I trust enable
the Right Honorable the Governor General of India
in Council to form a sufficiently accurate judgment
of the propriety of releasing the Tuanku, on the
grounds suggested by the Honorable Court, but I
respectfully hope I may be permitted, as an inferior
agent on the spot, and one who, from residing at
Penang but seldom, is comparatively indifferent, or
at all events free from all party bias, to say I am
perfectly satisfied that Tuanku Mahomed Saad deliver-
ed himself up simply because he could not effect his


escape, as the Perak Raja had informed him to my
knowledge that he would deliver him up if he (the
Tuanku ) did not quit the Baggan Tiang River, which
is in the Perak territory ; this the Tuanku was unable
to effect, inasmuch as he had in his boat his wife and
other females and his children, and therefore could not
pass through the impenetrable forest, which grows on
each side of the river, while the mouth of the river
itself was blockaded by the Government gun boats.
It was here indeed that Mr. Stewart on his going
to Penang left orders with the gunner of the Diamond
“to use every precaution against Tuanku Mahomed
Saad’s escape and to fire upon him should he attempt
to do so,” and that the Tuanku was aware he would
be put into the Fort or common jail if taken to
Penang is also clear from Mr. Stewart’s statements.
5. In my despatch of the 18th March,* reporting
the result of Tuanku Dye’s (the Ex King of Keddah’g
second son) visit to Keddah I have already reported
that it is the desire of the Siamese Government to
expunge from the Treaty concluded by Captain Burney
at Bankok, the 13th article of that instrument. This
at once puts at rest the principal inconvenience that
has heretofore been experienced by the Straits Au-
thorities from the invasion of Keddah by Malaya from
our coasts.
6. Should the Honorable the Governor General
of India in Council approve of my proceedings as
reported in my letter just adverted to I shall per-
haps shortly receive orders to see the Ex King re-
instated in Keddah, and should such be the in-
tentions of Government, as the Tuanku has been
declared not guilty of piracy, a fitting opportunity
of releasing him might be afforded on His Lordship in
Council being officially advised of the Ex King having
positively assumed the management of his former
territories. Should the Tuanku be set at large before
that period and make his appearance at Keddah before


the Siamese authorities have vacated the country, the
circumstance would uudoubtedly tend to aid unfound-
ed suspicions and probably render them less willing
to meet the wishes of the British Government with
respect to the Keddah question than they appear to
be at present.
7. In reference to the 100th paragraph of Col-
onel Burney’s letter to which you direct my attention,
I beg to remark that under the instructions of the
Government contained in a letter from your office
dated the 27th July 1840,* I addressed a letter to
the Praklang under date 15th September * following
of the tendency recommended by Colonel Burney.
It does not therefore appear to me, under the circum-
stances arising from our new relations by the re-
quest of the Siamese Government to expunge the
13th article of the Treaty, necessary again to
bring the matter to the notice of the Court of
Bankok.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore.
10th May 1842


To the Officiating Secretary to Government
in the Political Department,
Fort William.
Dated Allahabad, Bth June 1842.
Sir,
I am directed by the Right Honorable the Governor
General to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch
of the 18 th ultimo,* on the subject of the restoration
by the Siamese of the Ex Rajah of Queda to his prin-
cipality and the modification of the 13th article of our
treaty with Siam ; and to inform you in reply that
His Lordship concurs in the views and propositions of
His Honor the President in Council as stated in the
letter under acknowledgment.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) T. H. Maddock
Secretary to the Government of India
with the Governor General.
Allahabad
Bth June 1842


To S. G. Bonham Esqre.,
Governor Eastern Settlements.
Sir,
I have the honor, by direction of the Honorable
the President in Council, to acknowledge the receipt
of your dispatch dated the 18th March,* with its en-
closures, on the subject of the restoration of the Ex
Raja of Keddah, and the modification of our treaty
with Siam.
2. His Honor in Council considers it highly de-
sirable to seize this opportunity of formally annulling
those clauses of the 13th article of the treaty which
have reference in any way to the disposal of the Ex
Raja of Keddah, and you are authorized to notify to
the Siamese Court the consent of the British Govern-
ment to a modification thus far of that article.
3. But there appears to be no reason why the
remaining clauses of the same article, providing for
the proper administration of the place, and for its
perfect freedom of trade and intercourse with Prince
of Wales Island, should not remain in full force, that
their existence may operate as a restraint in the future
proceedings of those entrusted with the Government
of Keddah, while it will always be in our discretion
to revert to them or not as we may deem expedient.
4. It may become necessary that our mediation
should be tendered for the adjustment of the relations
of the Raja with the Court of Siam in case of their
leading to disputes affecting the tranquillity of the
country but His Honor in Conncil would not interfere
for such a purpose if it could be avoided.
6. At present there seems to be no necessity
for your interesting yourself in Keddah affairs to the


extent yon propose, and for your becoming a party
otherwise than passively to the division of the Keddah
territory, and, in general, to the other arrangements
in that quarter of the Siamese Government.
6. The President in Council authorizes the dona-
tion of 5000 Rs. to Mr. Hunter, the merchant of Bang-
kok by whose aid this negotiation has been brought to
a successful issue, but the outlay of 500 dollars on
account of Tuanku Dye’s passage money ought to be
considered an advance to the Keddah Rajah, to be re-
covered from that Chief on the first fitting opportunity.
7. A Copy of the Article in question is annexed
with those parts underscored to the omission of which
the sanction of His Honor in Council extends.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed ) G. A. Bushby
Officiating Secretary to the
Government of India.
Fort William
the 22d June 1842.


( Copy )
Article 13. The Siamese engage to the English
that the Siamese shall remain in Qaeda and take
proper care of that country and of its people ; the in-
hababitants of Prince of Wales Island and of Queda
shall have trade and intercourse as heretofore; the
Siamese shall levy no duty upon stock and provisions,
such as cattP, buffaloes, poultiy, fish, paddy, and rice,
which the inhabitants of Prince of Wales Island, or
ships there, may have occasion to purchase in Qaeda ;
and the Siamese shall not farm the mouths of rivers or
any stream in Qaeda, but shall levy fair and proper
import and export duties. The Siamese farther engage
that when Chao Phya of Ligore returns from Bankok,
he shall release the slaves, personal servants, family
and kindred belonging to the former Governor of Qaeda,
and permit them to go and live wherever they please.
The English engage to the Siamese that the English do
not desire to take possession of Queda , that they will not
attach or disturb it nor permit the former Governor of
Queda or any of his followers to attach, disturb or injure
in any manner the territory of Queda or any other ter-
ritory subject to Siam. The English engage that they
will mahe arrangements for the former Governor of Queda
to go and live in some other country and not at Prince of
Wales Island or Pryhe , or in Perah, Salangor or any
Burmese country. If the English do not let the former
Governor of Queda go and live in some other country ,
as here engaged , the Siamese may continue to levy an
export duty 'upon paddy and. rice in Queda. The
English will not prevent any Siamese, Chinese, or
other Asiatic, at Prince of Wales Island, from going to
reside in Queda if they desire it.
True Copy
(Signed) G. A. Bushby,
Offg. Sec. to the Govt. of India.


ii [To the Government of India, Fort William.]
India
Political Department,
Para. 3. You notify to us the prospect which
has opened of the Ex Rajah’s restoration to at least a
portion of his ancient territory. His son, Tuanku
Dye, it appears proceeded to Bankok, made submis-
sion in his father’s behalf to the King of Siam, and
obtained in return a promise of partial reinstatement,
subsequently confirmed by letters which the Praklang,
or Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Siamese Monarch,
has addressed to Mr. Bonham and to Mr. Prinsep.
No British authority took part in the negotiation, but
it is considered to have been much aided by the good
offices of Mr. Hunter, a British subject established at
Bankok, to whom consequently, in conformity to ex-
pectations previously held out, you have made a present
of 5,000 Dollars,
4. The present intention of the Siamese Gov-
ernment seems to be to divide the ancient territory of
Kedah into either three or four portions, of which one
only, but that one the most valuable, and including
the Fort and town of Kedah, is to be placed under the
authority of the Ex Rajah ; it is not stated on what
terms. The Praklang avows, as the motive for this
arrangement, the adoption by his Court of the policy
of governing the Malays through their own Chiefs.
5. The degree of sincerity, however, with which
the Siamese Court enters into this arrangement is
so uncertain, and the difficulties which may arise in
the adjustment of the mutual relations between that
Government and its dependant are so great, that we
think with Lieut: Col: Burney, that the Ex Rajah
should be told that he will accept the offer of the
Siamese Government at his own risk. If the two par-
ties, being unable to agree upon terms, should request


your mediation and guarantee, it will be time enough
to consider of the expediency of affording it. But you
clearly ought to be parties to no arrangement unless of
the clearest andjmost definite kind.
6. The Siamese Government has expressed a
strong wish that the thirteenth article of Colonel Bur-
ney’s Treaty should be cancelled, a circumstance which
we concur with that officer in considering to be in
itself suspicious. We entirely approve of your having
directed Mr. Bonham to intimate to the Siamese Court,
that so much of the article as relates to the disposal
of the Ex Rajah, being now inapplicable may be can-
celled, but that the provisions requiring the Siamese
to “ take proper care of the country, and of its people,”
and providing for liberty of traffic, moderate duties and
freedom from taxation on the export of provisions to
Penang should remain in force.
7. You have on the present occasion transmitted
to us the explanations of Mr. Bonham and Mr. Sal-
raond respecting the mode in which possession was
obtained of the person of Tuanku Mahomed Saad.
******
It is unnecessary to remark on the most repre-
hensible character of this proceeding, our strong dis-
approval of which we desire may be communicated to
Mr. Salmond.
******
12. If the arrangement for the return of the Ex
Rajah of Kedah takes effect, Tuanku Mahomed will'of
course be released from restraint, and permitted to
share the fortunes of his family.
We are, &ca.
(Signed) J. L. Lushington
&ca. &ca. &ca.
London
The 30th December 1842


Fort William the 5th April 1843.
To the Honorable S. Garling, Esquire,
Officiating Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
In transmitting for your information and guidance
the accompanying extracts, paragraphs 5—6 and 12 of
a letter from the Honorable the Court of Directors,
dated 30th December* regarding the expected restora-
tion by the Court of Siam, of the Ex Rajah of Keda,
I am directed by the Honorable the President in
Council to request you will report whether the Ex Rajah
has actually been restored, and if not, that you will
state the causes which have prevented the favorable
issue of the negotiation with the Court of Siam, of
which from Mr. Bonham’s letter of the 18th March
1842* there appeared to be every prospect.
2. You will observe from the 12th paragraph of
the Honorable Court’s letter that on the restoration of
the Ex Rajah depends the release of Tuanku Mahomed
Saad, now in confinement at Moorshedabad,
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) T. R. Davidson
Officiating Secretary to the
Government of India.
Fort William
the sth April 1843


Fort William the 29 July 1843.
To T. R. Davidson Esquire,
Officiating Secretary to the Government
of India, Fort William.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of 5 April last * I have the
the honor to acquaint you for the information of the
Honorable the President in Council, that the Rajah of
Keddah has been restored to his Dominions where he
has now resided some months, not at Keddah itself
but on his side of the river forming the northern
boundary of Province Wellesley. It is generally un-
derstood that he has taken up his residence at this spot
in consequence of distrust of the Siamese Government,
but I have received a communication from him in
which he informs me that he is about to move into the
fort of Quedah.
2. It does not appear that he has been restored
to the whole of his former territory, but that his rule
is restricted to the portion from Keddah to the fron-
tiers of Perak, while the northern portion is divided
between three Malay Chiefs independent of him. These
Chiefs appear to have anticipated the Rajah at the
Court of Siam and to have obtained these portions of
his territory prior to the late negociation,
3. Since his restoration the Rajah appears to
have taken forcible possession of a small tract of coun-
try, called Krian, claimed by the Chief of Perak, from
whom a letter was received by Mr. Carling on the sub-
ject, copy of which is enclosed. Mr. Carling forwarded
this letter to Keddah enclosed in one from himself,
copy of which and of the reply are herewith enclosed.
No farther notice has yet been taken of the matter.


i have the honor &ca.
(Signed) G. A. Blundell,
Offg. Govr. Prince of W. Island,
Singapore & Malacca.
Prince of W, Island,
21st June, 1843.


Translation of a letter from Sultan Abdullah
Mahomed Sha Bang-de per tuan of Perak addressed
to the Honorable Samuel Garling Esqr., Resident
Councillor.
On the 18th of Dulkodah (20 December 1842)
one of our people named Rajah Leila Pahlawn Pangu-
loo of Krean came to us and reported that part of the
territory of Krean under our control had been taken by
the Bang de per-tuan of Keddah, and that all his
property had been also seized, and that all his
followers had been sent away from that place.
We now inform our friend of this circumstance as
the Krean territory is not in any way adjoining to the
lands of the Bang de per tuan of Kedah, but it is ad-
joning to those of our friends, and further the ter-
ritories of Perak are under the protection of our
friend. We have therefore to state that this conduct
of Bang de per-tuan of Kedah towards us we leave for
our friend’s consideration.
With the help of God and of our friend we are
able to launch ten or twenty prows to retake Krean,
but we think that as Krean is close to the lands of the
English we therefore leave the matter to be considered
by our friend and whatever our friend may judge
proper we beg may be imparted to us and we will
readily be guided.
Written 4 Dal Hedjah 1258 (sth January 1843).
Fort William the 29 July 1843.


The Rajah of Quedah.
( Usual Compliments.)
Herewith I forward to my friend copy of a letter
dated 14 Hulhaji, which I have just received from the
lyang de Pertuan of Perak. I beg my friend will
advise me of the circumstances under which my friend
has seized upon Kariyan, and whether he intends to
withdraw from that district.
(Signed) S. Garling
Resident Councillor.
P. W. Island
23d January 1843
Fort William the 29th July 1843.


Translation of a letter from Sultan Ahmed Taju-
deen Allim Shah addressed to the Honorable S.
Garling, Esquire, Acting Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca, &ca. &ca.
On the 24th Dulhedjah (25 January 1843 )
Wednesday evening our friend’s letter arrived together
with a copy of a letter from Eang de per Tuan of Perak
and we understand all that is stated in them.
With regard to Krean we know that in the time
of our ance&tors it had always been part of the Kedah
territory and has descended to us, and we have always
ruled over it. Even at the time when we left Kedah
and came to live at Pulo Penang the Panghuloos of
Krean came and gave account of themselves and
brought the revenues to us. From the time when we
went to Malacca we no more ruled over Krean as it
was too far from us.
Now as the Siamese Rajah has been pleased to
have pity on us and returned Kedah and all the places
under it in the same state that it was before we did
not order the seizure but merely sent to call all the
Panghuloos of Krean ( independent of those in the
Company’s land which had been given by our parent)
in order to know how matters were as we had been so
long away.
Further there are many persons alive in Penang
who know that the left side of the Kurow river be-
longs to Kedah and that the right side going up be-
longs to Perak.
This is such as we have ever known to be the
boundaries between Kedah and Perak, not to say the
lands of Krean which is in the middle of territory.*
Written 25th Dul Hedjah 1258 (26 January 1843).
Fort William the 29th July 1843.


Fort William the 27th January 1844.
To the Honorable the Acting Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to forward copy of a letter
from Mr. James Hayes, a British Merchant at Bang-
kok, the capital of Siam, transmitting a petition to
the Right Honorable the Governor General from him-
self and two other individuals relative to the obstruc-
tions put in the way of trade, and which it is alleged
is contrary to the existing treaty between the Hast
India Company and the Siamese Government
It will be seen that one of the petitioners, Anser
Saib, is the individual who, by his own confession,
was connected with the disgraceful act of smuggling
opium, contrary to the well known law of Siam.
I have reason to believe that Mr, Governor Bon-
ham made a reference to Siam concerning the soldiers’
jackets and was either satisfied with the explanation
afforded by the Siamese authorities, or felt it was a
transaction not requiring the further interposition of
Government.
Mr. Bonham made a representation to Siam rela-
tive to the Sampan pukat trading boat) and the result
was that three of the Chinese were released and sent
to this Settlement, the boat belonged to Singapore.
It is notorious His Majesty of Siam interferes very
considerably with the general commerce of the coun-
try. On this point I observed in my annual report
dated 24th February 1843.
“ The Monarch of Siam is supposed to engross a
“ considerable portion of the trade of Bankok, the


“ capital of his dominions ; his interdictions as to the
“ export of certain articles would appear to be govern-
ed by no respectable principle. The British mer-
“ chants settled there are becoming seriously appre-
“ hensive that unless some reform speedily takes
“ place their interest, as well as commerce generally,
“ will suffer materially by the short sighted policy of
“ the King.”
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed ) T. Church
Resident Councillor.
Singapore
The 25th July 1843.


Memorial of British Merchants residing in Bangkok
Unto the Right Honorable Edward Lord
Ellenborough Governor General in Council,
The Memorial of the undersigned British
Merchants residing in Bangkok, Siam.
Humbly Sheweth,
That on account of the many obstructions thrown
in the way of trade between your memorialists and the
Siamese for some time past by the King of Siam, and
which obstructions are in direct violation of the exist-
ing treaty between the Honorable East India Com-
pany and this place, your memorialists are of
opinion, unless speedily put a stop to, will eventually
prevent trade being carried on between the English
and Siamese, and thereby prove detrimental to the
revenue of our Sovereign Lady the Queen.
In article 10 of the existing treaty it stipulates
“ Merchants are forbidden to bring opium which is
“ positively a contraband article in the territories of
“ Siam, and should a merchant intrude any the Gov-
“ eminent shall seize, burn and destroy the whole,”
whereas in the case of Aniver Saib, a Pulicat mer-
chant residing here, having opium found in his
possession, this article was not only confiscated, but
Aniver Saib himself bound with irons and thrown into
prison, and from which punishment your memorialists
submit he was exempted, no clause in the treaty
entitling them to commit such severe acts. Again in
the case of the capture of a Sampan Puckat off the bar
of Siam, in which affair a number of persons, affirmed
to have come under the denomination of Asiatic
merchants, were inhumanly murdered, and property
consisting of sundry lawful merchandize and monies
(besides opium) was unlawfully confiscated, the crew


thrown into prison, and subjected to hard labour,
under penalty of severe flagellations and starvation,
and from the severity of which numbers of them
perished.
Your memorialists also conceive that in the case
of the Siamese Government giving an order for mer-
chants to bring them articles from foreign countries, it is
imperatively required on its part to take those articles
when brought according to their instructions, whereas
in the case of Aniversaib, aforementioned Pulicat
merchant, after having executed an order, which had
been given him by this Government for a number of
soldiers’ jackets, they refused to take them, and the
clothing being valueless elsewhere, the merchant has
suffered most materially, having laid out of funds for
the space of upwards of 4 years to the amount of
about 15,000 ticals.
Amongst the articles prohibited by the existing
treaty teak wood timber has been exempted from such
prohibition, notwithstanding which, Messrs. Hunter
and Hayes residing here, having purchased a large
quantity of teak wood timber, a refusal was given
them by Government to its exportation, although
passes had been given hitherto by these officers for
large shipments of this article, and no intimation had
been given of its future prohibition.
In article sth of the treaty it specifies that
“ Merchants subject to the English and their ships,
“junks and boats may have intercourse and trade with
“ any Siamese country which has much merchandize,
“ and the Siamese will aid and protect them and
“ permit them to buy and sell with facility;” which
article has been violated in many instances of minor
importance, but more particularly in the case of a
British ship the “Good Success” arriving here for
a cargo of sugar, when the Government instead of
assisting the British Merchants in the purchase of a


cargo, monopolized the whole trade in that article
and the consignees were necessitated to purchase the
sugar for the vessel from the Government (or send
the vessel away empty) at a price tar beyond the then
market price, and by which the concerned were losers
to a large extent. And your memorialists further pray,
that the foregoing grievances may be taken into con-
sideration so that they may be remedied as quickly
as possible, trade being almost at a stand still and
your memorialists are of opinion, that the trade can
not improve until some gentleman be appointed fully
authorized to cause a new treaty to be made.
And your Memorialists will ever pray &ca. &ca.
&ca.
Dated in Bangkok This 28th Day of
Hunter and Hayes
Christopher Harvey
( Sign ) Aniversaib.


To the Honorable T. Church Esquire,
Resident Councillor,
Singapore.
Sir,
In June last year I visited Siam, in the ship
which I at present command, say the “ Good Success ”
belonging to Bombay, for the purpose of purchasing a
cargo of sugar. On my arrival at Bangkok I requested
my agents Messrs. Hunter and Hayes to purchase on
account of the owners of the “ Good Success ” eight
thousand peculs of sugar. They called upon a number
of the sugar dealers to dispose of their sugar but was
astonished to find that His Majesty the King of Siam
had issued an order prohibiting them from selling
their sugars to any person but himself under severe
penalties. My agents called upon Chow Phya Pra-
klang, Prime Minister, and remonstrated with him on
the step taken by His Majesty in direct violation of
the present existing treaty, but without effect, and was
told that they could get no sugar unless purchased
from the Government and at a price His Majesty may
deem fit to name.
Notwithstanding the prohibition imposed on the
native dealers they sold my agents two boat loads,
about 800 peculs of sugar, and had commenced to
weigh the same when the King’s officers came and
seized the boats and took possession of the sugar, and
deposited the same in the King’s stores, the King also
dispatched officers up the creek and rivers to meet
the boats as they came down from the plantations
and seized them in the name of the King and stowed
the sugar in his godowns, paying the dealers for
the same from 7 to 8 ticals per pecul and the dealers
were informed that if they sold sugars to my agents


Messrs. Hunter and Hayes they would be fined and
imprisoned and their sugars confiscated.
In consequence of these arbitrary measures I wag
detained 10 days and my agents were compelled at
last to purchase the cargo from the King paying for
the same (9) nine ticals per pecul, being one to two
ticals more than what they could have purchased
sugar at from the dealers themselves and making a
loss to the owners of my ship of nearly ( 12,000)
twelve thousand ticals.
As the owners of the “Good Success” are much
interested in the trade with Siam, and trading there
under the faith of the present existing treaty, I sin-
cerely trust the present case may be taken into your
serious consideration and prevent not only those with
whom I am connected, but all traders with that
country, from falling into the same snare as they
did, and hoping that this may be added to any other
attestation of facts you may have received on the
subject.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) Wm. Evans.
Singapore
The 29th July 1843


Fort William the 29 July 1843.
To the Magistrate of Moorshedabad.
Sir.
Intelligence having been received from the Gover-
nor of the Eastern Settlements of the restoration of
the Ex Rajah of Quedah to his dominions, I am
directed to observe that the Governor General in
Council does not see any sufficient reason for the fur-
ther detention of Twanka Mahomed Saad now
in confinement at Moorshedabad, and His Lordship
in Council accordingly authorizes the release of the
prisoner from restraint, conformably to instructions
received to that effect from the Honorable the Court
of Directors.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) J. Thomason
Secretary to the Government of
India.
Fort William
The 29 July 1843


Fort William the 27th January 1844.
To J. Thomason Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated the 16th of September,* wuth its
enclosures, being original documents forwarded by my
predecessor regarding the obstructions stated to exist
in our commercial intercourse with Siam.
2, On my arrival here I found a letter on the
same subject which I forwarded under date the 29th
August* without enquiry or comment of any kind, be-
lieving that the question was before the Right Honor-
able the Governor General in all its bearings. I have
now examined into the several grievances set forth in
the above communications upon which a good deal of
light has been thrown by a gentleman recently re-
turned from Bangkok after a four years residence in
this the capital of Siam, and who is himself one of the
Memorialists.
3. The ill treatment of Aniver Saib, which has
been much exaggerated, was by the showing of the
Memorialists, consequent on his acting in direct con-
travention of the 10th article in the first, or political
portion of the Treaty with the Rajah of Siam, and in
opposition to the laws of that country, by importing
and selling opium, thereby rendering himself liable
to punishment in accordance with the 6th article of
the latter or Commercial portion of the Treaty.
4. The same may be said with reference to the
Sampan Puckat which was conveying opium along the
coast; and on being closely pursued, fired into a
Siamese war boat, and killed one of the crew ; when


captured the opium was discovered in the Puckat and
the men thrown into prison, where nine died, one
absconded, and the remainder were given up at Mr.
Bonham’s requisition.
5. We came* again to Aniver Saib who now
figures as Rajah’s Agent for supplying the troops with
clothing. This case was also enquired into by Mr.
Bonham and the reply by the Siamese is so satisfactory
that I am not surprised further notice of the com-
plaint was deemed unnecessary. The Siamese version
of the tale has been confirmed by the subsequent
memorial from Anniver Saib which I have the honor
herewith to forward. It appears that Anniver Saib
had been employed to procure clothing for the Rajah’s
troops, failing however to bring any for two years a
contract was entered into with another party to pro-
cure what was required direct from Bombay. Even-
tually Anniver Saib arrived with a quantity of jackets,
when the Rajah offered to take the whole at the same
rate as he had obtained his last supply from Bombay.
This was refused, and upon this Anniver Saib grounds
his grievance.
6 These sort of bargains are never entered on
with Foreign Native Princes without a due consider-
ation to the hazard that is run by making engagements
with personages over whom there can be no judicial
control. A case of this nature is now pending bet-
ween the Rajah and one of the mercantile houses here,
which would doubtless form a matter of complaint if
I had not set my face against it. One of the party
concerned, from whom I received the information,
stated that his firm had been in the habit of supplying
warlike implements to the Rajah for some time, and
during the last year, prior to the termination of the
War with the Chinese, His Highness ordered 250
Guns of small calibre from England, in anticipation of
a visit from some of our ships on their passage to or
from China. These guns arrived a month or two


since, but the Rajah having no longer any dread of
such a visit in prospect or no further thoughts of
making a show of opposition in such a case, has now
refused to take the guns, which are thrown upon the
agent’s hands.
7. In all these matters I cannot see the smallest
reason for any movement on the part of the British
Government. iThe direct interference however of the
Rajah with the trade and the vexatious duties which
from time to time are imposed upon articles of traffic
i, may be deemed worthy of notice. The enclosed letter
from Mr. Hayes, the person alluded in the 2d
paragraph of this letter will show the extent to which
this is carried. I must here observe that the seizure
of the boats laden with sugar does not strike me as
being so heinous an offence as this letter and the
Memorials would imply, for it was known to the
purchasers of the sugar that His Majesty had prohi-
bited the sale of this article except through him, and
it was therefore an attempt to smuggle, for which the
vendors of the sugar were punished. Whether the
prohibition or in other words the monopoly of the
sale of sugar is in accordance with the tenor of the
Ist article of the Commercial Treaty is another ques-
tion, and one upon which I will nob presume to
anticipate His Lordship’s decision.
8. The heavy duty imposed on square rigged
vessels which has been noticed by every person writ-
ing on Siam is tantamount almost to their exclusion
from the trade. Tock Sing, the principal merchant
here, turned this to his own advantage, although not
to the extent expected, when he ordered a ship of 300
tons burthen to be built at Bankok in all respects
similar to an .English vessel of that tonnage, except
as regarded the rigging which was made junk fashion.
The first year the port dues on her at Siam were 350
ticals, but the next year it was increased to 680 ticals
consequent on the quantity of cargo she carried.,


This latter sum however is not more than one eighth
of what a square rigged vessel carrying the same
quantity and quality of merchandize would pay. 1
cannot but think therefore that if the evil tendency
of these restrictions to trade were pointed out to the
Rajah, and remonstrated against by the Supreme Au-
thority, there would be little difficulty in putting
matters on a better footing.
9. The existing Treaty with Siam was concluded
during the Burmese War, after that war had lasted
nearly three years, when it was considered of moment
to conciliate the adjacent powers. This was not lost
upon the Siamese, who are stated to be as canning
as they are cautious and timid. The whole politicag
horizon however bears a very different aspect in these!
days, and as I have before observed the Siamese were
for many months in a sad state of alarm at hearing
of our triumph in China and the prospect of a visit
from us. Chain cables (sold to His Majesty by the
very party who have now failed in their speculation
with the guns) were drawn across the river Main, at
the entrance to which the fortifications were repaired
and others commenced upon, with a view of making
some show of opposition, which it is universally be-
lieved would never have been offered, had their fears
been realized.
10. His Lordship will be able to form a just
estimate of the trade carried on between this port and
Siam by the abstract statement of exports and imports
noted in the margin* since 1826/27, the period at
which the above Treaty was concluded, to the present
time. I think it right to add that from all enquiry
I have been enabled to make, it is by no means pro-
able that any very great encrease may be expected
even were the restrictive duties taken off square rigged
vessels, for the chief articles of import are salt and
sugar, as will be seen by the annexed detailed extract*
from the official trade report of this year, and these


Abstract Statement of the Annual Imports and
Exports
TO AND FROM SlAM.
1826/27
1827/28
1828/29
1829/30
Imports
Drs.
148,669
211,622
281,938
255,757
Exports
... 218,955
131,030
366,298
337,642
1830/31
1831/32
1832/33
1833/34
Imports
Drs.
... 141,142
210,680
219,462
196,822
Exports
JJ
... 200,007
226,428
239,191
142,604
1834/35
1835/36
1836/37
1837/38
Imports
Drs.
... 159,141
176,791
345,012
279,872
Exports
... 191,083
233,086
216,980
377,791
1838/39
1839/40
1840/41
1841/42
Imports
Drs.
... 305,272
259,273
326,341
409,463
Exports
... 289,512
483,578
211,597
229,891
articles brought on junks do not give more than a
remunerating profit, but it would certainly gratify the
merchants here, and the house of Messrs. Hunter
and Hayes particularly, if a remonstrance were deemed
necessary, and I think such a measure would tend
to do good throughout the Malayan Archipelago,
where the Petty Chiefs have assumed a tone quite
inconsistent with their insignificance.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) W. B. Butterworth
Governor Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
The Bth Novr. 1843


To the Honble. Colonel Butterworth
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I beg leave to lay before you the following state-
ment regarding the commercial intercourse between
the English and Siamese, from which you will observe
that the latter have gradually assumed a tone quite at
variance to the present existing treaty.
From the time of my arrival in Siam in 1835 up till
3839-40 trade had been carried on amicably between
the natives and ourselves, without the interference
of the Government, and as our transactions were large,
and selling goods at a credit necessarily threw a large
amount of our funds into the hands of the natives, as
their mode of payment had been principally prodiice
( the exportation of ticals being prohibited ) we never
doubted but the smooth state of things would continue.
However, that was not allowed to be the case. The
King having turned merchant himself caused all deal-
ers in sugar to sell the same to him only and on no
account to trade with European merchants, under pen-
alty of fines and imprisonment. This threw us into
an awkward situation having a large amount out, in
the hands of the natives, our only mode of obtaining
payment of the amount was denied us. Besides these
restrictions in regard to the natives’ transactions with
us, the duties on all kinds of produce have been raised
to such an exorbitant extent as alone to amount almost
to a prohibition. These duties have been exacted in
direct violation to the existing Treaty, as in Article Ist
of the agreement annexed to it, it distinctly says “ No
import, export or other duty shall be levied upon the
buyers or export sellers fiorn or to Europeans.” Remon


strance has been used with the Siamese against the in-
justice of these restrictions, but without effect; indeed
as soon as they found they could levy these duties with
impunity, recourse was had to other means to extort
money from the European merchants.of the place. In
1841 my firm in Siam had purchased up a very large
•quantity of teakwood timber. The exportation of this
article having been allowed hitherto, no suspicion had
been entertained of a prohibition of this article, more
particularly so, as the officers of the Siamese Govern-
ment were aware of our buying up the said timber. If
the Siamese had informed us before, or while buying
this article, that they would not have allowed it to be
exported, it would have prevented a very serious loss;
but they did not do so until it was in the act of being
shipped, and as it was principally purchased by barter,
the price it commanded in Siam when resold, left us
very heavy losers. Again in the case of the “ Good
'Success” arriving in Siam to purchase a cargo of sugar,
the Government monopolised the whole trade in this
article, and actually seized two boats of sugar, which
had been previously purchased bj r me, and which were
laying at the time in front of the British Factory.
This act was in direct violation of the Treaty, as in
Article 6th of the said Treaty it says “ Merchants sub-
ject to the Siamese or English going to trade in Ben-
gal or any country, or any other country subject to the
English, or at Bangkok or any other country subject
to the Siamese must pay the duties upon commerce
according to the customs of the place on either side,
and such merchants and the inhabitants of the country
shall be allowed to buy without the intervention of
other persons in such countries. 1 ’ Here the Siamese
have not only interfered in the matter of buying and
selling but actually seized the article after it had been
purchased and threatened to flog and imprison
any native merchants who should sell this article to
Europeans, The price this sugar was purchased
originally at was eight ticals, but when repurchased


from the King, which I was necessitated to do after
detaining the ship for ten days, I was obliged to
pay him nine ticals, being one tical per pecul more
than the then market price, and which on a ship of
large tonnage amounts to a very large sum, and which,
added to the already enormous measurement duty
on the vessel, could not fail of leaving a very serious
loss. 1 would wish particularly to draw your atten-
tion to the large capital we have now in the hands of
the Native Merchants, and which we can in no way
recover, unless the system of monopoly by Government
be put an end to ; and craving your kind influence to-
cause an inquiry in the matter.
I have the honor &c.,
(Signed) JAMBS HAYES.
Singapore
The Ist November 1843.


Translation of a letter from the Chowe Peeah
Praklang Senah Body, Great Man of Beenooah Px*aak
Maha Nakun Sree Ahyou-teeah (!) in Siam to the
Honble. S. G. Bonham Esqre., Governor of Prince of
Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
We have received our friend’s letter together
with a list of goods and their value by Captain Jack-
son of the Bombay ship Kusravey, in which letter our
friend was informed that 18 Chinese belonging to a
Sampan Pukat had been put in irons at Siam for
having smuggled opium into a Chinese prow or Junk
and that these men were from Singapore. In reference
to the Treaty entered into between the English and
Siamese it is provided that those who were found
smuggling opium in Siam the opium only was to
be seized and burnt, but it appears that the Siamese
have exceeded the spirit of the Treaty by having not
only confiscated all the merchandize and goods of a
great many Chinese who trade in Siam, but impri-
soned and killed them. Our friend has learnt this
account from what has been simply stated by the
Chinese and on such information has written a report
of it to His Majesty the King of Siam requesting the
release of the Chinese alluded to with the delivery of
the goods which are not prohibited by the Treaty, and
that they may be sent back to Singapore; it is further
stated that a Chief or Minister belonging to Siam
had slain seven of the Chinese of the Sampan Pukat.
If our friend wish to continue the friendship which
exists between us we request that a proper investiga-
tion may be made into the subject to ascertain the
truth of what has been reported to our friend by
the Chinaman, that there might be no occasion of
misunderstanding hereafter between us. Our friends
letter appears to contain statements of undoubted


facts and hence our friend’s peremptory request to
release these men. That a Chinaman, named Koeh
Hoopeng, a four years resident of Singapore, who
had frequently traded in several Malayan ports stated
to our friend that himself and 31 other Chinese
sailed on the llth day of the 3d month (March
1839) to the eastward as far as Canton, with
a quantity of opium and other British goods. After
selling a chest of opium and some goods they were
obliged in consequence of some disturbance there to
’ proceed to Sengorah, but owing to contrary winds
they went to the Soomut Pakan. That on the 29th
day of the 3d month of the year Aujing (Dog) the
Noquedah of the Sampan Pukat sailed to the country
Bunlam, where they sold seven chests of opium, value
of each 1,000 kope, but the Noquedah received only
4,000 kope from that country, then he went to Anghin,
where they saw five boats coming out of Siam. The
five boats approached the sampan pukat when the men
of the Siamese boats hoisted their colours to intimate
that they were the guard vessels belonging to the
Siamese. The Chinese seeing that the guard vessels
h a( j would not believe that they were such,
’ but on being spoken to and desired by them to lower
the pukat colours they complied, when two of the guard
" boats fired into the Sampan Pukat and shot a China-
man dead. The whole five boats then attacked the
Sampan, some of the Chinese jumped into the sea and
the chief of the gun boats boarded the Sampan and
cut the Chinese Noquedah with a sword and threw
him overboard. The informant Koeh Hoopeng and
three other Chinese were tied to the mast of the guard
boat. The Sampan Pukat was carried to the country
of Soomut Pakan, where 25 Chinese were landed
and from thence carried to Siam before Tan Senah
Body to whom they were reported as belonging to a
Chinese pirate prow. They told Tan Senah Body
they were not pirates, but people belonging to Singa-
pore uho were trading in the Malayan ports, as will


appear from documents they possessed at the time that
they had sold opium and [?at ] Ban lam where they
had obtained some silver and that the goods and mer-
chandize contained in the Sampan Pakat had been
taken on credit from the different Merchants at Singa-
pore. Tan Senah Body said in reply that if they
were people who came from Singapore there should
have been some paper or document to that effect. He
then ordered them to land the cargo of the Sampan
and the whole of the Chinese 24 in number together
with the Nocquedah, who had been wounded, were or-
dered to be placed in irons. That in consequence of
their keeper having overworked them 7 of their num-
ber died ; 15 months after Koeh Hoopeng made his
escape to our friend who had sent his statement to-
gether with a list of the goods belonging to them.*
* * * All that our friend has written from what
has been reported by China Koeh Hoopeng, together
with the list, we perfectly comprehend. We now have
to solicit our friend not to credit a report coming from
such a person as the informant, China Koeh Hoopeng.
It is not usual for such a Sampan Pukat as that be-
longing to him to sail about the neighbourhood of
Siam.
On the 6th month of the year Aujing ( Dog)
Pia Chumpoon reported that on the 4th month of the
year Ahyam (Fowl) in the district of Toongka, about
a day’s journey from a place called Chumpoon, the
Pungulu Allawang Appie, in charge of the said district,
during his absence at Chayal, had his house plundered,
and his wife wounded by the gang of Chinese be-
longing to the Sampan Pukat. The Chinese en-
quired of her where all her valuables were kept,
they then pillaged not only the PunguluV house,
but all the houses in that neighbourhood, in con-
sequence of which the inhabitants fled into the jungle.
The amount of property plundered on that occasion
was estimated at 18,000 kopes. After this the Pia


Chumpoon and Kamkan directed the guard vessels to
go in pursuit of the Sampan Pukat but did not fall in
with it.
On the third month of the year Aiijin (Dog )
Peeah Pye Gee-booree and Peeah Tee booree (!) sent a
letter stating that a Sampan Pukat had entered their
countries not with any intention of trading but coasted
all along those countries carrying on illicit traffic in
opium with all the people about the sea coast. The
Sampan Pukat was seen in almost all the creeks and
other * inaccessible places for 2 or 3 days to-
gether and then sail * out to sea. Whenever
the Sampan met with any of the Siamese or
Chinese trading prows she invariably captured them
and plundered all their goods. The Chiefs of these
two countries sent guard vessels to go after her, but
whenever they came in sight the Sampan would set
sail and get off. When His Majesty Prah Bat Lam
deet Prahk Put Chou Hooah Beemooah Prakh Malta
Nakoon Sree Ahyou tuah (!), the King of Siam, heard
of the piratical acts of these Chinese he issued strict
orders to all the Chiefs of the Maritime ports to send
guard vessels after the Sampan Pukat and such other
boats and prows which contain opium or commit pira-
cies in their neighbourhood, and that vessels found
sailing about without proper passes from the ports of
Singapore or other places, people who come under
pretence of wishing to trade, like the Chinese belong-
ing to the Sampan Pukat, should in case of having
opium on board be seized and captured, the opium to
be destroyed or burnt, and the rest of the cargo to be
distributed to the captors as prizes. This is in accord-
ance with the old established laws of Siam.
On the sth month of the year Koorah (horse)
a guard vessel of the country Soomut Pakan sailed
in chase afler the Sampan Pukat, and when within
gun shot of her the Sampan first fired a couple of
shots into the guard vessel, which occasioned a fight


of nearly an hour. The fire of the Sampan killed
two of the Siamese, the Panglima then boarded the
Sampan with his men, some of the Chinese resisted
and others leaped into the sea. The number who
thus perished was not ascertained but those captured
were 25. The Sampan Pukat and the 25 Chinese
were taken to Sornut Pakan and from thence to
Siam, were His Majesty Prahk Bat Sam deet Prahk
Peet Chowe Hooah Benooah Prahk Maha Nakoon Sree
Ahyou teeah, the King of Siam (!), questioned where
they came from. They replied from Singapore. Where
is , your pass and what colours do you carrj 7 ? They
said they had neither. Under such circumstances
His Majesty the King of Siam was fully convinced
that they were no other people than pirates. In
searching the Sampan Pukat it was found that she
contained 23 chests of opium which were burnt and
the remainder of the cargo distributed agreeably to
His Majesty’s directions amongst the people of the
guard vessel who captured the Sampan, but not as
stated detained in Siam. All that the informant China
Koeh Hoopeng has stated to our friend is false,
in as much as this individual was not the Noquedah
but one of the crew of the Sampan. The Noquedah
of her is now at Siam and his name is China Teeheng
Seesake, who when questioned what was the cargo
of the Sampan Pukat, said she contained white
cloths in rolls, two boxes long cloths of 70 cubits
75 pieces, green cloth 80 corges, Malacca black
18 corges, Malay cloth 15 corges, handkerchiefs 6
corges, flowered red cloth 9 corges, white thread 11
peculs, yellow thread 1 pecul, black thread 4 peculs,
red thread 2 peculs, fine twine 1 pecul, dried China
fruit 1 pecul, iron bars 20 peculs, silver value of opium
sold at Bunlam, 3970 kopes. This is the saying of
the Noquedah Teheng. It is written in the 10th
article of the treaty that all foreigners whether
English, Malays or Chinese, who wish to trade with
Siam, must produce a pass from the English autho


rities to say that they are permitted to travel by land
or sea as the case may be from an English port to
Siam, and further that such persons wishing to trade
at Siam, were not to traffic in opium, and if they
knowingly persisted in carrying on illicit trade in this
prohibited article His Majesty the King of Siam was
to seize and burn the opium found in their possession.
In the 6th article of the treaty it is provided that all
British subjects, whether Malays, Dutch or Chinese
who come and trade at Siam in any ship or vessel
carrying Burmese crews were to be captured by the
Siamese and their cargoes forfeited, and the parties
liable to all the penalties and punishments prescribed
by the Siamese laws and may other provisions contain-
ed in the treaty which are not necessary here to
epeat.
It is also written in the treaty that all foreigners
who will not abide by the rules and customs of Siam
but resist the authorities and oppress the inhabitants
of the country, commit murder, steal or behave them-
selves disrespectfully towards the great men of Siam
such person shall be considered as great offenders and
after investigation if it be proved that murder has been
committed, death shall be awarded, and if other minor
offence be committed by Commanders or officers of
foreign vessels they shall only be fined, but if com-
mitted by other persons lower in degree than the
above, they shall on proof be either flogged or put in
irons agreeably to the established laws ot Siam.
Again it is provided that if any European, wish-
ing to settle at Siam for the purpose of trading, the
Governor General of Bengal was to restrict such person
from using any disrespectful manner or language to
the inhabitants of Siam, and if on the other hand any
of the people of the country should oppress an Euro-
pean, the offender would be punished. These Chinese
belonging to these Sampan Pukats have on very many
occasions been found smuggling opium at Siam and


committing acts of piracy, murder, rapine and all
sorts of crimes for years past. This one in particular
has been so bold as to fight with a guard vessel and to
kill her Panglima or Commander and those Chinese
are liable to be sentenced to death, but His Majesty
the King of Siam being very merciful towards all men
has simply put them in confinement and in awarding
such sentence against these Chinese His Majesty the
King of Siam does not exceed or depart from the pro-
vision of the oth article of the treaty.
On the 4th day of the 2d month of the year An-
jing ( Dog ) a vessel laden with opium, the Noquedah
of which was a Chinaman named Kung Seng and the
officer an European came and anchored outside in the
yellow waters, and on the 4th month of the year
Anjing ( Dog ) another vessel commanded by a China-
man named Beng Cheum, having also an European for
an officer came and anchored at the same place with a
cargo of opium. The 2 Chinese Noquedahs landed and
reported to the head man or Magistrate of Siam
that they came from Singapore and had brought
long cloths, white thread and iron bars and that
they wished to trade at Siam on the same footing
as before, and if they were permitted to do so
they would enter in, but if not return back to
Singapore. After this the two Nocquedahs went and
carried on an illicit trade in opium with the other
Chinese residing at Siam, on the understanding that
the purchasers were to take the opium from their
vessels which were lying outside. Three or four days
after the Nocquedahs came and told the head man
that the goods they had brought were unsaleable and
there were no purchasers. They requested permission
to return to Singapore when a pass was granted them.
Instead of sailing away they merely moved a little fur-
ther outside when the Chinese inhabitants carried on
smuggling to a great extent. When these two vessels
were about to sail the Magistrate suspected that a great


quantity of opium had been imported and on enquiry
amongst the Chinese 42 chests of opium were found.
Again another vessel belonging to Mr, Hunter
brought a quantity of opium which was sold to China
Lee-an in the year Anjing. This circumstance was
not known at the time, but when it was discovered
that the Chinaman had purchased the opium from
Mr. Hunter, no punishment was inflicted upon Mr.
Hunter, but only upon the Chinaman. After this a
ship from Bombay, commanded by Noquedah Azim,
came with a cargo of opium which was sold to China-
Lee-ho clandestinely. When detected the Chinaman
confessed he had purchased cheats from Noquedah
Azim. On this occasion likewise the punishment
fell upon the Chinaman and the Nocquedah was let
off. Another vessel from Bombay commanded by
Noquedah Moharaed Ariff with an officer named Dicy
came to trade at Siam. A Dutch belonging
to that vessel brought 35 catties of opium on shore
for sale, but was immediately detected and the opium
seized and burnt, but the man was let off un-
punished.
Another person by the name of Moorsaw, a
Madras man who had been settled at Siam for many
years with a wife and several children was reported
to the Minister Sena Bodhi that he was carrying on
an illicit trade in opium. Moorsaw was apprehended
and examined, but he denied having done so; six
months after when Moorsaw’s young wife had quar-
relled with him, she gave information against her
husband Moorsaw and said that a quantity of opium
was secreted under his house. On search being made
13 balls cf opium were found. On this occasion His
Majesty the King remonstrated with Moorsaw and
told him that he had now been residing for many
years in Siam and was aware of the rules and customs
of the place, had married a wife and begotten several
children. That he should have denied the circum


stance of his having carried [on] this trade in opium
when questioned by the Minister and for telling a
falsehood Moorsaw was ordered to be put in irons
for 16 days, merely as a warning, after which he was
let off.
All vessels under British colours trading at Siam
if detected in bringing a cargo of opium, the opium
alone is seized and burnt, but none of the crew ever
punished or confined according to the articles of the
treaty.
Chinese belonging to the Sampan Pukat did
not come to Siam for the purpose of traffic, but
brought opium and sold it to all the people on the
sea coast. This is acting contrary to the treaty, and
they are accordingly punished according to the laws
of Siam
That our friend’s request for the release of these
Chinese and delivery of such unprohibited goods be-
longing to them to be returned together with the
Chinese to Singapore is considered by His Majesty the
King of Siam as a mark of friendship, but all that the
Chinaman named Koeh Hoopeng has stated is posi-
tively false. That these Chinese have without doubt
entered the Siamese territories and* committed all
kinds of crimes with impunity and were so bold as to
fight the guard boat and kill her Panglima. This is a
great crime and if committed in an English country
would be viewed in the same light. This is given as
our real opinion on the subject which we communi-
cate to our friend, requesting our friend to weigh the
matter well and see into the merit of the case, after
which as a mark of friendship another letter on the
subject might be sent to us. We have dispatched this
letter in the Siamese and another copy in the Malayan
language, both containing the same subject.
Written on the 2d day of the 3d month Sunday
Sakerat Siam 1202 year of the Rat.


Translation of a letter from the Chon Phya Prak-
lang Prime Minister to His Majesty the King of Siam
to the Honble. S. G. Bonham Esqre,, Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
There is a large quantity of cloth brought at the
request of a captain ( Siamese) from the Coromandel
Coast. The name of the Pulicat merchant is Attra.
It has reached Bangkok, This captain does not wish
to take the cloth as it is not according to muster and
cannot be sold elsewhere, because, it has been made
expressly for the Siamese. If the Siamese Captain
does not take the cloth the Pulicat merchant will be
a heavy loser. The Emperor desires that Mr. Bonham
will have the goodness to enquire of the Noquedah
if he will suffer or not should the cloth not be taken.
Cloth also was sent by a chief person at Pulicat called
Mutsait (Chew Sap) in his vessel, the Noquedah of
which was An Noot Sap. It arrived at Siam and
brought a letter from Mutsait and mentioned that
any thing His Majesty wanted to send to Pulicat
should be sent in that vessel, and his Majesty wushed
to have a quantity of cloth (Layang) to make uni-
form for his troops and had given him muster to be
taken at Pulicat.
In the English era 1831 An Noot Sap went to
Pulicat and brought the cloth. The Emperor got 200
jackets made of it, the cost Drs. 2 per jacket for his
guards. Further the Emperor requested that more of
this kind should be sent, to the number of 997 pieces,
making in all for the troops 697 (sic/) pieces, which
was received. But it was not enough, and another or-
der was given to An-wa-sap to bring more. But the
Noquedah has informed us that the cloth could not
be got that year, but perilaps it might afterwards.


An-wa-sap has remained in Siam and sent another
person in las stead to Pulicat, but for two years no
cloth was received, and An-wa-sap said the cloth had
not yet been made and now four years have elapsed,
and the Pulicat merchant now says that formerly this
cloth could be sold at the former rate but not now
This being deceptive conduct. But matters have been
settled.
The Emperor therefore ordered Md. Asim, a
Bombay Nakhoda, to bring the cloth for 6 dollars and
2 rupees per piece, and he had taken away a pattern.
Now, in the English year 1838, the Emperor received
from the said Md. Asim the quantity of 3,500 and the
price has been paid and settled as An-wa-sap knows
and the Emperor has requested Md. Asim to bring
still more cloth from Bombay.
In 1839 (year English) Phra Khlang got a ship
loaded which went to Singapore to trade and returned
to Siam. An-wa-sap's correspondent at Singapore
took up the vessel on her return voyage, and sent
goods to Siam, and with these cloth for the troops,
to 4,000 jackets. An-wa-sap offered this cloth to His
Majesty for sale. The Emperor said that if he would
sell it at the same rate that the Bombay merchant had
done he would buy it. His Majesty wishes to be in-
formed if this man, An-wa-sap, has reported any of
these things to Mr. Bonham in order to throw blame
on the Siamese. For had An-wa-sap performed his
agreement His Majesty would not have sent to Bom-
bay for cloth, and as His Majesty will be supplied
yearly from Bombay in future. Also the supply at
present is more than sufficient for the troops. This
letter is merely to inform Mr. Bonham of these trans-
actions and to request Mr. Bonham to send back a
reply in the Siamese and Malayan languages.
Dated Wednesday in the Ist month year Khan.


To the Governor Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca,
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of*
your despatch of the 29th August last,* with its en-
closure from the Master of the ship “Good Success,*”
complaining of the obstructions thrown in the way
of trade by the King of Siam, and in reply to inform
you that it does not appear to be established that the
King has by the proceedings described in your des-
patch under reply directly violated any article of the
existing treaty and that the interference of the Gov-
ernment of India is not under the circumstances
considered necessary.
I have the honor &ca.
(Signed) T. R. Davidson
Officiating Secretary to the
Government of India.
Fort William
the 27th January 1844*.


To Lieut. Colonel W. J. Butterworth, 0. B.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
1 am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
despatch dated Bth November* last relative to the
obstructions which are alleged to exist in our com-
mercial intercourse with Siam and in reply to inform
you that there does not appear to be a violation of
any article of the existing treaty on the part of the
King of Siam, nor does His Honor the President in
Council consider the interference of the British Gov-
ernment at present required.
1 have the honor to be &ca.
( Signed ) T. W. Davidson
Officiating Secretary to
the Government of India.
Fort William
the 27th January 1844.


Fort William the 23d March 1844.
To the Officiating Secretary
to the Government of India
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to the 2d paragraph of a letter
under date the 21st June 1843*, from the late Offici-
ating Governor Mr, Blundell, bringing to notice tha
the Governor of Quedah since his restoration to power,
had forcibly taken possession ot a small tract of
country called Krean, claimed by the Rajah of Perak
and submitting a correspondence on the subject be-
tween Mr. Garling and those Chiefs. I have the honor
to state that—
2. On my arrival at Penang 1 received from the
Rajah of Perak direct, and through the Resident
Councillor, the enclosed letters*, the one addressed to
Mr. Blundell and the other to the {Superintendent of
Province Wellesley. After making most minute and
particular enquiries on the spot, and satisfying myself
that the Governor of Quedah had unjustly seized
upon the Krean country, and that a collision
between the two parties would most certainly
tend to the plunder ot the inhabitants of that part of
Province Wellesley bordering the Krean country, 1
directed the Rajah of Perak not to make any hostile
movement for three months and appointed a meeting
with the Rajah of Quedah which he did [not] choose
to attend but sent his son Tuanku Dye, to whom I
explained matters and urged him to induce his father
to withdraw from Krean.
3. When about to leave Penang I addressed the
enclosed letter to the Governor of Quedah, a s also
the one to the Rajah of Ligore,* under whose imme-
diate orders the Governor of Quedah manages his


country. The tone and tenor of the Rajah of
Quedah’s reply * lead me at once to lay the question
before His Honor the President in Council with a
view to my being favoured with definite instructions
how to act in the event of hostilities being carried
on between the Rajah of Perak and Governor of
Quedah.
4. The intimate knowledge of Major Low with
the boundaries of Perak and Quedah territories as well
as the parties most immediately concerned, induced
me soon after my return here to call upon him for
a report on the subject. A copy of this report with
a plan* showing the disputed territory in question
I have the honor herewith to forward, by which it
will be perceived, as I have previously mentioned,
that this is a most wanton and unjustifiable seizure
of the Krean district by the Governor of Quedah, the
validity of whose right and title is most completely
nullified, even on his own showing, for the man whom
he states as having been deputed by him to take
possesion of Krean was his nephew ( not his son ) and
a noted freebooter, withal!, who possessed himself of
the north rather than the south bank of the Krean
river to the terror and dismay of the inhabitants of
Province Wellesley.
5. The 2d and 3d articles of the treaty conclud-
ed under date the 18th October 1826 with the Rajah
of Perak, wherein we guarantee “assistance in expel-
ling from the country any Siamese or Malays who
may at any time enter the Perak countiy with the
political views or for the purpose of interfering in any
way with the Government of His Majesty ” lead me
most unhesitatingly to recommend that I may be autho-
rized to withhold the stipend promised in the Ist Article
of the treaty between the British Government and
the Rajah of Quedah till he shall have entirely with-
drawn for one whole year to the north of the Krean
River, and that I may be furnished with a strong


letter of remonstrance from His Honor the President
in Council to the Rajah of Siam to he forwarded in
the event of my letter to the Rajah of Ligor failing to
produce the desired effect.
6. The multiplicity of correspondence on record
regarding the Rajah ot Quedah will have made His
Honor acquainted with the wily character of this ob-
stinate old man. If, as he states, his conduct has been
dictated by the Siamese authorities, there can be little
doubt that their views extend to the whole of Perak,
and it therefore more especially behoveth us to move
at once in this matter.
7. Under anj-circumstances I most respectfully
urge that he may be made to withdraw to the former
boundary of Quedah, and as the most decisive method
of effecting this without bloodshed and convincing him
of his wilful error in regard to the tenure on which we
hold Penang, that his annual stipend be stopped till he
has done so for one whole year.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
7th February 1844.


Translation
of a letter from Saltan Abdallah Mahomed Shah,
Rajah of Perak, to the Honourable E. A. Blundell
Esquire, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singa-
pore and Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
I wish to inform my friend that the countries of
Palo Penang and Perak are indissolably united by
treaty and friendship. That in the Hijera 1211 Mr.
John Anderson, on behalf of the Honourable Company,
proceeded to Perak to meet Sultan Abdulla Moollum
Shah and entered into a treaty of alliance, and again
in the Hijera 1242 Captain James Low, as Envoy
to the Honorable the Governor in Council of Palo
Penang, also went to Perak and made a treaty, one
copy of which remains with each party, and by the
assistance of the English Government the reigning
Rajahs of Perak have remained as independent Rajahs
up to the present time. I consequently never wished
to break an}" of the agreements that were entered
into.
Moreover ever since the countries of Palo Penang
and Perak became allied no wrong has been done or
offence given, but all has continued well. Now I wish
to inform my friend about the District of Krean which
lies on the bank of Soonger Krean on my side of the
river. lam informed that when the Rajah of Kedah
received back his territory of Kedah, people came from
Kedah and forcibly seized and took the district of
Krean, that was under my dominion, and said they
did so by orders of the Rajah of Kedah ; they also
spoiled the country and plundered the inhabitants.
They likewise plundered Pangholoo Jumahat or Rajah
Lela Pehalawan and drove him away.


This Pangholoo Jumahat was placed by me in
authority there with the approval of Captain James
Low, because that Krean adjoins the country of Pulo
Penang and is rather distant from Perak but is near
to my friend, so that in case of any disturbance my
friend may soon have knowledge of it. The Pan-
sdioloo of Krean has come to inform me of the matters
o
respecting Krean and I would wish to send a large
armament to Krean to take it back, but should I do
so without the knowledge and concurrence of my
friend 1 fear 1 might be infringing the treaties. I
immediately after receiving information forwarded a
letter to the Honorable Samuel Garling Esquire,*
Resident Councillor of Prince of Wales Island,
and one to Mr. Perrier,* Superintendent of Province
Wellesley, and a long time has elapsed [but] I have
not received any answers. The reasons for this lam
not aware of.
Being informed of the arrival of my friend to
succeed Mr. Bonham who has returned to England
1 have the greatest hopes that my friend will favor
me with a reply, and assist me according to the terms
of the treaty existing between the English Company
and myself. From the remotest time the District of
Krean belonged to Perak and of this my friend is well
aware. With Compliments.


From the Honorable Colonel Butterworth, Aca. &ca.
To the Governor of Quedda &ca. &ca.
( After Compliments. )
I sent for my friend consequent on intelligence
having reached me that he had passed over, seized
upon and retained possession of the District of Krean,
hitherto considered as the undisputed property of the
Rajah of Perak.
I think it right before leaving Penang to repeat
what I said to my friend’s son Tuanku Dye, vizt., that
during the period Tuanku Annum continued as the
representative of the Siamese Authority in Quedah no
question was made as to whom the District of Krean
belonged, and that Tuanku Annum never for a mo-
ment attempted to exercise any jurisdiction there, on
the contrary the Krean district was universally con-
sidered as appertaining to the Rajah of Perak.
It is very much to be regretted that my friend
so immediately on his restoration to power should
have made this aggression on the neighbouring ter-
ritories of Perak, as it will probably lead to hostilities
with the Rajah of that country, who would long since
have commenced had I not requested him to desist
till I should see my friend and induce him to with-
draw to his own country on the South bank of the
Krean river.
At present I have not written to the Supreme
Government, but I must shortly do so unless my
friend listens to my advice and gives up the territory
he has recently seized upon, for if hostilities be once
commenced on the borders of Province Wellesley I
may be forced to adopt measures which will be very
detrimental to the future interests of my friend and
his family.
Prince of Wales Island
9th December 1843.


To the Rajah of Ligore &ca. &ca.
(After Compliments.)
I write to my friend consequent on the receipt of
a letter from the Rajah of Perak, who informs me that
the Governor of Quedha, under some misapprehension
of the right of territory on the south bank of the Sun-
gie Krean River, has seized upon and retained posses-
sion of the District of Krean hitherto considered as the
undisputed property of the Rajah of Perak.
During the period Tuankoo Annum continued as
representative of the Siamese Authority in Quedha
no question was made as to whom the district of Krean
belonged and Tuanku Annum never for a moment at-
tempted to exercise any jui’isdiction, on the contrary
the Krean District was, as I have before observed,
universally considered as appertaining to the Rajah
of Perak.
It is very much to be regretted that the present
Governor of Quedha, so immediately on his restoration
to power, should have made the aggression on the
neighbouring territory of Perak, as it will infallibly
lead to hostilities between the two countries and may
force me to adopt measures for the protection of Pro-
vince Wellesley, which will be detrimental to both the
contending parties.
Being anxiously desirous of preventing such a
state of affairs, I have requested the Rajah of Perak
not to make any hostile movement till I can hear from
my friend to whom I have addressed this letter, in the
hope that he will remonstrate with the Governor of
Quedah and induce him to withdraw his people to the
north side of the Krean River, if, as I have every
reason to believe, from the intercourse which has


hitherto subsisted between the Rajah of Perak and
the Settlements committed to my governance, as also
from the tacit acknowledgment of the Rajah of Siam
prior to the return of the present Governor to Quedah,
that the country south of the Krean river forms part of
the Rajah of Perak’s territory.
I shall be glad to hear from my friend at an early
period and it will afford me infinite satisfaction if
his views coincide with mine on this subject, when I
feel assured that steps will be taken to induce the
Governor of Quedah to withdraw to his own territory
and preclude the necessity of the Rajah of Perak going
to war to maintain his right to that boundary, hither-
to unquestioned, which nature appears to have form-
ed between the Perak and Quedah countries.
Prince of Wales Island
9th December 1843.
From the Honorable Colonel Butterworth, Compa-
nion of the Most Honorable the Military Order of the
Bath, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore
and Malacca-


Translation
of a letter from Sultan Ahmad Tajoodin Hallim Shah
To the Honorable Colonel Butterworth C. B.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
( After Compliments.)
I have received my friend’s letter on the 7th day
of the Hajee month stating that I was disturbing at
Krean river the peace of the Perak country. I wish
to acquaint my friend that from the time of my grand-
father before the English Company had asked to rent
Pulo Penang, Krean was under my father’s govern-
ment. My friend can learn this from old residents.
When Mr. Ibbetson was Governor he sent me to
Malacca, contrary to agreement with the Company.
Moreover, I have heard that Captain Low gave the
Krean river to the Perak people, a thing which is
contrary to the custom of former Governors from
Mr. Light’s time upwards to Governor Pliillip and
Governor Fullerton.
At the time of the latter I was ordered to go and
reside at Penang and I sent my son Tuanku Zein al
Abdin to go and rule Krean from the then north
boundary to the mouth of the river Korow, and ac-
cording to the state of things in my grandfather’s
and ancestor’s time and according to orders, and
which have not been departed from up to the pre-
sent day. I can show my friend these chops and
documents.
Moreover the King of Siam ordered me to go and
subdue Perak and annex it to Siam. My friend can
look at the registry of such papers and will there
find the agreement of my father with the English
Fort William the 23d March 1844,


Company. Now I would have sooner replied to my
friend’s letter but the gun boat returned so soon that
I had not time.
Dated 7th day of the Bulon Haji month Dulhaijah
' (27th December).


To the Honorable Lieutenant Colonel Butterworth, 0.8.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
1 have the honor to acknowledge the receipt
of your letter of the 19th ultimo,* directing me to
report most fully on the right and title or otherwise
of the Governor of Keddah to the Krean country.
2. The Krean river is the largest betwixt the
Murcia river in Keddah and the Perak River. It is
deep and broad and its course, which inclines a few
degrees to the southward of east, forms a very natural
and distinct line of demarcation betwixt the countries
of Perak and Keddah, from the sea on the West to the
mountains on the East, which last run parallel to the
coast at a distance of from at least 35 to 40 miles.
The ceded district of Province Wellesley occupies
about 10 miles of the north bank of the river up-
wards from the sea and the boundary pillar, and the
direct distance is 6 miles.
3. That this was the extreme boundary betwixt
Perak and Keddah when the latter had become fully
colonized is in some degree manifested by the total
absence of any vestiges of population on the Keddah
and Province Wellesley side of the river to a distance
often miles at least from its bank, while the country
still further north and those tracts bor-
dering on the Muda river, where the first Keddah
Chiefs settled, displaj 7 - in the ruins of forts and tem-
ples and other buildings traces of a dense population.
These traces disappear before reaching the Pry river
just opposite to Penang, and as no mention is made
in the History of Keddah which I received from the
Fort William the 23d March 1844,


Ex Rajah (or present Governor of part of Keddah)
himself of either the Pry or the Krean river, I am
inclined to think that the limit of Keddah to the
south did not in former times, i. e., from three to four
hundred years ago, extend beyond the Pry river.
4. When Penang was ceded to the British in
1786 it was natural that the authorities there should
have enquired about its limits. 1 cannot at this
moment find the Government Record to which I would
refer, as I have not the date, but Lieutenant Colonel,
then Captain H. Burney, who was Envoy from the
Right Honorable the Governor General of India in
1825/6 to the Court of Siam, refers to it in his public
report of his proceedings when sent on a political
visit to the Rajah of Ligor in lower Siam, subsequent-
to his mission to the capital of Siam. He therein
observes that he told the Rajah of Ligor that Captain
Light, the first Superintendent of Penang, had report-
ed that the river Krean in N. Lat. 5: 10 was then
and always had been the boundary betwixt Keddah
and Perak, and that this boundary was laid down in a
chart of the Malayan coast which Mr.' Lindsay had
constructed shortly after the cession of Penang. It
will be presently shown why this question was then
mooted at all. Colonel Burney must have been fully
convinced of the validity of these arguments, which
he used in his political capacity, for in a chart of
the Malayan coast which he himself compiled dated
10th April 1825, and which was presented by him
to the Right Honble, the Governor General, the Krean
river is laid down as the mutual boundary of Keddah
and Perak.
In 1813 the rajah of Keddah, or rather Gover-
nor of that countiy under the Siamese Govern-
ment, was ordered by the latter to invade and subdue
Perak, because the Rajah of that State asserted the
independence which had been transmitted to him by
his predecessors. This Rajah (the present Ex Rajah,


but as above stated, now the Governor of a portion
only of Keddah) nothing loth as it should seem, obey-
ed the mandate, and Perak sustained for a while all
the miseries consequent on such an unprovoked and
unprincipled aggression. I am unable positively to
state whether in retiring from Perak this Keddah
Chief retained the usurped possession of any tract of
land bordering on the south bank of Krean River, but
if he did so, it must have been but for a very brief
period, since such an occupancy is unknown to the
people in that quarter.
In the latter part of 1825 when I took charge of
Province Wellesley, the Rajah of Perak was in full
possession of the south bank of the Krean river which
was under his Panghula or officer, stationed on the
Korow River, this last lying about 10 or 15 miles to
the southward of Krean River.
5. The present Ex Rajah or Ex Governor of Ked-
dah was expelled from that province of Siam by the
then Rajah or Governor of Ligor in 1821. The south
bank of the Krean was then under the Perak Rajah. In
the Ex Rajah’s letter to you, dated the 27th December/
he observes that after his expulsion from Keddah he
had sent his son, he should have said his nephew,
Zemalaledin to govern Krean. This was however in
1824, several years after he lost Keddah. This asser-
tion of power exercised by him within what he calls part
of the Keddah territory, after he had been driven from
Keddah, would seem strange and incredible. Yet it
is true in one sense, and false in another, and affords
a strong argument that the Ligorian did not, from
1821, the period of his invasion of Keddah then in
rebellion to Siamese supremacy, up to 1824, exercise
any authority or control over the Krean river and
district. If he had, then this freebooter, Zemalaledin,
would never have been permitted to enter the river.
The Ex Rajah’s assertion is true in one sense and false
in another, because the Krean river is or should be at


least agreeably to the Law of Nations a thoroughfare
to the lawful possessors of both of its banks, because
the Keddah territory lying east cf the British ter-
ritory, is bounded by the north bank of the Krean
river, and as under such circumstances the Chief in
question might have had authority on the Krean with-
out at all interfering with the rights of Perak to the
south bank, and the navigation of the river by its
inhabitants.
(5. But the following are the facts of the case.
In the latter part of 1825, when I took charge of
Province Wellesley as before noticed, I found Zemala-
dien, otherwise called Tuanku Din and Koodin, a
man partly of Arab descent and partly of Malayan,
located on the north bank of the Krean river at
Bukut Tungal, just within ' the British territory.
There was not at the period a single Siamese post
on either bank of the Krean river—both banks being
in a very jungly state and thinly peopled. This
Chief, taking advantage of the unsettled state of Pro-
vince Wellesley about 1821, paid a pretended friend-
ly visit to Tuanku Noo, a Malay man the owner of
the village of Bukit Toongal and of some land adjoin-
ing, and after treacherously murdering him, took
possession of his wife and family and property. The
position was very favorable for this Chief’s piratical
propensities, as it enabled him unsuspectedly for a
while, to abet the numerous and atrocious piracies
committed on British subjects of Penang. With the
sanction of the local Government I proceeded with a
detachment of the Corps I then commanded and
expelled this man and his armed followers from their
dosition. His presence there as head of the pirates
doubtless contributed to prevent the Perak Eajah’s
people from settling on the Krean south bank to the
extent which they afterwards did, and even although
that Chief had not established any post on that bank
I may remark that this Tuanku Din headed the in


vasiou by the Malays of Keddah in 1829, where ho
was killed. In May 1826 the Ligorian was actively
engaged in undermining the power of the Perak Rajah
and had actually assumed the privilege of conferring
offices in Perak. A Perak merchant who had escaped
from Perak deposed at the Perak Police Office (18th
May 1826) “that on his departure he had heard thafc-
“ the Ligorian had delegated to one of his hirelings
“ Nakhodah Mahomed of Perak the G overnment of
“ the sea coast of Perak, from the Krean River to
“ Burnam River” which last divides Perak from
Salengore, which serves at least to show that Krean
was considered in Perak as the northern boundary
of Perak.
7. I had the honor in 1826 of being deputed
by the Honorable the Governor of the Straits, Mr.
Fullerton, as his Political Agent to Perak in order
to free that State from Siamese interference. The
object was effected, thereby securing that which was
contemplated in the 14th article of the Treaty ot Bang-
kok, the independence of Perak. My instructions
directed me to give the King of Perak clearly to
xmderstaud that he may rely on the assistance of the
British in expelling any Siamese who may proceed to
Perak, and in resisting any interference with his
Government. The Rajah of Ligor, when he corrupted
a number of Perak Chiefs, had given them secret
commissions under his seal. These were not returned
to him when his force evacuated Perak and one ot
these was afterwards discovered by me at Korovv river
as will be noticed. The Perak Rajah’s
authority over his subjects had been .so shaken that
even after he had been emancipated from direct Sia-
mese control, his frontier districts were in a distracted
state. One of these was the river and district of
Korcw, the Panghula of which upheld, as well as he
could, the authority of the Rajah up to and on the
Krean river. This Perak Chief had been a year or


two before my mission to Perak driven up from the
lower part of the Korow river by a piratical Chief
named Tuanku Long Puteh, but lie in turn was after-
wards expelled by an equally noted pirate Nakhodah
Oodin. Loth these men were Malays. The Korow
River lies about 12 or 15 miles south of the Kreau
and the pirates had formed a chain of strong posts
from its mouth to a distance of 15 miles up it, over-
aweing the people of the interior and depredating on
and killing British petty traders and others at sea.
No one ever suspected that the Rajah of Ligor, who in
the Bth article of his treaty with Captain
31st July 1825, had engaged to adopt effectual mea-
sures for the suppression of piracy, was leagued with
such men. Yet he actually and secretly was so be-
yond liis jurisdiction under the mask, as Mr. Fullerton
observed in his Minute, of constant and unceasing
protestations of amity towards the British.
8. The Penang Government finding the evil of
piracy to have reached an intolerable height were
pleased to order me to proceed in command of a mili-
tary and sea force to destroy the pirates and their
establishments at Korow. After this had been effect-
ed I discovered amongst the papers of the Chief there,
Nakhodah Oodin, which fell into hands, a number
of letters addressed to him by the Rajah of Ligor, and
amongst these there was one directing him to conti-
nue in the Government of Korow. This order was
dated a year or two back from that period and about
the time when the Rajah of Ligor had begun to cor-
rupt the Perak Chiefs with the view of usurping the
Government of that country. So His Highness might
have fairly if he had chosen denied any participation
in the guilt of Nakhodah Oodin, subsequently to his
own agreement with Captain Burney or to the
Treaty of Bangkok. By so doing he might have
evaded the charge of having infringed the 3rd and Bth
articles of his treaty with Captain Burney, which pro


videcl for the independence of Perak and suppression
of piracy although he could not have extricated him-
self from the odium and guilt of having abetted pira-
cies on British subjects previous to the treaty. Nak-
hodah Oodin could not be tried at Penang for piracy
as there was then no Admiralty jurisdiction. The
Penang Government therefore sent him “to the Power
to which he belonged ” —the Rajah of Ligor, and he has
not since returned.
9. The Rajah of Ligor was extremely mortified
and disconcerted when the account reached him of
()odin having been detected, for he could not deny his
own Seal, and as Captain Burney arrived shortly after-
wards from Calcutta with the ratified copies of the
treaty of Bangkok, the Rajah to save himself took the
bold measure of claiming Korow as a part of Keddah.
Captain Burney opposed to him the arguments before
stated, without much effect at the time, but soon after-
wards the Rajah received from the Honorable the
Governor of the Straits the cop}' of a letter which he
the Rajah had addressed in 1822 to the then Governor,
the Honorable Mr. Phillips, in which His Highness
had denounced Oodin as a notorious pirate and had
requested that he should be seized. After this
untoward exposure no more was or has since been
heard of the Rajah’s claim on Korow including Krean
district. If ho had still desired to enforce this
unjust claim he had every opportunity so to do when
the Honorable Mr. Ibbetson, the Governor of the
Straits visited him in 1831 to adjust the British and
Siamese boundary line and as 1 also accompanied Mr.
Ibbetson he might have questioned mo on the subject,
but he never even hinted at it.
10. There was no attempt made by the Siamese
Government in 1826, when the Treaty of Bangkok was
concluded, to bring any part of the territory south of
the Krean River within the limits of Kedah. The


Bajah of Perak was then the ruler of Perak, at least
dejura, however his actual authority might have been
placed in abeyance by Siamese interference, and
Krean river was considered by the British Authorities
in the Straits and by the Native population of Perak
and Keddak generally as an undoubted portion of the
Perak State. The Treaty of Bangkok therefore by its
14th article fully secured to the Perak Kajah the inte-
grity of his territory as it stood at the date of that
Treaty.
11. In 1531 I accompanied the Siamese officers
{who were sent by the Bajah of Ligor) to fix a spot on
the north bank of the Krean river on which was to be
and subsequently was erected the boundary pillar
betwixt Province Wellesley and the Siamese depen-
dency of Keddah. Neither these officers nor others
who guarded the post afterwards made the slightest
claim to occupy territory on the opposite bank. Thej r
only asked to be allowed a free egress to the sea,
which request would have been superfluous for to
this privilege they would have had an indisput-
able right, had possessed any such territory.
The Bajah of Ligor even at the time when I accom-
panied the Honorable the Governor Mr. Ibbetson to
visit him in his camp in Keddah after he had recover-
ed it from the Malays gave me the control of his
officers at this point on the Krean Biver, saying that
he would dismiss them should I ever be obliged to
report to him their incapacity or bad conduct. From
that period up to the time of ray leaving Province
Wellesley in November 1840, or rather up to that when
the Ex Bajah of Keddah made his encroachment on
Krean, the Siamese have as quietly as might be
occupied their post on the north bank of the Krean
River and close to the brick boundary pillar alluded to,
and without in any manner interfering with the Perak
people settled on the south bank of the river from the
sea to the mountains of the interior and this too with


out any claim having ever been set up by the Siamese
on this bank or having attempted to settle on it.
12. As the matter now rests it appears to me
that the present Governor of part of Keddah, the Fx
Rajah, would hardly have ventured on the dangerous
political movement he has made without some coun-
tenance from the Siamese authorities, and consequent-
ly that the latter, having as is well known no regard
for him, but the contrary, have either connived at his
conduct in order to bring him into discredit with the
British Government and to show how ungraciously he
repaid the exertions which were made by it to restore
him to some authority in Keddah, or else that the
Court of Bangkok, or at least the Rajah of Ligor, still
clings in secret to the ambitious views which that
Court formerly entertained in the direction of Perak
and Salangore,
I have &ca.
(Signed) James Low
Major.
Singapore
4th February 1844.


To the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
&ca. &ca.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated 7th ultimo,* with enclosures, relative to
the forcible aggression of the Governor of Queda
upon a certain tract of country called Krean, claimed
by the Rajah of Perak.
2. In reply I am directed to inform you that
under all the circumstances detailed in the corres-
pondence and papers that accompanied your dispatch,
the Governor General in Council authorizes your with-
holding the payment of the annual stipend to the
Rajah of Quedah till that chieftain shall have with-
drawn within the limits of the former boundary of his
territory, and have abstained from aggression on
Krean for the period of one year.
3. His Lordship in Council requests that you
will intimate to the Rajah of Perak the course you
have been directed by the Government of India to
pursue on this occasion, and you will urge him not to
adopt any measures for the forcible reoccupation of
the tract in dispute that may disturb the peace and
affect the interests of the common frontier.
4. The Governor General in Council is not dis-
posed, merely on the assertion of the Chief of Queda
as to the part taken by the King of Siam in this
matter, to make a formal remonstrance to that Sover-
eign of* the subject as recommended in paragraph 5 of
your letter.
5. His Lordship in Council would hope that
the proceedings now authorized will effect an early


adjustment of the affair. Their result, as well as the
reply that may he made by the Rajah of Ligor to your
letter alluded to in your dispatch, you will report for
the information of the Governor General in Council.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) F. Currie
Secretary to the Government
of India.
Fort William
20th March 1844.


Fort William 18th May 1844.
To the Right Honorable Edward, Lord Ellenborough
Governor General of India &ca., &ca.
The Memorial of Robert Hunter of Bangkok
in the Kingdom of Siam, British Merchant
and Agent.
Sheweth,
That your Memorialist in the mouth of August
1824 commenced business as a general merchant re-
sident at Bangkok and established a house of business
there which has since hitherto been and now is carried
on under the firm of Messrs. Hunter and Hayes.
That at the time of his first establishment there,
your Memorialist being the only British born mer-
chant resident in Bankok, had to contend with all the
difficulties attendant upon an experimental trade with
a semi-barbarous people, of whom Europeans knew as
little as they did of Europeans, and with whom at that
time European Governments had no fixed commercial
relations.
That in the year 1826 Captain H. Burney, being
sent to Bankok in a diplomatic character by the
Supreme Government of India, Your Memorialist had
the satisfaction of rendering some service to the Mis-
sion, which resulted in the existing Political and Com-
mercial Treaties with Siam of the twentieth of June
1826. He was also fortunate enough to be useful
to the Indian Government on the two subsequent
occasions of Dr. Richardson’s overland journey
from Moulmain to Bankok in 1839, and of the late
determination of His Siamese Majesty to restore the
expelled Rajah of Quedah to his territory, for which
several services your Memorialist received the official


thanks of the successive Governors General at these
periods.
That after the execution of the Treaties of June
1826, the trade of your Memorialist and of British
subjects in general having been placed on a steady
footing increased rapidly so that in 1842 the number
of square rigged vessels that resorted to the river ot
Siam was no less than fifty-five (55) chiefly under
British colours, nine being regular traders to the port
of Bankok and with the exception of three or four
direct from Great Britain, most of them coming from
Bmobay, Singapore or China.
That on the 26th of February of this current year
when your Memorialist left Bankok, there were five
permanent commercial establishments there, carried
on by British subjects, of which that of Hunter and
Hayes, to which your Memorialist belongs, is the only-
one in which British born subjects are interested,
the other houses consisting of one native merchant
from the Madras Coast and three branch establish-
ments of native houses at Bombay.
That this increase of trade was principally fostered
by the non-interference of the Siamese authorities, who
continued for some time content with the heavy
measurement duty of 1700 ticals per Siamese fathom,
chargeable by the terms of the treaty on vessels im-
porting cargo and 1500 ticals per fathom on vessels
entering without cargo ( Article Ist of Commercial
Treaty).
But avarice which is the characteristic of most
semi-barbarous Governments, and of that of Siam
amongst the rest, seems to have been awakened by the
opportunities afforded by the great accession to trade
and the arrival in 1842 of the Ship Good Success,
Captain Evans, with dollars on board for the purchase
of sugar, put the King of Siam upon the expedient


<of monopolizing this article for his own profit In
•direct contravention of the terms of the Treaty
<( Art. 1). Accordingly he issued an order that
sugar should be sold exclusively by one of his
own officers and at his Royal Stores. At the time
your Memorialist’s firm of Hunter and Hayes had con-
tracted with various dealers for about 2 or 3000 peculs
at 7to ticals, part of which was lying off their
wharf and about to be weighed and landed into store.
The effect of the order was that the whole of the sugar
was carried off to the King’s stores, and their firm in-
formed that if it wanted sugar for the “ Good Success ”
it must buj r at the King’s stores at 10 ticals per pecul.
To prevent a total loss of the voyage it was necessary
to submit, and as a great favour sugar was supplied
them from the King’s store at 9| ticals per pecul.
The same monopoly of sugar was enforced in the
following season, 1843, but the crop being large that
year your Memorialist’s firm was enabled to obtain a
supply from His Majesty at the rate of 8| ticals per
pecul, which it might have had direct from the
dealers certainly as low as 7f ticals.
That in the following season, 1844, his Siamese
Majesty professed not to monopolize to himself the
trade in sugar, but he did what was the same thing by
granting the exclusive right of dealing in that article
to the two head China traders, who paid him for the pri-
vilege 2 ticals per pecul and an extra 4 tical under the
name of duty, and your Memorialist’s firm, as well as
ether British traders were subjected to the alternative
of sending their ships away empty, or paying 9 ticals
per pecul for what would otherwise have been readily
sold at 7-7£ ticals per pecul at the utmost. Taking
the average annual export to be one hundred and ten
thousand peculs of sugar of first quality, which is a fair
estimate, the loss of the exporters on this article alone,
arising from the monopoly would be 273,000 ticals or


Company’s Rupees 343,750, most of which falls on the
trade of British subjects.
That by the Ist article of the Commercial Treaty
of June 1826 it is expressly provided that “with
exception of warlike stores, paddj^ - and rice, merchants
subjects of the English and merchants at Bangkok
may buy and sell without the intervention of any
other person and with freedom and facility and that
merchants coming to trade shall pay at once the whole
of the duties and Charges consolidated according to
the breadth of the vessel.
If the vessel bring an import cargo she shall be
charged 1700 ticals for each Siamese fathom in breadth
If the vessel bring no import cargo she shall be
charged 1500 ticals per each Siamese fathom in breadth.
No import export or other duty shall be levied
upon the buyers* sellers from or to English subjects.”
Thus the monopoly in question whether directly
by the King and his officers or indirectly by exclusive
grant to Chinese or others was a manifest infringement
of the Treaty by which British subjects trading in
Siam during the last three years have sustained unjust
loss to the amount of more than ten laks of Rupees
or 100,000 Pounds Sterling.
That if so flagrant a breach of treaty shall be
passed over without notice the Siamese Monarch, whose
passion is avarice that has increased with his advance
of years, will grasp one after the other, like Mahmood
Ally in Egypt, every exportable product of his country
and thus extinguish a commerce which it cost the
Indian Government great sacrifices to open, and
which was under its protection rapidly growing
into importance, to say nothing of the loss of
national character which must inevitably result from
submitting to such infractions. Some Native British


subjects have already been driven out of the trade by
these exactions and other vexations too numerous to
be detailed and others are already preparing to follow
their example.
That your Memorialist himself having entered
into a contract with the King of Siam to procure for
him a sea-going steamer and other supplies, and hav-
ing accordingly procured and brought out to Bangkok
at great expense and risk the Steamer Express for that
purpose, was in consequence of the King’s breach of
engagement and of the personal ill will thereupon
conceived against him by His Siamese Majesty com-
pelled precipitately to withdraw with the vessel from
the river of Assam (?), leaving behind merchandize and
outstandings to the value of three laks of rupees under
the charge of an European assistant, from whose com-
munications since received your Memorialist seriously
apprehends that it will not only be impossible for him
to withdraw his property from the country, notwith-
standing the express provision of the Political Treaty
in that behalf ( Art. 7), but that his English assistant
will be subjected to personal restraint or ill treatment
unless the protection of the British authorities be
afforded or at hand.
That the above infractions of Treaties that have
been most rigidly observed on the part of Great Britain
would, as your Memorialist believes, have been easily
prevented either by the presence at Bangkok of a Con-
sul or other British officers charged to watch over the
performance of the Treaties or by the casual ap-
pearance of a British Frigate or ship of war on the
Coast of Siam to shew that Great Britain was awake
to the interests of her subiects and commerce in that
quarter. Such is the timidity of the Siamese Mo-
narch and so sensitive his alarm for the vast hoards
that he has amassed by monopoly and other modes
of extortion that the least appearance of a resolution


to enforce the terms of the treaties would-be productive
of immediate apology and submission.
That should it be thought expedient to resort to
either of the modes of redress above alluded to your
Memorialist would further suggest that it might be
expedient on the first opportunity of explanation or
discussion with the Siamese Government to propose a
modification of the form or rate of consolidated charge
stipulated by the Treaty; a general duty of 1,700
ticals per Siamese fathom on vessels importing cargo
and of 1500 ticals per fathom on their coming in bal-
last is a clumsy and most unequal impost, prohibiting
all together on bulky articles and upon vessels com-
ing empty in quest of freight. A mode of assess-
ment, bearing more fairly on the import and far more
productive to the Siamese revenue if recommended to
their adoption by the British authorities would be most
readily acceded to by those of Siam, and such is the
productive power of the country that it is difficult to
assign a limit to the commerce that might be thus en-
gendered or the benefit that might accrue to the
neighbouring British Settlements, especially that of
Singapore. While the successes of Great Britain in
China are fresh in their memory it is not to be sup-
posed that the nations in her vicinity will venture to
disregard any claim for redress or any proposal for
improving future intercourse that may come from the
British Government or its representative in the Indian
Seas.
To conclude, Your Memorialist was in February
last compelled by acts of bad faith and caprice
of the Siamese Government to abandon his com-
mercial establishment and property at Bangkok
with the English assistant in charge of it to the
mercy of an ignorant and haughty despot whose
jealousy of his British allies, awakened no doubt
by the late operations in China, will as your


Memorialist has abundant reason to fear, urge him to
measures of personal violence and spoliation. Your
Memorialist has come direct to Calcutta in the
Steamer Express to claim of the Supreme Government
not only that protection to person and property to
which British traders are entitled by the positive
terms of the Treaties made with your Lordship’s
predecessor in June 1826 but also redress for a mani-
fest breach of those Treaties which stipulated for a
direct commerce between British subjects and the
subjects of Siam without intervention of the State ex-
its agents, in consideration of a consolidated measure-
ment duty on their vessels entering the port of Siam.
Your Memorialist feels assured by the energy of your
Lordship’s administration that his appeal will not be
made in vain and that your Lordship will promptly
find means to enforce the observance of the Treaties
either by interference of the Supreme Government
or by setting in motion the naval force of Great
Britain stationed in the China Seas for the protection
of British rights and interests.
And your Memorialist ever prays &ca. &ca.
(Signed) Robert Hunter.
Calcutta
The 24 April 1844.


MEMORANDUM by
MR. UNDER SECRETARY EDWARDS.
MEMORANDUM.
Mr. Hunter, a British Merchant and Agent enga-
ged in trade in Bankok in the Kingdom of Siam, has
addressed the Government of India complaining of
certain infractions of existing Treaties on the part of
the King of Siam, by which he and other British
traders resorting to the Port of Bankok, have been
put to serious loss and inconvenience.
( Here follow a summary of Hunter’s letter (No.
213) and extracts from existing Treaties).
# , * * » * *
From the Treaties in force it does not by any
means appear that any interference was intended with
the King or that he should be prevented from monopo-
lizing any product of his dominions or granting such
monopoty to any persons should he be so disposed. If
the King determines to monopolise sugar then such
monopoly becomes one of the laws and established rules
of the Kingdom of Siam to which our traders, by the
articles quoted, are imperatively bound to conform.
The tical levied from the sugar dealers for their
monopoly by the King which goes under the name of
duty as stated b} 7 Mr. Hunter can be considered no
infraction of the Treaty, for it is not levied from them
because they sell to the English but it is the sum paid
by them for their monopoly to whomsoever they may
choose to sell it.
The spirit of the several Treaties seems to be that
Fort William 18th May 1844.


the laws and customs of Siam should be rigidly con-
formed to. No specification of these laws or customs
is made, and if the monopoly of sugar be legalized by
the King then our traders would seem bound to con-
form to it, and it would not appear that we would be
justified in forcing the King to sell that product
without any restriction.
Mr. Hunter’s second complaint is that he has
been forced by the King to leave Siam abandoning
behind him there property to the amount of 3 lacs of
rupees.
This property has been left under the charge of
a.n European assistant. He fears that the property
will be plundered by the King and his assistant placed
under restraint.
If what Mr. Hunter anticipates actually takes
place then it would seem that there would arise an in-
fringement of the 7th Article of the Treaty which
specifies that* any English merchant or subject
who has nothing to detain him requests permission to
leave the country and to embark with his property on
board of any vessel he shall be allowed to do so with
facility.
But it must be remembered that Mr. Hunter’s
differences with the King of Siam appears to have
originated not so much on account of the sugar mono-
poly, which had been going on for two 3 r ears previous-
ly without complaint on the part of Mr. Hunter, but
on account of the Steamer Express. This vessel Mr.
Hunter states His Majesty commissioned him to pro-
cure for him from England. Until we are made aware
of the whole circumstances of that transaction, whe-
ther the King furnished the funds for the purchase of
the vessel, it is not possible to say whether the King
may not have some just claim against Mr. Hunter.
If His Majesty did furnish the purchase money, as the
vessel has not been transferred to him he may have


some just claim against Mr. Hunter’s property and s#
object to its removal from Bangkok.
(Signed) W. Edwards
Under Secretary to Govt. of India.


To the Governor of Eastern Settlements..
Sir,
I am directed by the Right Honorable th&
• o
Governor General in Council to transmit to you the
enclosed copy of a Memorial from Mr. Robert Hunter
of Bankok, dated the 24th ultimo, and to request that
you will ascertain as you may have opportunity what
real cause of complaint Mr. Hunter has and report the
result of your enquiry for the information of His
Lordship in Council.
1 have &ca.
( Signed ) F. Currie
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Fort William, Foreign Department,
The 18th May 1844.
Fort William 18th May 1844.


Fort William the 28th March 1845.
To F. Currie Esquire
Secretary to the Government of India
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
Mr, Under Secretary Edward’s Letter No, 1016 ot
18th May last,* inclosing Cop} r of a Memorial from
Mr. Robert Hunter of Bankok, and requiring me to
ascertain as far as practicable and report what real
cause of grievances Mr. Hunter has.
2nd. Mr. Hunter’s main complaints are two :
Ist Regarding the Royal monopoly of sugar;
2nd Regarding the sale of a steam vessel, but
the first above alone is very distinctly stated.
3rd. Of the monopoly of sugar there is 1 believe
no doubt. The question is whether it is a grievance
Mr. Hunter has a right to seek redress for through his
(Government.
4th. I am ot opinion it is not. Monopolies are
a main source of revenue in these countries, though
rulers seeking popularity give them up
for a time as was the case at his accession with the King
of Siam who concluded the treaty of 1826. But
these abjurations of trade and of monopolies are always
short lived from necessities of their political system
which need not now be mentioned. Mr, Hunter
seems, however, to think that in the treaty of 1826
monopolies were abandoned and their re-establishment
as respects British subjects provided against. He
quotes from the first article that English merchants
in Siam may, with exceptions of certain articles,
buy, and sell without the intervention of any other


person, but Mr. Hunter does not quote the beginning
of the articles and the 6th article requiring obedience
to the established laws of the country. Now, it will
be scarcely contended that the laws, including those re-
lative to trade and monopolies are never to be changed,
or if changed that British subjects are exempted
from obedience. But again the Commercial Treaty is
mere appendix to the Political Treaty containing rules
for the trade at Bankok and the foundation of it will
be found in Articles 6 to 9 inclusive of the Political
Treaty. In article 6it is expressly stipulated that the
subjects of either nation shall trade in the territories
of the other with out the intervention of other parties
in such countries. Now it will scarcely be contended
that as regards Siamese subjects the Salt and Opium
Monopolies are abrogated, and that the British Indian
Legislature as relates to Siamese subjects trading to
India be debarred from creating any other monopolies
it may think fit, but if we have not so tied up our
hand neither have we theirs.
5. If it be said that in this case the Commercial
Treaty is useless, I admit it, and I consider all such
treaties I know of with the natives between India and
China as worse than useless, and without protecting
trade tend to bring in interference, collision and war.
6th. As respects the steamer it is to be remem-
bered the King and all his Ministers and nobles are
traders, so is Mr. Hunter, who had for years great
influence with the Court. This he has now lost and
instead of being in some sort partners, he, and the
Ministers or King have become rivals in trade. It is
impossible to decide between them unless by judicial
investigation on the spot which is impossible.
7th. Mr. Hunter next states his fears that his
assistant will not be allowed to quit the country with
his property. This case not having occurred need not
be entered on further than to point out the difficulties


of enforcing the latter part of article 7 of the Treaty
of Friendship. It would be necessary to prove there
was nothing to detain the party desiring to leave the
country, and if any charges of crime, or doubt of right
to property were raised the tribunals of the country,
according to Article 6th of the Treaty of Friendship
and Article 6th of Agreement regarding trade at
Bangkok ( generally called the Commercial Treaty )
would have to decide the case, in other words to
detain or set free as they chose.
I have &ea.
( Signed ) G. Broadfoot
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Province
Moulmein
Commissioner’s Office.
The 2nd July 1844.


Fort William
Foreign Department
The 22d July 1844,
To the Honble. the Court of Directors
of the East India Company.
Honble. Sirs,
******
Para. 122. This correspondence relates to the
obstructions which are alleged to exist in the commer-
cial intercourse of British subjects with Siam.
122 A. On this subject we remarked that there
did not appear to be a violation of any article of the
existing treaty on the part of the King of Siam, nor
did we consider the interference of the British Gov-
ernment to be immediately required.
123, The Rajah of Kedah since his restoration
to power, had taken forcible possession of a certain
tract of country called Krean claimed by the Rajah qt
Perak.
124. Under all the circumstances of this case
we authorized the Government of Penang to withhold
the payment of the annual stipend to the Rajah of
Qaeda till that chieftain should have withdrawn with-
in the limits of the former boundary of his territory
and have abstained from aggression on Krean for the
period of one year. It was meanwhile directed that
the course which our Government had determined to
pursue on this occasion should be made known to the
Rajah of Perak, and that he should be urged not to
adopt any measures for the re-occupation ot the tract
in dispute, such as might disturb the peace and affect
the interests of the common frontier.
******
We have the honor &c.
(Signed) N. N. Bird
&c., &c.
Fort William
The 22d July 1844.


Fort William the 18th January 1845.
To F. Currie Esquire
Secretary to the Government of India,
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to your letter under date the 20th
March,* No. 383, conveying the authority of the
Governor General for withholding the payment of the
annual stipend to the Governor of Quedah till that
Chieftain shall have withdrawn within the limits of
his former boundary and abstained from aggression on
Krean for one year, and directing me to communicate
the result, as well as the reply made by the Rajah of
fug ore to ray letter requesting his interference.
I have now the honor to transmit the accompany-
ing copy of a correspondence which I held with the
Governor of Quedah whilst at Penang by which it will
be observed that the old man obstinately adheres to
the determination of holding possession of the Krean
Country. lam however happy to add that the Rajah
of Perak remains perfectly quiescent on the under-
standing that passive measures are in progress to cause
his restoration to that portion of his territories usurped
by the Governor of Quedah.
I have not received any reply to my letter to the
Rajah of Ligore which appears by the annexed copy* of
a communication from the Resident Councillor at
Penang to have reached its destination. I shall how-
ever assume that the letter has miscarried and trans-
mit a duplicate via Bangkok.
I hope and believe that when the Governor of
Quedah shall feel the want of the annual stipend, and
the crops from the Krean country shall have been
gathered in, that he will be more disposed to meet the


wishes of the Governor General of India.
I shall be careful to communicate any hostile
movements which may be made by either of the above
Chieftains of which at present I do not entertain any
apprehensions.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore,
11th November 1844.


From the Honble. Colonel Butterworth, Com-
panion of the Most Honble, the Military Order of the
Bath, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore
and Malacca.
To the Rajah of Quedah.
In my letter to my friend under date the 9th
December last* I pointed out the injustice of his
usurpation of the Krean Country which has remained
unquestioned in the hands of the Perak Rajah during
the whole period that Tuwankee Annum continued as
the representative of the Siamese authority in Quedah,
I also intimated the course I felt it incumbent
upon me to pursue in the event of my friend persisting
unlawfully to hold the Krean Country in opposition to
my expressed wish that he should withdraw to the
north bank of the Krean river.
On receipt of my friend’s letter bearing date the
19th January* I was compelled to lay the whole sub-
ject before the Supreme Government of India, by
whom I am now commanded to acquaint my friend
that the annual stipend hitherto paid him will be with-
held till he shall have withdrawn from the Krean
Country for one whole year.
I would now once again urge on my friend the
necessity for his immediately restoring the Krean
Country to the Rajah of Perak, as I have issued the
instructions of the Supreme Government that the
annual stipend hitherto paid my friend shall he with-
held till he has returned to and remained peaceably
for one whole year within the boundaries of the
Quedah District as they were acknowledged when my
friend resumed the Government of his Country.
Dated Prince of Wales Island 13th May 1844.
Fort William the 18th January 1845.


Translation of a letter from Sultan Ahmad
Tajoodeen Hallira Shah, Rajah of Kedah, to Colonel
the Honble. W. Butterworth, C, 8., Go vernor of
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
The letter which my friend forwarded to me by
ray man Ismail reached me on the 16th Jumadilawal
(2nd June 1844). Its contents I fully understand.
It is therein stated that on account of Krean
affairs my money on the Pulo Penang account is about
to be stopped. In my opinion this is highly improper
because the whole of Krean is actually under my
dominion as specified in my letter to ray friend. It is
therefore contrary to my reason that I should give up
Krean to the Perak people.
With regard to my money on the Penang account
according to the Treaty made between the English
Company and my late father, when I sent my son
Abdullah to Bengal, whilst I was at Malacca, I then
received a letter from Lord Bentinck confirming the
aforesaid Treaty which was entered into between the
English Compay and my late father, and which is to
continue unto my succeeding generations, and so long
as the British flag exists in the Island of Penang the
Treaty shall never end. The letter from Lord Ben-
tinck I have shewn to Mr. Bonham, Mr. Garling and
Mr. Lewis, who are all aware of the same, I therefore
place great confidence upon the said letter, because
from time immemorial whatever engagement that may
have been made by the English Company it is known
to remain firm and unchanged.
Upon the well known justness of the Governor of
Fort William the 18th January 1845.


Bengal who rules under the great King of England
my increasing confidence is placed and I consequently
rely upon my friend’s assistance.
Dated 17th Jummadilawal 1260 or 3rd June
1844.
(A True translation. Signed Abdullah.)


Fort William the 1st February 1845.
To F. Currie Esquire
Secretary to the Government of India.
Sir,
In continuation of my letters under date the 7th
February* and 11th* ultimo, relative to the usurpa-
tion of the Krean country by the Governor of Quedah,
and in obedience to the orders of the Governor General
of India as conveyed in the sth paragraph of your
letter dated 20th March*, I have now the honor to
transmit the reply of the Rajah of Ligore to my re-
ference on the above subject, which has just reached
me.
It will be observed that the Rajah of Ligor dis-
tinctly states the boundary of the Quedah country
extends only to the Krean river, and the Governor of
Quedah has no authority beyond the south bank of
that river ; moreover, that Tunkoo Annoora, who was
the representative of the Siamese Government in
Quedah prior to the restoration of the present Gov-
ernor, had never interfered with the Krean country.
I have addressed a further communication to the
Rajah of Ligore calling upon him to issue an order to
the Governor of Quedah to withdraw from the Krean
country. At the same time I have sent a transcript
of the Rajah of Ligore’s letter to the Resident Council-
lor at Penang with with a request that he will inti-
mate its contents to the Governor of Quedah and urge
him to restore the usurped territory to the Rajah of
Perak.
I trust these measures will be approved of by the
Right Rouble, the Governor General, although 1 have


little hope of their being attended with immediate suc-
cess, or that the Governor of Quedah will listen to
reason till he shall feel the want of his annual stipend,
which will, I trust, ultimately force him to retire
within the limits of his own territory.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
21 at December 1844.


Translation.
(After Compliments.)
This comes from me Pya Nackhon Sithammarat
hoping it will safely reach my friend the Honble.
Colonel Butterworth, Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca, and have to acknow-
ledge the receipt of a letter from the Governor of
Penang which has come into my hands, wherein it is
stated that the Rajah of Perak had written a letter to
the Governor of Penang complaining that the Rajah
of Quedah has intruded upon his territory to the
South, which is very improper, as his boundary
extends only up to the Krian River and he has no
right to go beyond that. At the time Tunkoo Annoom
had charge of Quedah there has been no complaints
whatever, but he was well spoken of by all around him,
and he has never interfered with the country of Krian.
I am now greatly astonished at the misconduct of the
Rajah who governs Quedah that he should meddle
with the territory of Perak which is so near to that,
for by so doing it will evidently create a war between
them, and therefore I trust that the Governor of
Penang will interfere and recommend the Rajah of
Perak not to cause any disturbance, and afterwards
that the Governor of Penang will be pleased to let me
know by letter, when, I will also give the Rajah of
Perak and the Rajah of Quedah my advice, so as
to make the population retreat back from the south
of Krian River, which was formerly the boundary of
the Rajah of Perak given by, the Governor of Penang
and therefore the Rajahs of Quedah and Siam cannot
on any account meddle or interfere in it. And further
the Governor of Penang will be pleased to advise the
Rajah of Quedah that when the Perak people go


to Quedah to recommend them to return back quietly
and to avoid all disturbances, that they may on both
sides live peaceably. That upon Tunkoo Dai, the son
of the Rajah of Quedah, having made sufficient atone-
ment to me the Rajah of Nakhon for their misconduct,
they were reinstated at Quedah and desired to govern
that country as formerly and Tunkoo Abdullah is to
convey the tribute money to me Rajah Nakhon, and
further that when Tunkoo Abdullah brought the
tribute money and was returning the winds were
contrary from the north, which induced him to stop at
Nakhon, and there I questioned him about the con-
tents of the letter from the Governor of Penang. He
replied that Penang, Perak and Soongi Krian
formerly belonged to the Rajah of Quedah’s father and
should descend to his children, but as the English had
rented Penang the same was given up by the Rajah
of Quedah’s father, but when the Rajah of Quedah
settled himself at Penang, Jenolahdeen was desired by
the Company to look after Soongi Krian, and the
Rajah of Quedah to remove to Malacca. Mr. Ibbetson
was at this time the Governor of Penang, and Captain
Low, regardless of the order respecting Soongi
Krian, gave it up to the Perak people, which the old
inhabitants there can testify, and likewise be proved
by the books and chops in possession of Tunkoo Ab-
dullah. That as to the books I Rajah Nakhon know
nothing of but that they merely signify the agreement
between the English and the Rajah of Quedah regard-
ing the landis which entirely belonged to Siam and that
Tunkoo Annoom, as the Rajah of Quedah, must know
all about the boundaries of Krian. That from 1826
to this moment no tribute money was sent by the
Rajah of Perak. That at this time Captain Burney
came upon a mission to enter into a friendly treaty
with Siam wishing that Perak be placed under the
English at Penang, and Quedah under the Rajah of
Siam, and owing to the mutual friendship between us,
I request of my friend to protect the lives and property
of the population both at Quedah and Perak by


preventing any tumult breaking out between them
and therefore send two letters to the same purport,
one in Malay and the other in Siamese.
Friday the Bth month and on the 11th day, in the
year Ulur Basar (22d September 1841).


From,
The Double Colonel Butterworth, Companion of
the Most Honble. the Military Order of the Bath,
Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and
Malacca.
To the Rajah of Ligore,
1 have received my friend's letter of the 22d Sep-
tember 1844,* and am happy to find that he entirely
concurs with me in the matter between the Rajah of
Perak and Governor of Quedah, in which the latter
has behaved most unjustly, 1 have now only to re-
quest that my friend will order the Governor of Quedah
to withdraw within the boundaries which have always
been recognized by the Ibluish Government and ac-
knowledged on all occasions as the limits of Quedah
by Tunkoo Annoom, who governed that country with
credit to himself and advantage to the people.
My 1 riend’s instructions to the Governor of Quedah
to vacate the Krean country ana retire from the south
bank of that river will doubtless be attended to, and 1
shall therefore only send notice to him of the com-
munication now under acknowledgment, intimating
that he will shortly have an order from my friend to
return to the north bank of the K'rAnn river, which
order 1 beg that my friend will despatch to the Gover-
nor of Quedah with that promptitude for which my
friend has obtained such high reputation. In the
mean time 1 shall induce the Rajah of Perak not to
make any hostile movements to recover the Krean
country.
Dated Singapore this 20th day of December 1844.


Fort William the 7th March 1845.
To F. Currie, Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India,
Fort William.
Sir,
1 have the honor to transmit for the information
of the Right Honorable the Governor of Bengal the
annexed copy of a letter from the Resident Councillor
at Penang,* with its enclosures from Tuanku Dye,
announcing the death of his father, Yang-de-per-Tuan,
Sultan Ahmad, Tajudin Halim Shaw, the late Rajah
of Quedah and soliciting the loan of 6,000 dollars to
defray his expenses consequent on that event together
with my reply thereto.
Tuanku Dye is the only surviving son of the late
Rajah of Quedah and will I trust be nominated his
successor, but he has lost the fingers of one hand and
objections on that score may be raised to him. More-
over Tuanku Mahomed Saad, who was recently sent
back from Bengal, is the son of an elder brother, and
will not, I am disposed to believe, quietly surren-
der his hopes of obtaining the Government of the
count ry.
The Siamese Government whose authority over
Quedah we have recognized will 1 think be favourably
disposed towards Tuanku Dye, and they certainly would
never permit Tuanku Mahomed Saad, who attacked
and committed such slaughter on the Siamese in
Quedah during the year 1838, to assume the government
of that country. The measures adopted by the Straits
authorities on the occasion above referred to led to
the capture of Tuanku Mahomed Saad, when he was
tried for piracy and acquitted on the plea that as


a descendant of the Ex Governor of Qnedah, he was
at war with Siam, and in consequence with the
British Government, the ally of that power, and
therefore that the act with which he was charged was
that of an enemy, not a pirate. As an enemy he was
then shipped for Bengal, from whence he has but
recently returned to Penang. I shall be careful to
abstain from any interference and from taking any
farther steps touching the Karian country beyond
what is mentioned in my letter to the Resident Coun-
cillor at Penang, till a successor to the late Governor
of Quedah shall be nominated.
It will be observed that Mr. Garling adverts, in
the concluding paragraph of his communication,* to
the Kotah District. This is a triangular piece of
ground having Kotah at its apex in the very heart of
province Wellesley. Lhis Kotah is the resort of all
the evil disposed people, whether belonging to the
province or to Quedah. By taking a straight line
from north to south we should obtain Kotah and the
command of the Prye River which would then be
within our boundar} 7 , but which is now navigated by
the Quedah and Kotah people, without their being
liable to search, although the Kotah boats may be
laden with opium, to the detriment of our revenue and
to the peace of the District.
I am not aware that any opportunity is likely to
offer at the present more than at any other time of
securing the Kotah District, as I conclude our nego-
tiation for it must be carried on with the Siamese, but
possession would be most desirable for the reasons
above stated, as well as that the soil is particularly
adapted for a sugar plantation, having a navigable
river frontage, and I beg therefore very respectfully to
know if the Right Honourable the Governor General
would be disposed to authorize any steps to be taken
by me with a view to obtaining the transfer of the
Kotah District to the Honorable East India Company.


I do not suppose that the Governor of Quedah on
the part of the Siamese would he disposed to relinquish
this strip of land, although it be of no use to him,
without some equivalent and there is nothing that we
could offer that I am aware of but the sugar boon re-
ported on in my letter under date 27th* instant, except
money, for which I have no doubt it could be readily
obtained at between 5,000 and 10,000 dollars, but I
have made no movement in the matter, and shall make
none till I receive instructions to that effect from the
Right Honorable the Governor General.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
The 31st January 1845


Translation ot a Malay Letter bearing the Redi
Seal of Tuanku Dye, the second son of the late Ex
King of Quedah, to the address of the Honourable
Samuel Carling Esquire, Resident Councillor of Pulo-
Penang, dated the 27th day of Dool Hadjee, corres-
ponding with the sth day of January 1845.
After Compliments.
This letter is written to acquaint my friend that
in the Hadjerat 1260 years now on the 11th day of the
month Shawal, Saturday (9th day of November 1844)
my son named Mahomed died, then on the 25th day
Dalkhedah (sth December 1844) my brother Tuanku
Abdullah died r then on the 20th day Dalhadjee (30th
December 1844) my elder sister died, afterwards on
the 25th day Dalhadjee (3d January 1845) Friday
night my Royal Father Yang de-per-tuan Sultan
Ahmad Tajudin Hallim Shaw expired. He died of
fever and bowel complaint under which he laboured
for only seven days. Such at present are my dis-
tresses, which I mike known to my friend, and under
these distressing circumstances want of means* (for
according to the Malayan custom, the expense attend-
ing the burial ceremonies is very great) I entirely
depend upon my friend as the only source from whom
I can look for assistance that my friend will compas-
sionate my present, afflictions by soliciting the loan of
five or six thousand dollars, to enable me to defray
the requisite expenses. If not to such an extent, I
must still place entire confidence for such aid as my
friend may feel disposed to grant and which I shall
consider as a token of lasting friendship which shall
never be forgotten. I therefore fully anticipate that
my friend will accede to this request as early as prac-
ticable. I send ray younger brother Tuanku Ibrahim
the bearer of this letter to my friend.


Toowanku Dayi.
(With usual Compliments.)
1 have received my friend’s letter dated the 27th
day of Dool Hadji announcing the death of the late
lang-de-per-tuan Sultan Ahmad Tajudin Hallim
Shaw, and certain others of my friend’s relatives, and
requesting the loan of several thousand dollars to
enable ray friend to meet the usual expenses.
I would convey to ray friend the expression of my
condolement on an occasion so distressing.
In respect of the loan of money, my friend must
be aware that I am but Treasurer of the State Funds
and have not power to disburse a single dollar without
the express sanction of ray superiors, much less there-
fore could I presume to disburse the large amount
quoted. My friend must therefore excuse my inability
to meet his wishes in the present distress. I shall
lose no time in sending a translation of mj T friend’s
letter to the Governor,
I take this occasion of begging of my friend to
advise me when it shall be finally determined who
shall succeed to the Government of Kedah in the room
of the deceased Sultan, as I have it in command from
His Honor to communicate with the ruling power of
Kedah on the subject of the Krian territory and the
common boundaries between the countries of Kedah
and Perak.
(Signed) S. Garling
Resident Councillor.
Prince of Wales Island,
The 9th January 1845


Fort William the 28th March 1845.
From the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
To W. Edwards Esquire,
Under Secretary to the Government of India
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter under date the 11th ultimo,* No. 79, .call-
ing my attention to your* communication of the 18th
May last transmitting a memorial from Mr. Robert
Hunter of Bangkok.
2nd. Your letter with the memorial in question
reached me at Pinang, where I was waited upon by
Mr. Hunter in person on his return from Calcutta and
at this interview, after freely discussing the matter
with me, he decided upon returning to Siam, and
promised to send early intelligence of his proceedings
from thence or on his return to Singapore.
3rd. On completing my tour of the Northern
Settlements I found that Mr. Hunter had been to
Siam, returned to Singapore, and had again sailed to
Siam, in a larger vessel, to bring away his mer-
chandize. All this bore a favorable aspect and 1
therefore postponed making any observation on his
second venture to Siam.
4th. Mr. Hunter returned only a few weeks
since, and was too ill to lay before me either personally
or in writing an account of his adventures, and when
he did visit me he was in so nervous a state from the
trials and vexations he had undergone that I did not
feel justified in pressing for any tangible information,
and it was not till the 7th instant that I obtained the


accompanying letter from that gentleman. I trust
this explanation will satisfactorily account to the flight
Honorable the Governor General of India for the delaj’ -
which has occurred in furnishing the account called
for.
sth. Mr. Hunter belongs to the oldest established
firm in Siam and himself resided there for the greater
part of the last 20 years, during the whole of that
time till 1842 in the full enjoyment of the King’s
countenance and favor, and at the same time retaining
the confidence of His Majesty’s Ministers so much as
to have proved of infinite service in our negotiation
with that monarch as will be seen by the accompany-
ing testimonial borne by Captain Burney and the
ready response of the Supreme Government in 1826
(A)* and to Dr. Eichardson on his overland journey
to Bangkok, in like manner acknowledged by the
Supreme Government in 1840 (B) *; also touching
, the negotiations for the restoration of the Ex
Rajah of Quedah in 1842, when a donation of 5,000
Rupees was accorded to Mr, Hunter for his aid on this
occasion (C)+.
It may, I think, be fairly assumed that the Bri-
tish trade with Siam has been mainly fostered and
' has attained to its present height owing to the temper,
tact and judgment displayed by Messrs. Hunter and
Co. in their earlier dealings with the natives of that
country, and it is much to be regretted that the
amicable footing on which the trade continued to be
carried on till 1846 should have been broken through
by the King, who in that year commenced a direct
interference with the traffic of the place, and behaved
in a most uncourteous, if not unjustifiable a manner to
the firm of Hunter and Hayes, as pointed out in the
communication of Mr. Hayes * which accompanied my
letter under date the Bth November 1843.
7th. The monopoly of sugar and the manner in
which it is carried on are fully reported on in my letter


unler date tli3 27til ultimo, and may I think be con-
sidered in contravention of the Ist article of the Com-
mercial Treaty of June ] 826, which says that no
import, export or other duty shall be levied from the
buyers or sellers from or to English subjects, and this
contravention of the Treaty necessarily tends to the
great disadvantage of the trade, but with all this it
will be seen b} 7 the abstract statement noted in the
margin,* of the commerce carried on with this port
and Siam during the past five years, that although the
imports to Singapore have diminished, the exports
from thence to Siam have increased since 1841.
* See below.
Bth. In the 9th para, of my letter under date the
Bth November, I have alluded to the expectation
entertained at Bangkok that after affairs had been
settled with China, the British ships would pay the
Siamese a visit, and every preparation was made to
effect a show of resistance. The fortifications at the
entrance of the main river were repaired, chain cables
stretched across that river and a large supply of guns
ordered from England through Messrs. Hunter and
Hayes, as also the steamer Express.
9. The peaceable return of the British troops to
India on the conclusion of the peace with China
entirely changed the King’s views and the whole of
his attention was then and is still devoted to the
accumulation of wealth. He therefore gladl} 7- availed
himself of any excuse for the nonfulfilment of his
engagement with Mr. Hunter for the supply of the
ordnance and the steamer “Express” which had been
* Abstract Statement of the Annual Import from and
Export to Siam for the past 5 years.
1839/40 1840/41 1841/42 1842/43 1843/44
Import Sp. Drs. ... 259,273 326,341 409,463 260,115 229,714
Export „ „ ... 483,578 211,597 229,891 357,492 305,594


commissioned from that firm. The immediate out-
break against Mr. Hunter and the subsequent animo-
sity which has been shown to that gentleman originated
in his saying that if the King would not give the price
agreed on for the steamer she should be sold to the
Cochin Chinese, with whom the Siamese are on hostile
terms. The command for the withdrawal of Mr. Hun-
ter with his steamer followed his impolitic speech and
the steamer Express was to be sold to the Cochin
Chinese at Singapore for 53,000 dollars prior to his
taking (but on condition that he should be allowed to
take) that vessel to Calcutta.
10th. This brings me to the period when I first
met Mr. Hunter on his way to Calcutta, at which time
lie detailed what is mentioned in his memorial and a
very few days subsequent to our conversation he ad-
dressed a letter to me marked D, # intimating that the
life of his assistant was in danger from the vindictive
feelings of the King of Siam towards the firm of Hun-
ter and Co. I had every reason to believe that the
object of this communication was to induce me to send
one of Her Majesty’s vessels to Siam with the view of*
frightening the King, but having satisfied myself that
neither Mr. Harvey’s life nor the property of Hunter
and Co. were in jeopardy I declined making any move-
ment, as will be seen by my reply to Mr. Hunter (E)*
feeling that I could not do so without compromising
the Government, and I am happy to find that my in-
formation was correct, for Mr. Harvey is still at Bang-
kok and I think it not improbable that Mr. Hayes
( Mr. Hunter’s partner) will join him there on his
return from England. After fully considering this
part of the memorial I do not conceive that there has
been any direct infringement of the 7th Article of the
Political Treaty.
11th. Should the 34 shilling rate of on.
sugar be extended to Siam a Consul must, I conclude.


be stationed at Bangkok, and the periodical visits of a
man-of-war will necessarily follow, but I would respect-
fully suggest for the consideration of the Right Honor-
able the Governor General, the expediency of seeking
a revision of our Commercial Treaty with that country,
when our trade, if not greatty increased, would cer-
tainly be conducted on a more equitable footing. To
show this J may mention that at present a vessel im-
porting cargo of a trifling value pays precisely the
same as if she conveyed the most valuable to the mar-
ket, and the charges are so exorbitantly high as to
deter vessels from touching there unless for a full
cargo of sugar viz. 1,500 ticals without and 1,700
ticals per Siam fathom in breadth with an import
cargo.
12th. 1 come now to Mr. Hunter’s proceedings
subsequent to his return from Calcutta, the details of
which are set forth in the accompanying copy of a
letter from that gentleman (E) as previously noticed.
It will be gathered from this communication, although
such is not expressly stated, that Mr. Hunter has col-
lected many of his outstanding debts and recovered
much of his property. The whole of the mortars
and guns adverted to in paragraph VIII of this re-
port, with a quantity of iron and sundry piece goods
&ca. in all amounting to about 2 lacs of rupees, are
accounted for by Mr. Hunter, making his losses as
estimated by himself under one lac of rupees in place
of three lacs, as was shown at the period the memorial
was addressed to the Supreme Government.
13th. It does not appear that the King of Siam
has openly thrown any obstacles in the way of Mr.
Hinder to retard the recovery of his debts, but under
a despotic Government like that of Siam, the open
withdrawal of the King’s countenance from a former
favorite would doubtless indirectly tend to this end.


I am, however, of opinion that all the ungracious con-
duct displayed towards Mr. Hunter has proceeded
from personal enmity against him consequent on his
threat, and the subsequent fulfilment thereof to sell
the steamer Express to the Cochin Chinese and the use
of other strong language, rather than from any sys-
tematic avoidance of the 6th Article of the Treaty.
Mr. Harvey would not have been permitted to remain
at Bangkok and to return there in the Port Captain’s
boat when it was intimated to Mr. Hunter that he
could not be allowed to re-enter the river, without the
King’s permission,
14. The sufferings endured by Mr. Hunter on
reaching the Gunga when refused permission to enter
the river could not have been anticipated by the King
of Siam, who had previously ordered him to quit the
country. On the occasion in question the authorities
simply insisted upon this order being carried into
effect, after affording that gentleman the opportunity
of taking away his merchandise, and when it is re-
membered that Mr. Hunter was looked upon and
treated with the greatest kindness for a long period
of years by the King and the Courtiers, the exasperat-
ed feeling of a despotic monarch, consequent on his
being told that negotiations would be entered into with
his enemies, are not to be wondered at. On the other
hand, had the Chinese war continued I am satisfied
that the steamer and military stores would have been
purchased without a murmur, but arriving as they did,
when their necessity appeared no longer urgent, the
King wished to obtain them below their estimated
value or considerably under the sum agreed for,
and it was whilst smarting under this ungenerous
proceeding that Mr. Hunter expressed himself in the
unguarded manner previously adverted to,
15th. The treaty with Siam was concluded at a
period when a continued wasting and unsalisfactor}’-
war with Burmah made it desirable to conciliate the


adjacent states on any terras, and with all due de-
ference and respect 1 would again observe that much
in that treaty might be revised and the whole placed
on a footing equally perhaps more advantageous to the
King of Siam, certainly more satisfactory to the trade
and more creditable to the British Government. Should
it be determined to depute any person to Siam on this
account a hint would be quite sufficient to ensure Mr.
Hunter’s assistant (Mr. Harvey) or one of his partners
every assistance in collecting the outstanding debts
and disposing of the remaining property of the firm of
Hunter, Hayes and Co. in Siam, but I do not think
that it could be expected or that it should be required
of the King of Siam, to recognise or countenance Mr.
Hunter in any way.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
The 13th Febiuary 1845.


(Enclosure D.)
To the Honorable Colonel W. -F. Bufterworfh, C. 8.,
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
When I had the honor of waiting on you on my
arrival here from Siam a few days ago, I communicated
to you in detail the circumstances under which I was
compelled to quit that country by order of the Siamese
Government, leaving behind me a very large amount
of property, and 1 expressed to you at the time my
apprehension that the Government might proceed to
further acts of violence to the jeopardv, not only of
the property in question, but possibly the life of Mi-.
Harvey, the European gentleman of my establishment
whom 1 left in charge. 1 regret to state that the
accounts I have since then received from Siam by the
Good Success, which left seven days after the vessel in
which I sailed, tend rather to heighten than diminish
these apprehensions. Mr. Harve\ r writes to me in a
strain of the greatest personal alarm, which 1 find is
not attributable to the feelings incidental to his lonely
and unprotected situation, from the facts and circums-
tances which have been brought to my knowledge by
Captain Evans, of the “ Good Success,” who described
all these bad feelings towards me as unhappily acquir-
ing new force, and likely to take a direction that will
be dangerous if not fatal to those with whom 1 was
closely connected during niy residence at Bangkok.
Under these circumstances J hope 1 shall not be
regarded as unreasonable, in pressing upon your
further consideration the state of my affairs at Bang-
kok through acts of illegal violence on the part of
Fort William the 28th March 1845.


the Siamese Government, with a possibility of their
proceeding to further outrage, both against my pro-
perty and those in whose custody it has heen left, and
to request that you will adopt such steps as may be in
your power to provide security for the lives and
property that may thus be endangered.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) R. Hunter
Singapore,
The 19th March 1844.


( Enclosure E.)
To Robert Hunter Esquire.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of this date, relative to the state of your
affairs in Bangkok and the precarious situation of the
person in charge of them.
From what passed at the interview to which
allusion is made in the communication under acknow-
ledgement I gathered that the immediate misunder-
standing between you and the Rajah of Siam occurred
with reference to the state of a steamboat which the
Siamese had offered to purchase, and which you had
actually brought from England for them, at their
especial request. That the Siamese refused to agree
to your terms and ultimately declined the purchase of
the steamer, upon which you intimated an intention
of selling her to the Cochin Chinese with whom the
Siamese recently were, or now are, on the worst of
terms; and lastly that immediately prior to leaving
Bangkok you gave the Siamese Authorities a specimen
of your mind pretty freely.
I have no doubt that the novel situation of Mr.
Harvey, who I learn is a very young man, can be any-
thing but agreeable, and I think it is to be lamented
that he was left behind under such circumstances. I
do not, however, understand that he is forcibly detain-
ed at Bangkok, and I cannot therefore anticipate that
he is in the smallest danger, nor do 1 think that there
is sufficient grounds at present to warrant any move-
ment on my part.
I have <lfcca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth,
Governor &ca., &ca.
Singapore
The 19 March 1844.


(Enclosure F.)
To the Honorable Colonel Butterworth, C. 8,,
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
On the 24th April last I had the honor to address-
to the Right Honorable the Governor General of India
a memorial * setting forth various infractions by the
King of Siam of the Treaties made at Bangkok on the
20th June 1826 between Captain Burney, acting on
behalf of the East India Company, and the Siamese
Government, and a number of acts of bad faith and
oppression practised towards me by the King of Siam,
through which, after suffering great personal wrong
and much pecuniary loss, I was at last compelled pre-
cipitately to quit the kingdom of Siam leaving pro-
perty to the amount of three lacs of rupees at the
mercy of His Siamese Majesty.
On requesting to be favored with the Governor
General’s reply to my representations I was informed
that copies of my memorial had been sent to the
Commissioner of the Tenasserim Provinces and the
Governor of the Straits Settlements in order that they
might enquire into and report upon the matters there-
in set forth. In consequence of this reply I came to
the Straits Settlements and at an interview with which
your Honor favored me at Penang on the 2nd June,
after my arrival from Calcutta, you were pleased to
advise me to return to Siam, and having lost no time
in complying with your suggestions, I now do myself
the honor of stating for your information and that of
His Excellency the Governor General the proceedings
which took place subsequently to the 2 June until the
time of my finally leaving Siam.
Fort William, The 28th March 1845.


In my memorial I mentioned the breach of con-
tract on the part of His Siamese Majesty respecting
the steamer “Express” and that after His Majesty’s
refusal to receive and pay for it, I was compelled
hastily to withdraw in the steamer from Siam. Finding
that there was no hope of His Siamese Majesty abiding
by his engagement, and that there was little probabi-
lity of my being able otherwise to dispose of the
steamer at Singapore, Calcutta or in China, I was
obliged to accept an offer to purchase it which was
made at Singapore by an agent of the King of Cochin
China to prevent in some measure the heavy loss which
would otherwise have arisen from the steamer having
been thrown upon my hands by the Siamese King.
On my arrival from Calcutta at Singapore I made
over the steamer to the agents of the King of Cochin
China and finding that none of the Commanders of
ships trading to Siam would give me a passage from
fear of incurring the displeasure of the King, I was
obliged to charter the small schooner Venus, in which
I sailed from Singapore on the 29th June last.
Immediately upon my arrival at Bangkok about
the middle of July I waited upon the Prime Minister
(Praklang). He received me very coolly and enquired
why I had returned to Siam. 1 informed him that 1
had come to look after my property. He then told
me that he had heard that my object in going to
Bengal was to complain against the King, but that I
was too little a man for the Governor of Bengal to take*
any notice of me, and added that as I had sold the
steamer to the Cochin Chinese 1 had better go to Co-
chin China myself, that the Siamese were not at all
afraid of the Cochin Chinese, and that I might go and
get them (the Cochin Chinese) another steamer. On my
applying for a pass to permit the schooner to leave
Bangkok and return to Singapore I was informed that
it would not be granted unless I left in her, and 1 was
at last obliged to consent to this, and on the


24th July sailed for Singapore, having obtained per-
mission to return with a large vessel to remove my
property.
On my arrival at Singapore I chartered the
British Barque “ Gunga,” Captain Bowman, in which
I immediately proceeded to Siam. On my return to
Bangkok the Siamese Authorities did not make any
objection to my landing, but they refused to give me
any assistance whatever in collecting my outstanding
debts. On the contrary, the King caused it to be
generally understood that it was against his wish
that any one should assist me, and the consequence
was that my native debtors were not slow in availing
themselves of the open encouragement which was
given them to withhold payment of their debts.
Indeed it was so generally understood that those who
paid me would thereby subject themselves to His
Majesty’s displeasure that some who were honest
enough to wish to make payment of their debts were
obliged to use many precautions in approaching my
residence in order that it might not be known that
they had held intercourse with, or assisted me in any
manner.
I need scarcely point out to your Honor that this
extraordinary course of proceeding on the part of the
Siamese Government is a direct violation of the 6th
Article of the Treaty of the 20th June 1826, which
provides that “if a Siamese or English merchant buy
or sell without enquiring and ascertaining whether
the seller or buyer be of a bad or good character and
if he meet with a bad man, who takes the property and
absconds the rulers and officers must make search and
produce the person of the absconder and investigate
the matter with sincerity. If the party possess money
or property he can be made to pay but if he do not
possess any or if he connot be apprehended it will be
the merchant’s own fault.”


The merchants were moreover prohibited from
dealing with me, every impediment was thrown in the
way of my satisfactorily settling my affairs, and every
kind of annoyance that despotism instigated by malice
could invent was practised against me. It would be
a disagreeable task and it would give needless trouble
to your Honor were I to relate these grievances in
detail, but I may mention one or two instances to
show how deeply rooted must have been the feelings
of hostility entertained against me and how unscru-
pulous the King was to* the means which he took to
gratify it.
It was intimated to me before the Gunga had half
completed her loading that it was His Majesty’s inten-
tion to visit the Churches ( which he does in a boat
attended by a large number of courtiers and priests
in other boats) and that the Gunga must go outside,
an order which was immediately obeyed, although
it was not extended to any other of the ships which
were then lying in the river. In consequence of this
arbitrary proceeding I was obliged to incur consider-
able expense in sending the cargo down the river to
the ship in small junks.
A message was at the same time sent to me that
I must also go down the river while the King was
afloat. This I complied with and remained for 3 or 4
days when I returned to my house which I reached in
the afternoon. His Majesty upon being told that I did
not seem so much annoyed by these proceedings as he
had anticipated, broke out into a passion, and turned
his rage against the Praklang, who narrowly escaped a
flogging. The Praklang left the Palace about 11*
o’clock p. m. when he immediately sent for the Port
Captain, who being sick sent in his stead an old
Portuguese Interpreter, named Sebastian, who had
been in the service of three Siamese Monarchs and
whom the Praklang immediately caused to be flogged.
The Port Captain and this Interpreter came to my


house at about 11 o’clck p.m. when I was in bed and
unwell and told me that I must forthwith go down
the river outside the bar, that it was the King’s Order
and must be obeyed, and that the Praklang was pre-
pared to use force in the event of my refusing to obey.
I remonstrated with them, stating that I was very
unwell and that it would be very dangerous for me
to travel in the night, that I had no provisions of
any kind on board my schooner but that I would
start in the morning long before the King came out.
The Port Captain represented what I had said to the
Praklang, but he could not be prevailed upon to grant
a respite of even a few hours, and I was forced to
start for the schooner in a small boat in the middle of
the night with my assistant, Mr. Christopher Harvey,
who was ordered to accompany me, in which we went
down to Paknam, and passed out to the shipping,
when we got safely on board the Gunga and remained
there for two or three days. The Church visiting
ceremonies being then over, I proposed to return to
Bangkok and accordingly started in company with
Mr. Harvey and Captain Bowman of the Gunga in
the schooner, but at the mouth of the river we were
met by the Captain of the Port and Sebastian with
a number of followers. They said that I could
not be allowed to go up but must go back to the
ship, and that the Praklang had given orders that
I was not to be allowed to enter the river until
the King gave permission. Mr. Harvey then went on
board their boat for the purpose of proceeding up the
river in their company and Captain Bowman and
myself stood out for the Gunga. It blew very hard
and night coming on we anchored, but the sea got so
very rough that were forced to get under weigh
again. The tide was then running very strong and
every sea breaking over the schooner and the
water was over the cabin floor so that we were
obliged to bale it out without intermission. The
night was excessively cold, and the weather so very


rough that we expected every minute that our little
vessel would go to the bottom. At day light we found
we had passed the ships during the night time, and
that we had been drifted so far down the Bay that we
could just see the Eoyai masts of the Prince of Wales,
one of the vessels at the anchorage, dead to windward
of us. Fortunately the schooner was recognised from
the Prince of Wales and the first cutter, well manned,
was sent to our assistance and reached us about 11
a, m., when we got into her, and she immediately
proceeded towards the shipping, but though the crew
pulled very hard, we did not reach the Prince of Wales
until 4 o’clock p.m. when Captain Bowman and
myself were so much exhausted that we were obliged
to be hoisted up the side in chains and carried into
the cabin. I soon recovered, but I sorry to say that
Captain Bowman is still suffering from his exposure
on this occasion.
The above will suffice to show how determined
the King was on giving me all the annoyance he
could, and I shall only mention one other fact by
which it will be seen that no considerations of honesty
or good faith were allowed to stand in the way when
there was a chance of oppressing and injuring me.
In my first settling at Bangkok I leased a piece
of ground from the King for the purpose of building a
house upon it, and it was agreed that I was to pay a
rent of 600 ticals per annum for the ground. The buil-
dings were erected at my own charge upon an agreement
with the King that when I should give up possession
he would pay me for them. Instead however of his
doing so he insisted when I was about to quit Siam
last month, that I should pay not only the rent for
the ground but also an equal sum for the buildings.
With this tyrannical and unjust demand I was obliged
to comply.
I finally left Siam on the 29th December last,
having broken up my establishment there and merely


leaving Mr. Harvey for a short time in Siam to try
and collect some of my debts.
Owing to the King’s not only, contrary to the
Treaty, refusing me all assistance, but even encouraging
my debtors to defraud me, I have been unable to
obtain payment of debts to the amount of Forty thou-
sand Spanish dollars, and will suffer very heavy loss
from a large quantity of goods having been returned
to me by parties to whom I had sold them, and which
have been deteriorated in value, besides what I shall
lose by the King’s having refused to receive the
steamer and other property which I had ordered for
him by his desire, and returned other property which
had been sold to him.
A total disregard of the provisions of the Treaties
between the Governments of British India and Siam
still continues to be openly manifested by the Siamese
King who rigidly enforces the monopoly of sugar, in
consequence of which the price of that article con-
tinues higher than it otherwise would be, and His
Majesty is apparently encouraged by the seeming in-
difference of the lauia. Government towards his viola-
tion of the Treaties to more open and [un-J disguised
acts of oppression and injustice and it is now manifest
that unless forcibly admonished of the danger of his
proceedings he will upon the first prompting of his ill
regulated and ignorant mind, or of the interested and
evil disposed foreign advisers (Klings &c.) who engross
him to the exclusion of those of his own family and
country who better perceive the true interests of the
King and his subjects, entirely set aside and disregard
the Treaties, if by so doing any momentary advantages
can be gained or feeling gratified.
In conclusion may I request that you will do me
the favor to bring this letter to the notice of His
Excellency the Governor General and I have a con-
fident trust that after due consideration of the


representations I have made in it and in my memorial
His Excellency will be pleased to adopt such measures
as may to him seem necessary to procure the due
observance on the part of the King of Siam of the
Treaties between the British and Siamese Governments
as well as some reparation for the losses and injuries
which I have suffered at the hands of the Kins'.
a
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Hunter.
Singapore
The 6 February 1845


i India Political Department.
***»#*
Para. 99. You stated to the Governor of the
Straits Settlements that “ there did not appear to be
“ a violation of an}” article of the existing treaty on the
“ part of the King of Siam, ” and we think with you
that neither his monopoly of the trade in sugar, his
prohibition of the export of teak, nor his augmenta-
tion of the duties on various kinds of produce
constitute such a violation, inasmuch as they are
measures affecting the trade of his subjects generally
and not their intercourse with our merchants in
particular. Any appropriate opportunity should
however be taken of endeavouring to prevail upon
His Siamese Majesty to afford greater facilities to
commerce.
100. By the treaty of 18th October 1826, we
are bound to protect the Rajah of Perak against any
aggression of this kind and as there appears to be no
doubt that Krean is part of his territory you very
properly authorized Lieut. Colonel Butterworth to
withhold payment of the annual stipend to the Rajah
of Kedah, until he should have withdrawn within the
limits of the territory under his Government.
******
We are &ca.
(Signed) J. Shepherd,
&ca. &ca. &ca.
London,
]9th March, 1845,
(Addressed to the Governor and
Council of Bengal.)


Fort William
Foreign Depai'tment,
The 16th August 1845.
To the Honorable
The Court of Directors
of the East India Company.
Honorable Sirs,
******
Para. 115. The Rajah of Kedah having, in oppo-
sition to the wishes of our Government, obstinately
retained possession of the Krean country which he
had usurped from the Chieftain of Perak, the instruc-
tions authorizing the suspension of the payment of his
annual stipend until he should withdraw within the
limits of his former boundary, were carried into effect.
116. The Rajah died in the early part of this
year, on which occasion his son, Tuanku Dye, applied
for pecuniary assistance to enable him to defray the
expenses consequent on that event. For this purpose
we sanctioned the advance of a sum not exceeding
3,000 dollars as a loan to the applicant out of the
arrears of the stipend of the deceased Chief.
117. In the course of the correspondence which
took place on this occasion, the local authorities
suggested the advisability of obtaining from the
Siamese State, the transfer to our Government of the
district of Kotah, which was described as a triangular
piece of land inconveniently projecting into Province
Wellesley, and as the resort of persons of objectionable
character. The proposed new line of demarcation, ifc
was shown, would bring within the British boundary
not only the tract in question but also a neighbouring
stream stated to be now navigated by boats not liable
to search, and therefore likely to prove detrimental to
the public revenue. For the reasons above stated,
as well as with advertence to the fact that the district
in question was well adapted for a sugar plantation.


Colonel Butterworth urged that its possession by the
British, was a very desirable object.
118. Before passing any decision on the question
submitted for our consideration, we requested to be
favored with the sentiments of the Governor of Bengal
On the subject.
119. His Excellency viewed the proposition
favorably, and we, in concurrence with that authority,
instructed the Governor of the Straits Settlements to
negociate for the transfer of the land referred to, on
the basis of a moderate compensation as suggested
by him.
* * * * * *
125. In the month of April last year, Mr.
Hunter, a British subject engaged in commercial
pursuits at Bangkok, complained in a Memorial
addressed by him to this Government, of certain
infractions by the King of Siam of the existing treaty
with that state, whereby the Memorialist and other
British traders resorting to that Port had been sub-
jected to serious loss and inconvenience.
126. Mr. Hunter’s Memorial was forwarded for
report to the Governor of the Straits Settlements and
the Commissioner for the Tenasserim Provinces whose
replies* together with the* papers in connection
therewith, are now submitted for the information of
'' your Honble. Court.
127. On the receipt of Colonel Butterworth’s
report it was considered right, with reference to the
statements and opinions therein comprized, to submit
the documents to the fourth ordinary member of the
Council for a legal opinion upon the question of the
infraction of the commercial treaty, by the alleged
proceeding of the King at Bangkok. By a mistake,
however, in the office of our secretary, the papers were


sent to the Law Commission instead of to Mr.
Cameron alone in his capacity of Member of Council.
128. Before the report of the Law Commission
was laid before Government, your Honble. Court’s
despatch dated 19th March 1845* was received, the
99th. paragraph of which contains the expression of
your concurrence in the view taken by the Govern-
ment of this question in 1843/44, when it recorded the
opinion that the acts imputed to the King of Siam as
shown in the papers then brought to our notice did
not constitute an infraction of the existing treaty with
that state.
129. As the circumstances mentioned in Mr.
Hunter’s Memorial do not differ materially from those
on which the decision of Government on the former
occasion was based, it was considered unnecessary,
without further instructions from your Honble. Court
to take any notice of the representation submitted by
that individual, or to re-open the question of infraction
in connection therewith, notwithstanding the adverse
opinion recorded by the Law Commission in their
report, a copy of which accompanies.*
We have &ca.
(Signed) H. Hardinge
&ca. &ca. &ca.
Fort William
The 16th August 1845.


Fort William the 10th January 1846.
To F. Currie, Esquire,
Secretary to the Government of India.
Fort William,
Sir,
I have the honor to transmit for the information
of the Right Honble. the Governor General of India,
copies of the several communications which have
passed between the Rajah of Ligore, the Rajah of
Perak, the Acting Governor of Quedah and myself in
reference to the Krean country, subsequent to my
despatch to your address under date the 21st Decem-
ber last. *
2. On my recent tour to the Northern Settle-
ments I requested the Acting Governor of Quedah to
favor me with an interview, but he made a trivial
excuse, * evidently to avoid a meeting, and 1 then
solicited * him to state definitely his intention regard-
ing the Krean Country usurped by his father from the
Rajah of Perak, to which he replied * that the question
rested with the Rajah of Ligore. I have reason to
believe that he is afraid of making any movement in
the matter till his nomination as the Governor of
Quedah shall be confirmed
3. The last letter* received from the Rajah of
Li gore also shows a desire to postpone any final
decision on the subject of Krean till the nomina-
tion of Taunkoo Daye alias Zeynal Rashid, the son of
the late Rajah shall have been approved of by the
Court of Siam. I have again addressed the Rajah of
Ligore in the hope that he may be induced to make
the appointment of Taunkoo Daye conditional on his
restoring Krean to the Rajah of Perak.
4. The Rajah of Perak* had become a little
impatient at the earl} 7 part of the year and from what


I perceived when in Province Wellesley on the borders
of the Krean country, I was disposed to think that hos-
tilities would be commenced without waiting for the
result of my further reference to Ligore which I in-
timated * having made. I therefore determined to
seek a personal interview with the Rajah and accord-
ingly wrote to that effect appointing Kotah Siac a
place from fifteen to twenty miles up the Perak
River at which to meet him,
5. On my return from Penang I proceeded on
the steamer to the spot indicated, and was met by a
vast concourse of people, the whole reach of the river
being studded with boats. After some general conver-
sation I induced the Rajah to accompany me to the
steamer, where I explained most fully what had been
done to obtain the restoration of Krean and urged him
to refrain from hostilities till I should receive a de-
finite reply from Ligore, to which he readily assented,
as he would I fancy at that moment to any request,
for both he and his chieftains were overwhelmed with
awe and astonishment at the machinery and move-
ments of the steamer.
6. Upon taking leave of the Rajah I presented
him and his chieftains, who were accompanied by
about 200 followers, with a few common shawls or
handkerchiefs which are much valued in that part of
the world, the cost of which did not exceed 40 dollars,
and we parted on the best of terms with the full un-
derstanding that he was not to make any movement
touching Krean till a Governor should be nominated
to the Quedah Country.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
The sth September 1845


A.
Translation of a letter from Tnanka Zeinoon
Rasheed, Son of Padooka Murboom Saltan Ahamad
Tajudin Hall* mishale, Governor of Quedah, to the
Honble. Colonel Butterworth, C, 8., Governor of
Prince of Wales Island. Singapore and Malacca.
The letter our friend addressed us on the 3rd day
of Jemadil Awal (Bth May 1845)* has reached us in
safety and its contents we have made ourselves
acquainted with, in which we are informed that our
friend has arrived at Penang and intimated a wish to
have an interview with us. At present we cannot go
to meet our friend as our Brother Taunka Mahomed
Akil has proceeded to Ligore and there is no one that
we can leave behind to be in our stead. Of this our
friend is already fully aware. We therefore have to
solicit that our friend will not take offence particularly
at the present moment.
Queda’i, 3rd day of Jemadil Awal Hejerat 1261
(Bth May 1845.)


B.
Prom the Honble. Colonel Butterworth, Com-
panion of the Most Honorable the Military Order of
the Bath, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singa-
pore and Malacca.
To Tnanku Quedah.
(After Compliments.)
I have received my friend’s letter dated the Bth
instant stating that he is unable at the present time
to meet my wishes by coming to Penang to confer
with me, as requested in my letter of the sth, in
consequence of the absence of his brother.
I regret that my friend cannot leave Quedah till
the return of his brother from Siam, and as this event
may not occur for some time I now write the particu-
lars on which I wished to hold a conference with my
friend vizt. the unjust retention of the Krean Country
belonging to the Rajah of Perak.
A letter recently received from the Rajah of
Ligore, which I was desirous of showing to my friend,
in which mention is made of a communication to his
address to the same effect must prove to my friend the
view taken of this matter by the Court of Siam, for
the Rajah of Ligore distinctly recognises the right of
the Rajah of Perak to the Krean Country. I now beg
that mjr friend will forthwith send me a definite
answer as to his intentions on this question, that I
may communicate the same to the Supreme Govern-
ment of India and the Rajah of Ligore and take such
further steps as may appear necessary, the Rajah of
[Perak] having abstained from any movement to
regain the Krean Country solely with the desire of
meeting my strongly expressed wishes on this point.
Written at Penang this 27th May 1845.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth,


c.
Translation of a letter from Taunkoo Zeynal
Rachid Son of the deceased Sultan Ahmed Taljoodin
Allum Shah of Quedah &ca., addressed to the Honble.
Colonel Butterworth, Companion of the Most Honble.
the Military Order of the Bath, Governor of Pulo
Penang, Singapore and Malacca, &ca. &ca.
(After Compliments.)
We have to inform our friend that his letter to
our address on the subject of the letter from the
Rajah of Ligore to our friend’s address in which it is
stated that he (the Rajah of Ligore) acknowledged the
right of the Rajah of Perak to Krean and that a
letter had been addressed to us also by the Rajah of
Ligore to the same purport.
We have now to state to our friend that a letter
to that effect regarding Krean has never reached us.
We will now write to the Rajah of Ligore about
this, and whatever may be the orders, we will be
guided by them, as this country of Quedah is under
the Authority of Siam. Our friend is well acquainted
with all these matters, and this regarding Krean has
been referred to Siam, and it prevents our being able
to do anything without the knowledge of the Siamese
Authorities.
Written this Ist day of Jemadil Ahkir (7th June
1845 ).


D.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore.
This letter is from us . * . . addressed to
the Honble. Colonel Butterworth, Companion of the
Most Honble. the Military Order of the Bath, Govern-
or of Singapore, Malacca and Pulo Penang.
With Compliments &ca.
We have received two letters from onr friend the
Governor of Singapore, one from Captain Peroni, an
English merchant who took it to Siam* In the said
letter it is stated that our friend the Governor of
Singapore had sent a letter to us. This we had an-
swered to our friend the Governor of Singapore, but
we have not heard further on the subject of it. The
other letter was sent to us by Chou Boree Rat-poo-
ban, Rajah of Poongah, 25th day of the 3rd Moon
year of the large snake Chow sok. In that letter our
friend stated that he has received a letter from us and
was glad to hear what we said in every particular.
With regard to what Chow Pia Ohree (Rajah of
Quedah) had done to the Rajah of Perak it was not
right. Now our friend the Governor of Singapore re-
quests us to order the Rajah of Quedah to give back
the country unto the former boundaries as far as what
the English know it to be and as it was when Tuankoo
Anoon was Rajah presiding over Kedah. All the ryots
know that this would be but justice and that if we
ordered the Rajah of Kedah to go away from Krean, our
friend thought that the Rajah of Kedah would follow
our directions. Our friend the Governor of Singapore
had written to the Rajah of Kedah to the effect that
we had written to the Rajah of Kedah desiring
him and his people to leave Krean. We have written
to the Rajah of Kedah regarding this affair and our


friend can direct the Rajah of Perak not to fight and
disturb the country for the regaining of Krean. Our
friend’s letter was also full of many other friendly
matters, all which we understand. With regard to
to Krean Rajah Mudah (Tuanka Abdullah) informed
us, and which we wrote to our friend, the Governor of
Singapore, on the subject. That our friend knows
everything therefore regarding it. We afterwards
sent a letter by a person to the Rajah of Kedah
desiring him that the boundaries of the territor} T of
Kedah as they have always existed ought to be
guarded and fixed by marks so that they may never
be exceeded and thereby prevent quarrels and wars
between the two countries and making enemies
amongst the people.
The Rajah of Kedah wrote to us stating that
Krean had always really belonged to Kedah that he did
not wish to seize any lands of Perak, That the Seals
formerly in use for that place are forthcoming, and
that there are persons of consequence at Perak and
Krean who can be searched for and from whom the
real truth can be obtained. This the Rajah of Kedah
wrote on the subject which coincided with what the
Rajah Mudah had stated. If we were arbitrarily to
order that the Rajah of Kedah should do as our friend
the Governor of Singapore has written, the Rajah of
Kedah would consider it unjust as he states he has
proofs in the possession of a Seal and that persons of
consequence both at Perak and Krean are witnesses
who can be questioned as to the truth. Now the
Rajah of Purlis and the Rajah of Chabang Passo
wrote to us that on the 25th day of the 12th moon
Rajah Mudah (Tuankoo Abdullah) died and that on
the 26th day of the Ist Moon the Rajah of Kedah
also died. It is said that the Malay custom is
that the dead Rajah cannot be buried until his succes-
sor is placed in his stead. The Rajah of Purlis and
Rajah of Chabong Passo have requested that Peeyah


Intawee Ohye, son of Chowpia Chree (meaning
Tuankoo Dye, son of the Rajah of Kedah) be raised
the dignity and to govern Kedah, in the meantime to
bury the deceased Rajah and to follow the Malay cus-
toms, and requested us to report the same to Siam to
the foot of the Throne of Phrabat Somdet Phra Buddha
Chao Yu Hua of Phra Maha Nakhon Sri Ayuthia, to
pray that the wishes of His Highness the King may
be taken. We have done as these Rajahs wished and
presented the petition, but the answer has not yet
returned and the mat ter is therefore unsettled. If it is
His Highness the King’s wishes to raise Prah Inta-
wee Ohye to the dignity of Rajah of Kedah according
to the wishes of the country everything will be quiet
and settled. When this is all settled and Prah Inta-
wee Chye confirmed, this matter of Krean can be
enquired into and whatever it may be we shall let our
friend know. Do not let our friend the Governor of
Singapore be angry at the delay.
This letter is written in duplicate, one in the
Siamese dialect and the other in Malays, both of the
same meaning.
Written 11th day of sth Moon Year Little Ser-
penchasok.


E.
Letter from Sultan Abdullah Mahomed Shah of
the Country of Perak to the Honble. Colonel Butter-
worth, the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singa-
pore and Malacca.
After Compliments.
That 1 have formerly written to my friend of date
the 9th September 1843 * on Saturday, respecting
Krean which was taken by the Rajah of Quedah and to
which my friend desired me to remain silent for a
period of 2 or 3 months, but as I have waited now for
a considerable time and received no intelligence from
my friend up to the present moment 1 therefore request
that my friend will let me know decidedly regarding
(Soonghi) Krean whether it can be restored back to
me or not, which is the object of this present appli-
cation to my friend.
Dated the 21st Moharum 1261 on Thursday 31st
January 1845.


F.
From the Honble. Colonel Butterworth, Com-
panion of the Most Noble the Military Order of the
Bath, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore
and Malacca.
To the Rajah of Perak.
I have received my friend’s letter under date
the 31st January last relative to Krean, which was
usurped by the late Governor of Quedah.
I have every hope of shortly seeing ray friend
reinstated in that country and it would therefore be
most unadvisable for my friend to make any movement
till the successor to the Governor of Quedah shall be
nominated by the Rajah of Siam, who takes a favor-
able view of my friend’s right to Krean, lam still,
and have been for some time past in correspondence
with the Rajah of Ligor on the subject.
Dated at Singapore this 23rd day of February
1845.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth.


To The Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
In reply to your despatch dated the sth Septem-
ber last* submitting copies of your correspondence
with the Rajah of Ligore, the Rajah of Perak, and the
Acting Governor of Quedah, relative to the Krean
Country, and detailing your proceedings in reference
thereto, I am directed to state that the Right Honble,
the Governor General approves your proceedings in
the matter, and sanctions the presents which you
made to the Rajah of Perak and the Chieftains on the
occasion of their visit,, amounting to 40 dollars.
I have &ca.
(Signed) F. Currie
Secretary to the Government of India
With the Governor General.
Camp
Futtehpore Sickree
The 31st October 1845.


i India Political Department.
******
Para. 66. After the death of the Rajah of Kedah
there will, we hope, have been no further delay in
obtaining the evacuation of the Krean country, which
he had usurped from the Rajah of Perak.
67. You will report to us the result of the
negociation which you have authorized Lieut, Colonel
Lutterworth to open with the Siamese authorities for
the purchase of the district of Kotah, a small slip of land
projecting into Province Wellesley, the possession of
which is considered desirable for reasons both of revenue
and of police. ,
******
69. With respect to the personal injuries com-
plained of by Mr. Hunter, they appear to have been in
some measure provoked by his own imprudence ; and
there would probably have been difficulty in establish-
ing the facts in such a manner as to entitle your
Government to make a public demand of redress on his
behalf. We approve, therefore, of your non-inter-
ference,
70. The general question remains whether the
King’s assumption of a monopoly of sugar is an in-
fringement of the treaty. You referred the question
to the Law Commission, who are of opinion that it is
so. Major Broadfoot is of a contrary opinion, and you
have determined not to interfere.
71. Monopolies being a frequent, and even
habitual resource of the Siamese Government for pur-
poses of revenue, we cannot but think that, if the
Government had intended to bind itself never to re-
establish them, an express provision to that effect


would have been inserted in the treaty. Without
distinct proof in the correspondence at the time, that
such was the intention of the negociators, we do not
think our right of remonstrance sufficiently clear to
induce us to exert it.
###**#
We are &ca.
(Signed) H. Willock.
&ca. &ca. &ca.
London
2d January 1846.
( Addressed to the Governor and Council of Bengal.)


Fort William 3d October 1846.
To G. A. Bushby Esquire,
Officiating Secretary to the Government of India
Eort William.
Sir,
******
My letter dated the 31st January 1845,* to the
address of F. Currie Esquire, Secretary to the Govern-
ment of India, announced the death of the late Gov-
ernor of Quedah, Sultan Ahmad Tajadin, Hakim
Shaw, and my desire to avoid any permanent move-
ment with reference to the Krean country usurped by
him from the Rajah of Perak, till a successor should
be nominated to the Government of Quedah by the
Siamese authorities, which event I hoped would have
taken place during the past or early in the present
year, when I had reason to think that the just expecta-
tion which Twanku Dye might entertain of obtaining
a continuance of the annual stipend guaranteed to his
father by the first article of the Treaty with the King
of Quedah in 1802, would lead to an early settlement
of the question of Krean, and I then proposed to
enter into negociation regarding the purchase of the
District of Kotah.
Tuanka Dye or Tuanku Zemoor Rasheed, the eldest
surviving son of the late Governor of Quedah has been
residing at Ligore for some time past in anticipation
of his nomination to the Government of Quedah, and
it is generally believed, although I can obtain no
authentic information of the fact, that he is detained
there, if not forcibly, under false pretences. I have
therefore again written to the Rajah of Ligore relative
to the restoration of Krean to the Rajah of Perak, but
I have deemed it expedient for the present to make no


reference to the District of Kotah, as by so doing, I
might in a measure appear willing to compromise the
interest of the Rajah of Perak in my desire to obtain an
an accession to our territories.
I trust the Right Honorable the President in
Council will approve of my letter to the Rajah of
Ligore, a copy of which I beg to enclose, as also of
my having refrained from taking any positive steps
with reference to the District of Kotah pending the
settlement of the Krean question.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
26th August 1846


From the Honble. Colonel Butterworth, Com-
panion of the Most Honble. the Military Order of the
Bath, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore
and Malacca.
To the Rajah of Ligore.
( After Compliments.)
I had ant icipated from my friend’s letter of the
2d September 18445* that the necessary instructions
would long since have been given to the Quedah
people to withdraw from the left bank of the Krean
River, which was acknowledged by the Siamese
Government as belonging to the Rajah of Perak at the
period of the ratification of the Treaty of Bangkok in
1826, and according!) 7 was never interfered with by
Tuanku Anum, the then Siamese Governor of Quedah.
My Friend intimated in the above letter that so
soon as a Governor should be appointed to Quedah the
'question touching the Krean country should be settled.
Now as I understand that Tuanku Dye, the eldest
surviving son of the late Governor, Sultan Ahmad
Tajudin Hallim Shaw, is at this moment residing at
Ligore preparatory to receiving this appointment to
the Government of Quedah, I beg that my friend will
forthwith give such instructions as will ensure the
withdrawal of that Chieftain's people from the Perak
territory.
I have hitherto succeeded in preventing the Rajah
<of Perak from making any movement to regain his
possessions, but I cannot hope to do this much longer,
and I must therefore beg that my friend will at once
take measures for the due fulfilment of the Treaty of
Bangkok, under date the 20th June 1826, wherein
D 7
both parties are expressly bound to maintain
Fort William 3d October 1843.


the friendly relations then existing between the
English and Siamese, which must be materially
atfected by hostilities on the Krean River,
otherwise I shall be obliged to report to the Supreme
Government of India the unsuccessful termination of
the references I have made to my friend, a step I most
earnestly desire to avoid.
The District of Krean is separated from Quedah
by the River Krean, a most natural and distinct line
of boundary from the sea on the west to the mountains
on the east, which run parallel to the Coast at a
distance of 30 or 40 miles, as my friend will observe
by a reference to the map of the Country. Moreover
the Rajah of Perak was in possession of his territory
of Krean when the Treaty of June 1826 was signed
and the proceedings of the late Governor of Quedah
were therefore in direct opposition to the 14th Article
of the treaty above referred to, which declares that the
“ English and Siamese shall not send any force to go
and molest, attack or disturb Perak.”
1 earnestly solicit an early reply to this communi-
cation, as the people on both banks of the Krean
River are in a most unsettled state, consequent on the
usurpation of the Krean District by the late Governor
of Quedah, in direct opposition to the Treaty above
referred to. lam desirous of communicating with my
friend on other matters, but I refrain from doing so
till the question of Krean be satisfactorily settled.
Dated at Singapore this 25th August 1846.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.


To Governor of the Straits Settlements.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 23d* August last, I
have the honor to state that the President in Council
approves of the tenor of your letter to the Rajah of
Ligore relative to the restoration of Krean to the
Rajah of Perak, and of your having refrained from
entering into negociation with regard to the purchase
of the District of Kotah pending the settlement of the
Krean question.
I have &ca,
(Signed) G. A. Bushby
Officiating Secretary to the
Government of India.
Fort William
The 3d October 1846
Fort William 3d October 1846.


Fort William the 6th February 1847.
To G. A. Busliby Esqre.,-
Officiating: Secretary to the Government of India'
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to my letter under date the 26th
August last,* I have now the honor to report that
Tuanko»Dye, alias TuankoZeinoon Rashid, Ebene, Mur-
boom, Sultan Ahamad Tajudin Hallim Shah, Governor
of Quedah, the eldest surviving son of the late Rajah
of Quedah, has returned from Ligore, having been duly
recognised by the King of Siam as successor to his
father.
2. The return of Tuanko Zeinoon Rashid to
Quedah was most opportune, for the country bordering'
our territory had been thrown into considerable excite-
ment by the untoward proceedings of Tuanko Mahomed
Saad, the Chieftain who was sent by Mr. Bonham as a
state prisoner to Calcutta in 184*1 r and remanded to'
Penang in September 1843.
3. Tuanko Mahomed Saad, after the receipt of the
letter to my address dated the 29th January 1844,*
having' proceeded to Quedah, located himself at Kotah y
and then and there commenced levying taxes on the
inhabitants of the District of Prye, upon which he
professes to have some claim in right of his wife. Not
content with this, be undertook an expedition a few
months since, with about 150 followers, and an
elephant which he obtained from a bad character
named Puteh Toh Ting, against whom there is a
warrant out for murder, to secure possession of the tin
mines at Pulie, under the charge of Hadj'ee Dultam,
the revenue, dues and tolls on which, amounting to
about 2000 dollars annually, are collected by the


Quedah Government at the mouth of the Muda River
by a person named Tuanko Ibrahim.
4. On this information being brought to Tuanko
Ibrahim, he forthwith gathered together his people,
and advanced to meet Tuanko Mahomed Saad, when a
skirmish took place, in which several persons were
killed on both sides terminating in favor of the latter,
who returned to Kotah with about 100 prisoners, of
both sexes, several head of cattle, &ca., whilst Hadjee
Dultam, the person in charge of the tin mines, equally
afraid of both parties, ran away to the jungles.
5. No time was lost on the intelligence* reach-
ing Province Wellesley from the Acting Governor of
Quedah, Tuanko Mahomed Hakip, in communicating
with Tuanko Mahomed Saad,* and in giving publicity
to Act X of 1839, and in directing the Superinten-
dent, Captain Perrier, to abstain from all interference,
and to prevent strangers from locating themselves, or
driving cattle within our territory, lest it should be,
as without such orders it doubtless would have been,
made the receptacle for stolen property, by either of
both of the adverse parties. At the same time, free
admission was given to those who might feel disposed
to pass on to Penang without offensive weapons of any
kind, and with the understanding that they were not
to return till hostilities should have terminated.
6. At this period, Tuanko Zeinoon Rasheed,
Ebene, Marhoom, Sultan Ahamad Tajudin Hallim
Shah, reported* his return to Quedah, and his deter-
mination to proceed against Tuanko Mahomed Saad.
Captain Perrier, the Superintendent of Province Wei-
lesley, who is a most trustworthy officer, then took
advantage of his proximity to Kotah, to seek a private
interview with the latter, in the hope of inducing him
to surrender up the property he had taken, dismiss his
followers, and ask forgiveness of his sovereign but with-
out avail. He then obtained the Gun Boat from Penang,


which he stationed at the Prye River, close upon
Tuanko Mahomed Saad’s position, and with a judi-
cious arrangement of the small Police Force at his
command, succeeded in maintaining peace and quiet-
ness, and allaying the fears of the inhabitants of Pro-
vince Wellesley, without moving troops from Penang,
which I was most anxious to avoid, unless under cir-
cumstances of extreme necessity.
7. Tuanko Mahomed Saad was easily defeated
and he is now a fugitive ; it is generally believed, but
nothing certain is known of his movements, that he
has proceeded towards the Southern end of the Pro-
vinces, some say with a view of inducing the Rajah
of Perak to espouse his cause, but I think this impro-
bable, for the old Rajah must have heard too much of
the said Tuanko Mahomed Saad to trust him. More-
over his family have all come to Penang, where I have
ordered that they shall be permitted to remain un-
recognised and unmolested, so long as they keep quiet,
and in the event of the smallest hostile movement, that
Act X of 1839 shall be enforced against them.
8. It appeared to me extremely desirable to view
the matter as a mere emeute on the part of Tuanko
Mahomed Saad and his followers, and to treat it as
lightly as possible, lest it should grow into a question
of sufficient political importance to unsettle the minds
of the inhabitants of the northern end of the Straits,
which are readily excited by the recollection of the
untoward occurrences between the Siamese and the
late Governor of Quedah, and the successful result of
this course is to be attributed to Captain Ferrier, who
has acted most steadily and judiciously on the occasion,
under the direction of the Resident Councillor at
Penang.
9. The return of Tuanko Zeinoon Rasheed Ebene,
Marhoom, Sultan Ahamad Tajudin Hallim Shah, offered
such a favorable opportunity of again mooting the


question of the restoration of Krean to the Rajah of
Perak, and of ascertaining the feeling of the Govern-
ment of Quedah with reference to our obtaining pos-
session of the District of Kotah, the scene of the
present disturbance, that I lost no time in addressing
that Ghiefrain on the subject, in a communication of
which the enclosed is a copy* herewith forwarded, in
the hope that it will meet with the approval of the
Honorable the President in Council, and that I shall
hereafter be enabled to report a satisfactory result.
, I have &ca.
(Signed) W. J. Butterworth
Governor.
Singapore
the llth December 1846.


Translation of a letter from Tuanku Mahomed
Hakip, acting for Tuanku Zeynoon Rashid, ruling the
Kingdom of Quedah and with compliments &ca &ca.
goes addressed to the Honble. Samuel Garling Esquire
Resident Councillor of Pulo Penang and its depen-
dencies.
Let it be known to my friend that on the 14th of
this month Shawal one of our people came to complain
that Tuanku Mahomed Saad accompanied by above
150 of his people, had been to a place called Kupong,
in the interior of Qualla Mudah, seizing everything
they could get including buffaloes and bullocks. Many
of the owners of the property they caught and mur-
dered and their houses were burnt by them.
We sent our relative Tuanku Ebrahim, presiding
over the affairs of Qualla Mudah, to meet them and to
retake the property and return them to their lawful
CtNvners. But Tuanku Ebrahim was not in time to
get up to them and thus Tuanku Mahomed Saad
escaped with them to Cottah Prye.
We are backward in following them to Cottah
Prye as it is situated in the immediate vicinity of the
Company’s.lands, aud those ot all our friends,
This proceeding of Mahomed Saad is extremely
bad and contrary to every usage and will be a grievous
offence to the Siamese, and just now Tuanku Zeynoon
Rashid has not yet returned to Quedah. It is not
proper that we should remain passive and we wish to
send and recover all the property seized by the said
Tuanku Mahomed Saad and return them to their
right owners.


We therefore previously inform our friend of our
intentions in case there should be fighting between our
people and those of Tuanko Mahomed Saad as the
.place is so very near to all our friends and the Com-
pany’s territories.
In the meantime we would wish to have the
opinion of our friend in answer to this our letter that
we may know how to act.
Written 29th Shawal 1262.
20th October 18,46.


To Tuanko Mahomed Saad.
(Usual Compliments.)
Herewith I forward to my friend a copy of a letter
dated 29th Shawal received from Tuanko Mahomed
Hakip, acting for, and in the absence of Tuanko Zey-
noon Rashid setting forth that my” friend entered
Kupong in the interior of Qualla Mooda and there
took violent possession of the cattle, and that several
of their owners were killed. Being desirous of pro-
moting peace and good will between all our friends
around the Company’s territory, we were concerned
upon learning these tidings and would now endeavour
to prevent the evil consequences which would result
from any warlike movement on the part of Tuankoo
Zeynoou Rashid, or his agent Tuanko Mahomed Hakip y
for the recovery of the property, and vindicating his
authority.
Should the facts be as stated by Tuanko Ma-
homed Hakip, I would enquire upon what provocation
my friend adopted measures which tend to a rupture
with Quedah and may possibly excite the jealousy of
the Siamese and irritate them against my friend. I
would also enquire whether my friend is disposed to
restore the property carried away as here described,
and to make such further restitution as may satisfy
Tuanko Zeynoon Rashid and preserve the peace of
the interior.
(Signed) S. Garling
Resident Councillor.
P. W. Island
The 27th October 1846.


Translation of a letter from Tuanko Mahomed
Saad &ca. addressed to the Honble. Samuel Garling
Esquire Resident Councillor of Pulo Penang &ca.
( Compliments.)
My friend’s letter was received with every respect
the language of which was so sweet to hear and filled
us with delight, and we return our warmest thanks to
our friend.
With regard to Tuanko Mahomed Hakip’s letter
stating that we had gone and seized the buffaloes and
cattle of the inhabitants of Kupong and that we had
killed half of their owners, we never did anything of
the kind as stated of seizing property and killing
people who were the owners of them.
We went to Kupong to secure some bad people,
there was a little fighting, some of our people were
wounded, and one of the thieves was killed, others ran
away vizt. Hadjee Dultam and Mahomed Soonghoot,
who had previously robbed and burnt a place called
Karangun, where people were employed collecting tin
from mines not far from Koolim. We had expended a
good deal of money in these mines of Koolim. All the
people employed in the mines and in cultivating the
high land paddy, and who kept buffaloes and cattle
were seized by Hadjee Dultam and Mahomed Soong-
hoot and carried to Kupong with their buffaloes and
cattle. The mines were in consequence abandoned
and no one left who knew how to work them and our
money advanced for the working of these tin mines
was lost.
Respecting Tuanku Mahomed Ahkib’s intention
to send and take back the property he says we had in.
possession, we are not aware in what they consist as


we deny having taken any body’s property. Refer-
ring to Tuanko Mahomed Ahkib’s intention of coming
to enquire of us we must submit to it and put
our trust in the Almighty and our just cause. Of the
ryots of Kupong one of the Panghuloos has removed
and joined us, together with his wife and family and
his buffaloes and oxen. These people have two or
three head of cattle each and have brought with them
their property. There are of these people so removed
fifteen families, consisting of their children and grand-
children, being unable to cultivate paddy and pay the
tax of one Koonchah each person imposed on them
since the death of the late Rajah. Many of them this
past year did not get any paddy and were obliged to
sell their property and incur debts to raise $5 each to
take to Quallah Mudah instead of the paddy. This is
what they have complained of to us.
What we have stated in the letter we declare be-
fore God to be true and no fiction.
We forward copy of a letter which we have ad-
dressed to Tuanko Ebrahim and our friend will see
all that we have said.
Written 31st October 1846,


Translation of the Enclosure.
The blessing of the Almighty goes from us ad-
dressed to our Cousin Ebrahim. There is a place
called Karan gun under the Government of Prye given
to the Father of our wife Tuanku Fatimah by the late
Rajah Mudah of Kyang under the sealed document.
The late Rajah of Ootah Leta also admitted of this
claim and the Father of Tuanku Fatimah, Tuanku
Soleyman, removed from Purl is to Prye at the time
the Rajah of Ligore attacked Quedah and drove out
the late Rajah Mudah, and then their claims were not
disturbed, and he gave a document that he should not
be disturbed by any future Rajahs of Quedah or by
the Siamese in the Government of Prye and its depen-
dencies, and our late father and his people by the
assistance of Providence lived in quietness and peace.
The whole of the country under him, thanks to the
Almighty, was not disturbed by the Siamese.
In the year in the month of Ramalaiq
i * .
Hadjee Dultam collected his followers and seized the
property of the people of Karangun who were working
the mines and carried off some to Kupong and others
escaped into the woods. After Hadjee Dultam had
left, those from the woods returned to their paddy
fields. The last month of Rabie Hawal Hadjee Dul-
tam and Hadjee Soonghoot came again and seized
these people, and the paddy housed was burnt in their
houses, and [they] left hanging up certain signs of
defiance such as wooden swords, together with arms on
trees. It is stated in our cousin’s letter that if we wished
to have Hadjee Dultam we should make known our
wishes to Tuankoo Mahomed Ahkip. In what man-
ner does our cousin mean that we should act? Hadjee
Dultam went and burnt and seized the property of the


people of Karangun and om* cousin knew of it, and
so far from seizing tlie said Hadjee—Dultam and send-
ing him to ns, being the agent of Tuankoo Dye, our
cousin did not even send for him and his people and
punish them by confinement in the Fort of Setar for
a month or two. How then could we have considered
these matters? Our dependencies for living was by
advancing mone}’ to the cultivators of padd} r living
at Karangun and by advances to the mines of tin
which amount to $578 This place Karangun, at
the time of the late Rajah of Setan (Quedah’s) life was
under the Government of Frye and has not since been
changed.
We went to apprehend those robbers and met
some Macow Chinese cutting down timber at Karan-
gun, who told us that it was with a permit from our
cousin. This proceeding ought not to have been done
without consulting us, as relatives, and appears as if
intended to drive us away. Not onty has our cousin
refrained from apprehending thieves, even Chinese are
sent to cut down timber. Our residence at this place
of Frye is to possess the property belonging to our
wife’s father, and he had further other property at
Quedah, which by the laws of God and man, ought
to be given. The father of our cousin (Tuankoo
Ebrahim) and of Tuanku Dye were similarly situated.
Our father also was Paha Sultan Abdullah, and ac-
cording to the laws and customs of Quedah we ought
to receive our share of the revenues, and in one year
to the amount of three to four hundred dollars.
We however did not ask for it but were content
with what we got by right of our wife.
With respect to these Chinese working as stated
we have received the duties, and we request that our
cousin will not demand it again of them as these poor
people will be paying double duties and we shall have
cause to be offended, as relatives, with each other, our


names be disgraced in other countries on hearing of*
these acts. If we take what does not belong to us
we only receive curses. If our cousin will not hear
this our advice, it will not be us that wish to change
the customs, it will be our cousin that does so in not
following what is laid down in the Koran as it is
stated.
It has never been our wish to act against the old
customs; whoever should [commit this faultJ the sin
of doing so will fall on himself.


Translation of a Malay letter from Tuanku Zeiuoon
Raschid* Ebene Marboom Sultan Ahamad Tajudin
Hallim Shah of Quedah.
To the Houble, Samuel darling, Resident Coun-
cillor, Pulo Penang, dated 13th day Dalkaidah, 3rd
November 1846.
(After Compliments.)
That on our return from Siam by land through
Ligore to Quedah whilst halt way we received letters
from our brothers Tuanku Mahomed Hakep, Tuanku
Ebrahim and Tuanku Mahomed Samraan intimating
that Tuanku Mahomed Saad had combined with people
of bad character and come over the Qualla Mudah River
in the District of Kupang under our jurisdiction, where
they have plundered buffaloes and cows, murdered several
of the ryots, burnt their houses, took their families and
carried them and their cattle away to Kotah Julutong
Prye, which place is also within our jurisdiction. We
are just now on our journey in haste and if in a day
or two we reach Quedah it is our intention to prepare
a fm’ce to go and seize Tuanku Mahomed Saad and it
is very possible that it will terminate in open war.
We therefore have to acquaint our friend of this
inasmuch as Kotah Julutong Prye is contiguous to
the Company’s territories, and as we have from time
immemorial been friends to the Company We should
wish that this timely intimation may reach our friend.
As for Tuanku Mahomed Saad our friend is aware
that he is well known for years past to be a wicked
man.
Written the 13th day Dalkhaidah.


To Tuankoo Zeynoon Rashid.
With Compliments.
My friend’s letter of the 13th Dalkhaidah I have
received. I am concerned that any proceedings of
Tuankoo Mahomed Saad should oblige my friend to
adopt measures for attacking Cota Jalutong Frye,
and nearing our mutual boundary with an armed
force,
I duly appreciate the consideration which prompt-
ed my friend’s letter, and I rely with confidence upon
his endeavour to restrain his people from any acts of
aggression within or upon our mutual border, and
from proceedings of whatever character which can in
any way affect the good understanding which has so
long existed between the British Government and the
Government of Keddah. My friend may rely with
every confidence upon my assurance that I shall
exert my best endeavours to prevent, within the
British border, any movement or proceedings at vari-
ance with the friendship now subsisting between our
respective Governments.
I have communicated all that has transpired to
His Honor the Governor of the three Settlements.
(Signed) S. Garling
Resident Councillor.
R W. Island
The 12th November 131-G.


Translation of a letter from Tuanku Zeinoon
Rashid Ebene Murhoom Sultan Ahamad Tajudin
Hallim Shah, Governor of Quedah.
To the Honble. Samuel Garling Esquire
Resident Councillor of P. W. Island &ca., &ca.
( After Compliments.)
That on the 28th day of Dhal Kaidah (17th
November 1846) our friend’s letter came to us and
that we have made ourselves fully acquainted with its
contents. We are requested in that communication
that our people who are about proceeding after the
capture of Tuanku Mahomed Saad should be restricted
from acts of violence either within or on the boundary
of the English Government so as to cause a breach of
the good understanding existing between our res-
pective Governments, and of our friend’s assurance
that nothing should occur within the Company’s
territory which might tend to disturb that amity.
We feel grateful to our friend for his attention
towards us in having communicated the whole of
this affair to the Honble. the Governor of the three
Settlements. We have to apprize our friend that we
have on our part duly restricted our people from
committing acts of disturbance approaching any parts
of the English boundary, as we are fully aware of
the long established alliance between our respective
Governments,' and of the mutual aid required each
from the other and upon the faith of such an under-
standing, we implicity trust that our friend will not
either into this affair of Tuanku Mahomed Saad, inas-
much as his acts are wicked, going about to commit
rapine within our jurisdiction, burn houses, murder
carry away property and cattle belonging to our
people, but that our friend will render every assistance
to us.
Written on the 28th daj of Dhalkaidah 1262.


From the Honble. Colonel Butterworth, Com-
panion of the Most Honble. the Military Order of the
of the Bath, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singa-
pore and Malacca.
To Tuanku Zeinoon Rashid Ebene Murhoom
Sultan Ahamad Tajudin Hallim Shah, Governor of
Quedah.
(After Compliments.)
I write to congratulate my friend on his retiini'
from Siam, and on his having succeeded to his father’s
rank and titles, which I trust he may long enjo} T in
health and prosperity and that he may prove a
blessing to the people over whom he has been
appointed to rule.
The present appears a most suitable period to
call my friend’s attention to my letters, under dates
the sth* and 27th May 1845,f relative to the usurpa-
tion of Krean, and, and to exchange a hope that he
will show to the world the uprightness of his inten-
tions by restoring that country to its rightful owner,
the Rajah of Perak.
I have intimated to the Governor General of
India the hope that my friend’s return would be
marked by the above proceeding, and it would give
me extreme satisfaction to be able, to report that this
hope had been realised, in order that my friend might
stand in the same position with that authority as his
ancestors did prior to the usurpation of Krean. Let
me hear from my friend on this subject.
I was sorry to learn by a letter of in} 7 " friend
addressed to the Honble. Mr. Gar ling that Tuanku
Mahomed Saad, some time past a resident in Kotah,
had been causing disturbances in 1113’ friend’s country.


but I doubt not this has all ended to my friend’s
satisfaction, and he may rest assured that Tuanku
Mahomed Saad shallreceive no countenance or support
in any of his wicked proceedings from the British
authorities.
This Kotah has always been a receptacle for the
bad characters of my friend’s country, as well as those
from Penang and Province Wellesley, and the people
there will continue to give us both trouble so long as
they are able to run from the jurisdiction of one power
to that of the other, by claiming to be the subjects of
the British or Quedah Governments as may at the
moment suit their particular ends and views. I would
therefore suggest to my friend an alteration in the
boundary by which Kotah should become part of
Province Wellesley.
If my friend concur with me in the expediency of
this measure, f will request Mr. Garling to depute
Captain Perrier to meet any person my friend may
nominate to negociate this matter. 1 am aware that
my friend’s subjects may be put to some inconvenience
in moving from Kotah, and that my friend may be
caused expense on their account, which to a certain
extent 1 should be happy to defray. My friend would
do well to communicate on this question with Mr.
Garling, in order that peace and quietness may continue
on our respective frontiers.
Dated at Singapore this sth day of December 1846.












