

THE
O’SHEA-PARNELL
DIVORCE CASE,
With Portraits of
Mr. C. S. Parnell, M.P. Mrs. Kitty O’Shea, and
the Captain.
Specially Reported.
WITH VOLUMINOUS CORRESPONDENCE.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
AH Rights Reserved.
Printed and Published by E. A. Goggin, at 155 Elizabeth Street, (near
Market Street)..Srf.ln<w
tybkell’s bookshop,
I 22 Castlereaoh St., Sydney, |
H And at I‘2B Gawler Place, Adelaide I


GO.,
3 G-EOHGE STEEET,
(Opposite St. Andrew’s Cathedral).
FOR UNDERCLOTHING, MILLINERY AND
DRESSMAKING.
SET LADIES, GIVE US A CALL.
J. T. FITZSIMONS,
(20 Years with E. J. Ho I ting'd ale,)
Practical Watch Maker & Jeweller,
119 ELIZABETH STREET,
(Six Doors North of Market Street),
SYDNEY.
Watches, Clocks and Jewellery Repaired on the Shortest
Notice.
THE
Gily frwidenfe SispensaFv,
603 GEORGE STREET,
Brickfield Hill , opposite Goulhurn Street , 2 doors above
Union Bank.
Dr. ALFRED AGASSIZ.
The Resident Medical Officer, a Legally Qualified Medical Practi-
tioner and Surgeon, registered in Great Britain, New Zealand, and
by the Medical Board of New South Wales ; late of the Royal In-
firmary, Edinburgh, and University College Hospital, London.
Sees Patients Daily. Advice and Medicine 2s. 6d.




O’SHEA-PARNELL
DIVORCE CASE,
lEetails.
In the Divorce Division, on Saturday, November 15, Mr. Justice
Butt and a Special Jury had before them the case of O’Shea v.
O’Shea and Parnell. The petition was that of Captain William
Henry O’Shea, a J.P. in County Clere, for a divorce by reason of
the alleged adultry of his wife, Mrs. Katherine O’Shea, with Mr.
Charles Stewart Parnell, M.P. Answers were filed denying the
charge, and the respondent made counter allegations against her
husband. Mrs. Steele was an intervener in the case.
The Solicitor-General (Sir E. Clarke, Q.C.), Mr. Inderwick,
Q.C., a,nd Mr. Lewis Coward appeared for Captain O’Shea, and
Mr. Lockwood, Q.C., and Mr. Pritchard for the respondent.
Mr. Parnell was not represented by Counsel, but Mr. George Lewis,
his Solicitor, was present. Mr. M’Cal appeared for the intervener.
Captain O’Shea came into court with his son shortly before
half-past 10.
Mr. Lewis Coward, in opening the pleadings, said that there
was a charge of connivance, neglect, and conduct conducive to
the adultry and wilful separation ; further, that the petitioner had
been guilty of unreasonable delay, also of cruelty. The peti-
tioner denied the several allegations.
Mr. Lockwood, Q.C., before the case was opened, said that he
appeared for Mrs. O’Shea, and he was instructed on her behalf
to say that he did not intend to cross-examine any of the witnesses
or to take any part in the proceedings.
The Solicitor-General said that the announcement of his learned
friend had seriously altered the position of affairs.
Mr. Justice Butt: Is there anyone appearing for Mr. Parnell?
There was no answer.


The Solicitor-General then said ; The petition was filed on
December 24th last year, and in due time Mr. ParneH applied to
put in a simple denial. Mrs. O’Shea did not content herself with
the denial, but made counter charges of adultry, in which she
included the name of hor own sister. She charged her husband
with cruelty, and put on the record statements with regard to
him implying that he had connived at the adultry over a series
of years. That almost amounted to a confessiop of adultry. It
is said that the petitioner, from the autumn of 1880 to the spring
of 1886, had connived at the adultry by directing the respondent
to see the co-respondent alone, and by directing her to invite the
co-respondent to the house. The petitioner first accused the
respondent of adultry in 1881, and many times since. The
statements of the wife were most grave and serious ; so grave, in
fact, that their withdrawal at the last moment cannot be any
satisfaction to the husband. Throughout the whole of the letters
there is not a word which can in the slightest degree support
any of the charges made against Captain O’Shea. They were
married in January, 1867. Captain O Shea belongs to an old
Irish family, and had been an officer in the 18th Hussars; Mrs.
O’Shea being the daughter of Sir John Page Wood, at one time
rector of St. Peter's, Cornhill. They were married quietly at
Brighton soon after her father’s death, Mrs. Steele, Mrs. O’Shea’s
sister, being present. From 1867 to 1880 the parties seem to
have lived a life of domestic happiness except in regard to
pecuniary matters, the difficulty being caused by Captain O’Shea
having stables at Bennington and Newmarket. In 1881, however,
Capt. O’Shea unfortunately became known to Mr. Parnell. During
the years of married happiness up to that time there were three
children born. In 1874 Mrs O’Shea went to reside at Wonersh
Lodge, Eltham, in order to be near her aunt, Mrs wood, who
regarded her as her favorite niece, and from that time Captain
O’Shea lived there occasionally, he having business at Madrid and
elsewhere. In the year 1880 Coptain O’Shea stood for Clare as
parliamentary candidate in conjunction with the O’Gorman Mahon,
who, at the Ennis railway station introduced him to Mr. Parnell.
The consequence was that Captain O’Shea asked Mr. Parnell to
dine with him, Mrs. O'Shea and Mrs. Steel being of the party, and
after that, although Mr. Parnell was occasionally seen by Mr. Cap-
tain O’Shea, nothing occurred to excite his suspicions until the
middle of May, 1881, when Mr. Parnell’s visits to Mrs. O’Shea
began, jCaptain O’Shea was entirely ignorant of these visits, but


in the early part of July in that year he head that they were tak-
ing place, and was furiously angry in consequenc. He had a great
scene with his wife, who left the 'lodge at night and walked to
London,, and on the following morning Captain O’Shea seat a let-
ter to Mr. Parnell, in which he said, “ will you be so kind as to be
in Lille or any other town in the north of France which may suit
your convenience on Saturday next, the 16th instant? Please let
me know by i o’clock pan. to-day where to expect you. I aw r ait
youn answer, and am arranging with a friend to accompany me.”
This letter sent, Mrs Steel used her influence to prevent the
contemplated duel and saw Mr. Parnell at the Westminster Hotel.
He assured her there was no ground tor Captain O’Shea’s suspi-
cions, and Mrs. Steel saw Captaih O’Shea and persuaded him to go
to Eltham, where he interviewed Mrs. O’Shea, and there was a
stormy and terrible scene. The result, howevei, was that they
resumed their former relations, but Captain O’Shea, going up to
town took a portmanteau belonging to Mr. Parnell, which he had
found at the lodge, and threw it out at Charing Cross station. He
also wrote to Mr. Parnell telling him he had not replied to his let-
ter, whereupon Mr. Parnell wrote to say he had sent a letter by a
careful messenger, and that Captain O’Shea’s surmise that he re-
fused to go abroad was incorrect. After the relations between Mr.
Parnell and Captain O’Shea were resumed, and Mr. Parnell, when
imprisoned at Kilmainham, was visited by Captain O’Shea, and
consulted in regard to political questions. When in May, 1882,
Mr. Parnell was liberated from gaol, notwithstanding the promise
given to Captain O’Shea, and the assurances of Mrs. Steel, Mr.
Parnell resumed his visits at Eltham, and did so to an extent
which attracted the attention of the elder children and the servants.
There was a bed room in which Mrs. O’Shea slept, and next to
that was a dressing-room which Captain O’Shea used when he was
there. On the other side of Mrs. O’Shea’s aoom was another dress-
ing-room which led to another bed-room. Mrs. O’Shea and Mr.
Parnell had been heard talking to each other in their respective
rooms ; they had been heard speaking together in the same room,
and there were other rooms in the house in which they were from
time to time exceedingly late of an evening. Mr. Parneihwas in
Parliament and he used to go down to Eltham by different ways,
sometimes driving, sometimes going to one railway station, some-
time another, getting to Eltham very late. Mrs. O’Shea used some-
times to go to bed, get up again when Mr. Parnell reached the
house, and go down and be with him very late at night. On some


Mr. C. S. PARNELL


occasions Mrs. O’Shea left the house and was away all night, and
on these occasions Mr. Parnell was not sleeping at Wonersh Lodge.
That state of things went on during 1882, Captain O’Shea being
entirely ignorant of these visits. In March, 1883, another child
was born, Clara; and in April of that year Mrs. O’Shea and her
family went to 39, Bedford-square, Brighton. When Captain
O’Shea was not at 39, Bedford-square there was another very con-
stant and remarkable visitor at the house. This strange gentle-
man, who was there very constantly, was not mentioned by name.
One of the witnesses heard him mentioned as Mr. Smith. There
is no doubt whatever that he was Mr. Parnell. While they were
there the behaviour of Mrs. O’Shea and Mr. Parnell attracted the
attention of the servants. I shall prove that on one occasion notice
was attracted and mention made of the fact that Mrs. O’Shea and
Mr. Parnell were locked together in her bedroom, and were talking
together. In November, 1883, another house was taken, and at that
house Mr. Parnell was a very frequent visitor. There he was not
Mr. Smith, but Mr. Stuart. He used to go to that house from time
to time. He was always very careful to keep out of the way when
Captain O’Shea came there, and there is evidence that he escaped
on one occasion from the balcony in order to avoid Captain
O’Shea finding him in the house, and came round to the front
door and presented himself as a visitor just arrived. (Laughter.)
In March, 1884, Captain O’Shea left England for some substantial
period and went to Lisbon, then to Madrid, and then to Lisbon
again. During his absence the same state of things as I have
described to you was continued. Rumors at this time came to
Captain O’Shea’s ears, and when he came back a correspondence
ensued. He mentioned to his wife personally the rumors he
had heard about Mr. Parnell, and she strongly and specifically
denied them. On August 4th in that year he wrote from the
House of Commons library :—“ You have behaved very badly
to me. While I often told you that you were welcome to stay
at Eltham whenever I was there, I beg of you not to do so
during my absence, since it would be sure at least, sooner or
later, to cause scandal. I am making arrangements with a view
of taking my family abroad for a long time, and I hope they will
be sufficiently advanced to enable me to ask for the Chiltern
Hundreds before the end of the session.” So anxious was
Captain O’Shea to guard his wife and his own name and the
interests of the children that he was prepared to resign his seat
in Parliament and take them abroad, with all the consequences


which might result trom separating the niece from the aunt,
rather than allow any sort of scandal to attach to his name. On
August 7th, 1884, Mr. Parnell wrote: —“In reply to your letter,
I do not know of any scandal or any ground for one, and can
only suppose that you have misunderstood the drift of some
sfasements which may have been made to you.” On the same
day Captain O’Shea received a letter from his wife, in which she
said, referring to their conversation regarding Mr. Parnell, “ I am
very sorry that you should have waited in on my account, but
after our conversation on Tuesday I could not imagine you would
expect me. lu any case I was feeling scarcely strong enough to
KITTY O’SHEA. >
travel again in the heat, and for the children’s sake I should mT
like to die yet. There was the correspondence, there was the
specific denial of Mrs. O’Shea, there was the denial of Mr. Parnell
in the letter which I have read to you, and for the time again
the incident was closed. Captain O’Shea’s suspicions had been
so lulled to sleep that Mr. Parnell and Mrs. O’Shea seem to have
become more confident as to what they could do at Eltham, for
in the month of lBB5, Mr. Parnell’s horses from Ireland
were brought over to Euston station, two horses in the first place,
named President and Dictator. President was Mr. Parnell’s
hack; Dictaior was always given to Mrs. O’Shea. They were


followed in the early part of 1886 by another horse called Home
Rule—(laughter)—which is described in one of the proofs before
me as being an old crock, and not fit to go in shafts—(laughter)
-—and what has become of that horse 1 don't know. (Laughter.)
I have evidence as to what went on at Eltham in 1885. Jane
Chapman was there in July and August, 1885, and will tell you
that a new room had been built at Eltham apparently for Mr
Parnell s convenience of getting in. It was a room which was
built out where the conservatory had been. It had a door to
Mrs. O'Shea,s boudoir. Mr. Parnell had a latchkey, and used
to used to let himself in through this new room, and from time
to time Mr. Parnell and Mrs. O’Shea were in that room, the door
being locked. The son Gerard is in court, and prepared to give
evidence with regard to this matter. He was born in 1870. Of
course at the time we are now dealing with he was a youngish
boy. You will hear something about his conduct in the matter,
and I think you will see that in a most terrible position he
behaved with great consideration for his mother, and at the same
time, when he came to understand what was really going on, with
loyalty to his father, and he showed himself a lad of honor and
of spirit; but although his name will have to be mentioned, and
you will have to hear what part he took in this case, I will not
compel him to go into the witness-box and be a witness in this
case against his mother. About May 21st, 1886, Mr. Parnell met
with an accident. On May 24th, 1886, a paragraph appeared in
the Pall Mall Gazette, which attracted Captain O’Shea’s
attention, and which he sent down to Mrs. O'Shea. It was headed,
“ Mr. Parnell’s Suburban Retreat,” and recountered the incident
of the accident. That paragraph was exactly true. Capt. O Shea
sent a telegram to his wife to know what the meaning of the
paragraph was, and he also sent the paragraph down to her to read.
He received an answer from her. The letter is dated May 25th,
1886. She addressed her husband: —
“My Boycey,—l received you letter, and, as I telegraphed, I
have not the slightest idea of what it means, unless it is ment to
get a rise out of you I am inclined to think that Chailie
(that is Mr. Charles Wood) is right. It is better to put up with
a great deal of abuse rather than to retaliate. I should say the
paragraph has been made up by Healy and Co. to annoy you
I should advise you to hold on to your seat. (Yours
truly, K.” ')


Possibly she thought that might be sufficient to reassure Captain
O’Shea ; but it was not. That letter was fortified by another,
which Mrs. O’Shea must have procured to have been written by
Mr. Parnell; and it is a deliberately false and inventive letter for
the purpose of setting Captain O’Shea’s mind at rest. The
Solicitor-General read the letter, in which the following paragraph
appeared :
“My dear Mrs. O’Shea, —Your telegram in reference to the
paragraph duly reached me. I am very sorry that you should
have had any apnoyance about the matter. I hope to see you
on Sunday.—C. S. Parnell.”
Proceeding, the Solicitor-General said: —Mr. Parnell was at
Eltham the night of the accident. He was at Eltham when the
telegram came from Captain O’Shea calling attention to the
paragraph, and then he wrote and invented that letter in order
that it might be put before Captain O’Shea, persuading him that
he had had nothing to do with it, and that it was only a newspaper
mistake. Now a correspondence ensued.
The Solicitor-General then proceeded to read at length the
correspondence which passed between Captain O Shea and his
wife when the former was at Carlsbad, the letters showing that
Captain O’Shea advised his wife to consult Sir Evelyn Wood and
her brother, Mr. Charles'Wood, who would be more inclined to
lean on her side then anybody else, and expressing his desire to
avoid anything unpleasant for the sake of his children. In answer
she wrote —“ I regard your last inquiry only as another method
of renewing the demand which I have repeatedly refused to
agree to.” That was at the beginning of October, after which
followed a remarkable letter. A paragraph appeared in the
Sussex Daily News saying that Mr. Parnell’s had been staying
at Eastbourne with Mrs. O’Shea with Captain O Shea’s knowledge.
The respondent wrote in reference to that:—“ I know nothing
about Mr. Parnell’s movements in reference to Eastbourne, and
I do not see why I should be expected to I do not
regard the paragraph as one of importance, but only an attempt
to draw you.” On October roth Captain O’Shea wrote again,
and in that letter he said, “ I am sorry you did not consult your
Solicitor, because I think he would have advised t T ou, in the
interest af your children, not to communicate with Mr. Parnell. ’
On December 13th, Captain O’Shea had his son up from Eltham,
and they went together to Jem Mace's benefit, at the Cannon-
street Hotel, I think. While there, or while on the way, Captain


O’Shea saw again a paragraph in a newspaper and he spolce to his
son about it. The son denied that Mr. Parnell had been to
Eltham. That denial was not true ; but the son took action him-
self in the matter which produced an immediate result. The son
evidently felt that his mother was treating his father very badly
and interposed in consequence. Eventually in June, 1887, the
undertaking which Mrs. O’Shea had refused to give to her husband
she did give to her son. On June 27th, 1887,' she wrote to her
CAPTAIN O’SHEA.
son, “ I am willing to meet your wishes with regard to Mr.
Parnell. I agree that there shall be no further communication,
direct or indirect.” On the following day she wrote another
letter to her son, stating that she intended to give up the stables,
and that she was not adraid of any proceedings There are three
matters which become very clear from this correspondence. First,
that aver and over again Captain O’Shea, for his own sake and


the sake of the children, insisted upon her not communicating
with Mr. Parnell; next there was a distinct statement, on October
9th, 1888, that she knew nothing of Mr. Parnell’s movements; and,
thirdly, the definite promise in June that she would not have any
further communication with Mr. Parnell. The statement with
regard to Eastbourne was untrue. Mrs. O’Shea and Mr. Parnell
had taken two houses at Eastbourne, and in one of them they were
habitually in the closest intimacy. They frequently travelled
together from London, but it often hapened that one would get
out at Polegate and the other at Eastbourne. The carriage usually
met the train at Polegate. In June, 1886, they took a house for
eight weeks at 2 St. John’s Road, Eastbourne, and the room
occupied by Mr. Parnell was close to that occupied by Mrs. O’Shea.
This lady, who said she knew nothing about Mr. Parnell’s move-
ments, had actually for 19 weeks occupied the same house with
him. In July, 1884, a house was taken in Staveley road, and
there Mr. Campbell (Mr. Parnell’s private secretary) was brought
upon the scene. That gentleman wrote a letter with regard to the
taking of the house, and when it was taken Mrs. O’Shea gave direc-
tions in reference to it. A small amount of the furniture was sent
down from Eltham, but it appears there never was a permanent
occupation, but Mr. Parnell was undoubtedly there with Mrs.
O’Shea. After the incident at Jem Mace’s benefit the son became
ashamed of the part he was playing, and in consequence of the
action which he took, which led up to the promise not to com-
municate with Mr. Parnell, a change was made. Another house
was taken at No. 112 Tressillian Road, Brockley, on January 20,
1887, and the way in which it was taken was very curious. A
gentleman presented himself at the office of the agent and said
that his name was Fox. That was Mr. Parnell. While he and
the agent were walking together the agent happened to mention
the name of Preston, upon which Mr. Parnell said, “ That is my
name.” At that house in Tressillian Road, Mr. Parnell and Mrs.
O’Shea had, at a not very inconvenient distance from Eltham, a
place where they could meet. On February 26th a paragraph
appeared in St. Stephen’s Review referring to Mr. Parnell
having been much annoyed by impertinent inquiries as to the
reason for his addressing a complaint to a certain coachman who
was in the habit of driving the “ uncrowned king ” to Eltham, and
adding that it was peculiar that Mr. Parnell seldom went twice
from the same station. Well, after this, in March, 1887, another
house was taken, namely 34 York Terrace, Regent’s Park. • This


\ . IS
A 4 S '
W& t'lffe fhthdfs of Messw;. Hedges and Granville, and Mrs*
O’Shea went to them about it. When asked for a reference s.ie
gave the name of C. Preston, Ix 2 Tressillian Road, Brooklcy,
and on being asked for another reference she gave the name of
“C.. S. Parnell, Esq., M.P.” 'The house was taken, and Mrs.
O’Shea and Mr. Parnell used it from time to time. Mr. Parnell w is
constantly there and Mrs. O’Shea was very frequently there in the 2
years, during which time the house remained in their occupation.
Owing to the denials of his wife and Mr. Parnell, Captain O’Shea’s
eyes were closed. It was not until after Mrs. O’Shea’s denial that
he received another denial of a formal charactter from Mr Pirn,
whom Mrs. O’Shea had been advised to consult. That letter was
dated April 22, and in it Mr Pirn said he had seen Mrs. O’Shea,
who most indignantly and emphatically denied that Captain O’Shea
had or ever had the least ground for the unworthy suspicion he
had entertained of Mrs. O’Shea’s fiiend, the fact being that the
friend alluded to was and had been a rare visitor to Mrs. O’Shea’s
house, and only became a friend of the family on Captain O’Shea’s
own introduction, I would remind you that the co-respondent
has not thought fit to appear in this case. He stands ouf of court
and allows‘judgment to go by default, and I am not the one to do
more in a case of this kind than to fulfil the strict and obvious and
peremptgry duty which I have to discharge, and to offer as
much evidence to you as may only entitle my client to relief from
a marriage which has been dishonored, and from a marriage tie
which is now to him only a shameful burden, but which will also
clear him from the imputations that have been cast upon him.
More I need not say. The co-respondent has practically made his
own admission—for he dare not come into court, as the criminal
law has terrors for some people whom no moral law can find, and
I do not wonder that he shrinks form adding an offence against
the criminal law. •
Captain O’Shea, the petitioner, was then called and examined
by Mr. Inderwick, Q.C. He said: I was married to the respond-
ent, Miss Katherine Wood, on January 24, 1867. I had known
her and her family long before. Her brother, Sir Evelyn Wood,
was a great friend of mine, and was in the service with me. He
introduced me to the family about 30 years ago. After the mar-
riage I stayed some time at Madrid. I had an interest in a bank
there. I lived with my wife in different places. I had a stud farm
in Hertfordshire, which was finally not a financial success. Mrs.
Wood, an elderly lady was an aunt of Mrs. O’Shea. She lived at


* 14
Eltham. In 1873 it was arranged that Mrs. O’Shea should live
near Mrs. Wood and be her companion. Mrs. Wood helped me
in my difficulties, and provided a house and also chambers in
London to enable me to attend to my Parliamentary duties. 1 hose
chambers were first in Charles-street and afterwards, in 1881, in
Victoria-street. I continued to occupy those chambers, visiting
my wife at Eltham, and she and the children visiting me in London
constantly. I have property in county Clare, and in 1880 was
elected a member for Clare, together with the O’Gorman
Mahon. In July, 1881, it came to my knowledge that M. Parnell
had been staying at Eltham in my absence, and I spoke to my
wife on the subject, I was very angry, and the result was that I
walked to London and saw Mrs. Steel at St. Jaraes’-street at 3
o’clock in the morning.
Was that the same day upon which you came up from Eltham ?
Yes —Did you go to Eltham with Mrs. Steel? Mrs Steel sent for
me in the afternoon, and I found Mrs. O’Shea there, and we all
three went to Eltham together.—Did Mrs. O’Shea give you any
assurance with regard to Mr. Pareell ? Yes, the strongest assu-
rances.—And did Mrs. Steele take part in the conversation ? Yes.
In the result did you accept Mrs. O’Shea’s assurances and those
of Mrs. Steele ? Eventually.—Did you at that time believe the
suspicions you had formed with regard to Mr. Parnell and Mrs.
O’Shea were without foundation? Yes. —In the Autumn of iBBx
were you in Ireland ? And in the course of that autumn did Mr.
Parnell go to Kilmainham ? Yes. —In the early part of 1882 I
think Mr. Parnell was released on parole in order to attend the
funeral of a nephew? Yes.—Did he see you on the way to Paris?
Yes. —After his release from Kilmainham did he go to Eltham
and stay with you for a short time ? He came shortly afterwards.
At that time was he in somewhat bad health ? He was in somewhat
bad health. In the early part of iSSj.Jhe daughter Clara was born,
after which you went to Bedford-square, Brighton ? > Yes.—-Did
your wife remain there some time ? She was there some time.
I used to go backwards and forwards. —Were you in Bedford-
square according to your recollection when Mr. Parnell was
there ? Oh, never.—ls it within your knowledge that he was
visiting your wife there? No. —During part of the time your
wife was there were you in Ireland on political business and private
affairs ? Yes.—Was it within your knowledge that he slept in the
the house during your absence ? Never. —Or that he was visiting
in your absence ? Never.— ln the early part of 1884 were you


obliged to go to Spain and Portugal ? Yes, in March.—On you
return in July or August did you hear rumors that Mr. Parnel
had been seen at Eltham ? Yes, vague rumors.
In consequence of that did you write to Mr. Parnell on August
4th, 1884? Yes.
Is this the letter; —“ You have behaved very badly to me.
While I have often told you that you were welcome to stay at
Eltham whenever you liked, I beg of you not to do so during my
absence, since it would be sure at least sooner or later to cause
scandal ? Yes.
In answer to that I got a letter, dated August 7th, 1884, from
Mr. Parnell;—
“ House of Commons Library,
“August 7th, 1884.
“ Dear Sir—ln reply to your letter, Ido not know of any scandal
or any ground for one, and can only suppose that you have mis-
understood the drift of some statements which may have been
made to you.”
Then there is a letter dated April 23,1886, from yourself to yonr
wife. The last paragraph is (reading): —“With regard to Mr.
Parnell I believe your assurance, but I have scores of times
pointed out to you that, however innocent in themselves, frequent
visits from a man to a woman during the absence of her husband
must give rise to scandal.” How did she take those remonstances
of yours ? She said that her acquaintance with Mr. Parnell was
kept up for political purposes. —Did she mention to you on one
occasion that Mr. Parnell was married ? She said that she knew
he was secretly married. —-Did you on some occasion in 1886
invite Mr Parnell down to Eltham on Sundays to dine with your
Yes. —Had you any knowledge at that time that he was staying in
the house ? Not the slightest.—ln 1886 did you see a paragraph
in the Pall Mall Gazette ? Yes. I wrote to her asking her
what on earth the paragraph ment. —What statement did she make
in reference to the paragraph in the newspaper ? She spoke to
me about the matter, and handed me the letter which has been
read. —Did you receive from Mr. Parnell a letter dated May 12th
from the Irish Parliamentry Offices in Bridge-street in these
wor( js “ Dear Mr. O’Shea,—Your telegram in reference to the
paragraph in the papers has duly reached me.' I had two horses
placed in the neighbourhood of Bexley Heath and turned out to
grass. lam very sorry that you should have any inconvenience
about the matter.” Did you at that time know about these horses?


16 ■ • ■
No.—That being the state of things in May, 1886, did yhu accept
that statement ? Well, yes. But I had found out something that
had nothing to do with the matter, and desired that there should
l)e no communication with Mr. Parnell.—When this letter with
reference to the paragraph was produced, did you make any
proposal with regard to taking criminal proceedings against the
newspapers? Yes; I suggested she should goto solicitors and
take criminal proceedings against the Pall Mall Gazette for
such an atrocious libel. What line did she take ? She appeared
to think very weil of the suggestion until she left, but next time
we spoke of it she had some arguments to the effect that it would
only be bringing the scandal into greatet prominence. Ultimately
you refrained from taking proceedings ? Yes, —Did you com-
.mmicate with the editor of the paper? Yes, in a subsequent
occasion. In that year you did go to Carlsbad? Yes, in June.
While at Carlsbad had you read to you a paragraph from the news-
paper wiih reference to Mr. Parnell being at Eltham ? Yes. —D_d
you write a letter to your wife on the subject ? Ye*.
Mr. Inderwick read the letter, which stated that while on a pic-
nic some American friends opened their post, and a lady, taking
up an American newspaper, remarked, “ Oh, Captain O’Shea,
here’s your name in the paper.” The lady then proceeded to read
the paragraph, but suddenly stammered, became as red as a peony
and tried to turn it off. .He (Captain O’Shea) knew well enough
what the paregraph was about. It was about Mr. Parnell’s visits
to Eltham and his suburban retreats in the absence of the hus-
band. He pretended to know nothing abont the matter. Did
you get a telegram in answer to that letter ? Yes.—lts purport
was that there was not a word of truth in the allegations, and that
it w««ld lie much better for you to look after health than to think
of anything else ? Yes.
Amongst these letters did you write one on August 20, iS*6 to
the effect that it would be advisable not to do anything definite
until )*hit return ? Yes, but that had reference to my children.
Did you write in that letter that you would be ready to take
away the children on October 1; that ,the proposals to live at
Brighton, and allow her to go to Eltham frequently, had, the ob-
ject that it would not alter the scandal ? that it would be necessary
to seek the advice of a third pewon; and that she should hold no
communication, directly or indirectly, with Mr. Parnell? Did you
also sugg that she should consult either Sir Evelyn or her
solicitor ? Yes, Did she object ? Yes.


On September'l3th, 1886, did you write a letter repeating the
condition that there should be no communication with Mr. Parnell
and that she should have a room prepared for you at Eltham in
order that you might live in the house ? The letter stated that the
condition was suggested by her brother, Sir Evelyn Wood, as the
only chance of mitigating the scandal? Yes. Did you write
other letters insisting upon her giving an undertaking to cease all
correspondence with Mr. Parnell ? Of course. On October 4th
did you write again to the effect that though saying she was anxious
to meet your views, she made no approach to them, and that while
refusing to acknowledge that there was any truth in the scandal,
yet for the children’s sake she professed to be willing to accede
to your request ? Yes.
Did you in 1886 see a paragraph in the Sussex Daily Nkws
stating that Mr. Parnell was staying at Eastbourne, and that you
knew where he lived? Yes. Did you write to your wife on the
subject ? Yes, immediately.
Did you get from her a letter to this effect: —That she knew
nothing about Mr. Parnell’s movements in reference to Eastbourne,
and did not see why she should be expected to know anything.
She was disgusted that he desired to drag her name into the
newspapers again, and warned him that she would take steps to
prevent it being done whoever attempted it? Yes. The follow-
ing day you wrote to her denying that you had attempted to put
her nane in the papers again, and saying that one of the effects of
its having been there had been to end your public life. You said
that if she would consult her solicitor he would advise her, in
the interest of her children, not to see Mr. Parnell any more?
Yes. —In December, 1886, was your son up in town with you, and
did you take him to a boxing tournament at the Cannon-street
Hotel for the benefit of Jem Mace ? Yes. In the course of the
evening did you see an announcement in the Pall Mall Gazette
that Mr. Parnell had been staying with you at Eltham? Yes.—
Did you speak to your solicitor about it ? I showed him the
paragraph, and expressed myself as extremely annoyed, and asked
if it were true. Did you write a letter to The Observer ? I
immediately telegraphed a denial to the Pall Mall Gazette
hoping it would catch a later edition, and also to the Observer,
the next day being Sunday. They put in a paragraph denying
the statement. Was the next thing you saw a paragraph in
the St. Stephens Review in the early part of 1887? Ves. —
What was done with regard to that ? I wrote to Mrs, O’Shea


18
r j
Did you get this letter : —“ lam glad you are feeling better ;
but sorry you are worried. I should not be if I were you, if you
refer—as I imagine you do—to the St Stephen’s Review, It is
evidently the old rumor again, and I think you are unwise if you
take any notice of it. If anyone finds they are able to take a rise
out of you they will go on for ever. I thought of writing to the
St. Stephen’s Review myself when I firit saw the paragraph;
but I am sure it is not worth it, and have no doubt it was done to
get a rise out of you ?—Yes.
Now, in April, 1887, did you receive a communication from
your son Gerald? Yes, —Up to that time had you heard anything
from your son with regard to Mr. Parnells’s visits or intimacy at
Eltham ? No.—ln consequence of that did you see Mrs. O’Shea
in Victoria-street? I immediately sent for him. He communi-
cated with me by letter in the first instance on April 13 —On the
15 th did you see Mrs O’Shea ? Yes,
Afid you had a long and painful interview with her ? Very
painful.
Did you show your son’s letter to her ? Yes.
Did she read it ? No doubt.
Mr. Inderwick then read the letter, which ran : North Park,
Eltham, Ke'nt, April 13, ’B7. —My dearest father, —Although my
news may not be very pleasing to you, yet it must be told. On
my return from London this evening I came in by the back way,
and as I came past the windo'w of the new room that was built
last year I heard the voice of that awful scoundrel, Parnell, talking
to a dog—Grouse, I suppose. So I asked my mother if it were
he, and she says that he has come to dine, and he will be gone
presently. Perhaps I ought to have gone in and kicked him—
(laughter)—but I am anxious to avoid unpleasant scenes with my
mother, and I also think it is better for you to know about it be-
fore giving him a thrashing, as you, of course, understand more
about these things than I do. However, if you wish me to kick
him you have only to say so, and it shall be done on the first op-
portunity”—(Renewed laughter.)
Did Mrs. O’Shea telegraph that she would see you in town on
the following day?—Yes.
It was on the day that you had the painful interview ?—Yes.
Did you point out to her what you conceived to be her duty ?—•
Yes.
Did Mr. Pirn, her solicitor, write to you on April 22nd, saying
that he had seen Mrs. O’Shea, who indignantly and emphatically


denied that you had then, or ever had, the least ground for the
very unworthy suspicions that you had affixed to her conduct ?
The particular friend you alluded to was, and has been, a rare
visitor to the house, and went first on your introduction. She,
therefore, although anxious to do nothing to cause you annoyance,
must decline to peremptorily close her doors on the few and far
visits that he was likely to pay her. The letter concluded with a
suggestion for some final adjustment of the difficulties between
you and your wife ? Yes.—Did you write to Mr. Pirn declining
to agree to that ? Yes.
About this time, also, did you write to Mr. Parnell, in the
House of Commons : “It has come to my knowledge that in
face of the scandal which has been so largely disseminated by
your own associates, and which I have no reason to believe you
have ever been heard to contradict, you continue to communicate
and associate with Mrs. O’Shea. I now personally call on yon to
discontinue any communications direct or indirect with her ?”
Yes.
Did your son show you a letter from his mother, dated June 27,
1886?—Yes ; under my orders he obtained that letter.
In that letter she said she was willing to meet the wishes her
son expressed with regard to Mr. Parnell; she was anxious that
everything should be made as pleasant for him as possible, and
desired no one to go there who was personally obnoxious to him.
She therefore willingly agreed that no communications, direct or
indirect, should be made wiffi her. In another letter she wrote
that he had instructed her groom to turn the horse Dictator into
the park ?—Yes.
As far as you knew from your son, had you reason to believe
that Mrs. O’Shea had broken off communication with Mr. Par-
nell ?—Yes.
Did you know anything about the house at Brockley ?—Not
until I saw the paragraph in the paper to the effect that he was
living at Brockley under the name of Preston. Did you know
anything about the house in York-terrace ?—Not until a year ago.
In Septomber, did you see two or three columns in a newspaper in
reference to your wife and Mr. Parnell ? Yes. In September 1889.
And did you subsequently see a paragraph in the same paper pur-
porting to come from Mrs. O’Shea denying the statement and
demanding an apology ? Yes. In the meantime I had consulted
a solicitor. —Did you know of your wife Ib.'ng at Brighton at the
end of the year 188 O? Yes, ~ \


Did you at the end of 1889 receive information which led you
to believe that Mr. Parnell was living in the house with your
wife ? Yes.
And did you thereupon consult your solicitor and file this
petition ? Yes,
The statement was made to you on December 20 and the
petition was filed on the 24th. Yes.
There is a serious charge of your having committed adultery
with Mrs, Steele? Yes.
Is there sny foundation for the charge ? No. It is absolutely
false as are the other charges.
Mr. M‘Call; I appear for Mrs. Steele. May I ask the witness
a question ?
The Judge : Yes.
Mr. M‘Call: From 1881 was Mrs. Steele on affectionate terms
with Mrs. O’Shea ?
Yes. —A short time before these particulars were given was there
a good deal of ill-feeling with regard to a probate suit ? Yes;
and it was after that that these charges were made ? Yes.
Harriett Bull, examined by the Solicitor-General: Were you
formerly in the service of Mrs. Dawson, 39 Bedford-square,
Brighton ? Yes. Do you remember Mrs. O’Shea staying there
five or six years ago ? Yes. What family was with her then ?
She had three children-with her. Was there another gentleman
than Captaiu O’Shea who used to visit Mrs. O’Shea at the house ?
Yes. Did you at that time know his name? I did not.
Look at this photograph (producing a photograph of Mr. Par-
nell) and tell me if you recognise it ? Yes. It is the gentleman.
How often did he come? Every day. Was he there when Cap-
tain O’Shea was not there ? Always, Did he stay long ? Yes.
In what room would he be? In the drawing-room, which was on
the second floor. Was that room occupied by Mrs. O’Shea ? Yes.
Was there anyone left at home with this gentleman and Mrs.
O’Shea? No.
And how long tvould they be in the drawing-rocm together
alone ? For hours.
Did he stay late in the evening? Yes, until n o’clock.
Do you remember on one occasion Mrs. O’Shea going away
and not coming back till a late train ? Yes,
What time did she come back? About 12 o’clock, I should
think. I sat up for her.
JVho came back with her? That gentleman (pointing to the


photograph of Mr. Parnell.)
Did he sleep in the house while Mrs. O’Shea was there ? One
night.
Was Captain O’Shea there when he slept in the house? No.
On this night when she came home was there anything which
attracted your attention ? Yes.
What was it ? Her appearance was anything but that of a re*
spectable woman.
Did you notice anything about her hair ? Her hair was all
flying.
Do you remember on one occasion going up to Mrs. O,Shea’s
bedroom to speak to her ? Yes.
Did you hear any voices? Yes ; I heard Mr. Parnell speaking.
Where was he ? In her bedroom.
And where was Mrs. O’Shea ? In there with him.
His Lordship : At what time was that ? Between 3 and 4 in
the afternoon.
In what condition was the door ? Locked.
Did you see them come out of the room ? Yes.
How long after you had knocked ? About three-quarters of an
hour.
Mrs. Caroline Pethers examined by Mr. Coward, said : I am a
widow, residing at Cheltenham, and I am professed cook.
Towards the end of the year 1881, I was put in the house No. 8
Medina-terrace, West Brighton, as caretaker. I was there all the
time the O’Sheas had the place.
Two or three days after Captain O’Shea and family had come,
did a gentleman appear ? Yes.
Will you look at that photograph. Can you tell me who it
was ? Yes, he went by the name of Mr. Charles Stuart at that
time. He generally called when Captain O’Shea was away. Used
to drive out with Mrs. O’Shea ? Yes, at night. And never in
the daytime? No ; never in the daytime.
Do you remember on one occasion, after their coming back
from a drive, they were in the dining-room for the greater part of
the evening? Yes; the whole of the evening. Do you know
whether the door was locked on that occasion ? It was always
locked when they were together—never open.
Were any directions given to you by Mrs. O’Shea with reference
to Mr. Parnell calling ? Not directly from Mrs. O’Shea, but the
young lady told me that Mrs. O’Shea did not like to be disturbed


x\nd what direction was given to you if anyone should call when
they were there ? “ Not at home.”
Have you had occasion to take up messages when Mr. Parnell
has been in the toom with Mrs. O’Shea ? Yes. Will you tell
us what took place ? I waited perhaps five or ten minutes, and
then Mrs. O’Shea would come to the door and open it a little way.
Did Mr, Parnell ever sleep in the house when Captain OShea
was at home? No.
Did he ever sleep in the house when Captain O’Shea was away?
Very frequently.
What room did he sleep in ? The one the captain used to use
—the dressing-room on the third floor.
On one occasion did Mr. O’Shea call when Mr. Parnell was in
the drawing-room ? Yes. What took place ? I went up to
light the gas and found the door locked. I heard Mr. Parnell in
the room. Did you go in ? I did not.
What happened afterwards ? Mrs. O’Shea went down stairs.
The captain rang the front door bell. I went to answer the door.
Ten minutes after that Mr. Parnell came to the door, rang the
bell, and asked to see Mrs. O’Shea,
Now tell us, did Mr. Parnell go down by the stairs? No.
Are you quite sure of that ? Certainly. He could not have
gone down by the stairs, or I should have seen him.
The judge : You are quite sure of that ?
Witness: I am quite sure that he could not have come down
by the stairs.
Mr. Coward (residing): Is there a balcony outside the room
where they were in ? There is.
Is there also a fire-escape accessible from the window ? Yes,
there are two.
Tell me, did this incident happen more than once? Yes,
three or four times.
And on these occasions Mr. Parnell was in the sitting-room,
and did not come down the staircase ? That is so.
On one occasion do you remember Mr. Parnell and Mrs.
O’Shea being in the drawing-room till after midnight? Yes.
On the occasions when Mr. Parnell slept there, who used to
take the hot water to him ? Mrs. O’Shea.
The Solicitor-General : My Lord, I am in a. difficulty with
regard to this matter. I had no idea that the case was likely to
be so much shortened as I have been enabled to shorten it by
the statement 1 have made. I thought I should have had to go
• s
« .


23
into greater detail, and I took on myself the responsibility of
saying that they need not bring more than a couple of witnesses
here to-day. Moreover, Mrs. Steele last night received an
intimation as to the length of the case which prevented her from
coming from Brighton to-day.
His Lordship : But on Saturdays the court rises at 2 If we
cannot finish at that time we can then adjourn till Monday.
The Solicitor-General; I have no other evidence here to-day,
but I don’t know how far your lordship thinks I have carried the
case by the evidence already given.
His Lordship : If you like to close the case now, 1 will tell the
jury what I think has been proved.
The Solicitor-General: Ido not think, after opening the case
as I did, that I should be entitled to elect to close the case until
the jury are satisfied with regard to the matter.
His Lordship; That being so I had better say nothing at
present. In any case we should not have got through it to-day,
and, therefore, will adjourn till Monday, at rx o clock.
THE VERDICT.
The hearing of the petition of Captain O’Shea for the dissolution
of his marriage on the ground of his wife’s misconduct with Mr-
C. S. Parnell, M.P., was resumed before Mr. Justice Butt and a
special jury on Monday morning. The court w'as again crowded
long before the proceedings commenced, and the same difficulty
was experienced as on Saturday in obtaining seats, the
accommodation being quite inadequate for those whose duty it
was to be present;
The opening of the court was fixed for eleven o’clock, and
shortly before that time Captain O’Shea, Mr. Gerald O’Shea-,
General Sir Evelyn Wood, and Mrs. Steele entered and seated
themselves at the solicitors’ table. Some amusement was created
in court prior to the Judge’s arrival by the circulation of a copy
of the Dublin Evening Telegraph, which, in a head-line
preceding its report of Saturday’s proceedings, announced that
“ Mr. Parnell meets the charges without the aid of counsel.”
The Solicitor-General (Sir E. Clarke, Q.C.), Mr. Inderwick,
Q.C., and Mr. Lewis Coward were counsel for Captain O’Shea ;
Mr. 1 Lockwood, Q.C., and Mr. Pritchard appeared for Mrs.
O’Shea; and Mr. McCall represented Mrs. Steele, who intervened


in consequence of allegations made against her in the respondent’s
answer. For Mr. Parnell there was again no appearance.
THE PHOTOGRAPHS.
Mr. Justice Butt took his seat on the bench punctually at the
time appointed, and, addressing the Solicitor-General, said : On
Saturday there were one or two photographs produced, and I
thought you seemed, in mentioning the matter, rather to assume
that that would be a satisfactory way of proving the identity. I
did not intend to assent to such a proposition, and I do not
know whether you understood me to do so, Sir Edward.
The Solicitor-General: Oh, no, my lord.
Mr. Justice Butt; Because we never act in cases of this sort on
photographs without some corroboration.
The Solicitor-General: On Saturday I had thought whether it
would not be possible to bring Mr. Parnell, who has been
subpoenaed, into court, so that he might be seen by the witnesses,
but I think I may be able to give evidence to render that
unnecessary.
Mr. Justice Butt: I merely mentioned it in case there should
be any misapprehension.
FURTHER EVIDENCE OF SERVANTS.
Jane Gleniston was then called and examined by the Solicitor-
General. She said : \ went into the service of Mrs. O’Shea, at
Wonersh Lodge, in October, 1880, and remained in her service
till October, 1882. Very soon after I went to Eltham I saw Mr.
Parnell at Eltham. He remained in the house a few days,
Captain O’Shea being there at the same time. In May, 1881,
and afterwards, Mr. Parnell was in the habit of coming to
Wonersh Lod t ge.
What room did he occupy ? The end room. We called that
the spare bedroom. There was between that room and Mrs.
O’Shea’s room a dressing-room and a door, so that one could
pass from the dressing-room to the bedroom without going out on
the landing. Mr. Parnell stayed there while Captain O’Shea
was away.
Was Mr. Parnell there during the day? Yes, until the after-
noon—until it was time to go to the House of Commons. On
one occasion I noticed that Mrs. O’Shea and Mr. Parnell were in
a room together, and the door was locked. I did not take much
notice, because Mrs. O’Shea told me that a secret society was
about, and it was necessary for the door to be locked. (Laughter.)


r . 2 5
Mr. Justice Butt: Do you mean the door of the house or the
door of the room ? Witness : The door of the drawing-room.
When we came back from Brighton, I heard about the door of
the school-room having been broken —that Mrs. O’Shea had come
home with Mr. Parnell between one and two in the morning, and
finding the servants in bed, had had to break in. Mrs. O’Shea,
used to go to bed between half-past nine and ten o’clock.
The Solicitor-General: Then you sat up for Mr. Parnell ?
Sometimes.
When Mr. Parnell came home did Mrs. O’Shea come down-
stairs again ? Yes.
And join him ? Yes.
And did you use to go to bed then ? Yes; after I had given
him his supper.
Now, did that happen frequently ? Oh, yes; every night when
he came home.
Did you at times take letters from Mrs. O’Shea addressed to
Mr. Parnell ? Yes.
Did Captain O’Shea come down on Sundays? Sometimes;
but not so very often.
Did anyone call at the house at any time while they were
locked in the room ? Yes ; and I went up and knocked at the
door, as I usually did. Mrs. O’Shea answered the door.
1 )id Mr. Parnell and Mrs. O’Shea walk in the park together ?
I do not know that, but they used to go out together
Have you known them out late at night ?—Very late. Until
twelve or one o’clock.
Did Mrs. O’Shea go away from the house any nights ? The
family all went to the seaside, but she was not out any other night.
When she went to the seaside, what happened with regard to Mr
Parnell ?—He went to Ireland.
1)o you remember one night after they went to the seaside, did
Mr Parnell and Mrs O’Shea come back to the house ? Yes.
Did they stay?—Yes; all night.
And the family \yas away ?—Yes.
Richard Wise, who was coachman in Mrs. O’Shea’s service from
the spring of iBBS till the latter part of 1888, said : On the even-
ing of May 2i, 1886, I fetched Mr. Parnell from the New
Eltham Station to drive him to Wonersh Lodge. We had a slight
accident. The brougham collided with a florist’s van, and was a
little damaged It was after midnight. Shortly after Uie accident


1 found that the horses, Dictator, President and Home Rule
had been taken from the stables belonging to Wonersh Lodge to
the Meessiter-mews, which adjoins them. Shortly after the acci-
dent 1 took President to Eastbourne. The family were staying at
2 St. John’s Road, and Mr. Parnell was also stayiug there, I used
to meet Mr. Parnell with the horse at the top of St. John’s Road.
I nevee saw Captain O’Shea there. Sometimes 1 saw Mr. Parnell
and Mrs. O’Shea walking out together.
Thomas Partridge stated : I am the son-in-law of the laist wit-
witness. I was with him at Wonersh Lodge, in the stables. I was
there about eighteen months, going there in 1985-
Do you know of Mr. Parnell being there ?—Yes, I remember
the accident. Soon after that Mrs. O’Shea and Mr. Parnell came
down to the stables, and Mrs. O’Shea told me that all the
horses and carriages belonging to Mr. Parnell were to be taken to
the next mews, I knew Mr. Parnell being fetched from the station
at night. When I went down to Eastbourne I did not see Mr.
Parnell at 2 St. John’s-road.
Thoms Kennett, a private in the ißth Hussars, was the next
witness. He said : I was employed as page by Mrs. O’Shea, at 2
St. John’s-road, Eastbourne. I was there about nineteen weeks,
and was with Mr. O’Shea about three years.
Did Mr, Parnell sleep at the house ?—Yes; he would go away
of an afteroon occasionally, and come back at night
Did Mrs O’Shea go away at all ?—Sometimes.
Did they ever come back together ?—I could not say.
Do you remember having a telegram given you in an envelope ?
Yes; Mrs. O’Shea gave it me, and told me to take it to Brighton
and send it from there. I took it to Brighton, but could not say
who it was addressed to.
EASTBOURNE WITNESSES.
Samuel Luck, 3, St. John’s-road, said : I am the owner of 2 St.
John’s-road. In May 1886, a gentleman came to me, and asked
to look at No. 2. He afterwards brought a lady with him to look
at the house.
Did you know where they were staying ?—T had an impression
that they were living at the Queen’s Hotel.
Did you know who they were at the time ?—No.
Did they take the house ?—Yes.
For how long ? —For eight weeks.
Was an agreement drawn up ?—Yes


What was the signature ?—“ Katie O’Shea ”
How long did they occupy the house ?—About nineteen weeks.
The rent was paid by her cheques
Uid you come to learn who the gentleman was ? —Only by rum-
our.
Were you in fact, told it was Mr Parnell ? Yes, sir, I was.
Samuel Drury, a cab proprietor, gave the following evidence :
I remember Mr. Parnell living at 2 St. John’s-road, in 1886.
He had your cab from time to time ? Yes.
Did you drive both Mr Parnell and Mrs. O’Shea ? Yes.
Ernest Vinall was the next witness. Replying to the Solicitor-
General, he said : lam a house agent and surveyor. I remember
on July 31, 1886, receiving a letter with regard to a house in Stave-
ley-road. The letter was signed “H. Cempbell.”
The Solicitor-General: The letter is witten by Mrs. OShea in
the name of Mr. Campbell.
Examination continued : after one or two telegrams, did you see
a lady in respect of the taking of the house? Yes.
By what name ? Mrs. O’Shea.
Did you see a gentleman? Yes, with Mrs. OShea.
Was his name mentioned to you ? It was not.
From whom did you receive the rent ?
From Mrs. O’Shea.
THE HOUSE IN YORK TERRACE.
Esther Harvey was called and gave evidence as follows : I was
engaged by Mrs. O’Shea as a parlourmaid, at 34 York-terrace.
Did a gentleman come there and live at the house ? Yes,
occasionally.
He did not slop there altogether, did he? —No.
But did he sleep there pretty frequently ? Yes.
Did he let himself in ? Yes.
Did you know his name? No.
Did Mrs. O’Shea at all tell you who he was? No.
Just look at that likeness in front of you. Tell me if that is like
him. Witness (after looking at the portrait of Mr. Parnell) said,
Yes, that is the gentlemam. ,
Mr. J ustice Butt: You know the gentlemn, then, as Mr. O Shea ?
Witness : Yes my lord.
Mr. justice Butt : As the witness says she knew the gentleman
by the name of Mr. O’Shea, perhaps you had better ask her, Mi.
Solicitor-General, whether Capiain O'Shea was the .vuo
used to come to the house.


The Solicitor-General: Yes, my lord.
Captain O’Shea, who was seated in the court, at once rose, and
The Solicitor-General asked : Is that the gentleman whom you
knew as Mr. O’Shea ? Witness: No, sir. (Laughter.)
The Solicitor-General: Was it the gentleman whose likeness 1
have shown you? Witness: Yes.
MR. “CLEMENT PRESTON'S" HOUSE.
George Porter, examined by the Solicitor-General : I was
formerly an auctioneer and surveyor at Deptford, Tresillian-road,
Brockley. At the beginning of January, 1 887, I was told by my
servant that a Mr. Fox had called to see me, and would call
again. On a subsequent day he did call, and 1 took him to show
him some houses in the neighbourhood.
Who was that gentleman ? You know now, I believe ? Yes
Charles Stewart Parnell.
When he first called, he did not give you any name, did he ?
No. I understood his name was Mr. Fox.
As you were going along, do you remember anything being said
about a person named Mr. Preston ? Yes.
What was it ? I said, “ Here’s a house that might suit yon ;it
belongs to a gentleman named Preston.” “Why,” be said, “that’s
my name.” I said, “ understood your name was Fox.” He
said, “No, that’s the name of the person lam staying with.”
Had you written to him by the name of Fox ? No. I think
the correspondence commenced when he told me his name was
Preston,
You let him the house eventually ? Yes.
Were any references given ? He refused to give references.
He said that a man with horses ought not to be asked for refer-
ences. (Laughter) He had taken lots of houses, and he had
never been asked for references. I told him that somebody evi-
dently knew him more than I did.
But eventually did he give you a very good reference in the
shape of fifty pounds down ? He agreed to pay half the rent down,
and that was done.
The Solicitor-General: That is my case.
MRS. STEELE IN THE BOX.
Mr. M‘Call: I ask your lordship’s permission to call Mrs. Steele.
Mr. Justice Butt: Certainly.
Mrs. Steele was then called, and examined by Mr. M‘Call as
follows ;


Hannah Caroline Steele, you are the sister of Mrs. O’Shea, the
respondent ? Yes.
In the respondent’s particulars, it ts alleged that Captain O’Shea
committed adultery with you on or about July 13 or 14, 1881
Is there one word of truth in that charge ? Witness (em-
phatically) : Not one.
His Lordship : You are the lady who has intervened. You are
the intervener? Witness : Yes, my lord.
Mr. M‘Call: There is not one word of truth in that charge.
Witness: Not one.
Then or at any time ? Then or at any time.
a juror’s doubts.
A member of the jury here rose, and said he felt certain doubts
as to the counter charges, and he failed to see how he could
dispel those doubts without the opportunity being afforded to
be cross-examined. (Laughter.)
Mr. Justice Butt : There is no counsel to cross-examine him,
you know.
The Solicitor-General: The petitioner has given a denial
on oath.
The Juror : My lord, we are asked to decide on the question of
neglect, and I should like to ask particularly some questions with
respect to the charge of neglect.
Mr. Justice Butt: You hear, Mr. Solicitor, what this is?
The Solicitor-General: Yes, I do, my lord.
Mr. Justice Butt : I will state at once what I had thought of
doing before this intervention. I had thought of leaving the
whole of these issues to the jury. I do not know but that the
more strict and regular course would be for me to put one or two
issues to the jury, and direct them that there is no evidence in
support of others; but I am not quite sure, on this particular
charge of neglect whether I could do that.
The Solicitor-General: My lord, I should like very much to
recall Captain O’Shea, with your lordship’s permission, to put a
few questions to him myself, and the juror can then ask him any
questions.
His Lordship : Yes, I think that is a reasonable course. That
is all that can be done now.
Captain O’Shea at once re-entered the box, and was further
examined by the Solicitor-General as follows :
You have told us in your previous examination that you were


living at Albert-mansions, while your wife was living at Wonersh
Lodge ? Yes.
Was that arrangement at your wife’s desire and your aunt’s
wish ? Certainly.
During the whole time down to your actual discovery of your
wife’s unfaithfulness had you been living on perfectly friendly and
affectionate terms with her? Perfectly.
1 think you have produced a large number of letters, some of
which have been read, that passed between you and your wife, I
believe, has produced some hundreds of letters ? Yes.
Mr. Inderwick : Eight hundred letters.
Were you in constant communication with Mrs. O’Shea ? Yes,
constant communication.
You used to go down to Eltham on Sundays ? Yes, and
often besides.
Did Mrs. O’Shea and her daughters come up to Albert-
mansions ? Constantly.
Among these letters there are numbers of telegrams from Mrs.
O’Shea about her coming and visiting you and dining with you,
and all the rest of it ? A number.
In any of these letters did Mrs. O’Shea complain of the arrange
ment that had been made ? Never.
Is there any pretence for saying that you ever neglected your
wife or treated her with unkindness? (Emphatically.) Never.
I never was away from my wife for a week, not only without her
consent, but without her approval.
Mr, M‘Call: I wish to ask whether, in your lordship’s opinion,
there is any evidence to go to the jury ?
Mr. Justice Butt: None whatever.
THE SUMMING-UP.
Mr. [ustice Butt then addressed the jury as follows : Gentlemen,
we all of us are placed in some difficulty by reason of the fact that
we have only heard one side. The respondent and co-respondent
have neither of them thought fit to appear. I should say the co-
respondent does not appear; but, while the respondent does
appear, she has taken no part in the case. We have, therefore, to
deal with the matter as best we may. Now, the first question for
you is whether these two people, Mrs. O’Shea and Mr. Parnell,
have committed adultery. Upon that there is a great mass ol
evidence which I do not think it necessary to call your attention
to in detail, because unless you are prepared, for some reason or


other which I cannot imagine, to say that almost every one of
the witnesses examined have been telling a false story, there can
be no doubt as to the adultery. House after house was occupied
by the respondent, and the co-respondent visited her, and gave
on some occasions names that were not his own, and there was
the getting out of the balcony and down a fire-escape when the
husband came. In fact, the evidence is so strong and con-
clusive that it scarcely admits of a doubt, and I do not, there-
fore, propose to occupy your time with that part of the case.
There are, however, certain other matters to be considered.
My first impression was that some of the questions arising from
these matters should be withheld from you, which I have the
power to do if I consider there is no evidence to go to the
jury. There are certain defences raised here which if established
by the respondent or the co-respondent, would be a conclusive
and absolute answer to the husband’s petition. Those defences
are summarily stated as connivance and collusion. Beyond the
question of the husband’s adultery, I very much doubt whether it
would be necessary for us to comment on the evidence. The
defence of neglecting his wife, or of separating himself from his
wife, is one of those defences called discretionary defences —that
is to say, that even though the plea may be established, the Court
is not bound to refuse the decree. Now, the matter to which one
of your number has addressed himself, and with reference to
which he has asked certain questions of the petitioner, is one of
those discretionary defences, a matter which must in the end
resolve itself into a question for me, because, if you thought there
had been neglect on the husband’s part such as that urged, I
should still have to consider whether 1 would allow it to debar the
petitioner from the relief which he asks. I have considered that
matter. Ido not say I considered that there is no evidence to go
to the jury on that point, but I say clearly that I would not allow
any such defence, having regard to the evidence, to avail the
defendants in this case. As exercising the power which the Act
of Parliament has given, I do not mean to allow that matter to
stand in the way. I shall not trouble you with any comments
upon it. The question of connivance and collusion is one which
would prevent the granting of a decree if you found it against the
petitioner, and, therefore, I will put one or two questions to you
upon that. We have had the evidence of the petitioner, Captain
O’Shea, and he has on his oath stated that there is not the
slightest pretence for the charge. There is no evidence to the
contrary. Then arises k the question, ought you to believe his


evidence? It is a very serious responsibility for a Judge or jury
to take upon themselves to disbelieve a witness who is un-
contradicted, unless there is some very strong reason for assuming,
notwithstanding his evidence, that he is telling that which is
untrue. But, gentlemen, in this case I cannot help thinking that
the matter does not rest upon the evidence of Captain O’Shea
alone, or anything like it. What are the facts proved here ?
There is a great deal of documentary evidence in support of the
statement. Why, gentlemen, on the very first occasion on which
the petitioner had suspicion of his wife’s misconduct, when he
found Mr. Parnell’s trunk in the house at Eltham, he wrote a
challenge to Mr. Parnell. I do not think there is any other
interpretation to be put upon the letter asking for a meeting at
Lille or some other town in the north of France. I say nothing as
to the legality or propriety of that proceeding; but it certainly
does not look as though any connivance of the adultery existed.
Well, what more have we ? AVe have from first to last throughout
the years the evidence has taken us over the persistent denial of
the respondent and co-respondent that any impropriety had taken
place. If there had been any kind of encouragement on the part
of the husband, or if he had been, so to speak, winking at and
wilfully shutting his eyes to what was going on, what would have
been the use of all this-denial on the part of the respondent and
co-respondent? Again, if the husband were a conniving and
consenting party, why should there have been all this disguise,
why should there have been the assumption by Mr. Parnell of
names that do not belong to him —such as Fox and Preston, and
1 rather think, Campbell, and a number of others ? But, above
all, why, then the husband comes to the door of one of the
houses in Brighton—l think at Medena-terrace—unexpectedly,
should Mr. Parnell, who is in the drawing-room with Mrs. O’Shea,
escape from the balcony by means of a fire-escape, and then come
round to the front door, as if he were an ordinary visitor, and ask
for Captain O’Shea ? And there I think the matter’practically
ends ; although I may call your attention to the fact that there are
other charges which were brought against the husband, one of
which was that he had been guilty of adultery with Mrs. Steele,
while there was also a charge of cruelty. But with respect to these
latter charges there is absolutely no evidence to put before you,
and I do not therefore mean to leave these issues to you at all.
Mrs. Steele has, by leave of the Court, made herself a party to
these proceedings, it being considered that where a party is charged
with such an act as has been alleged against her, that party has a


.... 33
a right to be heard, and it was therefore right that she should have
the opportunity afforded her of stating in the witness-box that
there was no foundation for this charge. There is no evidence of
any kind in support of the charge, but we have taken her contra-
diction. I may add that, in my opinion, it is a lamentable thing
that such a charge should ever have been made. It is made in
the answer of the respondent, but not in the answer of the co-
respondent. Still, both the respondent and co-respondent had an
interest in establishing this charge if they could, in the same way,
as they had interest in establishing the charge of connivance. Let
me point out to you, if it had appeared that the husband was
really a consenting party and accessory to his wife’s guilt, Mr.
Parnell—although the issue of cruelty might have been left open
—would have stood in a better position than he does at present.
Now, as to the charge brought against Mrs. Steele by Mrs. O’Shea,
it is simply shocking to my mind. There does not appear to me
to be the slightest shadow of foundation for it. You will also
remember Mrs. Steele is Mrs. O’Shea’s own sister. Having said
this much, I think 1 need do no more than simply ask you to
find —first, as to the adultery charged between the respondent and
the co-respondent having been committed ; and, secondly, whether
there had been any connivance at the adultery on the part of the
petitioner. You will now gentlemen, consider your verdict.,
THE VERDICT.
The jury, after consulting for about one minute, returned the
following verdict: —That the respondent, Catherine O’Shea, had
committed adultery with the co-respondent, Charles Stewart
Parnell; that the co-respondent; further, as to the petitioner,
Captain O’Shea, that he had not connived at the adultery.
Air. J ustice Butt: Ido not think it necessary to put any other
questions to the jury than those I have already submitted,
because any other questions arising out of the case would
ultimately resolve themselves into matters for my consideration ;
but as to them at present there is no evidence, therefore, on the
finding already made, I pronounce a decree nisi.
CUSTODY OF THE CHILDREN.
The Solicitor-General : Does your lordship make any order
with regard to the custody of the children ?
Air. Justice Butt : Are there three or two under the age
of sixteen ?
The Solicitor-General: There are two.
.Mr. Justice Butt; There will be the custody of the two under
the age of sixteen.


MLJO /> v
• r/UJO 34 - MC *
The Solicitor-General: Your lordship condenias'Whe co-
//>'jJ‘esP°ndent in costs ? JL *
t) - Mr. Justice Butt: Yes.
The Solicitor-General: And the respondent also ?
Mr. Justice Butt; The custom is to condemn the respondent
as well as the co-respondent in all cases where there is evidence of
there being a separate fortune.
The Solicitor-General: Then evidence of that will be put before
the Registrar.
Mr. Justice Butt: I think that is for me, but I will reserve the
question. Of course, prima facie, I should give costs against the
respondent as well as the co-respondent where there is separate
property.
Mr. Lockwood : I desire to ask you to reserve the question of
the custody of the younger children. I understand that applica-
tions on such matters may be made in accordance with the custom
of the Court, and that it would be open to us to bring matters
before your lordship which are not before you now.
Mr. Justice Butt : That is always so, but unless there is some-
thing to the contrary, it is a rule to give the custody of the
children to the innocent party.
The Solicitor-General: Then I am entitled, on behalf of
Captain O’Shea, to claim the usual order..
Mr. Justice Butt: Yes.~ My impression is this, that it has
always been open to a party to a suit, if there is evidence that the
children are not well cared for in the custody to which the Court
has assigned them, to make an application to alter the arrangement.
Mr. Lockwood? That is all I wish.
The Solicitor-General : I think the freedom of the law is such
that my learned friend does not want any leave to apply.
Mr. M‘Call : On behalf of the intervener, I ask that her costs
be paid by the respondent. It is within the jurisdiction of the
Court to make an order calling upon any person to pay the costs.
I ask that the costs should be paid out of her separate estate.
Mr. Justice Butt: 1 suppose, in fact, there is such an estate ?
Mr. M‘Call: Yes; I shall have no difficulty about that.
Mr. Justice Butt: Very well.
Mr. Inderwick : I think the usual course, if I may say so, is this.
If there is a question at the trial as to whether a party has a
separate estate* or not, and when that question is not disposed of,
the practice is to bring an affidavit before the Judge in Chambers,
and upon that an order is made.
Mr. Justice Butt: Yes, and that is what I direct to be done in
this case.


Secrets of Nature Revealed.
MARRIAGE GUIDE,
A Book of Nature, a Private Guide to Marriage Life.
Showing Fifty Engravings.
BIRTH—How, Why, What, and relation of Sexes.
PRICE, 3s. 6d., by post securely wrapped, 4s.
nxsmcA.ii.
Private Companion Married People,
Late Information.
Is., POSTED Is. 2d. STAMPS.
BEAR, 16 Park Street, Sydney.
Mrs, Besant's "Law of Population,"
Contains valuable Information. Is., post Is. 2d.
BEAR, 16 Park Street, Sydney.
SILEIVT FRIEXD
Revelations, Love, Courtship, Marriage, by Dr. Lamartine,
PRICE Is. 6d,
BEAR, 16 Park Street, Sydney.


RICHARD KELLY,
®liolcM«, |Wail & piping
Grocer & Colonial Wine Merchant,
158 GEORGE STREET,
Three Minutes From Circular Quay.
PATRONISED BY H.M’s NAVY.
Country Orders, a Speciality, (accompanied
by P. 0.0. or Cheque) forwarded with despatch
and delivered free to Kail or Steamer.
Families waited upon for Orders, and all Goods
delivered Free in Town and Suburbs.
Satisfaction Guaranteed.
