

e' -
' A/ 5 1/ tk
-




ifyiitCd t/AJCXKHf.
' 33Z. J7». '


Art. 111. — The Golden Age of Australia.
(1) Statistical Register of the Colony of Victoria. Compiled
[annually) from Official Records in the Office of the Govern-
ment Statist. Melbourne.
(2) Statistical Register of New South Wales. Compiled [annually}
from Official Ret urn sin the Registrar-General's Office. Sydney.
(3) Statistical Register of the Province of South Australia. Com-
piled [annually) from Official Records in the Office of the
Government Statist. Adelaide.
(4) Statistics of the Colony of Queensland. Compiled [annually}
from Official Recordsin the Registrar-General's Office. Brisbane.
(5) Statistics of the Colony of Tasmania. Compiled [annually}
from the Office of the Government Statistician from Official
Records. Hobart Town.
(6) A History of Prices. By Thomas Tcoke, F.R.S., and
William Newmaech. Yols. Y. andYl. Longmans and Co.
1857.
Australia, the newest of the worlds, has just held the
second of her International Exhibitions; and probably the
future historian will choose these two great exhibitions at
Sydney and Melbourne as events suitably marking the close
of the most remarkable epoch in the modern world, as un-
doubtedly the first Great Exhibition in London signalized.


its beginning. These incidents, indeed, are highly typical.
Better than any other single event, they illustrate the great
■expansion of human settlements and of material civilization,
which are the most striking feature of the memorable epoch
which began thirty years ago. From London to Melbourne
in the south, from London to San Francisco in the far west —
how vast is the transition ! If the English metropolis has not
played any paramount part in the recent marvellous expansion
of the European race and European civilization, it is at least
the fitting milestone from which that progress may be
measured. Thirty years ago, as now, London was the com-
mercial capital of the world. Geographers have remarked,
with sufficient truth to justify a striking saying, that the
British Isles, this little spot in the north-eastern corner of the
Atlantic, is really the centre of the largest mass of land on the
face of the globe, and therefore the most suitable site for the
world's emporium. Be this as it may, thirty years ago Lon-
don was already in the van of the commercial world; and it
was only natural that not only the first World’s Fair should
be opened on the banks of the Thames, but also that the first
■conception of such a project should have arisen in England,
as the most memorable individual achievement of the consort
of England’s Queen, Albert the Good.
How many of the fairest and noblest hopes to which the
lovely World’s Palace in Hyde Park gave rise—or at least of
which it was a concomitant and partly type or exponent—have
been dashed to the ground, fragile and vanishing as was the
orystal structure itself! Instead of a millennium of peace,
Europe, after nigh forty years of international repose, beheld
the opening of a new series of great wars; and in lieu of
social concord, we have had the bloody Commune at Paris,
and at present behold the red spectre abroad on the conti-
nent in the forms of Nihilism and Socialism, passionately
plotting the destruction of society and civilization, menacing
Europe with a chaos in the wild dream of rearing a commu-
nistic Utopia upon the levelled ruins. Truly, the path of
human progress is at best through brambles and pitfalls ; and
at times, like the bewildered rider- on the bosky Mexican
prairies, the end of its arduous and bootless efforts is an
unwilling yet compulsory return to the point from which it
started. Nevertheless, in its main and particular object, the
Great Exhibition of 1851 has truly symbolized the course of the
«poch which it was meant to herald. Paris and Vienna in
Europe, New York beyond the Atlantic, and now Sydney and
Melbourne at the Antipodes, have followed the example of


London, while the grand feature of the intervening period
has been the growth of that International Trade which it was-
the special object of the Great Exhibition of 1851 to glorify
and promote. Commerce —in itself developed, and in this work
aided, by the marvellous inventions of locomotion and in-
stantaneous verbal communication —has now brought the-
ends of the earth together; and California and Australia, the
uttermost parts of the globe, are now familiar not only in name
but in thoughtful purpose, to even the uneducated masses of
our own country, and in lesser degree of the civilized world at
large.
Of the population of our large towns there is probably no-
section so ignorant, in knowledge which does not immediately
and practically concern themselves, as the Cockneys or pure
Londoners of the lower class. Yet it so happens that the
name of the late found island-continent of the South, and
some of the qualities and doings of its people, have become
‘familiar as household words’ even to the street-boys of
London, as well as to the more opaque understandings of
the * bargees ’ of the river. Strange as it may sound, the
Londoner, although purely urban in his life and habits, is in
frame of mind quite a sporting character; and it is through
this eyelet of his sharp yet circumscribed nature that Australia,
or at least Australians, have penetrated vividly into his com-
prehension. Has not the Australian Trickett beaten our
champion sculler, Sadler ? And has not an Australian team
only just failed to beat the best of our English elevens in the
cricket-field ? Has there ever been as exciting or memorable
a day at the Oval as that on which the cricketers of England
and Australia contended redoubtably for the palm of victory ?
And has not the ‘ demon bowling ’ of a Spofforth and the
splendid fielding of our Australian brothers been talked of
and betted upon alike in the West-end clubs and in the
dingy lanes of Shoreditch and Blackfriars ? And this was not
the first, but a return series of matches in which England’s
progeny at the Antipodes have engaged as worthy antagonists
with the ‘ old stock ’ at home in that finest and most popular
of thoroughly English games.
These sporting events of the past year, in truth, have had
a very peculiar interest and even importance. While our
national trade-statistics show how vigorously and largely
the new-born Australian people—nation, perhaps, we should
say—take their place in the great work of international
commerce, and, most of all, of trade with their old home,
these contests in open-air games of combined skill and


The Britons of the South.
athleticism prove that the Australians, those Britons of the
South, preserve alike the old English spirit and the stout Eng-
lish physique. ‘ Coelum, non animum (nec corpora) mutant ’
may be said of these Northmen who have now planted them-
selves as a young hut already powerful nation beneath the
stars of the Southern Cross. Although their climate is hardly
so favourable as ours for vigorous outdoor exercise, Australians
can fairly compete with the British race in the mother Isles
alike in rowing, yachting, cricketing, and horse-riding. In
cattle-driving on the wide plains of the interior, and in long
journeys through the bush, they have fully developed the art
of rough-riding; and although in horsemanship they do not
show the finished style so common on the Lincolnshire fields,
our Australian brethren have as firm a seat in the saddle and
as daring a spirit as the best of our own foxhunters. They
have no wily fox to follow, but they hunt the more vigorous
kangaroo; and while, under the pressure of foreign agricul-
tural competition, we have to pass a Ground Game Bill,
proscribing hares and rabbits, the Australians, rejoicing in
the vast productive resources of their country, indulge their
passion for not unprofitable sport by introducing from
abroad, by careful acclimatization, the ierce natures in which
their own island-continent is so singularly deficient. They
stock their rivers with salmon for the pleasant sport of rod-
fishing ; they seek to plenish their solitudes by importing
wild animals and game-birds for the pleasures of shooting
and the chase. Indeed, even for horse-racing, and we fear
also for betting, they show a taste which, whether praise-
worthy or not, must prove to John Bull that they are * chips
of the old block.’ In intellectual pursuits, also, and in their
principles and system of government, the Australians are
proving themselves worthy of their racial origin; while
their material civilization, rarely favoured as it has been by
extraordinary circumstances, has advanced with a rapidity
well-nigh unparalleled in the world. Under all these circum-
stances, the ‘ blowing,’ or self-laudation, which Mr. Anthony
Trollope regards as a characteristic of the Australians—and
which has long been familiar to us in the Americans —although
not to be admired, can hardly be wondered at.
And all this progress in the development of human power
and of the arts and comforts of life has been attained
(speaking roundly) within the lifetime of a single generation.
Australian history dates really from 1851, and even its
origines, its earliest and insignificant beginnings, are within
the span of one long human life. John Pascoe Fawkner,


the fouader of the city of Melbourne, now the metropolis (if
one may venture so to call it) of the Australian continent,
lived to so recent a date that he was presented to the Duke
of Edinburgh when the royal Duke visited Australia ; and one
of the Henty brothers, who preceded Fawkner by a year in
settling on the mimosa-clad banks of the Yarra-Yarra, is alive
at the present day.
According to the common and natural usage of transferring
to new lands the names of places familiar in the countries from
whence the discoverers or colonizers come, the vast island -
continent of the South was first named New Holland by the
Dutch navigators; and when, in the middle of last century,
the greatest of English navigators, Captain Cook, took pos-
session of the eastern part of the island in the name of King
George the Third, he christened this new British possession,
New South Wales, a name then applied generally to the entire
region. But the island-continent was so vast, the early settle-
ments were so sparse and distant from one another, and the
means of intercommunication were so difficult, that as colo-
nization progressed, ‘ New South Wales ’ became subdivided,
and the region originally so called now holds only second rank.
Of the present divisions, besides the island of Tasmania (Van
Dieman’s Land), South Australia was first split off from New
South Wales, then Victoria (originally called the Port Philip
District), and lastly Queensland. The Australian territories
first received attention in the mother country as peculiarly
suitable for penal settlements. ‘Botany Bay’ became a
household word for transportation; and, undoubtedly, both
Van Dieman’s Land and New South Wales proper, with
its capital, Sydney, owed no small amount of their earliest
progress to the labour of the imported convicts from the far-
off British Isles. Tasmania, a small and thickly wooded
island, and the seat of Botany Bay, became at a comparatively
early time fully stocked with pastoral settlements, and there-
after gave the chief impetus to the settlement of what is now
the colony of Victoria. A strong desire arose for ‘ pastures
new, and some of the more enterprising Tasmanians began to
cross the narrow channel and settle on the adjoining portion
of the mainland, around the shores of Port Philip or on the
grassy plains of Yarra-Yarra. In 1834 the Messrs. Henty
established themselves at Portland; and soon afterwards two
other expeditions from Tasmania, one led by Mr. Batman and
the other by Mr. Fawkner, landed on the shores of the bay of
Port Philip at the place where now stands the city of Mel-
bourne. The very beginning of that city may be said to have


heen a store and tavern, built by Fawkner’s party, and which,
being a place of public resort and of corporeal supply during
the week, was also used as a place for divine service on Sun-
days —architecturally a mere ‘ shanty,’ still existing, and re-
garded as a venerable relic of bygone times, in 1852, when
the flood of gold-seekers began to pour into the juvenile city
from the old centres of population in the northern hemisphere.
In 1835, Major Mitchell, who had been exploring the interior,
published his narrative, in which he styled the region ‘ Aus-
tralia Felix,’ in admiration of its natural fertility, and ex-
claimed, ‘ We have discovered a country ready for the imme-
diate reception of civilized man, and fit to become [the abode
of] one of the great nations of the earth ! ’ Settlers began
steadily to arrive in the new colonjr, and each new arrival of
flock-masters pushed further and further into the vast solitary
plains of the interior. The first census of the State of
Victoria was taken in 1836, showing a population of only
142 males and 38 females; and a year later the population
amounted to 500, owning 150 horses, 2,500 cattle, and 150,000
sheep—showing a highly prosperous condition of the popula-
tion. But speculation, born of the sanguine spirit and trading
vigour of the people, outran even the highly prosperous
prices quickly overcast the fortunes of the young community.
Thus, on the very threshold of Australian history, we find
an outburst of the speculative spirit—even in agricultural in-
dustry, in the solid matter of sheep and oxen—such as again
and again chequered its subsequent career wdien speculation
found the most congenial of all its fields, viz., Money itself,
the canonized metal which constitutes the chief currency
•of civilized mankind.
Such, in brief, were the beginnings of Australia and of what
is now its metropolitan province, Victoria. But before com-
ing to the Gold-discoveries, which so brilliantly revolutionized
its career, it is highly instructive to notice some of the general
•conditions under which this Britain of the South was colo-
nized.
The colonization of Australia took place under peculiar and,
in most respects, highly favourable conditions. From the
outset the settlers were of one nation : they all came from
the British Isles, and mostly from England. Even under the
excitement of the gold-discoveries the immigration came en-
tirely from Great Britain, with the exception of the migratory
emigrants from China. Thus the Australian colonies possess
the great advantage of a homogeneous population,—a marked


contrast to the medley of peoples which poured into California,
and which, by the antagonism of races, aggravated the dis-
order which so long prevailed in that sister gold-country.
In Australia, also, the immigrants came from the most orderly
and civilized of countries, whereas half-barbarous adventurers
formed a large proportion of the California settlers.
Australia had another great advantage over the other
colonies of Great Britain. The aboriginal population was
sparse and unwarlike. Their tribal organization was of the
weakest and most rudimentary kind—without great chiefs,
still less with tribal confederacies. Accordingly the Australian
colonies have never been troubled, or their progress impeded,
by conflicts with the natives, as has been the case in all
our other colonies. In America our settlers had to encounter
the savage Indian tribes, in South Africa the Kaffirs and
Zulus, in New Zealand the Maories—in a succession of costly
and embarrassing conflicts of which the end has not come
even yet. In Australia, vast as that island-continent is, and
widespread as are the British settlements, there has always
been peace within their borders, undisturbed either by external
foe or internal dissensions, or by hostilities with the aborigines ;
nor have the white men presumed on their superior power
to oppress or despoil the earlier owners of the land.
Happily, also, the colonization of Australia was conducted
systematically", and with a social organization. The various
settlements were founded on the Wakefield principle. This
system recognized, from experience, the defects of desultory
and haphazard colonization. In its main features it was a
revival of the ancient method of planting colonies, as con-
ducted by the Phoenicians and Greeks, and as exemplified in
the still more ancient settlements made from Egypt. In these
enterprises the emigration was not confined to a desultory
swarming-off of the poor and labouring classes; it included
all classes, and generally took place under a chief or recog-
nized leader belonging to the upper ranks of society. It was
a planting of communities, not merely a going forth of colonists.
In one respect there was a fundamental difference between
the colonies of the ancient and modern world. With the
former the prime object was commerce—the establishment of
emporiums for the merchandize of the surrounding region.
Hence the Town—Carthage, Gades, Marseilles —was the first
work of the settlers, and it continued to be the stronghold and
centre of the colony: in some cases it was the colony itself.
Among the Anglo-Saxon race, the great colonizers in modern
times, the social spirit is weak compared with what it was


The Wakefield System.
among the ancient civilizations; and even under the Wake-
field system, where families, in preference to individuals, con-
stituted the emigration, the settlers quickly spread themselves
over the new country, engaging chiefly in agricultural pursuits.
Such procedure, indeed, was indispensable in the case of the
Australian colonies, which lay far apart from the highways
of the world’s commerce, and where there were no existing
products of the region, nor at that time any mineral store, to-
furnish materials for commerce.
The Wakefield system of colonization, elaborately worked out
by its author, aimed at ‘ maintaining an equilibrium between
land, labour, and capital.’ At the outset it was derided by
men of science, like M’Culloch and others, as Utopian and
impracticable ; and undoubtedly this opposition seriously ob-
structed the project, and maimed it of its full realization, by
tending to prejudice against it the better classes, whose co-ope-
ration was indispensable. Nevertheless the system gradually
established itself in public favour, and the soundness of its
principles (thanks to its success) became recognized by the
Government.
The most ordinary, and one of the most important features
of the Wakefield system —under which all the Australian
colonies and also New Zealand were settled —was a systematic
and careful employment of the lands in each colony as a
means of promoting immigration. The public lands were
carefully administered, and the proceeds of their sale were
devoted to defraying, or lightening, the costs of emigration to
suitable persons or families from the mother country. For
example, the State of Victoria (after its separation from New
South Wales) spent upwards of two millions sterling in
assisting immigration from the British Isles in the years
between 1850 and 1878. By such means a supply of labour
was obtained, without which the powers of capital, or the
advantage of wealthy settlers, would have been shorn of
their beneficial results. Capital is of little use in a new
country, or in any country, unless there be a supply of labour
through which it can operate and be reproductive. A man
with money, in Australia or New Zealand, might buy a large
tract of potentially valuable land at a very small price; but,
without labour to utilize it, the land might remain unpro-
ductive for a generation ; so that, through loss of interest,
the property would prove a most costly investment, how-
ever little may have been the first cost or outlay—in other-
words, however cheaply the land may have been purchased.
Capital, always scarce in new countries, will not go there


at all if there he not an available supply of labour. Capital
is the means whereby the intellect and enterprise of one man
is multiplied in potency, working through the agency of
scores of other men, with a proportionately increased gain
to its owner, while giving suitable remuneration to the hired
workers. The Parliaments of the Australian colonies, also,
did much to quicken the development of the country by the
construction of public works, most of which, besides serving
this purpose, were fitted to be ere long remunerative to the
Government.*
The Wakefield system greatly promoted the growth of
commerce in Australia, and enabled the colony to become a
trading country in a much shorter time than would otherwise
have been possible. Emigrants ordinarily consist of the poorer-
class ; and several thousand families may establish an* equal
number of small farms, and thereon live comfortably, yet
without producing any surplus property or commodities, still
less of such kind and in such manner as to be available for
export. Even if a considerable number of those families each
produced a small surplus of commodities, this surplus, being
distributed among so many owners, and over so wide a tract
of country, could not readily be concentrated for the purposes
of export trade. But when, as occurred in Australia, capitalists
bought or hired large tracts of ground, stocking them with
sheep or other animals, and working their ‘ sheep-runs ’ by
hired shepherds—each of whom was able to look after a large
number of stock—a surplus of produce at once arose; because
the stock thus reared was far in excess of the requirements alike
of the proprietor and of his work-people.t In this case there
are two factors of production, namely, labour plus capital,
whereas, in the former and ordinary case in colonies, there is
only one, viz., labour. Manual or physical labour, for which
kind of work alone is there scope in new countries, can produce
little more than is needed and consumed by the labourer : its
* In the Colony or State of Victoria the Government expenditure upon
public works has been as follows:
Prior to 1878,
During 1878.
£935,666
Total.
Railways £15,741,657 j
Roads and Bridges 6,857,267
Melbourne Water Supply 1,438,129
Other Water Works 1,740,232 ,
Other Public Works 7,851,898 I
£16,677,323
11,888
86,229
84,512
313,039
6,869,155
1,521,358
1,774,714
8,164,937
Total Expenditure. .£33,629,183j £1,381,334
£35,010,517
I This is the less to he wondered at, owing to the remarkableprolificaess
of flocks under the steady climate and genial skies of Australia.


The Squatter System.
return is little more than self-supporting. But there is no
mystery in the vastly superior results obtained when capital i&
added to labour. Capital represents, and is the result of ante-
cedent labour: it is an accumulation of profits from past
labour; and, if it be large, it may be the sum of many
hundred of labourers. Capital may be regarded as accumu-
lated labour in the most condensed and readily active form,.
—capable, as if at the touch of the wizard’s rod, of being-
converted into labour, reproducing at will the energy or
working-power out of which it sprang or was accumulated.
It may be likened to a coiled spring which has been wound up
by the power or labour of many men, or even of generations of
men, and which can at once give out all the power thus ac-
cumulated and stored in it—equivalent to the sum of the past
labour expended upon the machine. As regards the colony as.
a whole, the presence of Capital had the same effect as if the
the working or productive power of each unit of the population
had been vastly augmented, while their needful wants or con-
sumption remained no more than that of ordinary mortals.
In this way there arose a surplus of production, which soon
made Australia an exporting and trading country.
The chief form of investment of capital, and the source of
the early foreign trade of Australia, was the Squatter system.
A vast region of unoccupied and fertile land lay before the
immigrants, and the country beyond the Coast Bange was
peculiarly fitted for pastoral settlement. Accordingly, while
the poorer class of immigrants purchased allotments of ground
adjoining the coast, converting them into small farms, the
wealthy class took on lease large grazing tracts on the plains
of the Murray Eiver and its tributaries, and stocked them
chiefly with breeds of sheep from Europe. Under the clement
skies of that region the flocks multiplied rapidly, needing
little attendance. Mutton became exceedingly cheap through-
out the colony; indeed, owing to the smallness of the popu-
lation and the high cost of conveyance, the greater part of the
flesh of the flocks was of no value. The processes of pre-
serving meat, now so common, were then unknown; neither
had large ocean-steamers come into use to expedite and
facilitate conveyance between these distant settlements and
the rest of the world. But wool and tallow were not perish-
able and were readily conveyable; and so the flocks were
yearly shorn of their fleeces, and their carcases were boiled
down for the tallow : and these two commodities, almost from
the outset, formed the staple of a foreign trade for the new
country.


So ■wisely conducted and so prosperous was the settlement
of the Australian colonies, that in 1841 (only ten years from
ihe first settlement), the Crown-lands sold at a £1 an acre,
instead of 12s. as originally contemplated. Contemporarily
the Government-lands in the United States, although much
more accessible to European emigrants, sold at only a dollar
an acre. After being thoroughly discussed, the Squatter
system was formally adopted and established by legisla-
tion throughout the whole Australian colonies in 1846. But
■soon afterwards the unexpected advent of the gold-discoveries
rapidly began to alter the conditions of the case. Population
•and the requirement for land increased with wholly unlooked-
for rapidity, gradually rendering unsuitable a land-system
which had worked admirably during the circumstances for
which it had been designed. The gold-diggers rushed heedlessly
■or defiantly into the lands of the squatters, where the only sign
of ownership or occupancy was an occasional flock of sheep.
The squatters were incensed at such an invasion of their ter-
ritory, and there began that great land-question which ever
since has been by far the most momentous and the most
bitterly fought subject of contention throughout the Australian
colonies. The influx of the gold-diggers, however, was any-
thing hut a financial hardship to the squatters; for the
price of mutton and of other farm-produce rose
with a corresponding increase in the value of the squatters’
property. Large fortunes were made by those sheep-farmers
who sold their property when the gold-fever was at its height,
and Australian millionaires for some years became common
in England. A rare phenomenon; for it is one of the rarest
of occurrences for a man to make a large fortune from
farming.
Such was the condition of Australia when the gold-dis-
coveries took place. In all social respects the colony presented
n, most favourable contrast to what had occurred, and indeed
was still occurring, in California. Victoria and New South
Wales, in common with the other Australian colonies, pos-
sessed a stable government and an orderly society. The
population was homogeneous in race, and the flood of immi-
gration occasioned by the gold-discoveries (the migratory
•Chinese excepted) belonged entirely to the British stock.
The gold settlers found themselves among a population of the
same race, language, laws, and religion as themselves. Hence
there was a reign of order in Australia even during the gold-
fever, which was a happy contrast to the chaos and turbulence
prevalent in California. And, as already stated, this security


io life and property was attended by material as veil as moral
•and social benefits ; for wages and prices returned to a normal
level as soon as the exceptional conditions of supply and
demand were over, instead of being longer kept at an excessive
height, as in California, owing to the turbulence and social
disorders under which industrial pursuits had to be carried on.
In 1850, just before the great gold-discoveries occurred, the
Australian colonies, with the ready assent of the mother
country, acquired the powers of self-government, with par-
liamentary institutions, but under Governors appointed by the
imperial government, and paid out of the colonial revenues.
Under any circumstances Australia could safely reckon upon
.a slow but steady and orderly career of prosperity. Far
removed from Europe—the seat of the great warring States,
and the chief source or centre of the world’s wars; secure even
from the visits of hostile fleets, because protected by the all-
powerful British navy; exempt also from any internal con-
flicts with a hostile native population—the Australian colonies
were to a singular extent left free to develop their resources
in perfect peace and security. Nevertheless, but for the magic
power of gold, their progress would have been slow, and rural
life alone would have prevailed for many generations. Great
towns —those hearts of civilization, where the pulse of human
life beats quickest, albeit feverishly at times—would not
jet have arisen even upon the shores of the beautiful bay and
secure haven of Port Philip. Australia would have remained
a sparsely peopled land, covered by the wide sheep-walks of
the wealthy squatters, and by the small farms of the common
people ; a land without poverty, and of secure although homely
comfort; and with no greater foreign trade than arose from
the wool and tallow brought down from the interior over bad
roads and at heavy cost. At the time of the gold-discoveries,
there was hardly a place worthy of being called a town; there
were no piers or harbours other than of native making; and
rude jetties, or temporary planking, were all that was needed
or thought necessary for the few ships which arrived bringing
immigrants and taking away the surplus agricultural produce
of the country. But Gold, the most potent of magicians,
■speedily transformed Australia as it transformed California.
It built Melbourne, the London of the Antipodes, and changed
Victoria and New South Wales from a townless and sparsely
peopled agricultural territory into a state containing nearly
all the commingled industries and resources which build up
the power and prosperity of the greatest nations.
Even prior to the discoveries in California, it had been


known that gold was to be met with in Australia. Small pieces
of the precious metal had occasionally been picked up by
shepherds in Victoria, but no one dreamt that the country
contained great beds of gold. Accordingly the Government
discouraged any attempt at gold-finding. Believing that the
metal only existed sporadically, in small quantity, and was to
be found merely by chance, the Government at first suppressed
the news of occasional finds of the ore, fearing lest a gold
mania and gambling spirit would, without any adequate return*
divert the population from its course of steady industry. But
the tidings of the great gold-discoveries in California changed
the aspect of this matter. A rich and extensive gold-region
was shown to be possible and existent. Geologists, also,
recognized a resemblance between the rock-formations in many
parts of Australia and those which had proved so auriferous
in California; and the same resemblance struck the eye of
some settlers who had previously worked on the Californian
gold-beds. In March, 1850, a gold nugget was found at Climes
and was exhibited in a shop in Victoria. Under these circum-
stances, the Government reversed its policy, and, wisely
resolving to expedite the development of this new source of
wealth for the colony, offered a reward to the discoverer of
a gold-bed. In August, 1851, the precious metal was at length
discovered by Mr. Hargreaves in large quantity at Ballarat
—a locality which has proved to be one of the richest in
Australia. And soon afterwards gold was discovered in
abundance throughout both Victoria and New South Wales.
This discovery of gold rapidly changed the entire aspect
and general condition of these colonies. They had to pass
through a period of industrial, and to some extent of social dis-
organization, but accompanied by a vast increase of wealth*
which soon launched the country on a new, orderly, and most
prosperous career. At first, the whole industrial fabric was.
dislocated, and population rushed away from its old seats and
pursuits. ‘ln the course of a few months, half the male
population of A ictoria had left their legitimate occupations,
and had gone hot-footed in search of the precious metal.
Workshops stood idle, business places were closed, ships lay
empty at the wharves, trade was at a standstill, business wae
allowed to drift where it would; there was but one thing
thought of, and that was gold.’ Next, and speedily, there
came an influx of population from the adjoining colonies or
provinces of Australia; and of the seventy thousand inhabitants
of South Australia, no less than twenty thousand hurried off
to Victoria. Finally, in the summer of 1852, there began to


arrive the flow of immigration from Europe, which for several
years continued to pour in as fast as ships could bring them.
The previously solitary expanse of Hobson’s Bay began to fill
with emigrant ships, which were deserted by their crews as
soon as they dropped anchor ; and before they could he
manned again for departure, no less than £4O a month had to
be paid to each seaman for the voyage.*
In Australia, both in Victoria and New South Wales, the
great gold-beds lay beyond the Coast Range, in a region to
which there were no roads, and where no habitations were to
be seen, save here and there, at great distances from each
other, the homesteads of the squatters. It was fortunate for
the gold-seekers that these shepherd-kings had arrived before
them in the solitude, and covered the wide plains with their
countless fast-breeding flocks. Animal food remained cheap,
even when the rush to the gold-fields was at its height; and
as small farms were numerous, and the cultivation of the soil
had been,early established, the scarcity of food-supplies in
Australia never became so severe as it had been in California.
The comparative homogeneousness of the population, too,
and the lesser proportion of lawless adventurers and outlaws
from foreign lands, rendered life and property on the plains of
Ballarat and Bendigo less insecure than they were among
the gulches and sierras of Nevada. But the raging thirst
for gold, combined with the unavoidable absence of civic
restraint, which offered to the lawless and criminal passions
the temptation of opportunity, made turbulence and crime of
frequent occurrence. Lawlessness, it is true, never obtained
the mastery in any district; but at the gold-fields and on the
solitary roads leading to them, thefts, robberies, and even
murders were perpetrated ; and the dissipated class of miners
carried their turbulence and unbridled passions into the towns,
which they made the seat of their passing orgies.
During the four years subsequent to the discovery of gold,
nearly four hundred thousand immigrants were added to the
population of the Australian colonies—including Tasmania,
where the influx was small. Despite this sudden influx of
gold-seekers, the proportion of the sexes remained highly
satisfactory'—the females constituting fully forty per cent,
of the Australian population, even in Victoria where the
* ‘At the anchorage in Hobson’s Bay, at the present date (November, 1852),
there are 117 ships or barques, and 33 brigs or schooners, besides steam-vessels,
and about 70 sail of a lighter draught of water, which, as requiring a depth of
not more than nine feet when loaded, are able to ascend the river to Melbourne.
This amount of shipping forms a surprising spectacle for this young colony ’
(Melbourne ‘ Argus; ’ Tooke, vi. p. 816).
NO. CXLVIII. 2B


flood of immigration was largest. Naturally it was the
two gold-colonies, Victoria and New South Wales, which
received the largest portion of the influx of population ;
and Victoria, which was by far the most auriferous region,
was the goal of considerably more than one-half of the
entire immigration during the first four years. Gold was
discovered in Victoria in August, 1851, and before the
end of that year fully ten thousand immigrants had
arrived in that colony in search of the precious metal. In
each of the next two years the immigration into Victoria
amounted to nearly a hundred thousand. This was the flood-
tide of the immigration. Thereafter it began to slacken, but
the immigrants in 1854 into this single colony amounted to
about seventy thousand. So sudden and large was the influx
of the new population that the exertions of the Government,
generously aided by the public, were requisite to provide tem-
porary accommodation for the immigrants upon landing.
Barracks were erected at Melbourne, to give temporary shelter
at a small charge, while the larger portion of the immigrants
encamped in tents —a mode of habitation which was health-
ful, and even agreeable, at that summer season of the Aus-
tralian year. Several villages consisting entirely of tents
thus arose on the outskirts of Melbourne, the largest of which,
situated on a rising ground, contained some four thousand
inhabitants, well supplied with stores and protected by the
urban police. The population of Melbourne at this time
(January, 1858) had grown to fifty thousand persons, or more
than double what it was at the time of the gold-discoveries,
and the large suburb of Richmond contained several thousand
more.
In the early years of the gold-discoveries, 1851-58, the
population at work upon the gold-fields of Victoria was not
correctly ascertained. According to the estimates then pub-
lished, the population so engaged amounted in 1853 to 100,000,
but when the census was taken in April, 1854, the number w r as
ascertained to be only 67,000. This fact, however, does not
necessarily imply that the previous estimate was exaggerated,
because in Australia, as in California, a great crisis occurred
in gold-seeking, owing to the exhaustion of the surface of the
gold-fields, and the impossibility of working the gold-beds at
even a small depth below the surface without machinery and
capital; in consequence of which change in the conditions of
working, individual labour gradually became ineffective, and
large numbers of the gold-diggers forsook the gold-fields, and
betook themselves to other work.


The earnings of the gold-diggers during the first stage was
reckoned to be from <£B to £lO a week. This was the
average; and in many cases, of course, the earnings of the
individual miner were very much greater. These lucky in-
stances were kept in mind rather than the average earnings,
liigh as these were. Every instance of extraordinary luck
was widely circulated, and even exaggerated, by the shanty
keepers and other traders at the gold-fields, in order to attract
a large population, among whom they could carry on their
highly profitable business. In 1855, the daily earnings were
still reckoned at from fifteen to thirty shillings a day; but by
-that time individual labour was becoming less effective than
-co-operation under a capitalist and the receipt of wages.
Indeed, with the exhaustion of the surface-deposits, and
-especially with the growth of quartz-mining, the working of
-the gold-beds passed into the ordinary form of industry, and
wages took the place of individual earnings.
Considering that the average earnings in 1855 were still
so high as fully £1 a day, it seems as if the average rate
sibove mentioned of £8 or £lO a week was too low, certainly a
very moderate estimate, for the years 1852-53, when the jdeld
of the gold-fields per head of workers was admittedly at its
highest point. During these two years, the ordinary rate of
wages in Melbourne, the capital of the colony, where industry
•could be carried on more comfortably, or with less hardship,
than at the gold-fields, was from £6 to £7 per week; whereas
the rate of wages prior to the gold-discoveries had been from
-thirty to forty shillings a week. In other words, the discovery
•of gold at once quadrupled the wages of ordinary labour, while
The gold-diggers earned about six times as much. In this way,
for several years, there was witnessed the remarkable circum-
stance, that mere manual labour, working for itself, was able
io produce a large surplus of capital or reserve-wealth. Pre-
viously it had been Capital, invested in the squatting system,
•which had produced the only surplus wealth of Australia ; but
now, owing to the extraordinary richness and easy working of
-the gold-beds, unassisted Labour rapidly produced a large
amount of surplus wealth, which in its circulation benefited
all classes of the population, and became the main source of
the rapid expansion of the foreign trade of the Australian
colonies.
The emigrant ships arrived earlier than the trading vessels.
The labouring population of distant countries loosened them-
selves from their native soil and rushed to the gold-fields
faster than Commerce, with all its enterprise, could furnish


supplies for the new and highly profitable markets thus opened
to it. Accordingly a great scarcity of commodities ensued in
Australia, although it was felt less acutely than in California*
The period of highest prices in the colony of Victoria was the
twelve months subsequent to August, 1852; hut some com-
modities, especially food-supplies, attained a still higher price-
in 1854-55. Taking commodities all round, prices quadrupled,
and at their maximum became fivefold compared with the
prices which had prevailed during previous years. Butcher-
meat, the most plentiful of all the commodities in Victoria,
rose from a penny or twopence a pound to sixpence in the
autumn of 1852, and to eightpence and ninepence in 1854.
Flour, which had ranged from £8 to £l6 the ton, rose to £4O
in 1852; and after falling to £BO, rose again to £42 or £44
in the first half of 1855. Butter rose from a shilling or
eighteenpence the pound to four shillings in 1858, and to five
shillings at Midsummer, 1855. Garden produce became for a.
while still dearer : a cabbage early in 1854 cost five shillings,
hut, in two years afterwards, only twopence. Building
materials, during the height of the gold-fever, increased in
price beyond the other commodities. Bricks rose from thirty
shillings the thousand to £l5 and £lB in the autumn of 1852,
and timber per foot rose from fourpence to eighteenpence in
the same period of 1852, and to half-a-crown in 1853 ; but both
of these materials, and many other commodities, gradually
sank thereafter, until they stood at about double their old
price in 1857-58, by "which time a condition of settled pro-
sperity had been reached.
The value of the Crown-lands throughout the colony of
Victoria during these years of excessive prices rose greatly,
—the average price per acre in 1851-53, as shown by the
Government land-sales, being £3 10s., as against two guineas
previously ; while the extent of land sold during these years
was twice as much as it had been during the whole period
from 1837 to 1850. But it was in urban localities that the
rise in value was most conspicuous, and, under the influence of
speculation as well as prosperity, the price of town and sub-
urban land rose extravagantly high. The fortunate owner of
a small building-lot in Melbourne in a few months’ time found
himself a wealthy capitalist; and in some of the streets of that
city land sold at the rate of nearly half a million sterling the
acre.*
* The effect of the discovery of gold on Melbourne land prices, may be illus-
trated by the following among many instances. A piece of land in Collins Street,
having 22 feet 5 inches frontage, with a depth of only 16 feet 5 inches, having


High Prices.
Owing to these high prices, the cost of living, of course, was
proportionately augmented; while the rapidly increased wealth
-of the community, arising directly and indirectly from the
gold-mines, furnished the means for commensurately raising
the wages of labour. It is needless to quote the wages in
pastoral or agricultural life, because these were always accom-
panied by board or maintenance ; but the wages of ordinary
labour in towns quadrupled during the years 1852-58. The
pay of carpenters rose from five or six shillings a day to
twenty-five or thirty shillings, and fell to twelve shillings a
■day in 1856. The wages of masons and bricklayers followed
the same course; increasing fivefold during the height of
the gold-fever, and thereafter declining, until they settled at
about double their old amount.
With Midsummer, 1858, a change began in the state of
prices and in the commercial condition of the colony. Settlers
were still pouring in as numerously as ever; but immigration
had reached its maximum, and thereafter began slowly to de-
cline; and simultaneously the merchant ships, bringing supplies
of all kinds, began to arrive thick and fast. In the month of
May, 1853, besides smaller arrivals, twice a day some large
vessel from the other side of the world sailed into the port of
Melbourne, bringing supplies of all kinds, chiefly from England
or New York, while-trading vessels from India brought stores
of tea and rice. * But when these ships cast anchor in the
bay, they found that the mere cost of sending their goods
ashore was as much as the entire freightage from England!
Not only was labour at an exorbitant price, but the wharves,
although by this time considerably enlarged and improved,
were totally inadequate for the requirements of the shipping.
The lighterage, or mere landing of the goods from the ships
io the wharves, cost from twenty-five to thirty shillings per
ton; nor need this heavy cost be wondered at, when we read
in contemporary records that sometimes weeks elapsed before
a lighter could find a discharging berth at the wharves. And
-on it a small wooden building of but little value, was sold towards the latter end
of 1853 for £O,OOO, being at the rate of £267 Is. per foot frontage, or about
£441,000 per acre.
‘ Within the last twelve months (1853) the prices realized for laud of an ordi-
nary depth in Melbourne, not built upon, or with inferior tenements of small
value, have been as follows, viz.—ln the outskirts of the city, as North Melbourne,
<fec., from £2 to £6 per foot; in Elizabeth Street (from Lonsdale to Flinders
■Streets) from £l5O to £2OO per foot; in Bourke Street (from Queen to Spring
Streets) from £9O to £250 per foot ’ (Archer’s ‘ Progress of Victoria,’ p : 25).
* Of the arrivals of shipping at Melbourne in the month of May, 1853, forty-
six, of 22,857 tons burden, came from the British Isles ; eighteen came from the
United States; and twelve from India.


just as there was a difficulty in finding accommodation even
of the rudest kind for the immigrants, so was there a difficulty
in finding storing-room for the merchandize. The warehouses;
were filled to overflowing; and the rent paid for temporarily
storing the imported goods added a further element to their
market-price. Moreover, at the time when the supplies of
merchandize thus began to pour into the Australian ports, it
was winter there, although summer with us; and as the-
country was still almost roadless, the communication with the-
gold-fields, for which the greater portion of the new supplies,
were destined, was entirely closed for two or three months.
Thus before the year 1858 was out, a glut of goods had begun to
occur at the seaports; and as the merchant ships continued
to arrive in undiminished numbers, a glut of the imported com-
modities rapidly extended over the entire gold-colonies.
. Supply had overtaken demand. And the merchants in the
distant countries from whence the supjDlies came (chiefly Great
Britain) necessarily remained for a long time in ignorance of
the altered condition of the Australian markets. At that time
there were no telegraph lines traversing the continents and,
safely submerged in the bed of ocean, uniting the extremities
of the inhabited world. There was no Suez Canal; even the
Cairo railway had not been constructed, to lessen the delays
and discomforts of the overland route to the East. Steam
navigation, too, was still in its infancy, and no lines of swift
ocean steamers had as yet brought the island-continent of the
antipodes into closer relation with the rest of the world. The
only route was round the Cape of Good Hope, or by the
perilous circumnavigation of Cape Horn, where storms and
baffling winds or calms imperilled the voyage of the sailing
ships. It is only by remembering these old circumstances
that one can understand the severity of the commercial glut,
and consequent crisis in prices, which overtook both Australia
and California in the early years of the gold-discoveries. The
tidings of the exorbitant prices prevalent in the gold countries
induced the merchants of London, Liverpool, and New York to
strain every nerve to send out supplies. In like manner, a
merchant in Melbourne, seeing that certain commodities were
greatly in demand, while the people were so wealthy that they
could pay a high price for them, sent home a large order for-
such goods. But more than half a year had to elapse between
the giving of the order and the arrival of the goods ; while the
population was still so few in numbers that their demands,
however eager, could be easily met and overtaken by the great
commercial emporia of the Northern world. Thus it happened


that when the Australian markets had become full, there was
a long line of ships upon the ocean still bringing fresh supplies.
Moreover, even when the tidings of falling prices reached
London and New York, the known wealth of the population of
the gold countries induced the belief that the glut was but
momentary (as in reality it was but temporary), and the ever-
hopeful spirit of commerce or speculation reckoned that the
glut, reported three or four months previously, would have
ceased before the new supplies could reach their destination.
At the end of 1853 the import market in Victoria had be-
come fully stocked; but throughout the whole of 1854, mer-
chant ships continued to arrive in the port of Melbourne in
undiminished numbers. The inevitable result was a vast
depreciation of the imported commodities and an immense
fall in rents and in the value of real property generally. As
usual in such crises everywhere, the capitalist had the oppor-
tunity of making enormous gains. Buyers for cash could
dictate their terms to the embarrassed traders. Goods had
to be sold at any price; and it is recorded that ‘at the
auction-rooms no reference whatever is made to cost price.’
Despite the heavy cost of freights and lighterage, and the
exorbitant terms charged for store-room, many kinds of goods
sold at less than their value in the countries from which
they had been sent. Drapery and piece goods sold at from
ten to thirty per cent, below their cost price in England. The
finest champagnes could with difficulty be disposed of at
30s. the case ; and good clarets brought barely 15s. or
375. Brandies of low quality could be had at 4s. fid. the
case, and the best course the importer could take was to re-
export them for the British market. As regards commodi-
ties of all kinds, in November, 1854, the leading journal in
Melbourne said: ‘We strongly confirm our late advices to
suspend shipments entirely, until we have a better prospect
to report.’ Bankruptcies multiplied, and, owing to the sud-
den depreciation of property, the assets in most cases had
merely a nominal value, failing to recover the expense of
their realization. House property, which a year before had
risen to an almost fabulous value, suffered an equally re-
markable depreciation; and in many cases the rental value of
the warehouses fell below the amount of the ground-rent!
Alike in commercial and building enterprises in Melbourne,
it was contemporaneously recorded that ‘ the losses are of so
astonishing a character that they resemble fictions rather than
genuine narratives. Fortunes which could have enabled their
possessors to sustain for life the dignities of peerage were


acquired by plodding tradesmen in the course of a few
months ; and before they had time to receive the congratula-
tions of their friends, their riches passed away, and they
found themselves reduced to utter poverty. Perhaps in the
whole range of history [except in California] no records are
to be met with of vast sums of money so suddenly amassed
and so suddenly dissipated.’
Referring to the vast depreciation in house property,
‘ which in some instances has been the cause and in others
the result of commercial failures,’ the Melbourne ‘ Argus ’
(Feb. 1855) quotes the following cases : —‘A builder rented a
vacant piece of ground at a figure something below £3OO per
annum, and expended almost £40,000 in putting up a range
of spacious and commodious stores, massively built of blue
stone. When completed, the stores let readily at from
£I,OOO to £1,500 a year each ; and, judging from the result
of this and similar speculations, the owner reckoned himself
worth £15,000 a year, all claims being paid. In twelve
months from that date the rental value of the stores fell
below ground-rents, and the owner was utterly ruined.’
With respect to the commercial losses, the same journal
says: — c The amount lost by one firm alone in a twelve-
month, through bad debts, is deliberately estimated to exceed
£90,000 ; another firm lost, in a similar period, through the
same means, upwards of £40,000. A merchant who, two years
since, was regarded as worth £IOO,OOO, was recently obliged
to pay a small account by his acceptance for a month.’
In the latter months of 1853, the wages of labour also fell,
and never again reached the very high point at which they
stood in the immediately previous year. The Government,
threatened with a heavy financial deficit, had stopped the
public works; the gold-fields also were becoming gradually closed
against individual labour ; while emigrant ships continued to
arrive in hardly diminished numbers, and a large portion of
the new settlers came with the purpose of working as artizans,
and in other forms of urban employment. In consequence, the
hitherto strange spectacle was witnessed of labourers going
about in search of employment, and even as paupers demand-
ing relief! The fall of waiges was general throughout the
colony; but it was only in the towns that this change was
severely felt, and the want of employment was in great part
voluntary on the part of the workmen. Trades-unions had
not yet been formed in Australia, but the spirit of ‘ strikes ’
was in full existence. In not a few cases workmen preferred
to become idle rather than accept the lower rate of wages


'which had become indispensable,—or, as they said, ‘ rather
than aid in lowering wages.’ The current rate of wages at
that time w T as eight or ten shillings a day for unskilled labour,
which, despite the high cost of living, was good wages for
single men, hut (it is stated) only sufficient with constant
employment for married men living with their families in
the towns, where house-rent was high.
This severe crisis, and glut of the Australian markets,
differed in some important respects from the apparently
similar crises which occur in ordinary countries. The fall of
house-rents and prices and the glut of foreign goods were not
owing to any diminution of production and wealth in these
colonies. The mines were yielding annually some ten
millions sterling, with comparatively little labour ; so that a
large portion of this amount was really surplus wealth, an
annual addition to the capital of the people. The squatters,
or pastoral population, also continued their work of produc-
tion, with hardly any fall of prices for their commodities in
their own markets, and with none at all upon their exported
produce. It was only the trading classes who suffered, and
the speculators in house property. Indeed the depreciation
■of imported commodities was in itself a great gain to the bulk
of the population, engaged in actual production, in farming
and mining. . The crisis was occasioned merely from the
supplies from abroad being continued in undiminished
quantity long after the Australian market for these goods
was fully stocked—-a commercial mistake directly attributable
to the want of swift communication between Australia and
the rest of the world. The gold-colonies were progressing
rapidly in wealth ; the population was multiplying from the
continued influx of immigration. All that was needful to
terminate the crisis was a temporary check to the supply of
foreign goods. It was to these imported commodities alone
that the great fall of prices applied—the home-produced
goods, and the price of agricultural and mining labour being
but little affected in value. By the beginning of 1856 the
worst part of the crisis was over. Trade in its various
branches began to revive; merchants and shippers began
to share anew in the general prosperity. And thus, in the
year 1856, the gold colonies of Australia reached a condi-
tion of stable and settled prosperity. Thereafter, although
they experienced the commercial fluctuations common to all
countries, the chequered and peculiar stage of their career
was over. The worst —and also the best—effects of the gold-
discoveries were alike past.


Among the many advantages in social condition which the
gold-colonies of Australia enjoyed over California was the
existence of good banks. Banking, of the best kind, had been
established in Australia prior to the gold-discoveries. Aus-
tralian hanking was established upon the Scotch system, by
wealthy corporations, for the most part having their head-
quarters in London. These pillars of industry had rendered
most useful service from the outset, and they helped the
colonies greatly during the exigencies produced by a' vast
immigration and the turmoil of the gold-fever. Nevertheless,
during those early years of gold-finding (as also occurred in
California) there was a great scarcity of money. And a most
striking proof of this scarcity is the fact that gold in Australia
was worth only sixty or even only forty-five shillings the
ounce, in exchange for money, whether coin or bank-notes.
An ounce of coined gold (or its equivalent in bank-notes)
could buy an ounce and a quarter of uncoined gold in any
quantities. It was fortunate for the population that their
chief produce (gold) was, of all commodities, the nearest akin
to money. It is the raw material of money, yet hardly more
serviceable as money than a hide is to a man who wants a
saddle or a pair of leather breeches.
A scarcity of money is always very adverse to the producing
classes. It was so even to the gold-miners, who (although
gold-dust was more exchangeable than ordinary property)
had to exchange their produce for a fourth and sometimes a
third less than its fair and ordinary value where money exists
in adequate quantity, or, in other words, possesses its ordi-
nary purchasing power. How much more adverse to the
general interests would such a scarcity of money have been,
had the staple produce of Australia been other than the pre-
cious metals ? Production in such a case would have been
so largely deprived of its profits that it would speedily have
ceased, however profitably it could be carried on under other
and ordinary circumstances. But gold can be exchanged for
money more readily than any other commodity; and the gold-
fields were then so rich, yielding five or six times the value
obtainable by an equal amount of labour in other industries,
that the Australian miners became wealthy even although
their produce had to be sold at much less than its ordinary
value.
This scarcity of money in a country abounding in gold,
actually produced from the mines, may at first sight appear
a strange phenomenon. Especially it may be asked, When
gold was brought to the banks from the mines, why did not the


"banks purchase it, when they could get so large a percentage
of profit, seeing that their coin or notes could buy 30 per cent,
more gold than such money could buy elsewhere throughout-
the world ? Had the banks been able to purchase the gold, the
scarcity of money in circulation would have been at an end;
for there was an abundance of gold ready to be offered to the
hanks, and the coin and notes obtained in exchange for that
gold would soon have been sufficient for the monetary wants of
the population. Gold would have risen to its ordinary world
value : and thereupon the banks would have had no longer
an inducement to buy it ; while the gold-owners (their mone-
tary wants being supplied) would have no longer had any
necessity to make further exchanges of this kind. The gold
not needed for home circulation as money would have been
exported —as nearly the whole of the gold from the mines was
actually exported —in the form of bullion, which is the most
convenient and profitable form for gold as merchandize.
How was it, then, that this very natural procedure did not
take place, or at least but sparingly ? How was it that there
was, for several years, a scarcity of money in the Australian
gold-colonies ; and that a considerable quantity of gold from
the mines was retained in the country for currency purposes,
and yet carried only three-fourths of the value which the
metal possessed throughout the world at large ? The difficulty
which then existed in Australia may be explained in a single
word : there was no Mint. The scarcity of money arose in
this way. Gold coin, together with bank-notes convertible
into coin on demand, constituted the money, or sole legal
currency, of Australia, as of our own country. And the banks
held no more, or little more, money than was requisite to carry
on their ordinary amount of business. Being so circumstanced,
had the banks bought gold with their coin, the stock of coin
would have become too small to meet the demands of their
depositors or customers; and as they could not pay their
creditors in gold-dust or in bullion, the banks would have been
liable to bankruptcy. If they had bought the gold with their
notes, the sellers of the gold might immediately thereon have
demanded payment for the bullion in coin, and so have at
once deprived the banks of their profit on the transaction,
besides imperilling the solvency of the banks, which had no
spare coin wherewith to meet such a demand. Moreover, even
if the general creditors of the banks, whether note-holders or
depositors, had been willing to accept uncoined gold (of course
at its then current value in the colony), the banks w r ould have
obtained no profit, because the bullion, or uncoined gold,


■356 The Golden Age of Australia.
would have carried no higher value than the coins with which
the banks had purchased it. But the Australian hanks are
banks of issue, and can issue notes to any amount which they
may deem advantageous. Why, then, did they not make
purchases of the gold with their notes ? As a matter of fact,
it is highly probable that they might have done so with safety
to themselves, and, if so, with a large profit, while also
greatly benefiting the community by supplying the monetary
wants of the country. As money was greatly wanted, it is
probable, or indeed certain, that the notes thus issued would
have remained in circulation. So long as the credit of the
banks was stable, the notes were quite as good as coin, and
therefore there would have been no motive for any one cashing
them ; that is, demanding coin in exchange for them. But there
was a risk in such procedure, and all unnecessary risks ought
to be shunned in banking. Also, although the banks might
have made large profit from buying the gold with their notes,
with the result of supplying the monetary requirements of the
public, it is also true that a scarcity of money enables banks
to charge a higher rate for their loans and discounts. Banks
are the reservoirs of money, which they issue to the public
through loans or the discounting of commercial bills; and in
proportion as the currency which they supply is scarce, the
banks are able to raise the rate of discount, or, in other words,
their charge for supplying this currency. But the fundamental
explanation and ample justification of the Australian banks in
this matter is that the purchase of gold, under the circum-
stances, would have been substantially a trading operation, be-
yond the proper sphere of banking. Except in degree (for un-
doubtedly gold is more negotiable than any other thing, except
money itself), the purchase of gold by the banks would have
been similar to an investment of their money in any commercial
commodity. Their money would have been ‘ locked up,’just as
if they had bought a stock of wheat or wool. Their wealth would
not have been diminished—it might have been considerably in-
creased ; but their stock of money, the special commodity in
which banks trade, would have been greatly reduced, pro-
portionately lessening their power to meet the demands of their
customers, as as imperilling their own solvency.
ihis dilemma for the gold-producers and the general
monetary difficulty, although much felt in Victoria, was ex-
perienced still more severely in the adjoining province of South
Australia. While gold bullion in Victoria sold at sixty
shillings the ounce (instead of its normal or w T orld-value of


minting, at £8 17s. 9d.), in South Australia it sold, or was
convertible into money, at the rate of only forty-five shillings
the ounce. This great difference of price was owing to th&
weaker or less efficient position of the banks in the latter pro-
vince or colony. The South Australian banks held only a.
small stock of coin, and therefore were less able than their
compeers in Victoria to supply currency by the issue of bank-
notes. The hardship and general embarrassment in South
Australia became so great that the legislature of that colony, in
June 1852, established a Government Assay Office, at which
the possessors of gold-ore could get their bullion converted
into stamped bars. By a temporary Act (for one year) these
assayed gold-bars were legalized as currency at seventy
shillings the ounce —still considerably under their proper value
of gold, as in the other countries ; and the notes of the banks,
were made a legal tender to third parties (that is to
say, throughout the community), but not at the banks, which
were bound to cash the notes on demand, either in gold or in
the stamped gold-bars. This Act brought a great relief.
The scarcity of money was at an end. The banks bought
gold bullion in the form of the assayed and stamped bars,,
largely issuing their notes in purchase or exchange, and
thereby supplying the wants of the public for suitable currency.
In this way the note-circulation of the South Australian
banks rose from £97,000 in January, 1858, when the Act
came into operation, to £282,000 before the end of the year.
This fact shows how severe had been the dearth of currency
in this small community. As the notes were issued in ex-
change for bullion, they were well secured—gold going into-
the banks as the notes went out. In fact, contemporaneously
with this increase of £130,000 in the note circulation, the
bank reserves increased largely ; the increase, of course, being;
made, not in coin or money proper, but in the stamped gold-
bars.
Notwithstanding this important remedial measure, the hard-
ship to the mining population, or the gold-producers, was still
serious. They had to part with their gold at about one-fifth less
than its normal value, viz., such as it carried in England, New
York, Paris, and generally throughout the world. Thus their
produce and property was artificially depreciated. Could it
have been coined or converted into money on the spot, the gold
would have at once attained its full value. Had there been a
Mint in Australia, the gold-produce of the country would have
carried its normal value, with commensurate profit to the
miners, and indeed to the country at large. Very naturally,.


then, a general demand arose for a Mint. It was very hard
upon the miners that their produce should be, as it were,
depreciated; and it was hard upon the whole
Australian colonies or provinces that, although suffering
severely from a dearth of currency, they had to send their
gold 8,000 miles to London and back again before they could
get their gold converted into coin. At length, yet not without
demur, this most reasonable and urgent demand was granted
by the Home Government. A Mint was established at Sydney,
The oldest and, at that time, still the largest city in Australia;
and before the end of the year two millions sterling of coin
were issued.
We have dwelt with considerable detail upon this monetary
-crisis in the Australian colonies, because it is pregnant with
important lessons, inculcated and illustrated by very striking and
also plainly intelligible facts. It shows how largely dependent
is the value of gold upon the fact of its being the substance, or
raw material, of money. In proportion as the yellow metal
fails to acquire, or is obstructed in attaining, the quality of
money, its value falls greatly. In most of the leading countries
of the world there is a State Mint, ready to coin (usually free
of charge) any gold that is brought to it. In such countries,
accordingly, gold being immediately convertible into money at
pleasure, carries the same value, whether in the form of bullion
or of coin. But the case, as we have seen, was different in
Australia at the outset of the gold-discoveries. There were
gold-dealers and private assayers in Australia ; and, as like-
wise in California, gold-dust served to some extent and in
rough fashion as a medium of exchange—but always adversely
to the owners of the gold-dust, who never obtained for the gold
its proper price, or full value in exchanges so made. Even in
the form of ingots, or the officially assayed gold-bars, the
precious metal did not carry its proper price, or w T orld value,
because such lumps of gold were quite unsuitable for retail
payments, or in the daily purchases of ordinary life. What is
more, not even the banks could give the full or proper value
for these gold-bars—they could not buy the gold even with
notes of their own issuing, because they were bound to “ cash ”
or pay the notes on demand in legal money—for which pur-
pose these gold-bars, of course, were not available, until a
special Act was passed temporarily legalizing these bars as
■currency.
Further, no other set of circumstances could so clearly
demonstrate and strikingly illustrate the vastly important in-
iiuence of Time as affecting the great law of supply and demand.


Causes of the Dilemma.
When the Australians petitioned the Crown to extend to them
the royal prerogative of coining money—a right which all
-Governments properly keep in their own hands—the project of
establishing a Mint in Australia was strongly opposed by some
wery able men in this country, w 7 ho maintained that such an
establishment, besides being open to objection, was quite un-
necessary, and that the want of a currency would be, and should
be remedied, like all other wants, by the natural operation
of the law of supply and demand. But these upholders of
* economic science’ overlooked the element of time, and the dire
consequences which must ensue before their law could come
into effective operation. No doubt, even without a Mint, the
Australian colonies would by this time have become supplied
with an adequate currency. They would have supplied their
lack of coined money just as they supply themselves with
foreign commodities of any kind, namely, in exchange for the
surplus produce of their own country. And they had been so
doing. But, owing to the marvellously rapid increase both
of population and wealth, and the vast remoteness of Australia
from the great centres of civilization and production, the pro-
cesses of trade or exchange could not operate so rapidly as
was requisite for the requirements of the community. Merely
because it could not be coined upon the spot, gold, as we have
seen, was selling at only two-thirds of its proper value. Thus
the mining population, the producers of gold, which was then
the chief product of Australia, w r ere deprived of a large por-
tion of their just profits, entirely because they had no means
of utilizing the produce of their labour by applying it to its
normal use, viz., as Money. And further, the entire com-
munity suffered from the dearth of currency. Not merely
gold, but, even more, goods, houses, land —in short, property
of all kinds—was abnormally depreciated, on purchase or
in exchange, simply because money, owing to its deficiency,
there bore a far higher value than it did elsewhere in the
world. Hence the Australians were ready (under this com-
pulsion) to sell their produce to foreign buyers at much less than
its fair or normal value—a loss to the Australian community ;
while in purchases or exchanges amongst themselves, although
there was no loss to the community as a whole, there was
dire loss or even ruin to individuals; and such fluctuations
in the value of goods and property were both morally and in-
dustrially injurious to the best interests of the community.
Truly, this was a strange dilemma and social phenomenon
in a country like Australia. What can be more strange, at
first sight, than that there should be a dearth of money, and


a severe social crisis in consequence thereof, in a country whose-
chief and marvellously abundant product was gold, pre-emi-
nently the canonized metal which constitutes the money or
currency of mankind ; and yet such a dearth, with equally
disastrous consequences, overshadowed the fortunes, at one-
time or other, both of Australia and California, and has left
a lesson of no small importance to the world at large.
A very large portion of the intellectual mistakes of man-
kind arises from an implicit reliance upon some widely
known and well-established rule, maxim, or principle, without,
making allowance for circumstances and influences which at
times obstruct the operation of the deservedly venerated or
appreciated principle. The law of supply and demand is a
principle or doctrine of this kind. It is in itself rather a.
truism than a truth. It is no discovery of modern science ;
indeed, its general correctness has been visible to men of all
times and of the most commonplace intellect. The earliest
trader, even the simplest rustic who drove his pigs or sheep
to market, knew that the fewer the pigs or sheep in the field,
and the more numerous the intending purchasers, the higher
would be the price he could ask for his wares. Equally true
is it, when the maxim is applied to general affairs, that if any
commodity be scarce, and consequently its price exceptionally
high, in any locality, men of other countries, or in other
parts of the same country, wall hasten to supply the scarcity
in order to obtain a higher price for their goods than they
could get elsewhere. Further, as the earth is still capable of
yielding produce of all kinds sufficient for the wants of man-
kind, a scarcity in one part of the world will ere long attract
a supply from other quarters. Yet in human affairs how
much depends upon Time ! Men suffer or die under tha
scarcity, and what consolation is it to them that the supply
which they needed wall come in time for other men or another
generation ? Moreover, it is upon the current well-being of
its people that depends the power or prosperity of a State or
community. In a new State, especially, rejoicing in the vast
resources of a California or Australia, every season of hard-
ship, every generation or part of a generation which is robbed
of its gains by some cause beyond its own control, and of a
nature not merely local but highly exceptional, the effect most
seriously checks the progress and prosperity of the community.
The monetary dilemma of 1855 was the last of the peculiar
crises which characterized the early and transitional period of
the Australian colonies. Thereafter Australia entered upon a
career of mature progress. Several times since then it has ex-


Total.
Assisted.
Unassisted
1871
12,227
2
2
1872
15,876
?
2
1873
26,428
16,915
9,513
1874
53,958
44,394
9,564
1875 ....
35,525
28,891
6,634
1876 ....
33,191
26,404
6,787
1877 ....
31,071
22,461
8,610
1878
37,214
2
2
perienced commercial crises of more or less severity; but these
have been simply the ordinary vicissitudes, the * ups and downs ’
common to every settled country, and which are even most
frequent in those countries where material civilization has been
most fully developed. About that time, too—in December,
1855 the Australian colonies of Old England acquired the
readily granted boon of self-government. Local parliaments
and ministiies, under the titular rule of a Governor appointed
by the undertook the administrative work and re-
sponsibility which had previously been borne by the Colonial
Office in London. The youthful romantic period of Australia
was over; but those five years, full of the feverous excitement
of a golden youth, constitute a romance in the history of the
world, and also have permanently shaped the fortunes of these
young colonies. Blessed with a population well-nigh homo-
geneous in i ace, yet naturally varying widely in social position
and individual sentiments, alike in religion and politics, the wild
rush after gold brought all these classes so intimately together
in the common pursuit, that each became thoroughly tolerant
of the others, and the population became blended in common
sympathies, while wisely tolerant where they continued to differ.
In politics, of course, there is the active and critical spirit
which distinguishes the British race; and the Houses of
Parliament at Melbourne and Sydney exhibit the keen par-
tisanship with which we are only too familiar at home. There
are ‘ burning questions,’ too, in Australia as well as here ;
but it is an enviable fact that there is less of racial divergence
and dispute than there is in the United Kingdom, which (as
we at present feel to our cost) has a perpetual difficulty in the
unfused Celtic peasantry of Ireland,*
Of the two great and purely British settlements in the
Southern hemisphere, viz., Australia and New Zealand, the
latter is by far the most British-like in its physical conditions.
Alike in size, shape, physical features, and geographical*
* During the eight years ending with 1878, a quarter of a million of emigrants
have proceeded from the United Kingdom to Australia.
The stream of unassisted emigrants,’ says Mr. Hs yter, •is tolerably steady
and proceeds at the rate of something more than 8000 per annum.’
xo. cxlviii. 24


position, New Zealand closely repeats in the Southern hemis-
phere the characteristics of the parent Isles in the distant
North. A land of hills and valleys, and thoroughly insular,
blessed with a temperate climate, ever freshened with the sea-
breeze, it is in New Zealand that the rosy cheeks and bodily
vigour of the British race will be longer perpetuated than in
any other region of the world. Indeed, there is no apparent
cause why the pure English stock should ever become much
altered in that eminently favourable locality. Its chief towns,
Wellington and Nelson, Canterbury and Dunedin, may be
headquarters of the British race in far future times, when the
parent land from whence these names were transplanted has
long ceased to be the leading country of the world. The
transplanting of British names over the face of North America,
and also throughout the Southern Ocean, is one of the most
significant events in modern history. Some writers have
held that when the Athenians of old called themselves
‘ Autochthons,’ it was merely a remembrance, in course of
time misunderstood, of the Attock-land, from whence these
wandering Aryans are supposed by those writers to have
started on their westward migration. With the full light of
history now blazing on the world, the British names, now
scattered and so prominently figuring over half the world,
can occasion no such confusion of records or ideas ; never-
theless, were some new Avatar-like irruption of barbarism to
sweep over the present seats of civilization, learned men in the
far future, groping amid the half-lights of a new Renaissance,
might be gravely bewildered by the various Bostons, Yorks,
Portlands, Canterburys, and other town-names which the far-
roving Briton has conveyed into the new lands of his settle-
ment. And not less puzzling or wholly misleading, under
such circumstances, would be the European fauna and flora
of these Antarctic regions as enriched by the wise efforts of
acclimatization.
While New Zealand is an exact southern counterpart of the
British Isles, the island-continent of Australia is in the main
as unlike the parent country as can well be imagined. Occa-
sionally the extremes both of heat and of rainfall are very
remarkable. In the ‘ Victoria Year Book,’ under date 13th
January, 1878, we read that ‘the heat at Dubboo, N.S.W., is
reported to be so intense that birds were dropping off the
trees,’ while the thermometer in the shade rose to 121° Fahr.
We also read of a great rainfall at Sydney (Feb. 6, 1878),
when eight inches fell within twenty-four hours; while at
Parattoo, in South Australia, in the same year (March 18,


1878), seven inches of rain fell in thirteen minutes. Never-
theless the narrow littoral belt which fringes Australia on the
south-east presents no great diversity of aspect to the British
immigrant. That narrow coast region, between the mountains
and the sea, is cut into hill and valley by the spurs from the
Coast Range, between which flow rivers and rivulets, while the
coast is finely indented with plentiful bays. But for the ‘ hot
wind ’ from the north, the climate differs little from that of
England. But follow the ‘ hot wind ’to its home —surmount
the Coast Range, and then one comes upon a region of vast
plains, extending northward to the distant Gulf of Carpentaria.
Despite the heroic exploration of Burke, the interior of
Australia is still imperfectly known, except that it consists
of a vast region of levellest plains, in great part waterless
and arid in the summer months. Yet along the long course
of the Murray River, and also in many other parts, these wide
plains are grassy and verdurous—one of the finest pastoral
regions in the world. Thus Australia has two distinct regions,
fitted for entirely different forms of industry and of social
life. There is the commercial and urban region of the coast,
and the pastoral townless regions of the interior. It is as if
the steppes of Russia or of Upper Asia were in contiguity with
the sea-indented lands of Britain. Lacking our rich and
abundant mines of coal and iron, the Australian coast region
can never equal the mother country in the sources of com-
mercial and manufacturing power; but in the fertile plains
of the interior, Australia has an all-sufficient source of food
supplies, and amplest scope for the free and vigorous pastoral
life, where civilized nomads, ever in the saddle, rear flocks
of sheep and herds, both of cattle and horses, far in excess of
the wants or consuming power of the Australians themselves
—thereby giving a foreign trade to Australia, while helping
to sustain with the necessaries of life the dense centres of
population and civilization in the Northern world.
One of the characteristics of Australia is of itself a proof
that the original settlers came from a land of highly advanced
civilization. City life is fully developed ; and Melbourne, the
capital of Victoria, as also in lesser degree its rival, Sydney,
may, albeit creations as of yesterday, well compare with the
chief cities of the mother country. Melbourne justifies its
title as the London of the southern hemisphere. When
Governor Bourke visited the nascent settlement on the
Yarra-Yarra, he fixed its site on two hills sloping down to
the river, on its northern bank; and the rectangular space
which he then marked out —about a mile in length on the


banks of the river, by half a mile in width —still forms Mel-
bourne proper, the busy heart of the Victorian metropolis,
and now holding much the same place in it as ‘ the City ’
does in London. Melbourne has far outgrown these original
limits, spreading over adjoining eminences, so that it claims
to be, like the city of Eomulus, built upon seven hills. These
‘suburbs’ are largely interspersed with fine parks and re-
creation grounds ; and the main streets, which run parallel
with the Yarra-Yarra river, are being planted with trees.
The eminences of the city, which are crowned by the Uni-
versity and other prominent edifices, command a fine view of
the rugged summits of the Coast Eange, thereby giving to
the city the aesthetic advantage of a distant horizon. A large
and elegant suburb has lately been built on the south side
of the river—which, by an Irishism, may be styled the
West-End of Melbourne—where stands the fine structure of
the Government House, and where the beautiful Botanical
Gardens rise in verdurous terraces from the banks of the
river. The course of the Yarra-Yarra is broken in the middle
of the city by a basaltic dyke, called ‘ The Falls,’ which stops
the upward navigation from the sea. Above that point it is
a pleasure river ; and the picturesque, wood-clad upper reaches,
gay with boats and pleasure parties, remind one of the
Thames between Kew and Hampton Court. Ships of con-
siderable size can come up into the middle of the city ; and
Flinder’s Street, which runs along the strand of the river, is
occupied by large warehouses, and exhibits the usual features
of a seaport locality. The whole city is solidly built of brick
and of the blue stone of the district; the old wooden fabrics
having been cleared away, and the chief streets—Collins’
Street and Bourke Street —might almost be taken for parts of
London ; the former being the Oxford Street and the latter
the Edgeware or Tottenham Court Eoad of the Victorian
capital. Melbourne, as thus said, does not stand on the sea-
coast, but a short railway connects it with Brighton Beach.
On the beautiful and rural-looking shores of the bay, which, in
the Australian summer—notably on our Boxing-day—are the
resort of picnic and pleasure parties, thousands of people
are seen strolling and amusing themselves, as well as bathing
in the bright and bracing waters.
Such is Melbourne, the London of the South. Its seaport
is Sandridge, on Hobson’s Bay, where two well-fitted piers
stretch their arms a long way into the sea, affording berths
for vessels of the largest size, and shelter for a whole fleet.
But Melbourne has not a monopoly of Port Philip Bay,


which is an almost landlocked natural harbour some forty
miles across. On the opposite side to Melbourne stands
Geelong, which at one time might have risen into the com-
mercial premiership now held by Melbourne. At both places
a sand-bar originally obstructed navigation, hut Melbourne
quickly dredged away its bar, while Geelong is only doing so
now, when any hope of rivalling Melbourne is out of the
question.
Let us now sum up the rare and romantic progress of
Australia during the last thirty years, under the potent in-
fluence of gold. We can fittingly do so, because the rich
gold-mines which gave to these young colonies their giant-
like growth, have ceased to be the paramount, or even the
main element of their still-growing prosperity. Throughout
all these colonies the conditions of social life and of indus-
trial progress have now become similar to, if not quite identi-
cal with, those of the civilized world at large. Capital has
resumed its place as the life-spring of labour and enterprise.
Associated labour, under the leadership of capital, has sup-
planted even at the gold-fields the fervid and fitful individual
enterprise which at first sufficed to reap ample profits by rude
toil not only on the gold-fields, but even in the comparatively
settled business of urban and commercial life. The gold-mines
of Australia, like those of California, are now worked on the Old
World system of organized labour, and substantially under the
same industrial conditions as the coalpits of Durham and
Lanarkshire. A remnant of the old adventurous gold-seekers—
men ready for any toil and hardship, hut hating regular employ
or the control of a master —is still to be found in Australia ;
hut these now old-fashioned adventurers are only to be met
with on the outskirts of settled life, or far beyond them,
wandering and ‘ prospecting ’ amid the domain of the abori-
gines, in the hope of finding new gold-beds, where their
hardy enterprise may win anew the never-to-be-forgotten
earth-spoils of the vanished past.
In Australia, contrary to what prevails in California, much
the larger proportion of the gold is obtained from quartz -
mining,—that is, from excavating and crushing reefs of auri-
ferous quartz. These reefs, too, do not crop out at the surface
—as is usual, and as occurs in the new Indian gold-fields—
but, for the most part, lie at great depths below the present
surface ; and alluvious deposits, or layers of auriferous mud or
clay, are found at similar depths. It is manifest that here, as
in California, volcanic action has operated with mighty force.
A large portion of the auriferous mud, now found at various


depths, has apparently been vomited from volcanoes; while the
remoteness of that period is shown by the depth at which
these mud-layers lie beneath the present surface of the
country. A large extinct volcano exists near Ballarat, to
which many of the alluvious deposits of that district are dis-
tinctly traceable; and the ‘ blue stone ’ with which the city
of Melbourne is built is simply lava.
Of late years, as in 1877 and 1878, two-thirds of the gold-
produce of Victoria was raised from quartz-reefs, and one-third
from ‘ alluvial ’ mines. Also of the steam-engines employed
in connection with gold-mining, one-fourth are used in
alluvial, and three-fourths in quartz workings. The average
yield of gold per ton of quartz crushed in 1877, was 9 dwts.
9*BB grains ; in 1878 it was 9 dwts. 12‘99 grains. The decline
of gold-production in Victoria of late years has been from
1,855,477 ounces in 1871 to only 775,272 ounces in 1868.
The number and value of the machines used at the mines is
likewise decreasing; but apparently there is no decrease in
the area of auriferous ground worked in Victoria —which was
square miles in 1877, and 1,290 square miles in 1878.
Owing to constant changes, ground which one year is included
in the area embraced in gold-workings is properly excluded in
another. ‘As the shallow alluviums of the old gold-fields
are abandoned by the miners, they are often occupied by
agriculturists and gardens.’ These shallow workings, indeed,
are now wholly at an end, and deep-mining is the order of the
day. In 1878, for the first time, some of the shafts sunk in
search of auriferous quartz attained depths exceeding 2,000
feet, and with highly profitable returns. At Stawell, the yield
of gold from quartz obtained at depths varying from 500 to
1,180 feet, averaged from 17| dwts. to 2 oz. 10 dwts. per ton.
The four ‘ colonies,’ or young States, which compose
‘ Australia,’ differ very widely from one another alike in
geographical character and in the agencies which have in-
fluenced their growth. Some of these States, indeed, are in
most respects the very opposites of the others, but all of
them, more or less, have benefited by the potent influence
of the gold-mines. Statistics are repulsive to the general
reader; and as the main purpose of this article is to ex-
hibit the peculiar action of rich gold-mines upon a coun-
try’s career and prosperity, we shall restrict our statistics
of growth chiefly to the colony of Victoria, whose career has
been pre-eminently influenced by the golden treasures of
which it has been the chief seat. Victoria is nearly (not
quite) of the same size as Great Britain, having an area of


somewhat more than 88,000 square miles; yet it occupies a
mere corner of the Australian continent, which is about
thirty-three times as large—having in round numbers, an
area of three millions of square miles. The population of
Victoria, which was but a few scores in 1851, when the
discovery of gold was made, is at present about 900,000;
and happily, now as from the first, there is no great
disparity of the sexes —the males, in June, 1879, num-
bering 482,769, and the females, 404,665. The population of
its capital, Melbourne, at the same date, was 256,477. There
are upwards of 1,500 miles of railway already at work in this
colony, besides other lines in course of construction; and
good roads, traversed by stage-coaches, supply the means of
communication throughout the province in those parts not
yet visited by the ‘ steam-horse.’ There are also, within the
limits of Victoria, about 8,000 miles of telegraph lines. The
new State also resolved to acquire the attractive diversity of
industry and enterprise which characterizes all fully settled
countries; and naturally enough, although in defiance of the
economists, it has boldly entered the field of manufacturing
production. At the last census Victoria contained 2,848 fac-
tories of various kinds, employing 32,278 work-people ; and the
capital thus invested in buildings, machinery, and ground
amounted to £6,800,000.
The total quantity of gold ‘ raised ’ in Victoria, from the
beginning down the end of 1878, amounted to 48,058,649
ounces, valued in money at £192,234,576. And chiefly owing
to the effects of the wealth arising from the cheap attainment
of so large a quantity of produce of the most exchangeable
kind, the foreign trade of Victoria has increased in annual
value from one million sterling of imports, at the time of the
gold-discoveries, to sixteen millions sterling in 1878; and
from less than 1£ millions sterling of exports to just upon
fifteen millions. It is curious as well as instructive to mark
the annual amount of exports and imports per head of the
population at various periods. It was in the middle of 1851
that gold was first found, and in that year the imports of the
State of Victoria amounted to rather more than £l2 per head
of the population, and the exports to £l6 7s. 9d.; in 1878
the imports per head were £lB 12s. and the exports £l7 3s. sd.
—an increase of only one-half in the imports and hardly
any increase at all in the exports : a fact explainable mainly
by the vast decrease in the produce of the gold-mines. But
in the intervening period, when the gold-fields were at their
best, the amount of the foreign trade, in proportion to the


population, was remarkably large. For example, in 1852
the imports suddenly rose to upwards of £BO per head of the
population; while the exports rose to £56 per head. In
1858 the imports per head of the population were no less
than £Bl, and the exports £56 12s. 4d. —a state of matters
wellnigh without a parallel in history. In 1854 the imports
per head amounted to £66, and the exports to £44; and since
then the ratio of foreign trade to population has continued to
decline.
Of New South Wales, the other Australian colony which
possessed auriferous treasures, albeit much inferior to those of
Victoria, we may simply state that its foreign trade, which
was hardly existent previous to 1851, amounted in 1878 to
thirteen millions sterling of exports, and 14| millions of
imports. It has about 700 miles of railway open to traffic ;
and, while the gold-fields are becoming exhausted, there are
now 28 coal-mines, the annual produce of which is valued at
a million sterling, and promises to increase.
It might be tedious were we to chronicle further details of
Australian progress —the total tons of gold which have been
exported to support the ever-growing trade of the world, the
millions of sheep, the myriads of horses, and the hundreds of
thousands of cattle now reared upon the grassy plains of the
interior, or even the number and tonnage of the ships which
annually enter or leave its seaports upon ocean voyages. Yet
it is important to note how great has been the industrial and
commercial effect of these new States of the South upon the
long-civilized countries, and their busy hives of population
in the northern hemisphere. Long lines of shipping in well-
established trade-routes now traverse what were previously
the wastes of the Southern Ocean, where ships used to be as
few in number as are, now and for ever, the stars in the azure
expanse of the southern sky, where the brilliance of the
Southern Cross owes one-half of its fame to the starless solitude
amid which it shines. The new Australian world reacts
magnet-like upon the ancient and vast world of human life
in the northern hemisphere, stirring its life with a new and:
fresh impulse. From our own isles nigh twenty millions’
worth of goods are annually conveyed across the ocean to the
island-continent of the South. The wants of Australia give
employment and the means of subsistence to tens of thou-
sands of workers in the seats of old civilizations. They keep
men profitably at work at the loom or the forge both in
England and in the Eastern States of the American Union,
and even the Chinaman or the Hindoo finds his labour on


Ms five-acre farm, whether its produce be tea or rice, more
profitable to him on account of the demand for his produce
which comes from these prosperous communities in the far
off southern seas.
Such, in broad outline, has been the vast and rapid growth
and striking concomitant changes of condition, alike industrial
and social, which the present generation has beheld, with
wondering and also thoughtful eyes, in the great island-con-
tinent of the southern hemisphere. When Gold, the great
and only magician of modern times, first uprose in the sight of
mankind, like the Australian genius of progress, on the plains
of Ballarat, a splendid career was inaugurated for those new
settlements of the pure British race at the Antipodes. Instead
of remaining a pastoral and thinly peopled country, far
remote from the centres of human civilization, the potent
attraction of gold at once brought across the oceans of the
world a flood of immigration from the parent isles of Britain;
while commercial navies arrived from all parts of the globe,
in exchange for the golden argosies from the young and
hitherto isolated island-continent of the Southern Ocean.
Instead of a mere land of squatters, great cities arose, and
the intellectual urban life alike quickened and elevated
Australian society; and at length Australian industry and
enterprise have become as various in character and manifesta-
tions as those which flourish in the old and fully developed
communities of the northern hemisphere.
And all this has happened within the last thirty years—a
mere day in the life of nations ! This brilliant epoch of pro-
gress—the Golden Age of Australia —has already come to an
end, although it will long bear fruits, and has imprinted its
impress indelibly upon Australian history. The yield of the
gold-fields has for many years been declining; and although
we do not question the official reports as to the existence of
auriferous tracts still untouched by human labour, gold-pro-
duction will never more be paramount in the commercial and
industrial fortunes of the country. Gold-production still
remains, and for a good many years may continue to be, a
valuable item of the national resources; but its glamour and
its glory are past and gone, and hereafter mankind will no
more rush to the Antipodes on account of Australia’s gold
than they will flock to the British Isles on account of our now
more valuable seams of coal and beds of ironstone. The
Golden Age proper —the period when gold-finding not merely
yielded its peerless and romantic harvests of wealth, but pre-
sented its socially and economically peculiar features —lasted


in Australia, as in California, barely half-a-dozen years. But
that period, brief as it was, has been one of the most
important as well as romantic in the history of material
civilization. We, its contemporaries, have watched it eagerly
and with marvelling eyes; and, with an enduring interest,
the history and incidents of that time, that Golden Age—
exhibited contemporaneously in California and Australia —
will not fail to be studied by the philosophers and scientists
of future and probably long-distant generations, as a strikingly
illustrated compendium of some of the most interesting and
important questions in monetary and industrial science.
R. H. PATTERSON.
Art. IY. —The Tenure and the Transfer of Land.
It is impossible to doubt that the question of the tenure of
land in England has been brought by various circumstances
into so prominent a political place that it cannot now be put
aside until it has been more or less radically dealt with. Yet
it is quite probable that a sufficiently drastic reform may
presently take place to cause the question to be set at rest for
a number of years, even if all that the most earnest reformers
desire should not at once come to pass. We may have a suc-
cession of good seasons in England, and agitation may cease
in Ireland, but there cannot be any question that, if the general
tenour of recent legislation in regard to land be noticed, it
must be obvious that, apart altogether from temporary occur-
rences which have brought the land question prominently for-
ward, we have been fast reaching a point when the tenure and
transfer of land in England must be changed in something
more than a superficial manner. The Limitation Acts of
1888 and 1874, the Settled Estates Act, 1856, and other and
kindred statutes which have followed, enlarging the powers of
owners of land, as well as the Copyhold Enfranchisement Acts,
have all tended to bring us nearer to the time when the cardinal
principles of the tenure and transfer of land will have to be con-
sidered. For the agricultural troubles of 1879 and preceding
years have only hastened the time which was inevitably ap-
proaching. And as the day for a deeper change advances, it
is most desirable that the whole body of the public should
consider this important question in a temperate and reason-
able spirit; it is essentially one which concerns all classes of
the people, and which must be settled in obedience to a general
public demand. It is a question into which very great


prejudice and feeling may be thrown, both by reformers and
anti-reformers, and from its nature must, unless clearly under-
stood, cause the most groundless alarms. Security of property
and the constitution of the country will in the judgment of
some be threatened, and they may see communism and other
ills rapidly approaching. But a practical and a sensible people
like ourselves should be able to carry through this reform
without any danger to the principles either of property or of
the constitution.
The first point which has to be fixed in the mind of any one
who sits down to consider this question is that the distinction
between reforms of the tenure and reforms of the transfer of
land must be kept clear. The question of tenure is a question
in the main of principle, that of transfer in the main of detail.
Transfer is secondary to tenure, and with a simplification of
tenure, simplification of transfer will naturally and necessarily
follow. The first is a matter essentially for the consideration
of the people at large, the second, when the principle is ac-
knowledged that it should be as cheap and as easy as possible,
becomes a matter to be dealt with by experts. It is there-
fore solely with the tenure of the land that we are now
concerned.
The first question which suggests itself in relation to tenure
is the manner in which an estate should devolve upon a
descendant. That is to say, Should the present principle of
English law prevail, that in case of intestacy land should on
the death of the father belong to his eldest son ? Intestacy
must always be the exception rather than the rule ; even if a.
man approves of the general legal rules which govern the
descent of property he is almost certain to make some special
devises and bequests, and therefore the directions of the law
in regard to the descent of property in the case of intestacy
must be chiefly employed to prevent injustice when there is
an accidental omission to make a will. There are very few
persons who do not intend to make wills, but there are a good
many who forget or postpone their execution. It has been
recognized as just, if a man owns £I,OOO of railway stock,'and
he has one son and two daughters, that each child, if there is
no will, should have one-third of the property. Equal division
of property is theoretically just, and practically most con-
venient. But if a man owns a piece of land worth £I.OOO, and
leaves one son and two daughters, and dies intestate, the son
takes the whole of it, and the daughters are paupers. It is
for those who approve this exception to a just principle, one
which governs the descent of every species of property except


land, to justify it. It cannot be for the welfare of the commu-
nity that two persons—to follow out the illustration —should
be left penniless; and if it is answered that where there is per-
sonal property also, injury is prevented by its equal division,
it must be asked, Why should the accident of sex or of the
day of birth give a title to the land ? Nor is the retention
land in a few hands a desirable object, or one that the law
should aim at; in one word, in the absence of a will, land
should be equally divided among the next of kin, even though
in order that this may take place it has to be sold. This is a
reform of the simplest kind, which we regard as being very
near, and which cannot, and probably will not, be very
strenuously resisted, because a landowner will always have
the power to bequeath his estate by testament to whomso-
ever he may desire.
As we have said, intestacy is not so common as the
leaving of a will; and this brings us to the two next points in
regard to the tenure of land, namety, the propriety of tenan-
cies for life and charges on an estate. Land, we all know,
may be settled by will or by deed, and there can be no ques-
tion that the practice of so settling it has become deeply in-
grained among all classes who are owners of property to any
extent; what we have to consider is whether it is advisable
that the present owner of land should have the power to give
to his successor only an estate for life, so that the latter has
but limited powers, while the property must descend to a per-
son named not by the immediate predecessor, but by a former
owner. If a property be settled by will upon a son for life,
and on his children afterwards, the present owner alone deals
with the tenure of the estate after his death ; and therefore
we have in the simplest form the present generation limiting
and fettering the next, arranging in the present for future
years, the events and the circumstances of which cannot
be foreseen. Twenty years after his death the settlor—if,
like the shades in the Inferno, he could watch the events
of earth—might wish that he had not limited the tenure
of the estate which he has left behind him. But, confident
concerning the future, men fetter the power of their sons. If
however we have a settlement by a tenant for life, it takes
place with the concurrence of the heir who has attained the
age of twenty-one. Therefore the settlor acts not alone, but
with the concurrence of the first of those who will naturally
follow him, and the future tenant for life helps to fasten his
own bonds. The active agent is however the present owner
of the land, and experience must have taught most of us that


Estates for Life.
there is scarcely a youth of twenty-one in England, ignorant
of the law, who will refuse, if his father desires it, to join in
the settlement of the estate of which he is to become sooner or
later the possessor. In one word, the heir under the circum-
stances is not a free agent, and the contract is not made be-
tween two equal and independent parties. On the other hand,
it may fairly enough he said if the absolute owner of an estate
in fee simple chooses, say, at his marriage, to limit the estate
to himself for life with various remainders over and charges on
the land, that he is only acting within his rights, and is in
fact exercising that freedom of ownership to the full which is
the cardinal principle to be looked to in regard to the owner-
ship of land. Why, it may he asked, should the law prevent
this ? The answer is first of all that the man who so limits
his own pow’ers is acting contrary to public policy; and next
that the law, if it prevents him from so acting, is in reality
preserving to him a freedom which he wishes to put off; it will
allow him to sell his land, it will allow him to leave it by will to
whomsoever he may desire, so that the children may not want,
but so long as he lives and wishes to be the owner of it, he ought
to he an absolute, and not a limited owner. A well-known
solicitor, in an address to the Incorporated Law Society," has
stated that freedom is the main characteristic of landed pro-
perty in England. It is impossible to consider this assertion
correct when in so many instances the present possessor of
land does not possess absolute power over his property, and
is not fully liable to all the obligations incurred by the
possession of it.
A tenant for life may not touch the trees which have been
left standing for the ornament of the mansion house, he can-
not build a mansion house under the Improvement of Land
Act, 1864, without the sanction of the Inclosure Commis-
gioners. When money is borrowed from them for improve-
ments, it must be paid back with interest in twenty-five years,
though the term is sometimes extended to thirty years. All
improvements indeed, however beneficial they may be for the
inheritance, must be paid for by the tenant for life, and
cannot be charged by him on the inheritance of the settled
lands. Again, if land is sold, the proceeds must be reinvested
in the purchase of other lands, to devolve in the same manner
as the bulk of the estate, or else under the powers of the
Settled Estates Act, 1877, the aid of the High Court may
be invoked, and the purchase money may be devoted to a
* 1 Facts and Suggestions as to the Law of Beal Property.’ By N. T. Laurence.
London : Beeves and Turner.


limited class of objects, such as the redemption or purchase
of rent-charge in lieu of tithes, and the discharge of encum-
brances on the property sold or on property subject to the
same trusts. In most settlements, too, a power of sale and
exchange is given to the trustees, which however, says Mr.
Davidson, in his well-known work on Conveyancing, ‘has
become in its most improved form a somewhat complex and
elaborate piece of mechanism for parting with the settled
estate, or portions of it, and either substituting other land for
that parted with, or applying the proceeds in relieving the
property from incumbrances.’
The result therefore of settlements, briefly put, is that the
prudent owner, within the limits of the settlement, exercises
his powers just as he would do if he were free; but beyond
a certain point, able and energetic though he may be, he is
not allowed to deal with his property in a manner which it
may be for the advantage of himself and his family that he
should do. On the other hand, the improvident owner cannot
-carry his improvidence beyond a certain limit; he mortgages
his life interest, he spends the income on things other than
his property, he rack-rents his tenants, and does for them as
little as he possibly can. The sole result therefore of settle-
ment is that a property is kept in a family for a certain period
of time, quite irrespective of the desire of the present owner
to retain it, or of the advisability of his doing so, or of the
general good of the estate and those who live on it. How
would a banker or a shipowner who succeeded to the business
of his father conduct that business with success if he were
fettered by restrictive regulations contained in the will of his
dead parent ? and what would be the general opinion of a man
who handed his business on to his son with all kinds of restric-
tions ? He would be regarded as scarcely sane, and his con-
duct would be generally condemned. But land is simply one
form of property, to be employed for the benefit first of all of
the owner, but with the duty attached to the possession of it,
of utilizing it to the utmost in the interest of the nation at
large, to be dealt with according to the circumstances of the
possessor and the occurrences and events of the time. But this
becomes impossible if the owner is restrained by the last posses-
sor, and if he has only limited powers over the estate. There
always will be a strong desire to obtain landed property in this
country; the sporting and agricultural tastes of the mass of
English gentlemen, whether merchants or professional men,
impel them if possible to become the masters of estates, and
there is an equally strong wish to hand down the property which


Charges.
they own to their sons and their grandsons. Thus there need
be no fear that the principle of primogeniture will become
obsolete. Good or bad it will still exist without the continu-
ance of tenancies for life and strict settlements. The result
of the abolition of entailing estates would therefore be that
embarrassed owners would once and for all dispose of their
property, whilst possessors of estates which, though of some
value, produced but a low rate of interest, would be able, if
they wished, to turn them into cash and invest it in securi-
ties, sometimes bearing higher interest, and always more
convenient than land. They would hold their capital in a
form which would permit its use within the time in which
their stockbroker could return them a cheque. Not a little
of the difficulty which frequently at present exists in putting
the younger sons of landed proprietors into a position to
make money for themselves arises from the fact that, though
their fathers may be men of comfortable incomes, their capital
is tied up in land. They are owners of it only for their lives,
and they can only assist their children by giving them a cer-
tain annual allowance during their lifetime, instead of a capital
sum which might enable them to make a prosperous start xii
commerce. And even when the trustees of a settlement may,
with the consent of the tenant for life, advance part of a
younger child’s portion during the lifetime of a limited owner,
this cannot be done without encumbering the estate by some
kind of charge. The abolition of tenancies for life would
change all this.
A writer on the subject of landed property has, in a recent
work* which is worthy of careful perusal, advocated the aboli-
tion of charges on land by way of family provision except in
the case of widows. He proposes that a portion of the estate
should be sold, and the proceeds held by trustees on invest-
ments other than land. A fee-simple owner, as Mr. Brodrick
in his able work t on English land and landlords has pointed
out, would undoubtedly sell portions of an estate to pay legiti-
mate claims upon him, but in many cases to do so would not
be necessary, and where it was, both the owner of the property
and those who were entitled to receive portions out of it would
be in a far better position than if the whole estate remained
in his hands as a limited owner encumbered by rent-charges
of indefinite duration. There can be no question that the
* 1 Principles of Property in Land.’ By John Boyd Kinnear. London : Smith,
Elder, and Co.
f ‘English Land and English Landlords.’ By the Hon. G. C. Brodrick.
London : Cassell, Fetter, and Galpin.


owner of an estate heavily charged is in a highly embarrassed
state, and that the property is placed at a disadvantage ; there
is frequently no balance of income left for improvements, and
in many cases, as we are all aware, the owner of an estate
heavily encumbered in this manner, though the owner to the
world of a tine property, is practically insolvent. As a matter of
fact the nominal possessor is not the real owner of the estate,
which belongs to a number of persons who have no personal
connection with the property, whose only interest is to obtain
from it an annual sum of money, while the ostensible owner
is little more than an agent of the estate who draws his income
from the rents. Obviously, therefore, the natural devolution
of land into the hands of those who can buy it, and can attend
to it as they would to any other property, and who can de-
velope its capacities, is prevented, and the sole object at-
tained is that an estate remains for a certain period of time in
the same family and nominally is possessed by the head of it.
But if we look at this state of things with the practical and
temperate mind which we should bring to bear on any matter
of business, it must be obvious that we are preventing the
profitable employment of a species of property for the sake of
an object which is without real value; for the retention of a
family in a particular locality with an embarrassed estate is
hurtful to those who belong to it, and in these days, when so
many ‘ county families ’ have but the shortest of ancestral
trees, weakens rather than strengthens the position of the
landed gentry. The day, too, has gone by when the mere
possession of large landed estates gives power in this country.
If we look at the leading members of the House of Lords,
we see at a glance that they are not men who derive their
influence from the possession of large estates, and there, if
anywhere, the possession of property should carry influence
with it. The position of a country gentleman must always
bring with it some local influence, or must raise a man to a
certain position above those who have not this kind of property.
But when the property exceeds a certain limit, it carries with
it no greater influence than does the possession of so many
ships or so much London and North-Western Railway stock.
The size of the Hatfield property gives Lord Salisbury no
more power or prestige than the ownership of the small
Hughenden estate conferred on Lord Beaconsfield. The lessen-
ing of huge estates would in fact be a great social and national
benefit.
We have now dealt very briefly with the leading features
of the three questions connected with the tenure of land.


Our imaginary thinker has arrived at the conclusion that
the principle of primogeniture in cases of intestacy should
cease to exist, and that the time has come when tenancies
for life and charges on land should as a general rule no
longer be permitted by the law. We say as a general rule,
because it would seem to be unwise to forbid the owner of
land to leave all or part of it by will after his death to his
widow for her life, or to charge it with an annuity for her
benefit. Some exceptions there must be if we wish to take
proper account of practical objections to every general principle,
and this exception appears to be one which is not calculated
in any great degree to fetter the ownership of the land, and,
on the other hand, is desirable in the interests of the well-
being of families. There then only remains the question of
mortgages. The evil of mortgages has been shown briefly by
Mr. Kinnear in the work to which we have already alluded.
‘ It is hardly practicable,’ he says, ‘ that the owner of a mort-
gaged estate should improve it. The fact of a mortgage im-
plies the fact of a want of means.’ There are other disadvan-
tages to the community at large which also arise from the
practice of mortgaging, such as a false position before the
world, which gives the mortgagor a social standing which he
should not possess, and a pecuniary credit which is really
worthless. But it must be born in mind that if we act upon
the principle of freedom of ownership of land which we have
laid down for ourselves, we ought not to deprive the owner of
land of the power of pledging it and obtaining a temporary
supply of capital. Strong necessity, no doubt, would permit
mortgages to be abolished, but it may be doubted whether such
a necessity can be proved as would entitle us to limit this
power of the owner of land. We may allow that in many cases
the power of mortgaging is an unmixed evil, but we must also
allow (which Mr. Kinnear does not do) that in many cases
also it is a great and undoubted convenience. If a man bor-
rows money on an estate, and leaves a large margin of income,
this power gives him command of a temporary supply of money
which he may not be able in any other way to obtain. Nor
is it always possible to sell estates when cash is required, and
the power of pledging property may, from time to time, prevent
the necessity of a ruinous and forced sale. There can be no
question that the custom which certainly exists in this country
of borrowing large sums on mortgage and having for a long
period of time an estate charged with a debt, is thoroughly
immoral and injurious. To be in a chronic state of debt is
demoralizing to the debtor and to society, but there are
NO. CXLYIIX. 25


scores of honourable men at this moment in England who
are living in this state, with their estates heavily or lightly
mortgaged. If a man lived with a bill of sale of his furniture
in the hands of a creditor he would feel ashamed of himself,
but, curiously enough, he has no objection to eat, drink, and be
merry whilst his landed property is pledged to a respectable
banker. Of the mass of mortgage debts in this country prob-
ably there is no adequate and general conception. Nor js
there any mode of ascertaining their actual amount. But in
1878 the 672 building societies which were incorporated under
the Act of 1874, held mortgages to the aggregate amount of
more than twenty-two millions of pounds. We probably
should not be wrong in saying that, at this present moment,
at least twenty-five millions of pounds are owed by owners of
land on the security of mortgages. It is therefore perfectly
clear that the subject of the continuance of the power of mort-
gaging, and of the reform of the law of mortgage, is a matter of
the highest social and political importance. But in regard to
this question we arrive at the conclusion that while the power
of mortgaging lands should be allowed to continue, con-
siderable reforms are required to place the matter on a satis-
factory footing. And in regard to this point we are glad to be
able to agree with some of Mr. Lawrence’s suggestions which
he puts forward in the paper to which we have already referred.
There can be no doubt that all mortgagees should be registered ;
by that means second and subsequent mortgagees would be
able without expense or difficulty to know their exact position.
If this principle is allowed, then registered mortgages should
have priority over those which are unregistered. Moreover, it
is very probable that a system of registration would lessen the
number of mortgages. The publicity of debt is objectionable
to many who, if their pecuniary position is not known, feel no
secret shame. But when it is possible for the register of
mortgages to be inspected, a certain desire not to figure in
this black book would certainly be raised. Then the doctrine
of tacking, by which a prior mortgagee may, by annexing
another to his original security, postpone the rights of mesne
incumbrancers, should be abolished. Equally also should con-
solidation be put an end to by which, when ‘ a man mortgages
different lands at different times for separate loans to the same
person, the mortgagee is placed in the same position as if all
the land had been mortgaged to him for the sum total of all
the loans, so that a second mortgagee may be defeated.’ In
one word, priority of time should give priority of right to mort-
gagees, except in the case of a prior unregistered mortgage.


There are yet other reforms needed in this direction. Thus
dhe mortgagor should have power whilst he remains in pos-
session to grant leases. For in principle the object of the
mortgage is to give to the lender security for his debt, not any
•of the rights or privileges of ownership. And even some
further changes are probably desirable, but too technical in
their nature to be touched upon in a discussion of the main
principles of a reform of the tenure of land. It might even
he advisable to limit the borrowing powers of an owner to one-
half the value of the quantity pledged, which would obviate
some of the existing objections to mortgages, and yet not
vitally interfere with the principle of freedom of ownership.
If the changes shadowed forth in this paper ultimately became
law, it is obvious that the transfer of land will necessarily be
thereby simplified and consequently cheapened, titles will
be less intricate, and their registration made easier; so
that the reform of the tenure of land in this country is the
first and most pressing need rather than improvements in
the methods and manner of its transfer.
E. S. ROSCOE.
Aet. Y.— Thucydides.
Thucydides. Translated into English. With Introduction,
Marginal Analysis, Notes, and Indices. By B. Jowett,
M.A., Master of Balliol College, Regius Professor of
Greek in the University of Oxford, &c. Oxford ; Claren-
don Press.
The earliest and the greatest of the extant Attic prose-writers,
translated and commented on by the greatest master of the
difficult art of turning Greek into really readable English,
deserves from us more than a brief literary notice. No one
who knows Thucydides will deny the greatness of such an
undertaking, and its importance to the scholarship of the
present time, if successfully carried out. The task has often
been attempted —so often, indeed, and in some cases (as by
Mr. Dale and Dr, Bloomfield) so well performed, that some
may be disposed to doubt if, in the present state of the Greek
text, much still remained to be done. The Master of Balliol
is conscious that the cui hono ? question may be raised.
It may be asked (lie says, Introd. p. xviii.) whether, as philology
progresses, and words are understood to have a fixed meaning, the art of
interpretation must be always going on, like the labour of the Danaides,


pouring into a sieve knowledge wliicli is perpetually flowing out, and in
every generation requiring to be replenished.
His reply (among other arguments) is interesting—•
If Greek literature is not to pass away, it seems to be necessary that in
every age some one who has drunk deeply from the original fountain
should renew the love of it in the world, and once more j)resent that old
life, with its great ideas and great actions, its creations in politics and in
art, like the distant remembrance of youth, before the delighted eyes of
mankind (Introd. p. xx.)
It is becoming more and more an anxious thought with
some, and a curious speculation with others, how long the
higher study of Greek is likely to last in this age of rapidly
accumulating and varied knowledge ; and (if the higher study
of one ancient language—which means the study of half a
life—is to become almost obsolete) whether the ‘ smattering ’
of Greek which must take its place—often to be soon for-
gotten, seldom or never to be really used—will be deemed to
have sufficient value to ensure its continuance. Dr. Schliemann,
indeed, tells us—and we had to criticise his theory in our
May number —that Greek may be learned perfectly in a couple
of years. We know very well what an editor or a translator
of Thucydides would say to this. Such a solid work as the
present is a standing protest against such flimsy theories.
There is assuredly no ‘ royal road ’ to the study of Thucy-
dides. The value of the eminent explorer’s suggestion, that
a colloquial knowledge of modern Greek may well supersede
years of grammar in our public schools, must be estimated
by the effects of the deeper study of the language on such
minds as the Master of Balliol’s.
The verbal and grammatical difficulties of Thucydides are,
indeed, very great, and such as only the most accomplished
scholars—and even of those, the few who have made this one
author the special study of many years —can hope to grapple
with. His speeches, replete with that kind of rhetorical
pedantry which had been coming into fashion during the
later years of Pericles (who died b.c. 429), are, for the most
part, especialty, possibly even studiously, obscure; and what
he intended to say is often more easy to divine than it is to
explain his manner of saying it. But these difficulties it is
rather the province of explanatory notes than of a literal
translation to remove. What, then, has Professor Jowett
desired to effect in the present work ? Perhaps we may
answer in the words which he has himself applied in criti-
cising the edition of Dr. Arnold—


. Grammar and History Distinct Studies.
'When a great man undertakes the office of an interpreter, he throws
•a light upon the page which the mere verbal critic is incapable of
communicating, and it would be ungrateful to scan too closely his
■deficiencies in scholarship (Introd. p. x.)
The truth is that the historian, or the literary student of a
■work, and the verbal critic of the text, often have but little in
•common. The one is concerned with the matter, the other
with the manner of the composition, and each is absorbed in
his vocation. Partly from natural bent, partly from habit,
the mind and the talent of the one is of a kind altogether
■different from those of the other. The late Mr. Grote knew
Thucydides as a historian; the late Mr. Shiileto, of Cam-
bridge, spent some thirty years of his life in the purely verbal
study of the author. But unquestionably neither would have
become particularly distinguished by attempting the depart-
ment of the other. A collator of MSS., and one used to
compare and balance the authority of various readings, is
not the man to have a large insight into the causes and the
bearings of the Peloponnesian War. Dr. Arnold was one of
the few who devoted himself to both the grammatical and the
historical study of his favourite author ; yet the latter was
clearly more in accordance with the bent of his genius and
the nature of his scholarship. Perhaps, if there is any
living scholar who combines the two faculties, it is the Master
of Baliiol. In the first place, he accurately appreciates the
literary position of Thucydides. It is not so much that his
style is ‘ ungrammatical,’ as that ‘he was a great genius
writing in an ante-grammatical age, when logic was just
beginning to be cultivated, who had thoughts far beyond his
contemporaries, and who had great difficulty in the arrange-
ment and expression of them ’ (p. xiv.) ‘ The solecisms or
barbarisms,’ he adds, ‘ of which he is supposed to be guilty,
are the natural phenomena of a language in a time of transi-
tion ; ’ they are to be ascribed to ‘ a strong individuality
which thinks more than it can express.’ With all the incom-
pleteness of style, as some will call it, or with all his quaint-
ness and imperfections, as others may think, the Master holds
Thucydides ‘ to stand absolutely alone among the historians,
not only of Hellas, but of the world, in his impartiality and
love of truth ’ (p. xvii.)
This is high praise, and it stamps the old historian with a
greatness very different from, yet in its kind not less than,
that accorded to Herodotus. Mr. Mahaffy, though he has
much to say on the other side, still adds his testimony in
.these words: ‘ln acuteness of observation, in intellectual


force and breadth, in calmness of judgment, in dignity of
language, there has never been a historian greater than.
Thucydides.’ *
Love of truth may have been, and probably was, a cha-
racteristic of Thucydides’ mind. He wrote with an avowed
dislike of that mixture of fable with history, of the marvellous'
and the miraculous with the real, which his predecessors, the
‘ composers of stories,’ had hitherto adopted for the sake of
a brief popularity. But as there is no proof that any of the
histories before Herodotus were written books accessible to'
Thucydides, he probably composed his work under the great
disadvantage of having no sources of information beyond the
accounts of those who professed or pretended to know. So
much, indeed, he expressly says in respect to the actual his-
tory of the war: ‘Of the events of the war I have not ven-
tured to speak from any chance information, nor according
to any notion of my own; I have described nothing but what
I either saw myself, or learned from others of whom I made
the most careful and particular inquiry ’ (i. 22). Nevertheless,
he could not altogether work himself clear of the sensational.
Beyond question the celebrated account of the escape of the
besieged Athenians from Platsea, in Book iii. 20-24, contains
statements which can be proved to be absolutely impossible
from an engineering point of view.t Not less doubtful seem
the startling details of the almost total destruction of the
Athenian army in Sicily, as described in the concluding
chapters of the seventh book (75-87). Such an event so near
home, occurring to 40,000 troopers, is without a parallel, so
far as we know; moreover, it is passing strange that neither
Aristophanes nor Euripides, who wrote plays long after the
Sicilian expedition (in 415 e.c.), ever makes the slightest
allusion to so overwhelming a loss. Yet more strange is it
that although it is distinctly stated in the last sentence of
Book vii. that ‘ few out of many got back to their country,’
and that ‘ the infantry, the fleet, and everything else was
involved in one common destruction,’! yet the war went on
* ‘ Hist. Gr. Class. Lit.’ ii. p. 121.
f Sir G. W. Cox has shown this in Appendix K, p. 603, in vol. ii. of his
larger ‘ History of Greece.’ There is also a paper on the subject (by the present
writer) in the ‘ Journal of Philology,’ vol. x. It is there shown that Thucydides
mistook the great city wall, with its towers, for a work constructed in a few
months by the investing Spartan army.
+ The writer uses a more moderate expression in ii. 65,13, which (if Arnold’s
note is right) proves his history to have been written as late as b.c. 404, the last
year of the war. ‘ After the failure at Sicily with their other armament and
the greater part of their fleet, they still held out for three years against all their,
enemies both at home and abroad.’


Early Written Histories.
just as before for another ten years, and neither ships nor
men seem to have been wanting ! Lastly, the four concluding
chapters describing the disastrous defeat are written in a
rather peculiar style. There is an admixture of unwonted
words and idioms which may fairly awaken a suspicion that
some other hand has been employed on this part of the
narrative, and that the narrative is highly coloured and
exaggerated.
It is a most important remark, that the sources of know-
ledge possessed by Thucydides were both ‘ meagre and oral ’
(p. xvi.) ‘We do not know,’ says the Translator, ‘whether
the words or sentences of Thucydides were written down as
soon as they occurred to the mind, or were long preserved in
the treasure-house of memory.’ The writer of the present
article had long ago called the attention of the learned * to
the significant fact, that the historian, in his introductory
chapters (i. 1-23) on the early state of Hellas, has nothing
to refer to beyond ‘hearsay,’ ‘memory,’ ‘tradition,’ ‘infer-
ences and probabilities.’ If he had known of Herodotus,
whom he nowhere mentions (though some think one or two
indirect allusions are made to him), he surely would not have
treated, as a matter of doubt and as a field of inquiry, so
much ground which that historian had gone over in his fifth
and sixth books; nor would he have included the very brief
allusions to the Persian invasions in chap. 18, among the
‘ ancient events of which it is hard to obtain any trustworthy
account ’ (chap. 20). On the other hand, it is certainly
worthy of remark, that the history is continued by Thucydides
(i. 89-117) from the very point (the siege of Sestos) at which
Herodotus left it in chap. 121 of his last book, b.c. 479.
There may have been, as in the ease of Xenophon’s con-
tinuation of Thucydides by the Hellenica, some understanding
among the craft, in spite of certain rivalries and jealousies
which would seem to have existed among them. The fact,
that once only Thucydides mentions a contemporary historian
(Hellanicus) by name, goes far to show that the Athenians
were not at that period readers of books; they had no docu-
ments but public inscriptions or treasury accounts; the
popular story about Pisistratus founding a library at Athens
is a fiction of a much later age.
It has not been sufficiently noticed that the early Greek
histories were not written with pen and paper, and at once
transcribed and circulated. Herodotus and Thucydides
* In the ‘Journal of Philology,’ vol. v. No. x. pp. 223-231, ‘On Written
Histories in the Time of Thucydides,’


intended their works to be publicly read before audiences.
They were written (so far as can be ascertained, especially
from the entire absence of any terms for pen-and-ink writing
till a much later age) on wooden tablets overlaid with wax.*
We have the express assurance of Thucydides that his book
was intended for an audience. For he says (i. 22) that, ‘ for
hearing, his work will perhaps be thought less amusing from
its non-fabulous character;’ and just below he adds, ‘this
history is not meant to compete with others for giving present
pleasure to hearers, but is designed to be a possession for all
time.’ This word, tcTrjfia, seems to mean, that the autograph
copy —which we know, from the clumsy writing of inscriptions
before b.c, 403, must have been a work of much time and
labour—was meant to be an heirloom in the family; and we
happen to know, from Diogenes Laertius,t that the books of
the histories were afterwards taken or ‘filched away’ by
Xenophon, who added a continuation of them in the Hellenica.
Still further, we are told in the ‘Life of Thucydides,’ by
Marcellinus, § 54, that on one occasion, when he was present
at a public reading of the history of Herodotus,
and was seen to shed tears of emotion, Herodotus said to the
young man’s father, Olorus, ‘ Sir, your son promises to be
a genius.’
There were three classes of men in early times, who gave
their attention to history. (1) There were extemporary
lecturers, called \6jioi, who were classed by Pindar along
with the bards who recited epic poems from memory; (2)
composers of stories and anecdotes, \oyo7rolol, like Hecatseus
and 'M sop, not, perhaps, originally written; (3) writers of
stories, like Herodotus, Hellanicus, and Thucydides, who
were called, byway of distinction, \oyo<ypd(f)oo. It would have
been a welcome contribution to modern scholarship if the
Master of Balliol had given us his views on an obscure
subject, about which erroneous opinions seem to prevail.
The translation of the eight books, including a complete
index, is contained in the first volume of about 730 pages.
The second, also with an English and a Greek index, has
640 pages, and contains notes on the text, with a preliminary
essay on ‘ Greek Inscriptions of the Age of Thucydides,’ and
an Appendix (p. 148) on the Plague. The essay on Inscrip-
tions, which is very complete for the period included, is
* See an essay by the writer on this curious and little-understood subject,
‘ Bibliographia Greece.’ (G. Bell and Sons.)
f Book ii. 6, 13. It is clear that, if the anecdote is to be trusted, no other
written copies were in circulation. The word used, ixpeXiaQcu, well suits the
appropriating of a chattel, icrr/na.


•opportune, if only indirectly connected with the actual text
of Thucydides. For there is a rising school who wish to
assign to Greek writing, both in inscriptions and in book-
writing, a much earlier date than has hitherto been conceded,
and, in our opinion, than facts seem to warrant. But few*
■complete inscriptions exist that can be proved earlier than
the age of Pericles, and these are written in a style so
awkward and in forms of letters so archaic that it is self-
evident writing of any form was till then almost in its infancy.
But Professor Mahaffy, following the views of Kirchhoff, con-
tends that the Greeks practised writing—he does not say, in
■copying or composing books —before b.c. 700, and predicts
that any further evidence we may obtain will ‘tend to increase
rather than to diminish the age of the use of writing in
Greece.’Briefly, it may be said, that there is no proof of
.any prose writers having existed before Herodotus. The
names of several (such as Hecataeus and Pherecydes) from
whose ‘ books ’ extracts are quoted by much later authors, are
never mentioned, and do not seem to have been known as
authorities in history for some generations after their deaths.
Therefore, especially as it is probable that oral lectures,
anecdotes, or stories from history were long handed down
by memory, it is reasonable to conclude that what are spoken
■of as their ‘ books ’ w T ere those stories committed long after-
wards to writing.
Thucydides, then, had scarcely any written documents
to follow, nor could he distinguish, in an uncritical period,
what was history from what was myth. With him the
Trojan war is as real and as historical an event as the
Persian wars ; Theseus and Agamemnon, Cecrops and Erech-
theus, Helen, Deucalion, and Pelops, were as much real cha-
racters as Pericles and Alcibiades. Consequently Thucydides,
though he may have had the wish, had not the materials
for criticism; he .was just emerging from the age of fable,
and he was compelled, in default of authentic records, to
take the best report of speeches made or of battles fought
which he could get from any witness. Nor was he, apparently,
superior to political bias. Cleon, really a much greater
man, is disparaged, while Nicias is praised and pitied,
though his mishaps as a commander were more often the
result of incompetence than of what is called ill-luck. The
character of Antiphon (viii. 68) is also extravagantly lauded
as ‘ second to none of his time in virtue ; ’ whereas Sir G. W.
Cox says, and justly, of his defence at his trial on a capital
* ‘ History of Classical Greek Literature,’ vol. ii. p. 3.


charge, that, clever as it was, 4 if ever an orator deserved that
his words should not convince his hearers, that orator was
Antiphon.’ * It is possible, therefore, to overpraise the truth-
fulness of Thucydides. A Greek of his period, especially one
who had any share in state offices or state influences, could
not have been wholly free from that spirit which was the
bane of all Greek society, the spirit of caste and exclusive
nationality. Moreover, to belong either to the democratic or
to the oligarchical party was almost a necessity; for neutral
men, or ‘ do-nothings ’ {dirpayfiove^) , were but little tolerated at
Athens. How then could any one be really and wholly im-
partial ? Apart from a personal sense of wrong, how could
political partisans like Thucydides and Aristophanes deal
fairly with the character of Cleon ? One might as well expect
a high Church and high Tory newspaper to speak fairly of
John Bright.
Again, how far the funeral oration attributed to Pericles in
Book ii. is genuine, or a rhetorical essay composed by the
author in imitation of his style long after his death ; how far
the philosophical speculations on the insurrection at Corcyra
(hi. 82-84) are original and earnest thoughts, or a pedantic
affectation of the current philosophy of the age, are questions
not very easily answered. Even the account of the plague in
Book ii. seems, to say the least, highly coloured, and not free
from the effort of 4 sensational ’ writing. An adverse verdict
on these points must seriously affect the credit of Thucydides
as a writer, as well as detract from his reputation for
truthfulness.
The famous 4 Melian Controversy ’ (v. 86-112) is a regular
tangle of rhetorical quibble and technicalities. It is impossible-
that such a discussion should have been held by the represen-
tatives of two states who really wished to understand each
other.
The obscurities and outlandish contortions of expression in the dis-
cussion have struck all commentators, and elicited from Dionysius special
censure. It is properly ranked with the speeches on account of its
rhetorical and sophistical tone, and may be regarded as one of the weakest
points in the great history.!
The 4 eristic ’ or 4 antilogic ’ method of discussion came in
with the schools of philosophy in the time of Pericles, and the
practice of it was maintained till quite lately in the 4 keeping
an act ’ in the theological schools of the Universities. The
bullying tone of this argument —which, we may remark, is
* ‘ History of Greece,’ vol. ii. p. 500.
f Professor Mabaffy, ‘ History Greek Classical Literature,’ vol. ii. p. 11.


admirably rendered throughout by the Translator, who pos-
sesses a happy art of making the obscure and the involved
plain and straightforward to his readers —the assumed rights-
and superiority of the Athenians, who were bent on a cruel
and unjust sentence, and in mercilessly carrying it out,
must fairly be regarded ns an ex post facto defence of their
conduct. Thucydides wrote it, as a barrister conducts a plea,
to show that under the circumstances his countrymen could
not have acted otherwise. The end of the business was this
(y. 116): ‘ the Melians were induced to surrender at discre-
tion. The Athenians thereupon put to death all who were of
military age, and made slaves of the women and children.
They then colonized the island, sending thither five hundred
settlers of their own ’ (i. 407). The remarkable eulogy in
ii. 65 of the policy of Pericles, and the attributing all the
mishaps that afterwards befel the Athenians to their reluc-
tance to adhere to it, are the words of a hearty admirer, if
not of a political partisan. Dying as he did at the very
beginning of the war, he resigned the government to the ultra-
democratic party, whose ambition and energy he would have
found it impossible to control; even ‘ the Olympian,’ as he
was called, would probably have soon been dethroned, perhaps
even ostracized, like Aristides.
We have gone carefully through both this and the famous
speech of Pericles (ii. 85-46) with the translation, line by line.
The latter is a magnificent piece of English composition; as
perfectly English as the original is perfectly Greek. It has
the happy characteristic of being at once a paraphrase and
yet a faithful rendering. The Translator, while he under-
stands the modes of expression clearly—and they are in many
places greatly involved—also comprehends the current of
thought in the writer’s mind. Hence that generally odious
production, a ‘literal translation,’ is entirely avoided ; the
hardness of forced rhetorical antitheses is softened down, and
the imperfect and halting constructions of the Greek are
converted into fluent, accurate, and harmonious English. A
short specimen will suffice to show this (chap. 41) —
To sum up ; I say that Athens is the school of Hellas, and that the indi-
vidual Athenian in his own person seems to have the power of adapting
himself to the most vai’ied forms of action with the utmost versatility and
grace. This is no passing and idle word, but truth and fact; and tho
assertion is verified by the position to which these qualities have raised
the state. For in the hour of trial Athens alone among her contempo-
raries is superior to the report of her. No enemy who comes against her
is indignant at the revenges which he sustains at the hands of such a city ;
no subject complains that his masters are unworthy of him.


Nothing can be clearer or better expressed than this ; and it
is a fair specimen of the well-considered rendering which
prevails throughout.
The following (vii. 75) is the description of the breaking
up of the Athenian camp after their last decisive defeat at
Syracuse : ‘ On the third day after the sea-fight, when Nicias
and Demosthenes thought that their preparations were com-
plete, the army began to move. They were in a dreadful
condition; not only was there the great fact that they had
lost their whole fleet, and instead of their expected triumph
had brought the utmost peril upon Athens as well as upon
themselves, but also the sights which presented themselves
:as they quitted the camp were painful to every eye and mind.
The dead were unburied, and when any one saw the body of
a friend lying on the ground he was smitten with sorrow and
•dread ; while the sick or wounded who still survived but had
to be left were even a greater trial to the living, and more to
be pitied than those who were gone. Their prayers and
lamentations drove their companions to distraction; they
would beg that they might be taken with them, and call by
name any friend or relation whom they saw passing ; they
would hang upon their departing comrades and follow as far
as they could, and when their limbs and strength failed them
and they dropped behind, many were the imprecations and
cries which they uttered.’
In translating from Greek into English there is always this
difficulty to encounter, that, from the very large proportion of
Roman words in our language, we are compelled to render
Die Greek by at least half the number of Latin equivalents.
Now no two languages can be more unlike, both in structure
and idiom, than Greek and Latin. In these respects, English
comes far nearer to Greek than Latin does ; and it is just
because the genius of the Latin language differs so widely
from that of our own, that Latin is the more difficult language
to learn. It is possible, no doubt, to use a much larger pro-
portion of Saxon words, but this is to seek for equivalents to
the most polished of languages from the scanty vocabulary of
a semi-barbaric dialect. What now passes, as the most
sonorous and effective English prose, is that mainly based
on the language and the periods of Cicero, and not that of
iElfric’s Saxon homilies. To translate Thucydides well is,
on this ground alone; —to say nothing of the many and great
perplexities about readings and meanings—an extremely
difficult task. Decidedly, it is a work requiring the highest
intellect as well as the most accurate and extensive Greek


scholarship. It is due to the Master of Balliol to say that
he has proved himself equal to the task. He has succeeded
in avoiding the common fault of inferior translators, the use
of English words with the retention of essentially Greek
idioms ; and he has used the Latin element in our language
with such judgment and moderation that we are never
offended hy grandiose or ‘ Johnsonian ’ classicality. The
precise sense has always taken precedence of the exact form
of words; logical connection has been held in view more than
grammar, and in consequence, where a chapter of the Greek
reads, even to a scholar, in a somewhat crabbed and obscure-
way, the same chapter in this new English version conveys
a plain and easy meaning without any effort to interpret it.
Thus Thucydides has been improved in the only legitimate
way, hy the substitution of clear, well-balanced words and
periods for the crude and often awkward language of early
Greek genius unpractised in the art of writing. It is not that
a good English word has been put in the place of a Greek
one, but that the Greek idiom of every sentence has been
exchanged for a strictly English mode of expression. These
two things are entirely different. Good translation is in itself
a high art, and the practice of it is undoubtedly one of the
great benefits derived from a sound classical education.
We illustrate this remark by a short passage from the
same speech, quite literally rendered (ii. 44), and compared
with that given by the Master of Balliol—
Wherefore, I do not so much lament as I will try to console yon, the
parents of these (deceased) men who are now present. For they know
they have been brought up in events of very varying kind; and good
fortune (is theirs), who shall have obtained the most fitting (portion such)
as they have (met with) in their death, and you in your grief; and in
whom life was so measured together as alike to be happy in and to end
in.
So much for the style of Thucydides verbatim, and so much
for the kind of English which is found in a good many of the
classical ‘ cribs ’in common use. Let us see how the above
is made to read in the Master’s new translation —
Wherefore I do not now commiserate the parents of the dead whc
stand here ; I would rather comfort them. You know that your life has
been passed amid manifold vicissitudes ; and that they may be deemed
fortunate who have gained most honour, whether an honourable death
like theirs, or an honourable sorrow like yours, and whose days have
been so ordered that the term of their happiness is likewise the term of
their life.
Whatever opinion may be formed of the authority of
Thucydides on some political matters, there can he none


about his description of the plague; for he expressly saj'S
(ii. 48) that he not only had the illness itself, but was a
witness of its effects and symptoms in others. It is a most
interesting narrative, and though we cannot identify the
details with any known malady, we may feel sure that they
are, from their minuteness, strictly accurate. The only
■doubt, as we have hinted, is as to the extreme severity of a
pestilence which, coming from did not get into the
Peloponnesus at all (ii. 54, 7), w r as so short in its duration,
and is hardly ever alluded to by subsequent writers. And
w’hereas the historian says this was the first visit of the
plague at Athens, we infer from Plato (Sympos. p. 201), that
there had been cases of it ten years before, but that it had
been averted by prayer and sacrifices.
Modern science tells us that, of course, the outbreak was
really due to the over-crowded state of Athens, resulting from
the favourite policy of Pericles, that the country people should
shut themselves within the city walls, and leave their farms
to be ravaged by the enemy. Aristophanes speaks of the
misery of the people who had been compelled to find refuge
in every hole and corner for eight years.* A terrible Nemesis
overtook the author of so mistaken a policy (such, from a
sanitary point of view, it must be called), for he lost his son
and other near and dear relations, and survived it himself
only about a year. It is curious to find Thucydides remark-
ing (ch. 52) : ‘ The crowding of the people out of the country
into the city aggravated the misery; and the newly-arrived
suffered most.’ He says ‘the mortality was dreadful,’ the
very temples being filled with the bodies of persons who
had been compelled to find a lodging there, meaning, perhaps,
that tents or temporary residences had been put up for them
{eaicyvrjTo) in the sacred precincts. In vol. ii. (pp. 143-155)
there is a very interesting Appendix, in which the similar
(and, indeed, evidently borrowed) account of Lucretius in his
sixth book, as well as the recorded symptoms and pathology
of the plague and the ‘black death’ of the middle ages, is
compared. ‘lt is impossible,’ says the translator (p. 147),
‘ to identify the plague of Athens with any known disease of
other ages;’ but he adds that ‘two of the greatest pestilences
by which the human race has been devastated’ (that at
Constantinople, in 540 to about 590, described by Gibbon,
and the plague at Florence, which broke out in 1348, and
is narrated in Boccaccio’s Decameron), throw much illus-
tration on the moral and physical features of the great
* Ar. Equit. 792, exhibited b.c. 424, about six years after the plagu?.


Athenian plague. These two accounts are given at length;
and a third, equally horrible in its mortality, might have
been added of the London plague preceding the great fire in
1666, the publication of Pepys’ Diary having of late given
great accuracy and authenticity to the details.
Diseases, it would seem, follow the universal law, change of
type, which affects all organic things. Old forms die out,
and new varieties come in, as typhoid and diphtheria seem,
in some respects, altered forms of older and equally fatal
maladies.
In the case of the Athenian plague we have the inflamed
■eyes which attend measles, the ‘pustules’ of small-pox, the
ulceration of the bowels common in typhoid, and the usual
symptoms of putrid sore throat. But the incessant thirst,
and the desire of the patients to throw themselves into cold
water, seem peculiar; and the convulsions, and subsequent
loss of the toes and fingers in some survivors, are not such as
attend the course of zymotic diseases known to us. Possibly
the assertion, that dogs and vultures either would not touch
the bodies, or died after doing so, is due to an attempt to
connect cause and effect; for we are told ‘ there was a visible
scarcity of birds of prey ’ (ii. 50).
On the extraordinary panic which arose at Athens in con-
sequence of the ‘ mutilation of the Hermae’ (vi. 72), the
Master of Balliol has a good note on chapter 60 of that book.
He there shows that the person alluded to by Thucydides as
having given information against some of the citizens, was
Andocides the orator. Those who want to know what these
ugly stone posts were like, have only to look at the row of
monsters set up round the ‘ theatre ’ at Oxford. Few would
eare very much, perhaps, if a party of undergraduates were to
knock off some of the noses with hammer and chisel. But at
Athens the act was as bad as it would now be to break into
Christchurch cathedral and carry off the plate. It was, in
fact, sacrilege. These stone posts were symbols of a mysterious
nature-worship connected with phallic rites. What really
.alarmed the Athenians was, some great national calamity
resulting from the anger of the gods-another plague, or
some crushing defeat, such as in fact did occur soon after
fhe event.
The Essay on ‘ Inscriptions of the Age of Thucydides’ (vol.
ii. pp. ix.-lxxviii.) is an appropriate, though by no means a
necessary appendage to the work. There is not, perhaps,
very much that is new in the treatise, a good part of the
ground being already occupied by Mr. Newton (‘Essays on


Art and Archaeology,’ pp. 95-209), and by Mr. Hick’s folio-
volume, ‘Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum/
published in 1874. Much of the matter too, is purely tech-
nical, being taken up with accounts of tribute, temple-
revenues, and expenditure by the State. Nevertheless, if tho
remark of Professor Mahaffy is at all true, that ‘ in England
the Universities have completely neglected this study, and
the best English Hellenists, with a very few brilliant excep-
tions, are as helpless in the face of an old Greek inscription
as if it were in a Semitic tongue,’ * some general informa-
tion on the subject, accessible and intelligible to ordinary
readers, is a boon for wTiich many will be thankful. To
scholars, indeed, especially to those who have made inscrip-
tions a speciality, the subject is profoundly interesting ; and
it is as extensive as it is interesting, if Mr. Newton’s state-
ment'! is well founded, that in addition to upwards of nine-
thousand in Boeckh’s ‘Corpus Inscriptionum Gnecarum/
hardly less than twenty thousand more, yet unpublished,
have accumulated, mainly from the continued explorations-
since 1840. To these should be added—and this is a field
hitherto much less explored than any other —the great num-
ber of archaic names on early Greek vases, on some hundreds-
of which, preserved in the principal museums of Europe, w r e
have the actual writing, or rather, the painting, of letters by
the original hand at least five centuries before our era. Tha
earliest of these names are nearly always written from right
to left, as in Hebrew; they are often extremely curious and
important in illustrating the archaic alphabet, the lost letters
F and Q being pretty frequently found, and the H never
representing the recent y, but always the Eoman H, the
aspirate. This last, indeed, continued quite up to the time
of the Archon Euclides (b.c. 403), even in Attic inscriptions.
Thus ov is spelt HO, and oh is spelt HOIS in Attic inscrip-
tions as late as b.c. 415, while a/r is represented by </>cr, and
£by %<r, even b.c. 412. The ois regularly used both for ov
and for m. Dative cases, familiar to us as nyy and o'Ucp, are
spelt Tiyei and olkoi. Hence the attempt made to refer a
Nubian inscription (on the statue at Abu-Simbel) to the year
b.c. 640, and from it to build an argument on the early use of
prose writing, J though this date is upheld by eminent autho-
rities, must be regarded as extremely doubtful, since the-
letters y, yjr, and x seem to indicate a very much later period.
* ‘ Hist. Gr. Clas. Lit.’ ii, p. 2. The statement, however, is certainly very
much exaggerated,
f Essays, &o. p. 96. \ Mahaffy, vol. ii. p. 3.




m§m
