

[ IPriceOn.e Sliillingr-]
I Sib BisiSi^-
if v
| * SW« |BEBBi
I t«* »«I
|«S fr.j JPJPUiJ
BY
I THE RET, JOHN ALEX. DOWIE,
BEING
A PHONOGRAPHIC REPORT (REVISER)
I ljrJ^o I
I „ !‘.I, /1 'i:u I: U M* THE VICTORIA THEATRE, X
o I
On SUNDAYS, MARCH 16th and 23rd, 1879.
SOLO BY ALL BOOKSELLERS
♦
SYDNEY;
« lARRETT 5: Co., PRINTERS, OFFICE: 229 GEORGE STREET;
]. WORKS ; 92 & 94 LIVERPOOL STREET.
k 1879.


piSLt(>


t FriesOris Slxillingr.j
t* ii®
THE REV. JOHN ALEX. DOWIE,
BEING
A PHONOGKAPHIC JREPOKT (11EVISEI>)
BBLJVBRBIt i.V TUB VICTORIA TUBA TUB, SVI*J\'BV,
On SUNDAYS, MARCH 16th and 23rd, 1879.
mO BY ALL BOOKSELLERS*
SVDNEV:
TARRETT & Co., PRINTERS, OFFICE: 229 GEORGE STREET;
WORKS : 92 & 94 LIVERPOOL STREET.


f,\ «VV I' . ViVVi-A 1 1 V.VSOI )V} a.\VT T.V VVAft'AM IA’AAV
.6181 ,bi£S fariß diet HOfIAM ,BYAQHU2 nO


{l llf ptpima, tip : ]t[Cf}<3, ami the :Julpit.
The subject of our Lecture has been announced publicly as “ the
Drama, the Press, and the Pulpit.” But, as I am in the habit
constantly of taking for all that I utter here some word of God
as a direction, a motto, or an exhortation, I shall take to night,
with your permission, three passages of Scripture, and direct your
attention to them as containing the basis of our thought.
The first of these is in the 15th chapter of the gospel according
to St. John and the nth verse, where Jesus speaking to his
disciples says, “ These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy
might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.” Then that
passage where Paul, in his grand argument respecting the kingdom
of God, speaks of it in this wise, in the 14th chapter of the epistle
to the Romans and the 17th verse, “ For the Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink ; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.” Then, as the last passage, let us take that in one
of the beautiful epistles of the loving apostle John, in the First
Epistle, at the 3rd chapter and Bth verse, wherein he sets forth the
purposes of the manifestation of Christ, the Eternal Word, in the
flesh, in these words, “For this purpose the Son of God was mani-
fested (made manifest in the light, made to stand out of the dark-
ness, literally) that he might destroy the works of the devil.”
These three passages shall be our apology for all that we have to
say, and, ere we enter upon the subject proper, let me say some-
thing about that which rings through them all, that divine
word “ Joy”—“ Joy.” “I am come that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.” “ The kingdom of God is
. . . . righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.” And, in
order that that joy might reign, the very purpose for whichAhe
Redeemer came is manifestly set forth in those where the
Apostle says, that He was made to stand out in thdTight, in ordV
that he might destroy the works of darkness, “that He might destroy
the works of the devil.”


The world’s foundations were laid in gladness, and all the
orchestra of the heavens pealed forth the Oratorio of Creation. In
that which is probably the oldest book ever written under the in-
spiration of God, perhaps the very oldest piece of literature extant
in the world, (I mean the book of Job) this great scene is most
beautifully expressed when the poet, listening to God’s voice, hears
Him say, that when “ the foundations of the earth ” were laid, “ the
morning stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
joy.” And, when in due time man appeared in this beautiful world
which God had prepared for him, with such wondrous skill, and
such inimitable patience —if we dare use any such word as that re-
specting God —he was welcomed by all Creation. “ Day unto day
uttered speech ” to him that he could understand. Everything
rejoiced, as nature owned its lord. And since then, though man
has fallen, though man, who was made to rejoice, has learned how
to lament, yet let me tell thee that no song of sadness ever was in-
spired from heaven. That kind of music is unknown to heaven.
The sadness of earth has no place in the joyful songs above, Sin
has caused all sorrow, which cannot enter where sin is not, there-
fore it is that Love has always been, throughout the ages, pointing
the way to joy.
Hence the prophetic songs all speak of the Messiah as bring-
ing “ joy and gladness, thanksgiving and the voice of melody ”
to earth again, and causing “sorrow and mourning,” for ever-
more to “ flee away.” And He could only do that by bringing
the righteousness that man had lost, and the peace that he had
forfeited ; for without righteousness and peace there can be no joy.
When, therefore, He appeared, “joy-bells” rang in heaven, and
resounded on earth over that Bethlehem plain. It was joy that
woke the sleeping shepherds to hear the strain of the heavenly host.
And, when He re-ascended, canst thou not think that Heaven re-
joiced to see its Lord again, and dost thou not know that there He
is, among the angels of God, rejoicing. Enow that there is joy in
the presence of the angels (for Christ rejoices, and that makes
heaven glad) over one sinner returning home again.
Joy ! Is there a note of sadness in true Christian thought ?
Though Paul and Silas are in the deepest, darkest dungeon at
Philippi, yet they must sing. They cannot help it Their backs
may be smarting from the lash, but they sing praises that shake
the prison, shake it until God comes and delivers them from it.
And throughout the whole word of God (understand that, ye who
perhaps have thought otherwise) “ joy" from beginning to end is
the song, until at last thou dost hear the Hallelujah Chorus beside
that great sea, the ocean of eternal love. And there the ransomed
hosts lift their voices, and heaven and earth conspire to sing
“ Hallelujah ! for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth ! Halle-
lujah ! hallelujah ! For the kingdoms of this world have become


.the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ, and He shall reign
for ever and ever.”
Songs of praise the angels sang,
Heaven with hallelujahs rang,
When Jehovah’s work begun ;
When He spake, and it was done.
Songs of praise awoke the morn,
When the Prince of Peace was born ;
Songs of praise arose when He
Captive led captivity.
Heaven and earth must pass away ;
Songs of praise shall crown that day :
God shall make new heavens and earth;
Songs of praise shall hail their birth.
From creation until restoration, every act in the great drama of
the world’s story is ushered in with song.
Understand, therefore, to-night that, whatever I may speak, I
have no other thought than this,—not to diminish one single joy
which thou possessest, but to increase it; not to take one note
■of gladness from thy life ; but, that God would set thy heart to a
nobler, diviner music, leading to higher thought and yet more
beautiful expression in the life which thou hast yet to live on earth.
But let us not mingle in the cup of joy (and that is the thought
to-night which causes me chiefly to speak on this matter) the
poison of lust. Let righteousness and peace be wedded together,
and let joy be the offspring of a righteous life, and of a heart
.at peace with God. Then shall we have that which will make
every engagement pure, we shall have clear eyes to discern
between the good and the evil, and no uncertain power to express
ourselves regarding both.
Now, to the Church of the Living God, to the Church of Christ
the Lord, is given the great mission of spreading the joyful tidings
of salvation throughout the world. Ido not mean that Church
written upon any human rolls ; not that Church called by the
name of any man, however holy or successful a minister of the
Lord Jesus he may have been; not that Church which arrogates
to be the whole, when it is only a section; not any Church that
places the name of a Christian ordinance or of a form of Church
government above its doors. And yet, Ido not exempt any of
these, so far as their members are united to Christ the Head. I
mean that Church which God has the rule of, which is registered
in heaven with unfailing accuracy, and is known on earth by its
devotion, not to creeds, not to names, not to men, but its devo-
tion to God, and its following in the footsteps of Christ. To that
Church is given the great mission to go out into all the world and
preach a gospel that shall come straight into antagonism with the


darkness, that shall, in the name of the Lord of Hosts, marshal'
all its forces, and, storming the fortresses of darkness, shall destroy
them, and let the captives go free.
There is another host on the other side, of which I cannot help'
speaking to-night ; for that is the host with which we are in con-
flict when we touch such questions as these. It is the host of evil
doers. At their head stands “ the world,” with all its fashion and
vanity; “ the flesh,” with all its enticements; and “ the devil,”
commander-in-chief of all the forces of evil, who, with every means,
that he can devise, and every power that he can employ, leads on
his battalions with deadly intent to destroy man, and to thwart
the purposes of God.
“ It marches to the drum-beat roll,
The deep-mouthed clarion’s bray,
And bears upon a crimson scroll, —
Our duty is to slay.”
We shall make no mistake about it, though it come in all the
voluptuousness of the army of beautiful harlots who accompany
Dionysus or Bacchus, the god of drunkenness, in his efforts to
extend his sway throughout the earth. We shall make no mistake
about it, please God, though it come in all the pomp of those who
are crowned with wealth, and are bowing down basely at Pluto’s
shrine. We shall make no mistake about it, though it come with
joyous song in the train of thr\t passion mis-named Love, which is
but another name for lust as the word is now employed on earth.
This host, wherever and however employed, in apparent amuse-
ment or in deadly earnest, ever hates all that is good, and is but
one host, with one aim. Many in number, different in attire, but
one banner is above it, and on that flag is inscribed, “ Our duty is
to slay.”
But on the other side, wending along through the ages, some-
times apparently reduced to but a few, but ever victorious, with
“ Faith in God ” in every heart, I see another host of which I have
already spoken, and in which I believe that many here to-night
are true soldiers. That army, clad in the panoply of God, sings
as it fights,—
“ Along our ranks no sabres shine,
No blood-red pennons wave,
Our banners bear one single line, —
1 Our mission is to save.’ ”
To save ! To save ! At whatever cost to save our fellow men
from the awful miseries of bondage to sin, from the malice of the
powers of hell, and to tear from their eyes the veil of darkness which
hinders them from seeing the light of “ the gospel of the glory of
God.” Yes ! That is the mission of those whom God has sent


into the world to extend the kingdom that is righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and by the power of that Spirit
to destroy the works of the devil.
Now, in regard to the matter which we have before us to-night,
jt has seemed to me, as I have thought about it, that in dealing
with it we must not fail to recognise the three-fold conflict into
which we have been, within the last few weeks, plunged. Ido not
shrink from my share in that conflict, I do not seek it, but, as it
has come in the path, I feel that my soul must be delivered about
it, and I only ask from you to-night that candour and consideration
which you will give, I trust, to one who, however many his imper-
fections may be to grasp the subject, has honestly, and solely,
striven to look at it as in the sight of God, and as in the best
interests of his fellow-men.
I have said there are three combatants, apparently, in this con-
flict.
The first of these is the Drama, by which I mean, the drama
in its widest sense, not merely representations of one kind, but
theatrical representations of every kind, —tragic, comic, serio-
comic, operatic and all the rest of it, on the one side. The second
of those who have plunged into the fray is that extraordinary insti-
tution of comparatively modern times, which is exercising for good
.and also for evil, such mighty power in the world, I mean the
Newspaper Press. And the last of the combatants is the Pulpit;
by which term I mean, not merely those who stand in the pulpits
or on the platforms as the exponents of particular religious views,
but also the Christian Churches of this city, as represented by their
chosen spokesmen.
I may be very shocking to some of you to-night, in the thoughts
which I now feel bound to express. That will very little matter to
me or to you, if lam right. It will matter a great deal if I am
wrong. But it has seemed to me, looking at the matter as closely
as I could, that in the confusion of this late strife, and in the
mingled interest and amusement which we have derived from it,
we may lose sight of the real nature of the whole thing.
The conflict seems to me to be peculiarly foolish between the
newspaper press as it is now constituted, and the churches of this
city as they are now constituted, on the one side, and the drama
.as it now exists on the other : for it appears to me that, for the
most part, all the three parties are fundamentally on very good
terms with each other.
Now let me here guard myself against misconception, and yet,
not a word of that sentence which I have just uttered, shall I
retract.
Ido sincerely admire, and, indeed, I say without flattery, for I
have nothing to gain personally by what I speak, and I have nothing
to fear, I admire and I revere such men as Dr. Frederick Barker,


Bishop of Sydney. I have not the pleasure of being intimate with?
him, but from a general knowledge of that noble man, and his work
for the Great Master, I will say, that the day in which that hero in
the Christian strife falls will be a day to be remembered and
lamented : for a cedar will have fallen in Lebanon. He is a man
every inch of him ; he is a Christian I am sure in heart and life ; I
know he loves the Redeemer: and severely as I may criticise certain
views, I am not here to decide anything of an opposite nature con-
cerning anyone else who has taken prominent part in this contfo-
versy. But this Ido say (not speaking of men as individuals, but
of the Churches as organizations, not of the men who are its best
representatives, but of the Churches as they really are in the city,)
that many of the pulpits, and the vile daily newspapers with which
this city is cursed, are working on the same lines, for the most part,.
as the drama.
If we are to speak plainly in this matter, and to any purpose,,
and with any result, then we must be fearless and true. I for one-
do not care to speak into the air; nor do I want to aim so high
that I will hit nowhere. With that loving hearted fearless man of
God, John Knox, I too would humbly say—l am in the place
where I am required of conscience to speak the truth, and speak it
I will, impugn it whoso list.”
Our first procedure then will be, to consider the present co?idition
of the newspaper press of this city , with reference to its fitness for the
functions of a critic and purifier of the drama.
Cowper in one of his poems, “ The Progress of Error,” thus-
apostrophises the press,—
“How shall I speak thee, or thy power address,
Thou god of our idolatry, the press ?
By thee religion, liberty, and laws,
Exert their influence, and advance their cause :
By thee worse plagues than Pharaoh’s land befell,
Diffused, make earth the vestibule of hell ;
Thou fountain, at which drink the good and wise ;
Thou ever-bubbling spring of endless lies ;
Like Eden’s dread probationary tree,
Knowledge of good and evil is from thee.”
No words that I might utter could at all so adequately express
the difficulty of dealing with that extraordinary phenomenon, the
press.
Have you ever earnestly considered- the magnitude and the
altogether imposing grandeur of that little word the editorial we ?
I say advisedly it is imposing, most imposing, in fact is altogether
a great imposition. I have looked at it many times, and I have
looked at it in various places from behind the scenes. I have not
very much of a literary life to look back upon ; but I do know su
little about the editorial “we”; and it is remarkably wee as they


say in Scotland. If you only knew how little it was ! I have known
a half-drunken and wholly godless reporter come in after drinking
porter, or some liquid stronger than water, who, under this inspir-
ation, has set to work to report something, with the intention of
totally extinguishing somebody. Of course this is done in the name
of the mysterious we. But lam far from saying the reporters as a
class are like this. As a rule they are gentlemanly and fair, unless
their instructions, more or less plainly expressed, point in another
direction. And then, perhaps, some carefully prepared contribu-
tion will reach the gentleman who lurks in the recesses of that
mysterious place, the editorial sanctum, a place which is not very
cleanly, as a rule, in any sense of the word. And now, I might ask
you to behold the literary ogre sitting there, but as I will not attempt
to bring him as a personality out of the obscurity of his den,
suffice it to say that there he sits consigning all and sundry, like
some horrid Rhadamanthus,*to literary perdition, who are guilty of
the crime of displeasing his editorial 7f/<?ship, who is not infrequently
enveloped by clouds of tobacco smoke, and is further assisted in
his arduous labours, by the inspiration of some Wolfe’s Schnapps,
or other spirituous guides. •
This newspaper editorial we is a most ridiculous creation, for the
most part, in our newspaper press. Ido not say it is always so,
but there are not a few editors who come within these descrip-
tions. They have learned also to be as mystical as the Sphinx,
and their leading articles are about as difficult to interpret as
the questions of that mythical monster were. I tell you, sirs, if
the press does not take care it will become the laughing-stock of
the world. The editorial we, setting itself up with all the inflation
of a cowardly anonymity, stabs to the very heart whoever it likes,
excludes wherever it pleases, and tyrannises with a despotism that
the people will have to cope with, and fight, and conquer, if it does
not take care.
Now let us consider what this editorial we has given forth upon
the matter under consideration.
First of all, I would deal with the paper called the Evening
News.
It has become a critic, not merely of the worldly drama,
but also of the Church of Christ. So wondrously and fear-
fully made is this creature, that it has presumed to become the
interpreter, not only of the people’s thought, but it has set up an
Oracle which, if it does not claim to be infallible, somewhat ap-
proaches the pretensions of that specially Romish institution.
Writing about the sermons which were announced to be delivered
to-day on the Drama, in various Churches of this city, the editorial
we says :—“ The theatrical treasuries will benefit by these orations.
Even those not accustomed to frequent those places of amusement
will be very anxious to go and judge the question for themselves, and


in the strictest households the desire o f witnessing a good play will he
gaining strength.” Well, I do' not think the stage will gain any
considerable strength from what I shall say here this evening. I
think this editor would have been surer of his results had he waited
a little longer : for it is always safer to prophecy after the event.
Then, secondly, this beautiful passage appears : —“ And the fact
remains that in proportion as decent people patronise good whole-
some plays in respectably conducted houses, will the stage cease to be
the influence for evil, which, in too many cases, it is at present.” ’
And so this paper, as an unquestionable judge of what is decent
and respectable, tells you that respectably conducted theatres,
such as accord with its standard, and proper plays will, measured
by its well known propriety, under wise editorial guidance, do all
that is needed to purify the stage.
I suppose you have read Milton’s “ Paradise Lost,” and will
remember that amongst the daring and impudent assumptions
of Satan, there is none more audacious, than that wherein he
reproves sin,—Satan reproving sin, just imagine it. And then
from that reflection turn to the Evening News , and listen to it
telling you what is reputable and disreputable, what is religious
and what is not religious, in the most approved tx-caihedra
manner, utterly ignoring the fact that just the day before this horrid
column, which I now exhibit to you, appears in its pages, headed
“ The Intercolonial Prize Fight.” Remember, also, that it was
prefaced the previous day by another, nearly as long, containing
a particularly minute and disgusting report of every blow that was
delivered in the beastial fight on the Murray Riveri —that fight
where two men stood up and strove to destroy each other’s coun-
tenance, and batter each other’s head and body into insensibility,
by the infliction of fierce blows and horrid cruelty. And this
to afford sport to gamblers, bullies, and blackguards generally.
Look at it! This report shows that the proprietors of the
Evening News had evidently most carefully prepared for this fight,
and were most evidently on such intimate terms with those
members of the prize-ring and betting-ring concerned in the brutal
display, as to secure prompt and minute telegraphic details of the
fight, details which could only be given by an eye-witness.
Doubtless this literary judge of respectability, sent one of their
staff to hang on to the caudal appendage of one of the leaders of
the ring, so that he might be present at this fight—an advantage
which was of course denied to the police, who were so anxious to
be there. And they dare to put before us, and into our homes,
the disgusting account of that prize-fight.
Look at it ! They tell us, with evident relish, that at the second
last round “Foley put in a terrible blow on Hicken’s ribs, which
evidently knocked what little wind he had left clean out of him,
and was a complete settler. Hicken turned completely green and


went down.” Then this “ decent” paper goes on to describe the
sickening scene at the end, when this poor bleeding wretch stag-
gered forward to fight the last round. They tell us it was a farce,
for “ Foley knocked him all round the ring until he fell on
his knees. It was quite evident that he could never be brought
up to time again, and the sponge was thrown up, a shout
proclaiming that Foley had won a good battle, after a fight
which had lasted an hour and twenty minutes.” Then this
“ respectable” journal steps forward to place the laurel on the
victor’s brow in this brutalising contest, and speaks of him as the
“ New South Wales champion,” and “ champion of the colonies
and adds that, “ as for the fight and its surroundings, it may be
said of it, that it was, so far as a prize fight can be so, quite
respectably conducted Then further, they chronicle this hero’s
progress to Melbourne, that cries of “ Advance Australia” and
loud cheering greeted him af every station, &rc., and that, on his
arrival in the city, he received “ a tremendous ovation,” And then
we are, with all this, told, that “Hicken’s face is terribly damaged,
and scarcely recognisable as a face at all.” Just think of this
judge of decency and respectability and of Christianity bidding us
admire the “ champion” • who smashes a man’s face into an indis-
tinguishable pulp. (Laughter.) lam sorry you laugh. I know
you do not approve the shameful deed. But I cannot laugh. My
whole soul goes out in indignation at that degrading scene of
villainy, and I am ashamed that, in this nineteenth century of the
Christian era a paper should think that is the sort of pabulum for
its readers in this city and land. If you were wise in this matter,
my fellow citizens, you would show them different, by taking such
action as would affect them where their feelings are keenest, that
is in their pockets.
Is this the kind of thing that is to elevate, to improve, and to
“ Advance Australia ?” Are the amenities of the prize-ring to be
added to our constitutional blessings ?
And this is the fearful and w r onderful we that is going to set the
Church and the Drama right ?
NowT say that Satan should never undertake the task of reproving
sin, for sin will have an awkward w r ay of saying, “I am thy
daughter.” And this paper, seeing that it is the sustainer of this
and kindred evils, should never undertake. the correction of the
drama. We may rightly here say, “ Physician heal thyself.”
Worthless, confusing, deluding, and altogether mischievous is the
critical help of that portion of the press in this question of the
drama, not only for the reasons w r hich I have advanced, but for
others, which it is at present unnecessary to bring forward.
Now, it is time that w f e turned our attention to a yet graver task.
We are now called to consider the conduct of the Sydney
Morning Herald and its nightly Echo; for these papers, with their


accustomed pretentious gravity and sham, have undertaken the
task of correcting the evils of the drama, and of directing the
Church of God in its work of dealing with iniquity.
Now, if it be an impertinent and presumptuous thing for Satan
to correct sin, I think it is an infinitely more abominable thing for
a hypocrite to undertake its correction. (Applause.) {Mr. Howie
here requested that no expressions of applause should he, made, remark-
ing that he ivas abundantly satisfied of their approval by their
earnestness and attention, whilst, he added, if applause were allowed,
it would he obviously unfair to prevent any friends who might disagree
with him from -expressing their disapproval.) And I say plainly, and
without fear of consequences, that the name “ hypocrite” is my
term for the Herald, and also for its infant of the night the Echo.
When Christ was on earth, His cunning foes brought to Him a
woman taken in adultery, and they say : —-Now, Lord, judge her,
she was taken in the very act. Then -all those Pharisees got round
Him and said : —“ Moses in the law commanded us, that such
should be stoned ; but what sayest thou ?” They thought to get
him into a trap, and that He would go against Moses’ law. But
Jesusreplied, in words which were keen in their satire, as well as pro-
found in their wisdom, and I think I can. almost see the smile on
His face, and the twinkle in His eye, as He spoke the sentence,
“ He that is without sin among you, let him cast the first stone at
her.” And they, “ being convicted by their own consciences,
went out one by one.” The mask of their hypocrisy was completely
taken off by the Redeemer, and those men, who had gone there to
have the adulteress stoned, had the mark of her iniquity written
by the finger of God upon their brows, even as God set a mark
upon Cain.
And shall the Hprald and the Echo , the modern Scribes of the
modern Pharisees, demand judgment upon the Drama ?
With what fitness can they reprove sin who fatten upon it
pecuniarily ?
I am informed on reliable authority that the proprietors of
these journals bought up a sporting paper, and they get men,
who are commonly known by very vulgar names, to write for
it. In this “ family newspaper,” they publish every day the sport-
ing prophecies and the betting list, which used to be confined
to an obscure and low .sheet, but which are now given full promin-
ence regularly every morning, and with a pious “ Amen ” laid upon
the breakfast-table. Oh ! this is abominable ! and then this Herald
will favour you, after it has been working up the races with all its
power for months, it will favour you with an article on the enormity
of betting ! Is it not absurd ? And this is the paper that will take
the money of the people who produced that immoral play the
“ Psychoscope,” in this Theatre, a play which should have been
suppressed by the police on account of its immorality and indecency.


They will take the money of the people that produced “ Pink.
Dominoes,” &c. Yes, knowing their demoralizing characters, they
will yet take the money offered them, and advertise these plays far
and wide. They will send reporters, who will gloss over the iniqui-
ties of the performance, and then they will come out with a hypo-
critical article like this of March 12th, which I hold in my hand,
and which concludes with the following sentence, —“ Let the
Church join the Press in encouraging pure and lofty representations,
and in scathing every drama which goes to coarse vices for its
attractions.”
Consistent remark ! “ Physician heal thyself” !
I tell you this, I will never, as a Christian, work in this crusade
with such a press as that, nor do I believe that Christians generally-
will feel flattered by the invitation. I would rather work with
the most thorough-going freethinkers of this city, fifty times rather,
for they would have more influence for good in contending against
the iniquity of the drama. I would sooner trust them by far than
I would do the men who, taking the unclean money in their hands,
facilitate and praise the very dramatic performances, in one portion
of the paper, which they denounce in another column, and invite
the Church to unite with them in “ scathing.”
I have an idea that the scathing, is for the present, more richly
deserved by these pharisaical scribes, and I will do my best to
administer it, though I sincerely wish the unpleasant duty were in
other and abler hands.
There is a story in the Acts of the Apostles which reads
something like this Some people, they are called “ certain of the
vagabond Jews,” saw the Apostle Paul casting out evil spirits, SO’
they thought they would try the effect of using the name of Jesus
on those who were demon possessed, and see if they could cast
them out as well as the apostle. Well, they came up and said to
those possessed, “ We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.”
But the demon turned and said, “Jesus I know, and Paul I know,
but who are ye ” ? aqd the man leaped upon them, and thrashed
them soundly, “so that they fled out of the house naked and
wounded.”
Well may the Drama turn round upon the Herald and say,
“ Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye ” ? How shall
ye, who stretch forth unclean hands, stained with the gold which
ye have received from these perishing souls, dare to tell us that it
is for the Church of God to join you in your efforts to put down
an iniquity which you do so much to support ?
But I have yet more to say concerning the conduct of this por-
tion of the press, which I accuse of unfairness generally, and of
contemptible sycophancy in particular directions.
I shall not in speaking beat about the bush, nor use terms that
you do not understand. I do not believe with Talleyrand, that


speech was given to conceal thought, but rather that it was given to
express thought as clearly as possible, and I shall so act.
I will draw attention, first, to the way in which it treats its flatterers.
First of these stands the gentleman who occupies the pulpit of
the Church, called the Pitt Street Congregational Church.
I am, let me say, speaking as the Lord knoweth, in no sense
from motives of personal antagonism. I have not a very close
acquaintance at present with Mr. Jefferis, but I can also say that I
have had no personal difference with him.
This question as to the fairness of the press is a most important
public matter, and, as a public man, I deal with him in connection
with it, as I shall presently deal with another ecclesiastical person-
age. The contemptible and base conduct of the press has to be
met and exposed, and I for one feel bound to take my part in
doing it. I hope others who are abler and better will arise speedily,
and, fearless of the consequences, do their duty to God and man,
in preventing its enormous influence from doing deadly national
harm. These consequences are not a little bitter; for when
malicious, cunning men have the command of a whole paper in
which to attack you, and from which they can shut you out, and
when, with their “zig-zag” round-about ways of telling lies, they
can peck at you every night, then, I say, it needs some calmness
and courage to speak.
Knowing this, then, I deliberately assert that the Herald has dealt
with the gentleman to whom I have just referred, in a way that will
cover it with shame and contumely.
On a recent occasion, he delivered an oration in the Masonic Hall,
or what was intended to be one, at the Gladstone Demonstration,
and that speech the Herald professed to report in its issue of the
following day. Now I, and many here who were present, well re-
member his reception by the meeting. It was a very noisy reception,
and full of interruptions from first to last, with but brief intervals,
not one word of which confusion was reported. Then our friend
got into all kinds of trouble, and made many absurd statements and
assertions, which created merriment and disorder. I was sincerely
sorry for him, and yet more for the cause which was suffering at
his hands, which cause I did my best to uphold, and I would scorn
to mention these facts now, but for their absolute need in proving
my assertion concerning the Herald.
Well, what was the consequence, when this speech came to be
reported ?
I do not know how it was arranged, but, instead of the blunder-
ing speech which was delivered, there appeared next morning,
a speech which Mr. Jefferis never delivered, as it was there reported.
It began “ Mr. Mayor,” which expression was never uttered, for
the very good reason that the Mayor was not in the chair,
and then it launched out into a remarkable figure of speech


about a certain near relative of his, which certainly was never
uttered. Then it carefully kept out his blunders, and the conse-
quent interruptions that made it impossible sometimes for him to
proceed. Altogether, though the speech contained things he said,
it also contained many things he did not say, omitted many things
he said, and refrained from any mention of its unfavorable recep-
tion. It was a garbled, cooked speech, and many besides myself
remarked it at the time. This is how the Herald deceives the
public, and rewards its friends or flatterers. Had I delivered that
speech, you would have seen something very different as a report:
for I am neither a friend nor a flatterer, but one who has long
believed, and openly said, that the Herald, as at present conducted,
•is in many respects a disgrace, a hindrance, and a scandal.
And I have yet one more charge against it, which will prove that
my convictions are well founded, regarding the facts of which there
is no room for dispute.
I charge it with being a foe to all that constitutes a true hearted
allegiance to what we commonly speak of as Protestant principles ;
and a panderer, on the other hand, to Roman Catholicism, which
is, in its principles and practices, opposed to all true progress; and,
further, that it so acts from fear lest its pecuniary interests should
suffer, as well as from an inbred hatred of true liberty, which is
“ the heart centre ”of that system. One crowning proof of this is
to be found in the facts which I shall now state, though there is no
lack of similar, perhaps even worse, cases.
I know that I expose myself to severely venomous and personal
criticism, by selecting the case which I am about to place before
you ; and that it will be said, my motives in doing so are solely
those of personal chagrin. Against such I can only, in anticipation,
enter my simple denial. I have taken the case as an illustration,
because of its public importance, and because the facts are all
within my own knowledge ; and for no other reason.
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sydney, Dr. Vaughan,
delivered, some time ago, a lecture which was entitled “ Hidden
Springs.” It was inserted verbatim et literatim in the Herald of the
day following its delivery, and covered several whole pages, in small
type, most carefully revised and corrected. It must have been set up
in type days before it was delivered. The whole oration was an elabor-
ate endeavour to prove the supremacy of Rome, the infallibility of
the Pope, and that the only safety for individuals and nations lay
in absolute and unquestioning submission to the Pope and Church
of Rome. It was filled with falsifications of history, with fabrica-
tions of history, with plagiarisms, misquotations, misrepresentations,
false logic, and utterly baseless conclusions, wrapped up in seduc-
tive rhetoric. These facts I pointed out in two lectures, prepared
with much toil and care, and delivered to large audiences in the


Church at Newtown, of which I was then pastor, in Newcastle,
and in the Masonic Hall, Sydney.
And how did the Herald treat these lectures ?
Before answering, I must state some personal facts, which, how-
ever painful they are to utter, must, in the imperative interests of
truth, and as a duty to my fellow' citizens, be spoken.
I had come under the ban of the Herald for various causes,
none of which I have any reason to be ashamed of. But my crown-
ing offences were, that I formally protested against the election of
its then chief proprietor to the chair of the Congregational Union,
that I stated it to be w T rong for a man who took money from bettors
and actors, for the promotion of their interests, to sit in the chair
of a Christian assembly, since Christ had no concord with Belial ;
and, because I said, that a man must serve God or Mammon,
but that he could not serve both.
How did the Herald report my replies to Dr. Vaughan then ?
They inserted a few lines, saying something, if I remember cor-
rectly, about their being able, interesting, and eloquent; but
between their spite against me personally, which follow's me
until this day, and their cow'ardice to admit my exposure of
Dr. Vaughan’s lecture, they suffered the truth to be suppressed to
the injury of many. Now Ido not wish to be egotistic, but I feel
you will permit me to say this, that those lectures of mine, w'hen
afterw'ards printed in a pamphlet of 88 pages, demy octavo, were,
by friends, placed in the hands of such men as the Right Hon.
W. E. Gladstone and Dr. Pattison, the Rector of Lincoln College,
Oxford ; and that I received the kindest notes, and the most sym-
pathetic, warm, and discriminating praise from these able men, and
others, who stand at the head of literature in the subjects of which
my lectures treated. I mention these facts simply to show that
if the Herald , as it may likely, says that my lectures w r ere not worth
reporting, then their editorial we is at issue not with me only, not
only wuth some thousands who heard them wfith enthusiasm in Syd-
ney, but that they are at issue with men whom it w'ould be an
insult to compare with the anonymous wee people w'ho “ do ” the
criticisms of the Herald.
So much then for the now proved to be cowardly foe of the
Church of Christ, and friend of the Church of the Pope.
How dare this paper say, “ the Church should join hands w r ith
us” in any enterprise ? It is an insult to every section of it. And
as for the drama, why, unclean as the spirit in it may be, I again
say it would be justified in saying—“Jesus I know', and Paul I
know, but who are ye ?” And then, wfith well-merited reproach,
it might drive such a Press out of the field, saying, “ Get ye gone !
Get ye gone for ever !”
Here ends then our examination of the fitness of the Newspaper
Press of this city for the functions of a critic and purifier of the


Drama, and, if you will but consider the facts and reasons wdiich I
have advanced, you will, I humbly submit, accept my conclusion,
that the Press has been “ weighed in the balance and found to be
wanting ” in every quality needed for the task.
But we have now to deal with a more delicate and difficult,
even dangerous, question. Many persons seem to think that it is
almost sacrilege to at ail criticise the Pulpit and the Churches.
But this is neither scriptural nor common sense thinking; and
shrinking from examination is only additional proof of the need for
it. Any physician would say that of a patient who was suffering
from internal injuries, and I say it of the professing Churches of
Christ in this city. I distinguish between the Church and the
various Churches, and I do not adversely criticise anything or any
one further than as to the actual evidence of wrong which their
visible fruits supply ; for the Lord Jesus, who condemns censorious
judgments, bids us also to remember that “ by their fruits ye shall
know' them.” Therefore, when the churches and their pulpits
supply you with fruits of thought and life which taste bitter as
apples of Sodom, you are bound to remember the Master’s word
—“ A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.”
We are not, however, called upon to deal at this time with the
condition generally of the Churches and their fruits. Our investi-
gation is within comparatively narrow limits. We are to deal with
the general attitude of the Churches of this city in their dealings
with the world of sin around, and towards the drama in particular,
so far as that attitude has been expressed in recent pulpit utter-
ances, to which the Press has given an undue prominence so far
as their actual worth is concerned.
With these limitations, therefore, in our minds, let us proceed
to consider the present condition of the Churches , and the value of
their pulpit utterances , with reference to their fitness for the junctions
of critics and purifiers of tne drama,.
You will remember that I introduced our consideration of the
Press by quoting a passage from one of William Cowper’s poems ;
and it will slacken the strain upon my mind in speaking for a few'
minutes, and at the same time prove a fitting introduction to this
section of my lecture, if I repeat to you another passage from that
much neglected poet’s writings—writings which are of the highest
order of philosophic thought, and of the truest perception of that
impassable gulf which is fixed between things good and evil.
Cowper never recognised the right of evil to a place in man’s life
or in God’s world at all. He never advocated any compromises
with sin in any form ; but with all the lofty inspiration of a poet’s
genius, and the invincible faith and self-renouncing love of a true
Christian, he advocated the destruction of “ the works of the devil ”
wherever they w'ere found. Hence, he hesitated not to deal with
the shams which corrupted the Church in his day, and, among


other pieces on that subject, he wrote the following poem on
“ The Love of the World reproved; or hypocrisy detected ” ;
which, I think, you will agree with me, is as applicable to-day as it
was nearly a century ago, when he wrote it.
Thus says the Prophet of the Turk,
Good Mussulman, abstain from pork ;
There is a part in every swine
No friend or follower of mine
May taste, whate’er his inclination,
On pain of excommunication.
Such Mahomet’s mysterious charge,
And thus he left the point at large.
Had he the sinful part expressed,
They might with safety eat the rest;
Put for one piece they thought it hard,
From the whole hog to be debarred ;
And set their wits at work to find
What joint the Prophet had in mind.
Much controversy straight arose—
These choose the back, the belly those ;
By some, ’tis confidently said,
He meant not to forbid the head ;
While others at the doctrine rail,
And piously prefer the tail.
Thus conscience freed from every clog,
Mahometans eat up the hog.
You laugh—’tis well —the tale applied,
May make you laugh on t’other side.
“ Renounce the world ! ” the preacher cries.
“ We do,” a multitude replies.
While one as innocent regards
A snug and friendly game at cards ;
And one, whatever you may say,
Can see no evil in a play ;
Some love a dress-bait, or a race ;
And others shooting or the chase.
Reviled and loved, renounced and followed,
Thus bit by bit the world is swallowed ;
Each thinks his neighbour makes too free,
Yet likes a slice as well as he ;
With sophistry their sauce they sweeten,
Till quite from tail to snout ’tis eaten.
(Laughter.)
Now I feel serious about that, and yet who can help laughing ?
We laugh in our very pain, and with bleeding hearts, at such
fooleries as these, which are daily practised by those who profess
to be followers of their sinless Saviour and Lord, children of God
dead to sin and alive to righteousness. Imagine how it appears in
heaven, to see the Church at the Mayor’s Fancy Dress Ball, decked
out in the gaudy rags of the theatres.
“Oh, but man, proud man !
******
“ Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
“ As makes the angels weep.”


Why I would be honest, were my heart not with Christ but with
dhe shams of Vanity Fair. I would be on one side or the other ;
but I would not be such a fool as to persuade myself, I could stand
on both. I tell you they will find themselves vastly mistaken who
think they can do that. You cannot cheat God, you cannot even
cheat men who have got any sense either, and the most foolish of
all victories is to succeed at last in cheating yourselves.
Now what is the position of the Church of Christ in Sydney as
;a whole ?
Let me say here that I believe there are men and women as
noble as God ever breathed the breath of life into in this city,
I know men as noble and true (some of whom are sitting before
me to-night,) as ever I expect to meet with, or to work with, while
I live in God’s earth. I know many godly women, in all social
conditions, and connected with Christian Churches, who are as
pure and devoted to their Master, and as distinguished by true
piety of thought and life, as I have ever found in any part of the
world. But I speak of the Churches as organised bodies. Where
are they in this matter ? The minority are those who will not with
sophistry slime over the world, as a boa constrictor does its prey,
and then swallow it entire. These are the minority ; for
“ Throughout mankind, the Christian kind at least,
“ There dwells a consciousness in every breast,
“ That folly ends where genuine hope begins,
“ And he that finds his heaven must lose his sins.”
Thou canst not keep these glittering seductions which are contrary
to God, and which are destroying thy fellow-men, and yet have
treasure in the heavens. Thou canst not have the friendship of
the world, without having the enmity of God, for His word hath
•declared it.
Are the Churches generally, and their ministers, then fit critics ?
No, and that for two reasons.
First, they have not the right, until they have done all that in
them lies to reach, with good influences and good example, the
masses of the people around them, I say they have not the right to
speak one word in censure of those persons or practices which they
proclaim to be evil and destructive. Second, they have no right
to rebuke the vileness of the theatre, until they themselves show their
sincerity as reformers by ceasing to protect vileness quite as abom-
inable within their own borders, such as the iniquitous traffic in
intoxicating liquors, which has its strongholds in the Churches of
this city, and which traffic is the chief minister of the worst abom-
inations associated with the Drama.
On the very stage from which I am now speaking, plays have
within the last few days been performed, which are undoubtedly


filthily immoral, and I believe at these representations there were
numbers of professing Christians in this city—of some of those
who have been here I know the names.
Let me here say, I was glad to hear from the lips yesterday of
the manager of this theatre, who has always treated me with
gentlemanly consideration I may add, an indignant denial of his
having had any part in the production of at least two of these
demoralizing plays, one of which he at all hazards suppressed, even
at the risk of an action for damages by those to whom he had let
the theatre, as I understand.
But, is it not a scandal to think that many members of those
Churches where the Drama is severely criticised, are not infre-
quently present at all kinds of dramatic performances, and are
known to be so by their ministers, without the slightest attempt
being made to prevent them, or to exercise Church discipline ?
Theatrical managers have told me that in the green-room, and
behind the scenes the performers often indulge in contemptuous
laughter and mockery, when they converse with each other about
“ the leading lights ” of some Christian Churches, whom they have
seen gaping with admiration at their performances of “ sacred ”
scenes.
On a recent occasion in this city, when a play entitled “ Uncle
Tom’s Cabin ” was enacted, many professing Christians went to
hear the blasphemies performed therein : for it is blasphemous to
take God’s name in vain. I have been informed on the best
authority, that many of the performers who sung in that play some
of Mr. Sankey’s sweet hymns, which we use in our services here,
laughed and made sport of the very hymns which they had pro-
fessed to “ sing to the Lord ” a few moments before, when they
enacted for the time being some of the “ pious ” characters in that
piece.
What think you are the feelings of such performers when they
see Christians flocking to see their impersonations of Christian
piety ? Can you wonder, if they should say, that the piety of most
of them must be of a very sham kind, when they see them so easily
imposed upon by a theatrical burlesque of the Christian life ?
Consider the harm which is thus wrought to the extension of the
Redeemer’s kingdom. How shall the world be convinced of the
priceless riches of redeeming grace, when they see the Church
running after the “brummagem” imitations of the Drama?
But it is not at this point of my lectures that I shall deal with
the immoral • character of the modern drama. There is much to
be said, ere I reach that position. I will only here say, to each
Christian man and woman before me, that, if the general testimony
of many of the best men and women among modern actors,
dramatic authors, and theatrical managers is to have any weight,,
then it is provable beyond a doubt, that immorality is essential to


the stage as it now exists; and, as I shall show, immorality has
been connected with the stage as long as it has existed.
That last remark, however, expresses a very different conclusion
to that which has been expressed in two recent utterances of the
Rev. James Jefferis, which, as might be expected, have been ex-
travagantly praised by the Press of this city. So far from saying
that the stage has always been immoral, we have been told with the
most profound gravity, and assumption of classic lore, that the
Drama had its golden age of virtue, true beauty, and purity, away
back in the distant centuries before Christ, in Ancient Greece.
Now I have made up my mind in these lectures to call things
by their right names, and the names which rightly belong to these
statements of Mr. Jefferis, which I am about to quote in their literal
terms, are ignorance and arrogance. It amounts to a public scandal,
that statements which are wholly contrary to facts should be foisted
upon the public, regarding ages and literature not generally known.
Comparatively few persons would think of doubting the accuracy
of a man in Mr. Jefferis’ position, and it is, therefore, the more
necessary, that statements, so misleading to the people, and so
detrimental above all to the interests of the truth, should be as
publicly exposed as they were uttered. That, however, is not to
be expected, I fear, so far as the Press are concerned. The news-
papers pursue as a settled policy, it seems to me, the publica-
tion of lies that pay, rather than of unwelcome truths which do not
pay. They published, nearly in extenso, Mr. Jefferis’ lecture of last
Sunday evening ; and I may safely prophesy they will not print to-
morrow morning a word of what I now say. In the interests then
of truth alone, I enter upon the unwelcome task of dealing, as they
imperatively require, with the ignorant —for I cannot, I dare not,
imagine that he knew better —statements made as to the golden
age of the Drama, which it is supposed to be so desirable to restore.
On March sth, at the Annual Meeting of the Young Men’s
Christian Association ot this city, the following expressions were
attributed to Mr. Jefferis, in a speech which he had been requested
to deliver upon “ The temptations of large cities,” the correctness
of which report he has never questioned. These were the words: —-
“He confessed he had a sympathy with the views of the Bishop of
Melbourne with regard to Theatres. If such plays as those of
Sophocles and Euripides, or such plays as some of the earlier
English Dramatists could be produced without the accessories
there were, then, we as Christians could give in our .adhesion to
theatres.”
This was indeed confident language as to the purity of the ancient
drama ; but it was completely eclipsed by yet more confident asser-
tions, made after his views on the drama generally had been boldly
and ably challenged by the Bishop of Sydney, a few days later at
the Annual Meeting of the N. S. W. Auxiliary to the British and


Foreign Bible Society —one of the grandest of Christian enterprises,
let me say, in passing. Mr. Jefferis, in replying to Dr. Barker’s
criticisms on that occasion, said that he would take an early oppor-
tunity of setting his views on the drama more fully and carefully
before the public than he had yet been able to do. This he did
on Sunday evening last, in a lecture which is fully reported in the
Herald of Tuesday, March 18th, and which should, therefore, have
been in every part well considered. No one, consequently, can
blame me for dealing with it as containing his settled con-
clusions with reference to the question as to what the Ancient
Drama really was.
In this then, his third deliverance on the subject, he said :
“ The tragedies of Aeschylus and Sophocles contain high moral
and religious teaching. They represented men as they ought to
be, not as they were. But the theatrical assemblies of the ancient
Greeks were no more satisfied than theatrical audiences of modern
Englishmen with ideal pictures of a noble life.”
Here then are definite issues, and, if these assertions can be
proved, we have only to revive the ancient Drama to find a theatre
to which “ we as Christians could give in our adhesion.”
The claims here made for the plays of Euripides, Sophocles, and
HCschylos are three —
i, —“ They contain high moral and religious teaching.”
2. —“They represented men as they ought to be, not as they
were.”
3. —They contain the “ ideal pictures of a noble life.”
Each and all of these claims I declare to be wholly unwarranted,
and will prove that these plays are of precisely opposite a character
—that they are grossly immoral, that they are utterly irreligious
because of their degrading polytheism, that they represent the
greatest men as blind tools of fate, are most horribly polluted by
awful crimes, and present ideal pictures of as ignoble lives as the
human mind can conceive. Apart from the display of poetic skill
and elegance of composition in these dramas, they are utterly with-
out redeeming qualities, except it be for here and there a noble
thought, which has alone preserved them from utter extinction long
ago —such thoughts, however, being far better expressed in the yet
older and nobler, because infallible, writings which have been in-
spired by God.
I shall now, in proof of my assertions, refer to some of the prin-
cipal plays of these three writers, sorry as I am to do so, for I can
scarcely but refer to crimes and scenes of a most repulsive nature.
The responsibility must rest with him who renders such a course
necessary. I shall go as little as possible into details, which would
alone take hours to set before you.


Let us first refer to the works of Euripides, the later of the three
tragic writers mentioned by Mr. Jefferis in terms of such unbounded
admiration. He was born 480 years before Christ, and died about
406 B.C. He lived contemporaneously with Sophocles, and about
half a century later than H£schylos. Without doubt he employed
elegant Greek, and a high style of composition, in his works —
qualities which only increased their degrading power : for vulgar
vice in all its naked loathsomeness is not so dangerous as when it
is elegantly attired in the robes of a misapplied genius.
Aristotle in his “ Poetics ” (46) when criticising Euripides, dis-
tinctly charges it upon him, that.in his works “ men are represented
not as they ought to be, but as they are,'’ which is precisely the
reverse of Mr. Jefferis’ dictum. I wonder who knew best, Aristotle
who lived about 30 years later than Euripides, and who had pro-
bably all his works before him when he wrote, or Mr. Jefferis who
lived over 2,300 years later, and who, it is charity to suppose, has
never read them ] It does not seem to be known to Euripides’
modern admirer, that even among the ancients, most of his writings
were held to be demoralizing, with the single exception perhaps of
the Alcestis.
And amongst modern critics I will only refer to two, whose
special knowledge fits them for the task of judging Euripides, viz.,
Mr. Grote, and Mr. T. A. Buckley, both Greek scholars of the
greatest eminence. In his History of Greece (vol. 1 pp. 373-4,)
Mr. Grote says that “he put into the mouth of his unprincipled
dramatic diameters, apologetic speeches which were denounced as
ostentatious sophistry, and as setting out a triumphant case for the
criminal. His thoughts, his words, and the rythm of his choric
songs, were all accused of being deficient in dignity and elevation.
. . . And he incurred still greater obloquy on another point, on
which he is allowed even by his enemies to have only reproduced
in substance the pre-existing tales, —the illicit and fatal passion
depicted in several of his female characters, such as Phaedra and
Sthenoboea. His opponents admitted that these stories were true,
but contended that they ought to be kept back, and not produced
upon the stage.”
Can this be the author of whom Mr. Jefferis says, —“ If such
plays . . . could be produced . . then, we as Christians could
give in our adhesion to the stage 1 ” Why, even the heathen of
ancient Athens thought they, as Mr. Grote says, “ ought not to be
produced upon the stage.” Can it be that this modern critic of the
drama is of the opinion that the Christians of Sydney are so degraded
as to find entertainment in dramas which were pronounced to be
unfit for the heathen stage 1
But Mr. Buckley, an Oxford scholar of eminence and the trans-
lator of Euripides’ extant works, shall tell us his opinion, an opinion
worthy of consideration. He says, in his Introduction to the


Tragedies of Euripides (pp. vii-x), “As if he took a delight in the
black side of humanity, he loves to show the strength of false
reasoning, of sophistry antagonistic to truth, and of cold expediency
in opposition to the natural feelings of humanity. . . , His ex-
aggerations in the minor characters are scarcely to be surpassed by
the lowest writers of any period. . . Under Euripides, the stage
began gradually to approximate more closely to the ordinary and,
at that time, debased character of Athenian society. . . . An
attempt to depreciate the social influence and position of the
weaker sex, forms the most unamiable features of this change. . .
His excellent reasons for doing right or wrong, as the case might
be, must have been inestimably delightful to the accommodating
morals of the Athenians.” But it is not only for their immorality
that Mr. Buckley denounces these plays, which Mr. Jefiferis praises,
it is for their beastiality and cruelty. He says (p. x.) “So great
is the prodigality of slaughter throughout his Dramas, that we can
but imagine morbid cruelty to have formed a considerable ingredient
in the disposition of Euripides. Even his pathos is somewhat
tinctured with this taste for painful images. As we have beheld in
our own times a barbarian alternately glut his sight with executions,
and then shed floods of tears, and sink into idiot despondency;
so the poetry of Euripides in turn disgusts us with outrageous
cruelty, and depresses us with the most painful demands upon our
compassion.”
However, that ray exposure of the real nature of Euripides’ plays
may be complete, I will lay before you, shorn of some of its dis-
gusting details, one of his best productions —The Bacchce. Isay
the best, meaning the least abominable : for such plays as his
Hippolytus are too immoral to be referred to at length, setting forth
as they do the horrid crimes of gods and men who are famous in
ancient mythology.
The plot of The Bacchoe is. somewhat as follows.
Bacchus (or Dionysus) appears first upon the scene, and claims
to be the son of Zeus (or Jupiter), the supreme god of the Greeks, by
an earthly woman, Semele —the said Jupiter being just a supremely
beastial conception, Bacchus, being introduced, makes a long
speech claiming to be a real god, and setting forth the great
impiety of his native city, Thebes, where he then is, in rejecting
him, and especially expresses his resolve to punish the king,
Pentheus, who refuses to worship the god of drunkenness, being a
worshipper of Minerva (or Athense) the goddess of wisdom.
Bacchus declares—“ I will show Pentheus, and all the Thebans,
that lam a god”; and the whole object of the play is to manifest
how he proved his divinity beyond question. He drives the sisters
of his own mother out of the palace, filling them with frenzy, so
that they dwell in the mountains in a state of insanity; and
maddens also Agave, the mother of Pentheus, beside many other


women of Thebes, who engage in the vicious actions, and orgies,
which formed part of the worship of Bacchus. When this is fully
accomplished, and the women are all raving mad drunk in the hills
near the city, Bacchus appears in disguise, as a man, to Pentheus,
who is filled with indignation, having found that his nearest rela-
tives are worshipping the god whom he abominates. Bacchus pre-
tends to sympathise with Pentheus in his fierce anger, and per-
suades him to disguise himself in woman’s attire, and go out
among the women in the mountains, so that he may be able to
decide how to punish them. To this Pentheus agrees, and no
sooner has he attired himself like a female worshipper of Bacchus,
than he too becomes mad. When they arrive at the scene of
debauchery and revelry where the women are, Bacchus contrives
to make Pentheus appear like some horrid beast to the maddened
creatures ; whereupon, led by Agave, his mother, who has become
a priestess, they seize him and with the most cruel tortures kill
him, tearing him from limb to limb, whilst the Chorus sing these
words —“ Ye have accomplished a glorious victory, illustrious,
yet for woe and tears : for it is a glorious contest to plunge one’s
dripping hand into the blood of one’s son.” Then Agave takes
his bleeding head, and placing it upon the top of a thyrsus, she
bears it along in triumph through the city of Thebes, until she
meets Cadmus, her father, whom she invites to prepare a banquet
to celebrate her victory, and bids her servants to summon her son
Pentheus also. Cadmus horrified bids her look up into the sky,
whereupon her Bacchic frenzy leaves her, and she forgets much of
what she has said and done in it. Then Cadmus says —“ Whose
head is that you have in your arms ? ” She replies, “ That of a
lion, as those who hunted him said.” He bids her look again,
and she starts back in horror, exclaiming, “ What do I see ?
What is this that I bear in my hands ?” Cadmus rejoins, “ Look
at it, and learn more closely—Does it seem to you to be like a
lionl” The miserable Agave then exclaims, ‘‘No; but I,
wretched, hold the head of my son Pentheus —Who slew him, how
•came he into my hands'?—Tell me, since delay causes a quivering
at my heart.” To which the weeping Cadmus answers, “ You and
your sisters slew him ”; and then goes on to explain to her at
length, how Bacchus had caused her to slay him, because he had
insulted the god, by denying his divinity and refusing to worship
him. Cadmus closes his narrative by saying, “ But if there is any-
one here who despises the gods, looking on this man’s death, let
him acknowledge the gods.” Then Bacchus himself appears again
upon the scene, and dooms Cadmus, Agave, and the whole royal
family to banishment and worse. Cadmus beseeches the god to
have mercy, which prayer Bacchus refuses. Cadmus says, “ You
press upon us too severely.” Bacchus answers, “Ay, for I, being
.a god, was insulted by you,” Cadmus replies, “It is not right for


gods to resemble mortals in anger.” Bacchus then closes all
further discussion by saying, “ My father, Jove, long ago decreed
this.” Then, finally, the Chorus closes the drama by singing,
“ There are many forms of divine things ; and the gods bring to’
pass many in an unexpected manner : both what has been expected
has not been accomplished, and the god has found out a means for
doing things unthought for. So, too, has this event turned out.”
And now, I ask you if this representation contains “high moral
and religious teaching,” and is just the thing which will cause you
who are “ Christians to give in your adherence to theatres ” ? Is
Mr. Jefferis desirous of formally re-establishing the worship of
Bacchus ? I never thought him a very active foe to the temples
of Bacchus which curse this city ; but surely he cannot mean to
teach this as the newest thing in divinity. And, if these plays re-
present “men as they ought to be,” does Mr. Jefferis really mean
us to understand that we are to learn from Pentheus, and, instead
of worshipping the Eternal God of Wisdom, are we to become
worshippers of Bacchus, the god of cruelty, vice, and drunkenness;
and are all Christian mothers to get drunk like Agave, and murder
their sober-minded, wisdom-loving sons, as she did ?
And then, will Mr. Jefferis be pleased to point out “the ideal
pictures of a noble life ” contained in this, or any of Euripides’
plays ? Does the human impersonation of divinity in the person
of Bacchus, who proves himself throughout the play to be a liar, a
murderer, a lustful monster, and a most atrociously cruel and
merciless wretch generally—l say, does that impersonation contain
the “ ideal picture of a noble life ” ; or, if not, in which of the
characters can it be found ?
But let us turn to the writings of Sophocles, and see if they will
bear the admiration which Mr. Jefferis has so repeatedly bestowed
upon them.
Sophocles was born about 496 years before Christ, and died in
the same year as Euripides, 406 B.C. Admitting all that might be
said truthfully as to his undoubted genius, and that there are fine
passages here and there in his writings, and passing by his vices of
sensual indulgence and love of money, we need only glance at his
seven extant tragedies to see how utterly debasing the representa-
tion of them must have been, and how monstrously wicked it would
be for them to be enacted on the stage in these days.
The Ajax sets forth the details of the madness, murderous designs,
and suicide of its subject, one of the Grecian heroes of the seige of
Troy, who lost both his reason and his life through jealousy, be-
cause that the dead hero Achilles’ armour was bestowed upon a
better man, Ulysses.
I fail to see anything very “ noble ” there.
The Electra represents, principally, the successful murder by
Electra and her brother, Orestes, of their own adulterous and
murderous mother, Clytemnestra, and her paramour AEgisthus.,


I do not see anything very “ noble ” in that.
The Philoctetes is a shade better than the two preceding plays ;
but principally represents Ulysses’ unsuccessful attempt to steal
from Philoctetes the arrows of the god Hercules, whose descent
from the skies puts everything straight.
Where is the nobility, etc., of such mythical rubbish as that ?
The Antigone represents how two wretched brothers quarrelled
about their respective claims to the throne of Thebes, how they
brought about great slaughters in many contests, how they at last
slew each other in single combat, how their uncle who became king
denied one of them the rites of burial, how his sister Antigone did
bury him despite the king’s orders, how she was sentenced to die
from starvation in a cave, how the king’s own son slew himself
because of Antigone’s doom, how his mother Eurydice also com-
mitted suicide because of her son’s sad end, and how poor wretched
Creon, the king, is left a prey to fruitless remorse, with only this
consolation, by the Chorus, that the whole affair is decreed by the
gods, in these words :
“ Forever are the boastings of the proud
By the just gods repaid, and man at last
Is taught to fear .their anger, and be wise,
It may be my blindness, friends, but I fail to see “ the high moral
and religious teaching,” etc., of this horrible drama, which Mr.
Jefferis would have on the stage for “ Christians” to admire, and
be “ taught to fear the anger ” of the heathen gods, and thus at last
“be wise.”
Then the Trachince represents the doings of the god Hercules
when in human form upon earth, who murders a man be-
cause he cannot marry his sister, and then marrys another whom
he forsakes for the former woman, but at last perishes miserably
through wearing a garment sent to him by his jealous wife Dejanira,
which ends in her destroying herself when she hears of Hercules’
death, all which abominations, mark you, the last words of the play
bids us to “ remember are all decreed, and all the work of Jove.”
Again, I say, where in all this lies the “moral and religious
teaching ” of which we are told ?
And now, we come to the last two plays of Sophocles, the
(Edipus Tyrannus, and the CEdipus Colonetis, which were accounted
his greatest efforts in tragedy, and which should contain, if it is to
be found in any of his works, the justification for Mr. Jefferis’
extravagant praises and recommendations.
But, what do we find in them ?
Why, tenfold worse abominations than in any of those we have
glanced at.
This will be seen by an examination of their plot —they are but
one story —an examination which shall deal only with its outline;
and which, I venture to affirm, will be enough to settle forever, in


every candid mind, the value which is to be attached to the public
teachings of one who dares to represent these plays as models of
purity.
I have no pleasure in this most manifestly unpleasant task of
what a famous modern writer has called “ a job of buckwashing ” ;
and, were it not for the imperious demands of truth, and because
of my sworn allegiance to the Lord Jesus Christ, whose honour is
at stake in this attempted revival of heathenism from the pulpit of
a professedly Christian Church, I would have nothing more to do
with the task. But servants of God cannot choose their path, when
the voice of conscience, and the finger of providence, clearly point
the way. Believing that way to be this which I now take, I shall offer
no apology for the painful exposures which I have already made,
and the, perhaps, yet more painful which are to follow. In many
directions, I perceive a subtle movement towards a revival of Pagan-
ism, and this is but one of these, which would revive it first under
dramatic forms. It is a strange, and suggestive spectacle, to see
Dr. Vaughan, representing Papalism, and Mr. Jefferis, representing
Congregationalism, working on the same lines ; the one to bring us
back to Paganism by the gross idolatries of the Roman system, and
the other to bring it back to us, by restoring the heathen Drama,
Extremes, in humanly devised systems, often meet. This seems to
me to be an instance. Hence the pains lam now taking to show
the pitfal which lies before those who blindly follow the lead of a
purblind Press, and, in this matter at least, a wofully blind Pulpit.
“If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.”
But now, to return from this long digression, let us finish with
the two last plays of Sophocles, to which I have referred above, the
(E dipus Tyrannies, and (Edipus Colonms.
QEdipus, the central figure in both these plays, is the son of
Laius and Jocasta, king and queen of Thebes, a city of ancient
Greece.
Before he is born, the oracle of the god Apollo declares
that he is doomed to commit the most awful crimes, namely, to
murder his father, to marry his mother, and to bring dreadful
sufferings upon his descendants. Accordingly, Laius and his wife
determine to destroy this infant when it is born. They give the
child to a shepherd, with orders to expose it on Mount Cithseron,
so that it may die from neglect, or be destroyed by wild beasts.
Instead of doing this, however, the servant gives the child to a
shepherd whom he meets on the mountain, who, filled with pity,
rescues it from death, and carries it to Corinth, where it is adopted
by Polybus, the king there, who knows nothing about its birth, and
trains it as his own son. When CEdipus reaches manhood, he is
greatly beloved for his wisdom and goodness, and renowned for
strength. He consults the oracle of Apollo, and learns to his
horror, that he is doomed to be a parricide and to commit incest


with his own mother. Horrified, he vows never again to return to
Corinth, and never again to look upon Polybus and Merope, the
king and queen, whom he supposes to be his father and mother.
As he journeys, he meets in Phocis, where three ways met, his real
father, Laius, and, a quarrel arising, Laius is slain by CEdipus in
the fight, who is ignorant wholly of the name, rank, or relationship
of the person he has killed.
He continues his journey to Thebes, where a horrid monster
known as the 6phinx is at that time destroying the principal citi-
zens who cannot answer the riddles she propounds, and, in con-
sequence of this, proclamation has been made that whoever will
read the riddles shall become the king, and receive the widowed
queen, Jocasta, for his wife.
Arrived at Thebes, CEdipus solves the problems, marries Jocasta,
becomes king, and reigns for many years in great prosperity, four
children being born to him in the royal palace. At length a terri-
ble plague, by device of the gods, desolates the land, and the oracle
of Apollo declares, that it will cease when the murderer of Laius
is banished from Boeotia. The most minute investigation follows,
the dreadful secret is discovered, it is found that CEdipus himself
is the murderer, and that the awful decree of the gods has been
fulfilled by him in every part.
Jocasta, filled with horror and despair, with terrible cursings and
ravings enters her room in the royal palace, and there hangs herself
over her bed. CEdipus finds her there, an awful scene ensues, he
plucks from off her robe a golden buckle which she wore, and
buries in his eyes the sharpened point, crying he ne’er will look
on her nor on his children again, whilst the blood streams down
his cheeks, and over the dead body of the wretched Jocasta. The
citizens rush in, and ask “ What madness drove thee to this desper-
ate deed ? What god inspired ? ” —to which CEdipus replies,
“ Apollo was the cause ; he was, my friends ! the cause of all my
woes.” He is then sent out into banishment, attended only by his
daughter Antigone, and Creon, who becomes king, declares to
him, “ Thy hapless fate should teach us to believe and reverence
the gods,” —which ends the first play.
And then the dreadful story goes on in the CEdipus Coloneus.
CEdipus has been cruelly treated by his sons, he curses them in
awful language, pronounces the terrible doom that they shall slay
each other in a struggle for the throne of Thebes, which actually
happens, and finally dies at Athens, where he had lived in his last
days, under the protection of Theseus.
Now these plays were written by Sophocles undoubtedly to convey
“ religious teaching,”—plays of which I have felt shame even to give
you the outlines ; —but of what kind is that teaching ? Is it “ high
and moral” as Mr. Jefferis informs us? Let the outlines I have
given answer. Do you feel disposed “to believe and reverence


the gods ” who planned all these abominations ? For, do not
forget that Sophocles teaches these things to honour and exalt the
gods, and holds (Edipus to be personally innocent, as appears from
many passages; notably that in which CEdipus blames Apollo in
the passage which I quoted ; and also in that where in reply to
Creon, who reproaches him with his crimes, he says :
“ Thou, who upbraidest me thus for all my woes,
“ Murder and incest, which against my will
“ I had committed ; (so IT pleased the GOtfs,
Offended at my race for former crimes ;
“ But I am guiltless) canst thou name a fault
“ Deserving this ! For tell me was it mine,
“ When to my father Phoebus did declare
“ That he should one day perish by the hand
“Of his own child? Was CEdipus to blame
“ Who had no being then ? ... No,
“ For I was drove to ill by the angry gods.”
And again where he says,—
“ ’Tis not in-mortals to avoid the crime
“ Which Fleaven hath pre-ordained.”
And, in further proof of this, if such be needed, that Sophocles
taught that these horrors were rightfully inflicted by the gods, in re-
turn for some fancied insult to these fabulous monsters whom he
worshipped, take the last three lines of the last play of the two with
which I am dealing, and there you will find that the consolation
offered to CEdipus’ two wretched daughters when their father dies,
and leaves them exiles and wanderers doomed to life-long misery,
is thus expressed,—
“ Remember, virgins ! to repress your sorrows,
“ And cease your fruitless grief; for know ’tis all
“ Decreed by Fate, and all the work of Heaven
This then is what a prominent teacher of Christ’s pure and
soul-quickening truth, desires us to receive as “ high moral and
religious teaching,”—namely, that blind Fate decrees human crime
and misery; that brutal Lust, and not a Father’s Love rules
eternally above ; and that the work of Heaven is to execute
fiendish and cowardly revenge upon innocent mortals, the details
of which prove it clearly enough to be the work of the Devil ! Is
it not monstrous ?
But Sophocles should, according to Mr. Jefferis, picture in his
heroes “ the ideals of a noble life,” and show to our astonished
gaze “ men as they ought to be,” which we had supposed this
critic had found in the life of Jesus Christ alone long ago. Surely
then the innocent, wise, and good CEdipus, who innocently suffered
for the guilt of others, should present the “ ideal,” and the “ real,”
picture of a “ noble” man. But, what do we find ? Does Sopho-
cles represent him as patiently enduring his sufferings, and dealing.


nobly with those upon whom he had unwittingly brought shame
and sorrow ? Far from that. Look at his conduct to his two
sons, or brothers, for they were both. They offend him, but does
he dream of forgiving them ? Nay, though he has so cruelly
wronged them, by affixing to them an awful stigma of shame, he
openly becomes their enemy, even in his exile, as is shown, when
he says to his daughter Ismene, —
• “ Whilst to my sons
“ A throne was dearer than a father’s love.
“ But'THEY SHALL NEVER GAIN ME FOR THEIR FRIEND,
“ Nor ever reign in Thebes.”
And then, when Polynices comes to beg his father’s forgiveness
and blessing upon his endeavour to wrest by force of arms the
Theban throne from his brother Eteocles, he not only refuses his
petition, not only fails to warn him against his crime and danger,
but curses them both with awful vehemence, and predicts, with
evident fiendish pleasure, their approaching ruin. He says,—
“ Though Heaven hath spared you long,
“ Death will overtake you ; when thy forces come
“ To Thebes, which shall not fall before thy arms,
“ There soon shalt thou and thy vile brother die.
“ Long since my curses did declare thy fate,
“ Which here I do repeat, that you may learn
‘ ‘ The reverence due to parents, and no more
“ Reproach a sightless father.”
And then, this “ ideal” father, this “ noble” picture of what
“ men ought to be,” goes on to administer his parental love, and
manifest his greatness and goodness, by saying to his own son,
who kneels a suppliant at his feet, —
“ Meantime, thou worst,
“ Thou most abandoned of the race of men !
“ Begone ! away ! and with thee bear this curse,
‘ ‘ Which here I do pronounce : to Argos ne’er
“ Mayst thou return ! never may Thebes he thine !
“ Soon mayst thou perish by a brother’s hand,
“ Slaying the slayer ! May dark Erebus
“ Receive them both ! And now on you I call,
“Ye goddesses revered ! and thou, O Mars !
“ Thou who hast raised the strife between
“ My impious sons, bear witness to my words !
“ Farewell : now go, and tell the Thebans, tell
“ Thy faithful friends, how fair an heritage
“ Your CEdipus hath here bequeathed his children.”
Surely, for intense bitterness, unnatural animosity, malignant
fiendishness of delight, and unmixed hatred, no curse was ever
more awfully wicked. And yet, this is Sophocles’ ideal of a noble
nature —an ideal which, Mr. Jefferis tells us, only needs to be
presented on the stage to-day, and, straightway, “ Christians could
give in their adhesion to theatres !”


And now I turn to ZEschylos’ writings, the last of the three
ancient dramatic works praised by Mr. Jefferis.
Although Arion, who lived about 580 years before Christ, is said
to have been the inventor of tragedy, yet ZEschylos—who was born
in 526 8.C., produced his first drama in 500, and died about 456
—is generally considered to be the father of Greek tragedy. Most
writers are, however, agreed that he is inferior to Sophocles, and it
is said that Sophocles’ repeated victories over him in the competi-
tions of dramatists at Athens, led to his self-banishment to Syracuse,
where he lived under the protection of the king, Hiero. There is
abundant evidence too, that the Greeks of his day considered him
to be impious, and that for a time his life was in great danger. His
dramas were of a more directly religious nature (in the heathen
sense of the words) than those of Euripides and Sophocles, and he
made them also the vehicle for conveying political teaching—a
teaching full of contempt for democratic principles, which were
obtaining the ascendancy in Athens during the administration of
the government by Pericles and others : for ZEschylos was the poet
of the conservative party of that day.
As to the source of his dramas, ZEschylos himself said that his
tragedies were but “made-up dishes” from the great Homeric
banquet—the Illiad and Odyssey.
Consequently, he deals largely with the gods, and heroes, and the
disgusting mythology of Greek legendary history. His dramas were
rather spectacles than plays ; and it is said that these representations
by dresses, masks, and scenic effects were so successful that when,
in the Eumenides , he introduced “ a chorus of the avenging Furies,
fifty in number, with masks of unequalled and horrible ugliness,—
serpents twisted in their hair, blood dripping from their eyes, a red
tongue projecting between their lips,—the spectators were so startled,
that children went into fits, and women were very seriously injured
by fright.”
Is it desired to introduce once more upon the stage these horrid.
Furies as messengers of Heaven? So Mr. Jefferis declares by his
endorsement of these plays.
As to the “high moral and religious teaching ” of his dramas, the
very mention of such a thing existing in them for this nineteenth
century of the Christian era, is a screaming farce.
ZEschylos starts with “ a firm belief that the myths of Greece
represent the facts of Divine history,” and, when the filthy abomin-
ations of these are known, there can be no question as to what that
teaching must be. Zeus the supreme god, is represented as cruel
and lustfulas hating all progress in knowledge, power, and culture
among men ; as punishing by a penalty, which was to last forever,
a great being named Prometheus, who was man’s friend and helper ;
and yet as being himself, though nominally supreme, so subject to
Fate or Necessity, that it should yet drive him from his throne.


All the imaginary monsters, whom the Greeks called gods and
godesses, were for him real beings, and he gave special prominence
to the infernal deities who rule in the dark abodes beneath, such as
Pluto, of whom he says,—
“ In Hades, as men relate, a second Zeus
“Judges men’s evil deeds, and to the dead
‘ * Assigns their last great penalties. ”
And speaking of him again, he says,—
“ The Avenger terrible,
“ God that destroyeth, who not e’en in Hades
“ Gives freedom to the dead.” *
Then too his conceptions of Zeus, or Jupiter, sometimes repre-
sent him as anything but pure in his morality —indeed he says,—
“ From a just fraud God turneth not away.”
And again his disregard of truth appears where he says,—
“There is a time when God doth falsehood prize.”
Will Mr. Jefferis be pleased to point out “the moral and re-
ligious ” elements in the nature of such a patron of liars ?
But ,/Eschylos is not consistent with himself, and there are
passages where instead of polytheism, he seems to teach monothe-
ism of an elevated kind, whilst in others he seems to believe in
pantheism, as in the following lines, —
“ The air is Zeus, Zeus earth, and Zeus the heaven,
“ Zeus all that is, and what transcends them all.”
Mr. Grote, in his History of Greece (vol. I, p. 370), remarks upon
the attempts made by many critics to bring out Zeus in ZEschylos’
Prometheus Bound as “ a just, wise, merciful, and all-powerful
Being,” and says that in doing so “ they distort the figures, alter
the perspective, and give far-fetched interpretations of the meaning
of this striking drama, which conveys a meaning directly contrary
And how any one can take the whole representation of Zeus in that
and other plays, where he is sp constantly the enemy of man, deal-
ing with them as with miserable slaves or brute beasts, but never as
with children whom he loved, is beyond my comprehension.
ZEschylos carries out, in his conception of the divine government,
the ideas which underlie his proud overbearing contempt for the
great body of the people in Greece, whom he seems to think are
born to be slaves or tools to the few, of whom he was one. Hence
we have in his conception of Zeus, a brutal autocrat; and not, as
in Christianity, a Father of eternal love who delights in mercy.
There are but seven plays now extant, out of the seventy which
were said to have been written by ZEschylos ; and a very brief ex-
amination of their plots will show, that they are at least equal in
vileness to those of the two authors, with which I have already dealt
at some length.


The Agamemnon , Choephori (or Libation Tourers) and the
Eumenides, form what is called the trilogy of the Oresteia, and refer
to the same events as the Electra of Sophocles* of which I have
already spoken. The only difference between them is that great
prominence is given by to the Erinnyes or Furies, who
appeared to Orestes after he murdered his adulterous mother,
Clytemnestra, and drove him from land to land, making his life
miserable by their curses and other modes of revenge.
These monstrous beings are described as more ancient than even
Zeus himself, and, therefore, as not being under his rule. Their
bodies covered with black, serpents twined in their hair, and their
eyes dripping with blood, they pursue the criminal and urge him on
to despair And although they become the Eumenides, or Gentle
Ones, at the end of trilogy of the Oresteia , yet, as Dr.
Leonard Schmitz remarks, “ it is a mere euphemism, because people
dreaded to call them by their real name, and it was sqid to have
been first given them after the acquittal of Orestes, by the court of
the Areiopagus, when the anger of the Erinnyes had become
soothed.”
The best that can be said for them is that they were worthy of
their company among the brutal gods and goddesses, and bad men
and women, which these plays describe.
The Persians is a mere military and naval spectacle describing
the defeat by the Greeks, aided by their gods of course, of Xerxes’
great host at Salamis.
The Seven against Thebes deals with events which have been
already referred to in the CEdipus Coloneus of Sophocles, and sets
forth the seige of Thebes by Polynices, son of CEdipus, aided by
six other great captains, who were each stationed with one of the
divisions of the army, at the seven gates of the city.
The play describes the awful carnage of the battles, and at last
the single combat between the two brothers, in which they slay each
other. This horrid fratricide is set forth as the result of the god
Apollo’s anger, of- CEdipus’ dying curse upon his sons, of the
Furies’ hatred, and of Destiny : for the sisters of these two self-
murdered brothers chant over their dead bodies, —
“ Ah me, thou Destiny,
“ Giver of evil gifts, and working woe,
“And thou dread spectral form of CEdipus,
* 4 And swarth Erinnys too,
“ A mighty one art thou.”
Will Mr, Jefferis be kind enough to point out “ the high moral
and religious teaching ” in that play ? Does this combination of
horrible furies, father’s curses, god’s anger, and relentless Destiny,
working out death to thousands, and fratricide to these wretched
brothers, seem to be “ moral,” or “ religious,” or “ noble ” from a
Christian stand-point ? I leave you to answer.


The Prometheus Bound is another eminently “ religious ” play ;
and, as I have already said, degrades the idea of the supreme god,
to inconceivable depths of lust and malice. The story of 10,
daughter of Inachos, king of Argos, whom Zeus (the supreme
monster worshipped by yEschylos) is represented as having
“ loved,” is abominable in the extreme.
It is introduced into this play. If you can conceive anything
“ moral ” in the supreme god basely destroying the purity of a
woman ; if you can imagine anything “ religious ” in that supreme
god permitting his wife, the goddess Hera or Juno, to transform
that poor betrayed maiden into a cow, and then torture her by
sending a gadfly constantly to sting her and drive her over many
lands; if you Christian men and women can get “moral and re-
ligious teaching ” there, it is more than I can think. No ! this play,
albeit there are beautiful passages in it describing the unmerited
sufferings of Prometheus, and indications of the heathen world’s
longing for a Redeemer—l say this play is, perhaps, the most de-
grading of all yEschylos’ dramas.
The Suppliants seems to be a stupid play, setting forth the flight
of the fifty daughters of Danaos, who flee for refuge to Pelasgos,
king of Argos, from the fifty sons of Egyptos, who desire to marry
them. But it seems likely that in a lost play, the Danaida, the story
was carried on, showing, as was the common version of it, that the
fifty daughters of Danaos married the sons of Egyptos, but that, by
the advice of their father, they all murdered their husbands, with
but one exception, oh the wedding night.
And that is the last play extant of Eschylos.
Do you find any improvement in morals between it and the first ?
Is this to be the “ religious ” teaching of the future ? Is murder
to be the goal of a “ noble life ” ? And is Mr. Jefferis prepared to
place upon the stage a play which “teaches ” forty-nine out of fifty
future brides to murder their newly wedded husbands ? “Of course
not ”is the reply. Well, but why did he thrice repeat words which
identifies him with such abominations, and forces upon him such
conclusions ? He owes a retractation to the people of this country,
as public as was his foolish declaration ; and I sincerely hope he
will make it speedily.
But now, having reached, at last, the end of this most unpleasant
task of examining these three ancient Greek tragedians’ works,
Euripides, Sophocles, and yEschylos, I claim your verdict on every
count against the utterly unmerited laudation of their dramas in
which Mr. Jefferis indulged,—l claim (i) to have proved my asser-
tion that the statements made were compounds of ignorance and
arrogance ; I claim {2) to have proved that they cannot be con-
sidered as either “ moral ” or “ religious ” in their teaching ; I claim
(3) to have proved that, they do not represent “ men as they ought
to be,” but the opposite —namely, men as they ought not to be ; I


claim (4) to have proved that they do not set before us “ ideal
pictures of a noble life,” but pictures which should cause us to
loathe and fight against any revival of the ancient heathen drama
in our days ; and, finally, I claim (5) to have proved that “ if such
plays were produced, we as Christians,” so far from giving in “ our
adhesion to the theatres,” would have a more awful conflict before
us in destroying the theatres’ demoralizing effects than any now
confronting us, terrible as the contest awaiting us with the Modern
Drama is.
And it is precisely that last consideration which compels me to
deal so seriously with, and to give such lengthened refutations of,
Mr. Jefferis’ dictum concerning the ancient Greek drama. If it had
not been proposed to revive Paganism yet more fully by the restor-
ation of that drama, I for one should have left his reckless rhetoric
where I found it, as I have done with so much more of the same
kind, in the kindly dust bin to which the Herald daily hastens.
But, when the Church of the living God w T as called upon to
create a stage upon which the abominable gods and men of heathen
times should flaunt their horrid crimes and vices, it seemed to me
quite time for some one to step forward, and slightly lift the curtain,
and show you, my fellow citizens generally, and Christians in par-
ticular, the horrid abyss which lies in that direction.
That being done, it is time to drop the curtain, and let us each
in our own way learn the lesson which these investigations have
taught us.
In my next lecture, I shall consider the origin of the Drama,
somewhat of its history in modern times, its present condition, and
the attitude which we ought to take respecting it.
But ere I close this night, let me entreat you my fellow men who
are not yet on the Lord’s side in destroying the devil’s works, in
extending His glorious kingdom, and in spreading abroad “ the joy ”
which He longs to impart —I say, let me entreat you this very night
to be wise, to rise and go to your Father’s Mercy Seat.
Oh, young man, if you want to be a man worthy of the name, if
you want to follow the blameless King and enter into His rest, I
beseech you, in the name of God, as you value the eternal soul that
is in you, to put down your fool’s cap and bells. Thou hast played
the fool too long.
Oh, man, with the snows of winter on thy brow, hast thou
destroyed thy peace in the wine-cup of folly ? Then find peace to
thy weary heart, and joy in thy sorrow, in Christ thy Lord.
Young man, if thou wantest to be happy, good, noble, true and
god-like, do not say, “ How close can I sail to the rocks ” ? but say,
“ How far, by the help of God, can I keep on the safe track, so
that I may be able to help others, and enter into that life for which
God has destined m«.”
Yet one word more.


Frederick the Great, ere he was king, was a dissolute prince.
It is said, that one night he was in the midst of his boo'n com-
panions, engaging in their usual folly and drunkenness, when a
messenger entered, and whispered something in his ear. He
started up at once, and threw down his mountebank parapher-
nalia. His companions laughed at him, thinking it was a part of
his fun. But turning to them, with his face white as death, and
his form drawn up, he impressed upon them a deep silence and
said “Stop your fooling ! lam King! The King.is dead ! lam
King ” ! And, from that moment, he laid aside his folly, and be-
came, if not good, at least outwardly a moral and capable prince.
But I have a greater message than that to speak to thee.
I want to whisper in thine ears to-night, “ God calls thee to be a
King ” ! Put down thy cap and bells; trample undewr foot the lusts
and passions that would destroy thee, let God give thee the crown
of His forgiveness and clothe thee in the impenetrable armour of
His truth, and fill thy heart with the sweetness, purity, light and
joy of His perfect love. Behold, ’tis not I, but thy Lord, the Captain
of our Salvation, who calls thee. If to-night He inspires thy heart
with sorrow for sin, and with longings for a nobler life, then do
not I pray you resist the strivings of His spirit.
‘ ‘ Quench not the holy fire within thee,
Though temptations darts shower down upon thee;
Gird thine armour on : Fight well;
And thou shalt see, after these wars,
Thy head wear sunbeams, and thy feet touch stars
Above the heavens, where God’s mercy dwells. ’
And may “ the Lord bless thee and keep thee ” in this day of
temptation.


|lic prama, % and tfe |ulpit
SECOND LECTURE.
I continue to-night the subject of last Sabbath evening, and, as
I then took a portion of the inspired Word of God for our direc-
tion, I will again invite your attention to another portion of
the sacred Scriptures, in the ist epistle to the Corinthians xv, 33
and 34, “Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good
manners. Awake to righteousness, and sin not : for some have
not the knowledge of God ; I speak this to your shame.” Read
also verse 32 to get the connection.
The word translated “ communicaiions ” may be equally, if not
better rendered “associations,” and the words translated “ good
manners ” may in like fashion be translated with equal appropriate-
ness, “ useful, wise, or good habits.” The 33rd verse would then
read, “Be not deceived; evil associations corrupt good habits.”
And then in the 34th verse that expression, “ awake to righteous-
ness,” in the original is a very emphatic rendering, which can
scarcely be done into English. It would read something like this
if it could be done, “ sober out rightly ” —that is it, “ sober out
rightly, and sin not: for some are ignorant of God, I speak this to
your shame.”
You will see what use bye and bye can be made of this text.
Meanwhile I take it, and place it in the front of all I say this even-
ing, believing I shall be able to justify the application of it in the
fullest sense of the words to the associations of the Drama, not
only as they now exist, but as they have always existed.
It seems to me that it will be wise for me to-night to go back a
little, and remind those who are present of the course of our argu-
ment in our last address, and those who were not here may get, in
some degree at least, the drift of that argument.
(Mr. JDowie here recapitulated the principal points of his previous
lecture.) t


I have shown then in my previous lecture, that the ignorance
which the Pulpit and the Press have hitherto displayed in this city
on this subject, has been most extreme.
And now we turn to consider for ourselves the Drama as it was,
as it is, and our rightful attitucTe as Christians towards it.
What is the origin of the Drama ?
It is not to be found in Hebrew literature of any period, and
it is not to be found in the whole range of Eastern literature,
previous to its connection with Greece.
It is absurd to talk, as some hate done, of the book of Job as a
drama. It is a dramatic poem ; but it is not a drama, with a stage
chorus, with players in disguises taking unnatural parts, and all the
necessary attention to details of construction, so as to fit it for the
“ business ” of a theatre.
And who would dare to say that the book of Job was ever
written, that man might make it a play, to be acted upon the boards
of a theatre ? Who would dare to call it a drama in the sense of
a drama for the stage ?
For whom did God intend the part which He takes in that
strange story, and who would in these days dare to represent by
the aid of stage carpenters, theatrical costumes, and gas-lights the
unspeakable glories of the Heavenly Court, at which “the sons of
God came to present themselves before the Lord ” ?
It must be ignorance that talks like that ! An inspired dramatic
poem is one thing, a dramatic work for production on the stage is
essentially another.
Now when, and where, and wherefore, did the Drama originate ?
Every authority that I have been able to consult is agreed that
the Drama proper had no existence prior to about 600 years before
Christ, and that “ it is to Greece alone that we must look for the
invention of the Drama.” Before that period, it is true that, at the
great festivals, there were recitations by poets of verses recounting
the “ glorious ” deeds of gods and heroes. But these poems were
not dramas, they were rather songs, sometimes choral songs, in
praise, generally, of particular divinities. From these poems or
songs the Drama arose.
Arion, about 580 8.C., is said to have composed the first tragedy ;
Thespis, in 536 B C., and Phrynichus, in 512 8.C., still further
carried out the design of Arion ; and Epicharmus, about 485 8.C.,
produced comedies, and introduced numerous actors, whom he
had trained himself. But it is not until the time of Hlschylos,
whose plays we have already considered, that Greek tragedy properly
begins; and it is from that period the Drama proper originates, so
that its birthplace was Athens.
The enquiry, however, as to the “ wherefore ” is by far the most
important, and to that I have recently given a considerable degree
of attention : for therein lies the whole question as to the capabili-


ties of the Drama. No stream can rise higher than its source ; and
we are on safe ground in estimating the purity of a river’s waters,
when we analyze these waters at the fountain head
The original purpose and character, therefore, of the Drama will,
when ascertained, enable us to speak with some confidence as to
its essential nature.
Now, I here deliberately make the assertion, that the Drama was
originated entirely as a principal portion of heathen worship; and
that, in consequence, it is impure in thought, debasing in morals, pro-
ductive only of evil, destructive of social order, and dishonoring to
God from its very origin.
If this can be proved, the way is perfectly clear to enable us to
form a more correct estimate of the Modern Drama than we could
by merely comparing conflicting statements as to its present con-
dition. Knowing the stream at its sources, we shall be sure of its
true nature, by whatever specious names it may be called, wherever
it flows.
I shall ask one of the highest, if not the very highest, authorities
respecting Greek literature, Mr. George Grote, F.R.S., to come
forward, and give us his dispassionate account of its origin.
You will find he treats this subject at great length in chapter 57
of his History of Greece; and it is most suggestive to note the
circumstance in connection with which he branches off from his
main work to write concerning the philosophical and literary
character of that particular age.
That circumstance was “ the trial, condemnation, and execution
of Socrates,” perhaps the greatest thinker of ancient Greece, and
one whose philosophy has exerted an influence only second to the
inspired Scriptures upon the best writers and thinkers of every age
since his death. His influence upon Plato and Aristotle, who were
his pupils, was of the most marked character, and indeed the prin-
cipal works of the former are those wonderful dialogues wherein
Socrates is represented as taking the principal part —that dialogue
called the Phsedo, on “ The Immorality of the Soul,” is of the
sublimest and most convincing nature.
Now, why was Socrates put to death? Mr. Grote answers, —
“ The state of dramatic literature will be seen to be o.ne of the
causes directly contributing to the fate of Socrates.” And there
cannot be the shadow of a doubt, but that the plays of Aristophanes
very largely brought about his destruction, because his teaching was
too noble for the base conceptions of men and gods upon which
the Drama was founded. So we see, that, like its infamous author,
the Drama was “ a murderer from the beginning, and abode not
in the truth, because there is no truth in [it].”
Mr. Grote then says (vol.viii.p. Ix 9), “the tragic drama belonged
essentially to the festivals in honour of' the god Dionysus; being
originally a chorus sung in his honour, to which were successively


superadded—first, an lambic monologue, —next, a dialogue with
two actors, —lastly, a regular plot with three actors, and the chorus
itself interwoven with the scene. Its subjects were from the be-
ginning, and always continued to be, persons either divine or
heroic, above the level of historical life, and borrowed from what
was called the mythical past.”
Then I shall bring another recognised authority, Mr, J. W.
Donaldson, 8.A., the author of a most learned work on “The
Theatre of the Greeks.”
Writing in his introductory chapter “ On the origin of Dramatic
Exhibitions in general ”he says,—“ The dramatic art , especially,
wherever it has existed has always been connected in its origin with the
religious rites of a polytheism , and, generally, with those of an ele-
mentary worship. That such was the case with the Greek Dramas
we shall see presently ; the same is stated of the Indian plays, and
the mummeries and mysteries of the middle ages were not very
different, either in their origin or in their character. True it is
that the Drama of modern Europe contains little or no ‘ religion. ’
This, however, is no argument against its c religious ’ origin.”
Again, the learned author of the article “ Drama ” in Chambers’
Encyclojicedia, says, “ There can be no doubt that the origin of the
Drama is to be sought for in the enthusiasm attendant upon the
worship of the god Bacchus.”
Here then, we see a general agreement, that the origin of the
Drama is entirely heathen, and is chiefly connected with the basest
form of heathenism, the worship of the god of drunkenness, who
was called Dionysus by the Greeks, and Bacchus by the Latins.
In my previous lecture, I gave you an outline of the Bacclm of
Euripides, a play composed in honor of that god, which set before
you clearly the abominable character of the worship of Bacchus
during the fifth century before Christ.
That worship was most abominable and shamelessly indecent —
so obscene indeed, that it is impossible to enter into minute details
of even the things which are known concerning it. The orgies
carried on became so dangbrous, that they had to be suppressed at
last in Rome, with the utmost severity, by the Senate, and the
account which Livy gives of them is most disgusting and repulsive.
Nor were they in earlier ages ever pure or good.
It will be sufficient, if I bring forward but one authority to sup-
port my assertions regarding that heathen form of worship, at which
the Drama originated, and of which it, was a part.
Dr. Leonard Schmitz, in his able article “ Dionysia,” in Smith’s
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities , has entered fully into
the nature of these festivals in honor of the god Dionysus or Bacchus.
I will quote a few passages, which are by no means the worst that
could be spoken of that awfully degrading worship. He says,
(p. 413) ) —“At a very early period of Grecian history, Bacchic


festivals. were solemnized with human sacrifices , and traces of this
custom are discernible until very late. In Chios this custom was
superseded by another, according to which the Bacchse were
obliged to eat the raw pieces of the flesh of the victim which were
distributed among them.” Again, in regard to these festivals in
Rome, he writes, —“ The initiated indulged in the coarsest excesses
and the most unnatural vices. . . . All modesty was set aside.
But the crimes did not remain confined to these meetings : their
consequences were manifest in all directions; for false witnesses,
forgeries, false wills, and denunciations proceeded from this focus
of crime. Poison and assassination were carried on under the
cover of the society. ... It was a principle of the society to hold
every ordinance of god or nature in contempt. . . . Men who re-
fused to take part in the crimes of these orgies, were frequently
thrown into dark caverns and despatched, while the perpetrators de-
clared they had been carried off by the gods.” And, referring again
to the earliest periods of Bacchanalian worship in Greece, Dr. Schmitz
tells us of horrid practices, and obscene customs observed then ;
and St. Augustine, writing so late as the fifth century of the Chris-
tian era, (2 he City of God, Book vii. 21.) gives us an account of
precisely similar wickednesses being observed, as acts of worship,
in many parts of Italy in his own time. You will see, therefore,
that in eyery age these horrid festivals of Bacchus were abominable
in the extreme.
The whole secret of these vices may be found summed up in
Dr. Schmitz’s words, “ Drunkenness . . , was common to all Diony-
siac festivals. . . . The indulgence in drinking was considered by
the Greeks as a duty of gratitude which they owed to the giver of
the vine ; hence in some places it was thought a crime to re-
main SOBER AT THE DIONYSIA.”
And now, my friends, let me ask you, what good thing can you
expect to find in the Drama which had its origin in connection
with such a form of worship as this, when every one present
“ thought it a crime to remain sober,” when “ every ordinance of
God • and nature was held in contempt,” when filthiest vices and
cruel murders were considered rightful associations —I say again
not “ what good can you expect to find ” ; but what evil will you
not find arising quite naturally from the Drama, which w r as born
more diseased and foul than words can express ?
■ I should imagine that it is only people who get most “ religi-
ously ” drunk, like the ancient Greeks —and I have known not a
few such persons—who could see any good in the Ancient Drama,
after becoming acquainted with these facts.
That it was connected wfith these rites, and originated from them,
is beyond dispute.
I have not stated merely my own opinions, but the testimonies
of the highest authorities ; and I have dealt in this matter not with


fancies, but with historic and provable facts, which are beyond all
question.
That then is the origin of the Drama. It originated in the
desires of the sensual .worshippers of the god of drunkenness.
And caji you wonder that ever since, it has been connected with
that base worship ?
Can you wonder that when I stand at the Theatre Royal corner
of Castlereagh and King Streets, I can count 25 public-houses
within sight, within a pistol-shot ? Can you wonder that that this
Theatre is surrounded, I think, by nearly 12 public-houses ? Can
you wonder that one evening, making one of my recent mid-night
tours of observation with respect to these places, I counted at the
close of that Saturday upon which the late Governor was tendered
by his racing friends the drink sellers, members of the Ring, and
and others, that most iniquitous day of “ Valedictory and Compli-
mentary Races,” fully one thousand men between the hours of
twelve o’clock at night and a quarter to two on the Sunday morn-
ing, coming from and going into these public-houses and kindred
places. Just imagine it, that there were passing to and fro at that
hour, one thousand persons —I said “men” in error, many of
them were women. They filled those houses, many of which
are houses of shame, as Staff-Surgeon Reid has recently testified
in a report to Commodore Hoskins. These houses deserve
every bad name that I can pour upon them : for they are ruining
our city—if ruin means destroying its youth and hope for days to
come.
Venus, and Bacchus, and the Drama are, in a trinity of devilry,
destroying this city, and I for one shall not hesitate to say it.
There is a story told by Plutarch in his life of Solon, one of
“the seven sages ” of Greece, who flourished in the sixth century
before Christ, the time when Drama had its origin, which is very
suggestive of the effect which he wisely prophesied dramatic per-
formances would have upon the people, and he lived to see his
prophesy fulfilled. Plutarch says ; —“ Solon, who was always will-
ing to hear and to learn, and in his old age more inclined to any-
thing that might divert and-entertain, particularly to music and
good fellowship, went to see Thespis himself exhibit, as the custom
of the ancient poets was. When the play was done, he called to
Thespis, and asked him, If he was not ashamed to tell so many lies ,
before so great an assembly ? Thespis answered, It was no great
matter if he spoke or acted so in jest. To which Solon replied,
striking the ground violently with his staff, If we encourage such
jesting as this, we shall quickly find it in our contracts and agree-
ments.”
And verily the prophesy has been fulfilled with a vengeance in
these days of ours when the Drama has so much power. Many
people seem to make such things as truth and honesty, self-denial


and mutual helpfulness, matters for jest rather than for practice.
There seems to be little disgrace attached to falsehood, so long as
the lie is successful, in business and in political life —aye, and
throughout life generally. We may trace much of this to the un-
ashamed way with which crowds of people every night flock to the
theatres, to hear and see lies performed for several hours. Living
in this manner, truth becomes hateful to them, and so they carry
the jesting and untruthfulness quite easily into all kinds of con-
tracts and agreements, even into the marriage contract only too
often, upon the purity of which depends our place and work as a
people.
Remember my friends the warning of the Christian poet, —
“He that hates truth shall be the dupe of lies ;
“.And he that will be cheated to the last,
“ Delusions strong as hell shall bind him fast.”
Having examined at considerable length the origin of the ancient
Drama, I do not need to deal very largely with its later history.
It is admitted on all sides that, during the period of the Roman
Empire, not to speak of the Roman Republic, the Drama was very
generally despised. • During a considerable portion, indeed, of the
Roman Republic it was prohibited, and in the time of Julius
Caesar and later, and for a long time before, any person who was
an actor, or connected with the Theatre, lost his rights as a citizen,
and any person of noble birth, in any degree officially mixing up
with it, became at once degraded. An instance of this is found
when Caesar, wishing to insult a certain senator, made him act upon
the boards of a Theatre. The senator by-the-way took advantage
of it to ridicule the administration of the government by Julius
Caesar. But though that senator was subsequently restored to his
rank, the people of Rome would never look upon him as having
his previous honour, and though he had been compelled to do this
to save his life, yet so great was the detestation of theatrical per-
formers, that he was never thereafter looked upon as a man fit to
occupy a senatorial chair.
When the pagan Empire of Rome fell, and Christianity came
fully upon the scene, we are met by a remarkable fact. The Drama,
not in some part of it, not merely in tragedy, not ffierely in comedy,
not merely in what may be akin to opera, not merely in burlesque,
but the Drama in every department of it, fell with the idols of the
Roman Empire, and fell utterly.
The Drama never rose again until the sixteenth century of the
Christian era.
And it only rose again in the west, because of the corruption of
the Christian Church, which having become a revived form of
paganism, most properly reverted to the vices connected with
paganism.


A certain sort of “ religious ” Drama, therefore, was put upon
the stage of the middle ages, consisting of miracle plays, and things
of that kind, which prepared the way for the bringing in of the
abominable Drama, which for wellnigh twelve centuries had almost
disappeared from the earth, —I mean, from western civilization.
The Drama did not dare to revive polytheism ; for polytheism
was dead in Europe. It came upon the stage, therefore, not any
longer to degrade God in the same way that it had done in
ancient times ; but to minister still to the lowest passions of men,
and to degrade God by destroying and defiling his creatures.
Hence arose the Drama in Italy, and it crossed, after a struggle,
to Great Britain. It did not appear in America until the year 1752,
so slow was its progress.
What then, was the effect of the revival of the Drama in Great
Britain ?
I do not hesitate to say, that nine-tenths of the social corrup-
tion and degradation of the United Kingdom, at the present day,
is as much traceable to the Drama, as it is to any other one cause.
So abominable was the Drama in England, during the of
the Stuarts, that the puritans were backed by the voice of the nation
in crying, shame upon it ] and when Oliver Cromwell rose, it was
crushed for the time being, but crushed by military power, and
that always provokes reaction ; for the sword has never yet settled
any question or quarrel.
When Charles the Second came to the throne, then it was that
the Drama really revived in England. And what was the result of
that ? Ido not hesitate to affirm as an historical truth, provable
by any man who will at all attentively examine the question, that
the worst national evils with.which we have to cope to-day, received
an intensity of power through the revival of the Drama in the reign
of Charles the Second. Subsequent changes of dynasty, and care-
ful, progressive legislation have done much to minimise these
evils, yet they are still eating like a cancer into the heart of the
British Empire, and a brief reference to the Drama pftwo centuries
ago, and of the present day, will prove this.
Nell Gwynne, a prostitute of the streets of London, born in base
circumstances, if not of base birth, appeared upon the stage, and,
in the very presence of the insulted Queen of England, she was
publicly commended by that dissolute monarch, Charles the Second.
She, as publicly, subsequently appeared at Whitehall, and to the
unutterable shame of the monarch, she became the vile paramour
of that wretched being. And from her, and another theatrical
harlot, sprung two ducal families, with many branches, who own
much of the people’s land, and monopolise the honours which
rightfully belong to the men who have made England what it is,
and not to the illegitimate offspring of a dissolute King. In con-
sequence of that shameful example, many of the aristocracy of


England, and the people generally, began to imitate their monarch,
and this theatre-born lust spread through every class of society,
until England was filled with the most horrid debaucheries.
The first fruits then of this fully revived Drama was to produce
a Nell Gwynne, and to hinder the progress, and facilitate in every
way the degradation, of England.
From that time to this, the Drama has been most intimately
connected with what has been called the “ governing class ” of
England, and the consequent degradation of that class, despite
brilliant exceptions, has become very great. Even lately, to prove
to you that the Drama has not changed its power over Royal
princes, and that the Ethiopic aristocrat has not changed his skin,
the newspapers have given publicity to the alleged fact, that the
Heir Apparent to the throne of England has defiled and disgraced
the name of man, much less of prince, by vile association, or by
vile approbation, of one of the low play-actresses of the Parisian
Theatre, who performed in certain plays which were so indecent
that the Lord Chamberlain, the British censor of theatres, would
not allow them to be introduced upon the London stage.
It is, therefore, evident that the Drama of to-day is essentially a
lineal descendant of the Drama of the days of Charles the Second.
May God forbid that the like consequences should follow.
And now, I have to say of the Modern Drama, that from its very
constitution it is essentially immoral, and that scenes of lost, drunken-
ness, and crime are inseparably connected with it.
Is that provable ?
I will appeal to dramatic authors, to dramatic performers, and to
the indisputable facts which surround us for the proof.
I take, first of all, the testimony of Dumas, the famous French
author, whose plays are being acted to-day throughout Europe and
America.
In replying to one of his critics, he has recently given a very
clear statement as to the character of the Modern Drama.
This critic wrote to him that he was exceedingly sorry that his
plays were, despite their genius, so immoral and so vile that he
could not take his daughter to the theatre to see them performed.
Dumas replied : —“ You would not take your daughter to see
the play ? You are right. But let me say, once for all, that you
must not take your daughter to the theatre. It is not merely the
work that is immoral it is the play. Whenever we paint man, there
must be a grossness which cannot be placed before the eyes, and
whenever the theatre is elevated and loyal, it can only be by using
all the colours of truth. The theatre being the picture or the satire
of social manners, it must ever be immoral, the passions and social
manners being themselves immoral.”
And Dumas is right as to the fact that, if the Drama is to hold
the mirror up to human nature as it is chiefly manifested in the


predominant habits of modern society, then it must reflect villainy,
hypocrisy, and uncleanness to a very large extent.
But it is precisely the opposite which should be done. Instead
of fixing thousands of mirrors around scenes of vice, so as to in-
crease their debasing effects, everything should be done to suppress
vice, and not to display it for the entertainment and imitation of the
giddy crowds, who have an outrageous appetite for lies and impurity.
There, however, you have in these words of Dumas, a candid
confession as to the principles which guide modern dramatic
authors ; and he is but one of many who have made similar con-
fessions, besides which I believe I can without fear of contradiction
say, that the most successful dramatic authors of this century have
depended chiefly for the interest of their works upon the grossest
immorality.
If these then are the principles which guide the creators of the
Drama, is it to be wondered at if the effects are beyond contradic-
tion most lamentably unclean, and dangerous to society.
But I shall turn from play-writers to play-actors ; and amongst
the most reputable performers of the present day, it will be admitted
that Macready stands in the first rank.
And what does he say ? Writing of the stage after he retired to
Sherbourne, England, he says :—“ None of my children, with
my consent, under any pretence, shall ever enter the theatre, nor
shall they have any visiting connections with play-actors and
actresses.” And do you think Macready would debar his children
from what was good ? Does not his denunciation prove that his
experience had proved the theatre to be bad ?
But why does such a man put off this confession until he has
got all he could from the stage, and has retired from it ?
He reminds me of a little child who, when it was getting dark at
night, came to her mother very affectionately, and said, “I love you
very much. ” And then she got round her mamma, and got her to
forgive all her little faults ; and when everything was put right
she went to bed. But presently the little thing said, “ Ma, do you
know why it is that I came to you just now ?” “No dear.” “ Oh,”
she said, “ I always become good when it is getting dark : for then
I get afraid when I think of the naughty things I have done.”
Yes, and though Macready’s old age testimony is good, yet I had
rather fifty times that a man would be good in the light, and man-
hood, and strength of his life, than be good “ when it comes dark. ”
When days are dark, when a man has spent the strength of his
manhood in consciously doing evil, it is the meanest of things to
give the dregs of life to God, and try to cheat the devil by coming
to God in the last hours of life.
Young men, do not I beseech you contemplate this abominable
course. Live to God now.


“ I would not come when I am old
Presenting unto God a withering life,
A heart whose energies are waxing cold,
And powers unmeet for noblest strife.”
“Now in the blushing morn of youth,
Help me, O Christ, my little all to give,
To consecrate my every force to Truth,
And live supremely while I live. ”
Besides Macready, I might quote many actors of eminence, who
have denounced the theatre,—indeed it may be said that their
numbers are legion.
Many managers of theatres bear similar testimony. In fact the
manager of a theatre, I will not say in what city, and I will not say
under what circumstances, made a most damaging assertion to me
with the utmost gravity, and with a pained sincerity that I knew
sprung from real conviction of the truth of what he was saying. I
was speaking to him about the Drama generally, and remarked, —
“ I suppose your actors are by no means all bad; some of your
stars, for instance, as you call them, are really, I suppose, often
people of good life.” “Well,” he said. “ I thought much of so-and-
so, naming a distinguished actor and actress, but I don’t know
what to say now.” “ But this I will say to you sir, —If you ask me
where I am to find behind the scenes a woman in whose virtue, in
whose personal purity,- I have confidence, sir, though I have been
many years director of a theatre, I do not know, I am sorry to say,
where I would be sure to find her.”
I was grieved beyond expression, I had not thought that such a
statement could be made by a man in a position such as this
gentleman occupied.
And, let me here say, I don’t want you to connect that statement
with any man’s name : for you are most likely to be wrong in
your suppositions. I connect it with no name and implicate no one.
It might have happened in a remote place just as easily as in Sydney.
But, if you have any curiosity to gather similar testimony in that
matter, you have only to refer to Alfred Bunn’s, “ Before and be-
hind the Curtain,” the work of a man who was for many years
director of Drury Lane, Covent Garden, and other London theatres,
and there you will get more than confirmation for what that manager
stated to me.
Do not, however, let my repetition of that sad statement cause
you to imagine that I have any personal antagonism to such per-
sons as players, etc. lam conscious of the fullest desire to set
down naught in malice. For myself I can have none.
God knows that it is the thought of my heart when I say,—
If there be a man or woman in this theatre to-night who has
sometimes acted on these or on other boards, let me tell thee that
I would as soon grasp thy hand, and say a kindly word of manly,


brotherly sympathy, as I would grasp the hand of any man or
woman in this city. If there be any that need such sympathy as
man can give, it is you my brother, you my sister, who have
fallen into the toils of the destroyer, and have become a pro-
fessional fool to please a set of fools.
And now, I propose, that, ere I close these lectures, we shall
consider two questions, which will enable me to summarize the
conclusions fairly to be derived from the facts and arguments which
I have laid before you.
These questions are, —
1. What do we consider the Drama to have been ?
2. Can the Drama be purified or restored ?
In answering the first of these questions, I submit that we have
already proved three things concerning the Drama, namely,—
1. The Drama has never been pure.
2. The Drama has been a destructive element always.
3. The Drama has been condemned by its own history.
It would be useless for me to further argue just now with those
who, notwithstanding the facts advanced in proof of these conclu-
sions, deny their truth. Unless the facts differ from my represen-
tation, the conclusions are logically indisputable.
And, as to the first, I only say that I will immediately recant
this, as publicly as I state it, if any man can give to me proof of,
or in any public way show me, a single year in which the Drama
has been pure.
Then, as to the second. Will anyone tell me what it has con-
structed ? I have heard some persons say, that the plays of Shakes-
peare have constructed a great national sentiment in England, and
imparted a sound knowledge of English history to the great body
of the people in all Anglo-Saxon lands.
Now, as pieces of literature, I hfive a profound admiration for
Shakespeare’s works, as what man has not who values genius ?
But I am bound to say, that in my opinion there is very little
grandeur in the “ national sentiment ” of England at the present
time, and the want of it, and the presence of so much bullying and
bluster in England to-day, is in no small degree due to the glorifi-
cation of foreign wars to be found in Shakespeare’s plays. And as
for English history being taught by Shakespeare, it is all nonsense
and clap trap. You might as well, from a few scraps of distorted
fact, sit down and evolve a history of England out of your own un-
aided imagination, as take your history from Shakespeare. His
characters are nedrly all imaginative creations in the main, and he
has not written a single play which is historically correct.
They are mostly romances built upon romances ; and Shakes-
peare no more believed them to be correct history than does that
very ingenious and elegant weaver of historical deceptions in this
city, Dr. Vaughan, Roman Catholic Archbishop, believe in his


inventions,"when he from time to time spins an elegant, rhetorical,
historical essay upon the dignity, purity, infallibility, etc., of Papal-
ism, for the purpose of imposing upon the ignorant multitude
whom he systematically deceives. The difference however is here,
that Shakespeare produced his as romances, but Dr. Vaughan pre-
tends that his romances are facts. However, Dr. Vaughan apart,
Shakespeare’s plays can not rightly be held to teach history.
No, the Drama has never elevated the national sentiment, but de-
graded it often. It has also in every direction been a destructive
agent of all that is best in religion and in morals.
And as to the third conclusion, I claim to have proved, that
from its origin until now, the Drama has been condemned by its
own history. It is condemned by its own best exponents. It is
condemned by those who have to deal with it from day to day.
Some have approved it, even as they have approved the wine-cup
which has been digging their graves, and destroying their honour.
But whilst the actual facts of its history condemn it, it is idle to
talk mere false unsupported sentiment as to the good it has done.
Who can produce the good results ? No one. We can, and have,
set before you the evil results recorded in its history.
And now we come to the second question which I proposed that
we should consider-—namely,—Can the Drama -be purified or re-
stored ?
How can you, I say first of all, make pure that which is essen-
tially impure? How can you restore that which is essentially
corrupt ?
Look, I have a glass of clear water here in my hand, I believe it
is good water and I will drink it on faith —I do a great many things
on faith —and I.shall not imagine for a moment that anybody has
put poison into it. But somebody comes up here now, and says,
“ Wait a minute, Mr. Dowie, before you drink it, I have something
here which I should like to put in the water. See, here it is, sir,
a nice little paper, with just the smallest pinch of arsenic in it,
about the quarter of a teaspoonful. Do you object to my putting
it in ? ” “Ohno ” I reply. He does put it in, and then hands the
glass to me, saying,—“ Drink this now, sir?” “No indeed,, no
indeed !” I reply. “ But why,” asks this gentleman, “ nine hundred
and ninety-nine parts of what is in that glass are pure water, and I
only put ever so a small pinch of arsenic in it, which you cannot even
see now.” “No matter,” I answer, “ although I cannot detect the
arsenic m the water, I know it is there and, although the water is
999 to i, the poison which you dissolved in it is so powerful, that
it would be certain death to drink it. The arsenic has permeated
the whole water, and rendered it impure and deadly. If I drink,
I die.”
That glass of poisoned water represents the Drama.


I do not say that there are no noble sentiments uttered from the
stage of the theatre, to say that would be simply absurd. The
devil is far too great a master of his very ancient profession of tell-
ing lies, not to know that he must mingle a good deal of truth, if
the lie is to go down. And, therefore, we have minute, choice
pickings from the Drama, stolen jewels from nobler treasuries of
thought, which the Drama has misappropriated. And when these
are exhibited, we are proudly asked, “Is not that noble ? Is not
that grand ? Is not that majestic ? ” We have gentlemen flooding
the papers with literary productions, which are a crude abortion,
somewhere between Shakespeare, and Dion Boucicault, Thomas
Carlyle, Ruskin, and I don’t know who, telling us in tones of
thunder that the Drama is an “ elevating ” thing. Yes, perhaps it
is from that point of view. I also know a good many H elevating ”
things which are very bad things; for instance, I have been told
that whiskey, brandy, etc., are very “elevating,” though I have no
personal experience of their exalting power. lam sceptical about
the fact, however: for I have seen persons who were said to be
thus “ elevated,” lying in the gutter in a very degraded position.
There are a good many “ elevating” things belonging to Bacchus,
which I intend to spend my life in trying to bring down from the
thrones which they usurp —and the Drama is one.
In God’s name, I say to the Drama, Thou whited sepulchre, come
down ! Thou hast a countenance outwardly beautiful, as that of
the fairest woman ; but thou hast also, like the destroying Sphinx,
in Grecian fable, the claws of a vulture, the body of a lion, the
soul of a liar, and the bosom of a seducer. Would God the earth
were quickly, and forever, rid of thee.
Now, since you cannot purify or restore the Drama, what should
be done with it ?
First of all, I say to all Christians whom my voice can reach,
entirely discountenance it, and never imagine that you can have
any rightful compromise with it. The Divine word, which is your
law-book has said, “ Abstain from all appearance of evil.” Or, if
you prefer it, you may translate the instruction, “ Abstain from
every form of evil.” For, if you want to be divine, in the sense
that God can make you the “ partaker of the divine nature,” thou
shalt have to be clean from the polluted touch of the Drama.
There can be no question that it is a “ form of evil ” entirely
opposed to the kingdom of God.
And as for compromise, let me say, I never heard of a Christian
compromise that was not a lie—and, remember, lam speaking
from the Christian’s standpoint entirely for the moment. Whoever
may compromise with evil, my brother, my sister, you and I can-
not. We stand in a position where we proclaim that we will have
no compromise with sin. We are followers of Him who came, not
to mitigate, but “to destroy the works of the devil.” Ah ! there is


a great deal of the spirit of compromise among some Christians,
which savours of a certain kind of piety of which I heard among
certain American negroes, though I will not guarantee the story.
“ Pompey,” saiid one professing Christian negro to another, “ I have
been greatly tempted.” “ Yes, what was it by, Sam ? ” “I have been
greatly tempted to steal; but I have been delivered. I compro-
mised the matter.” “ How did you do it, Sam ?” “ Well, I was
in a store, and I reckon I saw a pair of boots there, the finest I
ever saw in my life ; and I thought I better have those boots. But
my Christian profession and conscience said, No that would be
stealing, that would be doing a great sin. Ah, but they were the
most elegant pair of boots you ever saw, Pompey.” “Well, what
did you do, Sam ? ” “I compromised the matter ; I took a shabby
pair.”
That is in effect the result of all Christian compromise,—it ends
in the commission of some sin.
’Tis with these as Cowper has written, —
‘ Renounce the world ’ ! the preacher cries,
‘We do,’ a multitude replies,
While one as innocent regards
A snug and friendly game at cards
And one, whatever you may say,
Can see no evil in a play.
Reviled and loved, renounced and followed.
Thus bit by bit the world is swallowed ;
Each thinks his neighbour makes too free,
Yet likes a slice as well as he ;
With sophistry their sauce they sweeten,
Till quite from snout to tail ’tis eaten.
I tell you this, my fellow-men, I would rather be an infidel to-
day, standing out and saying the whole thing was a sham and a
lie, than I would be like some of these men, who profess a Chris-
tianity which they make no serious attempt to practice, and who
are the curse of the Church, and the greatest hindrance to the con-
version of the world.
Seeing now, therefore, that the Drama cannot be purified, and
that it is impossible to restore a thing that never was good, some
other way of dealing with it must be found.
The way to improve a nuisance, is to abolish it—to improve it
off the earth as speedily as possible; and that is the only right
way to deal with the Drama, which has proved itself to be a public
nuisance and danger. I would improve it off the face of the earth,
and say to it, —Begone ! thou hast a bad origin; thou hast had a
bad history; thou art corrupt utterly j God has no part in thee ;
thou vile thing, sprung from the devil and nursed by sin, get thee
into the darkness from whence thou hast come ; begone, begone,
and let this world quickly see the last of thee.


And how is it to be done? Now, first of all, rest assured that
it shall be done. I will not live to see it, perhaps; but I will tell
you how it is going to be done, —Christ will do it by a purified
people : for He “ came to destroy the works of the Devil.” As one
then of His disciples, how do I propose to set about this work 1
Would I begin by pulling down this theatre ? No. It is about
the best place to speak in in the city. Yet, if I could lead the
host of God to-morrow, I would sweep down upon these theatres,
and, in the name of God, I would consecrate to His service every
stage, and in ihe name of God consecrate their green-rooms, and
in the name of God, consecrate every part of them. Pay fairly every
penny of the money for them, and then take possession in the
name of the Lord God Almighty. Make them places where true
Christian joy shall ring, where God shall be owned, where man
shall be happy, where women shall get purity, and where iniquity,
and the sad misery that are the consequence of the Drama, shall
never, never, never again appear.
Young men, I am glad to see so many of you to-night, and to
you 1 desire to address myself especially ere I close.
When you go away from this theatre to-night, I reckon you will
be summing me up in various fashions. I have not the slightest
objection to your summing me up. I often sum up myself pretty
severely, after I have done my best here.
But, if you will forgive my imperfections as a speaker, and will
deeply consider the great importance to you of the facts and argu-
ments which I have advanced, letting them have their due influence
on your hearts and lives, you will do a long way better than by
making invidious comparisons between myself and anyone else,
or by dwelling upon unimportant differences of opinion,
I say to you young men, Be men in this matter. Take up a firm
attitude of resistance to the numerous forms of evil, of which the
Theatre is only one, which would drag you down, and bind you in
fetters of lust, in dungeons of despair. Tread these down, or they
will tread you down in the mire.
‘ ‘ All thoughts of ill; all evil deeds,
That have their root in thoughts of ill;
Whatever hinders or impedes
The action of the noble will; —
All these must first be trampled down
Beneath our feet, if we would gain
In the bright fields of fair renown
The right of eminent domain.”
Do not sell your birthright in the heavens for a mess of pottage
on earth. I have read, that some one has recently said, that you
must have amusement such as the theatre alone affords. An asser-
tion is no reason. I think there are scores of employments for
your time, which will afford you real and pure joy and leave no
poison sting behind,


There are few bigotries like that of the pleasure seeker, who
considers every one to be his enemy who will not eat from his un-
clean dish. There is
“No blinder bigot, I maintain it still,
Than he who must have pleasure, come what will.
******
He finds the modish manners of the day,
Though loose, as harmless as an infant's play. ”
Young men, if our city is to be truly great, you must make it so.
Greatness is only great, when it is good, not merely when it is
rich.
Good men make a great city, and of such it may be said as was
said of the citizens of ancient Sparta, its men were its walls. Good-
ness is a better fortress than forty-ton guns can make. Wealth has
often destroyed, but Virtue has always built up a great people.
“ 111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates but men decay.”
I have read somewhere a story, which is somewhat as follows.
On one occasion a student came to the eminent and wise Chris-
tian philosopher, Philip De-Neri, a well-known friend of young
men, who lived at Rome, in the sixteenth century.
The young man laid before the philosopher his plans, and sought
for advice.
De-Neri said, “ Well suppose you succeed in your studies, and
finish your course with honour —What then ? ” The young man
replied, with eager interest, how he was determined, by industry
and good conduct, to endeavour to attain some position of useful-
ness in the land.
And “What then?” was still the question of the philosopher.
Again the ambitious youth replied, setting forth the possibilities of
high renown and honour which might be his, if he were able and
wise now. And “ What then 1 ” Oh, then, he would live to a green
old age, and in, perhaps, a well earned retirement and position of
comfort and ease, spend the rest of his life amid the respect and
love of a devoted family and kind friends. And, “ What then 1 ”
still repeated De-Neri.
After a long pause, the young man solemnly replied, “ And then,
I suppose, I must die.”
And “ What then ? ” rang out the yet more solemn question.
But to this there was no reply.
Then kindly, tenderly, and firmly the good old man reviewed
the young man’s eager, and, if kept in a subordinate place, not un-
wise aims and methods of attaining man’s favor, and a good earthly
inheritance ; but he him how he was providing for
things which only “ might be,” since he could not assure himself


of either health, or wealth, or life itself, whilst he was neglecting to
provide for death or judgment, which “ must be.”
How solemn are the thoughts which that story suggests.
“ After the joys of earth,
After its songs of mirth,
After its hours of light,
After its dreams so bright, —
What then ?
Only an empty name,
Only a weary frame,
Only an aching heart,
Only a conscious smart. ”
“ After that empty name,
After that weary frame,
After that aching heart,
After that conscious smart, —
What then ?
Only a sad farewell,
To a world loved too well;
Only a silent bed,
With the forgotten dead.”
“ After that sad farewell
To a world loved too well j
After that silent bed
With the forgotten dead, —
What then?”
Oh then, I say to each of you, remember thou hast to stand
before thy God. And What then ? What then i Then thou shall
be required to give an account of the deeds done in thy body—
thou shalt give an account too of this night.
Now thou raayest choose the “ better part,” and find in thy Lord
the “ one thing needful ” to make thy life pure, beautiful, and true.
With the Lord there is mercy to forgive, there is power, to save.
He can keep thy feet from falling. Thou dost need a Saviour, and
thou shalt find Him in Jesus alone—called Jesus: for He shall
save His people from their sins." And He is willing to save thee
from thine.
“ He died, He rose, He reigns, He pleads,
There’s love in all His words and deeds,
There’s all a guilty sinner needs,
In Jesus.” , .
“ Though some should sneer, and some should blame,
I’ll go with all my guilt and shame,
I’ll go to Him because His Name
Is Jesus.”
How shall I persuade thee of His love ? Let me entreat thee
to seek to know its power, and the joy of its presence in thine heart.
This God’s Spirit can alone impart Then, when thou hast the
Comforter within, thou shalt be blessed indeed. Purer joys, holier


Quiet at heart and home,
Where the heart’s joys begin,
Quiet where’er we roam,
Quiet around, within.
' • . '■ j ::■< ; 1 • •
,9t:isdi bnc JIjs d.i h 03 11*1
-in ' min OJ 03 in
tetnlfw »m s I < avol .-in 1o abnt/mq 1 Usrfg woH
rmad iuiiib ni oonot xiq eli io vu urh brm ,yamxj Ms m.>n'A ot A-.ysc 0i
"... ■ r ei/t’j
Jabrktt jr Co., Steam Printers, 229 Qeorge-st.: Works, 92 & 94 Liverpool-st., Sydney.
employments, glorious prospects will thea unfold before thee even
in this life, and lead thee to the unspeakable glories of the sinless
life beyond.
Thou shalt not so much as think then of the poor, sickly, gas-
light pleasures of the Drama. Temptations lose their power, when
the Holy Spirit possesses the heart.
I stand to-night before you, pleading with you as an ambassador
for Christ, but, erelong, this body must decay, these lips moulder
in the dust, and this tongue lie silent in the grave, — What thm ?
Oh then, I must stand before my God, and give account of these
opportunities he has given me. And I want to say in that day,
that I warned thee of thy danger, and pointed thee to “ the way
everlasting,” to Christ, who alone can save thee. Do not then re-
ject the condescension of thy God’s forgiving love. It is like no
other love. He welcomes thee without reproaches, and blesses
thee without limit.
“ Kind hearts are here, yet would the tenderest one
Have limits to its mercy, —God has none ;
But man’s forgiveness may be true and sweet?
But yet he stoops to give it; more complete
Is love that lays forgiveness at thy feet,
And pleads with thee to raise it; only God
Means crowned, not vanquished, when He says,—
‘ Forgiven,’ ”
Behold, even now, how He stoops to conquer thy heart, to for-
give thy sins, to heal thy heart-sickening sorrows, to redeem thy
life from destruction, and to crown thee with loving kindness, and
tender mercy. Do not spurn such love and such priceless treas-
ures. Do not turn to “ evil associations h of any kind.
Seek to “acquaint thyself with God, and be at peace.” “Peace
with God ! ” What blessing can be sweeter ? This quiet of the
soul is the divinest gift. He who has it, craves for no higher bliss.
“ Seek, and ye shall find ” it, to your eternal joy.
“ How beautiful within our hearts to keep
This treasure the All-merciful has given,
To feel, when we awake and when we sleep,
Its incense round us like a breath from heaven*




