

6 D -
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.
Who Lilted the Lid off Hell?
German Bribery of the Press
Official.
The Kaiser’s White Book.
Germany’s
Ten Commandments.
(Mining Standard War Pamphlet No. 3.)
CRITCHLEY PARKER.
Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
1914.


CONTENTS.
Page.
German Bribery of the Press 5
The Kaiser’s White Book 13
Germany’s Ten Commandments .. 41
The Horrors of Barbarian War 42
There are Germans and Germans 44
The Duty of Australians 47
Goths and Yandals 49
.I '■■■■■ ■■■ yi l i r>: 'C/
Wanted, Understanding 51
The Keasons Why 55
Who Lifted the Lid off Hell ? 61
, . i : .*■ ■ - -
Wholly sot up and printed in Australia by Mining Standard, Melbourne.


MINING STANDARD
List of War Publications
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS: Who Lifted the Lid off
Hell. German Bribery of the Press. The Kaiser’s White
Book. Germany’s Ten Commandments.
In One Book. 6d., by post 7d.
THE WHITE BOOK (Correspondence respecting the European
Crisis).
6d., by post 7d.
MILITARY WAR MAP (Published by authority of Defence
Department).
1/-. by post 1/1.
COMMENTS ON THE WAR. (By the Author of “Germany
and Good Faith.”)
56 pages. 6d., by post 7d.
THE EUROPEAN WAR AND HOW IT BEGAN.
32 pages. 6d., by post 7d.
GERMANY AND GOOD FAITH. By E. H. C. Oliphant.
250 pages demy octavo. 3/6, by post 3/7.
OTHER BOOKS IN ACTUAL PREPARATION.
Published by
Critchley Parker, Melbourne and Sydney.
To Gritchley Parker,
Mining Standard,
370 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
Please send me
(Here state what book or books you require from the above list.)
for which 1 enclose the sum of £
Name
Address.
(Strike out those you do not require.)


GERMAN BRIBERY OF THE PRESS.
DESPATCHES FROM HIS MAJESTY’S AMBASSADOR
AT BERLIN RESPECTING AN OFFICIAL GER-
MAN ORGANISATION FOR INFLUENCING THE
PRESS OF OTHER COUNTRIES.
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of His
Majesty. September, 1914.
No. 1.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received March 2.)
Sir, — Berlin, February 27, 1914.
I have the honour to transmit herewith a report on the
establishment, under Government control, of a powerful secret
association for the purpose of influencing the foreign press in
the interest of the German export trade and of the spread of
German influence generally.
I have, etc.,
W. E. GOSCHEN.
Enclosure 1 in No. 1.
Report.
For some time past a variety of schemes had been ventilated
in the press with the object of improving German prestige
abroad. It was said that in certain foreign parts Germany was
being persistently and wrongfully abused, that she could obtain
no fair hearing because the press of those distant countries was
in hands hostile to any German enterprise, and because the
telegraphic agencies serving those countries were equally biassed.
An “Association for World-C'ommerce” was to have remedied
this evil by a persistent pro-German propaganda in the countries
most bitterly complained of. It was hoped that the necessary
funds could have been raised by contributions from all the
trading and industrial societies interested in the German export
trade, and, in view of the supreme importance to Germany of
her export trade, it was intended that agents of the Association
should be sent and stationed abroad to assist the exporting in-
dustries by timely advice and an active policy generally, such as
private individuals could pursue more effectively than officials.
The opportunity for realising this scheme seemed to offer
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


itself under the following circumstances. A plan was being pre-
pared to start a German-American Economic Society. Similar
societies with an application to other countries already exist—
e.g., a German-Argentine Society, a German-Oanadian Society, a
German-Russian Society, etc. The foundation of a German-
American Society had been advocated in connection with the re-
vision of the American tariff which gave German industries new
chances of an intensified export to the United States. As was
natural in any matters dealing with German-American affairs,
M. Ballin, of the Hamburg-America Line, was approached to
rake the matter in hand. He consented. Under his inspiration
the idea of a German-American Society was abandoned and the
idea of a World Society was substituted. A preliminary meeting
was held, at which the various German-foreign societies were
represented; there were present also representatives of the
•‘Central Association of German Industrials,” and of its great
rival, the “Federation of Industrials,” as well as of most of the
leading industrial firms. Internal dissensions, however, soon
appeared, and several important members sent in their resigna-
tions.
The details of the foundation were to have been settled at a
meeting convened for the 26th February; to-day the whole scheme
stands prorogued sine die. If it is ever realised its plan will have
to be considerably altered. In the meantime the original plan
of a German-American Society has been revived. This society
is, in fact, to be constituted in Berlin early in March in the form
originally intended.
It would seem strange had M. Ballin so readily accepted
defeat. The explanation lies in the fact that, at the request of
very highly-placed persons, his interest has been transferred to
another more delicate and more or less secret organisation, devised
to undertake those duties of M. Ballin’s would-be “Weltverein’
which concerned the German reputation abroad.
A short time ago a meeting, of which the secret has been
Avell kept, was convened in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, of
which Dr. Eamann. the notorious head of the Press Bureau of
the German Foreign Office, was the oi’igiuator, and at which the
Foreign Secretary himself was present. The meeting was at-
tended by members of the leading industrial concerns of this
country: the Horth German Lloyd, the Hamburg-America Com-
pany, the Deutsche Bank, the Disconto Gesellschaft, the All-
gemeine Electricitatsgesellschaft, Siemens and Halske, the
Schuckert Works, Krupp, the Cruson Works, etc. They formed
a private company with the purpose of “furthering the German
industrial prestige abroad” —a conveniently vague purpose. The
company will be financed by private subscriptions and by a
Government grant. The sum at first suggested as a necessary
revenue- from private subscription w T as £12,500, but the com-
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS .


pany present at the first meeting was so enthusiastic that it
■definitely promised annual subscriptions amounting to £25,000.
The Government will add £12,500 per annum—the whole Secret
Service Fund, in fact, at the disposal of the Imperial Foreign
Office for similar purposes ( e.g for the payment of subsidies to
certain papers abroad).
The company has entered into an agreement with the
u Agence Havas” that the latter will in future only publish news
concerning Germany if supplied through “ Wolff’s Telegraphen-
Bureau.” The latter will receive its German news exclusively
from the new company. The company intends to make a similar
arrangement with Reuter’s Telegraphic Bureau for those foreign
countries in which Reuter controls telegraphic communications.
If Reuter declines, the “Deutsche Kabelgesellschaft,” a smaller
German news agency supplying telegrams from certain countries
{c.g., Mexico) and working in agreement with Wolff’s Telegraphic
Bureau, is to be financed by the new company to run a service
in competition to Reuter’s.
All the concerns represented at the meeting have furthermore
agreed to pay into the company’s hotchpot the very vast sums
which they are accustomed to spend abroad for their advertise-
ments in foreign papers. The total of this item alone is believed
to be not less than £25,000 per annum —so the annual sum
available for the purpose of the new company will reach a total
of £50,000 to £75,000. The company will in future issue the
advertisements of its members only to those foreign papers which
publish German information originating exclusively from the
new company, which is to be regarded as the only authentic source
of information concerning Germany and all things German. This
information they are to receive free of cost or at a nominal sura
—so that the willing foreign papers will derive very material
benefits from their collaboration with the company; viz., lucrative
advertisements and free matter written in the language of the
country in which the papers are published. The foreign press
is to be watched by the company’s agents appointed in the
various foreign centres. Any incorrect reports are to be tele-
graphed home and corrected by telegrams issued by the com-
pany. The countries in which the system is to be immediately
inaugurated are chiefly the South' American States and those
of the Far East, but the system is to embrace all countries outside
Europe. The German cable rates for press telegrams are to be
reduced in the interests of the new company.
It is difficult to say whether the evil which the new company
is to remedy really exists, or exists to any perceptible extent, but it
is certain that a very influential private company has been called
into existence with every official encouragement commanding an
enormous revenue for the purposes of a pro-German newspaper
propaganda. Whether the evil exists or not —the money will be
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


spent on secret service to popularise Germany abroad. It docs not
seem to have occurred to the promoters of the scheme that they are
preparing the ground for a vast system of international blackmail
—hardly a proper way to reach the desired end.
No. 2.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received April 6.)
Sir, Berlin, April 3, 1914.
In my despatch of the 27th February last, concerning the
secret foundation of a German society to supply the foreign press
of certain countries with news favourable to Germany and German
interests, it was foreshadowed that German cable rates for press
telegrams would probably be reduced, in the interests of the new
society.
I have the honour now to report that, in fact, reduced rates
for telegrams to the United States, Canada, Argentine, Chile, Peru
and the German colonies are to come into operation as from the
Ist April, 1914. These telegrams, which are to be officially known
as week-end telegrams, will be admitted at a reduced rate between
Saturday midnight and Sunday midnight, to be delivered on
Monday or Tuesday respectively. These week-end telegrams must
have reached the cable station at Emden before midnight on Satur-
day, but can be handed in at any telegraph office in the course of
the week.
The rates, which in some cases represent a reduction to one-
fourth of the usual rates fixed, are: —
Pfennigs
per word.
To New York, Canada, Argentine, Chile, Peru
(minimum charge for each telegram, 20 M.) 80
To Togo and Cameroons (minimum charge, 18
M.) 90
To German South-West Africa (minimum
charge, 15 M.) 75
Negotiations are pending for extending the week-end telegram
service to other distant countries.
Telegrams sent to the United States or Canada are sent at the
reduced rate only to New York or Montreal respectively; thence
they are forwarded either free of charge, by letter, or at the local
relegram rates per word, by telegram.
I have, etc.,
W. E. GOSCHEN.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


No. 3.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir E. Grey.—(Received May 4.)
Sir, Berlin, May 2, 1914.
With reference to my despatch of the 3rd ultimo, I have the
honour to report that, according to an announcement in the “North
German Gazette,” the system of reduced rates for what are called
“week-end telegrams” is to be extended as from the Ist instant to
Oape Colony, Natal, The Orange Free State, Transvaal, South and
North Rhodesia, Nyasaland, British India, Burma, Ceylon, Mal-
acca, Penang, Singapore, and Labuan, under the conditions de-
scribed in my above-mentioned despatch.
The rates are as follows: —
Pfennigs
per word.
To Cape Colony, Natal, Orange Free State,
Transvaal 70
To South Rhodesia, Malacca, Penang, Singa-
pore, and Labuan 80
To North Rhodesia and Nyasaland 95
To British India, Burma, and Ceylon 50
I have, etc.,
W. E. GOSCHEN.
No. 4.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received June 12.)
Sir, Berlin, June 9, 1914.
I had the honour, in my despatch of the 27th February last,
to explain a scheme under which a society had been founded with
the object of supplying the foreign press, by telegraph, with infor-
mation favourable to Germany generally, and to German industrial
enterprise in particular. I have since transmitted lists of the coun-
tries to which, under the name of “week-end telegrams,” the cable
rates have been very considerably reduced, to assist the propaganda
of the said society.
I to-day have the honour to forward a translation of a cutting
from the “Deutsche Export Revue,” of the sth June, 1914, in
which the existence of the scheme is, for the first time, as far as
I know, admitted in public print.
The “Deutsche Export Revue,” which is published in Berlin,
is a weekly periodical devoted to the interests of the German ex-
port trade. It is regarded as well informed, and enjoys a good
reputation generally.
The article confirms the various particulars set out in my
despatch; it confirms more especially the fact that the Imperial
Foreign Office is supporting the scheme with an annual subscrip-
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


tion of £12,500, paid out of its secret service fund. It supplies a
list of the members of the society, the names of the directors, etc.
The last paragraph of the article merits special attention on
account of a certain refreshing ingenuousness.
I am informed that the order has gone forth from high
official quarters not to reproduce or in any way to refer to this
article, as its inadvertent publication is, not unnaturally, con-
sidered extremely inopportune and embarrassing.
I have, etc.,
W. E. GOSCHEK
Enclosure in No. 4.
Extract from the “Deutsche Export Revue” of June 5, 1914.
Germany's World —Wide Economic Aims.
A Syndicate for the Supply of A'ews Abroad.
Our readers will remember that one of the items in the pro-
gramme of the German Association for World Commerce was the
establishment of a news service abroad on generous lines. Whilst
the other parts of the Association’s programme met with hostile
criticism as soon as they became known, the proposed service for
the supply of new abroad was greeted with general sympathy, as
such activity promised to have a useful effect on our foreign rela-
tions. The failure to organise the Association for World Com-
merce seemed, unhappily, to render it doubtful whether the organi-
sation of the news service could be realised. It is all the more
gratifying that, according to information which has reached us
from well-informed quarters, the scheme for a German news ser-
vice in foreign countries has by no means been abandoned, but
that, on the contrary, an extensive organisation is actually doing
work in the desired direction.
A German syndicate w r as very quietly formed a few weeks ago
for the purposes of this foreign news service. It uses the organi-
sation of a news agency already in existence; its activity is gradu-
ally to be extended over the whole globe. Its main object will be
to reply in an appropriate form to the prejudiced news concerning
Germany, and to the attacks made upon her, and by the judicious
publication of newspapers inspiring the necessary articles to spread
abroad the knowledge of the true state of German industry, and of
Germany’s cultural achievements.
We are in a position to give the following information con-
cerning the organisation of the enterprise. It is presided over by
a directorate, consisting of three men, viz.:—
Privy Councillor von Borsig;
“Landrath” Roetger (retired) ; and
' Herr Schacht, a director of the Deutsche Bank.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


A special administrative board, the main duty of which it is
to make suggestions as to the organisation and methods of report-
ing, comprises, among others: —
Professor Duisburg, of the dye works, “Bayer”;
Herr Hagen, of the Disconto Gesellschaft;
Commercial Councillor Hasenclever, of Remscheid;
Herr Hermann Hecht, of Berlin;
Director Heineken, of the Horth German Lloyd;
Director Helfferich, of the Deutsche Bank;
Director Huldermann, of the Hamburg-America Line;
Director Kosegarten, of the “Deutsche Waffen-und Muni-
tions-Fabrik”;
Herr von Langen, of the Disconto Gesellschaft;
Privy Councillor Rathenau;
Director Reuter, of the Maschinen Fabrik, Duisburg;
Director Salomonsohn, of the Disconto Gesellschaft;
Privy Councillor von Siemens;
Herr Edmond Bohler, Hamburg, etc., etc.
The management will be entrusted to two managers, Herr Asch
and Dr. Hansen. The former has for years edited several foreign
news agencies; the latter is known to the readers of the “Deutsche
Export Revue” through a series of articles dealing with the ques-
tion of a supply of news covering the whole world.
For the present the enterprise has taken the form of a loose
syndicate, constituted for three years, which is, later on, to be
replaced by a more systematic form of organisation. The annual
subscription payable by the firms which are members amounts to a
minimum of £5O. It is a significant fact that the Imperial Foreign
Office has voted a grant of £12,500 towards the expenses of the
syndicate, provided the same amount is contributed by Gorman
industrial houses. As the subscriptions and the contributions by
the latter already exceed the sum of £12,500, the contribution from
the Foreign Office funds seems secured. As every firm subscribing
a sum of £5O has a vote, or, rather, as for every £5O subscribed the
subscriber receives a vote, it may be expected that the Imperial
Foreign Office will have a powerful and decisive influence upon
the management of the syndicate generally, and upon the develop-
ment of the news service in particular.
We further learn that efforts are now being made to induce
the joint German and Foreign' Economic Societies to join the
syndicate, as these societies embrace pre-eminently merchants and
manufacturers interested in the German foreign trade. These
societies, it is true, appear to be still divided in their opinion con-
cerning the new enterprise—at least, so far no definite decision
has been arrived at.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


It is believed that an increasing membership will make it
possible to establish a reserve fund out of subscriptions and volun-
tary contributions received, so that, later on, the interest of the
reserve fund may suffice to defray the expenses of the news sendee.
It is also hoped that the foreign press may eventually be induced
to pay for the news supplied. Finally, it is intended to send
journalists to the various countries, who are there to busy them-
selves in favour of German interests in the manner indicated
above.
The task which the syndicate has set itself is in itself worthy
of acknowledgment. But only the future can show whether the
task can be accomplished in the manner indicated. We are of
opinion that good results could be achieved, and perhaps wdth
greater success,, by utilising the German legations and consulates
abroad, if ample funds for this purpose were placed at the dis-
posal of the official departments. At the same time, the joint
German and Foreign Economic Societies might well, as, indeed,
some of them already do, work quietly for a better appreciation
abroad of the state of German industry and of German cultural
progress. The intended despatch of journalists, we believe, how-
ever, in any case to be a mistake, as it would certainly soon be-
come common talk in the editorial offices in the several places
abroad that they represent a syndicate officially supported by the
German Empirei If such things are intended, it would be better
to fall back upon gentlemen who are already in touch with the
respective editorial offices, and who could serve German interests
without attracting so much attention as would journalists sent
out for the purpose.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


THE KAISER’S WHITE BOOK.
A Red Herring.
On June 28 last the successor to the Austrian throne, Archduke Franz
Ferdinand, and his wife, the Duchess of Hohenberg, were assassinated by
the revolver shots of a member of a Servian band of conspirators. An
investigation of the crime by Austro-Hungarian officials has revealed that
the plot to take the life of the Archduke was planned and promoted in
Belgrade with the co-operation of official Servian individuals, and was
carried out with weapons from the Servian Government depot.
This crime was bound to open the eyes of the whole civilized world, not
only with regard to the object of Servian politics as relating to the existence
and integrity of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, but also with regard to
the criminal means that the Pan-Servian propaganda did not hesitate to
employ in order to attain these ends. The ultimate object of these policies
was to revolutionize gradually and finally to bring about a separation of the
south-western region of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy from that empire
and unite with Servia.
The repeated and formal declarations of Servia to Austria-Hungary to
bring about good neighborly relations did not change this trend of Servian
politics in the least. For the third time in the course of the last six years
Servia has brought Europe to the verge of a world war in this manner. She
could only do this because she believed herself supported by Russia in her
endeavours.
As a result of the developments of the year 1908 growing out of the
Turkish revolution, Russian policies had begun to organize a league of the
Balkan States directed against the existence of Turkey, under Russian
patronage. This alliance of the Balkan States which was successful in
crowding Turkey out of her European possessions in 1911, came to grief
over the question of the disposition of the spoils. Russian policy was not,
however, frightened by tins failure. It was the idea of Russian states-
men that there should be formed a new Balkan League under Russian
patronage, whose activities should be directed this time not against Turkey,
which had been driven from the Balkans, but against the existence of the
Austro-Hungarian monarchy. The idea was that Servia should cede to
Bulgaria the section of Macedonia that she had won in the last Balkan
war and offset the loss by the acquisition of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the
expense of the Monarchy of the Danube. For this purpose Bulgaria, by her
isolation, was to be made pliable, Rumania, as the result of a propaganda
undertaken with the aid of France, was to bo chained to Russia, and Servia
was to be referred to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In view of these circumstances Austria had to admit that it would not
be consistent either with the dignity or self-preservation of the monarchy
to look on longer at the operations on the other side of the border without
taking action. The Austro-Hungarian Government advised us of this view
of the situation and asked our opinion in the matter. We were able to
assure our ally most heartily of our agreement with her view of the situa-
tion and to assure her that any action that she might consider it necessary
to take in order to put an end to the movement in Servia directed against
the existence of the Austro-Hungarian Monaichy would receive our approval.
We were fully aware in this connection that warlike moves on the part of
Austria-Hungary against Servia would bring Russia into the question and
might draw us into a war in accordance with our duties as an ally. How-
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


-ever, recognizing the vital interests of Austria-Hungary which were at
stake, we could neither advise our ally to a compliance that would have
been inconsistent with her dignity, nor could we deny her our support in this
great hour of need. ' We were all the more unable to do this inasmuch as
our interests also were seriously threatened as a result of the continuous
Servian agitation. If Servia, with the help of Russia and Fiance, had been
allowed to imperil the existence of the neighbouring monarchy any longer,
this would lead to the gradual downfall of Austria and would result in
submission to Slavic sway under the Russian sceptre, thus making the posi-
tion of the Germanic race in Central Europe untenable. A morally weak-
ened Austria breaking down as the result of the advance of Russian Pan-
Slavism would no longer be an ally on whom we could count and upon whom
we could rely, such as we need in view of the attitude of our eastern and
western neighbours, which has constantly grown more threatening. We
therefore gave Austria an entirely free hand in her action against Servia.
We have taken no part in the preparations.
Austria chose the way, laying before the Servian Government in detail
the immediate relation between the murder and the general Servian move-
ment, not only tolerated by the Servian Government, but supported by it,
which an investigation of the murder at Sarajevo had established. At the
same time Servia was asked by Austria to put an absolute end to these
activities and to allow Austria to punish the guilty parties. Austria
demanded as a guarantee for the carrying out of the proceedings participa-
tion in the investigation on Servian territory and the definite dissolution of
the various Pan-Servian societies carrying on an agitation against Austria-
Hungary. The Imperial and Royal Government set a time limit of forty-
eight hours for the unconditional acceptance of her terms. One day after
the Austro-Hungarian note had been handed to it, the Servian Government
began mobilization. When, after the expiration of the time limit, the
Servian Government made a reply which, while satisfying the demands of
Austria-Hungary on certain points, made known emphatically with regard
to the essential ones its intention to refuse the just demands of the mon-
archy by means of temporizing and the introduction of new negotiations,
Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Servia without having recourse
to further negotiations or allowing herself to be put oft by Servian assur-
ances, the value of which she knows well enough —to her sorrow.
From that moment Austria was actually in a state of war with Servia,
which was publicly proclaimed by means of the official declaration of war
on the 28th of the month.
From the very beginning of the conflict we took the stand that this was
an affair of Austria which she alone would have to bring to a decision with
Servia. We have therefore devoted our entire efforts to localizing the war
and to convincing the other powers that Austria-Hungary was compelled to
(take justified defensive methods and appeal to arms. We took the stand
emphatically that no civilized nation had the right in this struggle against
lack of culture (Unkultur) and criminal political morality to prevent Aus-
tria from acting and to take away the just punishment from Servia. We
instructed our representatives abroad in that sense.
At the same time the Austro-Hungarian Government informed the Rus-
sian Government that her (Austria’s) move against Servia was entirely a
defensive measure designed to put a stop to Servian agitation, but that Aus-
tria-Hungary was compelled by necessity to demand guarantees of a con-
tinued friendly attitude on the part of Servia toward the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy. Austria-Hungary, the note to Russia stated, had no intention
of bringing about a disturbance of the balance of power in the Balkans.
Both the French and the English Government, replying to our explanation
that the German Government wished and was trying to localize the conflict,
promised to work in the same interest. In the meantime, these efforts did
not succeed in preventing Russia’s interference in the Austro-Servian dis-
agreement.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


The Russian Government issued an official communique on July 24,
according to which it would be impossible for Russia to remain indifferent
in the Servian-Austrian conflict. The Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Sazonof, made this position known to the Imperial Ambassador, Count
Pourtales. On the afternoon of July 26 the Austro-Hungarian Government
again explained through its Ambassador in St. Petersburg that Austria-
Hungary had no plans of conquest, but only wished to have peace at Oast on
her frontiers. In the course of the same day the first reports of Russian
mobilization reached Berlin. On the evening of the 26th the imperial Ambas-
sadors at London, Paris, and St. Petersburg were directed to call the atten-
tion of the English, French, and Russian Governments energetically to the
danger of this Russian mobilization. After Austria-Hungary liad officially
declared to Russia that she did not seek the acquisition of any territory in
Servia, the decision for world peace lay entirely in St. Petersburg. The
same day the Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg was directed to make
the following statement to the Russian Government:
The military preparatory measures of Russia will compel us to take
counter-action which must consist in the mobilization of the army.
Mobilization, however, indicates war. Inasmuch as we know France’s
obligations toward Russia, this mobilization would be directed simul-
taneously against Russia and France. We cannot assume that Russia
wishes to let loose such a European war. Inasmuch as Austria-Hun-
gary will not impair the continuance of the Servian we are
of the opinion that Russia can adopt a policy of waiting. We shall be
all the more able to support Russia’s wish not to allow the integrity of
the Servian Kingdom to be called into question, since Austria does not
call this integrity into question herself. It will be easy to find a basis
of agreement in the further coarse of the affair.
On July 27 the Russian Minister for War, Suchomlinof, gave the German
Military Attache his word of honor that no mobilization order had as yet
been issued. He said that for the present preparatory measures were being
taken, no horses being levied and no reservists being called in. In case
Austria-Hungary were to cross the Servian boundary, the military districts
facing Austria, those of Kieff, Odessa, Moscow and Kazan, would be mobil-
ized. Under no circumstances would there be a mobilization of the dis-
tricts lying on the German front: St. Petersburg, Yilna, and Warsaw. In
answer to the Military Attache’s question as to what was the object of
mobilization against Austria-Hungary, the Russian War Minister shrugged
his shoulders, and referred to the diplomats. Thereupon the Military
Attache indicated that measures to mobilize against Austria-Hungary were
also decidedly threatening to Germany. In the following days reports con-
cerning the Russian mobilization followed each other in quick succession.
Among these were reports concerning preparations on the German border,
such as the declaration of a state of war in Kovno, the departure of the
Warsaw garrison, and the strengthening of the Alexandrovo garrison. On
July 27 the first reports of preparatory measures by France arrived. The
Fourteenth Corps discontinued its manoeuvres and returned to garrison duty.
In the meantime, we continued to exert our most energetic influence on
the Cabinets to insure the localization of the conflict.
On the 26th Sir Edward Grey had suggested that the differences be-
tween Austria-Hungary and Servia be laid before a conference of the Am-
bassadors of Germany, France, and Italy, with himself presiding over the
sessions. To this suggestion we replied that, while we approved his tender,
we could not take part in such a conference because we could not call upon
Austria to appear before a European court in her controversy with Servia.
France agreed to Sir Edward Grey’s proposal, but it was finally
brought to naught because Austria, as was to be expected, held herself aloof.
True to our conviction that an act of mediation could not take int®
consideration the Austro-Servian conflict, which was purely an Austro-Hun-
garian affair, but would have to take into consideration only the relations
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


between Austria-Hungary and Russia, we continued our efforts to bring
about an understanding between these two powers. We. were also willing,
after declining the conference idea, to transmit a further proposal by Sir
Edward Grey to Vienna., in which he urged that Austria-Hungary either
agree to accept the Servian answer as sufficient or to look upon it as a
basis for further conversations. The Austro-Hungarian Government, in
full appreciation of our mediatory activity, replied to this proposal that,
coming as it did after the opening of hostilities, it was too late.
In spite of this we continued our mediatory efforts to the utmost, and
advised Vienna to make any possible compromise consistent with the dignity
of the Monarchy. Unluckily, all of these mediatory acts were soon over-
taken by the military preparations of Russia and France. On July 29 the
Russian Government officially announced in Berlin that it had mobilized
four army districts. At the same time additional reports reached us of
rapidly progressing military preparations by France on land and sea. On
the same day the Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg had a conversation
with the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs, concerning which he reported
as follows by telegraph:
The Minister tried to persuade me to agree in behalf of my Govern-
ment to a conversation of four parties to devise means of moving Aus-
tria-Hungary to give up those demands touching on the sovereignty of
Servia. While I agreed to a complete transmission of the conversa-
tion, I took the stand that, since Russia had decided on the ominous
step of mobilization, it was difficult for me to exchange any opinions on
this subject, and it almost seemed impossible to do so. I said that
what Russia now demanded of us in respect to Austria-Hungary was
the same thing of which Austria-Hungary was accused regarding Servia
—a usurpation of the rights of sovereignty; that Austria-Hungary had
promised to be considerate of Russian interests by declaring her terri-
torial disinterestedness, a great concession on the part of a nation wag-
ing war. For this reason, I said, an opportunity should be given the
Dual Monarchy to settle her dispute with Servia alone. There would be
time enough to come back to the subject of safe-guarding Servian
sovereignty when peace terms were to be concluded.
I added very earnestly that at the present moment the Austro-
Servian affair was secondary to the danger of a European conflagration,
and I made every effort to show the Minister the greatness of this
danger.
It was impossible to change Sazonof ’s mind on the point that
Russia could not desert Servia now.
Similarly the Military Attache at St. Petersburg reported by telegraph
■on the 29th as follows, regarding an interview with the Chief of the General
Staff of the Russian Army:
The Chief of the General Staff asked me to call, and informed me
that ho had just come from His Majesty. He stated that he had been
instructed by the Minister for War to assure me again that everything
had remained the same as it. had been explained to me by the Minister
two days ago. He offered me a written confirmation, and gave me his
word of honor in the most formal manner that mobilization had begun
nowhere, that is to say, not a single man or horse had been levied up
to that hour, three o ’clock in the afternoon. He stated that he could
not answer for the future, but he could declare most emphatically that
no mobilization was desired by His Majesty in the districts touching
on our boundary. However, many reports have reached here and also
Warsaw and Vilna of the levying of reservists in various parts of the
Empire. I therefore told the General that I was confronted with a
riddle as the result of his announcements to me. On his word as an
officer he repeated, however, that such reports were untrue; that a false
alarm may have been raised here and there.
In view of the positive, numerous reports before me of actual
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


levying, I am compelled to consider the conversation as an attempt to
mislead us with regard to the extent of the measures that have already
been taken.
Inasmuch as the Russian Government, in reply to the several inquiries
regarding the reasons for its threatening attitude, several times alluded to
the circumstance that Austria-Hungary had not yet begun any conversations
in St. Petersburg, the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador, at our request, was
directed on July 29 to begin the conversations with Mr. Sazonof. Count
Szapary was authorized to make known to the Russian Minister the
contents of the note to Servia which had been, as it were, overtaken by the
declaration of war, and to receive any suggestions that might still come
from the Russian side, as well as to diSeuss with Sazonof all questions touch-
ing directly on the Austro-Russian relations.
Shoulder to shoulder with England we continued to work without ces-
sation for mediation, and supported every suggestion in Vienna which we
believed showed hope of the possibility of a peaceful settlement of the con-
flict. As late as the 30th we transmitted an English proposal to Vienna,
which established this basis of negotiations, that Austria-Hungary, after
succeeding in marching into Servia, should dictate her terms there. We
had to assume that Russia would accept this basis.
While these efforts of ours for mediation, supported by English diplo-
macy, were being continued with increasing urgency in the time from July
29 to the 31st, there constantly came new and increasing reports concerning
Russian mobilization measures. The assembling of troops on the East
Prussian border and the declaration of a state of war in all important places
on the Eussian western boundary no longer left any doubt of the fact that
Russian mobilization was actively going on against us, while at the same
time all such measures were denied anew on word of honor to our represen-
tative at St. Petersburg. Even before the reply to the last English-German
mediation proposal, the basis of which must have been known in St. Peters-
burg, could reach Berlin from Vienna, Russia ordered a general mobiliza-
tion. On the same day an exchange of telegrams took place between His
Majesty the Kaiser and King and Czar Nicholas, in which His Majesty
called the Czar’s attention to the threatening character of the Russian
mobilization, and to the continuance of his own activity as mediator.
On July 31 the Czar directed the following telegram to His Majesty:
I thank you from my heart for your mediation, which permits a
gleam of hope that everything can yet be settled peaceably. It is a
technical impossibility for us to halt our military preparations, which
became necessary through Austria’s mobilization. We are far from
desirous of war. So long as the negotiations continue with Austria
concerning Servia, my troops will not undertake any challenging action,
I solemnly pledge you my word as to that. lam trusting in the grace
of God with all my might, and hope for the success of your mediation
in Vienna, for the welfare of our coiintries, and for the peace of
Europe. Your sincerely devoted
, NICHOLAS.
To this His Majesty the Kaiser replied:—
Upon your appeal to my friendship and your plea for my help, I
have undertaken a mediatory action between your Government and the
Austro-Hungarian Government. While this negotiation was under way
your troops were mobilized against Austria-Hungary, which is allied
with me, as a consequence of which my mediation was almost madfe
illusory, as I have already informed you. Notwithstanding this, I con-
tinued it. Now lam in receipt of reliable reports of serious prepara-
tions for war on my eastern boundary also. Responsibility for the
safety of my Empire compels me to take counter defensive measures.
I have carried my efforts for the maintenance of world peace to the
utmost limit. It is not I that bear the responsibility for the calamity
that now threatens the entire civilized world. Yet at this moment it
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


lies in your power to stave it off. No one threatens the honor and
might of Russia, which might have awaited the result of my media-
tion. The friendship for you and your Empire which was bequeathed
to me by my grandfather on his deathbed has always been sacred to
me, and I have been faithful to Russia when she was hard pressed,
especially in her last war. It is still possible for you to maintain
the peace of Europe if Russia will decide to put a stop to the military
measures that threaten Germany, and Austria-Hungary.
Even before this telegram reached its destination, the mobilization of
the entire Russian fighting force, which had been ordered in the forenoon of
the same day, openly directed against us, was in full swing. The Czar ’»
telegram, however, was sent at 2 o’clock in the afternoon.
After the mobilization became known in Berlin, the Imperial Ambassa-
dor at St. Petersburg was ordered on the afternoon of July 31 to advise
the Russian Government that Germany had declared a state of war as a
counter move to the mobilization of the Russian Army and Navy, which
would have to be followed by mobilization unless Russia ceased her military
preparations against Germany and Austria-Hungary within twelve hours,
and so advise Germany.
At the same time the Imperial Ambassador at Paris was directed to
request an explanation from the French Government within eighteen hours
as to whether, in the ease of a Russo-German war, Prance would remain
neutral.
The Russian Government destroyed the painstaking mediatory work of
the European State Chancelleries, shortly before its successful outcome, by
her mobilization, which endangered the safety of the German Empire. The
mobilization measures, concerning the seriousness of which to the Russian
Government no doubt was allowed to arise from the beginning, together
with her continued denial, show clearly that Russia desired the war.
The Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg delivered the message that
had been given to him for Mr. Sazonof on July 31 at midnight.
After the expiration of the time limit set for Russia without the re-
ceipt of an answer to our inquiry, His Majesty the Emperor and King
ordered the mobilization of the entire German Army and the Imperial
Navy at 5 p.m. on August 1. In the meantime the Imperial Ambassador
at St. Petersburg had been instructed to hand a declaration of war to
the Russian Government in case no favourable reply was issued before
the expiration of the time limit. However, before a report regarding the
execution of this order arrived, Russian troops crossed our border and
advanced on German territory, namely, as early as the afternoon of
August 1.
By this move Russia began the war against us.
In the meantime the Imperial Ambassador at Paris put the question
that he had been ordered to present before the French Cabinet at 7 p.m.
on July 31.
To this the French Prime Minister made an ambiguous and unsatis-
factory reply at 1 o’clock in the afternoon of August 1. This does
not give a clear picture of the French position, since it was limited to the
statement that France would do what her interests seemed to warrant. A
few hours later, at 5 in the afternoon, the complete mobilization of the
entire French Army and Navy was ordered.
On the ra6rning of the following day France opened hostilities.
Concluded on August 2, noon.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


THE AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN NOTE TO SERVIA.
From the Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, July 25, 1914.
Berlin, July 24.
The Austro-Hungarian Minister at Belgrade at 6 o ’clock last night
handed to the Servian Government a verbal note with the demands of the
Austro-Hungarian Government. In the note the answer is requested by
6 p.m., July 25. It reads as folows:
On March 31, 1909, the Royal Servian Minister at the Court of
Vienna, at the order of his Government, handed the following explana-
tion to the Imperial and Royal Government: ‘ ‘ Servia admits that her
rights were not interfered with by the events in Bosnia, and that
she will in accordance therewith accommodate herself to the resolutions
which the Powers will draw up in reference to Article 25 of the Berlin
Convention. Servia, in following the advice of the Great Powers,
pledges herself to give up the attitude of protest and resistance which
she has assumed in regard to the annexation since October last, and she
further pledges herself to change the course of her present policies,
opposed to Austria-Hungary and to live in future with the latter as a
friendly neighbour. ’ ’
The history of the past few years, and especially the painful de-
velopments of June 28, have indicated the presence of a subversive
movement in Servia, the object of which is to separate certain sections
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy from the Empire. This movement,
which has arisen before the eyes of the Servian Government, has
resulted in acts of terrorism and a long line of attempts on human
life, ending in murder outside the territory of the Kingdom.
Far from attempting to carry out the formal pledges made in the
declaration of March 31, 1909, the Servian Government has done nothing
to suppress these activities. It tolerated the criminal acts of the vari-
ous societies directed against the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, the un-
bridled utterances of the preds, the glorification of those committing
crimes, participation by officers and officials in subversive intrigues;
she Countenanced an unhealthy propaganda in the public schools and,
finally, all manifestations which could mislead the Servian populace into
hatred of the Monarchy and scorn of its management.
This tolerance, of which the Royal Servian Government was guilty,
continued even at the moment when the events of June 28 showed the
whole world the terrible consequences of such toleration.
It is made clear from the utterances and admissions of the
criminal authors of the attack of June 28 that the Serajevo murder
wah planned in Belgrade, that the murderers obtained the weapons
and bombs with which they were supplied from Servian officers end
officials, members of the Narodna Odbrana, and, finally, that leading
Servian officials on the boundary sent the criminals and their weapons
to Bosnia under their auspices.
The above results of the investigation no longer permit the Austro-
Hungarian Government to observe the attitude of forbearance toward
actions that for years have aroused prejudice against it, actions which
had their centre in Belgrade and have been carried over to the ter-
ritories of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy from that point. These
developments make it incumbent upon the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment to put an end to the revolutionary movements which constitute
a constant threat to the peace of the monarchy.
In order to attain this end the Austro-Hungarian Government finds
itself compelled to demand an official assurance from the Servian
Government that it denounce the anti-Austro-Hungarian propaganda,
that is to say, that it denounce every effort, the ultimate object of-whieh
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


is to sever territory from the Austro-Hungarian: Monarchy, and that it
pledges itself to do everything in its power to suppress this criminal
and terrorizing propaganda.
In order to give an official character to these promises the Royal
Servian Government will publish the following statement on the first
page of its official organ on July 26:
11 The Royal Servian Government condemns the propaganda di-
rected against Austria-Hungary, that is to say, every activity the
object of which is to sever territories from the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy, and it regrets sincerely the terrible consequences of these
criminal operations.
“The Royal Servian Government regrets that Servian officers and
officials have taken part in the above-mentioned propaganda and thereby
jeopardized the pleasant, neighborly relations which the Royal Govern-
ment formally pledged itself to cultivate, in its declaration of March,
31, 1909.
“The Royal Government, which disapproves of and rejects every
thought or every attempt to interfere with the destiny of the inhabi-
tants of any part of Austria-Hungary, considers it its duty to call
the attention of the officers and officials and of the entire populace of
the kingdom most emphatically to the fact that it wall in future take
the strongest measures against individuals found guilty of such acts,
to prevent and to suppress which every effort will be made.
‘ 1 This declaration will be brought to the attention of the Royal
Army by an order of the day from his Majesty the King and will be
published in the official organ of the army.
“Furthermore, the Royal Servian Government pledges itself:
“1. To suppress every publication that incites to hatred and
contempt of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy and the general ten-
dency of which is directed against the territorial integrity of the latter.
“2. To proceed at once to the dissolution of the Society Narodna
Odbrana, and to confiscate all its material for propaganda; also to
proceed in the same way against other societies and organizations in
Servia that are carrying on a propaganda against Austria-Hungary.
The Royal Government will take the necessary measures to prevent the
dissolved societies from renewing their activities under different names
or in other forms.
‘‘ 3. To set aside everything in the public instruction of Servia,
including the teaching corps, as well as the teaching materials, that
tends or might tend to nurture the propaganda against Austria-
Hungary.
“4. To dismiss from the military service and the public service
in general all officers and employees who are guilty of propaganda
against Austria-Hungary, whose names, together with the accusations
against them, the Austro-Hungarian Government reserves the right
of making known to the Royal Government,
‘‘ 5. To consent to the co-operation of representatives of the Aus-
tro-Hungarian Government in Servia to help suppress the subversive
movement against the territorial integrity of the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy.
“6. To institute a legal trial of the conspirators in the plot of
June 28, who are on Servian territory. Officials delegated by the
Austro-Hungarian Government will take part in the proceedings.
“7. To proceed with all speed to arrest Major Voja Tankkosic
and a certain Milan Ciganovic, Servian State officials, who have been
compromised as a result of the investigation.
“8. To take appropriate steps to prevent assistance by Servian
officials in smuggling weapons and explosives across the border, and
to dismiss from the service and severely punish those representatives
of the frontier service of Schabatz and Loznica who helped those con-
cerned in the crime of Serajevo to cross the border.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


“9. To make an explanation to the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment regarding the not easily justifiable utterances of high Servian
officials in Servia and abroad who, regardless of their official positions,
did not hesitate to express themselves as unfriendly to Austria in in-
terviews after the crime of June 28.
“10. To advise the Austro-Hungarian Government without delay
with regard to the carrying out of the measures outlined above. ’ ’
The Austro-Hungarian Government awaits the reply of the Royal
Government at the latest by Saturday, the 2oth inst., at 6 p.m.
A memorandum of the results of the investigations of Serajevo, in so
far as they concern the functionaries mentioned in paragraphs 7 and 8,
is inclosed with this note.
[lnclosure.]
The investigation by the Court at Serajevo against Gabrilo Princip
and accomplices in the assassination committed on June 28 of this
year has up to now established the following facts:
il. The plot to murder Archduke Franz F’erddnand during his stay
in Serajevo was planned by Gabrilo Princip, Xedeljko Gabrinovic, a
certain 'Milan Ciganovic, and Trifko Grabez, with the assistance of
Major Voja Tankkosic.
2. The six bombs and four Browning pistols which were used
by the criminals were obtained for them and handed to Princip, Ga-
brinovic, and Grabez in Belgrade by a certain Milan Ciganovic, and
Major Voja Tankkosic.
3. The bombs are hand grenades coming from the arsenal of the
Servian Army at Kragujevac.
4. In order to make sure of the success of the attempt, Milan
Ciganovic instructed Princip, Gabrinovic, and! Grabez in the art of
hurling bombs, and taught Princip and Grabez how to shoot with
Browning pistols in the forest beside the shooting grounds of Top-
sehider.
5. In order to make possible the crossing of the Bosnia-Herzego-
vina frontier and the smuggling in of their weapons, a secret
portation system was organized by Ciganovic. The entrance of the
criminals with their weapons into Bosnia and Herzegovina was carried
out with the assistance of the frontier Captains at Sehabatz (Rade
Popovie) and Lozniea, as well as the customs officer, Rudivoj Grbie
of Lozniea, and several other persons.
The Frembenblatt writes, among other things as follows: “The crime
of Serajevo has revealed to the whole world the dangers that threaten us,
and has directed our attention to the pressing need of insuring quiet and
safety to ourselves at any cost. The Austro-Hungarian Minister at Bel-
grade to-day made known to the Servian Government the demands which
we must make to it to-day. It is the result of long, careful consideration
and does not go any further than absolutely necessary. We must insist on
the demands as they stand; for this is a matter of underground passages
extending from Servia directly to the heart of our South Slavic territories.
Conditions that we cannot allow to continue have made themselves apparent
on the threshold of our house as a result of the encroachment of the Pan-
Servian idea. Servia has covered herself with a network of societies which,
with the pretext of fostering culture, preach the doctrine of hatred of us
throughout the country. Emissaries are sent out to Bosnia, Herzegovina,
and Crotia to incite the populace to revolt and to picture to them an im-
minent union of those territories with the Servian Kingdom. The Servian
Government, in spite of its emphatic declaration, has done nothing to
stop this movement; its tolerance has had the effect of silent consent.
Anything that has been done has been done only for appearances. There
are many persons of high military rank, or professors or teachers in the
service of the State who are among the leaders of these societies. If one
group hopes to attain its ends by means of pacts and war, the others ex-
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


press their conviction that a terroristic and revolutionary stage must pre-
cede the diplomatic and military action. The event of Sarajevo Ims demon-
strated that this plan of campaign is being waged against us with terrible
emphasis. It has been proved that the murder of the Archduke Franz
Ferdinand and his wife was carried out with the support of officials of
the kingdom. We have to deal with an irreconcilable, bitterly hostile move-
ment, which shows itself in most varied forms, but which, in its entirety,
keeps our border populace in a state of excitement, shatters the confidence
of the various races in our monarchy as to our ability to maintain peace
with the outside world, and is the main point for the beginning of all
efforts against us, and causes much precious blood to flow on our territories.
The results of this agitation have frequently been felt in our economic life.
Thousands of careers have been blasted as a result of the alarming crises
following the constantly recurring Pan-Servian scare. Were we to endure
all this without stepping in to take decided action against it, the same
agitators who continually, for the sake of rhetorical effect, accuse us of
the misuse of power, would call this a sign of weakness, lack of will, and
fear. They would state that we do not dare to defend on reelves, and
in that way they would find new supporters and would feel encouraged
to a doubly strong attack. While we are making our will felt, we are
bringing the Servian people themselves to a realization of their position.
They will see that they have been deceived, that the movement for a
greater Servia will break against an iron wall, that the monarchy is deter-
mined to spurn them. The feeling that we have to deal with a condition
that has become unbearable, that a stop must be put to it, is so strong
among our people .that complaints concerning the long delay in dealings
with the situation are getting louder. This impatience and criticism can
be understood. But the Austro-Hungarian Government did not wish to
act in anger, not without the most careful testing of every circumstance,
not without making absolutely certain what demands must be made. Servia
has been allowed a brief time in which to comply with our demands. We
do not wish to lengthen the period of the crisis that weighs down our
economic life and is making all Europe uneasy. We want to adjust an
untenable relation as quickly as possible, convince public opinion in Servia
of our determination, and finally come to a settlement. We hope that
Servia will bow to the desires that we have expressed within the time
set. There is no more reason to doubt our determined will to maintain our
position under all circumstances then to doubt our sincere wish that better
relations may be developed in the future between Servia and Austria-
Hungary. ’ ’
VIENNA, July 24.—The newspapers declare that the note to Servia
is the beginning of a defence and is not an attack, that it shows th© strong
will of the monarchy, but demands nothing from Servia except what should
have been done long ago for the maintenance of its respect before Europe
The entire press expresses the hope that Servia, by prompt acceptance of
Austria-Hungary’s terms, will remove the suspicion of partnership with
the murderers, and that she will be far-sighted enough to choose peace
and not war.
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY AND THE SERVIAN NOTE.
From the Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, July 29, 1914.
VIENNA.—JuIy 27. —.The note of the Royal Servian Government of
July 25, 1914, reads as follows:
The Royal Government has received the notification of the Austro-
Hungarian Government of the 10th inst., and is convinced that it*
answer will remove every misunderstanding that threatens to disturb
the pleasant neighborly relations between the Austro-Hungarian Mon-
archy and the Servian Kingdom.
The Royal Government is certain that in dealing with the great
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


neighboring: monarchy those protests have under no pretext been re-
newed which formerly were made both in the Skupschtina and in
explanations and negotiations of responsible representatives of the
State and which, through the declaration of the Servian Government
of March 18, 1909, were settled; furthermore, that since that time
none of the various successive Governments of the kingdom, nor any
of itsjidfficers, has made an attempt to change the political and legal
eonditions set up in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Royal Government
is certain that the Austro-Hungarian Government has made no repre-
sentations of any kind along this line except in the case of a textbook
concerning which the Austro-Hungarian Government received an en-
tirely satisfactory reply. Servia, during the Balkan crisis, gave evi-
dence in numerous cases of her pacific and temperate policies, and it
will be thanks to Servia alone and the sacrifices that she alone made
in the interest of European peace if that peace continue.
On this the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy comments:
The Royal Servian Government limits itself to the statement that
since it made the declaration of March 18, 1909, no effort has been
made by the Servian Government or its officers to alter the position
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Thereby it consciously and wilfully evades the grounds on which
we base our course, since we did not make the claim that it and its
officials had undertaken anything of an official nature along this line.
Our grievance rather is this: that it failed to suppress movements
directed against the territorial integrity of the monarchy in spite
of the pledges made in the note in question.
Its pledge consisted of this: that the entire trend of its policies
was to be changed and pleasant, neighborly relations with the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy brought about; not merely to refrain from
officially taking up the question of Bosnia’s belonging to the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy.
The Servian note thereupon continues:
The Royal Government cannot be held responsible for utterances
of a private character such as newspaper articles and the peaceful
w'ork of societies, utterances which are- quite ordinary in almost all
countries and which are not generally under State control, especially
since the Royal Government, in the solution of a great number of
questions that came up between Servia and Austria-Hungary, showed
much consideration as a result of which most of these questions were
settled in the best interests of the progress of the two neighboring
countries.
'Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
The contention of the Royal Servian Government that utterances
of the press and the activities of societies have a private character
and are not under the control of the State is contrary to the practice
of modern States, even under the freest interpretation of the rights
of the press and societies, which are of public legal character and both
subject to State supervision. Moreover, Servian practice is to ex-
ercise such control. The charge against the Servian Government is
that it has entirely failed to inspect its press and societies whose acts
hostile to Austria-Hungary were known to it.
The Servian note continues:
The Royal Government was therefore painfully surprised to hear
the contention that Servian subjects had taken part in the preparations
for the murder committed in Sarajevo. It had hoped to be invited
to co-operate in the investigations following this crime and was pre-
pared, in order to prove the entire correctness of its acts, to proceed
against all persons concerning whom it had received information.
Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
This contention is incorrect. The Servian Government had'been
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


carefully advised as to certain definite persons who were suspected,
and it was not only in the position but bound by its internal laws to
begin an action spontaneously. It did nothing at all along these lines.
Servians note continues:
In conformity with the wish of the Austro-Hungarian Government,
the Eoyal Government is prepared to turn over to the couifi, regardless
of station or rank, any Servian subject concerning whose participation
in the crime at Serajevo proofs may be given to it. The Government
pledges itself especially to publish on the first page of the official
organ of July 26 the following declaration;
“The Royal Servian Government condemns every propaganda that
may be directed against Austria-Hungary; that is to say, all efforts
designed ultimately to sever territory from the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy, and it regrets sincerely the sad consequences of these
criminal machinations. ’ ’
Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
Our demand read as follows: “The Eoyal Servian Government
condemns the propaganda that is directed against Austria-Hungary
. . . .’ ’ The change made by the Royal Servian Government in
the declaration demanded by us infers that such a propaganda against
Austria-Hungary does not exist or that it is unknown to the Royal
Government. This formula is not sincere, and conceals something in
order that the Servian Government later may reserve an avenue of
escape, saying that in its declaration it did not disavow the existence
of the present propaganda, and did not recognize it as inimical to the
monarchy, whereupon it could mislead further to the contention that
it would not be pledged to suppress a propaganda like the present one.
Servia’s note continues;
The Royal Government regrets that, in accordance with advices
from the Austro-Hungarian Government, certain Servian officers and
functionaries are taking an active part in the present propaganda,
and that they have hereby jeopardized the pleasant neighborly rela-
tions to the maintenance of which the Royal Government was formally
pledged by the declaration of March 31, 1909.
The Government (what follows her© is similar to the text de-
manded).
Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
The formal declaration demanded by us was as follows: “The
Royal Government regrets that Servian officers and functionaries . . .
took part in , , . ” Also in this choice of words and in the addi-
tional clause “in accordance with advices from the Austro-Hungarian
Government,” it is shown that the Servian Government is carrying out
the object indicated above —to allow itself free rein in the future.
Servia’s note continues:
The Eoyal Government further pledges itself:
1. To introduce a provision in the press law on the occasion of
the next regular session of the Skuptschtina, according to which in-
stigations to hatred and contempt of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy,
as well as any publication directed in general against the territorial
integrity of Austria-Hungary, shall be punished severely.
The Government pledges itself, on the occasion of the coming re-
vision of the Constitution, to add to Article XXII. a clause permitting
the confiscation of publications, the confiscation of which, under the
present Article XXII. of the Constitution, would be impossible.
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
We had demanded:
“1. The suppression of all publications that arouse people to
hatred and contempt for the Austro-Hungarian monarchy and whose
tendency is directed against the territorial integrity of the monarchy.”
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


We thus wished to obligate Servia to take measures for having
such attacks in the press cense in future; we wished, therefore, to
be sure that we had won certain success in this direction.
Instead, Servia offers to make certain laws that may lead to the
above result, to wit:
(a) A law by which the individuals may be punished for above-
mentioned statements of the press hostile to the monarchy. This is
nothing to us, especially as it is well known that the punishment of
individuals for press misdemeanors is possible only in very rare cases,
and, under a correspondingly lax handling of such a law, even these
few would not be punished. Thus this is a suggestion which in no
wise answers our demand, and therefore does not offer us the slightest
guarantee of the result desired by us.
(b) An addition to Article XXII. of the Constitution to th©
effect that confiscation be allowed —a suggestion that likewise must
fail to satisfy us, since the existence of such a law in Servia is of no
use to us. What would be of use would be the promise of the Govern-
ment to enforce it, which promise is not made to us.
Therefore these suggestions are thoroughly unsatisfactory, all the
more so as they are of an evasive nature, since we are not told within
what space of time these laws will be enacted, and since if the enact- '
raent of the laws should be refused by the Skupschtina —to say nothing
of the possible resignation of the Government—all would remain as
it was.
Servia’s note continues:
2. The Government possesses no proof —and the note of the Aus-
tro-Hungarian Government provides it with none—that the ‘ ‘ Narodua
Odbrana” Society and other similar associations have up to the pre-
sent committed any criminal acts through any of their members,
Nevertheless, the Royal Government will accept the demand of the
Austro-Hungiarian Government and dissolve the Narodna Odbrana
Society, as well as all societies that may work against Austria-Hungary.
Observations of the Imperial and Royal Government:
The anti-monarchical propaganda of the Narodna Odbrana and
the associations affiliated with it fills all public life in Servia; it is
therefore a quite unreliable statement on the part of the Servian
Government to maintain that it knows nothing about this society.
To say nothing of the fact that the demand made by us is not
entirely granted, since we furthermore demanded:
That the means of propaganda of these associations should be
confiscated.
That the reorganisation of the dissolved associations under other
names and in other forms should be prevented.
Concerning these two points the Belgrade Government preserves
complete silence, so that we have no assurance, in the partial
agreement given us, that an end will be put to the anti-Austrian
associations, especially of the “Narodna Odbrana,” by their dissolu-
tion.
Servia’s note continues:
3. The Royal Servian Government agrees to eliminate forthwith
from public education in Servia everything that might help the
propaganda against Austria-Hungary, provided that the Austro-
Hungarian Government gives it actual proof of this propaganda.
Observation of the Imperial and Royal Government:
Upon this point also the Servian Government demands proofs
that, in the public instruction courses of Servia, there is an anti-
Austrian propaganda, although it must be aware that the books
employed in the Servian schools contain such matter, and that a great
part of the Servian teachers are in the Narodna Odbrana and affili-
ated associations.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


•Moreover, in this case also, the Servian Government has not met
a part of our demands, since, in its text, it left out this addition desired
by us, “as well as the body of teachers and the means of teaching
are concerned”—an addition which clearly shows where the anti-
Austrian propaganda in the Servian schools is to be sought.
Servia’s note continues:
4. The Royal Government is also ready to discharge from mili-
tary and civil service such officers—provided it is proved against
them by legal investigation- I —who have implicated themselves in acts
directed against the territorial integrity of the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy; the Government expects that, for the purpose of institut-
ing proceedings, the Austro-Hungarian Government will impart the
names of these officers and employes and the acts of which they
ere accussed.
Observation of the Imperial and Royal Government:
In view of the fact that the Royal Servian Government makes
the discharge of the officers and employes in question from military
and civil service dependent on whether they are found guilty after
trial, its accession to our demand is, limited to those cases where
such persons have committed acts laying them open to legal penalties.
Since, however, we demand the elimination of those officers and em-
ployes who are making an anti-Austrian propaganda, which in Servia is
not usually punishable by law, it would seem that in this case also
our demands have not been met.
Servia’s note continues:
5. The Royal Servian Government must confess that it is not quite
clear as to the sense and scope of the desire of the Austro-Hungarian
Government to the effect that the Royal Servian Government bind itself
to allow the co-operation within its territory of representatives of the
Austro-Hungarian Government, but it nevertheless declares itself
willing to permit such co-operation as might be in conformity with
international law and criminal procedure, as well as with friendly
neighborly relations.
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
International law has as little to do with this question as
criminal procedure. The question is purely one of national policing,
to be solved by special agreement. Servia’s statement is, therefore,
incomprehensible and, on account of its vague form, would give rise
to insurmountable difficulties if an endeavor were made to arrange the
agreement.
Servia’s note continues:
6. The Royal Government naturally holds itself bound to institute
an investigation against all such persons as were concerned in the plot
of June 16-28. or are supposed to have been concerned in it, and are
on Servian soil. As to the co-operation of special delegates of the
Austro-Hungarian Government in this investigation, the Servian Go-
vernment cannot accept such co-operation, since this would be a
violation of the laws and criminal procedure. However, in individual
eases, information as to the progress of the investigation might be given
the Austro-Hungarian delegates.
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Government;
Our demand was perfectly clear and not to be misunderstood.
We wished:
(1) The institution of a legal investigation against those impli-
cated in the plot.
(2) That Austro-Hungarian representatives should take part in the
investigation, (“recherche,” in contradistinction to “enquete
judiciaire.”)
(3) We did not desire that Austro-Hungarian representatives
take part in the Servian legal proceedings; all we wished them to do
was to co-operate in the police preliminaries, and help get together
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


and corroborate the evidence for the investigation. If the Servian
Government misunderstands us it does so purposely, since the difference
between “enquete judiciaire” and the simple “recherches” must cer-
tainly be plain to it. Since it wished to be free of all control in the
proceedings to be instituted, which, if' properly conducted, would have
results highly undesirable for it, and as it has no loophole for plausibly
declining our co-operation in the police proceedings (analogous cases
for such police intervention exist in great number) it has taken a
ground that gives to its refusal the appearance of right and to our
demand the stamp of impossibility.
The Servian note continues:
7. On tiie very evening on which your note arrived the Royal
Government caused the arrest of Major Yoislar Tankosic. But,
regarding Milan Ciganovic, who is a subject of the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy, and who was employed until June 15 (as candidate) in the
Department of Railroads, it has not been possible to arrest this man
up to now, for which reason a warrant lias been issued against him.
The Austro-Hungarian Government is requested, in order that the
investigation may be made as soon as possible, to make known in the
specified form what grounds of suspicion exist, and the proofs of
guilt collected at the investigation in Sarajevo.
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
This answer is insincere. Ciganovic, according to our investiga-
tion, went on a furlough three days after the crime, when it became
known that he was concerned in the plot, and repaired to Ribari in
the service of the Prefect of Police of Belgrade. So that it is incorrect
to say that, between June 15 and 28, Ciganovic was already out
of the Servian service. To this must be added that the Prefect of
Police of Belgrade, who himself had brought about the departure of
Ciganovic, and who knew where the latter was, declared in an inter-
view that there was no man of the name of Milan Ciganovic in
Belgrade.
The Servian note continues:
8. The Servian Government will increase the severity and scope
of its measures against the smuggling of arms and explosives.
It goes without saying that it will at once start an investigation
and mete out severe punishment to he frontier officials of the Sabac-
Loznica line who failed in their duty and allowed those responsible io'r
the crime to cross the frontier.
9. The Royal Government is willing to give explanations of the
statements made in interviews by its officials in Servia and foreign
countries after the crime, and which, according to the Austro-Hun-
garian Government, were anti-Austrian, as soon as the said Government
indicates where these statements were made and provides proofs that
such statements were actually made by the said officials. The Royal
Government will itself take steps to collect the necessary proofs
and means of transmission for this purpose.
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Government :
The Royal Servian Government must have perfectly good know-
ledge of these interviews. If it requires that the Austro-Hungarian
Government provide all sorts of details about these interviews and
demands a regular investigation, it shows that it lias no desire really
to accede to this demand.
The Servian note continues;
10. The Royal Government will, in so far as this has not already
occurred in this note, inform the Austro-Hungarian Government of the
taking of the measures concerning the foregoing matters, as soon as
such measures have been ordered and carried out.
The Royal Servian Government is of the opinion that it is
mutually advantageous not to hinder the settlement of this question,
and, therefore, in case the Austro-Hungarian Government should not
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


consider itself satisfied with this answer, it is ready as always to
accept a peaceful solution, either by referring the decision of this
question to the international tribunal at The Hague or by leaving
it to the great powers who co-operated in the preparation of the
explanation given by the Servian Government on the 18th-31st March,
1909. (Close of the note).
Annex 1 A.
From the Austro-Hungarian Material.
VIENNA, July 27. —The “dossier” mentioned in the Austro-Hun-
garian circular note to the foreign Embassies concerning the Servian dis-
pute is made public to-day.
In this memorial, attention is called to the fact that the movement
originating in Servia, which has as an object to tear away the southern
portions of Austria-Hungary from the monarchy and unite them to Servia,
strikes far back into the past. This propaganda, always the same in
purpose, changing only in means and intensity, reached its climax at the
time of the annexation crisis, and came out openly at that time with its
aims. While, on the one side, the entire Servian press preached for war
against the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, associations were formed —to say
nothing of other means of propaganda —which prepared such warfare, among
which the Narodna Odbrana was the most important. Originating in a re-
volutionary committee, this association became entirely dependent on the
Servian Foreign Office, under the direction of statesmen and officers, among
them Gen. Jankovic and former Minister Ivanovic. Among the founders
are also Major Oja Tankovic and Milan Pribicevic. This association had as
an object the formation and equipment of bodies of volunteers for the
coming war against Austria-Hungary. In addition to the memorial, a
quotation is given from the association’s official organ, which bears the
same name, Narodna Odbrana, and is issued at the association’s head-
quarters, wherein, in several articles, the activities and aim of this society
are set forth. Therein it is stated that part of the main task of the
Narodna Odbrana is to effect union between its brothers far and near
on the other side of the border, and with all the rest of our friends in
the world.
Austria is mentioned as the first and greatest enemy. Just as the
Narodna Odbrana preaches the necessity of war with Austria, it also
preaches a holy truth about our national situation. The closing chapter
contains an appeal to the Government and people of Servia to prepare
in every way for the struggle which the annexation foreshadowed.
The memorial tells of the Narodna Odbrana’s activities at that time,
os set forth in a statement of a komitadji raised by the ososciation; it
maintained a school under the direction of two of its principal members,
of whom one was Tankovic, for the instruction of bands of men —schools
which Gen. Jankovic and Captain Milan Pribicevic inspected regularly.
Furthermore, the komitadjis were instructed in shooting, bomb-throwing,
laying of mines, blowing up of railway bridges, etc. After the solemn
declaration of the Servian Government in 1909 it looked as if the end
of this organisation also had come. But expectations in this direction have
not only been fulfilled, but the propaganda was continued by the Servian
press. The memorial adduces as an instance of this how the attack on the
Bosnian local chief, Voresanin, was utilized in the public prints, which
extolled the man responsible for it as a national hero and glorified his
deed. These sheets were not only circulated in Servia, but were smuggled
into Austria-Hungary along well-organized secret channels.
Under the same leadership as when it was founded, the Narodna
Odbrana recently became the centre of an agitation to which the Schutzen-
bund, including 702 associations, a Sokolbund, with 3,500 members, and
various other societies belonged.
Appearing in the disguise of a culture association, concerned only with
t;u> intellectual and physical development of the population of Servia as
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


well as with its material strengthening, the Narodna Odbrana betrays
its genuine reorganized programme in the above-mentioned quotations from
its official organ, in which “the holy truth” is preached—that it is an
inevitable necessity to carry on this fight of extermination against Austria,
the first and greatest enemy, with rifle and cannon, and to prepare the
people in every way for the struggle to liberate the oppressed territories
where many millions of enslaved brothers are suffering. The appeals quoted
in the memorial and addresses of a like character, cast a light on the
manifold foreign activities of the Narodna Odbrana and its affiliated
societies, which consist of lecture tours and taking part in celebration sof
Bosnian societies, at which members for the above-mentioned Servian union
are openly recruited. At present an investigation is being made of the fact
that the Sokol societies of Servia intended to unite with similar societies in
Austria-Hungary in a union kept secret up to now. Men of trust and
missionaries stirred up adults and unthinking youths. Thus Milan Pribice-
witsch persuaded former Honved officers and a Lieutenant of gendarmes to
leave army service in the Austro-Hungarian monarchy under serious cir-
cumstances. In the schools where teachers are educated an agitation of
wide scope was developed. The wished-for fight against the Austro-
Hungarian empire was also prepared militarily to the point that Servian
emissaries were commissioned to destroy means of transportation, etc.,
and to kindle revolts and panics, in case of the outbreak of
All this is told in a special inclosure.
The memorial tells further of the connection between this activity
of the Narodna Odbrana and affiliated organizations with the attempts
against Cuvaj, the Royal Commissioner at Agram, in July, 1912; with
the attempt of Dojcic in Agram in 1913 against Skerleez, and
the unsuccessful attempt of Schafer on May 20 in the Agram Theatre.
It then takes up the connection with the attack on the Crown Prince and
his wife, and how even children in school are poisoned with thoughts of the
Narodna Odbrana, and how the conspirators, with the aid of Pribicewic
and Dame, secured the weapons for the attack. Here special stress is laid
on the part played by Major Tankosic, who delivered the weapons for the
murder, as also on that of a certain Ciganovic, a former comitadji,
now employed on the Servian railways at Belgrade, who as early as 1909
figured as a graduate of the school for instructing bands of men maintained
by the Narodna Odbrana of that time. Furthermore, it is told how bombs
and arms were secretly smuggled into Bosnia, which leaves no doubt that this
is a well-prepared and often utilized road for the secret aims of thie
Narodna.
One inclosure contains a quotation from the minutes of the court-
martial in Sarajevo concerning the investigation of the attack on the
Archduke Francis Ferdinand and his wife. According to this, Princip,
Cabrinovic, Grabez, Crupilovic, and Papovic appear as having confessed
that they, in company with the fugitive Meh'medbasic, organized a. plot for
the murder of the Archduke and that they kept watch on him for this
purpose. Cabrinovic is said to have confessed that he threw the bomb and
that Gabrilo Princip carried out the attempt with the Browning pistol. Both
men acknowledged that in doing the deed they premeditated murder. The
other parts of the inclosure contain further statements of the guilty
parties before the Judge conducting the investigation as to the origin of
the plot and whence the bombs came. These were manufactured for mili-
tary purposes and, judging from the way they were originally packed,
came from the Servian arsenal at Kragujewac. Finally, the inclosure gives
information as to the transportation of the three conspirators and their
arms from Servia to Bosnia. From further testimony of witnesses it
appears that a subject of Austria-Hungary wished to give information to
the Austro-Hungarian Consulate at Belgrade that he suspected a plan
existed for an attempt on the life of the Archduke during his stay in
Bosnia.. It is alleged that this man was prevented from lodging this in-
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


formation by Belgrade police officials, who arrested him on some empty
pretext just as he was entering the Consulate. It is furthermore stated
that the testimony of witnesses shows that the said police officials had
knowledge of the attempt planned. Since these statements have not yet
been investigated no opinion can be formed for the present as to their
validity. In the inclostire with the memorial it is stated: Before the
reception hall of the Servian Ministry of War there are four allegorical
pictures, of which three are representations of Servian victories, while
the fourth shows the realization of Servia’s hostile dreams against the
Austro-Hungarian monarchy. Over a landscape that is partly mountains
(Bosnia), partly plans (Southern Hungary), the Zora, the morning light
of Servian hopes, is dawning. In the foreground stands the armed figure
of a woman, on whose shield are the names of the “provinces yet to be
freed” —Bosnia, Herzegovina, Wojwodina, Syrmia, Dalmatia, etc.
Annex 18.
The Chancellor of the German Empire to the Imperial Ambassadors in
Paris, London, Bt. Peteisburg.
BERLIN, July 23, 1914.—The statements of the Austro-Hungarian
Government as to the conditions under which the attempt on the life of
the Austrian Crown Prince and his wife occurred make clear the aims of
the Pan-Servian propaganda, and the means which it employs to accom-
plish its ends. Also, in view of the facts brought forward, there is no
longer any doubt that Belgrade must be looked upon as the centre of
action of the efforts to tear away the southern Slavic provinces from the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and effect their union with the Servian King-
dom, and that these efforts develop there with the connivance, at least,
of officials of the Government and army.
The Servian machinations go back many years. Servian Chauvinism
showed itself in an especially marked form during the Bosnian crisis. That
there was no conflict as a result of Servia’s provocative attitude toward
Austria-Hungary at this time was due to the moderation of the Austro-
Hungarian Government and the energetic intervention of the great powers.
The assurances of future good behaviour which the Servian Government
then gave have not been kept. Under the very eyes, or, at least, with
the silent consent, of official Servia the Pan-Servian propaganda has con-
tinually grown in scope and intensity; the latest crime, the threads
which lead to Belgrade, must be placed to its account. It has become un-
mistakably apparent that it is incompatible both with the dignity and the
self-preservation of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy that it should con-
tinue to look on inactively at the plotting across the border, which con-
tinually jeopardizes the integrity of its territory. Considering the con-
ditions, the acts as well as the demands of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment cannot but be looked upon as justified. Nevertheless, the
attitude adopted recently both by public opniion as well as by the Govern-
ment in Servia docs not preclude the apprehension that the Servian Go-
vernment will refuse ,to comply with these demands, and that she is allow-
ing herself to be led into an attitude of provocation toward Austria-
Hungary. Unless the Austro-Hungarian Government wishes definitely to
give up all claim to its position as a great power there is nothing for it to
do but back up its demands on the Servian Government by strong pressure
and, if necessary, by recourse to military measures, in which case the
choice of means must be left to it.
I ask your Excellency to express yourself in the above terms to the
representative of (Mr. V'iviani) (Sir Edward Grey) (Mr. Sazonof) and
to lay particular stress on the view that the above question is one, the
settlement of which devolves solely upon Austria-Hungary and Servia,
and one which the powers should earnestly strive to confine to the two
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


countries concerned. We strongly desire that the dispute be localized,
since any intervention of another power, on account of the various alliance
obligations, would bring consequences impossible to measure.
I shall await with interest a telegraphic report from you as to the re-
sult of your interview.
Annex 2.
The Imperial Chancellor to the Confederated Governments of Germany.
Confidential!
Kindly make the following announcement to the Government to which
you are accredited:
In view of the facts which the Austro-Hungarian Government
has made known in its note to the Servian Government, the last
doubt must disappear that the plot to which the Austro-Hungarian
Crown Prince and his wife were victims was hatched in Servia, with
the connivance, at least, of officials of the Servian Government. It is
a product of the Pan-Servian efforts which, during a number of years,
have become a source of lasting disquietude for the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy and for all Europe.
Pan-Servian Chauvinism showed itself in an especially marked
form during the Bosnian crisis. Only to the far-reaching self-control
and moderation of the Austro-Hungarian Government and the ener-
getic intervention of the great powers was it due that the provocation
which Austria-Hungary suffered at this time from Servia did not lead
to war. The assurances of future good behaviour which the Servian
Government gave have not been kept by it. Under the very eyes, or
at least with the silent consent of official Servia, the Pan-Servian pro-
paganda has continually grown in scope and intensity. It would be
compatible neither with the dignity nor the self-preservation of the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy if the latter continued to look inactively
upon the plotting across the border, through which the safety and in-
tegrity of its territory is menaced in view of the conditions,* the acts
as well as the demands of the Austro-Hungarian Government must be
looked upon as justified.
The answer of the Servian Government to the demands which’ the
Austro-Hungarian Government made on the 23rd of the month through
its representative in Belgrade makes clear that those at the head
of Servian affairs are not inclined to give up the policy hitherto
adopted by them, nor their activity os agitators. Therefore, the Austro-
Hungarian Government, if it does not wish to give up forever its posi
tion as a great power, has nothing left to it but to back up its demands
with strong pressure, and, if necessary, by the adoption of military
measures.
Certain elements in Russia consider it a natural right and the
duty of Russia energetically to take the part of Servia in her dispute
with Austria-Hungary. In fact, the Novoe Vremya considers itself
justified in making Germany responsible for the European conflagra-
tion that might result from such a move by Russia, if it does not
compel Austria-Hungary to back down. Here the Russian press takes
a wrong view. It was not Austria-Hungary that brought on the con-
flict with Servia, but Servia, which, by unscrupulous favoring of
pan-Servian aspirations, even in parts of Austria-Hungary’s territory
has jeopardized the very existence of the latter, and created conditions
which finally found expression in the dastardly crime of Serajevo.
If Russia feels constrained to take sides with Servia in this conflict,
she certainly has a right to do it. But she must bear clearly in mind
that in so doing she makes Servia’s aspirations to undermine the
conditions necessary for the existence of the Austro-Hungarian Mon-
archy, identical with her own, and that she alone must bear the re-
sponsibility if a European w r ar arises from the Austro-Servian question,
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


which all the rest of the great European powers wish to localize. This
responsibility of Russia is perfectly apparent and is all the heavier
since Count Berchtold has officially declared to Russia that there is
no intention of acquiring Servian territory, nor of threatening the con-
tinued existence of the Servian Kingdom, but that all that is desired
is to obtain permanent relief from Servian machinations that threaten
Austria’s existence.
The attitude of the Imperial German Government in this matter
as clearly outlined. The agitation conducted by the Pan-Slavs against
Austria-Hungary has, as its principal aim, the dissolution or weakening
of the Triple Alliance by means of the destruction of the Danube
Empire, and, as a result, the complete isolation of the German Empire.
Our closest interests, therefore, summon us to the side of Austria-
Hungary. The duty to save Europe if possible from a general war
demands also that we support the efforts to localize the trouble, in
accordance with the policy which we have successfully followed for the
last forty-four years in the interests of the preservation of the peace
in Europe. But if, contrary to hope, the trouble should spread owing
to the intervention of Russia, then, true to our duty as an ally, we
should have to support the neighboring monarchy with the entire
might of the German Empire. We sliall draw our sword only if
obliged to do so, and we shall do it then in 'the firm conviction that
we bear no responsibility for the calamity which a war must needs
bring to the nations of Europe.
Annex 3.
Telegram from the Imperial German Ambassador in Vienna to the
Imperial German Chancellor.
July 24, 1914 Count Berchtold to-day summoned the Russian Charge
d’Affaires in order to explain to him in detail and in friendly terms the
position of Austria regarding Servia. After going over the historical
developments of the last few years, he laid stress on the statement that the
monarchy did not wish to appear against Servia in the role of a con-
queror. He said that Austria-Hungary would demand no territory, that
the step was merely a definitive measure gainst Servian machinations;
that Austria-Hungary felt herself obliged to exact guarantees for the
future friendly behavior of Servia toward the monarchy; that he had no
intention of bringing about a shifting of tlie balance of power in the
Balkans. The Charge d’Affaires, who as yet had no instructions from
St. Petersburg, took the explanations of the Minister ad referendum, adding
that he would immediately transmit them to Sasanow.
\
Annex If.
Telegram of the Imperial German Ambassador in St. Petersburg to the
Imperial German Chancellor.
July 24, 1914.—1 have just availed myself of the contents of Decree
592 in a long talk with Sasanow. The Minister made wild complaints
against Austria-Hungary, and was much excited. What he said most
■definitely was this: that Russia could not possibly permit the Servian-
Austrian dispute to be confined to the parties concerned.
Annex 5.
The Imperial German Ambassador in St. Petersburg to the Imperial
German Chancellor — Telegram.
July 26, 1914.—The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador had a long inter-
view to-day with Sasanow. Both, as they told me afterward, received a
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


satisfying impression. The assurance of the Ambassador that Austria-
Hungary was planning no conquests and simply wished to secure quiet at
last on her boundaries visibly calmed the Minister.
Annex 6.
Telegram of the Imperial German Ambassador in St. Petersburg to
the Imperial German Chancellor,
July 25, 1914.—Report for his (Majesty from Gen. von Chelius. To-
day the drilling of the troops in the Krasnoe camp was suddenly interrupted
and the regiments are to return at once to their garrison posts. The
manoeuvres have been given up. The military pupils were promoted to
officers to-day instead of in the Autumn. Great excitement reigns in
general headquarters as to Austria’s proceedings. I have the idea that
all preparations have been made for mobilization against Austria.
Annex 7.
Telegram of the Imperial German Ambassador in St. Petersburg to the
Imperial German Chancellor.
July 26, 1914. —The Military Attache requests the transmission of the
following report to the General Staff:
I consider it certain that mobilization has been ordered for Kieff
and Odessa. It is doubtful whether this is the case at Warsaw and
Moscow, and elsewhere it has probably not been ordered.
Annex 8. *
Telegram of the Head of the Imperial German Consulate in Kovno to the
Imperial German Chancellor.
July 27, 1914. —State of war declared in Kovno.
Annex 9.
Telegram of the Imperial German Envoy in Berne to the Imperial German
Chancellor.
July 27, 1914. —Have learned reliably that Fourteenth French Corps
stopped manoeuvres.
Annex 10.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German Am-
bassador in London.
Important!
July 26, 1914. —Austria-Hungary has declared officially and solemnly
in St. Petersburg that she contemplates no acquisition of territory in
Servia, and that she will not endanger the continuance of the kingdom,
but wishes only to secure quiet. According to reports reaching here,
Russia is about to summon several bodies of reservists immediately, which
would be equivalent to mobilization against us. If this news is corro-
borated, we shall be forced against our will to take measures to meet it.
To-day our efforts are still directed toward localizing the trouble and
maintaining the peace in Europe. For this reason we ask that the
strongest possible pressure be brought to bear in St. Petersburg for
achieving this end.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


Annex 10A,
feUgram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in Paris.
July 26. 1914.—After Austria-Hungary officially declared to Russia
that she contemplated no acquisition of territory and would not tamper
with the continuance of the Servian kingdom, the decision of the question
as to whether there is to be a European war lies with Russia alone,- who
has to bear the full responsibility. We trust that France, with whom we
know we are agreed in the desire to maintain the peace in Europe, will
use her influence in St. Petersburg in a quieting manner.
Annex 108.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in St. Petersburg.
July 26, 1914. —After Austria formally declared that she was not
interested in acquiring territory, the responsibility for a possible disturb-
ance of the peace in Europe through Russian intervention lies with Russia
alone. We still trust that Russia will take no steps that may seriously
endanger European peace. J
Annex 11.
Telegram of the Imperial German Ambassador in St. Petersburg to the
Imperial German Chancellor.
July 27. 1914.—Military Attache reports concerning talk with Minister
of War;
Said Sasanow had asked him to explain the situation to me. The
Minister of War then gave me his word of honor that as yet no mobi-
ization order had gone forth, that for the time being merely prepara-
tory measures were being taken, but that not one reservist had been
summoned nor a single horse requisitioned. He said that if Austria
should cross the Servian frontier, the military districts in the direction
of Austria—Kieff, Odessa, Moscow, Kazan—would be mobilized that
those on the German front—Warsaw, Vilna, St. Petersburg— would not
be under any circumstances. He said that peace with Germany was
3arnestly desired. To my inquiry as to the purpose of the mobilization
against Austria he shrugged his shoulders and referred me to diplo-
matic channels. I told the Minister that we appreciated the friendly
attitude toward ourselves but would look upon the mobilization against
Austria alone as very menacing.
Annex 12.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in London.
July 27, 1914.—Nothing is known here as yet as to a suggestion of
Sir Edward Grey to hold a four-sided conference in London. °lt is im-
U n to bn ?£ our aUy before a European court in its difference
with Servia. Our mediatory activity must confine itself to the danger of a
Russian-Austnan conflict. s K
Annex IS.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in London.
July 25, 1914.—The distinction made by Sir Edward Grey between the
Austro-Servian and Austro-Russian conflict is quite correct. We wish as
little as England to mix in the first, and, first and last, we take the ground
that this question must be localized by the abstention of all the Powers
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


from intervention in it. It is therefore our earnest hope that Russia will
refrain from any active intervention, conscious of her responsibility and of
the seriousness of the situation. If an Austro-Russian dispute should arise,
we are reedy, with the reservation of our known duties as allies, .to co-
operate with the other great Powers in mediation between Russia and
Austria. ,
Annex 14-
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in St. Petersburg,
July 28, 1914.—We are endeavouring continually to cause Vienna to
make clear in St. Petersburg the purpose and scope of the Austrian action
regarding Servia in an indisputable and, it is to be hoped, satisfying
manner to Russia. The declaration of war made in the meantime makes
no difference in this connection.
Annex 15.
• Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor lo the Imperial German
Ambassador in London.
July 27, 1914.—We have started the efforts towards mediation in
Vienna immediately, in the way desired by Sir Edward Grey. Moreover,
we have communicated to Count Berchtold the wish of Mr. Sasanow for
a direct talk with Vienna.
Annex 16.
Telegram of the Imperial German Ambassador in Vienna to the
Imperial German Chancellor.
July 28, 1914. —Count Berchtold requests me to express to your Excel-
lency his deep gratitude for communicating to him the English mediation
plan. He remarks, however, concerning it, that, after the opening of
hostilities by Senna and the declaration of war made in the meantime,
he must look upon England’s step as belated.
.
Annex 17.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
, Ambassador in Paris.
Juiy 29, 1914. —Reports to us of French preparations for war increase
from hour to hour. I request that you talk on this matter with the French
Government and make it clear to thorn that such measures would lead to
precautionary measures on our part. We should be obliged to proclaim the
danger of war, and even if this should not mean calling in reserves and
mobilization, it would, nevertheless, increase the tension. We still hoped
uninterruptedly for the maintenance of peace.
Annex IS.
Telegram of the German Military Envoy in St. Petersburg to His
Majesty the Kaiser.
July 30, 1914. —Yesterday Prince Troubetzki told me, after be had
caused your Majesty’s telegram to Emperor Nicholas to be delivered at
once: “God be praised that a telegram from your Emperor has come.’’
He told me a little while ago that the telegram had made a deep impres-
sion on the Emperor, but since mobilization against Austria had already
been ordered, and Sosonow had doubtless convinced his Majesty that it was
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


no longer possible to recede, his Majesty unfortunately could do nothing
to alter matters. I then said to him that the responsibility for the un-
measurable consequences lay on the early mobilization against Austria-
Hungary, who was involved after all in a purely local war with Servia,
that Germany’s answer thereto was just and that the responsibility lay
with Eussia, as it had ignored Austria-Hungary’s declaration that she
contemplated no acquisition of territory from Servia. I said that Austria-
Hungary had mobilized against Servia, not against Eussia, and that there
was no cause for Eussia to plunge into the question. I added that in
Germany we were unable, after the frightful crime of Serajevo, any longer
to understand Eussia’s words to the effect that “we cannot leave our
brothers in Servia in the lurch. ’ ’ I told him, in conclusion, that he
must not be surprised if Germany’s forces were mobilized.
Annex 19.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in Borne.
July 31, 1914. —We negotiated continually with a view to reconciliation
between Eussia and Austria-Hungary, both through direct exchange of
telegrams from his Majesty the Kaiser to his Majesty the Czar, as well
as in our relations with Sir Edward Grey. But all our efforts are made
much more difficult, if not impossible, of realization, by Eussia’s mobiliza-
tion. In spite of calming assurances, Eussia, according to all reports that
reach us, is taking such far-reaching steps against us also, that the
situation becomes constantly more threatened.
Annex 20.
I. His Majesty to the Gear.
July 28, 10.45 p.m. —With the greatest disquietude I hear of the im-
pression which Austria-Hungary’s action against Servia is making in your
empire. The unscrupulous agitation which has gone on for years in Servia
has led to the revolting crime of which Archduke Francis Ferdinand was
the victim. The spirit which allowed the Servians to murder their own
King and his wife still rules in that land. Undoubtedly you will agree with
me that we two, you and I, as well as all sovereigns, have a common
interest in insisting that all those morally responsible for this terrible
murder shall suffer deserved punishment.
On the other hand, I by no means overlook how difficult it is for you
and your Government to resist the tide of popular opinion. Bemembering
the heartfelt friendship which has bound us closely for a long time, I
am therefore exerting all my influence to endeavour to make Austria-
Hungary come to an open and satisfying understanding with Eussia. I
earnestly hope that you will help me in my efforts to set aside all obstacles
that may yet arise.
Your very sincere and devoted friend and cousin.
(Signed) WILHELM.
Annex 21.
11. The Czar to Ills Majesty.
Peterhof Palace, July 29, 1 p.m.
I am glad that you are back in Germany. In this serious moment I
ask you urgently to help me. A disgraceful war has been declared on a
weak nation; the indignation at this, which I fully share, is immense in
Eussia. I foresee that soon I can no longer withstand the pressure that is
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


being brought to bear upon me, and that I shall be forced to adopt meas-
ures which will lead to war. In order to prevent such a calamity as a
European war, I ask you, in the name of our old friendship, to do all that
is possible to you to prevent your ally from going too far.
(Signed) NICHOLAS.
Annex 22.
111. His Majesty to the Czar.
I have received your telegram and share your wish for the maintenance
of peace. Nevertheless —as I said to you in my first telegram—l cannot
consider Austria-Hungary’s action “disgraceful war.” Austria-Hungary
knows by experience that Servia’s promises, when they are merely on
paper, are quite unreliable. According to my opinion, Austria-Hungary’s
action is to be looked upon os an attempt to secure full guarantees that
Servia’s promises shall also be turned into deeds. lam confirmed in this
view by the statement of the Austrian Cabinet that Austria-Hungary con-
templates no acquisition of territory at the expense of Servia. I think,
therefore, that it is quite possible for Russia to remain in the role of a
spectator toward the Austrian-Servian war, without dragging Europe into
the most terrible war that it has ever seen. I think that a direct under-
standing between your Government and Vienna is possible and desirable,
an understanding which —as I already telegraphed you —my Government is
endeavoring to help with all its power. Naturally, military measures by
Russia, which Austria-Hungary might take as threatening, would hasten a
calamity that we both wish to avoid, and would undermine my position as
mediator, which I have willingly assumed after your appeal to my friend-
ship and help.
(Signed) WILHELM.
Annex 23,
IV. His Majesty to the Czar.
July 30, 1 a.m.—My Ambassador has been instructed to call your
Government’s attention to the dangers and serious consequences of mobili-
zation; I said the same thing to you in my last telegram. Austria-Hungary
mobilized only against Servia, and at that she mobilized only a part of her
army. If Russia, as appears from what you and your Government say, is
mobilizing against Austria-Hungary, the position of mediator, which you
intrusted to me in a friendly manner, and which I accepted at your urgent-
request, is jeopardized if not rendered untenable. The whole weight of
the decision now rests on your shoulders; they must bear the responsibility
for war or peace.
(Signed) WILHELM.
Annex 23A.
» The Czar to His Majesty.
Peterhof, July 30, 1914, 1.20 p.m.
I thank you from my heart for your prompt answer. lam sending
Tatisheff this evening with instructions. The military measures now be-
ing token were decided upon five days ago for defensive purposes against
Austria’s preparations. I hope with all my heart that these measures will
not influence in any way your position as mediator, which I highly esteem.
We need your strong pressure on Austria in order that an understanding
mav be brought about with us.
NICHOLAS.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


Annex 24-
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in St. Petersburg.
July 31, 1914. —In spite of still pending mediatory negotiations, and
although we ourselves have up to the present moment taken no measures
for mobilization, Eussia has mobilized her entire army and navy; in other
words, mobilized against us also. By these Eussian measures we have been
obliged, for the safeguarding of the Empire, to announce that danger of
war threatens us, which does not yet mean mobilization. Mobilization,
however, must follow unless Eussia ceases within twelve hours all warlike
measures against us and Austria-Hungary, and gives us definite assurance
thereof. Kindly communicate this at once to Mr. Sazonof, and wire hour
of its communication to him.
Annex 25.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial Geimian
Ambassador in Paris.
Important!
July 31, 1914. —In spite of our still pending mediatory action, and al-
though we ourselves have adopted no steps toward mobilization, Eussia has
mobilized her entire army and navy, which means mobilization against us
also. Thereupon we declared the existence of a threatening danger of war,
which must be followed by mobilization, unless Eussia within twelve hours
ceases all warlike steps against us and Austria. Mobilization inevitably
means war. Kindly ask the French Government whether it will remain
neutral in a Eussian-German war. Answer must come within eighteen
hours. Wire at once hour that inquiry is made. Act with the greatest pos-
sible dispatch.
Annex 26.
Telegram of the Imperial German Chancellor to the Imperial German
Ambassador in St. Petersburg.
Important!
Au<*. 1, 1914. —In case the Eussian Government gives no satisfactory
answer to our demand, will Your Excellency, at 5 o'clock this afternoon
(Central European time), kindly hand to it the following declaration:—
The Imperial Government has endeavored from the beginning of
the crisis to bring it to a peaceful solution. In accordance with a
wish expressed to him by His Majesty the Emperor of Eussia, His
Majesty the Emperor of Germany, in co-operation with England, ap-
plied himself to the accomplishment of a mediating role toward the
Cabinets of Vienna and St. Petersburg, when Eussia, without awaiting
the outcome, proceeded to mobilize her entire land and naval forces.
Following this threatening measure, occasioned by no military
preparation on the part of Germany, the German Empire found itself
confronted by a serious and imminent peril. If the Imperial Govern-
ment had failed to meet this peril, it would have jeopardized the' safety
and even the existence of Germany. Consequently, the German Govern-
ment was obliged to address the Government of the Emperor of all
the Eussias, and insist upon the cessation of all these military meas-
ures. Eussia having refused to accede to this demand, and having
manifested by this refusal that her acts were directed against Ger-
many, I have the honor, by order of my Government, to make known
to Your Excellency the following:
His Majesty, the Emperor, my august Sovereign, in the name
of the Empire, takes up the defiance, and considers himself in a
state of war against Eussia.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


I urgently ask that you wire the hour of arrival of these in-
structions, and of their carrying out, according to Russian time.
Kindly ask for your passports, and hand over protection and
business to the American Embassy.
Annex 21.
Telegram of the Imperial German Ambassador in Paris to the Imperial'
German Chancellor.
Aug. 1, 1.50 p.m. —To my repeated inquiry as to whether Prance, ini
case of a German-Russian war, would remain neutral, the Premier declared,
that Prance would do that which might be required of her by her interests..
—Mining Standard, November 14, 1914.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


By courtesy London “Punch.”
God (and the Women) Our Shield!
Study of a German gentleman going into action.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
The British manufacturers recently held a meeting at
the rooms of the National Patriotic Association at St.' Paul’s
Churchyard, when Sir George Pragnell stated that Germany
had during the last few years been circulating by the thousands
a circular which has come to be known as the “Ten Command-
ments”; they are as follow:
1. In all expenses keep in mind the interests of your own
compatriots.
2. Never forget that when you buy a foreign article your
own country is the poorer.
3. Your money should profit no one but Germans.
4. Never profane German factories by using foreign
machinery.
5. Never allow foreign eatables to be served at your table.
6. Write on German paper with a German pen, and use
German blotting paper,
7. German flour, German fruit, and German beer can
alone give your body the true German energy.
8. If you do not like German malt coffee, drink coffee from
German colonies.
9. Use only German clothes for your dress and German
hats for your head.
10. Let not foreign flattery distract you from these precepts;
and be firmly convinced, whatever others say, that German pro-
ducts are the only ones worthy of citizens of the German
Fatherland.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS .


THE HORRORS OF BARBARIAN WAR.
Mining Standard, September 17, 1914.
In our issue of September 3 we urged that it was the duty
of the United States and other leading nations neutral in the
present struggle to insist that it should be conducted by the belli-
gerents in accordance with the laws of humanity, and in accord-
ance with the terms of the Hague Convention. The United States,
however, does not seem inclined to take a course which would
confer upon it undoubted honour, though one of its leading citi-
zens, Professor Hale, has urged a declaration of war against
Germany for her violation of the said Convention. The President,
however, prefers to issue a proclamation calling upon the people
of the United States to pray for the peace of Europe. What
would one think of a general who sent his troops into war, and bade
them trust in the Lord; one would perhaps feel as the parson
felt when the captain of the ship by which he was sailing told
him, when the ship was drifting on to a lee shoi’e, that there was
nothing to do but pray. “Dear, dear!” he said, “has it come to
that?” Dr. Woodrow Wilson’s attitude ra'ay be very correct, but
meantime he is allowing acts of the most atrocious villainy to be
perpetrated. He is in a position where he may insist upon the
rules of war being followed, and he does not insist. Let us detail
the respects in which Germany has violated the terms of the
Hague Convention, and afforded President Wilson with ample
reason for insisting that that sort of thing should cease.
First of all, it is expressly stipulated in Article 1 of the
Convention entered into at the Conference of 1907 that hostilities
should not commence “without a previous and explicit warning in
the form of either a declaration of war, giving reasons, or an
ultimatum, with a conditional declaration of war.” This article
was unquestionably violated by Germany in the case of France.
Article 6 prescribes that prisoners of war shall not be put to work
having connection with the operations of the war. This artcile
has been violated, and more than violated, if it be true that
Belgians have been forced over to the eastern frontier of Germany
to take the field against fhe Russians. On Article 23 a whole
number of clauses have been violated. This article expressly
forbids the improper use of a flag of truce, of the national flag
or uniform of the enemy, or of the red cross insignia, the destruc-
tion or seizure of property, except when “imperatively demanded
by the necessities of war,” or the compelling of a hostile nation’s
subjects to take part in war-like operations directed against their
own country. Every one of- these things has been done by the
German troops. Article 25 prohibits the attack or bombardment
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


of “undefended towns, villages, dwellings, or buildings.” This is
another article that has been violated in several cases. Other
things prohibited in civilised warfare are the disgraceful treatment
of dead bodies on battlefields, the killing or maiming of sick or
wounded soldiers, the use of explosive bullets, the killing of harm-
less private individuals, and the forcing of non-combatants to
furnish information. Every one of these things has been done
by the German troops, and the most recent stories tell of their
violating women and mutilating men, the special acts of mutilation
given being the cutting off of boys’ ears, and the cutting of the
wrists of the wounded. And it is not only on land that Germany
has shown so little desire to play her brutal game fairly. The
laying of unanchored, automatic contact mines at sea is expressly
prohibited, unless they are “so constructed as to become harmless
one hour at most after the person who laid them has ceased to
control them.” As everyone knows, this is another condition that
has been wilfully and deliberately violated. The violation of the
Treaty of London for the neutrality of Belgium need not be dwelt
upon; and, indeed, violations of any convention or treaty are as
nothing compared to the sins against humanity done by these
monsters. Nor need there be any doubt of the basic truth of the
shocking stories told. When the “New York World’s” correspon-
dent in Belgius interviewed General von Boehn in regard to these
wickednesses that have disgraced the name of German, the general
emphatically denied that the German troops had committed atroci-
ties on Belgian non-combatants; but, when the correspondent
pointed out that he had himself witnessed many cases of such
barbarity as he referred to, the general could find nothing better
to say than that “he did everything possible to protect non-
combatants.” The one thing that he should have done to protect
his good name was to make an example of those guilty of such
horrors, but doubtless this he did not dare to do, because the
criminals w T ere officers of very high standing. It is not the
troops we need blame so much as the aristocratic ruffians who lead
them.
We are not going to suggest that the allies ought to descend
to the German level, and visit upon them barbarities equal to
their own; indeed, we shall think all the more of them if they
behave like civilised nations instead of like German barbarians.
But human nature is human nature, and if they retaliate there
will be no need to pay much attention if the German Government
squeals. If German non-combatants suffer for the wrongs done
by German combatants, and if these be imposed upon every German
town occupied by the allies, a levy proportionately twice as heavy
as the levies imposed upon Belgians towns, neutral powers such as
the United States will have no cause to interfere, because they had
nothing to say when the game of brutality and rapacity was in-
augurated:
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


THERE ARE GERMANS AND GERMANS.
Mining Standard, September 24, 1914.
Let us discriminate. There are at least four classes of Ger-
mans amongst us, and to deal or to wish to deal with all of them
in the one way is foolish in the extreme. In the first place, there
are Germans who are good, honest, loyal British subjects. These
men should be treated not only without animosity, but with sym-
pathy and kindness: they are unfortunate in their German birth,
since there must naturally be some suspicion clinging to them;
but, where they have proved their faithfulness, every consideration
should be shown them, for their position is exceedingly unpleasant,
and it is unreasonable to expect them absolutely to take delight
in the reverses of their own people. Many of them have been
naturalised for many years; and, so far from wishing to see them
boycotted, we should like to see them strongly supported, where
(and this is an important qualification) they are not dependent
upon their connections with Germany, though even then they
should be fairly and kindly treated.
There is a second class of Germans against who we need to
display no animosity, though we are not called upon, as with the
others, to exhibit them any particular kindness; that is the class
of Germans who still remain German at heart, and who want to
see Germany come out on top in the present war, but who have
the common sense not to make a parade of their feelings, and who,
despite their sympathies, take no action inconsistent with the oath
of allegiance they have seen fit to take on becoming naturalised.
It is no use quarrelling with these peaple because of their national
prejudices and preferences, but we certainly need not go out of
our way to help them.
There is, however, a third class of people, against whom
Australians may very well set their faces. These are folk who
are blatantly pro-German; and it is astonishing how comparatively
numerous such people are. No establishment should be tolerated
that has a German of that class at the head of it. The special
animosity shown by the German soldiers and people against our
own folk should be sufficient to prohibit it. Great Britain should
not be taken as our model for dealing with such gentry. It would
be better to follow the action of other countries—for example,
Japan (which recently suppressed two Tokio newspapers conducted
by Germans), and the still unconquered city of Antwerp (which
ordered all Germans to leave its territory). These blusterers we
are justified in looking upon as enemies, and we are entitled to
treat them as enemies; but we do not, at least, need to behave
towards them without mercy. There is, however, in our midst yet
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


a fourth class of German, with whom any leniency is absolutely
out of place. This is the traitor. He does not show his hand like
the man of the class just referred to; he either keeps quiet, or
professes a strong pro-British feeling. In nine cases out of ten
he has become naturalised since the outbreak of the war; and he
not only retains his connection with Germany, or has it merely in
abeyance, but will, if he can, act the part of a spy, conveying in-
formation to the German authorities. This man, if discovered,
should be treated without the very slightest leniency. Again, we
do not want to imitate the painful weakness that characterises
the British authorities in dealing with such individuals. Only
the other day news was received by cable of the sentencing to
six months’ imprisonment, with subsequent deportation, of a man
who was regarded by the police as a most dangerous spy, who was
at one time branch secretary of the National Sailors and Firemen’s
Union, who possessed a knowledge of the inner working of the
principal seaports and dockyards of Great Britain, and who was
arrested in the central lobby of the House of Commons. Had he
been an English spy in Germany, or a German spy caught in either
France or Belgium, he would have been executed, and deservedly
executed, after no very lengthy trial. Instead, he is to be sent, in
six months’ time, with his knowledge and his information, to Ger-
many. Quite recently we had the German Consul at Abo, in Fin-
land, summarily shot by the Russian authorities because he had
been found guilty of espionage. It is the severe methods adopted
elsewhere, and not the milk-and-water methods of the British
authorities, that we want to follow.
Those silly people who will say that such counsel is wicked
and bloodthirsty are hardly worth considering. The spy knows,
when he enters upon his nefarious business, that he is qualifying
his neck for the halter; and the man who, posing as a loyal sub-
ject of our King, enjoying our hospitality, and acting the part
of a friend, is all the time planning to effect treacherous coups to
destroy our waterworks, to blow up our railway communications,
to do this, or that, or the other piece of wanton wickedness while
concealing himself under the cloak of friendship, is deserving of
no more mercy than a mad dog. Nearly 2000 Germans have been
naturalised in Australia since Germany broke the peace of Western
Europe. It is not too much to surmise that the majority of these
are people who are strongly anti-British at heart, and who have
become naturalised for no other reason than to enable themselves
to carry on their business successfully, while their own nation and
ours are at w r ar, Jsy naturalising them we have given them the
privileges of British subjects—a privilege not merited by a very
large proportion of them. The one satisfaction we have is that,
now they are naturalised, action on behalf of Germany will make
them subject to treatment as traitors. The question then remains,
will we treat them as traitors should be treated, or by the puerile
methods adopted by Great Britain—methods which are, in fact,
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


only an incentive to further treachery? Signs are not wanting
that our new Labour Government will show Great Britain how
such people should be dealt with, if, that is to say, any be found
within the bounds of Australia.
There are Germans belonging to all the classes, and there are
a number of Australians and others not of German race who may
be specially mentioned here because they are agents for German
firms. Their business at present is in abeyance, but there are many
of them quite confident that, once the war is over, they will step
back again into their old relations with the Australian people.
These persons must be made to understand that it will not be so.
When we hear of the excessive vindictiveness shown by the German
nation towards the British, when we find German soldiers declaring
that no British prisoners should be taken, when we hear of British
prisoners in Germany being singled out for especial humiliation,
when we hear of the Kaiser urging his men to exterminate the
English, when we hear of all sorts of lies being put about by the
German authorities to persuade the world that Great Britain is
responsible for the present war, and when, above all, we note to
what an extent Germany has used her consuls and her traders as
spies and as agents provocateurs throughout the British Empire,
it behoves the Australian people to make up its mind that it will
do without German goods until the German nation has been abso-
lutely purged of its militarism and its ambition, its treachery and
its tyranny. That a firm like Krupp’s, for instance, which has
done so much to bring about the present war, which has created
the means of murdering so many of our best men, which has fos-
tered the military feeling which has been such a curse to Europe
for so many years, and which has done so much to help on the
feeling of hatred for the British Empire that has been so carefully
instilled into the German mind, should be able to retain its Aus-
tralian business after this war, is something not to be supposed,
unless we are prepared to sacrifice all self-respect for perhaps some
slight monetary advantage. To deal with such a firm would be
to help Germany to pay the indemnity which every loyal Briton
hopes will be imposed upon her, to make her pay for all the suffer-
ing and loss and wanton damage she has inflicted upon nations that
were not injuring her in any way when she saw fit to attack them.
Firms like this must learn that the Australian public does not
forget so easily as they had imagined.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


THE DUTY OF AUSTRALIANS.
Mining Standard, October 1, 1914.
Last week, under the title “There are Germans and Germans,”
we wrote urging discrimination in the treatment of the various
classes of Germans in our midst. Some were to be helped in every
possible way, some to be treated with consideration, some to be
treated, though mercifully, as enemies, and some to be treated
without mercy; and then, in the concluding paragraph, we pointed
out the duty of the Australian people. It is our purpose here to
devote a few lines to extension of this consideration. We urge
now, as we urged then, that it is the duty of Australians to cut
their connection with disloyal firms who have been helping to
make Germany the great force that she is at the present moment,
and have thereby been helping on the present terrible war.
Let it be explained that we (and the people of Great Britain
and of the other dominions of the Empire also) need to act in
this way because, as Dr. Freund has just remarked in the “Yos-
sische Zeitung,” “After the war no German patriot will buy British
products, and England will suffer by the boycott,” Yery good;
but, if we are to suffer a tremendous loss by this action on the part
of Germany, we must retaliate. To deal with Germany for our
products when she will not deal with us- for ours would be stupid
in the extreme. As Dr. Freund has so obligingly made known
the German intention, let us act up to it, and prepare now by
making ready, wherever possible, to obtain our goods preferably
from within the Empire, and, if that be not possible, from our
friends and allies, but certainly not from the countries with which
we are now at war, and in any circumstance whatever not from
Germany, the country which has entailed so much suffering upon
the world. It is the duty of our business firms to find non-German
firms to take the place of the German firms for which they have
hitherto acted, and to determine, when the war is over, not to
resume their old relations. It is the duty of our heads of families
to see that they will not purchase German goods when this war
has been brought to a conclusion, whatever that conclusion may be.
We advocate this, not merely as a matter of vengeance (in fact,
scarcely at all on that score), but as a matter of bringing home to
the German the fact that he cannot, as he thought he could, play
fast and loose with us, picking up our business whenever he‘might
choose, and imperilling it by no conduct, however outrageous.
How thoroughly the Germans prepared for this war has been
shown in many ways, and it is also becoming increasingly clear
to what an extent their business men, trading or having agencies
in Australia, were aware that this war was coming. The coal
which has enabled the Em den to prey on British commerce was,
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


there is reason to believe, obtained in Brisbane and Newcastle
months ago, and sent away to an unknown destination, whence it
could be used for the purpose of enabling the Emden to sink
British ships. It may not be without significance, too, that all of
the bydney ironmongers were cleaned out of small arms a little
while before the outbreak of war. It is, perhaps, still more signi-
ficant, as showing how thoroughly ostensibly peaceable firms knew
what was coming, that many German accounts with Australia
were, for the first time, allowed to fall into arrears towards the
close of the first half of this year. Can we then trust a people
such as this ? Indeed, do we not know them to be a contract-
breaking people, whose signature to “a scrap of paper” is of no
sanctity whatever? If we cannot trust them, have we any justifi-
cation for continuing to deal with them? No, it is our duty, both
on moral grounds and on grounds of policy, to have nothing what-
ever to do with a race so treacherous. Let it be added further,
that, now we are thoroughly acquainted—but no, that is too much
to say: let it altered to, “now we are to some slight extent
acquainted” with the dubious and underhand methods employed
by German firms for the furtherance of business in Australia and
elsewhere we will say deliberately and unhesitatingly that any
municipality, any Government, any public concern whatever, ac-
cepting a contract from any firm representing German interests,
will lay itself open to a very grave suspicion of having had its
honour tampered with. It is notorious that some of the German
firms trading in Australia»set aside sums of money for use by their
agents for purposes of bribery. Let it be made quite clear, then,
that anybody, when this war is over, accepting the contracts of such
firms, will be open to the suspicion of having been induced in this
way to consent to the placing of a contract with a nation which
has shown itself to be the deadly enemy of the Empire to which
we belong.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


GOTHS AND VANDALS.
Mining Standard, October 15, 1914.
It is very common to see the German barbarians who have
been so successful in proving that they have not advanced beyond
their savage ideals of 1500 years ago, spoken of as Goths and
Vandals. This is doing an injustice to both the Goths and the
Vandals. The fact is that neither of these great Teutonic peoples,
who may or may not have been ancestors of portion of the German
people, but who at least were a kindred race, as the British are
kindred, was as bad as it was made out to be by Catholic historians.
The Goths came into history as heathens, they continued as Arians
—that is to say, as heretics —and therefore the Catholic historians
of the time found it utterly impossible to say anything too bad
concerning them; but there is plenty of reason to believe that
their stories of the wanton destruction and devastation wrought by
both Goths and Vandals were sheer lies, told for the greater glory
of the church, and for the defaming of heretics. The Goths were,
in fact, one of the finest, and, on the whole, one of the most humane
of the races of their time; and the Vandals, if cruel, do not seem
to have indulged in that wicked destruction of works of art for
which their name has become a byword. These things have been
reserved for a Germanic people living 1500 years later. It is not
with the Goths and the Vandals that the subjects of the Kaiser
should be compared, but with the Huns —those devastating savages
whom His Imperial Majesty held up as a model to the troops he
sent to China.
It may be remembered that at first the “Mining Standard,’
while accepting the frightful statements made concerning German
brutality, questioned the deliberate “Vandalism” (should we not
henceforth say “Germanism”!) with which the troops were
charged; but the evidence since to hand seems to be conclusive
that their destruction of noble monuments of antiquity has been
deliberate. They have confessed, for instance, to the deliberate
shelling of Rheims Cathedral, the excuse made being that they
suspected that the tower was being used as a point of observation.
If that was so, the leader of any civilised army would have in-
formed the enemy that if this was persisted in it wmuld lead to
tlse shelling of the cathedral. Had this been done, there would
have at once been received an assurance from the French com-
mander that this was not being done, and would not be done, and
there would have been no necessity to inflict irreparable damage
upon one of the noblest specimens of mediaeval architecture. More
recently still we have the dropping of a bomb on the famous Paris
cathedral of Kotre Dame. This must have been deliberate, and
is to be regarded only as a piece of sheer wickedness. For men
THE -BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


who act thus to talk of their culture and their civilisation is
amusing; the civilisation to which they would reduce the world
is that in which the world wallowed when the church was all-
powerful, and those who ventured to oppose it were slaughtered
on a wholesale scale. So have instructions gone out that those
who are guilty of the sacreligious wickedness of opposing the Holy
Kaiser are to be ruthlessly wiped out. Are not the German troops
to “address all their skill and valour to exterminate the treacherous
English”!
The fact is that the whole of the barbaric conduct of the
German troops is the outcome not of hot-blooded ferocity, but of
cold-blooded calculation; it is deliberate; it is systematic. The
lines of it were laid down by Bismarck when he said, “You must
inflict on the inhabitants of invaded towns the maximum of suffer-
ing, so that they may become sick of the struggle, and may bring
pressure to bear on their Government to discontinue it. You must
leave the people through whom you march only their eyes to weep
with.” This w r as said not by a brutal Roman bent on the destruc-
tion of a rival civilisation, not by a ruthless Hun, with no under-
standing of culture, not by a fierce mediaeval Christian religionist
who was not content that his religion should bring a sword, but
wished it to bring the stake and the rack as well, but by a nine-
teenth century Prussian statesman, who remains, with Frederick
the Great, the main ideal of the Prussian nation. From a people
with such an ideal there is nothing but brutality to be expected—
and, moreover, brutality of the very worst order—the brutality of
cold, politic calculation.
Australia is sending troops to take part in the operations
against these barbarous wretches. Are we taking the necessary
precautions to see that no one is included who will be likely to
descend to the German level? It must not be forgotten that in the
Boer War all the early contingents reflected credit on this country,
but that, unfortunately, in Victoria at any rate, the high standard
at first demanded was, later on, relaxed, with the result that one
of the contingents from that State earned for the men of the Com-
monwealth a reputation' that has ever since constituted a stum-
bling-block in the way of Australians in South Africa, where even
to-day it is no unusual thing to see advertisements ending with
the words, “Ho Australians need apply.” It is to be hoped that
no risk will be run in this war of sending men who will bring dis-
grace upon their country, and who will enable the Kaiser’s bar-
barians to fling back at us a “tu quoque” which, while affording
them no real excuse, will have the effect of reducing us to silence.
It would be better for us to send 20,000 men who know how to
behave like gentlemen than 100,000 who would reduce the Aus-
tralian name to the level to which the Kaiser and his infamous
abettors have reduced the once honoured name of German. It is
to be hoped that this is a matter which has not escaped the atten-
tion of the military authorities.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


WANTED, UNDERSTANDING.
Mining Standard, October 22, 1914.
Despite the soothing policy followed by the press, the British
public seems to be awakening to the seriousness of the position in
Europe. Despite all the assurances given that the fall of Antwerp
was of no consequence, the public has begun to realise that matters
are more serious than they had supposed, and the Government, too,
has arrived at the conclusion, or seems to have arrived at the con-
clusion, that the trouble is really worth taking seriously. When
we find that Germans living in Belgium, and enjoying all the
privileges of Belgian citizenship, made use of their residence there
to prepare for a German invasion by installing cement foundations
for the big German guns, and when, moreover, we find that similar
concrete foundations have been established by German firms in
positions that would command London and the great naval base
of Rosyth, it is obvious, or should be obvious to any but fools, that
people of that sort are not to be lightly dealt with. The question
arises, how is this danger going to be met? Hitherto it has been
met in the most trumpery and inadequate fashion. Six months’
imprisonment and deportation have been the punishments awarded
to notorious spies and traitors; or perhaps they have not been
punished at all, but merely subjected to surveillance. This may
be in accordance with the weakly merciful instincts of the British
Government, or it may be due to a pusillanimous fear of those
silly, half-traitorous sentimentalists who are the curse of the
British Empire. But, whatever may be the reason, this leniency
will have to cease if the Empire is to be preserved. Treacherous
Germans in Great Britain and the Dominions will have to be
treated as English spies would be treated if captured in Germany.
In other words, they will have to be given the very shortest shrift.
When we find so notable a person as Professor Arthur Schuster,
Seci-etary of the Royal Society, violating the law by the possession
■of a secret wireless installation, it is obvious that every German
who has not absolutely proved his bona tides is to be regarded with
suspicion. A man like Professor Schuster cannot put forward the
excuse that he did not know he was violating the law. If he did
not know, he should have known, and unless some thoroughly ac-
ceptable excuse for his action be forthcoming, he should be sum-
marily executed as a traitor to the country he lives in, and pro-
fesses to be loyal to. The greatness of his position should not
eause him to be treated exceptionally.
All this has a distinct application here. What are we doing?
Private wireless plants are known to have been in existence in
Australia, Were all these reported to the authorities? If not,
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


have those that have not been reported been seized? If they have
been seized, what has been done with the traitors who were using
them? We maintain that there is only one proper course to take
with regard to such persons—they should be tried by court-martial,
and, if convicted, summarily shot. We are sending troops away
to fight the battles of the Empire in Europe, but we do not want to
leave ourselves at the mercy of spies and traitors within our own
gates. There is not a German here, or in any other part of the
Empire, who does not know that, if he is in possession of a wireless
apparatus, he is breaking the law; and, that being so, he should be
made to feel that in so breaking the law, he is not taking the mere
risk of a fine of £2O, such as was inflicted upon a German traitor
in Hew Zealand, but of suffering the death penalty. If he realised
that, he would probably think twice before violating a law which
he probably does not think once about violating now.
When war was declared, and even before it was declared,
when practically every German knew it was coming, there was a
great rush on the part of German and Austrian residents of the
Commonwealth to be naturalised. Very foolishly, no difficulty was
put in their way, with the result that many of these men became
naturalised with the sole object of making use of their naturalisa-
tion against the Empire. Some utilised it by thus obtaining free-
dom to leave the Commonwealth, with the object of getting away
to Germany; others, and they are by far the worse, have remained
here, to see what they can do to help on their cause by treachery
to their adopted country. What is being done with these people?
To allow them the freedom that they have hitherto been allowed
is suicidal. They should be treated, every one of them, as poten-
tial enemies. In some cases, perhaps, injustice would be done, but
that is inevitable in war time, and it is better that injustice should
be done to a few than that the very existence of the State should
be jeopardised by undue leniency to those whose intention it is to
betray it. These people, unless they can give the best possible
proofs of their bona fides, should either be put under lock and key,
or expelled the country. But there are also many long naturalised
Germans who are no less to be suspected. Where the Govern-
ment sees any solid reason for suspicion of their good faith, such
people should be laid by the heels. There are numbers of these
ostensible Britishers who never have a good word to say of the
British Empire, and are blatantly, aggressively, and offensively
pro-German. These men should be put where they can do no
harm.
Why should not a commencement be made with the German
clubs ? These clubs were, during the Boer war, hotbeds of sedition.
It is not too much to suppose that they are at the present
time equally hotbeds of disloyalty to the Empire which protects
them. Why not, then, let the Empire cease to protect them? By
such action we should only be following (in less brutal fashion)
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


the action already taken in Germany towards English clubs.
The Germans could not, therefore, find any great fault with us
for following the example of the Fatherland. We could not,
indeed, do better than follow it in this respect; but God grant
that the nation may never follow the example it has set in the
treatment of women and children and other harmless non-com-
batants ! We want to follow Germany only in its strength of
purpose, not in the savagery with which it wields that strength.
We have headed this leader “Wanted, Understanding,” be-
cause we hold that the main requirement of the position is an
appreciation of the fact that, now w r e are in for this war, we have
to battle to the utmost of our ability. We cannot afford to go
into the ring with one hand tied behind our backs by humani-
tarianism and sentimentalism. It is, as we have remarked more
than once, characteristic of the British people to take situations
lightly until they find that they have got almost beyond control.
That is a serious flaw in the national character, for it is only
fools who act in that way. Australia seems at length to be
realising the position, and a Bill has been introduced in the
House of Representatives by the Attorney-General providing
against spying and the giving of information to the enemy. It
makes treason punishable by death; but the question is, will the
death sentence in such cases be recorded and carried out? The
disclosure of official secrets by Commonwealth officers is punish-
able by two years’ imprisonment; the approaching of prohibited
places, or tlxe making of sketches which might be useful
to the enemy, by seven years’ imprisonment; the possessing
of sketches, documents, or information relative to pro-
hibited places, by imprisonment for two years. These are
quite good and sound provisions for peace times; but they do
not constitute war legislation. If a spy be found in possession
of information, he should be shot,, and not merely rendered
liable to two years’ imprisonment. These are times not only of
w T ar, but of life and death for the Empire; and it is time that
she ceased to wage war with boxing gloves, and resorted to bare
fists.
There is yet another way in which we as a nation “want
understanding.” We have yet to grasp to its full extent the damn-
able treachery of the German authorities! While the Kaiser was
telling us that he loved the British people almost as much as his
own, and while he posed as the man who had preserved peace in
Europe for a quarter of a century, this treacherous scoundrel was
making his preparations for wanton attacks upon Great Britain
and France and Belgium, and doing it through the medium of
men resident in the countries they were destined to betray. It
is very hard for the peace-loving Briton to comprehend all this
treacherous preparation on the part of Germany. The recent
revelations have made our sentimental pacifists look even bigger
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


fools than they looked before, although that seemed scarcely
possible. But what is now wanted is that the nation should ab-
solutely grasp what Germany did, and what it meant to do; and,
once that is understood, it will be realised that no action can be
too severe to prevent the carrying-out of the machinations of
these infamous people. The British Empire will not be blame-
worthy if it regard every German with suspicion.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


THE REASONS WHY.
Mining Standard, October 29, 1914.
It having become obvious that the general public has now
come round to the view maintained by this paper since the out-
break of the war, that it is suicidal to ignore, as the British people
has done, the danger arising from the presence of German spies
and traitors, it is advisable to state plainly and definitely the
reasons for such strong measures as are now being advocated in
so many quarters and are being met so lukewarmly by certain
persons in authority. Mr. Norman Bayles, for instance, the
Victorian M.L.A., raised certain questions which were met by
Mr, Murray, Chief Secretary of the State, in his best “laissez
faire” manner. But the public is becoming increasingly im-
patient of the shillyshallying in these matters that is charac-
terising too many of our Governments, and, although we de-
iprecate unnecessary alarm and anything in the nature of spy-
mania, we feel strongly that the easy-going methods obtaining
are not unattended with danger of the very gravest disaster, and
for that reason we intend to put clearly and simply the reasons
why the perhaps too excited public is much more likely to be in
the right than are Ministers only too ready to find an excuse for
doing nothing.
When two nations are at war, it should surely be an axiom
that a Government must not employ persons who by birth and
training belong to the enemy, unless their loyalty has been proved
absolutely and incontrovertibly. It is not only that there is a
chance of some of these people being spies in the pay of their
native country, but there is the extreme likelihood that, though
not in the pay of the enemy, and though they would not
think in ordinary circumstances of abusing the trust re-
posed in them, yet, when a situation arose in which it might
be possible for them to deal a stalwart blow for their native
land against the country employing them, they might be unable
to resist the temptation. There are people of German nationality
occupying such positions here. These people should be absolutely
deprived of the chance of their yielding to sudden temptation of
the sort which we have outlined. There are men of German race
and German birth in positions of great trust in this country,
both public and private; positions in which they can control the
safety of great national undertakings, in which they can influence
for good or for evil public opinion, in which they are able to
have within their hands every day dozens of lives. Is it right
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


that they should be left in such positions, subject to such tempta-
tation? Even if in 99 cases out of 100 those men would
do nothing to violate the trust reposed in them, it is still well to
deprive them of the opportunity, if only for the sake of the
hundredth. War is a game which is to be played seriously, and
that side is greatly weakened which has reason to fear that some
of its members may be “playing stiff.” And so we have no hesi-
tation in saying that there should be at the present time no place
for Germans in positions of responsibility whether under Govern-
ment or in private employ, and that the loyalty of the private in-
dividual employing such may be regarded as open to suspicion,
and that the Government so acting must be prepared to take the
entire responsibility if, as a result of its inaction, the country —
State or Commonwealth—suffer in consequence loss redemiablo.
only at a terribly heavy cost. The position occupied to-day by
the Commonwealth Prime Minister and by the Governments of
the States of New South Wales and Victoria is the very weak
one that was previously held by the British Government, and
which that Government has now been obliged to abandon. When
even so milk and watery a ministry as the Asquith one has found
it necessary to order the arrest of all Germans and Austro-
Hungarians between the ages of 17 and 45, it should afford a
hint to our ministries that they arc not doing their duty if they
do not do likewise. Raids, it is true, are being made upon certain
German houses in search of compromising matter, but such matter
is hardly likely to be found at this late day, and what is wanted
is action much more stringent and much more effective than
this.
One reason, then, is the mere fact that we are at war.
Another is the more precise one that Germany has paid special
attention to the organisation of secret services in foreign countries
—a point on which we may perhaps dilate in a later issue. Yet
another is that it is discourteous not to follow the example of
the enemy. Germany has done its utmost to prevent the risk of any
spying on the part of British subjects unfortunate enough to be
within its bounds. It at least pays us the compliment of taking
us seriously. Again, though we do not wish to urge it as a
reason, there is to be taken into consideration the bitter, virulent
hatred of the British Empire entertained by the German people.
It is not a hatred natural to them, but one which has been care-
fully instilled into them by their historians, by their teachers,
by their statesmen, and by their Kaiser; and they have learnt
their lesson so thoroughly that they hate Great Britain almost
more than they love themselves, and would do so quite if it were
not an absolute impossibility. We do not wish to urge vengeance
against a people that hates us, but we do urge most emphatically
that this hatred makes it entirely necessary that we should employ
no half methods. If the German people were a people with whom
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


we were having a mere temporary disagreement, a sort of quarrel
between brothers, a tiff between friends, we would not need,
perhaps, to take particularly strong action; but when our foes
are men whose keenest desire in life, next to their own advance-
ment, is absolutely to destroy our empire, it is the very depth of
insane weakness to refrain from any action’against them, because,
forsooth, some innocent might suffer with the guilty.
One more reason is that Germans of fighting age—that is to
say, from early maturity to the age of 45 years—cannot be
naturalised effectively, since the German law does not recognise
oaths of allegiance taken by such people to the British crown;
and, moreover, even the British-born sons of such men are
Germans, according to the German law, and liable to military
service against the enemies of Germany. And, lastly, and most
important of all, there is the consideration that every German
commercial house doing business in any part of the Empire is to
be regarded as in all probability a confederate of the German
Emperor in his treachery and wickedness. It is an undeniable
fact that long before war was declared, long before our poor
fool pacifists had any conception that they were being made
ridiculous, every German firm of standing was busy getting itself
on the right side of the ledger with every foreign (and especially
every British) firm, so that the bills owing to their British
customers amount to many millions sterling. This shows their
essential dishonesty—that they are a people with whom it behoves
one to do no business unless one has absolute cash in hand for it.
But it means far more than this—it means that all those firms
and all the banks which 'were backing them knew what was
coming. And. quite apart from this, we have seen how supposedly
private German firms have prepared in Belgium and in France
and in Great Britain to deal deadly and dastardly strokes at the
country which protected them. That is a matter which will be
best dealt with when we are considering Germany’s spy organisa-
tion. But, meantime, it may be advisable to set out briefly the
reasons we have adduced why no man of German birth in our
midst should be allowed to occupy any position of responsibility,
why every German liable to military service on behalf of Ger-
many should be taken the greatest care of, and why no business
direct or indirect should be done with any firm that is liable to
the suspicion of being in any way connected with the German
Government:—
(1) A state of war exists between the British Empire and
Germany.
(2) The fight is one of life and death for the British
Empire, inasmuch as the German people hates it and is bent on
its destruction.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


(3) There is no necessity for the British to treat the
Germans with great consideration when Germany is showing
Britons none at all.
(4) The German Government has made a practice of estab-
lishing a system of espionage and treachery in every one of the
countries with which she is now at war, and has used for this
purpose many ostensibly private individuals and private firms.
(5) Germany does not recognise the oath of allegiance taken
by any German subject on his naturalisation, or even recognise
as a British subject the son of any such German.
(6) Almost all the large German firms dealing with foreign
countries have been in the confidence of the German Government
to at least this extent, that they knew war was coming, and pre-
pared for it by acting in the most dishonest manner towards their
British customers.
If these be not sufficient reasons, in Heaven’s name what do
our Governments require?
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


MILITARY WAR MAP.
Several maps of the “Seat of War” have already been offered
to the public, excellent in their way, but so lacking in detail,
showing so few place-names, and indicating so little of the con-
tour of the country that, excepting when comparatively large
towns and the principal cities are concerned, they are practically
useless as a guide to the ever-changing areas in which fighting is
actually going on. On the best of them the newspaper reader who
wishes to follow the movements of the opposing armies intelli-
gently, has looked in vain so often for the various places mentioned
in the cabled news that he is now agreeably surprised if he suc-
ceeds in identifying one place out of three or four, and interest
in the news is proportionately diminished. The reason, of course,
is that very frequently the places mentioned are really very small,
and commonly uninteresting. Before 1815 Waterloo was such a
village, and it is now indicated on maps because of its historical
rather than its commercial importance. If fighting were unhappily
taking place in New South Wales, and the fighting line extended
from Tumut to Queanbeyan, strangers to Australia could easily
find the positions of those places on almost any fairly good map;
but they would be at a loss if they tried to identify a battle
front extending from, say, Little Billabong to Brungle, and the
map which showed these small places would be the one to win the
market. It is clearly impossible to indicate every place-name over
a very large area on a conveniently handy map. But the Mining
Standard has succeeded in making arrangements with the Com-
monwealth Defence Department, under which they have published
a military map, issued with the imprint of the British Ordnance
Survey Office, 'Southampton, which gives far more information
than any other map yet published. It shows over 116,000 square
miles of country, comprising the north-east of France, the whole
of Belgium, the southern portion of Holland, and portions of
western Germany and north-western 'Switzerland. From below
Bourges, in France, and Beme, in Switzerland, to The Hague
and Utrecht, in Holland, well away to the north of Essen and
Wesel, as far as Munster, in Westphalia; and from Boulogne and
Orleans in the west, to beyond Frankfort and Darmstadt in the
east, many thousands of places are authentically indicated. Lines
of railway are clearly marked, a good deal is shown of the physical
characteristics of the .country, and in addition to the present
Franco-German frontier, the frontier prior to 1871 is also marked.
The map measures 26% inches by 23% inches, and is sold for
Is. by all booksellers and newsagents.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


Extract from “Sydney Morning Herald” October 22, 1914.
POST BELLUM POLICY FOR AUSTRALIANS.
To the Editor.
Sir, —The “Yossichc Zcitung” tells us that Dr. Freund re-
marked “that after the war no German patriot will buy British
products, and England will sulfer by the boycott.” This is one
of the few straightforward statements we have been favoured with,
and certainly it should be placed immediately to the credit of
Germany. We all know now how the Germans made ready for
this war, and we are only just beginning to find out to what
extent Australia was used by such of them as were detailed off
to operate in this part of the world. With the full knowledge
that the Emden, Schamhorst, and Gneisenau were later to prey
upon British shipping, arrangements for supply of coal from
Newcastle were undoubtedly made before the war broke out. How
significant it is that the peace-loving Germans had got the tip
beforehand, and allowed their accounts with Australia to fall into
arrears. Your numerous correspondents on the question of 'German
trade with this country, I think, are too prone to discuss the
question of goods already here. I contend this is.not the point.
We want to make preparation for excluding German goods after
the war. This can only be done through an effective tariff, and
I have no doubt that the Commonwealth Government will see that
this is done. It is no use discussing it after hostilities cease.
After studying the shady methods employed by Germans “in
peace” or at war, we should insist that any municipality, any
Government, or any public concern whatever, accepting a contract
from any German firm (or from any English or Australian firm
representing German interests directly or indirectly), should be
made the subject of a public inquiry. It is.within common know-
ledge that some of the German firms trading in this country
provide money for use by their agents for purposes of bribery—
with this knowledge hanging over them, what public concern will
lay itself open to the suspicion of having bad its honour tampered
with?
I am, etc.,
CRITCHLEY PARKER.
THE BARBARIAN AND BIS METHODS.


WHO LIFTED THE LID OFF HELL?
By Elbert Hubbard.
If any one asks, Who lifted the lid off Hell? let the truth-
ful answer be; William Hohenzollern.
He has a shrunken soul, and a mind that reeks with
egomania.
He is a mastoid degenerate of a noble grandmother.
in degree he has her power, but not her love. He has her
persistence, but not her prescience.
He is swollen, like a drowned pup, with a pride that stinks.
He never wrote a letter nor a message wherein he did not
speak of God as if the Creator was waiting to see him in the lobby.
“God is with us” —“God is destroying our enemies”—“l am pray-
ing our God to be with you”—“God is giving us victories”—“l
am accountable only to my conscience and to God.”
This belief that the Maker of the Universe takes a special
interest in him marks the man as a megalomaniac; and the idea
that the nations were “laying for him” is the true symptom of
paranoia.
His talk of a Slav invasion is stall-stuff, subtle and sly, to
divert attention from his own crafty designs.
His interest in farming was a pose —his encouragement of
business a subterfuge.
Every farmer between fourteen and sixty years of age has
been drafted into the ranks to be food for vultures.
Every farm horse that could carry a man or draw a load has
been seized.
All beef-cattle have been appropriated.
Every penny in every savings-bank in Germany has been
levied upon, and a “receipt” given to the starving holder. This
loss of a lifetime’s savings means death to multitudes of old people,
to widows, children, invalids and cripples.
The money a man might have left to care for his widow,
orphans, aged parents, is swept away in the maelstrom of blood.
Old-age pensions, sick benefits, and life-insurance are only
dreams.
We are told that the Kaiser kept the peace for forty-three
years. True, just waiting for this stroke at world dominion.
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


Every male child born in that forty-three years, who can
now carry a gun, is taken from useful work, and made to do the
obscene bidding of this sad, mad, bad, bloody monster.
In Germany no private individual can operate an automobile.
All the oil and “petrol” has been seized to incinerate the dead.
Ho slab marks their resting place—no records of the slain are-
kept.
In Germany to-day, no bands play in the public parks; all
savings-banks are closed; commercial-banks pay or not, as the
War Minister orders; all insurance-companies—both life and fire
—are bankrupt; colleges are turned into hospitals—all students
are at the front; factories are closed; laboratories are memories.
All the progress of the last forty-three years lies a jumbled,
tumbled mass of fears and tears in the dust and dirt of the-
gladiatorial arena. All the wealth gained in that forty-three
years is already lost, dissolved in a mulch of festering human
flesh.
Caligula, that royal pagan pervert, was kind compared with
the Kaiser.
Hero, the fiddling fiend, with his carelessness in use of fire,
never burned property in all his pestilential career worth one-half
that destroyed when the Kaiser’s troops applied the torch to-
storied Louvain.
What has been done before may be done again. The “Thirty
Years’ War” reduced Germany to cannibalism. The old and the
crippled were knocked on the head and eaten.
The nunneries were turned into communes. Huns, widows,
girls, were seized and distributed like cattle. Every soldier was
ordered to take two wives, because the country must be re-popu-
lated.
Women and children toiled in the fields like beasts of burden
to raise crops to feed the people. Eamily-names were lost, de-
stroyed, forgotten.
A new order prevailed.
To commemorate the dead was a crime.
Why do the German people stand by the War-Lord?
The answer is easy. It is a matter of the hypnotic spell of
patriotism and the lure of the crowd, combined with coercion.
We make a virtue of the thing we are compelled to do.
The marvellous recuperative power of the Teutonic people is
proved by the fact that the German race was not wiped out of
existence long ago, like the Incas or the Aztecs. The will to live
was strong, and a new race was ours.
Are we to go back to that black night of bloody medievalism?
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.


Surely not! Our hearts are with Germany—the Germany of
invention, science, music, education, skill—but not with the War-
Lord. The Emperor does not represent the true Germany. He
•symbols the lust of power, the thirst for blood.
The crazy Kaiser will not win. The wisdom of the world
backs the Allies, and Saint Helena awaits. It must be so.
Germany will not be subjugated, but she will be relieved of a
succubus that has threatened her very existence.
Disarmament must come.
This awful chain of wars will make a World Federation a
necessity. It need not longer be argued for. Hot a sane man or
woman on earth but knows World Federation and disarmament
mean the safety of the race.
Canada and the United States have kept the peace lor a
hundred years by “an arrangement” whereby it was provided that
each government should have on the Lakes two boats each with a
crew not to exceed twenty-six men.
The “arrangement” has worked.
One army and one navy, serving as police, can keep the peace.
Beyond this, “preparedness” spells hell in italics.
Let us thank William the Second for exploding for us, among
other bombs, the bromidial fallacy that vast armaments insure
peace.
When things get bad enough they tend to cure themselves.
The Law of Compensation is at work. At the close of this
war, which famine will dictate shall be brief, there will be for sale
a fine job-lot of secondhand crowns.
And the forces of industry, economy, science and love shall
rule the world.
—Elbert Hubbard in “The Philistine.”
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS.
