

THE AMERICAN WAR:
Its Origin, Cause, and Probable Results.
CONSIDERED SPECIALLY WITH REOARD TO
SLAVERY.
%
AN ESSAY
BY THOMAS HALLIWELL
Utitb Blaster of the Central glistrid Stlrool, graicbht.
READ AT THE ATHEMIUM, MAY 11, 1863.
DUNEDIN:
FEINTED AND PUBLISHED BY JOSEPH MACKAY,
BOOKSELLER, STATIONER. BOOKBINDER, AND ENGRAVER,
PRINCES STREET.
1863.




THE AMERICAN WAR:
Its Origin, Cause, and Probable Results.
CONSIDERED SPECIALLY WITH KEOAKD TO
SLAVERY.
AN ESSAY
BY THOMAS HALLIWELL
Stub Hinder of the (Tmtal jpisrfrirt Srbowl, gmubin.
READ AT THE ATHEMHM, MAY 11, 1863,
DUNEDIN:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY JOSEPH MAC KAY,
BOOKSELLER, STATIONER, BOOKBINDER AND ENGRAVER
PRINCES STREET.
1863.


THE AMERICAN WAR:
Its Origin, Cause, and Probable Results.
CONSIDERED SPECIALLY WITH REGARD TO SLAVERY.
AN ESSAY
BY THOMAS HALLIWELL
Htß& Ip aster of tjre Cental Jlistrict School, Jlnmtrin.
READ AT THE ATHENAEUM, MAY 11, 1863.
*' They are slaves who do not choose
Scorn and hatred and abuse,
Bather than in silence shrink
From the truth they need must think;
They are slaves who will not be
In the right with two or three-”
DUNEDIN:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY JOSEPH MACKAT,
BOOKSELLER, STATIONER. BOOKBINDER, AND ENGRAVER,
PKINCEB-BTHBKT.
1863.


PREFACE.
The reproach of the silence of Britain in reference to the policies
of North and South America in their present terrible struggle is
how rolled away, and Britain can no longer be accused of even
passive assent to those claims upon her sympathy that were an
insult to her nature and to her history. The Mr. Yancy, who
claimed, for the South trade in negroes as free as trade in nutmegs,
and the Mr. Mason, who introduced the Fugitive Slave Law, are
the men who have resorted to every unrighteous means to bespeak
the good-will of Britain; and stupendous as was the indignity, it
was calmly endured, and the experiment was 'thought to have
succeeded. For nearly two years the Southerners and their friends
have boasted almost without contradiction, that Britain was on
their side, and;the effrontery of the lie seemed to give it immunity
from effectual exposure. At length the shameful supposition is
dispelled, by denials the more loud and indignant, even to
anger, that they had been so long withheld. There are now no
public buildings in Britain large enough to contain the throng-
ing thousands eager to declare that their sympathies are, always
were, and ever must be, with the free and freedom-giving Union,
against the double traitors, who have made a bloody rebellion,
solely for the power of maintaining and extending an infernal
tyranny. Such demonstrations of popular feeling are without
parallel. Exeter Hall,has been the scene of many remarkable ex-
pressions of excited feeling, but never of one so extraordinary as
the one now against the slave policy of the Confederates, which
still declares the perpetuation of the infamous slave system to he
the corner-stone of their national existence. The object of this
Essay is to lead to the inquiry, whether the Confederates, who
represent ignorance, indolence, and slavery,-—or the Federalists
who represent knowledge, industry, and liberty, deserve the sym-
pathy of the world ?


ESSAY.
My object in this Essay will he to prove;—
Ist. That the war originated with the South, and that Slavery
was ehe sole cause. 1
2nd. That the triumph of the South would result in the per-
petuation and spread of slavery, anl on this account does not
deserve our sympathy or support.
3rd. That the triumph of the North will be most likely to
promote the best interests of the world.
In reference to slavery, which I maintain has been the cause of
the present war, you are aware that there have always been two •
classes in the society of America, one in favour of slavery, and
another against it, and that the latter was in the minority till the
election took place, that made Lincoln President, and it will be
well to remember, that those against slavery, peacefully sub-
mitted to the rule of the majority, being no doubt convinced
that their principles would ultimately prevail, and here is the.
key to the cause of the war. Immediately the slave-owners dis-
covered that the anti slavery cause had become so strong in the
North, as to make Lincoln President, they created hostilities and
demanded separation, and hence the war originated.- The North,
of course, resented this demand, and was it not right so to do ?
Would England resist the taking by force of any of her depen-
dencies? or, as the Rev. Baptist Noel asked at a public, meeting,
Would England resist the taking by Spain of the Rock of Gib-
raltar, the ceding of which would he such a commercial advantage
to that country ? President Lincoln was, I conceive, only
keeping the oath which he had taken, and it is to me clear, that
the object of the Southerners, when they began the war, was to
maintain the bondage undiminished of millions of human beings,
and to perpetuate that bondage for ever. John Bright de-
fines the origin of the war in the following words;—“ A hand-
ful of whites determined to lord it over millions of blacks—made
black by the band that made us white—to tread upon, to buy, to
break the hearts of negroes, and to close their eyes to that light
which separates the man from the brute, and to make chattels of
men and wo,men.”
That this war originated with the South, and was entered upon
with a view to the perpetuation of slavery. I select the following
announcement of Mr. Stephens, the Vice-President of the Con-
federate States :—“The new constitution,” he says, “has put at
rest for ever all the agitating questions relating to one particular,


institution—viz., African slavery as it exists among ns—the proper
status of the Negro in onr form of civilization. This was the
immediate cause of the late rupture and present revolution. The
prevailing ideas entertained by Jefferson and most of the leading
statesmen at the time of the formation of the old constitution,
were that the enslavement of the African race was in violation of
the laws of nature; that it was wrong in principle, socially,
morally, and politically. Our new government is founded upon
exactly the opposite ideas. Its foundations are laid, the corner-
stone rests upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the
white man: that slavery, subordination to the superior race is his
natural and moral condition—the stone which was rejected by the
first builders is become the chief stone of the corner in our new
edifice.” Now, if the maintenance of slavery was the main cause
of the war according to the admission of the South itselfj what
hag been the action of the United States Government since the
commencement of hostilities, in respect to the accursed system?
Mr. Lincoln was elected to the presidential chair to maintain
the policy of the non-extension of slavery into the vast territories
belonging to the American Union, and not yet divided off into
separate states ; since he came into office in March, 1861, slavery
has been abolished in the district of Columbia, compensation has
been offered to the border States for the emancipation of their
slaves, more than 200,000 slaves have in various ways gained their
freedom; slavery by an Act of the Legislature has been for ever
excluded from the territories, a district, nearly as large as Europe.
The Government of Washington have entered into treaty with
Great Britain for the more effectual suppression of the African
slave trade; and it has carried out for the first time the law of the
United states which punishes as piracy the importation of slaves.
It has formally recognised the negro republics of Hayti and
Liberia. The President, as possessed of supreme military
authority has issued a proclamation declaring that on January
Ist, 1863, all slaves in States then in rebellion against the Govern-
ment shall be absolutely .free; while notice was given that a
measure will be proposed to Congress at the next session, offering
compensation to loyal citizens for the emancipation of their
slaves. Whatever may be objected to this proclamation, whether
by friends or foes, there can be no doubt of the direction in which
it points. Who csuld have anticipated a very few years since
such advances in the cause of emancipation ? And who with the
slightest respect for his own credit will assert in the face of these
facts that slavery has nothing to do with the present war ? And
what man whose mind and heart are sound in abhorrence of
slavery so well named by John Wesley “ the sum of all villairfefr
can hesitate as to which side should have his sympathies in this
terrible conflict ?
But it is alleged that the Southern States were oppressed by
the Northern tariff, and that on that account hostilities were com-
menced. If so, why could not remedy be sought by legitimate
and peaceful means, in accordance with the American constitution?
But no, the Confederates did not even attempt any such course,
but ignored their solemn obligations, disregarded the contracts
they had made, and turned the property, arms, and the defence*


which they occupied, against the Government they had pledged
themselves to support, and had resorted to the most, treacherous
means in carrying out their despicable plot. It must be remem-
bered that the first protective tariff in the States was one which
enacted a duty or certain per centage on all imported cotton, and
was for the protection of the Southern producers themselves, and
that their produce has always been protected; and singular enough
this tariff was passed by a pro-slavery administration. It cannot
be contended that the North ever sought to interfere with the
interest of the South in this matter, for at the time of its enact-
ment the law was entirely in the hands of the Southern repre-
sentatives. The Southerners had always a sufficient voice in the
Legislature to prevent any tariff being imposed without their con-
sent. Is it not then evident that the Confederates forced the war
upon the Federalists, and on finding the anti-slavery cause so
strong, they took alarm, and were apprehensive of the danger of
their fond institution of slavery. Particularly so, since Mr.
Stevens, the Vice-President of the Confederate States, has had the
audacity to openly declare that slavery is the natural condition of
the negro, and as such slavery would be the corner-stone of their
new confederacy. The result will doubtless be, that the con-
spirators will be thwarted in their wickedness, and slavery soon
abolished.
But I will now proceed more fully to lay before yon such facts
as I have been enabled to compile relative to both North and
South America, and from which I will submit the reasons adduced
against the separation of the States :
Ist. The South—Professor Cannes reports that about 47 per
cent, of the population of the South are slaves, and about 49 per
cent, non-slaveholders, leaving about 4 per cent, who own the
real estate and rule the whole concern, and that the present con-
flict is being carried on exclusively in the interest of less than
300,000 slaveowners who compose this 4 per cent, of the people.
In the South, slaveholders have little more responsibility lor
slavery than the slaves themselves; and as to public opinion,
there is none, but such as will receive the endorsement of the pro-
slavery lords.
The society of the Southern States —says the same writer—■
resolves itself into three classes:—
Ist. The slaves, on whom devolves all the regular industry.
2nd. The slaveowners, who reap all its fruits.
3rd. An idle, lawless rabble, who live dispersed over vast plains
in a condition little removed from absolute barbarism. The con-
dition of these miserable outcasts before the war, is sufficiently
notorious, and the various Southern writers speak of them as a
numerous horde of people, who, too poor to keep slaves, and too
proud to -work, prefer a vagrant and precarious life, spent in the
desert, to engaging in occupations, which would associate them
with the slaves whom they despise.
In the Southern states, no less than five millions of human
beings are now said to exist in this manner, in a condition little
removed from savage life, ekeing out a wretched subsistence by
hunting, by fishing, by hiring themselves out for occasional jobs,
and by plunder; combining the restlessness and contempt for


regular industry peculiar to the savage, with the vices of degraded
whites of civilized communities. These people make up a class
at once depraved and dangerous; and constantly reinforced as
they are by all that is idle, worthless, and lawless among the
population of the neighbouring States, form an inexhaustible re-
serve of ruffianism, ready at hand for all the worst purposes of
Southern ambition. The planters complain of these people for
their idleness, for corrupting their slaves, and for their thievish
propensities; but thay cannot dispense with them, for in truth
they form an indispensible function in the economy of slave so-
cieties, of which they are so completely the victims. It is from
, their ranks that the filibustering expeditions are recruited, which
have been found so effective an instrument in extending the do-
main of the slave power. They furnish the “ border ruffians”
who, in the colonisation struggle with the Northern States, con-
tend with free-soilers on the territories; and it is to their
antipathy to the negroes that the planters securely trust for re-
pressing every attempt at servile insurrection. Would the “ in-
dependence” of the South he likely to benefit this, the overwhelm-
ing majority of its white population? I cannot see how this is
possible so long as slavery exists. In a political point of view
their power must be small, for to leave out of sight their uniform
ignorance and degradation, it is impossible that they, scattered over
a territory as large as Europe, can combine against the slave
aristocracy, and if they did, it would avail little against such a
compact aristocracy of slaveowners, who, by virtue of the electoral
law, are invested with three votes for every five slaves.
Socially, the majority of the whites, who are not slaveowners,
have no hope of advancement under the present system, there being
no room for them in the economy of Southern life. The planters
never employ nor need their industry. The slaves do nearly all
the work on the estates and farms, and the very presence of these
“ degraded whites” ia the neighbourhood of a plantation is so
much a source of annoyance and suspicion, that the slave aristo-
cracy will pay high prices to get them off. What benefits then
' can “ Independence” bring to this numerous, wretched, and in-
dolent people in their present condition ? It will not place them
in the same position as the immigrant to the Western States,
whose industry is able in a few years to secure him a competence.
But it will strengthen the despotism of the slaveowning class, and
enable them more securely to carry out their avowed policy. For
the slaveholders to promote the educatioir-and social status of these
people would be to raise up a class which would seriously menace
the monopoly of power. Under the slave system the interests of
the slaveowners and the non-slaveholding white population are,
and must always be, antagonistic.
Even the immense changes which the present struggle must
entail and has already brought about in the South will not alter
the action of this inflexible law, so long as slavery continues to be
the corner stone” of the new confederation. No doubt they
have been utilised by the war, and constitute the bone and sinew
of the Confederate armies, and their nomade habits and addiction
to wild sports make them excellent material to weave into soldiers.
In that condition—viz., as the hireling tools of th§ propertied


classes, it will be the interest of the rulers of the South to kefep
them. To disband so numerous a body of men, versed in military
life, who have no natural position in the social system, would be
an extreme peril, but by being retained as soldiers they constitute
a standing menace to the Northern States, a large portion of
whose population (viz. the North) cannot be spared from indus-
trial life. Is it surprising then that the North should fight with
such desperation against a system which would alter the whole
structure of American society, and would become a perennial
source of danger and anxiety to the American continent, the
fundamental principle of the Southern confederation being at war
everywhere with free labor in the Northern States ? To suppose
that two antagonistic systems, not merely of political but of social
life, can exist side by side, is disproved by all experience. If the
Union were dissolved to-morrow the Federal power would be
obliged to maintain a gigantic military force as a protection
against such armies as those of the South; a slave power consti-
tuted as in the Southern Confederation being not only the enemy
of civilization, but a perpetual terror to its neighbours. Southern
“ independence” cannot be sought for the benefit of the slaves,
neither can it be for the advantage of the overwhelming majority
of the white population, whose labor is a drug in the slave States,
and who never can heco.me industrious and prosperous citizens so *
long as slavery exists. It can only be sought for the aggrandise-
ment of the slaveholders alone.
Mr. Forster, M.P., gives the following definition of the-
“ independence” for which the Confederates are fighting:—“ They
are fighting for the freedom to enslave, for the freedom to tear
the wife from the husband and the mother from the child; for
the freedom to make it legal to torture or kill a black father for
defending his outraged daughter; for the freedom to make it legal
for a white father to sell his own child in the market place; for
,the freedom to make it a crime to teach boys and girls to read and
write; for the freedom to extend that system which makes labor
a curse. This is the freedom for which the South is fighting.”
And now a word of reply to a class of persons who, I regret to
say, are to be found who will argue that slaves are well treated,
aud that any statements to the contrary are unfounded. In fact,
I confess I cannot but feel that such persons must have every
principle of humanity completely rooted out of their constitution,
or they must have their entire nature perfectly iron-bound to
prevent any human principles from entering.
I would recommend such persons to emigrate at once to South
America, where their sympathies would be fully appreciated, and
:when, if the South were to succeed in the present war, they might
■ get employment suitable to their hardened constitutions, in con-
ducting the whipping machines, &c., whipping negroes being a
regular business in some parts of the South. Machinery has been
invented and put into operation, and whipping is done by whole-
sale. .An institution of this kind is located at Mayena, on St.
Francis road. The “Whipping-house,” as it is called, is thus
described.. It is about six feet in diameter, and ten feet high. A
shaft runs fi-om bottom to top;, on the upper end is a small cog


wheel running horizontally into which a large wheel works. The
propelling power is a robust negro. Attached to the shaft are
leather thongs or straps about two inches wide. Lashes are in-
serted in these, and when the shaft is in motion they reach the
deck. Near by is the office and stripping-house. Here the
victims are divested of their clothing, and five or six are placed
in the torture room; the door being fastened, the negro takes
hold of the crank, the proprietor with watch in hand orders the
machine to he put in motion. Around whirls the shaft at the rate
of 200 revolutions per minute, with straps and lashes extended,
bruising and lacerating the poor victims with thousands of blows
extending from head to foot. Fifteen minutes is considered by the
proprietor—Hampton Jones—to be a reasonable time to grind a
batch of human flesh; and then it is made very cheap, costing but
a dollar per head I Nothing for human torture could be more
terrible. A thousand scorpions stinging their flesh could not in-
flict more punishment. At the end of the time, the poof, bleeding,
quivering victims are brought out more dead than alive. The
plantations for miles send their grist to this mill to be ground,
and the proprietor has been doing a thriving business until the
Union troops came, and consequently Othello’s occupation was
ruined. Does mot slavery do violence to the instinct of our com-
mon nature, and is it not a-flagrant offence against humanity, and
are we not all placed under the weightiest obligations to do what
in us lies to bring a speedy end to that great crime and curse,
wherever it exists ? But there is still another class, and lam
sorry to say somewhat numerous who argue that slavery is the
natural condition of the coloured race, and act on the proverb of
giving a dog a ban name and hanging him.
The picture drawn by Carlyle of Quashee squatting on bis pro-
vision ground, idling all the day and satisfied with his pumpkin,
is the favorite illustration of negro habits by those who regard
slavery as the happiest and natural condition of the African race,
and by those also who are content to wink at slavery for the sake
of its advantages. The negro (they say) is inherently apathetic,
indolent, improvident, incapable of using his mind, of exercising
judgment or forethought. He is like a child, and needs a master,
and if left to his native tendencies will not work at all. If these
allegations, as applied to American slaves universally, were true,
they would not prove that the coloured race then, are incapable of
acting as free men. They would only show the debasing influ-
ence of long-continued slavery; and that degradation, denial of all
rights, the suppression of all motives for industry and self-
reliance, have produced their natural results. The same theory
was, indeed, applied to the Celts, after centuries of oppression by
the Anglo-Saxons, and it is equally applicable to any race that
has for generations been down-trodden by despotism. To the
plea of the American slaveowners then there is the following reply;
They deny the negro the fruits of his industry, they employ
him as a mere machine, they shut out from him all knowledge,
they refuse to allow him to exercise self-reliance in anything. If
he be nothing better than an animal they have never allowed him
to be anything else. They might as reasonably accuse a man
whose eyes have been put out of bejng unable to see, as admit the


justice of their pleas for refusing to emancipate their slaves. We
have already seen what the negro is able to become when free.
The British West Indies are a standing testimony to the blessed
results of emancipation. Governor Darling of Jamaica, states, in
reference to the free negroes, that “an independent, respectable,
and’trustworthy middle-class is rapidly forming in that island.”
“ How comes it,” he then inquires, “ that among this people, who
have been so libelled, there are 60,000 families all housed in their
own cottages; that the accumulated property of the negroes of
Jamaica since emancipation amounts to £2,358,000; and that
three-fifths of all the cultivated land in that island is the bona-
fide property of the coloured people, bought and paid for by the ir
own industry ? Is it a mark of indolence and improvidence that
the negroes of Jamaica have nearly £50,000 in the Savings Bank
—and of their apathy, that they support their own religious in-
stitutions at an expenditure of many thousands of pounds, besides
contributing to the aid of foreign missions ?”
But we need not go to the West Indies, nor even to the Northern
American States and Canada, where distinguished politicians,
lawyers, manufacturers, &c., of the coloured race are to be found,
for proofs of the falsehood of the plea that the negro is under all
circumstances, incapable, indolent and shiftless, and, to give the
lie to Mr. Stephens’ theory “ that slavery—subordination to the
superior race—is his (the negro’s) natural condition.” Abundant
evidence that it is a libel may be found in the slave States them-
selves. No candid person would deny that as a general rule,
slaves are childish and sensual, wt|rk listlessly, and require con-
tinued superintendence. But is not that the result of forced labor
all the world over? Supply but the motives for industry, and
the negroes will work with diligence and perseverance. We see
this in the tobacco factories of Richmond, where they are hired
' out and allowed to keep all their earnings beyond a certain
amount. The result is that they are able to obtain from five to
twenty dollars a month. In the lumber trade slaves are hired out
by the year, and are credited with all they earn over and above
the sum paid to their master; and the cost of their clothing and
provisions, being comparatively free men. “ These chattels,”
says Mr. Olmsted (of “ The Slave States”) “ were more sprightly
and straightforward in their manner and conversation than any
field-hand plantation-negroes.” He says, “ I saw at the South
two or three of their employers with whom I conversed and they
spoke well of them as compared with other slaves, and made no
complaints.”
It is the same on the sugar plantations of Louisiana where the
slaves work with greater cheerfulness at the “ grinding season,”
when eighteen hours of labor is the average, than at any other
period, and why ? Because they are better paid; they have
better and more varied food and stimulants than usual, but es-
pecially have a degree of freedom and social pleasure, and a variety
Of occupation which brings a recreation of the mind, and to a cer-
tain degree gives them strength for and pleasure in their labour.”
And Mr. Olmsted lays it down as a rule that slaves show them-
selves worthy of trust most, when their masters are most con-
siderate and liberal towards themthat in proportion as incen


tivjs arc offered to t!ie negro is the value of his industry—and
that the slave of the agricultural districts of North Carolina, where
lie is in a condition of semi-freedom, is twice as valuable as the
slave on the plantations of South Carolina, with the driver stand-
ing over him, whip in hand. This result is indeed so uniform that
in Cuba, where every slave has the opportunity of working out
his own freedom, the consequence is that emancipations are
constantly going on, and the free people of color are becoming
enlightened, cultivated and wealthy.” And it is to be observed
that, in Cuba, a very large proportion of the slaves have been,
within the last generation, brought direct from Africa. That
such an ameliorative practice does not prevail in America, where
every slave has been born on the soil, is owing to the action of
law and opinion, which decide that slavery is the “natural” con-
dition of the African race ; or as the ‘Richmond Examiner’ puts
it; —“lt is a thing that we cannot do without, that is righteous,
profitable, and permanent, and that belongs to Southern society as
inherently, intrinsically, and durably as the white race itself.”
We need not cite the free negroes of Jamaica or Pennsylvania
to show that the race, although education is denied tiiem, is
capable of intelligence and civilization. Under even the disad-
vantages of slavery itself we find evidence of the fact. There is
no need to pretend (said a Texan slaveowner to Mr. Olmsted)
that the negro is incapable of being greatly improved. “No man
improves faster under favorable circumstances.” The difference
between town bred and plantation bred slaves, in point of general
intelligence had been always very striking. Put there hasJately
come before the American public an extreme case, which conclu-
sively proves the safety and policy of giving freedom to the negro.
When, on the appearance of a Federal armament, the planters
of South Carolina were obliged to abandon the sea Islands, they
left behind them nearly 10,000 plantation slaves of nnmixed
African descent, most of whom were aged, infirm, and children,
being about the most degraded of their race.
The able bodied amongst them, about 4,000, were set to work
on low wages, under the auspices of the Northern superintendence;
first to gather in the standing cotton —more than a million pounds
of which were picked, made-up, and sold in New York for the
benefit of the national treasury. Subsequently 14,000 acres of
cotton, corn, and other provisions were planted by these negroes
under great difficulties, and in the midst of a raging war, but with
surprising success. Mr. J. M. McKim, who spent some weeks
among them, and visited all the principal islands, reports that
“ these livelong chattel slaves, dehumanised in law, and degraded,
in fact, to the extent of human power, when suddenly transformed
into free labourers, go to work, and continue to work, peaceably,
happily, and industriously; ” they are sober, susceptible of control,
decorous in their behaviour, and tidy in their appearance. “On
the first day of the week they' all £0 to church, or rather to
Sunday school, which is generally held in the church. During
the week the children to the number of 2,500 are taught, but on
Sunday, people of all ages assemble, and the superintendents and
others act in the capacity of teachers.”
A similar work has been going on around New Orleans, and in


the parts of North Carolina occupied by the Federal forces,
all the emancipated negroes arc being instructed by teachers from
the North, who have nobly given themselves to the work. Such
is the interesting enterprise being carried on in the Southern
States by those whom some denounce as “ exterminaters,” and as
eager to stir up servile insurrection and massacre in the South.
As in the West Indies before 1838, so in the Southern States of
America at the present time; it is obvious that the assertions as
to the irreclaimable depravity of the coloured race are simply
selfish and hard-hearted pleas urged to avoid emancipation, and
that the same should be reiterated by any one now, is a disgrace to
civilized society. It needs but, that the slaveowners of America
should be willing and just, to make emancipation perfectly safe
and beneficial, alike to white and black. The difficulties exist not
in the condition of the negro, but in the will of his master.
The abolition of negro slavery—always an object of earnest
desire to the philanthropist, has become now an urgent political
necessity. Thirty years ago England found it impossible any
longer to tolerate the existence in her colonies of 800,000 bond-
men. Since that time, France, Holland, and Portugal have de-
cried the abolition of slavery in their colonial possessions. Slavery
in the United States of America has at length produced a crisis as
much more terrible than that which threatened England, as the
extent of the system is greater and the strength of the slaveowner
more formidable. If, in England slavery had occupied half the
soil, had counted as votaries or as victims a third of the popula-
tion, had for many years controlled the government, and had
(diffused the poison of its influence through *Ull her religious and
social institutions, we should not have got rid of it by so easy a
process as the payment of £20,000,000 sterling. It would probably
have provoked a civil war; and have threatened to destroy the
commonwealth it could no longer rule.
But now as to the triumph of the North being the most likely
to promote our interest and that of the world. Do not North
America and ourselves stand side by side both as to what we are,
and have in common, as well as what is peculiar to each ? All,
doubtless, will agree in this, that all that is peculiar and
prominent in our institutions, as distinguished from those of past
ages and other countries, is identical with all which is fundamental
in the institutions of America. They are working out the same
religious and political problems that we are.
The men of the Free States—like ourselves, are industrious,
manufacturing and commercial people—are in favor of peace, both
within their own national borders, and in relation to all other
powers; but peace and slavery is now very generally admitted to
be an absolute impossibility. Hence, as the speediest and most
effectual method of crushing the rebellion, those in power are now
striking an effectual blow at its cause; and are, in fact, exacting
irom the originators of the strife, and the real authors of all its
disastrous consequences in America and in Europe, the abolition
of that enormous wrong, for the extension and perpetration of
which the Southern States took up arms. Nor can there be any
hope (commendable on the score of humanity, however attempts
atiriendly mediation may be) that a permanent peace can be es


tablished till slavery is brought to an end. What kind of peace
can be expected from the South, which has boldly declared that
its “chief corner stone” is “ slavery?” The South has commenced
the conflict to place the hateful institution upon a firmer basis,
and there cannot be the least possible shade of doubt that if the
South triumph it will re-open the slave trade. Let us not forget
that the South has openly ventured the daring blasphemy of
calling slavery a “ divine institution, and thus seeks to rivet more
firmly the chains of slavery upon the oppressed slaves.”
But further, in reference to the character of the Northerns in
in relation to ourselves, the people of the Free States speak our
language, read our books, love our Bible, respect our Sabbaths,
sing our hymns, chant our prayers, and breathe our love of
liberty, civilisation and religion, and we cannot but feel a sympathy
for a people so nearly allied to us in all that should cement na-
tions together. We cannot forget the kindness and courtesy with
which they received the Prince of Wales, and that while he was
every way treated in a way becoming his rank and country in the
North, he was insulted and annoyed in the South. The words of
Mr. George Thompson to the people of England are; —“ Let
us not forget that while the Americans have lessons to learn by
the war, we have also something to learn. We are verily
guilty concerning our brother. We have read of the anguish
and sorrow that ‘ God’s image in ebony’ has been suffering in
America, and yet we have continued to get our supplies of cotton
from a country where it has been wet with the sweat of unpaid
labour—and moist with the tears and blood of our suffering
brethren. It cannot and must not be so in the future. India,
China, Africa, and the West Indies are all saying to us ‘We have
abundance of the soil and the sunshine necessary to produce
cotton. Let us have some of your energy, capital and skill and
we will render you independent of slave grown produce.’ For
the sake of what we have done relative to slavery in the past, let
us resolve to make this an occasion for rendering ourselves for
ever free from the guilt of supporting slave labour; for the sake,
too of those toiling millions who have borne their privations and
sufferings so nobly, so heroically and so patiently, and who amidst
all their sorrows (to their honor be it spoken) have never asked
us to break the blockade or recognise the South, and who, now,
doubtless would rather suffer on, than that we should join hands
with ‘ men-stealers’ and sellers of their own flesh and blood; for
the sake of these let us hope that the North may succeed in
crushing a rebellion that had slavery for its origin, and human
degradation as its end. Above all, for the sake of that religion
which has long been outraged by the Southern States of America,
and through their influence has also been insulted and trampled
upon in the North, let us hope that peace and liberty may soon
dawn upon that land, and that in the same grave in which the im-
plements' of war shall be buried, shall also be covered the' chains
of the slave, and that with slavery and war (earth’s two greatest
curses) removed, America may have before her a career of pros-
perity that shall eclipse the past.
I am proud to be able to state to this meeting, that almost to a
man in Britain, that is, Christian men, patriots, and philan


thropists are joining issue in the above sentiments. The
struggle in which the .North and South is engaged is indeed ex-
tremely deadly. The Southerners are apparently strong in
numbers, because the white men can be spared to fight, inasmuch
aa the labour is conducted by slaves, and no doubt many of the
white population have been forced into the army, and even
Unionists have been compelled to enter the Southern army. But
this system is as exhausting as it is for the time effectual, and
doubtless the end must come sooner than some of the friends of
liberty imagine. The rebellion has been of the most flagrant
character, and every Briton who upholds it supports a most
causeless and criminal proceeding.
If we wish to see freedom triumph and not to see the slave-
holders have all the freedom for themselves, we shall cordially
support the efforts which the North is making for emancipation.
Is not the past history of the North a fair guarantee that its suc-
cess would be most likely to promote the beat interests of the
world ? Is it not in the North that there is a free church, a free
school, a free soil, and a free vote, for every child of the humblest
parent of the land ? What can be in truth said of the South P
The best that can be said of the Southerners is that they possess
the pluck of a traitor and the daring of an assassin; while the
Northerers are fighting for principles that ought to commend
themselves to every Briton.
The following are the reasons which Wendell Philips, Woodruff,
and the various American writers give to show that a separation
of the States as demanded by the Confederates would not be
beneficial to any lover of America or mankind generally:—
1. Because any essential modification of Its constitution, or
division of its territory, would destroy confidence in all future
attempts at representative or constitutional government.
2. Because it would encourage a minority when defeated in an
election, to resist authority by violence, wmch would be fatal to
all representative or self-constituted government.
3. Because it would justify and stimulate rebellion against all
government.
4. Because it would encourage unprincipled politicians, when
they get a government into their hands, to abuse the confidence
of their constituents, and lead their cherished institutions to
anarchy and destruction.
5. Because it would revive questions that past generations have
justly settled with England, France, and Spain, that could not
be re-opened without imperilling the progress of a century, and
the peace of the world.
6. Because Great Britain furnishes illustrious examples of the
benefits of union even after the sanguinary struggles for separation
of Scotland and Ireland.
7. Because Italy furnishes an example, where sin and corruption
bad first divided, and then destroyed an empire, which it is now.
the desire of nations to re-unite.
8. Because any division of the moral and political forces of the
Union would array the parts against each other, thus producing
feuds more sanguinary than those of South America, because of
the more ardent temperament of the Anglo-Saxon race.


9. Because the fruits of the present Government during the
eighty years of its existence have been realised in the peopling of
a wilderness, raising a population from 5,000,000 to 30,000,000,
establishing schools and churches among them, equal in excellence
and number to any in the world, and converting a population
which, beyond its own natural increase, was taken, for the most
part, from the worst populations of Europe, into as intelligent and
virtuous a nation as now peoples the globe.
10. Because the whole of the present Union is not too large,
either to furnish an asylum for the oppressed of nations, or to
work opt the theories pf self-government.
11. Because the Protestant religion needs just such a power to
check the institution- of Romanism, secure civil and religious
liberty and guarantee them against reaction.
12. Because it would furnish to the world a fatal instance in
which a groundless reason, nay, a wicked one, imprudently asserted
and violently fought for, was taken as a good cause for rebelling
against solemn compacts, and even self-constituted authority.
13. Because it would call into existence a form of government:
fitted only for the dark and feudal ages.
14. Because it would encourage ambitious men to perpetuate
institutions like slavery, rendering a people ignorant and bar-
barous, converting them into ferocious savages, and then leading'
them over the crushed hopes of the race to victory , wholly for
their own aggrandisement.
15. Because it would revive the slave trade, to the desolation of
Africa and the disgrace of Christendom.
16. Because it would subject the feeble republics ot Central and:
South.-America to the invasion of the Southern States, for the
sole purpose of prostituting their soil to the slavery system.
17. Because no compact or treaty could be made which would
be executed, with a people who now sacrifice every principle i)f
justice and policy for the avowed aggrandisement Of slavery ; and'
a cessation ol hostilities would only increase their resources foi a-
more destructive conflict than that now raging.
18. Because there can be no compromise with the powers of;
slavery, that would not involve the giving up of all principle and
submission to terms, which would shock the moral sense of'
mankind.
19. Because it wouM admit that sin is better than death, and
slavery than war.
20. Because there are no natural boundaries between the North"
and the South, and any peace to-day based upon a division would,
be broken to-morrow.
21. Because the running a'way of slaves alone would be a
continual cause of v ar, and were the South separated from the
North, no treaty could be made with them which would not in-
volve the surrender of the slaves both from the North and
Canady. , ,
22. Because the terms of peace and union which the present
Government now offer and have continually pressed upon the
acceptance of the South, are everything the South have asked
e ;cept the extension of slavery; ami the payment for slaves justly


forfeited by the crime of rebellion is more than any power not
wishing a division would ask at the hands of the North.
23. Because the wealth that is now being furnished for Chris-
tianising the heathen and the amelioration of mankind is wanted
for that purpose more than to perpetuate civil wars, which must
be the result of a division.
24. Because when the military power of less than 400,000
slaveholders is broken, there will be 5,000,000 of white free men
and 4,000,000 of coloured free men disenthralled. To these the
present army will take an open Bible, education and free institu-
tions, which in five years will so identify them with the North
that any proposition for a separation would disgust them, if
possible, ss much as the reasons now given for separation disgust
those who understand them.
25. Because the North could not submit to terms of peace dic-
tated by the sole interests of slavery without incurring the just
execration of mankind—nay, without high treason against the
mandates of Heaven, and the well-being of every creature bearing
the image of God.
26. Because it would encourage foreign governments to inter-
meddle with the sacred rights of other nations, with a view of
dividing and weakening their government, that they might rub
out the institutions of freedom for selfish ends.
27. Because it would encourage the commercial power of a
country to plot against state policy through the channels of trade,
invite conspiracies with foreign nations, and with money pervert a-
free press into a mercenary engine to defeat the designs of a just
government.
28. Because our real friends who advise a division, ought to
see that it would not only be surrendering all, but would convict
the North of a guilty blunder, while obeying the clearest pro-
vidential teachings. Instead of helping us, such friends, what-
ever they may say, are our worst enemies.
29. Because while the recent elections show a return of power
to the democratic party, not one man elected but is in favour of
the Union and the war for it. The republican party, in the pro-
vidence of God, will have removed the millstone of slavery from
the neck of the nation, and no party will again outrage the con-
science of Christendom by adopting it, and by the aid of a higher
power than that of man, the democratic party, with its policy of
free trade, will soon restore peace and commerce.
The causes which have led to the sad disasters of the armies cf
the North are' only what could have been expected under the cir-
cumstances, being as follows—
-Ist. The absence of a military spirit among the people, arising
from the nature’of their education' and a desire to conciliate the
South on the principles of peace.
2nd. The officers of the Northern armies when the war com-
menced were mostly Southerners, and had of course to be dis-
missed, the result being that inexperienced officers had to be put in
their places.
3rd. The deficiency of unanimity of feeling, and hence a want of
a sufficiently strong feeling for the cause in which the people ar e


engaged; one portion of them wanting the union of the States
maintained without the abolition of slavery, and the other portion
desiring both. This division of their strength is doubtless a great
error, as unaminity in policy would certainly have been a great
advantage. Yet He who is too wise to err, and omnipotent,
is not an indifferent spectator of all the revolutions which
take place in the world. He at once perceives the past, the
present, and the future; and comprehends all their bearings
and dependances. How infinitely wise were the measures
which he used to conduct the children of Israel to the blessed
ends that he proposed ? In vain did the nations wrapped in
idolatry oppose their progress, and conspire the destruction of a
people who marched under the eternal banners of their God
and followed a pure and holy religion, which pre-eminently dis-
tinguished them from, and raised them above, all the surrounding
nations, blinded by superstition and persisting in their errors. In
like manner, God who made all minds free, and dwells in light in-
accessible, and whose wisdom is too profound to penetrate, will, I
feel confident, in his own good time interpose in behalf of our
Christian brothers of North America. The seat of the wicked is
often with princes, while the righteous hide their heads in the
dust; villany triumphs, and integrity is oppressed ; fortune smiles
upon iniquity, and the friends of humanity and religion experience
disappointment and adversity. Yet there is a Providence and He
will prevail. May that Providence loose the band of wickedness,
undo the heavy burdens, let the oppressed go free, and break
every yoke, that so the coming of that Kingdom may he promoted,
which is appointed to proclaim liberty to the captive, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound.




JOSEPH MACKAY,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
BOOKSELLER, STATIONER,
BOOKBINDER, PRINTER, AND ENGRAVER,
PRINCES STREET, DUNEDIN.
Always on hand ,
A large and varied Stock of Plain and Fancy STATIONERY,
including Stationery for Office use.
The largest and best assorted Stock of BOOKS in Otago,
comprising many thousand volumes in every branch
of Literature.
