

VENGEANCE.
THE WORLD'S
11TH HOUR
(AUG. 15TH JULY 1914.JOUTBREAK EUROPEAN WAR.)
11th HOUR.
EUROPEAN WAR.
CON FEDERACY OP THE NATIONS.
CIVIL RELIGIOUS CONSTITUTION.
AGE’S LAST GOSPEL MESSAGE.
HOUR OF TEMPTATION AND PERSECUTION.
PARTIAL JEWISH RESTORATION.
SNATCHED FROM AN INFERNO.
RUSSIA INVADES PALESTINE.
PALESTINE THE MAGNET FOR EUROPE’S ARMIES.
THE SWORD STRIKES.
MIGHTY REVOLUTION WORLD-WIDE.
ECCLES. EUROPE IN THREE FACTIONS.
DEVASTATING EASTERN HORDES VIA TURKEY.
JUDGMENT UPON THE SURVIVORS.
A NEW MONARCHY ON THE EARTH.
GOLDEN AGE OF PEACE AND JUSTICE.


If the European War brings in a Confederacy of the Nations, an
United States of Europe, a “Holy” Alliance, tliien know that the end
of the Age is at hand. Parallel with its inauguration look for a great
church scheme to Christianise mankind. You’lll then see church and
state uniting in promoting the world’s peace amd a civil-religious con-
stitution in full swing. The inevitable tyranny of such a combination
will follow. Resist and you’ll be persecuted—boycotted, imprisoned,
starved. Support it and if you escape the sword you’ll be burned by
fire while the confederacy itself will fall shattered in one mighty un-
paralleled conflict of war, revolution, slaughter and destruction. A
short time only will the confederacy stand.
Testimonies: Authentic history, wonderful Bible predictions, re-
cent wonderful astronomical discoveries, mathematics, etc.—an irre-
futable concentrated force expressed in convincing, logical English
easily understood. Accept not the statements herein and you must
fight against the stars in their courses, refute history and chronolgy,
disprove mathematics, throw overboard all reason and intense pro-
bability. No man can do it. The mistakes of others are no criterion.
%j
Some one was bound to hit the approximate time eventually—when
the set time came. Certainly no man of himself knows. But there is
what is to most an unexplored realm recording history in advance and
man runs in cycles and history repeats itself, remember. What’s
ahead andn the approximate time man can know, is intended to know
and can now know with all certainty and verification.
Examine late English and French newspapers and writers —Eng-
lish “Globe” of August 2, 1915, and London “Daily Telegraph” a
week later, or “S.M.H.” of January 1, 1916, for signs of this coming
supreme delusion and death-trap. They came to the writer’s notice
since the following matter had gone to press. Ask the bishops of the
C. of E. in the U.K. what great scheme they are now contemplating,
and their secret hopes and aspirations. Church-goers and non-goers,
Christians and non-Christians, rich and poor, will be between two fires
—persecution from man, fiery vengeance from on high. Everything
fully accords with eight connected series of events eventuating in
Europe, Palestine, and Turkey, and forecasted from 1800 to 2500 years
ago, nine-tenths of which has been fulfilled to the very letter, and in
the exact order as given. The last lap has now been entered. No place
for human forethought and sagacity. It’s high time to take notice.^
This booklet is the product of a one-time sceptic, and is put forth
for the “man in the street” and earnest Christians generally as a gold-
mine of saving knowledge. Trained in business and verse with science
generally the writer is critical, analytical, comparing, is against blind
fanatic faith, but appeals to reason with facts stripped of all superfluity
and vain imaginings. I n it you’ll find boiled down considerable study
and research after a careful examination of leading views and deduc-
tions, an analysis and comparison of reasonings and objections, and
the elimination and sifting of all that is grossly imaginative and
heterogeneous. One who is watching.
ARTHUR CLIMO. Postal Address:
Whoever hears the sound of the trumpet (war) and take not warning,
if the sword (divine vengeance) come and take him away his blood
will be upon his own head.. But he that takes warning will save him-
self. (Ezek. 33-4, 5). December, 1915. Ist Edition—6,ooo Copies.


PRICE, 7d. Copy.
INCREASING INTEREST
OF “WORLD’S 11th HOUR.”
The interest in this handbook of prophecy is more and more increasing.
Many testimonials testify to great light received, /renewed consecration, con-
version, etc. Gives a true understanding of the signs of the times. Among
others it deals with: —
THE PROJECTED GREAT CIVIL-RELIGIOUS CONFEDERACY, (p. 1, 11,
21, 22, 47). It began to become prominent in June, 1916, and by the present
activity and progress already made is now CERTAIN.
REVIVAL OF ROME AND UNITED CHRISTENDOM (p. 11, 22 (line 1 of
line 12), 46). Dome’s destiny is linked with the coming confederacy. With
the help of democracy it will prove her stepping stone into power for the second
and last time.
RETURN OF REVOLUTIONARY REPUBLICANISM, (p. 15, 21 22, 46).
Now CERTAIN.
RETURN OF THE JEWS. (18, 19, 20, 21). Now CERTAIN. FALL OF
TURKEY, 15, 16.
“LATTER RAIN.” Indicated in prophecy and perceived by the earthly
setting forth the spiritual, (p. 24).,
CORRECTIONS.
P. 4. Delete “Day of Wrath, (line 12). P. 11., Dejected read rejected, (line 18.) P.
25. In view of confederacy, Jewish return, etc., it was Not Thought that the little
season of Satan would be 40 years. The conjecture was given to enable the reader to
deduce his own approximatetime. 20 years harmonises with prophecy better (cp. with p.
18.) P. 44. Sunday, read Saturday, (line 24) Read lOd. (line 27) and order from D.
Nield, 148 Tasman St., Wellington, N.Z. Paper, “God’s Sabbath” not now obtainable.
P. 49. Author became editor of “Banner of Truth” shortly after publishing “11th Hour.”
NOTE: All chronology is based upon the accepted era and system. Not correct but ap-
proximate enough. In respect of the prophecies of the Revelation (p. 5-12), send for “Our
Times.”
NOTES
Read the “World’s 11th Hour” straight through, ignoring the scripture references.
They are for verification in study after reading. Receive nothing which the Bible does
not countenance in the interpretation which comes from the illumination of the Spirit of
God. It is desired to place copy of “World's 11th Hour”' into the hands of EVERYONE
truly loving Jesus and His appearing, Copies free from author for those with whom the
price would work the slightest hardship.
AGENTS
SYDNEY: Tyas, 558 George-st; Bible Depot, 869 Elizabeth-st; Gordon and Gotch, Pitt-
st.; Mihell’s, 313 Pitt-st. MELBOURNE: Pater and Co., 271 Lttie Collins-st; Cole's Book
Arcade. GEELONG; A. Pearson, 190 Moorabool-st. N.Z.: Bible Depot, 71 Willis-st, Wel-
lington; Auckland Bible House, 135 Upper Simmonds-st. BRISBANE; Methodist Book
Depot. NEWCASTLE; N.S.W. Central Agency, 69 Hunter-st. Stamps of any country ac-
cepted by the author. International Coupons, value each, can be obtained from any
post-office.
AGENTS WANTED! Shops and agents wanted to dispose of the “WORLD'S
11th HOUR," in Commonwealth and abroad. Price 4/6 doz. Sale or return.
Postage paid by author.
NOTE CHANGE OF ADDRESS: ARTHUR CLIMO, c/o COOK and CO.,
Printers, 200 CASTLEREAGH-STREET; or, ARTHUR CLIMO, Victoria-street,
Chats wood, Sydney.
BANNER OF TRUTH.
CONFEDERACY, REVOLUTION, ROME’S REVIVAL, JEWS, ETC.,
Began May, 1916. Ended March, 1917, and merged into “OUR TIMES." Some
copies of Feb. and Mch., 1917 left. Free copy of each sent, as long as they
last, with all requests for “OUR TIMES."
“OUR TIMES" OR THE VOICE OF THE APOCALYPSE.
Being an exposition of the Book of Revelation in conjunction with other pro-
phecy that establishes and hears upon in their nature and season, and their
relation to the true spiritual Church and the speedy pre-millennial advent of
Jesus, of the return of revolutionary republicanism, the coming civil-religious
confederacy, coming dominion of Rome, the restoration of the Jews, etc., ere
the time of the “harvest" or “rapture."
PART I. NOW READY (OCT., 1917). ISSUED FREE.








TABLE OF CONTENTS.
THE COMING DAY OF VENGEANCE 4
Ciose at Hand —Unawares to the World —A Terrible Description v\ ay
of Escape.
HISTORY IN ADVANCE . . . . 5
Prophecy in Scripture—A Deacon Light Attestations by Histoiy
Wonderful Fulfilments —Prophetic Books of Daniel and Revelation —
Startling Significance among Heathen To-day.
IST CHAIN COURSE OF THE CHURCH 7
Wonderful Predictions —Convincing Identifications —Church's Last Stage
To-day—Supper time.
2ND CHAIN, FRENCH REVOLUTION 8
Course of Gospel to French Revolution —Detailed Predictions of Revo-
lution Fulfilled—Papal Judgment from 1798 —Worthiness for First Resur-
rection from 1873—Preparation for Vengeance.
3RD CHAIN. 7 TRUMPET JUDGMENTS 9
Europe’s Great Wars Predicted—French Revolution Again—Marvellous
Fulfilments—7th Trumpet now Sounding—The Death-stroke of Dearth's
Mighty Kingdoms.
4TH CHAIN, ROME, PAGAN, AND PAPAL 10
Convincing Identifications —A 1260 Year Period to very Month
—Mi ssion Movements from 1798- —Fall of Great Babylon—Revival of
Church Rulership—Persecution Ahead —A Fearful Doom—Snatched from
an Inferno—Palestine Red with 8100d—144,000 Sealed Against Death.
STH CHAIN, 7 VIAL JUDGMENTS 12
French Revolution Era —Decay of Turkey—Predicted Revivals of Roman-
ism, Lawlessness, and Infidelity—Their Significance—7th Vial Near-
Sword Strikes —World-wide Upheaval—-Ecclesiastical Europe in 3 Fac-
tions —Cities of Nations Fall in Revolution—Europe the Prey of Eastern
Hordes.
6th CHAIN, CHRIST’S GREAT PROPHECY 13
Matthew 24—Its Christian Phase Traced to Dark Day of 1780, and Falling
Stars 1883—Approaching Shaking of Heavens and Nations in Perplexity
Earth's Armies Destroyed.
7TH CHAIN, THE WORLD’S EMPIRES 14
Past Universal Empires Minutely Predicted 2500 Years Ago—The sth, A
Divine Empire—Coming as a Thunderbolt upon Earth’s Dominions —A
Smashing to Powder —Papacy in Prophecy.
BTH CHAIN, THE TURKISH EMPIRE 15
Wonderful Verifications by 19th Century History—The Fail of Turkey
the Signal for Armageddon and Day of Vengeance—A Prediction Now
Fulfilling—The End at Hand.
SIGNS IN HEAVENS 16
Scripture Predictions Amply Fulfilled —Startling Sky Phenomena from
1814 to 1909.
THE FALL OF JERUSALEM 17
Matthew' ch. 24 —Its Jewish Aspect—Lifting of Jewish Punishment from
1916 —Fulness of Gentile’s Times.
JEWISH RETURN TO PALESTINE—ITS SIGNIFICANCE 18
A Great Sign—Startling Facts—lnvasion by Russia —England to Contend
—Predictions Fulfilled and Fulfilling—Very Little to Go —Significance of
1930.
COMING CONFEDERACY IN EUROPE. . . 21
Civil-Religious Constitution —Confederacy of 10 Kingdoms—Man’s Last
Administration —Wonderful Haimony of Scripture Prophecy—History
Again the Key Persecution Ahead —Doom of Its Partakers.
THE EUROPEAN WAR AND THE 11TH HOUR 22
New Prophetic Key Discovered —History Attests—9th Flour, 1831 10th,
THE WORLD’S 1 1 th. HOUR.


1871 —llth, very month of E urope’s Outbreak —Coming Events —Last
Gospel Message—Peace Cry— Convincing Analogy.
THE WITNESS OF ASTRONOMY 24
Recent Astronomical Discoveries Prove Genesis —-Astronomy Witnesses
for Christ —Creation’s Date.
THE PROPHECIES OP ENOCH 25
An Ancient Book Lost and Refound —Quoted by Jude—Wonderful Pro-
phecies—Supports the Bible—Shows Day of Vengeance at Hand.
THE CORRECT LAW OP GOD 25
The Correct First Commandment —Man’s 3 Relations to the Law—Their
Meaning.
SEPT. 25 A.D., CHRIST’S FIRST ADVENT PROPHESIED 26
Daniel’s 490 Year Period —Jesus Constituted Christ Year Predicted Jose-
phus’s Historical Testimony to Christ —A Letter from Jesus to a Syrian
King—Anti-Christ-—Upheaval Ahead.
A DIVINE KING RULING THE E EARTH 28
Christ, Earth’s Coming King for the Golden Age at Hand—Ample Scrip-
tural Testimony.
SAVING A LOST WORLD 3P
God’s Plan to Redeem the World —A Divine Monarchy on the Earth —
Immortal Beings Ruling—Jerusalem the World’s Metropolis—the Millen-
nium—Peace and Justice—Early Church’s Testimony.
SETTING UP THE DIVINE MONARCHY 32
Establishing the Coming Kingdom—Contingent Events Darkest Hour
Before the Dawn—What Transpires at the Time —Manifestation to a
Startled World.
GOOD NEWS FOR MANKIND 36
World Under Condemnation—-Retribution Inevitable Resurrection and
Second Death —Fearful Doom of Ungodly at Hand —Redeeming the World
Winning Man Back to Immortality—Escaping Condemnation and Gaining
a Place in the Kingdom—Mystery of the Cross Logically Explained—
Eternal Life or Death, Which?
THE LIFE THAT TELLS 46
Living to Inherit the Kingdom Necessary Development Unfruitful.
Backsliding, and Nominal Christians —Valuable Hints from Scripture—
True Christians the Only Over comers and Inheriters.
THE MORAL CODE OF FAITH 42
The righteousness of the Christian Vs., the Righteousness of the World.
THE SABBATH, IST OR 7TH DAY 44
Sunday the True Bible Sabbath in Australia, India, China, and Japan.
STARTLING “COINCIDENCES.” 44
Divine Visitations upon Wickedness in Our Own Time.
BIBLE BAPTISM—WHAT IT MEANS 45
A Necessary Ordinance —Forgiveness of Sins for the Kingdom—ldentifi-
cation with Christ—lmmersion Proved Correct Mode —Infant Baptism—-
Objections Answered.
SIGNS OF THE END 46
24 Chief Indications of the Proximity of the End of the Age—Facts.
AN APPEAL TO CLERGYMEN 47
LABOUR THAT COUNTS 48
Servants of the Kingdom Expected to Work—Reward for tne Profitable
Outer Darkness for the Slothful —Robbing God—Divine Arrangement
for Helping—Riches a Barrier to the Kingdom—Fearful Judgment upon
the Rich—a Great Responsibility—Knowing More.
GOD’S SIGNATURE IN THE BIBLE—FINAL WORDS 56
ABBREVIATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS:—
cp.-—Comb are. A.V.—Authorised Version of Bible. R.V. —Revised Ver-
sion of Bible. Heb. —Hebrew. V.VS.—Verse, Verses, Version. Grk. —
Greek Language. O.T.—Old Testament. N.T. —New Testament.
Books of Bible.—Usual Abbreviations.
Christians. —True and Faithful Disciples of Christ.
Vat. —Vatican Ms., 4th Century. Sin. —Sinaitic Ms. about 350 A.D.


THE COMING DAY OF VENGEANCE.
The Jewish Day of Vengeance (Luke 21-22) will he nothing to
the Gentile’s Day of Vengeance (Dan. 12-1). Palestine with a few
millions of people was then affected. The Day of Vengeance to come
will affect the whole world. A Day of Vengeance equalling the pro-
phetic description of the horrors of Jerusalem is clearly taught in the
New Testament, from which Christians are exhorted to pray that they
may he accounted worthy to escape (Luke 21-36). it is likened to
Sodom and Gomorrah and the days of the Flood. The people then
were caught unawares. Likewise will it he in the days of the Son of
Man. (Luke 17-26 to 30; Rev. 11-18, 19, 14-20, 16-17 to 21, 19-20 to 21;
Matt. 24-37 to 42.)
The Day of Wrath or Day of the Lord is a day of 1,000 years
(2 Peter, 3-8). Particularly at its beginning and its close is it a day of
retribution; in general it is so during the whole 1,000 years, 'out only
where necessary and in a modified form (cp. Zech. 14-17). It both
begins and ends with judgments and vengeance (Jude L, 14-l<>;
I Thess., 5-3; Rev. 20-9)., The former judgment is marked by the
tribunal of Christ (Rms. 14-10), the latter by the perdition oi the un-
godly (2 Peter 3-7 ; 2-6 Rev., 20-12 to 15), and the melting and burning
up of everything with fervent heat (2 Peter 3-10, 12). Note. WTierein
and in the which (day) which Rev. locates at the end. The eaiin will
then again be void and without form (Jer. 4-23), from which, however,
will appear a new heavens (atmospheric) and a new earth wherein
dwelleth righteousness (2 Peter, 3-13; Is. Go-1/’).
The Great Day of Wrath begins with the return of Christ. He is
coming as a thief in the night to punish earth’s inhabitants (Is. 26-21)
with fierce wrath and fire (2 Thess., 1-8; 2 Peter, 3-4,10, 12). He comes
as God’s representative and our King to assert direct control of the
whole world, which is His by right (Coll. 1-16, Ezck. 21-17). His
glorified saints will rule with Him and rule with a rod of iron (Rev.
20-6, 19-15, 5-10, 2-26, 27; Dan., 7-18). Scripture abounds with refer-
ences to this great day, both of exclusive and typical application, the
typical Day of God’s Wrath finding a fulfilment with the Israelites,
but nevertheless is a type for our admonition now (1 Cor., 10-11. Grk.
These things and all types.). Hence, though many of the following
quotations from the Old Testament refer primarily to Jerusalem,
they cannot apply with any less intensity to the Day of Vengeance to
come. Remember heathen is properly nations in the Old Testament.
Mighty men will cry bitterly. It is a day of wrath, trouble and
distress, of wasteness and desolation, darkness and gloominess. Blood
will be poured out as dust and flesh treated as dirt. Silver and gold
will not deliver then. A speedy riddance will be made of all in the
land (Palestine, Zep. 1 to 18; James 1-5 to 6; Is. 13-6 to 13), for it is
God’s determination to gather the nations to pour upon them His
indignation and fierce anger (Zep. 3-8, Rev. 16-16). With the fire of
his jealousy will He devour the earth for its persecution of His people
(Joel 3-2 to 8; Matt. 25-41 to 46). Men of all nations will he roused
up. Even ploughshares will become weapons. Even the weak will
say, ‘ ‘I am strong. ’ ’ Then will the Lord roar out of Zion and utter
His voice from Jerusalem that the nations may know that He is King
and has asserted His authority (Joel 3-9 to 17, cp. v. 13, with Rev.
14-15 to 20). No one will he able to stand (Joel, 2-11). That day


will burn as an oven, and all the proud and wicked will be stubble
(Matt. 13-40, Malachi 4-2). God at Christ's right hand will strike
through kings (Ps. 110-5),. and humble the earth for its evil and
iniquity, haughtiness and arrogancy (Is. 13-11).
The day comes as a destruction from the Almighty. Every man's
heart shall melt. They shall be amazed one at another and seek caves
to hide in. Even the earth will move out of its place (Is. 13-6 to 13
ch. 24). Kings will be bound with chains and nobles with fetters of
iron by Christ and His saints, who will execute the judgments written
(Ps. 149,-7 to 9; Rev. 19-14 to 16). The thrones of kingdoms will be
overthrown and the strength of nations destroyed (Haggai 2-22) midst
anger and fury such as they have not heard (Micah 5-15). They will
be as though they had not been (0b.15-16). A man's hand will be
against his neighbour and the slain will be from one end of the land
(Palestine) to the other (Jer. 25-33; Is. 66-15, Cp. Rev. 14-20). In it
a man will find no way of escape, turn which way he will (Amos 5-19)
and judgment will run down as water (v. 24). It will all constitute
“a time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation even
to that same time (Dan. 12-1).
He who says the Lord will not do good neither will He do evil 5
shall be punished in that day (Zep. 1,12), and he who says evil shall
not prevent or overtake him be wise (Ps. 50-22). Judgments are com-
ing that salvation and peace, righteousness and complete subversion
of all earthly powers may result through repentance and conversion
to the Glory of God and His Son (Zeph. 2-11, 3-9; Haggai 2-7; Amos
5-24). But to those who trust in God a stronghold will He be to them
in the Day of Trouble (Nahum 1-7) and a deliverer to whomsoever
will call upon Him (Joel 2-32; Ps. 50-15). Therefore seek the Lord,
seek meekness, seek righteousness through Jesus Christ now. Maybe
you will be hid in the Day of the Lord's Anger (Zeph. 2-3; Is. 26-20).
HISTORY IN ADVANCE.
The Coming World's Crisis will not come unawares if you heed
divine prophecy. God is in prophecy giving history in advance and
challenges men to do likewise (Is. 41-21 to 23, 46-10). Neglect its
study and you suffer loss of meat in due season (Matt. 24-45)) and the
strongest weapon you can possess for the divine authorship of the
Bible. Distinguish between Bible prophecy and prophecy so-called
and let not the discredit many have brought upon it keep you in dark-
ness. It is more easily understandable than is supposed and its fulfil-
ment less obscure. History is its key and attests to fulfilments irre-
futably beyond human foresight or sagacity. Its fulfilment to the
very day and in the exact order as given bespeaks the ruling of God
in the world's kingdoms (Dan. 4-17). To us its possession is a bless-
ing, a gift, a privilege, and of all sacred books the Bible is the only
one containing predictions.
Of chains of prophecy there are many. Most have been fulfilled—-
a few are fulfilling now, of which all focus to Christ's Return with
very little to go. Upwards of 100 expositors—same of whom wrote
more than a century ago—place the Great Crisis at the end of the
nineteenth or early in the twentieth century—now. The day or hour
no man knows. But says Jesus after enumerating a chain of events
preceding His Return, “When ye see all these things know that it is
near, even at the doors" (Matt. 24-33). Paul, speaking of Christ's


Return and the suden destruction to burst upon the world (1 Thess.,
5-2, 3), says, “Ye are not in darkness that that day should overtake
you as a thief. For ye are children of light (v. 4to 6). Peter, speak-
ing of this light, says, “We have also a more sure word of prophecy
whereunto ye do well to take heed as nnto a light that shineth in a
dark place’ 7 (2 Peter, 1-19). Then he dwells upon Christ’s Return
and the last days (ch. 3). While teachers arc needed in addition
to the ministry of the spirit (if not, why were they given?),( yet prove
all things, hold fast that which is good (1 Thess., 5-21) and despise
not prophesyings (v. 20). Lean less upon man, however, and more
upon God and His Word, asking and receiving, seeking and finding
(Matt. 7-7).
Startling fulfilments of prophecy are found in events concerning
Christ, the Jews, Egypt (Cp. Ezek. 30, 6, 7 with Is. 19-22 to 25), Roman
Empire, the Papacy, Europe, Turkey, Palestine, Babylon, Persia,
Greece, Nineveh, Jerusalem, etc., etc. Porphyry (300 A.D.) found
such startling correspondence between Daniel’s predictions and
historical events that he argued Daniel wrote after the events an
argument that would necessitate Daniel living in our own time. The
sufferings of Christ are so minutely told in Is. 53 and Psalm 22, that
Bolingbroke asserted Jesus brought on his own crucifixion by a series
of preconcerted measures —an absurdity. The Roman Emperor Julian
(361-363 A.D.) knowing of Christ’s prediction concerning Jerusalem
set an army of workmen to rebuild it. Result: Mysterious outbreaks
of fire came from the foundations and scorching the men caused the
attempt to be abandoned. Dying on the battlefield, Julian cried, “0
Galilean, thou hast conquered.”
While Daniel, John and other prophet sforetell of Christ’s Re-
turn and the Day of Vengeance, a prophet also means one who brings
to light or expounds. As in God’s revelation of Himself, their pro-
phecies consist of a series of progressive revelations —the further we
go the more we are told. Generally the prophets wrote and under-
stood not (Dan. 12-8). Hence early expounders cannot be as correct
as those later. The opposite, however, prevails concerning general
doctrine, as a river is purer at its source. The two books that mostly
concern the Christian to-day are Revelation (literally Apocalypse)
and Daniel. Daniel is more easily understood, as its symbols are
explained. The Apocalypse is not so easily understood. It is a sym-
bolic book, and few of its symbols are explained. Christ signified it
unto John (1-1). The Greek is “semaino”—to write not in plain
words, but by signs and symbols. Why should it be so given reasons
are many. One is that under Pagan Rome its possession in literal
language would have been high treason to its possessor. Hence one
must translate it into literal language from a study of context, and
symbolic language, and comparison with other scripture, always re-
membering that where a symbol cannot adequately portray an event
the event is necessarily in literal language, while on the other hand
it is folly to confound a thing with the thing signified.
Revelation was given to John on Palm os in A.D. 96, as stated
by Irenaeus, a pupil of Polycarp and Papias, who were disciples of
St. John. Some not perceiving the analogy between Jewish events
and Christian confound its visions with the Fall of Jerusalem, thus
placing its date prior to A.D. 70. Christ gave it to the Christian


Church, for Christians and it concerns Christians. It contains Jewish
Imagery because Israel in the flesh was typical of Israel in the Spirit,
hence the things signified arc Christian. It .treats of things (1-19)
that John “saw” —the visions of (1-8 to 20) “the things which are,”
relating to the states of the church then prevailing (chps. 2-3), and
those things “which shall be hereafter” which were shortly to come
to pass (1-1), as the time was at hand (1-3, 22-10). Hence the book
was not to be sealed until the time of the end, as Daniel’s vision was
(Dan. 12-9) .
In Revelation a day is one year (Ezek. 4-5, 6; Numbs. 14-32);
360 days are reckoned to a year and 30 days to a month. The visions
are not consecutive but in parallel series, and are sometimes trans-
posed. Agreeably to its statements its visions began to materialise
soon after A.D. 96, and the fulfilment has been in progress ever since.
This was perceived by nearly all the writers of the first fifteen cen-
turies, including the reformers, but many are now taking the book
literally, and therefore put every thins* from the fourth chanter in the
future. It is called the literalist or futurist interpretation, and is
the opposite to the extreme of spiritualising everything. “Eat my
body and drink my blood” and “this is my body” no Protestant takes
literally. The Bible is both figurative and literal, and one must
determine which is correct. The futurist interpretation takes the
church from the world before the visions begin to materialise, leaving
practically nothing to apply to the Christian Church, and renders
unfulfilled five chains of events determining the close proximity of
the Return to us now, of which, apart from the bare prophecies of
Daniel, Matthew and Rev. 2 and 3, we have none. It originated in
its present garb about 1600 with the Jesuit Ribera to relieve the
Papacy of the terrible stigma the book casts upon it. About 100 years
ago it found its way to England, and being zealously propagated has
won its way into the minds of thousands everywhere.
FIRST CHAIN. COURSE OF THE CHURCH.
The state of the professing church to-day marks the early ap-
proach of the Great Day of Vengeance. The second and third chapters
of Revelation give messages to seven Christian Churches in Asia Minor.
There were considerably more than seven churches there at the time
Revelation was written, but the chief state of the churches chosen
represents the seven successive stages or complete course (seven repre-
sents completeness) of the professed Christian Church to the close
of the age. Following are briefly given their respective names in the
order given in Revelation, the meanings of their names, a main charac-
taeristic ascribed, and the time of location in history. Notice the har-
mony manifest..
(1) Ephesus—desirable; praiseworthy; first century. (2) Smyrna
-sweet-smelling savour; 'tribulation; Nero’s times and later, when
Christians were burnt, sacrificed to lions, or killed, because of their
faithfulness to Christ. Smyrna endured the fiercest persecution of
all, ten ‘ 4 years” as prophesied, 303-313 A.D., under Diocletian (Rev.
2-10). (3) Pergamos—elevation; union with the world; Constantine’s
time, when the church “married” the state. (4) Thyatira—song of
works; death; to the Reformation Era and onwards, when the church
was relying on works for justification, when works bring no justifica-
tion (Gal. 2-16). (5) Sardis—the escaping ones or those called out;


non-remembrance; the Protestant Churches after the Reformation,
who soon began to forget all that Protestantism meant. (6) Phila-
delphia—brotherly love; word of his patience; watching for Christ’s
Return (Ps. 37-7) ; 1831 and onwards, which marked the great revival
of Christ’s Return, when Christians manifested so much love towards
each other. (7) Laodicea —judging the people; lukewarm, and urged
to repent because of the quick return of Christ; the present time;
the hour on the world’s dial is late —supper time (Rev. 3-20).
Don’t be a Laodicean. She is declared to be of all others too con-
fident, wretched, pitiable, blind, poor and naked, and will be spued
out of Christ’s mouth at His Coming (Rev. 3-14 to 21). Become a
Philadelphian. Look for Christ’s early return, keep the Command-
ments, and remain faithful. You will then reap the glorious promises
given and be kept from the hour of temptation coming upon all the
world (Rev. 3-7 to 13).
SECOND CHAIN. FRENCH REVOLUTION.
The Gospel or Good News with which the Church was born
was at first uncontaminated in its purity and therefore potent, uncon-
querable. With the decline of the Church, however, it became marred,
veneered with corruption, until instead of saving it producd death. The
Church guided the Gospel and the Gospel as presented reflected the
state of the Church. Under the symbols of seals, horses and riders,
Rev. 6-1 to 8 outlines the courses of the Gospel and the Church, ter-
minating with a vision of martyred souls followed by forerunners of
the end of the age. The seals also prefigure in a preliminary sense the
state of the Roman Empire from 66 A.D. to 321 A.D.
Under the First Seal a white horse goes forth (a horse was then
a token of news), and a characteristic of the ruler is a conquering-
spirit denoting the Church’s success in its early stages. Second, a
red horse, finding a climax of trouble and bloodshed in the overthrow
of paganism by the Christian Emperor Constantine, when the Church
received a sword, emblematic of civil authority. Under the Third
Seal (324 A.D. to 533) the Church fell from favour, bringing itself
into judgment (balance denotes equity, justice) by the gross super-
stitions, worldliness, and moral corruption of the time, producing
spiritual want and famine and reflecting the Gospel as "black.” Under
the Fourth Seal (533 A.D., the rise of the Papacy, to the Reformation
Era) the Church was death to over 50 million persons. Hades (not
Hell, as A. Y.) naturally followed, and the Gospel reflected the pale-
ness of death. Under the Fifth Seal (6-9 to 11) souls of Christian
martyrs are seen joined later after a little season, even after the Re-
formation was well established, with some hundreds of thousands
more.
The French Revolution embraces the Sixth Seal (Rev. 12 to 17),
when the Papal sun or supreme ruling power of the day was eclipsed
(cp. Gen. 37-9, 10), France as the moon or chief subordinate power
reflecting the! "sun,” became as blood, and the stars or religious
princes and political rulers fell (cp. Dan. 8-9 to 11), the political
heaven (cp. Dan. 4-22) departing and every form of established autho-
rity or mountain (France called its Committee of Public Safety The
Mountain) and independent interests or islands set up removed.
Again, practically all the established kingdoms of Europe (cp. Je.
51-25) and many provinces or lesser kingdoms (cp. Is. 41-5) made war


on France, many fleeing to them to escape the wrath, trance recog-
nising in the turmoil following her public war against God and t e
Bible, the Wrath of Heaven, in so far that she resorted to the Govern-
mental Bodies (or mountains) and members of the assemblies (rocks
composing the mountains, cp. Matt. 16-18) to find a means of escape
from the trouble by having Robespierre acknowledge the Supreme
Being in 1794 and the Bible recalled in 1796. An alternative reading
for chief captains, v. 15, is Military Tribunes, for which the French
Revolution is notorious. The Revolution marked the beginning of
the time of the end and was a manifestation in a modified form of
the Great Day of Vengeance itself, when the “mountains and
islands” are no more found (Rev. 16-18 to 20).
Rev. chpts. 4 and 5, which are a transposition of the termination
to the six seals, follow here, with which cp. Dan. 7 from v. 9, compar-
ing in. particular verses 9, 10, 13, 14 with Rev. 4-2 co 4 and l —,
remembering that cast down equals set down, Ancient of Days is a
Chaldean name for God, and that the horn mentioned is as history
indisputably identifies, the Papacy. The visions bespeak the giving
of justice to the saints in the consumption of the Papal power from
1798, the individ nal worthiness of the saints for the first resurrection
(cp. Fhill. 3-11; 1 Peter, 4-17; Luke 20-35, not world, Grk. age; Rev.
5-4) and the investure of Christ as king ((cp. Luke 19-12 to 15) from a
throne set in mid-heaven or thereabouts. The termination concludes
in ch. 7 with the sealing of 144,000 Christians (cp. James 1-1) and the
gathering of the saints prior to Christ’s Return when leaving Heaven
to usher in the Day of Vengeance, silence reigns (ch. 8-1).
THIRD CHAIN. SEVEN TRUMPET JUDGMENTS.
From 395 A.I). onwards, the Roman Empire was afflicted with
severe judgments embraced under seven trumpets in Rev., 8
to 11. A careful study of scripture symbolism and history identifies
the trumpets with the following events with sufficient certainty as
to be almost unanimously received by expositors of fulfilled prophecy.
The first four trumpets embrace the hostile incursions of Alaric
and the Groths and Huns from 395 to 410 A.D., Genseric and the
Vandals (429-477), Attila and the Huns (433-453), and the founding
of the Gothic Kingdom by Heruli (476-560). Mahommed follows nexc
with the Saracens, fittingly symbolised as locusts (sth Trumpet, ch.
9-1 to 11). The Saracens" entered Syria in 632, bearing with them*
Abubeker’s instructions similar to the command in v. 4. By 782 A.D.
their ravages and the progress of their empire had ceased —150 years
(v. 5). In 625 Mahommed was in Arabia preaching, and from October
of that year to June, 626, the air there was darkened by an eclipse
of the sun —a literal confirmation of v. 2. The sixth trumpet followed
with the loosing of the four angels (Grk. messengers) of God's judg-
ments (v. 14) in the leaders of the Suljukians, who crossed the
Euphrates in 1063 A.D. (date of loosing unknown), the Moguls (1212),
Othman Turks (1317), and Moguls under Tamerlane in 1400, the
Othmans ending the imperial power of Rome with the fall of Con-
stantinople, May 29th, 1453, which, reckoned from May 15th, 1062,
would equal 391 years 2 weeks, as required (v. 15). The fall of Con-
stantinople brought the Greeks and their books into Western Europe,
bringing in the revival of learning and thereby hastening the Great
Reformation (1517), symbolically outlined in ch. 10.


During the Papal term of power of 1260 years, the Holy City or
Church (cp. Rev. 21-9, 10) was trodden underfoot, but God’s witnesses
comprising the wild and true olive trees (v. 3-4, cp. Roms. 11- , )
witnessed for true teaching or prophesying until 1793, when they were
killed —i.e., silenced or dead to expounding when the Bible, their
life to witnessing ,was taken away (v. 7), until France recalled it
just three and a half years later (v. 11) in feaay re-established religion,
and won for it and the witnesses higher respect than ever from the
nations around (v. 12). In the same “hour” the tenth of the Papal
City of Babylon fell (cp. Rev. 17-5, 18) in the French Revolution)
('France is one of the ten offshoots of the Roman Empire), and with
it the abolishment of 7,000 titles (Grk. names of men), borne wit-
ness to by examiners of French records. The Reign of Terror lasted
1793-4 when France became afraid of her rejection of God, and
nationally acknowledged Him in 1794, an event described by Thiers
as a iC singularly grand and beautiful event unparalleled in the his-
tory of the world” (v. 13).
The seventh trumpet sounded next (v. 15), and embraces the anger
of the nations, especially since 1848, the time of reward and judgment,
and to those destroying the earth wrath and destruction (v. 18). That
time is now, and therefore at hand is Armageddon, also a mighty
revolution and great incursions of (probably) Eastern nations (v. 19,
cp. 8-5, 16-12; Ps. 97-4, 18-14, 15; Is. 28-2, ref. to Assyrian armies),
when the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdoms of God
and His Christ (v. 15 to 17).
FOURTH CHAIN. ROME PAGAN AND PAPAL.
Revelation, ch. 12, opens with the early Christian Church paining
to be delivered from the Diocletian persecution (303-313). The child
is not Jesus, because this is one of the things to be, from A.D. 96 (4-1),
though the symbols are drawn from facts connected with Christy Two
hundred and eighty days is the period of gestation the period in
years from 33 A.D., the date of Paul’s conversion, to 313 A.D,, when
Constantine was “born” to the Church, delivered her from her pagan
persecutors, as Michael overthrew Paganism, 324 A.D., thence was
placed in the ecclesiastical heaven in Rome. The rulers of the Roman
Empire, the seven forms of government (or heads) with the supreme
ruling power therein as indicated by the seven crowns and the ten
horns, the ten uncrowned rulers of the ten Roman provinces at that
time constitute the dragon of v. 3. The Roman standard was a fiery
dragon and the diadem was the imperial badge. Whilst proving a
deliverer, Constantine proved an oppressor, hence the flight of the
true church in the many whom he forced into seclusion. From them
sprang the Waldenses, Paulicians, Albigenses, and other Protestants
who suffered the special enmity of Rome for 1260 years; v. 17 probably
implies a persecution yet to come (c. 14-12, yet future).
With the conquest of Italy (476 A.D.), the Gothic rulers took
possession of the Western Empire and established it under the ruler-
ship of ten kings. Hence the horns are seen crowned in 13-1. Con-
stantine established the seventh head of civil-religious government,
which was interrupted by Julian, a zealous pagan (361 A.D.), but
renewed by Jovian (363). This “beast” from the sea continued to
the French Revolution, when the Roman code of government was
abolished, and he it was who was the civil tool of the papacy against


Protestants. Contemporaneous with this beast was the Papal Beast
of two horns, denoting its civil-religious rulership (v. 11). “Before
him” in v. 12 is literally “in his presence.” The wonders or miracles
so-called of the Papacy are proverbial. The image or likeness (v.
14) is the Vatican’s ecclesiastical organisation with the Pope as King
—a body similar to the rulership of the Beast under Constantine’s
government. It was a monarchy in all respects, and hence a true
image of the Beast. The solution of the number (v. 18) is Lateinos,
on record from about 170 A.D. It totals 6G6 exactly in Greek nume-
rals. The inscription on the Pope’s crown totals 666 in Roman
numerals.
Passing over 14-1 to 5, manifestly a transposition and follows
v. 20, because Christ is not seen coming until v. 14, we come to the
great Gospel and mission movement, notably from 1799, which has
spread to all the world (v. 6). Its next phase (v. 7) began about 1844.
Great Babylon is the aggregate of the Papacy’s nationalised church
governments (the image), and its fall is their dejection as civil estab-
lishments—l79B and 1870. Though dejected, Babylon still exists, and
many Christians are still worshipping it and the Beast (v. 9). The
language, however, implies a revival, but remember no matter what
church it is, if it is nationalised, supported by and similarly governed
to the civil rulership, it becomes an image to the Beast. The angel
symbolises men who will fully expound the position and warn people
at the proper time (Lord, 1847). Those who will not heed the
messengers will be punished according to v. 10 and 11, which compared
with Matt. 13-40, shows that the revival of the Beast and its image
will begin just before and continue until Christ’s Return. It is the
hour of temptation of 3-10 contemporaneous with 17-12.
Whilst the “Philadelphians” will be raised above temptation,
the “Laodiceans” are exhorted to buy gold tried in the fire (3-18),
he., for a place in the first resurrection they will be tested or tried
in the keeping of God’s commandments and the faith of Jesus (14-12,
cp. 12-17) through a time of affliction. “Those who die in the Lord”
(v. 13) is considered to denote a persecution even to death for
Christ’s sake and His Truth. Their works (Grk.) go with them; he.,
they are rewarded then. As crops are gathered for preservation,
so all God’s people through Christ who constitute the wise virgin*
will be gathered from the Day of vengeance (v. 14 to 16). Note that
Christ does not descend to the earth (cp. Dan. 7-13 for “One like
Him”). This portrays the rapture many Christians are looking for.
Wrath on the wicked follows (17 to 20). They are the vine (national
apostasy (Is., ch. 5, especially v. 7 and Joel 3 from 13), and are gath-
ered and trodden without the city, Babylon, therefore outside Europe
and in Palestine, for 1600 furlongs very nearly approximate the length
of the Holy Land (cp. Rev. 19-15 to 21; Is. 66-15, 16; Ezek. 38-18 to 23
39-17 to 19).
From, among those who stand for God and Christ during the great
apostate revival at hand will probably be taken the 144,000 servants
who will be sealed against death and harm (7-1 to 8, and 14-1, cp.
Ezek. 9-4 to 7). They will be changed to immortality at the first
resurrection. The chief characteristics of the 144,000 or those from
whom the 144,000 are sealed will be a full and emphatic denial and
resistance of the assumed right of the civil rulers and legalised church


governments to legislate in the place of God, who, making their will
the rule of faith and test of Christianity, treat dissent from it as a
crime against God. The men mentioned in notes on v. 9 will probably
precede the sealing and will excite and conduct the separation and
testimony.
FIFTH CHAIN. VIAL JUDGMENTS.
The French Revolution era marked the beginning* of the “time
of the end” (Dan. 12-9). In it the 1260 years of Papal Supremacy
ended, and in it began to be poured out the seven last vials of Rev. 16-2
to 21 —termed last because they would cover the latter days. The first
was poured on the European earth about 1786, France receiving the
dregs. It produced an irritating sense of grievous oppression, which
culminated in the French Revolution (v. 2). Into this troubled sea
the second was poured, producing the bloodshed that followed from
1789, when all “superiors” whom it maintained and supported, died
(v. 3, cp. Is. 57-20). For aiding the Papacy in its persecution the
other nations received the third vial. In 1792 France declared war
on Austria. Prussia, Holland, Sardinia, Russia, Italy, Spain, England,
Switzerland, Denmark and Portugal followed. It was blood to them
while the Napoleonic Wars lasted (v. 4to 7, cp. 17-15). The Govern-
ment or successive ruling bodies symbolised by the sun, including
Napoleon, received the fourth, about 1793, when practically all Europe
became scorched, and Prance more oppressed than ever (v. 8,9).
Rome felt the fifth vial. Revolutions broke out and the Pope was
forcefully exiled (1798). France, too, as a part of the Beast’s King-
dom, felt its old pains in the forceful restoration of the Bourbon
Kings (v. 10, 11).
Turkey is the recipient of the sixth. The Euphrates runs through
Turkish territory and water means nation (Rev. 17-15). Greece re-
volted in 1821. Other territory of her large empire she soon lost,
until a mere fraction now remains (v. 12). The classes propagating
(1) Romish doctrines, (2) lawlessness, and (3) infidelity, including
rationalism, higher criticism, spiritualism, etc., are considered to be
the three demons like frogs of v. 13, 14. The present revivals of these
doctrines have all been subsequent to 1830. They are called demons
because they come between man and his faith in God (demons were
originally regarded as mediating spirits), and frogs because of their
noisy, incessant, clamorous, restless agitation, and their vain boasting
and great swelling words of vanity. V. 15 warns of Christ’s Return.
With Jesuitism originated the modern revival of the widespread doc-
trine of a personal antichrist, satanically gifted with power, who is
to rise in Jerusalem and dominate the world, to whom the spirit of
liberty will naturally oppose with all its might, and likewise the spirit
discountenancing the Bible, it not expecting or perceiving the truth,
and hence will believe the lie. Let Christ be mistaken for Antichrist
and how easily will the nations be gathered to Armageddon, Palestine
(v. 16).
The seventh vial is poured into the air. Its effects will therefore
be universal. Armageddon and the Day of Vengeance then follow,
precipitating a mighty revolution that will divide the great European
ecclesiastical city into three factions, plunge the cities of the nations
into conflict and bring down every form of government and all inde-
pendent interests. To all this will be added the rapid incursions of


hostile armies beating down like hail (v. 18 to 21, cp. 17-12 to 14 ; Is.
8-9, 10; Ps. 2-2; and notes on seventh trumpet, ch. 11-la and sixth
seal, 6-12 to 17). Read the horrors of the Fall of Jerusalem and the
French Revolution. They were all days of vengeance and all types in
a partial sense of the seventh vial. You are warned. Heed not and
your blood will be upon your own head. Ch. 15-2 to 4is probably a
transposition and follows here.
SIXTH CHAIN. CHRIST’S GREAT PROPHECY.
Upon the Mount of Olives Jesus unfolded to His disciples the
signs marking the Fall of Jerusalem, His (Grk.) Presence, and end
of the age in relation to the Jews, and because the history of Israel
is a typical history of the Christian Church or true Israel. He inci-
dentally gives the events leading up to His Return and the end of
the age in relation to the Christian. See Matthew 24-5 to 80.
Concerning the Christian fulfilment: From the time of Hadrian
(117 A..D) to 1682, twenty-four false messiahs are recorded. In de-
fence of one, Cazibee, the Jews lost over half-a-million persons (132
A.D.), v. 5. From 250 A.D. to 800 wars and rumours of Avars in
Europe, especially in Italy, were frequent (v. 6), kingdom rising
against kingdom and strifes occurring daily. Famine and pestilence
accounted for millions in Italy, England, Constantinople, Russia, and
Eastern nations, 1346 A.D. seeing 25 millions perish in Europe alone.
Earthquakes occurred in Asia Minor, Constantinople, Portugal, Italy,
etc., in or through Avhich millions perished (v. 7). Early Christians
endured ten organised persecutions between 81 A.D. and 313 A.D. (v.
9). From 337 A.D. the Church became divided against itself, excom-
munications, arrogance and unnecessary restrictions causing Chris-
tians to betray and hate one another (v. 10).
In March, 533 (went into effect March, 538) and 607 A.D., impe-
rial decrees conferred power upon the church which opened the way
for it to travel on the new lines of Pope Gregory the Great (590 A.D.)
in order to constitute a Latin Christianity. Incidentally false teachers
lose, and the acceptance of numerous false doctrines followed (v. 11).
Because iniquity then abounded love grew cold, hatred came in, and
bloodthirstiness followed in the cruel persecution of the Paulicians in
A.D. 679 and 844, the rise of the Crusades (a Papal invention) and
the persecution of the Waldenses in 1179 (v. 12). Thus the way was
paved for the great Reformation tribulation. In fulfilment of v. 14
a society was formed for the propagation of the Gospel in foreign
parts in 1701. Others soon followed until the testimony has scone to
all the world.
The last abomination in Jerusalem (v. 15-20) was the Saracenic
"desolation” in 637 A.D., bringing in a time of affliction in Palestine
for both Christians and Jews, which continued more or less furiously,
especially during the Crusades, until the Ottoman Turks peaceably
took control in 1516, when toleration for pilgrims followed. That same
year saw Tetzel in Europe selling Papal indulgences. Luther saw
him, too, and with that came the Reformation or unparalleled tribula-
tion for Christians in earnest, which continued with Satanic fury until
about 1685 (v. 21). From Mch. 538 to Mch. 1798, year of Papal down-
fall, Christians were in the hands of the Papacy—l26o "days” as
prophesied (Dan. 7-25). Had the day of Papal persecution extended
until 1798 few Christians could have survived. To Rome it meant exter


mination, and she very nearly did it (v. 22). Then came spriritualism
in 1848, followed by Christian Science, pantheism, higher criticism,
etc., bringing a new era of false teachers, and the false Christs that
have now begun to appear, (v. 23 to 27).
Immediately after that tribulation, for it did not cease until the
suppression of the Jesuits in 1773, the sun was darkened, constituting
the famous Dark Day of May 9th, 1780, the true cause of which is a
mystery to science. In the night, the moon, though at the full, gave
no light until midnight, when it appeared with the stars (cp. Is.
13-10). On November 13, 1833, the stars fell and continued to fall for
5 hours. The next sign is the shaking of the powers of the heavens
(v. 29), with Nations in Distress and Perplexity (Luke 21-25 to 27,
Cp., Haggai 2-6, Is. 13-13, Joel 3-16). Rev. 6-17 symbolic, seenm to
be a fuller delineation of Matt. 24-29 literal, in which case the shaking
of the heavens is equivalent to their departing as a scroll, or as Is. 34-4
has it, “dissolved and rolled together as a scroll. As we are this side
of the shaking of the heavens then Is. 34-1 to 3 must be finding at least
a preliminary fulfilment now remembering that the word destroyed
in V. 2 is more properly rendered devoted.
SEVENTH CHAIN.—THE WORLD’S EMPIRES.
The world’s four great empires and the coming of Christ and the
fifth Universal Empire are clearly foretold in the Book of Daniel.
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, from 604-561 8.C., desiring to know
the future (Dan. 2-29) had a dream picturing a great image of a man,
and to Daniel, a Jewish captive in Babylon was made known its inter-
pretation, who in turn expounded the dream to Nebuchadnezzar.
The head of the image (Dan. 2-32) represented Nebuchadnezzar.
His was the first and finest of gentile empires. The cuneiform inscrip-
tions lately excavated from the site where Babylon once stood, attest
the authenticity of Daniel. Thus Nebuchadnezzar’s pride (4-30) is
witnessed by one, and his insanity (4-34) by another. A third speaks
of the conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar predicted in Ezekiel
3-10 and Jeremiah 43-10 —predictions previously considered as having
no historial fulfilment. Babylon fell before the Medes and Persians
538 B.C.
The Medo-Persian Empire came next (v. 39). It lasted until 334
8.C., and is denoted by the breast and arms of silver (v. 32), to which
its combination of two nations answers. In ch. 7-5 it is symbolised by
a bear with three ribs in its mouth: Babylon, Lydia and Egypt—which
it conquered. A ram being defeated by a goat—Grecia—symbolises
it in 8-3 to 7-20. The stomach and thighs of brass (2-32) denote the
third universal empire (2-39). Under Alexander the Great, its first
king, the Graeco- Macedonian kingdom became mistress of the world,
334 B.C. In 7-6, it is a leopard with four wings and four heads. When
Alexander died his four leading generals partitioned the empire into
four divisions, namely, Syria, Egypt, Greece, and Asia Minor, includ-
ing Thrace (cp. 8-5 to 8, 21, 22). From Syria rose Antiochus
Epiphanes, 175 8.C., the great persecutor of the Jews. (8-9 to 12, 23 to
26). His doings fully accord with the prophecy.
The fourth empire (2-40) was the Roman, denoted by the legs of
iron (v. 33). At Christ’s birth it was mistress of the world. The iron
despotism of Rome is proverbial, and its iron monarchy the by-word
of historians. By 476 A.D., it had become divided into 10 kingdoms


(7-7, 23, 24; 2-41 to 43). Just who they all are now, conquest and dis-
union since then has made it difficult to ascertain. The 10 kingdoms
of Rev. ch. 17, when developed should dispel the uncertainty. The
rise of democracy is significant. From the pure imperialism of the
autocracy, the governing power is now centered in the people, where
we find a mixture of imperialism and democracy—the iron and clay
mixture of the image’s feet, that won’t hold together. Subsequent to
the 10 kingdoms came the papacy (7-20, 21, 24, 25), before whom fell
the kingdoms of the Heruli, 493 A.D., Vandals, 534 A.D., and Ostro-
goths, 538 A.D., of which the Pope’s triple crown is significant. The
Beast with his horns is slain and destroyed (7-11), or according to
ch. 2-34, 35
''A stone smites the image upon its feet of ten toes and smashes
them. Then the whole structure becomes as chaff and disappears,
while the stone grows and fills the whole earth. V. 44 and 45 give the
interpretation. God is to set up a kingdom (the Kingdom of God, or
Heaven, or Messiah’s Kingdom, so understood by the Jews themselves*
and early Christians that will break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms (existing to-day) and will stand (Heb.) for the age. (cp. Is.
8-9 to 12, 2nd Psalm, Matt. 21-44, Luke 20-17, 18.) Hence Daniel is
in agreement with Rev. Be not deceived therefore with the world’s
conversion and peace-bringing talks of man (ep. Ezek. 13-10). You
are warned.
EIGHTH CHAIN.— THE TURKISH EMPIRE.
At the time Turkey comes to her end the Day of Vengeance m
ushered in. Daniel, Chpts. 11 and 12. As aforementioned, Alexander’s
Empire became four divisions after his death (7-6, 11-3, 4). In Ch. 11,
the rulers of Asia Minor and Greece are not particularly followed, but
those of Syria and Egypt and their successors, the kings of the North
and South respectively, are in prominence because of their relations
with Palestine.
Prom v. 5 to 19 is embraced with that of their successors the feud
between the first king of the south, Ptolemy Soter, who possessed
Palestine, Coelo-Syria, and Phoenicia, in addition to Egypt, and
Antiochus Theos successor of Seleucus, first king of the north and pos-
sessor of the Syriac division of the Grecian Empire. V. 20 mentions
Seleucus Philopater, who when he had raised, by excessive taxation,
an indemnity due to the Romans, was privately poisoned, 176 B.C. V.
21, to the end refers firstly to Antiochus Epiphanes, of infamous
memory, who fulfilled to the letter the prophet’s predictions. He died
164 8.C.. In his steps followed the Romans, including the Papacy, and
the Saracens and Turks repeating in principle and practice the doings
of Antiochus. The Romans have been identified with the Libyans
(literally Lubbites), and the Saracens and Turks with the Ethiopians
(literally Cushites). V. 43, which is more properly rendered, “shall
follow in his steps. ”
Turkey, though owning Syria, is a “king of the north,” and the
last one of this prophecy. V. 40 refers to the time of the end of his
empire, and by comparison with other prophecy to the time of the end
of the age also. In i 798 the French, under Napoleon, possessed Egypt,
France thus becoming King of the South. Egypt was then a semi-
dependency of Turkey, hence the taking of Egypt was a push to
Turkey to move out. Turkey declared war against France; gent strong


bodies of Turks, swarms of Mussulmen and a fleet of ships, reinforced
by English and Russian vessels. On May 21, 1799, Napoleon sounded
the note of retreat for the first time. From Acre the Turks passed
into Palestine and its provinces, which again fell to Turkish oppres-
sion. Edom, Moab, and Ammon, outside the line of march, escaped.
The Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, and other arabs, the Turks
have never been able to subdue. Forty thousand crowns annually the
Turks pay to them for the safe passage of their caravans (v. 41).
Aboukir, Rosetta, Ramanick, Elmenayer, Cairo and Alexandria
then fell to the Turks and their allies (v. 42), along with Egypt from
the ruler of which the Turkish sultan exacted an annual tribute of
gold and silver; 600,000 measures of corn and 400,000 measures of
barley. In 1853, Persia (East), and Russia (North), angered the Sul-
tan. Russia, being the chief aggressor, Turkey turned on her, “fought
like devils/ ’ as an American said, and won several victories before
England and France came to her aid. Turkey is next to pitch the
tents of his palace (or camp) in Jerusalem, which lies between the
Dead Sea and the Mediterranean Sea and Mt. Zion (cp. Joel 8-17),
when he shall come to his end (v. 45). Turkey is now encamped at
Jerusalem.
At that time, Christ to us, and Messiah to the Jews, designated
Michael by Daniel (Michael, the Archangel, presides over human
virtue, and commands the nations, hence the name is appropriated to
Christ), stands up, i.e., to reign (cp. 11-4), the time of great trouble
Is ushered in, certain Jewdsh living are delivered, and the resurrection
takes place (Dan. 12-1 to 3). At that time, may cover several years, yet
it may not. The appearances are that the Day of Vengeance is dis-
tressingly near. Be on the safe side and flee now from the wrath at
hand.
SIGNS IN THE HEAVENS.
In the last days, wonders are to be seen in the heavens—sun,
moon and stars (Luke 21-25, Joel 2-30, 31). In a book entitled “Last
Day Tokens/" authored by Mr. J. N. Loughborough, of Lodi, Cali-
fornia, is a collection of marvellous unexplainable signs that have
appeared in the heavens notably from 1814 to 1909. They are well
authtenticated, most have been reported in periodicals, and have been
witnessed in many cases by the communities of whole towns and cities.
Suns and rainbow signs are the most common—significant, consider-
ing that Christ, at His Returning, is called the Sun of Righteousness
(Mai. 4-1, 2), and that the rainbow is symbolic of God’s covenant.
On April 14, 1814, the sun was covered in several parts of Russia
for a whole day under a cloud. On each side of the cloud appeared
a clear sun, under the clouded sun a clear white cross, under the cross
a serpent (cp. Rev. 20, 2), and under the serpent a sickle (cp. Rev.
14-14, 15). On the opposite side of the heavens was The moon. In
the “Cincinnatti Sun,” March 27, 1843, is an account of the appear-
ance of a serpent of dazzling brightness in the sky, which turned to a
lively bright red, deep and awful. It then twisted in to the letter G,
then O, then D. The parable to the King of Tyrus (Ezk. 28-12 to 19)
is considered a veiled reference to Satan, the Serpent of Rev. 20-2.
He is seen to have been once bright and perfect, but becoming the*
diabolos (adversary) of God and man, and man’s accuser (Satan), he
became the world’s death and bloodshed; but God will yet be all in


all (1 Cor., 15-28)..
On May 19, 1843, a great sword, exceeding bright, was seen, fol-
lowed two days later by a splendid crown, highly ornamented and as
red as blood—symbols of justice and kingship, with vengeance in the
crown. In Valencia, and other places in Spain, October 16, 1816, a
bright sun appeared two hours after sunset, surrounded by seven stars,
Ihe whole lighting up the city as bright as day. In County Down, Ire-
land, August, 1858, rainbow circles were seen passing through four
suns—two on each side of the real sun. In Stockholm, 1909, a sun to
the west of the real sun appeared and shone with all the colors of the
rainbow. It was reported in Lloyd’s “Weekly News,” February 28,
1909.
On September, 1870, in Northwestern Illinois, U.S.A., was seen
about midnight, a large bright circle of golden red in the sky, which
soon evolved into a beautiful crown with sharp prongs. This disap-
peared and was replaced by a band of red light extending from east
to west with prongs issuing from its south side and pointing to the
south-west. The band looked like a timber saw. Then from the north
came a large army of men, fully equipped, arms shouldered. From
the south came another army. Marching towards each other they met
at the red band and opened fire. No report was heard, but the smoke
with the fire and confusion of battle was clearly seen. Rifle butts
were next used, the clubbing continuing until no one was left standing.
The scene then disappeared. After a little while a bright, flaming
red light came from the east and extending to the west revealed a
terrible scene of dead bodies and broken guns. Parties in Wisconsin,
Ohio, Missouri, lowa and Sweden, attest to having seen it. Compare
Jer. 25-32, 33), which refers to Armageddon.
Signs in the moon have been numerous. The New York “Express,”
of May 25, 1848, contained the following headlines:—“Wonderful
Phenomena—Singular appearance of the Moon—A Spot on the Sur-
face —The Moon Split into Fragments—Lights Shooting Forth Form
the Appearance of a Man.” In Sweden, 1870, the moon was seen
divided into colored quarters of red, white, yellow and green re-
spectively. It was seen by hundreds of persons. Many other moon
signs are recorded, too numerous to mention here. At Urskong, some
twenty miles north of Christiania, Norway, was seen in August, 1896,
for an hour or more, two hours after sunset, in a clear sky, a large red
cross and under it in great red letters, the initial letters to an important
sentence in the Norwegian language: J.K.S. —Jeg Kommer Snart: “I
Come Quickly.” You may still see it painted on the rocks round
about. The cross is symbolic of Christ; the phrase is His (Eev. 22?7,
12, 20; 3-11), and the significance of the color is attendant on His
Return.
THE FALL OF JERUSALEM.
Concerning the Jewish fulfillment of Matt. 24: On the authority
of the Jewish historian, Josephus 37 to 97 A.D.), Palestine was over-
run with false Christs who deceived multitudes. Especially under the
reign of Nero, they were so frequent, that some were taken or killed
almost every day, (v. 5). Though peace was reigning when Christ
lived, about 38 years after His death, violent wars became frequent
throughout the Roman Empire, and many wars were declared and
threatened but left unexecuted (v. 6). Jews and Syrians rose up


against each other, and Italy was in a turmoil of civil strife—-kingdom
against kingdom, while famines raged in Home, Laodicea, Hierapolis,
Colosse, Smyrna, Chios, Samos, Miletus, Pompeii, Crete, etc. divers
places indeed (v. 7). In fulfilment of Luke 21-11 (additional), a star
resembling a sword hung over Jerusalem for a year, the Jewish temple
was mysteriously lit up as bright as day for three hours one night
(A.D. 65), a huge gate of solid brass, which it took twenty men to
move opened of its own accord, chariots and troops besieging cities
were seen in the clouds, a noise as of a multitude was heard saying,
“Let us depart hence,” and a person cried, “Woe, woe, to Jerusalem ’
for seven years and five months. (See Josephus’s Wars of the Jews,
Ch. 5, Book 6.) Tacitus, a Pagan Roman historian, living at that time,
mentions three of these signs Josephus gives.
By persecution, imprisonment, and scourging, early Christians
including the apostles, were delivered up to Councils, were beaten and
brought before kings and rulers ,and thousands were persecuted and
killed (v. 9). Then seditions and party strifes raged with furious
hatred in Jerusalem prior to and during its destruction (v. 10), false
prophets (public expounders or teachers) abounded, many deceiving
the people to think Heaven would send aid (v. 11), while during the
siege thousands fell by the hands of their neighbours (v. 12). To all
the then known world the gospel was preached (Coll. 1-6, 23. Rom.
1-8, and contemporaneous testimony) Paul even supposing to have
gone as far as Britain. The end came in A.I). 70 (v. 14), when the
Romans, under Titus desolated Jerusalem, over one million people
perishing (v. 15, cp. Luke 21-20, Dan 9-26, 27). The Jews themselves
understand the abomination here mentioned to be the Roman Army.
It was a desecration of their most holy things and brought in an un-
]barrelled time of trouble (to the Jews), but not until the Christians
duly warned fled from the city to Pella, in Judea, and other places
(v. 16 to 21), Titus was for reducing the city by famine, in which case,
with regard to the circumstances, few would have survived. The Jews
forced the war, and so shortened the days (v. 12) of vengeance (Luke
21-22). The Fall of Jerusalem was merely one affliction in the seven
times or 2520 years of punishment for their sins (Lev. 26-24 to 46).
Consequently their affliction has continued until now (cp. Luke Vat.
Ms. 21-24, Dan. 9-26, 27), but will expire in 1916. 1923, or 1934, accord-
ing to whether times count from the servitude, captivity, or desolation
of Jerusalem, 605, 598, 587 B.C. (cp. Ezek 33-21), respectively. The
great sign of the expiration of the days is the return of the Jews to
Palestine, where they will again be bothered with false Christs (Matt.
23 to 26) ; again be given signs (Joel 3-15, 16) ; and again besieged
(v. 28, Zech. 12-13), when the Messiah will come, and with him Jewish
belief and the fulness of the times of the Gentiles (cp. Roms. 11-25), in
one huge time of trouble (for the Gentiles (Dan. 12-1), when the Jews
will be completely restored. (Dan. 12-7). The Gentiles’ seven times
(Dan 4-23 second application) began somewhere this side of 604 B.C.
JEWISH RETURN TO PALESTINE.
In rejecting Jesus the Jews overflowed their cup of iniquity.
When Jerusalem fell in consequence, the remnant that escaped was
sent to the mines in Egypt, many were made slaves, completely glutting
the markets, others were scattered among all nations, and left few in
number, their cities laid desolate and waste, the sword was drawn


after them, and in this state they have abided without king, govern-
ment, or sacrifice, etc., for some 1800 years. (Foretold in Dent. Ch. 28,
4-27, Lev. 26-33, 34, Hosea. 3-4.) The figtree is the national emblem
of the Jews hence the blasting of the figtree by Jesus was typical of
their national destruction, and though they were to suffer persecution,
woe unto them through whom the persecution came, for all who oppress
them will perish (Is. 49-25, 26; 41-11, 12; cp. Luke 17-1).
In their exile they have been providentially cared for (Jer. 31-28
ep. 30-11), for their punishment is not to be perpetual (Ezek. 36-24 to
31; Lev. 26-44, 45; Rms. 11-1, 2, 23 to 26.) God will remain true to
His Covenant and for his Holy Name’s Sake restore their land to
them (Ezek, 36-22, 32), gathering them (Ezek. 37-21, 22, 25, 36-24;
Micah. 7-18; Amos 9-14, 15; Jer. 32-44, 31-10) for his purposes concern-
ing them, when after a time of exceptional tribulation and purging—
Jacob’s Trouble—(Jer. 30-1 to 9; Ezek. 22-17 to 22) a remnant will be
saved, (Zech. 13-8, 9; Zeph. 3-12, 13; Micah. 4-6, 7), who will be
brought under the bond of the covenant (Ezek. 20-37) for there will
come out of Zion the Deliverer—Christ—who will turn away their
ungodliness (cp. Dan. 12-1; Michael . . Thy people will be deliver-
ed) and so all Israel will be saved (Rms. 11-25, 26 cp. 23), to become
nationally supreme (Is. 60-3, 10 to 12, 14-15), and a praise and a bless-
ing to all nations (Zeph. 3-19, 20; Zech. 8-13, 23). They are not all
Israel that are of Israel, neither is a child of the flesh counted as a
child of God (Rms. 9-6, 7). A Jew must therefore be saved as a
Gentile is saved—by faith. Hence the national purgation called
Jacob’s Trouble, (cp. Ezek. 20-34 to 38; Mai. 3-3; Zeph. 3-11.)
There is only to be a partial restoration before Christ returns (cp.
Pent. 30-4; Is. 27-12, 11-11, 12; Micah, 4-6, 7; Ezek. 20-32 to 34; Matt.
24-31; Is. 66-20. Swift beasts in this V. is considered better rendered
swaying furnaces—quick railway trains). It is when they are partially
restored that Jacob’s trouble begins. Russia reaching the culmination
or her dislike to the Jews and her passionate desire for Palestine in-
tensified by its then increased prosperity comes with all her allies at
that time including Turks, Persians, Armenians, etc., like a cloud upon
the land of unwalled villages in the latter days. .He is Gog of the
land of Magog (Magog peopled Siberia), Prince of Rosh, Meshech, and
Tubal, i.e., Gog, of the land of Siberia, Prince of Russia, Moscow, and
Tobolsk. (Ezek. ch. 38 and 39, R.V.) Now Britain must safeguard
Syria to safeguard her Eastern Traffic and her understanding and
friendship with the Jews will cause her to contend with Russia (v. 13.
Merchants of Tarshish—England. Young Lions, her colonies). Eng-
land’s possession of Egypt paves the way for her protection over Pales-
tine. Jerusalem will then become a bone of contention and a cup of
trembling unto all about it. (Zech. 12-2.) AH nations will be gathered
to it (Joel 3-1, 2, 11, 12, Zech. 14-2), and all that shall burden them-
selves with it will be cut to pieces (Zech. 12-3). The Jews will be
God’s battle axe (Micah. 14-11, 13; Jer. 51-20), the nations will be
confounded at their might (Micah. 7-16), resulting in a great tumult
amongst them, with every man’s hand against his neighbour (Zech
14-13).
It is when Jerusalem is again taken that Christ returns with all
His saints, lands upon the Mt. of Olives, and goes forth to fight against
the nations (Zech. 14-3 to 5). The Jews will then see in their Messiah


the One whom they have pierced and will mourn for Him (Zech. 12-10
to 14). Then after the Great Day of Vengeance and when all those
who fought against Jerusalem have been consumed (Zech. 14-12), shall
there be one King—Jesus Christ—over all the earth and every one that
is left of all the nations that came up against Jerusalem will be
required to go up there every year (v. 16; cp. 8-22) ; in default —no
rain (v. 17 to 19). Then the following texts will find fulfilment: —
Hosea 1-10, 11, 2-23, 14-4, 8; Zeph. 3-14 to 20, cp. Is. ch. 60, 49-23, 14-2,
His. 61, 62; Jer. 3-17, 18 ; Zech. 10-6; Ezek. 39-28, 29, 23-5 to 8, etc. Be-
ginning with France in 1793 all Europe has now emancipated the Jeivsy
while from 1867 Turkey has allowed them to possess land in Palestine.
At the same time the land was being providentially got ready for
their re-occupation until now no longer is Palestine as desolate as it
was. The yearly fainfall is on the increase, they have refreshing
showers and heavy dews where previously they had none, and what
were barren hillsides are now green with vineyards and olive groves.
Papers have reported that the climate is changing. The set time has
come.
A religious revival is another “Jewish sign” of the last days.
(Hosea 3-5, cp. 5-15, 6-1). Previously Christian missionaries labored in
vain among Jews. Now there are 245,000 Jewish converts ,while apart
from Damascus, Jaffa, Safed, and other places, there is in Jerusalem
a great Church with a large membership of Hebrew Christians. There
is awakening interest in Christianity everywhere. 239,000 Hebrew and
500,000 Hebrew-German New Testaments found a ready sale some
years ago, while six <c Lives of Christ” have been published by
American Jews. In Southern Eussia there is a flourishing Church of
Hebrew converts, founded by a Jewish Eabbi, with a liturgy, articles
and creed all its own, and everywhere, but more especially in Pales-
tine, the are earnestly praying for the reconciliation of Israel.
From lying dormant for centuries Jewish national life has awakened
with phenomenal activity. The world abounds with Jewish societies,
of late inception for the colonisation of Palestine, that are becoming
stronger and more influential every year. In 1899 some 90 agents
from Russian and Roumanian societies were surveying the land.
Roumania has been credited with having 49 of such societies, which
usually render assistance if needd. Form 1897 we have had a united
Israel, and the race is animated as never before to get back. Let
Turkey—the stumbling block be removed —and their national restora-
tion will take but a day.
Jerusalem is again a Jewish city. In 1840 some 300 Jews were
in Jerusalem, 17,000 in 1885, and some 70,000 to-day out of a popula-
tion of 100,000. The Palestine Exploration Society commenced sur-
veying in 1872 (cp. Zech. 2-1 to 4). Since then numerous colonies
some 40 in number have sprung up round about the city—villages
without walls (See Ezek. 38-11), that have made Jerusalem outside
greater than Jerusalem inside, which from being a desolate Moslem
town has now become a modern city, with modern improvements of a
cab stand, adequate water supply, telegraph, electric light, police
force, well-paved streets, etc. Building has been in rapid progress;
railways now exist and others are proposed or are in course of con-
struction, trade is yearly increasing, and the price of land has risen
greatly—several hundred per cent, within a year along the Jaffa


Road, while a piece bought, some years previous to 1910, for £lOO was
in 1910, worth £l6OO.
To sum up: In the Valley of the Dry Bones of Israel there is a
shaking, and the bones are coming together. Nay, more, the sinews
and flesh are coming upon them. The skin comes next, then life. (Ezek,
37-1 to 14, espec. VII, 7,8.) After two days (1000 years each, accord-
ing to several ancient Jewish Expositors), the Jews will have been
revived (Hosea 6-2). Counted from A.D. 70 they fall out 1930. In
1934, four years after the “two days,” the limit of their captivity of
2520 years ends (see Eposition of Matt. 24, Jewish Phase), when tho
Jewish national restoration will be an accomplished fact. On the third
day, which begins from 1930, they will live in Christ’s sight (literally
presence). The figtree of Israel is putting forth its leaves (Matt. 24-
32). Therefore know that He is near, even at the doors, (v. 33.)
COMING CONFEDERACY IN EUROPE.
The next state of things to exist is a civil-religions administration.
It will continue a short time and be the last man will set up. It is
clearly foretold in Rev., ch. 17. Omitting the references therein to the
Pope’s Ecclesiastical Kingdom, designated as Babylon the Great,
examine the scarlet-colored beast there described. He is not the beast
of Ch. 13-1, in the stage there presented. He has no crowns on his
horns, showing the supreme governing power is not in the hands of
kings, he arises, not from the sea, but from the abyss, and instead of
having mere names of blasphemy, is full of them. He is that beast
first mentioned in 11-7, that the French Revolution called up.
From the abyss this beast retires from view into a spiritual or re-
ligious wildernesss, where he is seen the seat of Great Babylon (v. 3).
There his horns representing the ten dynasties of the kings of the
“Western Roman Empire” began to scorn her claims for rulership in
the European Kingdoms, confiscate her property, take away her ter-
ritory, strip her of her power and destroy her (v. 16), which continued
notably until 1870. The statement of one of Napoleon’s generals that
“they were consuming the old carcase by a slow fire,” is significant
compared with v. 16 and Dan. 7-26. The beast is presented in a three-
fold state of existence. It “was” in existence in the beast of 13-1.
Then retiring from view one could say it “is not.” But it will return
and “shall again be present.” v. 8, latter part. The oldest MS. of
Rev. reads thus; none read as A.Y.).
As in his previous stage, this beast represents civil rulers, acting
more or less in harmony in the various forms of government, symbol-
ised by the heads (v. 3,9, 10), for such is the import of the greek
word here translated kings. The “kings” are said to be “mountains. ”
(“Th ere are” should read “they are,” v. 10.) And as a mountain
is a ruling body (see Jer. 51-24, 25, where Babylon in her governing
aspect is so called), and a head is a mountain (v. 4), therefore a head is
a form of government. The Roman Empire had seven forms of
government. The old Roman historians, Livy and Tacitus, enumerate
five of them —kings, consuls, dictators, decemvirs (committees of 10
men), and military tribunes. At the writing of Revelation, A.D. 96,
these five had fallen (v. 10). The sixth, the imperial, was then
reigning in the person of Domitian, Emperor, from 81-96. The next
change came with Constantine’s civil-religious constitution, which
many consider the seventh. It fell 476 A.D., though renewed by the


Papacy later in another, an eighth form.
But ch. 17 is a vision of things in the latter days. Will VIO estab-
lish the period of time. Yes. France was imperial with Napoleon
crowned as Emperor in 1804. Prior to this, and the 1 renca
Revolution Era (mark it), consuls, the Committee of Public Safety, of
nine members, the analogy of the Roman decemvir, military tribunes,
dictators, and kings had all existed and fallen. (See any good history
of the French Revolution.) Therefore the seventh, yet to come, is the
seventh of the old Roman constitution, the false Christian government
of Constantine. Ten kingdoms will confederate and embrace it, and
ten kings or chief rulers with one couisel will support it. The churches
will develop it into an Bth head, but it will so embody all the prevous
modes of government as to be of the seven. When this beast comes
he continues a short space—the “one hour the kings rule with hin.
These kings come up against Christ at Armageddon, and with the
beast suffer destruction along with their armies and the false prophet
—the Papacy. (VII. to 14-19—11 to 21. Also see notes on 14-18 to 20).
Isaiah (8-9 to 12) warns all people not to associate or join this
confederacy. If they do they will be broken in pieces and their
counsel will come to nought. Counsel for what : Psalm 2-2 tells us.
4 ( The kings of the earth and the rulers take counsel together
aganist the Lord and against His anointed.” (Christ is the Greek for
anointed). Christ is on Mt. Zion as king He has returned (v, ),
and will dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel (v. 9). Notice the
startling harmony of Rev., Is., and Psalm quoted. In a word a con-
federacy of powers is to exist at Christ’s Return, and as fulfilled
prophecy shows how near that return is then the confederacy to come
must be startlingly near.
To conclude: “Look with vigilant suspicion upon any scheme of
churchly triumph that forgets an absent Christ, is satisfied with His
absence and negatives His Coming.” I. M. Haldeman, D.D., Pastor
First Baptist Church, N.Y. City. Likewise upon any great state scheme
that will Christianise people, or any revival organised by the Church
or State where no individual conversion takes place, and were decrees
and enactments are made a test of Christianity, thus making void the
love wherein is found the true test (John 14-21). People will acclaim
this beast’s coming as the enthronement of Christ as King, and the
millenium of peace. Be not deceived, for it is when they are saying
peace and safety that sudden destruction is to come upon them. . . . .
and they shall not escape (T. Thess. 5-3). It will create attention and
surprise but those who are God’s true children will not be drawn off
to pay homage to it.” Barnes, 1852, on v. 8, Ch. 17.
THE EUROPEAN WAR AND THE ELEVENTH HOUR.
To be manifested between now and the end is the fulfilment of
the parable of the servant who, growing tired of waiting for Christ
becomes careless, takes to eating and drinking with the ungodly (Matt.
24-48), and then begins to smite his fellow servants (49) —an indica-
tion of reproach, hatred and persecution ahead. At Christ’s presence
(v. 50, cp. v. 39, coming, literally presence) he is cut off —taken un-
awares (cp. Luke 21-34). Then (at that time) will the Kingdom of
Heaven be compared to 10 virgins who, having taken their lamps
•'God’s word or law, Ps. 119-105; Provs. 6-23), went forth to meet the
bridegroom (Christ. Matt. 25-1). Scripturally, a virgin is a pure per


son (Eev. 14-4, 5), and obviously only those who went forth were those
looking for His Eeturn, and he so hoping purifies himself, hence ac-
counted a virgin. (I John 3-3). The nearness of Christ's Approach is
manifest to all, but whereas some, anticipating delay, took oil (Holy
Spirit) in their vessels (in themselves, Jer. 22-28), the others took
none. Christ tarries and they all slumber and sleep until midnight,
when the cry is raised, “Behold, the Bridegroom.” All then rise, trim
their lamps (implying heart-searching), but only those with the Spirit
of God in their Hearts are worthy. They are taken —the foolish are
left—left to buy the “necessary Oil” in the coming terrible market
of affliction (cp. Eev. 3-18).
In America, Europe and Asia, from 1831, scores of thousands went
forth to meet the “Bridegroom.” The expectation sprang up in many
places at once and was felt practically throughout the world.
Prophecy paved the way. In Great Britain, between 1829-1834 six
journals on prophecy were successfully established, and about 50
different works issued, whilst over 30 books appeared there in defence
of the pre-millenial advent. Irving wrote a dozen books and dis-
coursed to audiences approximating 12,000. Dr. Wolfe, sent out by
the London Missionary Society took the message to the East, while
Me. Neile, with some 300 ministers of the Anglican Church alone
thundered it from the pulpit. Macaulay asserted that the believers in
the “ancient faith” equalled the entire population of the Jews in
Great Britain, and people were stirred there as they had never teen
stirred since the Eeformation. In practically every European Country,
and in India, Tartary, Turkey, Italy, Syria, Palestine, Afghanistan,
Persia, Egypt South Africa, Australia, and even in Thibet, etc., the
message was heard while in America, the expectation reached an ex-
citement. “Scores of Thousands of Converts,” wrote the Hon. E. M.
Devens, in his “Great Events of the Greatest Century.” People
manifested brotherly love and fellowship unparalleled since the"
Church's inception. No one wanted. Altars and churches were piled
with money and goods, left unguarded, and only those needing took.
The whole movement was the manifestation of the Philadelphian
Church of Eevelation, ch. 3. It is warned, “Behold, I come quickly!
Hold fast that which thou hast.” (Eev. 3-11).
The virgins began to go forth on or about October, 1831. Adding
41 years and 8 months (an hour of 1000 year day), the result is sixth
month Jewish or Pebruary-March, 1873. Counting from March
538, when the last obstacle to the free exercise of Papal power was
removed, the 1260 year-days of Dan. and Eev. ended March 1798
the month and year of the Eoman Eepublic Proclamation on the de-
thronement of the Pope, February, 1798. Consequently Daniel's 1335
years ended March 1873—just “one hour” from the going forth of the
virgins, who in Eastern marriages go out about 9 o'clock, thus making
March, 1873, as the tenth hour, and eleventh month of 1914 (Jewish
reckoning July-August, outbreak of European War) as the eleventh
hour. The eight hour fell on October-November, 1790, which marked
an epoch in the French Eevolution, when Louis placed a constitutional
weapon in the hands of the French Assembly, which led later to his
beheading. Soon after the era of bible societies and modern missions
began. The tenth hour began the hour of judgment for the dead (in
Christ) (Eev. 14-7, cp. 11-18) —the Investigative judgment which has


gone to all parts of the world, when Daniel was to stand in his lot
(Dan. 12-12, 13). The eleventh hour now beginning, is the hour of
temptation upon the earth (Rev. 3-10), which is contemporary with
and the result of the hour of the confederacy (Rev. 17-12). Remem-
ber, midnight does not necessarily mean 12 o’clock. A little before nr
after can bo included in the term (cp. Rms. 9-28). 1749 (7th hour)
witnessed a widespread and powerful evangelisation of England. 1708
(6th hour) witnessed a new era of evangelisation and missionary zeal.
The time is due for the calling out of the eleventh hour laborers
of Matt. 20-6. Go back in church history and on or about every 41
years, revivals, missionary movements, great truths, etc., are promin-
ent. It is during this eleventh hour before us that 144,000 servants are
sealed against death (Rev. 7-3 to 8, cp. 14-1 to 5), to allow the last
harvest sowing to ripen—a parallel of the 41 years and eight months
of comparative peace from Christ’s Baptism in September, 25 A.D. to
Vespasian’s preparation in A.D. 67 for entrance of Galilee, May 67 A.D.
wdiich culminated in the fall of Jerusalem. The 144,000 have the Spirit
of Prophecy (Rev. 12-17, 19-10) —a result of the expected latter rain
(falls prior to harvesting in Palestine), or outpouring of the Holy
Spirit, of which Pentecost (Acts.'ch. 2) was the former or “early
rain.” After the wheat harvest the heat in Palestine becomes intense,
indicating the following fiery affliction, until the grape harvest and
treading of the winepress (Rev. 14,14 to 20).
THE WITNESS OF ASTRONOMY.
The heavenly lights are for signs, seasons, days and years. (Gen.
1-14.) Prof. J. B. Dimbleby, Premier Phrenologist to the British
Chron. and Astron. Assn., and author of “All Past Time,” studied the
Scriptures and attests to astronomy witnessing for God. He adduces
these facts:—“Bible time is planetary time, and all scripture periods
are astronomical. That Genesis (scripturally understood), is a veri-
table historic record of actual fact, attested by a cloud of witnesses of
indubitable veracity, and that he who will not accept his statements
must fight against the stars in their courses. That from the fourth day
(Gen. 1-14 to 19), when the heavenly orbs shone forth, solar cycles,
lunar revolutions, motions of the earth, transits and eclipses harmon-
ise and synchronise, and can all be traced with absolute precision down
to our own day, and this can be done from no other point. .All time
cycles began together at Creation and have never been together since,
nor can they again. That transits and eclipses confirm the accuracy
of Bible dates. That the total eclipse of the sun that took place at
Adam’s creation recurred upon the birthday of the “Second Adam”—•
Christ (cp. I Cor. 15-45). That by the concentrated force of prophecy,
history and astronomy, Christ is none other than the Son of God—the
seed of the woman who was to bruise the serpent’s head. (Gen. 3-15).
His date for creation (or when earth was made habitable for man) is
3998 B.C. or 3999 counting creation as 0, Ivan Panin, an able Rus-
sian chronologist, and exponent of the numerical value of the scrip-
tures, which proves their inspiration also gives 3999. Ussher’s date
is 4004 B.C. Christ was our Passover Lamb (1 Cor. 5-7), slain from
the foundation of the world (Rev. 13-8). In the type the lamb was
kept for four days. (Ex. 12-3 to 6.) Christ was kept for four days of
1000 years each. (II Peter 3-8, cp. Luke 13-6, 9). When the fulness of
time came God sent forth His Son (Gal. 4-4). 1915 A.D. is therefore 5917.


THE PROPHECIES OF ENOCH.
The Book of Enoch conies to ns through the Abyssinian Bible.
Jude quotes from it almost word for word. (Jude 14, 15.) It was re-
discovered in the Ethiopic language about 100 years ago. In it under
the symbol of sheep is the whole consecutive history of Israel from
the one sheep who had 12 sheep down to the coming of the Lord of
the Sheep in wrath who rents asunder the earth (ML of Olives), clears
the land of all, “beasts” and “birds,” erects His Throne, opens the
sealed books, executes judgment upon apostate Jews and, “fallen
stars” (angels, II Peter 2-4; Jude 6 cp.; Gen. 0-2) “immerges that
ancient House (Jerusalem), etc.,” before the taking place of the Judg-
ment, the execution of the sentences, and the Resurrection, ihe book
is a revelation concerning the Creation Period, and e vines of ais own
time, and contains a prophetic chain in 700 year-week periods. Ihe
Flood is predicted after the completion of the second week, ending
1400 A.M. (Bible 1656). In third week (1400 to 2100), a man of the
plant of righteous judgment shall be selected.” (Call of Abraham,
2083 A.M.). In the sixth week (3500 to 4200), “a man shall ascend.
(Christ ascended 4032 A.M.) During its completion the “House of
Dominion shall be burnt, and the race of the elect root shall be dis-
persed. (Jerusalem fell 4073 A.M., 70 A.D.) The Papacy and the Re-
formation are also indicated. Ninth week (5600 to 6300), the judg-
ment of righteousness will be revealed to the whole world, all The v ork
of the ungodly will disappear, and the earth will be marked for
destruction, while all men shall! be on the lookout for the path of
integrity. (Milieu. Reign.) On the seventh day of the tenth week
(7000) takes place the everlasting judgmnt (Great White Throne),
the former heaven shall pass away and a new heaven shall appear.
Afterwards shall there be many weeks eternally existing in goodness
and righteousness, (cp. II Peter 3-13.)
The first Judgment and Resurrection occur 1000 years before
the second. This places the first at 6000 A.M., less the little season of
Rev. 20-3; but according to Enoch (and the Bible), things are restored
in Palestine long before the Resurrection takes place. Hence Christ
will return long before 6000 A.M.-—the time of regeneration or resti-
tution (Acts 3-21, cp. 1-6; Matt. 19-28), and Paul says, He will finish
the work and cut it short in righteousness, because a short work will
be made upon the earth (Rms. 9-28). Be on the safe side and heed
tins warning' i If tin? little season should lie 1 hour, the Ircsui lection is
thrown back to 5958 A.M.., and if Christ, is to return one hour prior
to the resurrection then He will return during or about 1916 A.D.
This is merely conjecture, but you will do well to walk in daily anticipa-
tion of the Return from now onwards. Make yourself secure, for the
world will be taken unawares and the wicked will do wickedly, but
the wise will understand (Dan. 12-10; Amos. 3- i ; Ps. 25-14, cp. 111-10;
Gen. 18-17).
THE CORRECT LAW OF GOD.
The law of God is the commandment that is perfect, holy, just,
good and spiritual converting the soul (Ps. 19-7, 8; Rms. 7-12, 14.) It
is perpetual (Matt. 5-17, 18; Ps. 111-7, 8, 119-89), for by it is the
knowledge of sin (Rms. 3-20, 7-7), and where there is no law there is
no sin (Rms, 5-13). It is God ? s standard of character and righteous-
ness and His detector of sin—a detector of necessity perfect for no


correct test can be established by a faulty standard. It is the law
Christ magnified (Is. 42-21). In His teachings He gave it a breadth
and fulness that is unperceivable to the natural mind. See Matthew
especially, for the full meaning and requirements of God’s law.
Practically all churches omit the first commandment proper, while
Borne omits the second as given by Christendom, and splits the
tenth to make up ten. As given in Leeser’s Hebrew translation,
God’s law with the introduction to it is as follows: —“And God spoke
all these words, saying :
1. —1 am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of slavery, (cp. Mrk, 12-29, 32; I Cor. 8-6).
The Jews have this first commandment correct. In a spiritual sense a
Christian has been redeemed, likewise. (Cols. 1-12 to 14; John 6-44).
2. —Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. Thou shaft not make
unto thyself any graven image, etc. See Exodus 20-1 to IT.
The Law of God rests upon two divisions (Matt. 22-40). First:
(Embracing commandments one to four) “Hear, 0 Israel, the Lord
thy God is one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart . . mind . . soul . . aijid strength.” (Mrk. 12-29, 30.) Second:
“Thou shaft love thy neighbour as thyself.” (V. 31.) To Christians
this is amended by, “Love one another as I have loved you.”—Jesus.
(John 13-34).
Man bears three relations to the Law. If wicked he is living in
open hostility, and what liberty he has is the liberty of an outlaw;
whose capture is sure. If for salvation lie is depending upon his own
actions done in obedience to the law, he is serving the letter and his
prospect is hopeless for the Kingdom. (II Cor. 3-6.) In his case the
law is a schoolmaster. (Gal. 3-23; Boms. 3-19.) It is true perfect
obedience to a perfect law would inherit one eternal life, but through
weakness of the flesh that way is closed, for no man can render'
obedience to its requirements. Hence the law, though ordained unto
life was found to be unto death. (Bins. 7-10, 14, 8-2), and there is no
law that can give life. (Gals. 3-21.) The man who has life is the true
Christian. He is Christ’s and in Christ is the Spirit of Life that frees
from the law of sin and death (Bins. 8-2). By love the law becomes
written within his heart. (Jer. 31-33, cp. Hebs. 8-10; Ps. 40-8, 112-1;
Bins. 7-22; I John 5-3, 2-4, 5.) He is no longer at enmity with God and
His Law. (cp. II Cor. 5-18 to 20.) Obedience to God’s law is his de-
light. He has become a new creature in Christ Jesus, dead to the law
of death, but under the law r of life to Christ (I. Cor. 9-21; Cols. 3-3.)
Being led by the Spirit He establishes the law (Gals. 5-18; Bms. 3-31,
6-15). It is God’s Covenant with man (Ex. 34-28 ; Dent. 4-13); old if
served by letter, new if served from the heart. (Bms. 7-6;
Hebs. 8-6 to 13). The ministration —not the law, has changed—
changed from one of death to one of life. (2 Cor. 3-7 to 11).
SEPT. 25 A.D. CHRIST’S FIRST ADVENT PROPHESIED.
Dan. 9-25 to 27 predicts Christ’s first advent (Hebrew, Messiah,
English Anointed, Greek: Christ) the year of his baptism, and the
overthrow of Jerusalem. Some add a prediction of a personal Anti-
Christ yet future, and hence prefer that translation which supports
their belief. But the marginal readings of the B.Y. preferred by the
American revisers and those of the A.Y. give practically no such sup-
port. While the translation in parts varies the following interpreta


tion submitted should cause one to pause before teaching a personal
Antichrist to arise in Jerusalem. Everything in Daniel, Revelation
and elsewhere referring to the Papacy is transferred to this future
“ Antichrist ’ ’ and the belief itself originated in its modern garb with
J esuitism.
• • • • from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem unto the Messiah, the Prince shall be 69 weeks
(fB3 days—4B3 years; Ezek, 4-5, 6. Numbs. 14-32) it Jerusalem) shall
be built again in troublous times. And after 62 weeks
(434 years) shall the Messiah be cut off and shall have nothing (i.e.,
without a successor to follow Him), and the Prince’s coming or future
people (A.V. Marg.—the Gentiles of whom the Romans were representative)
shall destroy the city and the sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with
a Hood (the Roman Army, cp. Is. 8-7; Ps. 69-15, 88-6, 7), and unto the end
of the war (effects still continue; Luke 21-24), shall it (Jerusalem) be cut off
by desolations (A.V. Marg.). And He (the Coming Prince) shall confirm a
(A.V. Marg.) covenant with many for one week (7 years), and in the midst
of the week He shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, and with
the abominable armies (A.V. Marg.) He shall make it desolate (cp. Matt.
23-37, 38); Ps. 40-15- even unto the consummation (end of the age), and
that determined shall be poured upon the desolate” (land or city). See
notes on Matt. 24-15.)
Artaxerxes’ reign, according to the historian Herodotus, com-
menced Feb. 464 B.C. Herodotus visited the court of Artaxerxes and
in his date is supported by the astronomical calendars of Ptolemy and
Guinness. 7 months previous, July 465 8.C., the usurper Artabanus
commenced reigning from which it is clear that Nehemiah the Jewish
Court official reckons Artaxerxes ’ reign. Artaxerxes’ 7th year there-
fore “Scripturally” commenced July 458 B.C. At the commencement
of the year Ezra and some 1800 others left Babylon (Ezra 7-9) with
Artaxerxes’ decree for the restoration of Jerusalem in its rebuilding
(ep. Ezra 9-9, 6-14, Neh. 2-16), and its civil, political and judicial aspect
(Ezra 7-11 to 26). He arrived in Jerusalem on July-Aug. of 458
B.C. (Ezra 7-8. Ezra had the decree in March-April. Allow 6 months
for preparation and for gathering the colonists (none too much under
the circumstances) and Sept. 459 B.C. fixes the date of the decree or
commandment. 458 full yrs. from 483 yrs. adding the necessary lyr.
for B.C. and A.D. computation) leaves 26 yrs. which less the 3 months
back to Sept. 459 8.C.-Sept. 25 A.D. Did the Messiah then come?
Yes. Jesus at his baptism w r as divinely constituted the Anointed One
which Guinness gives Sept. 25 A.D. The date of Christ’s birth now
generally recognised is B.C. 5, which added to Sept. 25 A.D. less (not
in addition here) the necessary 1 yr. makes Jesus at his baptism 29J-.
Luke says about 30 yrs. (Luke 3-23). Thus ended the 69 weeks of
Daniel 9-25—“ the time is fulfilled” said Jesus. (Mrk. 1-15).
For 7 years Jesus confirmed the covenant with the Jews—34 yrs.
by Himself and 34 through His disciples (c.p. Matt 10-5, 6, 15-24, Heb.
12-24, CP.IS. 42-6). On March 29 A.D.. according to Guinness and
many eminent early and modern chronologists, Lactantius (300 A.D.)
Augustine (400) Origen (Born 185), Tertullian (200) and Clement of
Alexandria (b. 150) among the former. Jesus became our sacrifice
which the Jewish ordinances typified (Heb. 10, 1 to 18, Cols. 2-14) thus
causing the sacrifices to virtually cease 34 yrs. from Sept. 25 A.D. in
the midst of the 70th, week the latter half of 34 yrs. continuing until
Stephen s death (32 A.D. Baronins’s Eccles. Annals) which occurred a
little before Paul’s conversion, and this Jerome the learned Hebrew


scholar (331 A.D.) who lived and studied in Palestine places at 33 A.D.
Ihe prophecy requires Sept 32 A.D. (Acts 13-46). Thus ended the 70
weeks for the Jews to make an end of sins and bring in everlasting
righteousness (Dan. 9-24) which thousands did through faith in Christ
who our righteousness which is life everlasting (Ems. 6-22, Is. 53-11,
Ems. 3-25, John 6-47) Some think the prophecy begins from the 20th
>ear of Artaxerxes (13 yrs. later) when Nehemiah went up to Jerusa-
lem expressly to build the wall, the work of which was being hindered
(Neh. 1-3, 2-17, 4-7, 6-15). He had no written decree as Ezra did, he
found Ezra s men busy building (Neh 2-16) and he accomplished his
work in 52 days whereas the prophecy allow r ed 49 yrs.
Josephus the Jewish historian of the Ist century wrote of Christ
in this wise:
“yow there was about this time Jesus, a wise man if it be lawful to call
film a man, for He was a doer o f wonderful works He drew over to
Him many of the Jews and many of the Gentiles. He was the anointed
(or Christ), and when Pilate at the suggestion of the principal men amongst
us had condemned Him to the cross, those that loved Him at the first did
not forsake Him, for he appeared to them alive the third day And
the tr ibe of Christians so named after Him are not extinct to this day"
(Antiquities of the Jews’ Book 18, Ch. 3, Sect. 3.)
Eusebius (260-339 A.D. records that he found in the archives of
the library at Edessa the following letter from Jesus in answer to one
from King Abgaius of Syria wh|o needing to be healed of a sore disease
an ci being moved at Christ’s reception by the .Jews desired Jesus to
share ‘a very small but noble estate which is sufficient for us both”.
Eusebius found a copy of the King’s letter with it and translated the
two from their original Syriac tongue. Here is Jesus’ answer:
Blessed art thou, u Abgarus, w ho without seeing me hast believed in me.
For it is written concerning me that they who have seen me will not be-
lieve that they vho have not see n may believe and live. But in regard to
what thou hast written that I should come to thee, it is necessary" that I
shomd mini all things here tor w hich I have been sent, and after this ful-
filment thus to be received again by Him who sent me. And after I have
been received up I will sent to th ee a certain one of my disciples that he
may heal thy affliction and give life to thee and those that are with thee.”
After the gathering of the harvest (Eev. 14-14 to 16), the vintage,
to be in harmony with natural events, may follow about three months
after, i.e., the Divine Wrath may begin about three months after the
wise Christians are taken away. Christ is to return to Jerusalem,
ram down fire on the besieging armies and issue His decree for un-
conditional submission (scripture given elsewhere) —just what is ex-
pected of Antichrist. The world’s armies will go forth and meet with
destruction at Armageddon (see notes on 6 vial, Eev. 16-16). You
can picture the effect on a turbulent world in excited anticipation of
Antichrist it will go mad. .The spirit of antichrist is pregnant in the
world to-day in anyone who is against Christ. And because a Christian
is a member of Christ’s body he who is against a Christian is against
Christ—he is therefore antichrist. -The great antichrist is he who is
against Christ’s children everywhere, and though it professes God
and the Son in word it, in every action, denies them. Etymologically,
Antichrist means an opposing Christ, a vice-Christ, a rival Christ.
A DIVINE KING RULING THE EARTH.
Christ is prophet, priest and King. When he first came He exer-
cised His prophetical and tutorial character (John 4-19 6-14 9-17.
Matt. 21-11, 21-46, Luke 7-16, 24-19).He was that Prophet promised of
Cod to Moses (Dent. 18-18, 19, Acts 3-22,23) and came to proclaim the


acceptable year or dispensation of favor (Is. 61-1, 2, Luke 4-17 to 19).
The day of Vengeance mentioned in Is. He ushers in at His second
advent. This is one instance not uncommon in scripture where a
break occurs between events which follow apparently immediately.
When Christ died he became both our sacrifice and High Priest (Heb.
9-11, 12, 8-1) in place of the Jewish sacrifices, ordinances, and High
Priest, type meeting anti-type. (Colls. 2-17, Ephs. 2-15, cp. Heb. 9-10).
He is now the mediator.and intercessor in Heaven on behalf of His
people when they sin ( John 1-9, 2-1, Heb. 2-17, 4-14,15). The time is
-at hand for Christ to leave the Heavenly Sanctuary when the decree of
Rev. 22-11 will then go into effect, and being invested with power
and dominion He returns to earth constituted King Supreme.
(tod’s purpose with this earth is to make it a paradise of happy,
overliving, sinless beings and His means of accomplishing this is to
rule the world Himself through His Son Jesus Christ and Christ’s
true followers, and this epoch is for 1000 years—a millenium. Christ
will bring in this age as King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Rev. 19-11
to 16), returning (Thess. 4-16, Ps. 50-3, Zech 14-5, Is. 40-10, Rev. 22-12,
Acts 3-20. etc) bodily and visibly as He went (Acts 1-9, 10). He is the
nobleman who went into a far country to receive a kingdom and re-
turn (Luke 19-12). 'Dan. 7-14 and Rev. 5-12 portray his investure as
King over the world with Palestine as its centre, Jerusalem divinely
restored) its capital, and Mt. Zion as Christ’s Throne (Ps. 2-6, 48-1,
.2, Is. 24-23, Matt. 25-31, cp. 5-35, Zech. 2-12), from which he will execute
judgment and justice in the earth (Jer. 23-5, Micah 4-3) ruling with a
rod of iron (Rev. 19-15) in the midst of His enemies (Ps. 110-2, Ps. 99-5.
The earth is Cod’s Footstool, Matt. 5-35). All dominions shall serve
and obey Him (Dan. 7-27). He will be seen in His glory (Is, 33-17,
15.40-5) when He has built up Zion (Ps. 102-16). His saints will be
with Him (Ps. 89-5 to 7), and the kings of the earth will be silent before
Him for that which had not been told them will they see (Is. 52-15).
Christ will with righteousness judge the poor and reprove with
equity for the meek (Is. 11-2). No one will have just cause to fear
2 Sam. 23-3, 4) and all nations will call Him. blessed (Ps. 72-6,17) and
will go up every year to Jerusalem to render Him homage (Zech 8-22,
14.-16, Ps. 45-12, 72-11) for which purpose Christ will build a magnifi-
cent temple (Zech. 6-12, 13), the specifications of which are in Ezekiel
from 40th Chpt. onwards, and which have been developed to archi-
tectural proportions. The kingdom that Christ brings in is the King-
dom of God or Heaven that He and His disciples preached (Mark 1-14,
Matt. 26-29, Luke 4-43, 9-2, 23-42, Acts 1-3, 19-8, 20-25), and is together
with the things concerning Jesus” the gospel or glad tidings. The
kingdom will not be of this world (John 18-36 Grk-kosmos-arrange-
ment) i.e. not of this present state of things (cp. 2 Peter 3-6) specially
so because flesh and blood cannot possess it (1 Cor. 15-50). It will
require resurrection bodies. Christians are heirs of this heavenlv
kingdom (2 Tim. 4-18, Jas. 2-5, 2 Thess. 1-5, cp. Gal. 5-21, Ephs. 5-5)
not possessors yet (Dan. 7-18, cp. v. 27). Luke 17-21 is considered cor-
rectly rendered “ God’s Royal Majesty is among you”.
Man thinking this world belongs to him will not give it up without
a mighty struggle hence the coming Armageddon (Rev. 17-14) when
the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdoms of God and
Christ (Rev. 11-15). At present they belong to Satan (Matt. 4-8, 9,


Lphs 2-2, John 16-11) hence he must be bound in consequence (Rev.
20-1 cp. Mark 3-26, 27). To the Jews, Christ, when He returns comes
as their long expected Messiah whom they expect to reign personally in
Jerusalem as king. Hence at his first Advent they took him to be an
impostor and suffered almost national extinction because they knew
not the day of their visitation (inspection Luke 19-44). Be careful lest
our day of visitation (1 Peter 2-12) come upon us unawares, for if God
spared not the Jews neither will he spare us (Rms. 11-21, Heb. 12-25,
10-9). After His resurrection even the apostles asked Christ if he was
then going to restore the kingdom to Isreal (Acts 1-6 cp. Luke 19-11).
Note the answer! No denial but an affirmation of the truth of their
conception in that it was not given to them “to know the times and
seasons” (Acts 1-7, cp. 1 Tim. 6-15, Rev. 1-5).
Regard the Jews well always in their unbelief for they were;
broken off that we might be grafted in (Rms. 11-19, 7), but when
Christ returns to dispense retribution upon the wicked living (Rev.
19-11 to 16, 17-4, 2 Thes. 7-8, Jude 14, 15), and establish His Kingdom
then they (purged) will be grafted in (Rms. 11-23 to 26), and there
will be one Lord, King over all the earth (Zech. 14-9), Jesus Christ.
“The Government will be upon His shoulders and He will be called.
Wonderful, Counsellor of the mighty God and Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace for promoting . . . peace without end upon the
Throne of David (cp. Luke 1-32, Acts 2-29, 30), and upon His kingdom
to establish and support it through justice and righteousness from
henceforth unto eternity.” (Is. 9-6, 7, Leeser’s Hebrew Version) when
He shall have delivered th Kingdom to God, having put down all rule,
all uathority and power, for He must reign until He has put all
enemies—even death—under His feet. (1 Cor. 15-24, 25).
SAVING A LOST WORLD.
Canaan or Palestine was given to Abraham by promise of God (Gen.
13-15, Gal. 3-18) not for works of law, but for faith (Gal. 3-18, 3-6,
James 2-23), that it might be by grace—a gift (Erns. 6-23, Ephs. 2-7, 8).
It is an inheritance (Heb. 11-8), and includes the world in its political
aspect (Rms. 4-13 world-GrkrKosmos.-order of things). Isaac and
Jacob were heirs with him (Heb. 11-9). While dwelling therein he
was a stranger and a sojourner and together with them died without
receiving the promises (v. 13, Acts 7-5). Hence to inherit the gift they
must be resurrected, and with God’s true children of all ages, who have
been saved by faith (See Heb. 11) possess the land and rule over the
world (cp. Rms. 9-6 to 8, Gal. 3-7). The promise was also made to
Jesus (Gal. 3-16). It is called the blessing of Abraham and a gentile
can only inherit it through faith in Christ (Gal. 3-14) and if you are
Christ’s then you are Abraham’s seed and an heir according to the
promise (v. 29, 22, 7). The promise with its attendant glory and honor
comes into effect at Christ’s return and continues throughout the
Millennium (Rev. 20-4 to 6, Luke 14-14, Proverbs 11,33, Ps. 37-9
Is. 60-21).
At the end of the Millennium will be created a new heavens and a
new earth (Is. 65-17, 66-22, 2 Peter 3-13). Through sin ours is a lost
world, and Christ came to save it (Luke 19-10). The Milennium will
see that salvation in full effect with Christ as King and the saints
ruling the nations with Him in righteousness (Is. 32-1, Dan. 7-27, 1 Cor.
6-2. Rev. 2-26) until God is all in all (1 Cor. 15-28). At Christ’s First


Advent the required number to rule with Him was not sufficient, hence
the invitation to the gentiles (Matt. 22-2 to 14, Luke 14-16 to 24). The
number is not yet quite complete, for whilst many are called few are
chosen (Matt. 20-16, cp. Rev. 17-14). They will reign over cities
(Luke 19-17 to 19) as priests and kings (2 Tim 2-12. Rev. 20-4, 6. 5-9,
10, v. 9—for as read some, v. 10—for us read them; for we read they).
True Christians are now priests and kings in a preliminary sense
(1 Peter 2-9), but their manifestation as such (Rms. 8-19, Eev. 1-6), is
reserved for the coming age (cp. Rms. 8-17 to 23).
Especially from Christ’s First Advent have people for the coming
Kingdom of God been chosen through Christ and built up and sancti-
hed who together with the practical righteous alive after Armageddon
will constitute its rulers and subjects respectively. (Matt. 13-43, 25-31
to 40. No heir can imagine the riches in store for Him (ICor. 2-9.
Ephs. 2-7). Rising an immortal, incorruptible and righteous being
ICor. 15-35 to 58) he will be glorified like unto Christ and take his
allotted place in the kingdom, determined by his faithfulness and ser-
vice (Luke 19-11 to 13, 1 Cor. 3-8 to 15, 4-5, 2 Tim. 4-7, 8, Eev. 19-8 to
10). He will be given power over the nations and rule them with a
rod of iron (Rev. 2-26, 27), and as Christ ate after his resurrectiom
(Luke 24-41 to 43), and will again drink (Matt. 26-29) so will he eat
(Luke 14-15. 22-30). People will truly say in those days “Our fathers
have inherited lies” (Jer. 16-19). His enemies will come and bow
down at the soles of his feet (Rev. 3-9), and because of the King of
Kings and his co-princes Jerusalem will be a praise in all the earth
(Is. 62-7, Jer. 3-17, Is. 2-3). The kingdom will be that of David re-
stored (Amos 9-11, Luke 1-32, cp. Jer. 22-2), and people will no more
need to pray “Thy kingdo-m come.”
They who do the works of the flesh enumerated in Gal. 5-19 to
21, cannot inherit the kingdom—neither can such remain alive after
Christ has returned and judged them (2 Cor. 5-10; 2 Tim. 4-1). An heir
of the Kingdom must be meek, loving, gentle, trustful, and dependent
converted as a little child (Matt. 18-3, 5-5). They then living who
pass into the Kingdom—the wheat or sheep—are blessed because of
their good works for Christ and His followers but the wicked will be
cut off and burnt (Ps. 101-8; Mai. 4-1; Matt. 25-41 to 46. 13-30, 38 to
42, 49, 50. World in v 39 and 49 is age.) Hence this judgment is at the
end of this age—not the Millenium. The wicked will lose their bodies
at Christ’s return and along with the unprofitable Christians be con-
veyed to outer darkness and there gaoled and tested for their mis-
doings. (Matt. 18-34; Is. 24-22; Matt. 22-13, 24-51, 25-30; Rev. 14-10,
II; Luke 12-59.) The reason probably is that death is to be abolished
(I Cor. 15-26), and as sin brings death, wickedness will have to go.
They are the tares —children of Satan—and therefore are his and not
God’s and hence have no right to the Kingdom, but during the day of
free salvation soon to end, “whosoever will may come” (Rev. 22-17).
The Kingdom’s subjects will be mortal beings, but because of the
beneficent reign he who dies at 100 will be counted a minor (Is. 65-20).
The saints then will be the pastors and teachers (Is. 61-6; Jer. 3-15),
and they will behold them, and if one attempts to sin a voice will say,
“This is the way, walk ye in it” (Is. 30-20, 21). No one will want,,
neither will he sorrow or weep any more (Is. 65-19 to 23; Jer. 31-12).
'Wild beasts will become tame (Is. 11-6, 9), each man will have his own


plot of ground (Micah. 4-4), and extortion and oppression will cease
(Is. 16-4, 5). There will he hope for the poor and needy (Ps. 72-4), and
peace, quietness, and assurance for all under perfect social conditions
(Zech. 3-10, 9-10; Is. 32-17). There will be universal disarmament. (Is.
2-1 to 5; Hosea. 2-18), and nations will no more make war (Jer. 3-17;
Mich. 4-1 to 3). The land that is now desolate will then become like
paradise (Ezek. 36-35; Is. 35-1, 60-15), and the earth will yield its in-
crease (Ps. 67-6), with unexampled profusion (Amos. 9.13; Ezek. 36-29;
Is. 55-13, 41-19). And what a man builds then he will inhabit, and
what he plants he will eat (Is. 65-20 to 22). Neither will a man be sick
(Is. 33-24), nor blind, nor distressed, nor drunk (Is. 35-5, 6; 65-19, 20).
The earth will be completely filled with the knowledge of the Lord
(Is. 11-9; Hab. 2-14; Jer. 31-34), and all nations will serve Him with
one consent Zeph. 3-9; Is. 25-7). At the end of the Milennium a rebel-
lion occurs, those participating are burnt, and the second resurrection
and general judgment before God Almighty takes place. Those found
worthy according to their works pass into life, the others are con-
sumed (Rev. 20-7 to 15 cp.; Matt. 10-28 cp.; Heb. 4-12).
As a river is purer at its source, so Christian doctrine is much
purer and of greater concord in the first centuries. The doctrine of the
Millenium was then in great prominence. Papias, 116 A.D., bishop of
Hierapolis in Phrygia, whom Irenaeus speaks of as one who saw and
heard John, and was his pupil, says, that “there will be 1000 years
after the resurrection from the dead when the reign of Christ person-
ally will be established on the earth.” Justin Martyr, 150 A.D., says,
4 ‘l and others who are orthodox believers on all points, know that
there will be a resurrection of the dead, and 1000 years in Jerusalem,
built, adorned, and broadened as the Prophets Ezekiel, Isaiah, and
others declare.” Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, 175 A.D., about, says,*
4 4 The Lord will come down from Heaven. . . . bringing in for the
righteous the times of the Kingdom, the rest, the hallowed seventh day,
and restore to Abraham the promised inheritance.” Again, “Jerusa-
lem will be rebuilt after the pattern of Jerusalem above,” and adds,
“The first resurrection is of the just, and the inheritance of the king-
dom is, on the earth.” Lactantius, A.D. 300, preceptor to the son of
Constantine, writes, “ .... The righteous King will raise the righte-
ous dead to eternal life, and will Himself reign with them on the
earth, and will build the holy city, and this kingdom .... shall be for
1000 years. This is the doctrine which we Christians follow.”
Many of the other early fathers alike testify, witnessed to by our
greatest historians, including Gibbon, who attests to its being the
reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers.
SETTING UP A DIVINE MONARCHY.
To Christians, Christ is the Bridegroom, and they His bride (John
3-28 to 30; II Cor. 11-12; Rev. 21-9, 19-7; Is. 54-5, cp. VI.; Gals. 4-27).
An Eastern betrothal was ratified by oaths and presents. From thence-
forth until the marriage the bride remained in her father's house, and
the bridegroom at his. If he wanted to communicate with her he could
only do so through his friend. When the wedding day came, she hav-
ing previously bathed and prepared herself, waited with her father and
attendants for his arrival, face veiled. He, duly attired with a crown
of gold upon his head, set out with his friends and attendants for the
bride's home, arriving there at night. In other words, it was his com


ing for her, and upon being duly presented, his PRESENCE (Grk.
Parousia) with her. After the marriage supper all went in procession
to the bridegroom’s home, friends of his joining with them on the way
with lamps burning; in other words, a manifestation (Grk. Epiphania
—Bright Shining). In the bridegroom’s home festivities followed, to
which many relatives and neighbours were invited, who were furnished
with wedding garments at the host’s expense. The husband, exempted
from service and business for a year, then rejoiced with his bride. In
other words, this constituted a revealment, uncovering or unveiling to
the world of their relation and status. (Grk. Apokalupsis.)
When Christ ascended on high, He gave gifts to His Church (Ephs.
4-8, II; Acts 10-45; Heb. 2-3, 4; I Cor, 12-4). In God’s House there are
many mansions (literally, dwelling places). Paradise is one. Christ’s
friend is the Holy Spirit, and His and our means of communication.
The Church is prepared and cleansed by the Word. (Ephs. 5-26, 27;
Eev. 7-14). Christ, when He ascended, ascended to the very presence
of God. (Heb. 8-1, 9-24). Paradise, the garden state of blessedness
for the souls in Christ, is not Heaven proper. (Luke 23-43 cp.; John
20-17.) It is the third Heaven. (II Cor. 12-2, 4.) The Heaven of Heaven
where God’s throne is, is therefore above Paradise. Chapters 4 and 5
of Revelation, and Daniel, chant. 7, teach that about the time of the
French Revolution, God descended to a lower heaven (probably mid-
Heaven, or Paradise), and there set His Throne and Judgment Seat to
execute judgment against the papal power, investigate the worthiness
of the disembodied saints for the first resurrection, and invest Christ
with the power and authority of King. (See notes on 7 seals, last par. ?
cp., texts carefully.) It is there that Daniel stands in his lot at the
end of the 1335 days. (Dan. 12-12, 13.) These days ended in 1873,.
two and a half yeans after the last phase of the initiative executive
judgment upon the Papacy. The investigation of the saints has there-
fore been in progress 42 years.
Upon the completion of the investigation, Christ, after finishing
His last ministering rites as High Priest, descends from the Heaven of
Heavens to Paradise, or thereabouts —the Bridegroom coming for His
bride and kingdom (Dan. 7-13, 14; Rev. 5-6, 12, 7-9, 14, 17 cp.; Joe]
2-16), with a crown of gold upon His head (Rev. 14-14), and a cloud
of probably attendant angels* but the token of a cloud is PRESENCE
(Exodus 13-21; Is. 4-5; Ezek. 10-4). It is the sign of Christ’s presence
(Matt. 24-30, cp. V., 3 and 37, where “coming” is literally “pre-
sence”). On earth —the world as in the days of Noah (Y. 37 to 39),.
and the days of Sodom and Gomorrah (Luke 17-28, 29). Among Chris-
tians—wise and foolish waiting for the bridegroom (Matt. 25-1 to 13).
The wise (those with the holy spirit of Christ!y Character) are taken
(cp. Matt 24-40, 41, 12-38 to 40; Luke 17-34 to 36). See notes on Rev.
14-15, 16. The foolish are left (cp. Luke 13-25 to 27), but with the
144,000 sealed, the servants (literally) “who are left over (on earth)
at the presence of the Lord (in Paradise). (I Thess. 4-15 cp.; Luke
12-37, 38, 42 to 44; Rev. 7-3.) No Holy Spirit to restrain evil for the
“Friend of Communication” accompanies the Bridegroom to the bride.
The world will but need a spark to provide an inferno! That spark
will be Christ’s Return to Jerusalem, but to the blind world, anti-
Christ’s rising.
That Christ’s presence with His bride takes place in Heaven be


fore God Almighty, the following texts where the Greek is literally
presence, and not corning as translated, make plain. Paul hoped that
the Thessalonian Church would be found “unblameable )implying an
investigation) before God (literally in the presence of God) in the
presence of Jesus Christ with all His saints.” (I Thess. 3-13 cp., 5-23,,
and Jude 24, where God will present the bride faultless—to Christ—-
in the presence of His—God’s —Glory.) II Thess. 2-1 concerns the pre-
sence of Christ and the Church’s assembling unto Him. Paul’s hope of
joy was to see the Thess. Church with Jesus, in, or during His
(Christ’s) presence. (I Thess. 2-19.) Those who are Christ’s in His
presence will be the first-fruits of them that slept when they are resur-
rected (I Cor. 15-20, 23). The Church is to be patient unto Christ’s
presence when the husbandman (God, John 15-1) will receive the lat-
ter in addition to the early (not rain as A.Y.), but harvest or fruit
(Sin, Ms. James 5-7 cp.; Eev. 14-15; Mrk. 4-29.) John hoped that we
may “not be put to shame from Him in His presence.” (I John 2-28.)
but have our names confessed? (Matt. 10-32, 33; Luke 12-8, 9) ; Rev.
3-5.) At “His presence” Christ receives His Kingdom—a receipt un-
seen by those on earth and hence coming not with observation
(Luke 17-20). His presence is likened to the lightning flash (Matt.
24-27). As the current exists before the flash occurs, so is Christ’s
presence in Heaven extant, until leaving Heaven accompanied by His
bride (chosen disembodied saints. Rev. 19-11 to 16, 17-14, 7-17 cp.;
Zech. 14-8; Heb. 12-23), and angel attendants, His presence flashes
forth as the lightning when occurs His bright-shining or manifestation
(Grk. Epiphania).
At Christ’s manifestation, the following texts, where Epiphania is
translated brightness or appearing, find application:—l. Tim. 6-14, 15 ;
II Tim 4-8; Titus 2-13 ; and II Thess. 2-8, when Christ, alighting upon
the Mount of Olives (Zech. 14-4) exposes, consumes and renders power-
less the Lawless one (Great Babylon with revived pretensions) by the
manifestation of His presence along with the destruction of the armies
besieging Jerusalem (Zech. 12-2, 3,4, 8,9, 4-12, cp. Luke 17-36).
Escorted by all His holy ones, Christ comes (Zech. 14-5) from the
Mount of Olives to Mount Zion (see Matt. 21-1 to 10, the shadow of this
event). He takes His Throne and issue sHis commands for complete
unconditional surrender (Rev. 16-18 cp.; Ps. 29-3, 4, 97-4). The armies
ga hered at Armageddon, make war, but are shattered with the sword
(Rev. 17-14; Ps. 2-2; Rev. 19-17 to 21; Zech. 14-13). Tis the treading
of the winepress in Palestine (Rev. 14-18 to 20), and the ushering in
of the world-wide time of trouble in which the foolish virgins can buy,
(Matt. 25-9 cp.; Luke 17-30 to 33; II Tim. 4-1 R.Y. Marg.; Rev. 3-18.)
After that Satan is bound (Rev. 20-1 to 3), the Tribunal of Christ is
set up and the Apostles take their thrones (Rev. 20-4. Weymouth: Saw
thrones, and some who were seated on them to whom judgment was
entrusted, cp. Matt. 19-28; James 1-1). The souls in Christ, both those
who were at His presence and Kingdom, and those of His appearing
or manifestation (Christians who died for Christ in the time of trouble
(II Tim. 4-1, R.Y. Marg. Re. souls cp.; Rev. 20-4) are judged for
awards (Matt. 19-29), and awarded according to their works (Matt.
16-27; Rev. 22-12), done in the body (II Cor. 5-10; Bphs. 6-8).
On the souls being clothed with bodies (Rev. 20-4,
“and they—the souls—lived” is rendered by Weymouth, “Came to'


life/’ and by Westcott and Hort, “restored to life ?^ , they rise and
together with the 144,000 living who were left over at His presence are
caught away in clouds into the air to meet the Lord (I. Thess. 4-17;
Grk. eis, into; not en, in cp. 1 Cor. 15-51, 52; Phill. 3-21; Ps. 91), angels
probably assisting in this gathering. (Matt. 24-31; Mrk. 13-27; Ps. 50-5;
Luke 13-29.) The living 144,000 remain with Christ on Mount Zian
(Rev. 14-1). The New Song denotes complete salvation—body, soul,
and spirit (cp. Ps. 98). The others are next seen in Heaven (V 2 and
3), returning to be received in their resurrection bodies by God and
glorified by Him as Christ’s body was glorified. (John 7-39; Luke
24-39, cp. Matt. 17-2; Rev. 1-13 to 15). As Christ executes the last
vengeance upon the wicked Babylon when He returns (Rev. 18-21),
hence Rev. 19-1 to 9is a transposition—place it after V. 21. The saints
have returned to Heaven and are praiseful because (literally) “Our
Lord God the Omnipotent reigned” (Weymoutn: “has become
King”). Again the bride is granted apparel that is (Grk.) bright or
shining (See R.V. or Weymouth), implying glorification. (Contrast
Rev. 7-9, 13; 6-11). Rev. 19-7 and 9 are in the past tense (Diaglott
Vers, cp., also I Cor. 15-38 to 41, remembering that an unglorified re-
surrection body is a body of glory cp. with one of flesh and blood. Also
Mrk. 4-20 and Dan. 12-3. For further “resurrection” tests see Acts
24-15; Luke 14-14; John 5-29; I Thess. 4-16; Ps. 17-15; Is. 26-19; Luke
20, 36).
After Christ has settled with His servants (Luke 19-15 to 26), and
the world has reaped its sowings of evil, Jerusalem built after the pat-
tern of Jerusalem above, will not stand long before it is perceived by
the world’s mighty ones who assemble and perceive Christ on His
Throne, and Jerusalem in Glory. They will marvel. Trouble will seize
them, and they will be terrified and confounded (Ps. 48-1 to 6; Is.
62-2). Christ will then be revealed to the world in flaming fire (execu-
tive judgments), taking vengeance on the wicked living (II Thess. 7,
8; II Tim. 4-1; Luke 19-27), separating the wheat and tares, or sheep
and goats, and making the good ones safe while fire and brimstone is
rained down upon the wicked (Luke 17-29, 30; II Thess. 1-9, 10), thus
revealing every man’s work by fire (I Cor. 3-13), and uncovering
everything (Luke 12-2). (See notes on the Millenium, fourth par.).
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of God
;(Matt. 13-43).
After the Bridegroom has taken out of His Kingdom everything
that offends, effecting a new heaven and a new earth (Rev. 21-1; Sym-
bolic here of high and low order of things, cp. V 5), and no more sea
(wicked), the Bridegroom’s Millennial Home is then ready for the
bride who returns glorified under the symbol of a city (Rev. 21-9, 2),
which symbolises also Great Babylon, the counterfeit city (Rev. 18-10
to 24). It is the Church apostolically founded by the 12 apostles (Y
14, cp. Ephs. 2, 20). God dwells in it by Hih Spirit (V 3, 22; cp. Ephs.
2-22), and in this sense tabernacles with men, Christ is the chief corner
stone (Ephs. 2-20), and only those who are in the Lamb’s Book of Life
comprise it (V 27). No more tears in it, etc. (Y 4, cp. 7-17). All things
are new (V 5), and there the overeomer inherits the promised inheri-
tance (cp. 22-5). The various stones that comprise the foundations of
the wall (V 19, 20) denote the various degrees of glory of the saints
who comprise them. The peoples that are saved walk according to its


light (V 24), i.e., by its teachings and knowledge, and are healed (22-2)
and reigned over in righteousness (22-5).
Then the following texts find application where the word trans-
lated revealed, revelation, appearing, coming, and manifestation is
ajjokalupsis signifying revealment, or unveiling as of something previ-
ously present, but hidden :-Rms. 8-18, 19 ; 1 Peter 4-13,1-4, 5 ; 5-1,1-13,
1-7; I Cor. 1-7. Also Colls. 3-4; I John 3-2; II Tim. 4-8; I Peter 5-4,
find fulfilment. The Bride is the Queen to reign with Christ, and she
shall be brought joyful in glory to the King (Ps. 45-9 to 17 cp.; Ps.
149). Abide, therefore, in Christ, be patient until He comes (James
5-7, 8), be diligent and exhort one another (Heb. 10-25), that you may
be found peaceful without spot (spots of the world, James 1-27), and
blameless (II Peter 3-14), that you may approach Him with all confi-
dence (I John 2-28). Therefore watch for we know not the day or
hour.
GOOD NEWS FOR MANKIND.
The righteous and meek (humble, mild) shall inherit (occupy,
possess, obtain) the earth. (Matt. 5-5; Ps. 37-9,29, 34.) God creating
it to be inhabited. (Is. 45-18.) Nowhere in the Bible is Heaven
promised as the endless abode of man. The Heaven is the Lord’s, but
the earth has He given to the children of men. (Ps. 115-16.) Man was
created perfect, but retrogressed when he sinned (broke the law of
God. I John 3-4). The apple incident is figurative. The sin was
such as to place into the human family the transfused character of the
Great Enemy himself—a deep-rooted enemity against God. (Rms. 8-7.)
Consequently the human race, tainted at its source, is “born in sin
and shapen in iniquity,” (Ps. 51-5), and as the wages of sin is death
(Rms. 6-23); so death has passed upon all men because all have sinned
(Rms. 5-12, 3-23). The Book of Enoch known to early church, lately
refound), an inscription from ancient Chaldea, and several passages
in Genesis, and the Gospels manifest the character of the first sin,
but let it suffice here that because of sin, man has forfeited all claim
to an abiding place on this earth, the only place he has been promised.
Between now and the Resurrection he is in Hades (Unseen World),
in an unclothed state (in spirit or soul), awaiting his trial (cp. II
Peter 2-9; Job 21-30), but Hades will at last be consumed (Rev. 20-14).
Paradise is the abode for the souls in Christ,
If man kept the law of God he would not die. But he is helpless.
If he breaks one commandment he breaks the whole law. (James 2-10).
If he could keep it from now it would be useless, because God requires
the things that are past (Eccles. 3-15), and the law means more than
it apparently says. (cp. Matt. 5-21, 22, 27, 28.) Again, a violated law
cannot justify—make righteous. Hence by works of law will no man
be justified (Gals. 2-16; Rms. 3-20), and because of his violation of
the law he is destined to condemnation or judgment, when, reclothed
and resurrected he appears before God Himself at the end of the Mil-
lenium to be judged according to his works. (Rev. 20-11 to 15, 21-8.)
The Judgment Throne is white—strict justice. No rainbow, no mercy
then. Every thought and deed wull be weighed in the balances. Every
careless word will tell (Matt. 12-36). If anything he knew was right
and did not do it, it will tell against him. (Janies 4-17). Beware lest
you refuse to hear God. You will rue it. (Heb. 12-25); for while His
Name is Love He is also a consuming fire (v. 29). His character is;


the unchangeable perfection of holiness; and that holiness is love to
the holy and wrath to the guilty. The same lire that warms and
cheers also burns and blasts. It all depends on our relation to it.
Hence, “it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God.”
(Heb. 10-31). And in the last day into His hands one must fall if he
rejects Christ and His words. (John 12-47, 48; cp. Heb. 10-28, 29). If
wanting there is no hope. He is burnt up and dies once again—the
second death. (Rev. 20-15). There’s no chance between death and
the resurrection to make amends, for death justifies from sin. (Rms.
6-7).
Peter calls the second death the perdition (destruction) of the un-
godly, when everything is burning with fervent heat (II Peter 3-7, 10;
cp. Heb. 10-27), and is likened to Gehenna by Christ. Gehenna was
the blazing lire outside Jerusalem into which everything abominable
was cast, including dead bodies. Speaking of His Father, Christ says:
“Beware of Him who can destroy both body and soul in Gehenna (not
Hell as A.V. Matt. 10-28; Luke 12-5 ; Ezek. 18-4; cp. Matt. 5-22,29,18-9,
23-15, 33; Ps. 37; Phill. 3-19).” Gehenna is the executive judgment
upon the dead. That upon the living Christ executes at His Return.
They also are judged according to their works. If found wanting, are
burnt—suffer the vengeance of “eternal” fire as Sodom and Gomorrah.
(Matt. 25-31 to 46, cp. 3-12; John 15-6; Matt. 13-40 to 43. World in
v. 40 is Age in Grk. Contrast; II Peter 3-7 and v. 6, where world is
Kosmos in Grk. Mai. 4-1 to 3; Rev. 14-10; cp. 2 Thess. 1-9; Jude 7;
2 Peter 3-6). Torment in practically all cases means primarily a trial
or testing. The word is from Basanos, a Lydian stone, supposedly
possessing the property of testing metals. God’s testing stone is lire.
(I Cor. 3-13, 15).
Through sin this world is lost. It must be redeemed—brought
back to Edenic sinlessness and purity—be renewed (II Peter 3-13; cp.
Ps. 102-25, ,26), and populated with joyous, sinless, deathless beings.
God’s plan is to place Christ over it as King (for which purpose He
was born, John 18-37), and His Church (Grk. ekklesia, those called
out cp. Acts 15-14), ruling with Christ in justice, righteousness, and
all divine knowledge until death is abolished. (I Cor. 15-24 to 28.) Of
necessity the Ruler is divine and all-powerful. Likewise must be His
co-rulers. The promise is that if His chosen suffer (Grk endure) with
Him they shall also reign with Him, (II Tim. 2-12), and just as they
have borne the image of the earthly they will bear the image of the
heavenly ((I Cor. 15-49 to 54), becoming partakers of the divine
nature (2 Peter 1-4; 1 Peter 5-4; Cols. 1-12) ; made equal to the angels.
(Luke 20-36). The reign will be one lasting happinesss for all reign-
ing, in caring for the well-fare of others, putting Christ’s teachings
and principles into full effect without hindrance, and ruling with
justice and righteousness for 1000 years, in all honor, glory and
power. Israel first received the invitation, but few were found
worthy because they sought it not by faith (Rms. 9-32). Hence the
invitation (foreordained) to the gentiles, both good and bad. (Matt.
22-2 to 14). For other proof texts see articles on the Millenium and
Christ as King. Not until the harvesting of the 11th hour laborer’s
sowing will the number be completed. You can be in that harvest
and so escape the great time of trouble and condemnation, (cp. Rev.
14-14 to 20).


The Kingdom class rises in the first Resurrection, and upon them
the second death has no power—they escape the judgment (Rev. 20-
<6). Manifestly only righteous beings have any title to reign in a
kingdom requiring pure righteousness. In God’s eyes no man is
righteous (Rms. 3-10), because no man can keep the law —the measure
of righteousness. Hence righteousness by works of law is unattain-
able (Rms. 9-31, 32; Gals. 2-21), because a violated law cannot justify
the transgressor. He who is hoping for salvation by works of law is
said to be under the law (and this the natural man desires to be. cp.
■Gals. 4-21), but no man under the law can become an heir with Christ.
(Rms. 4-13, 14, 9-7, 8), and so escape condemnation. What does God
do for man? What can He do? He makes by His G/ace His glorious
promises, a gift or favor. (Rms. 5-15 to 17, 6-23; Ephs. 3-6, 7). And
that the inheritance might be b ygrace He makes it of faith. (Rms.
4-16). Faith is taking God at His word —not doubting Him but be-
lieving that what He promises He can perform. It is confidence in
the things hoped for; the evidence of things unseen. (Heb. 11-1).
Abraham believed God and it was accounted to him for righteousness.
(Rms. 4-3). Likewise faith saved Abel, Enoch, Noah, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Moses and others under the law (Heb. ch. 11), and it must
save us (Rms. 4-23 to 25), for if the inheritance and hence endless
life be of law it is no more of promise (Gals. 3-18), and faith is made
void (Rms. 4-14, cp. 9-31, 32). Hence understand that they who are
of faith are made heirs according to the promises if they are Christ’s.
(Gals. 3-7, 29.) See article on the Millenium, first paragraph.
Before the world’s foundation it was ordained that the promises
be centred round Christ. (I Peter 1-20; Rev. 13-8; cp. Matt. 25-34, 13-
35; John 6-62, 38, 17-5, 8, 24; Cols. 1-16, 17; Hebs. 1-2; Dan. 3-24, 25).
God told of His Great Plan to redeem the world to the Jewish Fathers
by the prophets, but to us He has spoken by Christ. (Heb. 1-1.) Though
in the form or image of God, Christ did not meditate a usurpation to
be like God (as Satan did. Veiled refs. Ezek. 28-12 to 19; Is. 14-12 to
17), but divested Himself (of His Glory and body), taking a servant’s
form in the likeness of man (Phills. 2-6, 7, literally). A body was
prepared for Him (Hebs. 10-5), which was begotten of God by His
Holy Spirit (Matt. 1-18), and born of Mary. Hence God is Jesus’s
Father and Jesus His Son (the only begotten. John 1-14), as verily
as any man is the son of his father. God sent Him that He might
redeem those under the law to become His adopted sons (Gals. 4-4, 5),
until the resurrection birth, when God puts His Spirit into us, and
wm become sons indeed, and Christ our Elder Brother in reality.
(Rms. 8-23. Adoption should be sonship here. 8-29; I Cor. 15-23;
James 1-18; Rev. 14-4; Heb. 12-23.) If you believe God you will be-
lieve Christ for God testified of Him (Matt. 3-17, etc.), and Jesus
and His apostles so testified that He was that One ordained by
works and miracles, etc. (Acts 10-42, 18-5, 28-23; John 5-39), which
works and miracles prominently existed in the Church in the first
two centuries as Eusebius and Mosheim testify. Though Christ took
upon Himself the likeness of man thereby so weakening Himself that
He could of Himself do nothing (John 5-19, 30), and was tempted in
all points as we are (Heb. 4-15, cp. 2-17, 18), yet He broke not the
law—He did no sin (1 Pet. 2-22; John 15-10), and was resurrected in
consequence. If He then kept the law why did God suffer Him to be


put to death? (John 19-11; Rms. 8-32.)
r lhe blessing of Abraham (promised inheritance), can only come
to us through faith in Jesus Christ (Gals. 3, 14, cp. 21, 22; Rms. 5-1, 2.)
that we may be justified by having His righteousness imputed to us
(Rms. 3-21, 22; Gals. 3-29), and if one continues to live by faith, this
righteousness is imputed to him continually (Rms. 1-17; cp. Cols. 2-6),
while if he sips he has an intercessor in Jesus (I John 2-1). What of
our past sins? They were imputed to Christ. He bore our sins in
His Own Body on the Cross (1 Peter 2-24). On Him was laid the
iniquity of us all (Is. 53-6, 11), that He might redeem us from our
iniquities (Titus 2-14). He bought them. They became His. In this
way He became the “Vilest sinner” that ever lived —for us, when in
His own right death had no claim over Him. Because He loved us—
we who do not love Him—He gave up His life, and bore all sorrow,
suffering, shame, that He might open a way to life and immortality.
((! Tim. 1-9, 10; Rms. 6-23). Christ knew it and submitted —was
obedient unto death. Marvellous love. At the cross the strain gave
way—His heart broke. (The incidents surrounding His death prove
this.) Yet He is still despised and rejected of men. He still says:
‘Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life (John 5-40, cp. 11-
25.) He will not make you. It’s “whosoever will, may come,” and
he who comes will in no wise be cast out. (John 6-37). He gave
Himself a ransom for all (I Tim. 2-6), was made a propitiation for us
through faith in His Blood for remission of sins. (Rms. 3-24 to 26, 4-24,
25 Gals. 3-22), for without shedding of blood there is no remission
(Heb. 9-22). That is, it is faith in His Blood that secures for us
pardon from God though our sins be as scarlet (Is. 1-18), because it
is belief in Christ that is belief in God, and God imputes that belief
as righteousness to us and so remits our sins for the Kingdom, and
keeps us so justified, by providing us with a faithful High Priest and
mediator—Christ. Hence our faith would be in vain if Christ had
not risen (I Cor. 15-17), and once justified we must live by faith to
have Christ’s righteousness continuously imputed (Heb. 10-38, 39), not
doing good works to be saved but working good because we' are
saved; for through works faith is perfected (James 2-22). Good
works are then the evidence and fruit of faith—not the means of
justification. Saving faith always works. (Miscell. Texts. John 3-16
18; I Cor. 15-20 to 22; Rms. 6-9, 3-25, 5-12, 19; II Cor. 5-21; I John
3-5; Matt. 1-21, 26-28; Luke 24-47; Acts 10-43; Cols. 1-14; Bphs. 2-8).
For the remission of sins the ordinance of baptism (immersion),
is ordained (Acts 2-38). This follows belief and repentance and links
us with Christ (Gals. 3-27). We become crucified with Him (Rms.
C-6. cp. Cols. 3-8, 9; Gals. 2-20) dead (Cols. 3-3; cp. Rms. 6-7), and
buried, and then rise to newness of life with Him. See article on
Baptism. Though onr cross is not material it is nevertheless literal.
When we desire to lead a life to inherit the kingdom we give ourselves
a new mind so to speak, and this mind crosses the old mind at every
turn. The sin within ns wants to do one thing, but our new mind'
says “No.” Hence the old mind is crucified, mortified, put to death
that we should no more serve sin. (cp. Gals. 5-24, 6-14; Rms. 8-13).
Hence there is no condemnation for those in Christ Jesus (Rms. 8-1
cp. John 5-24). Outside Jesus? Yes! Why? (John 3-19.) Hence
he that believes not (implying a hearing and knowledge, and this you


now have), shall not see life, but God’s wrath abides upon him. (John
3-36.) If in Jesus, we are saved from this Wrath (at the judgment),
and that near at hand (Rms. 5-9, 2-5; Eph. 2-3, 5-6; Cols. 3-6; I Thess.
1-10, 5-9; Matt. 3-8 ep. 10), Insult the spirit of God’s grace and
treat as a common thing the blood of the covenant and how can you
escape punishment (Heb. 10-28, 29). Concerning the righteousness of
the law ,(Rms. 10-5), Paul was blameless, but he came to the righteous-
ness of faith, that he might attain unto the resurrection “From
Among” the dead (Phills. 3-6, 9, 11).
Which will you choose? The ministration of death —remain under
the law, or will you come under the ministration of grace—the spirit.
(Cols. 3-6 to 11, 18). You may count the gospel foolishness (1 Cor.
1-18), but that is because the god of this world has blinded you that
you may not see (2 Cor. 4-4). Will you so suffer him? You have
your family to think of, who will be bound to be caught in the time
of trouble if you escape by death. Honour and glory in the Kingdom,
and a deathless joyous existence in flesh and bone, and spirit on this
earth-made-heaven is yours without money and price. On the other
hand you miss the Kingdom and come into condemnation at the Great
White Throne. Do you count yourself unworthy of eternal life ? Then
God is likely to so account you. Seek the Lord while he may be found.
(Is. 55-6). Now is the day of salvation; now is the accepted time.
(2 Cor. 6-2). “Then they that feared the Lord and thought upon his
Name spoke to one another, and the Lord hearkened, and a Book of
Rememberance was written before Him. And they shall be Mine,
saith the Lord of Hosts in that day when I shall make up my jewels,
and I will spare them”. (Mai. 3-16, 17). Will your name be there?
Then let the gospel—the glad tidings or good news fall on good
ground. (Matt. 13-8, 23). Man has not seen, nor heard, nor realised
the things God has prepared for them that love HIM. (1 Cor. 2-9.
Rms. 8-17 18).
THE LIFE THAT TELLS.
He can best rule who has first fulfilled all obedience and con-
quered himself. Likewise with Christians. (2 Cor. 10-5, 6. 1 Peter 1-2,
14, 15. 2 Cor. 2.9). As Christ was obedient unto death so must w ebe.
(Phill. 2-8. Heb. 5-8), and our obedience is total submission to His
precepts and teaching, which reflect a character which is gentle,
chaste, loving, hopeful, joyful, meek, humble, peaceloving, forbearing,
longsuffering, unselfish, faithful, prudent, steadfast, sincere, compas-
sionate, forgivving, merciful, etc. These qualities are the fruits of
his spirit. (Gals. 5-22. Ephs. 5-9. Rms. 6-22. II Peter 1-4, 8. Hebs. 13-5.
James 3-17, 18). If one does not manifest them (allowing time for
growth) he has not the Spirit of Christ and is none of HIS. (Rms.
8-9), and hence has no inheritance in the Kingdom. Of all qualities
LOVE is greatest. A man may have all knowledge and Christian
truth in its fulness, the gift of tongues of prophecy, faith, hope, give
all he has for the poor, and even be burned (martyred) ; if he has not
divine love —pure, unselfish, indiscriminate, long-suffering, steadfast,
forbearing love—ALL THESE PROFIT HIM NOTHING. (I Cor. 13.
'9-27, Rv.) Love for Christ works love for His children—our brothers
and sisters—and if we love Him we will keep His Commandments.
(John 14-15, 21, 1 John 3-24, 2-4, 5).
God’s grace imputes to a Christian Christ’s perfection, but in


himself a Christian is not perfect but to attain the Kingdom Prize he
must strive for perfection working* out his own salvation with fear
and trembling. (I John 1-8. Matt. 5-48. Ephs, 4-13. Cols. 4-12. II Cor.
13-9. Phills. 3-12, 14. 2-12) for faith is perfected by works (James
2-22), and fa th works by love (Gals. 5-6), and love is the fulfilling of
the-law and the bond of perfection. (Rms. 13-10. Cols. 3-14). Hence
leave the first principles and go on to perfection (Heb. 6-1), on to love,
that your reward may be great. Cols. 3-24. II John 8. I Cor. 3-8. Rev.
22-12). Search the scriptures! (N.T. first) for every precept com-
manded and quality required. (See specially Rev. chps 2,3, and Ps.
37). Examine yourself, note your deficiencies and resolve to strive —
you will not reach perfection, but the more you try the nearer you
will attain to it. God will help you, and His Grace is only limited by
your willingness. Has one fallen from grace, come into condemna-
tion? A Christian can. (Heb. 12-15 to 17. I Cor. 15-2. II Cor. 6-1. II
Peter 1-10, cp. 3-17, 18. Heb. 3-14. Matt. 10.22. James 5-12). Such
are however mostly nominal Christians. They have not been fully
enlightened, have not known the heavenly gift, (inheritance in the
Kingdom) or the glories of the Coming (Grk.) Age, nor received
the pledge of the Spirit, nor experienced a change of heart and sub-
mitted to immersion (baptism) into Christ for forgiveness of sins.
(Heb. 6-4, 5. 12-16,17). Such must begin where the stranger must. If
one has tasted all these things and truly backslidden, he cannot renew
again to repentance. Heb. 6-4 to 6. 10-26 to 29).
Every Branch in Christ that is unfruitful will receive no inheri-
tance (John 15-2, 16. cp. Matt. 7-19), for he wdio lacks Christly quali-
ties is blind and has forgotten that he received forgiveness of sins.
(II Peter 1-3 to 9). Are you fruitful, yet afflicted. Every Branch
that beareth fruit is purged that it may bring forth more fruit (John
15-2), and he whom Christ loves He rebukes and chastens. (Rev. 3-19.
Heb. 12-5 to 7). Endure therefore and repent upon chastening to
walk .more worthily. The foolish virgins have no oil —Holy Spirit—
in themselves —are unfruitful and for this reason are left behind in
the time of trouble. SEARCH THE SC RIPTURES. Th e more you
STUDY your Bible the more your faith will increase (Rms. 10-17.),
the more established you will become in the promises. (John 5-39.
If Tim. 3-15. cp. Acts 17-11. Matt. 4-4). You need guidance and light
even though you be accepted of God. (cp. Acts 10-3, 4)). For this
teachers have been given, and in every epoch since the apostles' time
they have appeared in due season, but because of human imperfection,
place no childlike trustfulness in anybody, for you will imbibe their
errors as well as their light. But shut not your eyes against error for
you will of necessity shut out light also. YOUR RULE. Comparing
with the Bible prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.
I Thes. 5-21). Beware of wolves in sheep’s clothing (Matt 7-15. Acts
20-29.), teaching the traditions of men and worshipping vainly in
consequence. Matt. 15-9). YOU WILL FIND THEIR HABITATION
WITHIN THE FOLD. Let not everyone strive to become a teacher.
(James 3-1, Grk. Teachers). If any man is ordained he will
know it. Continue in God’s will, seek to know" it, be
willing to fulfill every requirement and you will know the truth (John
8-31, 32), and be able to discriminate (John 7-17), for wisdom results
from fear of God, (Ps. 111-10. James 1-5), and wisdom from above


bears good fruit. (James 3-17, 18). Seek light, study earnestly and
continuously for truth shields from deception and error. (II Thes.
2-11, 12 cp. Ps. 81-11, 12). Don’t follow your own spirit thinking it
is God’s Spirit. Test it by the Scriptures.
You who are nominal Christians, are proving a stambling block
to thousands coming to Christ. “Lord, Lord” is ever on your lips,
yet you do not Christ’s will. (Luke 6-46 to 49. Matt 7-21). Christ
knows you not though you say “He has eaten and drunk in your pre-
sence and taught in your streets” (Luke 13-25 to 28). Like the
scribes and pharisees of old you will not enter the Kingdom (Matt.
23-13, 25-41 to 46). You who are God’s true children. —Confess your
shortcomings every day, give all thanksgiving and praise to God,
disseminate your light, help the weaker brethren, exhorting and re-
buking with all longsuffering and love (11 Tim. 4-2), keep unspotted
from the world (James 1-27. II Peter 3-14, and pray continually that
you and others may be accounted worthy to escape the time of trouble
(Luke 4-36.), for it is high time to awake our salvation is nearer than
when we beleived. The night is far spent; the morning is at hand.
Close not your eyes to the truth. When once perceived you cannot so
do and remain innocent, (cp. John 15-22). Count as nothing every-
thing, that you may win Christ. The overcomer will inherit all things
including “aionian” or age-lasting life, and life beyond in the new
earth. (Kev. 2-26, 3-12, 21. 21-4, 7. I Cor. 3-22. I Tim. 4-8. II Peter 1-4.
I John 2-25, Rev. 20-6. James 1-12. Hebs. 10-36, 37. II Peter 1.4. I John
2-25, Rev. 20-6, James 1-12, Hebs. 10-36, 37, 2 Peter 3-13), and who is
the overcomer but he that believec that Christ is the Son of God.
(] John 5-5. 1 Cor. 15-57. Our faithfulness is the victory that over-
comes the world. (I John 5-4. Rms. 8-37.) and inherits the kingdom.
THE MORAL CODE OF FAITH.
The righteousness of the law —an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, love your neighbour, (he of the same tribe), but hate your
enemy, is the righteousness of the world (Matt. 5-38, 43. Exodus 21-24.
Lev. 24-20), —a world that is striving to establish its own righteous-
ness (cp. Rms. 10-3) —the righteousness of the flesh which cannot!
escape the judgment of condemnation. (II Cor. 6-7, 9), little realising
that man’s wrath cannot work God’s righteousness (James 1-20). Man
is forbidden to be angry with his brother, universal sense. (Matt. 5-22).
Two oldest mss. omit “without a cause”. The righteousness of faith
revealed by Jesus Christ, and taught by His disciples is the only
“moral code” that will attain one to the Kingdom thereby escaping
condemnation.
In pursuance, the righteousness of faith, works love even for
one’s worst enemies (Matt. 5-44), never renders evil for evil (1 Thes.
5-15. I Peter 3-9.), nor resists it, (Matt. 5-39. material sense), but over-
comes evil with good. (Ems. 12-11). It will suffer wrong and fraud
rather than retaliate ( I Cor. 6, 7 cp. Heb. 10-32), never seeks revenge,
but may give way to (Grk.) THE wrath (of God), in that vengeance
is His and He will repay (Kins. 12-19 cp. Dent. 3235), lives the sermon
of the Mount (Matt, chs 5, 6 and 7), obeys governments (Titus 3-1.
Rms. 13-1 to 7), has no respect of or partiality to persons, which is
sin (James 2-9), but honors all men and honors and obeys all rulers,
good or bad, in that it renders unto Caeser the things that are
Caesar’s (Mrk. 12-1), but obeys God before Caesar even unto death.


(Acts 5-29. Dan. 3-1 to 30 cp. Exodus 23-2, Acts 4-19 cp. 5-19). It
works patience and non-resistance under injustice (James 5,6, 7), and
from being a man pleaser works one to serve God and Christ (E-ms.
12-1. Matt. 4-10. Gals. 1-10 cp. Ephs 6-6). It lives by faith—not by
force, and works peace, harmlessness, gentleness. (Ems. 14-19. Heb.
12- Titus 3-2. James 3-17, 18), putting humility BEFOEE honor
(Proverbs. 15-33), and in the words of Tertullian (200 A.D. “requires
us rather to suffer death than to inflict it”.
Being the righteousness of ‘‘light”, it is in continual conflict with
“darkness”. It fights but with weapons spiritual, not carnal. (II Cor,
10-3, 4. IPs breastplate is God’s righteousness; sandals, peace;
shield, faith; helmet, hope of salvation; sword, the word of God. (Ephs
6-14 to 18 cp. II Tim. 4-7). It fights to seek to save men’s lives, not
destroy them (Luke 9-54 to 56), wrestling not aginst flesh and blood
but against “spiritual wickedness in heavenly places”, of which the
wickedness here is but the reflection (Ephs. 6-12 cp. 2-1). Hence
“those that take the sword shall die by the swrod” (Matt. 26-52. Eev.
13- remembering that Christ forbids His disciples to fight for His
kingdom—a kingdom not of this world. (John 18-36. Grk. order of
things). In the incident of the temple (Matt. 21-13) Christ did not
kill, nor was his action violence as we understand it Cp. Is. 53-9) but
zeal, and if Luke 22, 36 is literal it does violence to Christ’s principles,
and that instead of going forth as “harmless as doves” Matt 10-16 the
disciples prosecuted their mission with swords in their hands. No!
It was an injunction to them to be on guard as the Sheppherd was
going to be taken from them (cp. Mark 14-27), and is one of those
figurative sayings of Jesus’ which He did not always explain (cp. John
648 to 66). Perceiving they did not understand, He simply said “It
is enough.”
There were converted soldiers in the early days (cp. Luke 3-14)
who acted as policemen in times of peace, but in one notable in-
stance in time of war the Thebian Legion of 5000 Christians was cut
to pieces. If others acted otherwise Christ’s principles remain un-
altered. Don’t copy a disciple’s errors but copy the “Author”. When
obedience is fulfilled and Christ returns, with the “Sword of His
Word or Mouth” Eev. 19-15. Heb. 4-12. cp. John 12-48), then one will
be prepared to punish all disobedience. (II Cor. 10-6). Christendom
is not Christendom, Christ testifies against it in Eev. as severely as He
did against Jerusalem. The disciple of Christ should be a stranger
and a pilgrim here (I Peter 2-11), and though in it he is to be aprt
from it (John 17-16, 2 Cor. 6-17), lest in trying to serve two masters
Matt. 6.24), he will become spiritually blinded and conformed to this
world, for it exercises the stronger influence here, and if any man love
the world, the love of God is not in Him. (I John 2-15). No matter
how righteous any part of the world is, whether it be gentile or
Jew (or Israel) it is not the righteousness of grace, but of condemna-
tion; and a disciple of Christ’s who may attempt to justify himself by
the law, beware lest He fall from favor (grace) and having received 1
greater light come into greater condemnation. (Gal. 5-4. James 3-1).
The kingdom of God is righteousness and peace (Ems. 14-17, 19),.
and he who strives for it living according to the Spirit will suffer re-
proach if not persecution (Gals. 4-29), but happy are you (I Peter 3-14)
for it is through affliction that the Kingdom is entered (John 16-33.


Acts 14-22)—a prize of the highest calling (Phill. 3-14), and one that
innst oe striven for earnestly. (Luke 13-24). A Disciple of Christ’s
takes his ruling from Heaven as revealed in the Word (Phill. 3-20.
(jik. citizenship, govt., nr polity). While the powers of this world
will become Christ’s at His return (Rev. 11-15), now they are not His
mil another’s. Matt. 4-9 j. Hence being espoused to Christ (cp. Kms.
<-4), union or friendship with the world is spiritual adultery with
Hod (James 4-4). That’s why Babylon is called the Mother of Har-
lots. Rev. 17-5). “Ye are not your own”, “ye are bought with a price”.
(I Cor. 6-19, 20. 7-23). Can Caesar demand what is God’s? The word
of God is THE defence (cp. Matt. 10-19, 20), and faithfulness a test-
ing. No man can lay hands upon a disciple of Christ’s unless it is
permitted him (cp. John 19-11). “Love one another. By this shall all
men know that they are My disciples.”
SABBATH—1st OR 7th DAY?
Ihe earth spins round from west to east. Coming round from Arme-
nia the site or vicinity of Eden where in accordance with Genesis God first
reckoned the days of the week, each new day reaches us 15 hours later
Hence Eden is God’s Day Line—the point on earth where the days benn
and end. Man’s day line is the 180 Meridan which runs through the Fiji
islands. In coming from America to Australia one whole day would he
dropped from the Calendar. If God’s Day Line were taken no day would
be dropped, or added in recrossing it. Sunday, the first day of the week
would be seen to be the 7th in New Zealand, Australia, India, China, and
Japan. And so it is. All who are keeping Sunday as the Sabbath are in
reality keeping Friday—the 6th. For absolute convincing PROOF 1 that
such is the case write for “Eden’s Initial Day Line,” an SO-page book post
free for 4d.
If the Ist day of the week be the true Sabbath then Monday is the cor-
rect Biblical day here. But has the Sabbath been divinely transferred, was
it abolished, is it Jewish, or was it instituted at Creation and known’ and
kept by the ancients long before Moses lived, does one come under the
law by observing it, what is' it’s history, and the circumstances surround-
ing its change, was the Ist day or the 7tn the Sabbath of the early Church,
does God’s day begin and end at sunset? (it does. cp. Lev. 23-32, Gen. 1-5,
Mrk. 1-32, Neh. 13-9. Hence Sabbath here begins at Sunset Saturday night,
Friday night in Europe and America). These and many more important
questions are answered concisely, Biblically, and historically with citations
from reliable witnesses and an examination into the Bible Texts adduced
for the change, in a paper entitled “God’s Sabbath.” No matter what text
you think upholds the change an abrogation of the Sabbath it will on cri-
tical examination be found biblically incorrect. Put your mind at rest for
if the first day is the Sabbath, Monday is the day to keep here. Kindly
'enclose 3d. in stamps.
STARTLING “CO INCIDENCES.”
On Good Friday of 1902 the people of Martinique reaching the
culmination of a long period of tne most appalling wickedness and
moral degradation crucified a masqueraded hog, and resurrected it on
the Easter Sunday immediately preceding the terrible earthquake
which destroyed Martinique and buried 40,000 under the burning lava.
San Francisco, described in Blackwood’s Magazine of June 1906 as
the “Californian Sodom” having flaunted its unparalleled iniquities
for nearly 60 years was suddenly wiped out. It was during Britain’s
war with China 1839-42 (Ist Opium War) that 3480 soldiers and 13,000
camp followers were massacred in the Kyber Pass while two weeks
after England had approved by a general election for a second opium
war, the never-to-be-forgotten Indian Mutiny broke out May 11th,
1857. At the close of 1908 the unspeakably wicked and irreligious
‘Condition of some of the inhaitants of Messina was expressed in a


series of violent resolutions passed against all religious principles
while the journal “II Telefono 77 printed in Messina, published in its
Christmas number an abominable parody daring the Almightly to
make himself known by sending an earthquake. In three days it
eame. Many more like “Co-incidences. 77
BIBLE BAPTISM—WHAT IT MEANS.
The witnessing ordinance to belief and faith in the Gospel, repent-
ance for sin, and a genuine desire to be “dead” to such in future is.
union with Christ by the baptism He commanded with all its privileges,
including forgiveness for both past and present sins, and an inherit-
ance in the Kingdom of God to reign with Him if we suffer (endure)
with Him (Acts 2-38, 41, 22-16, 8-32 to 39, Matt. 28-19, 3-7 to 11, Mrk.
16-15, 16, 1-4, 1 John 2-1, cp. 1-9, 2 Tim. 2-12, 3-12, cp. Rms. 8 ; 17).
There is only one Baptism (Ephs. 4-5), the verb of which in the
Greek is defined by 40 standard lexicographers as meaning “to
plunge,” “immerse.” Practically all revised translations render
“immerse.” Baptize never means sprinkling or pouring the Greek,
for which are Rantizo and Ekehao. The Greek Church itself immerses
—never sprinkles. The early Latin Christian Fathers Tertullian, Cy-
prian and Jerome in common with the Greek Fathers Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Origen and Chrysostom, interpreted baptize “to plunge,”
“to immerse.” Prominent Church Historians record that immersion
was the mode of the early Christian Church. The English Prayer
Book of 1552 demanded immersion, while Catholics of Milan demand it
to this day. Popery is the origin of sprinkling—its counterfeit —-
which became common about the 4th or sth century. It was substi-
tuted for immersion because it was found “more convenient.”
(Cardinal Manning in Faith of our Fathers). See Matt. 3-6, 16; Acts
8-38, 39; John 3-23; Eph. 5-26.
Baptism is a burial with Christ into His death, and on rising from
the water a resurrection to newness of life with Him. (Rms. 6-3, 4,5,
Cols. 2-12). Hence, only immersion can fit the figure, and as Christ
only died once, one immersion is correct. Of itself baptism does not
take away sin, but it is the divinely ordained way of our becoming
united with Christ (Gals. 3-27), and if after we “be dead” with Christ
we seek those things above (Cols. 3-1), we shall live with Him. (Rms.
6-8). If baptism were “Christian Circumcision,” as some claim,,
then to be consistent only males can be baptized (Gen. 17-12). Paul
was immersed—not sprinkled. Speaking of being buried with Christ
by baptism he includes himself. (Rms. 6-3, 4. “Arise” in Acts 22-16
is in the Greek “anastas,” which means also to make “people arise to
leave their home.” (Liddell and Scott). Peter with his 11 com-
panions without his 120 assistants could have had no trouble in
immersing 3000 in one day. (Acts 1-15, 2-41). Dr, Clough in Ongole
India, in 1878, with six assistants, only two immersing at a time,
baptised 2222 in 6 hours. Climate makes no difference. The Russian
Greek Church immerses throughout Russia.
The preaching of the Gospel succeeded by faith and repentance
precedes baptism, in all instances of the N.T., thereby excluding infants
who, not having sinned, require no remission for sins. Babies are not
lost. Cp. Jer, 31-15 to 17, with Matt. 2-18, and 1 Cor. 7-14, stating
that children of one parent who is a Christian are holy. Christ loved
little children (every disciple of His will do the same), and He blessed


them (a Jewish custom), but no mention whatever is made of water,
(Mrk. 10-16). Says the Church Historian Neander, "infant baptism
was unknown in the apostolic age.” Concerning Lydia’s household
(Acts 16-24, 15, 40) it is not known that she was married; she was.
300 miles away from her home in Thyatira, and the household and
brethren mentioned says the renowned commentator Meyer ''meant
those women who assisted her in her business.” In the Philippian
Jailer’s household (the jailer himself was probably immersed in the
prison bath or in the River Gaggitas), Paul spake to all (Acts 16-32),
obviously all who could understand. Babies could hardly believe
(v. 34). The same remarks apply to Crispus’s Household (Acts 18-8),
while that of Stephanas devoted itself to service for the saints (1 Cor,
16-15 literally), something babies cannot do. Granted that there were
babies "all” does not necessarily include them, because in scripture
idiom all is frequently used for some, and most of which Young’s con-
cordance enumerates some 15 cases, as examples in the N.T. alone.
Infant baptism proves a stumbling block to thousands coming per-
sonally to Christ in after life, and for this reason, if for no other,
is to be deprecated. Says Jesus, "Except a man be born of water
(may imply immersion, but probably refers to washing by the Word.
Ezek. 36-25, Ephs. 5-26; John 15-3), and of the Spirit (implying the
resurrection birth of which conversion is the begattal or conception,
cp. James 1-18, 1 John 5-1, Grk. begotten) he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God (John 3-5, 3). And "Now why tarriest thou? Arise
and be baptized.” Any Baptist minister will gladly do it. But
wherever you go have the principle recognised that your baptism is
into Christ’s Body irrespective of church or sect.
SIGNS OF THE END.
Motor cars in evidence in me days of God's Preparation (Nahum 2-3,
4). Return of Jews, ending ol their punishment from 1916, and inhabiting
of Jerusalem with unwalled villages. The judgment of the dead and ending
of Daniel's 1335 years in 1873. Unprecedented harmony of students ot
prophecy. Falling stars in 1833 and signs in heavens, notably from 1814,
to he followed by shaking of pow ers of the heavens with nations in per-
plexity. The drying-up of Turkey and the spirits of lawlessness, apostate
ecclesiasticism and infidelity, the latter-day type of the inscription on the
Cross, “King of the Jews" in hat in. Hebrew, and Greek (John 19-20), Rome
representing politics, Judea, Church apostacy, and Greece learning. Anger
of the nations and the toe-period of Daniel's image. Present indications
of the Coming Confederacy and the return of the “Beast" of French Re-
volution origin. Will he again usher in a revolution? Consumption ol:
Papal Power from 1798 —the beginning of the time of the end. Coming
warnings against worshipping the Beast and His image (revived) —the last
gospel message of this age. (Rev. 14-9, 10). Increase of travelling and
knowledge in the time of the end. (Dan. 12-4). The beginning of the lliii
hour and falling due of 6000 years from Creation. The oppression of op-
pressive employers of labour and the crying out of the workers at the time
the judge is standing at the door (James 5-1 to 6, cp. v. 9, Rev. 3-20). Re-
vival of doctrines of demons and heed-giving to seducing spirits in the lat-
ter times. Beginning in 1848 Spiritism now has over 60 million adherents
(1 Tim. 4-1; Lev. 20-27; II Kings 21-6, Is. 8-19, Jonn 4-1, 2 Cor. 11-15).
Scoffers concerning Christ's Coming in the last days. (2 Peter 3,4). Men
in the last days to be covetous, b lasphemers, boasters, truce-breakers, lov-
ers of pleasure, having a form of Godliness, etc. —therefore including the
professing Christian described as lukewarm, self-sufficient, and blind when
Christ is knocking for admittance at supper time. (2 Tim., 3-1 to 5, Rev.
3-15 to 20). Non-endurance of sound doctrine, truth turned into fables,,
teachers teaching smooth things and prophesying deceits, and the people


loving to have it so. (2 Tim. 4-3, cp. Is. 30-10, Jes. 5-30, 31). Your Rule:
To the law and to the testimony: If they speak not according to this word
it is because there is no light in them. (Is. 8-20).
AN APPEAL TO CLERGYMEN.
If you love the Shepherd you will love His sheep (John 21-15 to
17). You will feed them, not for lucre but willingly, not as Lord’s
over God’s heritage, but as examples of humility and godliness. (1
Peter, Ito 5). You will have a heart-felt consecration to Christ and
His people, and count all things as nought that you may be found
faithful. You will not love the world or the things in it that you may
abide in God’s love. (1 John 2-15). You will not be wise in your own
conceit, but search the Scriptures and note every Godly attribute of
character. You will continually examine yourself and mould your life
according to the Great Pattern. You will pay special attention to
Paul’s Epistles to Timothy, and Christ’s letter to the Laodicean
Church, and act upon them. You will get love for all men, rich and
poor, that your labor for all may be a pleasure. Your lips will keep
knowledge, and knowing that Israel of the Flesh is a type of Israel
of the Spirit you will give heed to God’s Word to Israel’s Priests as
being applicable to yourselves. But many of you have departed from
the way. You have corrupted the covenant of Levi—are unfaithful
to your calling. (Mai. 2-7 to 9). You are slumbering, or, what is
worse —false shepherds are among you—wolves in sheep’s clothing,
and you cannot detect them.
Many of you are sowing much but reaping little. Spiritual death
is reigning. Come more to the scriptures (this includes prophecy),
and leave alone the works and teachings of men, and science so-called.
Break the bands of theological training, and creeds, dogmas and church
routine, etc. Breathe more the living' truth of Christianity—give
unadulterated the message of God. Give the people bread—not
■stones. Reason with them. Demonstrate the truth of the Bible. Give
them to understand. My people are destroyed for want of know-
ledge” (Hos. 4-6). Be evangelical. If you are satisfied with no con-
versions you’ll get none. Don’t wait for a Chapman-Alexander mis-
sion. Step out and breathe life. Save and warn the people. Fill
them with the truth. Wake them up to the peril ahead) You will
not frighten them away. Be not afraid of your living. The Crown
of Righteousness you hope for is worth more than that. Teach not
the righteousness of the law—an eye for an eye, etc. You know what
is meant. Think less of stipends, collections, etc. Cry aloud! Lift
up your voice like a trumpet. Remember, “if the watchman see the
sword come,” etc.
Build your sermons upon the Bible. The'message for now is,
“Peril Ahead! Armageddon! Come to Christ! Live the Life!” But
few of you will hear. You have shut your eyes to the Beacon Light
of Divine prophecy and are blind. The Confederacy of Peace ahead
you will be among the first to extol, saying, “Peace,” when there is
no peace. Foolish prophets that follow your own spirit saying, “The
Lord saith when the Lord hath not saith, and hoping others will
confirm the word. But your wall of peace built with untempered
mortar will fall and you with it (Ezek. 13-1 to 16). Christ knows
you not if you do not love mankind. And loving them you will warn
them, guard, admonish and rebuke them. Interest yourself in God’s


people. Be less a churchman and more a Christian. You can put to
profitable use every scripture text in this booklet and profitably heed,
(John 10-11, 13, Acts 21-28, 2 Tim 4-1, 2, Titus 2-7, Ezk. 34-2 to 12,
Matt. 15-14, Is. 56-10, 11, 8-21, 29-11, cp. Dan. 12-14, Is. 30-10, Jer,
50-6, 23-1 to 4, 25-34 to 37, 1 Peter 5-4). Most of you are so close to the
church that you have lost all perspective. Get the viewpoint of one
outside. Write for papers containing many inspiring, truth-stirring
pointers. They are not doctrinal but designedly written to be an
inspiration and help to you, and are free for the asking.
THE LABOUR THAT COUNTS.
To every servant Christ has given talents and work to do which
He likens to the Kingdom of Heaven. (Matt. 25-14 to 30, Mrk. 13-34).
Eacli servant is expected to trade with his “talents,” which include
ability and means. After a long time Christ returns and reckons,
with His servants. He who has profitably traded receives a rulership
o\ ei many things and enters into the joy of his Lord—enthronement
in the Kingdom, (cp. Zeph. 3-17, Heb. 12-2, 1 Thess. 2-19, 20). He
vho did not trade help in the Kingdom—is slothful and unprofitable,
and goes into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth. (See also John 15-2). Hence let us be rich in good works,,
leady to distribute and help, laying up in store for ourselves a good
foundation against the time to come that we may lay hold on eternal
3-18, 19). The poorest of us can do something. Tracts
(of the right sort) cost little, and are easily given away. Remember
tne widow’s mite. If you can speak, or write, herald the message
that way. If possible conduct meetings, take halls, etc. People are
staining for heavenly food while whole populations are going the
broad way of destruction, all unheedful of the peril ahead. Won’t
you do something? God accepts according to what a man has if it
be given willingly. (2 Cor. 8-12, cp. 9-7), and every man can give
according to the Divine Arrangement.
Don’t have a debt to settle with Christ when He calls for an
account of your stewardship. Christ gave His Blood for us. He
asks that we may make Him known to others. To warn the people is
clearly the message to-day. It must be carried forward. We cannot
hold back if we see the sword coming. To be truly Abraham’s chil-
drcn we must be true to Christ (Gals. 3-7, 29), and if Abraham’s we
shal! do his works. (John 8-39). He gave tithes of all to Melchizedek.
(Gen. 14-17 to 24, cp. Hebs. 7-1, 2), of which priesthood is Christ.
(Heb. 5-6, 10, 6-20), Jacob likewise (Gen. 28-22), proving that tithe-
giving was extant before Moses. God wants one day in seven and
one-tenth of our earnings. Jesus upheld tithe-giving (Matt 23-23)
and it is God’s purpose for the support for His Ministry and Work to-
T < ~' or ‘ n 16-2). “Will a man rob God? Yet ye have
robbed me. Ye have robbed me in tithes and offerings.” (Mai
3-8 to 10. This is a latter-day prophecy). If you seek God have you
been honest with Him? “Return unto me and I will return unto you
saith the. Lord of Hosts.” (v. 7,8). “Honour the Lord with thy
substance and increase and your barns will be filled with plenty ”
(Provs 3-9). Tithes are God’s sacred reserve, and we are His
stewards. How, then, if we are unfaithful stewards of earthly things
can we expect Him to entrust us with Heavenly things? “Then they
that feared the Lord spoke to one another and the Lord hearkened


and a book of remembrance was written before Him. And they shall
be mine,” says God. “In that day when I make up my jewels and I
will spare them.” (Mai. 3-16, 17, which refers primarily to tithes,
cp. v. 7to 10, 14). And that day is the Great Day of the Lord now at
hand. (4-1 to 3).
He that trusts in his riches will fall. Provs. 11-28; 1 Tim. 6-17).
God abhors the covetous. (Ps. 10-3). Beware of it, for a man’s life
consists not in the abundance of his possessions. (Luke 12-15). Be
not like the rich man who stored much (v. 16 to 21), for we can
take nothing away at death (1 Tim. 6-7). Don’t forget to be bene-
ficent and to distribute, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased
(Debs. 13-16). And he who gives to the poor his righteousness will
remain for ever ((2 Cor. 9-9)). It is impossible for a rich man to
miter the Kingdom (Matt. 19-24), for riches bring temptation and
.soon prove a snare that drowns men in destruction (1 Tim, 6-9).
Hence Christ’s words, “Woe unto you that are rich, for you have
received your consolation (Luke 6-24), as Dives whose crime was that
Lazarus was in need of help of which Dives was loth to give (Luke
16-20 to 31). That you may make your riches (if you are rich) your
.safeguards and friends before it is too late be sure to read the judg-
iiien pronounced upon the rich in Jemes 1-10, 11, 5-1 to 6, cp. Mai.
*3-5, 4-3), and use you rmeans liberally for God’s service and help to
the poor that you may store up treasure in Heaven.
The writer has consecrated his life and possessions to service for
Christ that people may flee from the wrath to come. He calls for
helpers. This book and study have taken nearly all his means. He
doesn’t want the message to end here. Everything above bare living
expenses is Christ’s, and he rejoices in singleness as Paul rjoiced.
He has been a writer for six years, and is totally unsectarian, realising
that God has His People everywhere, and he wishes to work for all.
His library embraces many helpful and valuable works, and his
facilities for profitable Bible study are great. He desires to promote
a periodical devoted to the giving of meat in due season. His creed
is the Bible only, and truth with him comes before all things. He
purposes to make the journal representative of every school of thought
and creed, investigating the interpretation of each one on all points
and comparing with the Bible in its correct translation. Reasons for
and against will be given, and a thorough analysis made of every-
thing, and its columns will be open to all interested. Everything will
be given that will enable the seeker after truth to arrive at a correct
judgment and understanding. The writer is not dogmatic. If addi-
tional light and understanding come upon any point he will accept it.
Will you help him with gifts, tithes or offerings? Every penny
will be acknowledged and accounted for, and should it not be used
will be returned. For bona-fides he can refer to many leading city
firms for whom he has held money in trust. They can vouch for his
integrity. Any correspondence concerning the matter he will willing-
ly answer. He sees the sword coming, and if the watchman see the
sword coming and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned,
if the sword come and take any person awmy in his iniquity his blood
will I require at the watchman’s hand (Ezek. 33-6, Acts 20-26, 27,
Mrk. 13 34), while he that sows bountifully will reap bountifully (II
Cor. 9-6), and he that ministers seed to the sower ministers food to


God’s people, and increases the fruits of his own righteousness (v. 10),
for God will not be unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love
(Heb. 6-10).
GOD’S SIGNATURE IN THE BIBLE.
The diameter of the earth, moon, Venus ,and Mars, is a multiple of seven.
Neptune and tlranus not known as accurately. Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn
each come within one second of this phenomenon. Seven sevens mark Mercury's
axis period, sevens and nines Jupiter's (Airy), seven and thirteen Neptune’s
moon. Seven and nine the year of the earth and moons of Uranus. AATthin one
second of being a multiple of seven are the earth’s and Mars’ (Proctor) axis
period and sidereal revolutions of Jupiter’s moons. The repeated occurrence of
one bespeaks an uniform error in the calculations or instruments.
The Greeks and Hebrews had no ligures —each letter had a numerioal value.
Mr. Ivan Panin, a Russian scholar, has found that the Bible has a mathematical
foundation and superstructure underlying and pervading its 66 books, their letters,
words and paragraphs and the Bible as a whole. Few instances: Matthew 1-1 to
II is constructed on an elaborate system of multiples of sevens, extending to
the vocabulary, forms of words, distribution of gender, parts of speech, compara-
tive frequencjr of occurrences, etc., and these sevens pervade the entire chapter-
and Bible. The Greek and Hebrew order of its books, their number and the
occurrences, values and distribution of author’s names, are based upon some 50
features of sevens and elevens. Take away or add one book, and the whole
system falls. In Psalm 110 some 14 features of sevens exist. The chances of
being accidental rather than designed run from millions to some billion millions?
taken a million million times. Other phenomena found exist in multiples of 9, 11,
13 and 17, and sevens and nines. i
The writers of the Bible were unconscious of constructing numerical phenom*
ena. Man cannot do it. If he could he would require tens, hundreds or thousands
of years. Some of the cleverest men have tried then admitted their helplessness.
As not a part of the whole Bible but is constructed similarly its authorship by
one supernatural mind is settled. The point is invulnerable. “Numerics” ia
God’s signature in the Bible, as it is in the universe, verifiable by anyone slightly
acquainted with the original text. “ Numerics” settles questions of Chronology,
vocabulary, spellings, titles, doubtful words, order of books, writership, letters,
etc., and protects against interpolation and alteration. The Bible is not man’s
product. Rather is it, “Put off thy shoes from off thy feet for the place whereon
thou standest is holy ground.” Mr. Panin’s address is Armac Press, Toronto,
Canada. AVrite him.
FINAL WORDS.
Study this booklet with the Bible . (R.V. or other improved translation).
Practically all texts quoted are based upon the literal Greek or Heberw. Sug-
gestions and helpful criticisms are invited though not necessarily acknowledged,
and help (however small) is solicited in establishing the journal required
or a larger book, from all who love Jesus Christ and think upon His Name.
Or send in your name for a free copy of journal when issued. No obligation.
This booklet may be had at 2/6 half-dozen, 5 /- dozen, post free, and to anyone
desiring to enter the Kingdom and escape the coming vengeance, or is in honest
perplexity, command my help. Remember ,also, not to keep back the message in
its entirety for any imperfections so considered.
Your servant in the name of earth's Coming King,
ARTHUR CLIMO.
Sound the Alarm! .The Day of the Lord cometh. It is nigh at hand. (Joel,
2-1).. For in that day God will stretch forth His hand upon all —backsliders and
all—who have not sought or enquired for Him. (Sep. 1-4 to 6).


Wholly set up and Printed in
Australia by
H. Cook & Co.,
200 Castlereagh St., Sydney,
New South Wales.
