

I\/-W swhO
'Aj f-x>
bp/if I
~Jksi . <*^. N Ji^tC-<Jb
~j£ uzJZefj, • %I~y
( XXX M. . 3// -3y 2^


with a profusion of imagery, always delighting by aptness of
illustration, sometimes by sportiveness and wit, but oftener by
its richness and warmth, with a refined delicacy of sentiment
and brilliance of expression; and such a variety of elegant phra-
seology as the language of no other poet, in the same order of
poetry, can match.
All these qualities, however, marvellous as the combination is,
do not prove that he was capable of the highest efforts of poetic
genius:—that his mind possessed the majesty, magnificence, and
scope of Homer; the sublimity of Milton, ‘ wielding the ele-
ments or the grandeur and profundity of Shakspeare, sounding
the depths of the human heart, and raising and stilling the pas-
sions at his bidding.
It is therefore high, perhaps the very highest in the second
class, that we rank the poetic genius of Pope; with regard to the
place which his works hold in English literature, the question
hardly admits, and for any useful purpose does not require, a very
precise answer. Much in the judgment of every individual will
depend on that individual’s tastes and sympathies—we cannot,
however, claim for his works the same power to soften, elevate, or
purify the soul, which we confess in Shakspeare, Milton, or
Spenser—their strains are of a higher mood; Pope is the poet of
common life; and keeping this in our recollection, if we are to
decide by the quantity and variety of pleasure afforded, by the
value of the knowledge imparted, or the sound morality inculcated,
whom should we place before him, but Shakspeare alone? in
what other poet’s works can we find, with so little intermixture of
what is base and corrupt, so many, such various, and such copious
sources of delight and improvement?
Art. ll.—l. A Statistical Account of the British Settlements
in Australasia, including the Colonies of New South Wales and
Van Diemen’s Land. By W. C. Wentworth, Esq. a Native
of New South Wales. Third Edition. 2 vols. London. 1824.
2. An Account of the Colony of Van Diemens Land, princi-
pally designed for the Use of Emigrants. By Edward Curr.
London. 1820.
3. Geographical Memoirs on New South Wales, hy various hands.
Edited by Barron Field, Esq. F.L.S. &c. London. 1825.
is something so strangely different in the physical con-
stitution of Australia, from that of every other part of the
world; —we meet with so many whimsical deviations, on the two
islands of New Holland and Van Diemen’s land, from the ordinary
rules and operations of nature in the animal and vegetable parts
of the creation, that he must be a dull traveller indeed who does


irot glean something new and amusing from these regions, which
are yet so imperfectly known to us. We might produce a host of
instances in illustration of this anomalous character: thus, we
have in one or other or both of these colonies, birds without wings,
as large as deer, their bodies covered with hair instead of feathers; —■
beasts with the beaks of birds; —swans that are black, and eagles
white. Here too we lind the ferns, nettles, and even grasses,
growing to the size and shape of trees; —rivers running from the
sea and lost in interior swamps; —trees that are evergreen in spite
of frost and snow; —extensive plains on which, as one writer tells
us, ‘ one tree, one soil, one water, and one description of bird,
fish, or animal, prevails alike for ten miles and for one hundred;’ —
and, as it is said, though we do not believe it, a climate diminish-
ing in temperature in proportion as cultivation extends itself.
‘ But/ (says another writer,)
‘ this is New Holland, where it is summer with ns when it is winter in
Europe, and vice versd ; where the barometer rises before bad weather,
and falls before good; where the north is the hot wind, and the south the
cold; where the humblest house is fitted up with cedar (cedrela toona,
according to Mr. Brown); where the fields are fenced with mahogany
(eucalyptus robusta), and myrtle trees (myrtaceae) are burnt for fire-
wood; where the swans are black and the eagles white; where the kan-
garoo, an animal between the squirrel and the deer, has five claws on
its fore-paws, and three talons on its hind legs, like a bird, and yet hops
on its tail: where the mole (ornithorhynchus paradoxus) lays eggs, and
has a duck’s bill; where there is a bird (meliphaga) with a broom in its
mouth instead of a tongue ; where there is a fish, one-half belonging to
the genus raia, and the other to that of squalus; where the pears are
made of wood (xylomelum pyriforme), with the stalk at the broader
end; and where the cherry (exocarpus cupressiformis) grows with the
stone on the outside.’— Field, App. p. 461.
It is not our present intention, however, to dwell on the mar-
vellous productions of the creation in this part of the world,
which seem to present an almost inexhaustible fund for the re-
searches of the naturalist, but to take a cursory view of the recent
improvement and the rising importance of the two colonies of
New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land; touching at the same
time on the geographical researches which have been and still are
in progress, more epecially on the immense island of New Hol-
land. The prosperity of these colonies is the more gratifying to
the mother-country, setting aside any direct advantages she may
hope to derive from them, from the circumstance that, by their
means, and probably at no very distant period of time, her laws
and her religion, her language and manners, will spread themselves
over a large portion of those numerous islands which rise out of
the great southern ocean, and are scattered around at no great
distance from either of them. The original planners of these set-
tlements


dements could scarcely have contemplated this result; and we
believe the most sanguine, at the time of their establishment,
expected nothing farther from them than the getting rid of a set of
desperate malefactors, whom it would have been inconvenient to
turn loose again upon the public. Those who had the charge of
them, and the very few voluntary emigrants who ventured to reside
among them, had, like the early planters of North America, to
struggle for many years against a variety of accidents and misfor-
tunes, physical and moral, which not all the aid and encouragement
of the mother-country were for a time entirely able to avert. They
have happily, however, survived that almost hopeless state of dif-
ficulty, and are now advancing, with accelerated rapidity, from
the period of infancy to that of manhood. There are even those
among them, who foolishly fancy themselves old enough and
strong enough to go alone—to shake off the easy yoke of parental
authority and to set up a government of their own : and who begin
to think it matter of speculation (in the foolish language of Mr.
Wentworth), ‘ whether, in fine, their infant establishment will re-
main the attached and dutiful child of a considerate parent, or seize
the first favourable opportunity that shall occur to renounce the
controul of an unwise and unfeeling master.’ Does this urnvise
young man reflect what the consequence would be to himself and
others, should the mother-country withhold its annual grant for the
maintenance of the convicts, and withdraw the garrison, leaving
himself and the other settlers to the mercy of a body of ten thou-
sand hardened malefactors, who have no kindred ties to soften
them, no property to attach them, no principles of religion or mo-
rality to restrain them ? What could be expected in such a case
but the utter ruin and destruction of persons and property
throughout the whole settlement? Mr. Wentworth, it seems, is
now practising at the bar in the supreme court recently established
at Sydney, and has associated himself with another lawyer of the
name of Wardell, the ci-devant editor of a London newspaper
called the Statesman, in the conduct of a public journal at Sydney,
under the title of the ‘ Australian.’ Of this journal we have seen
some eighteen or twenty numbers. It is precisely what Mr. Went-
worth’s work, now under review, would have led us to expect it
would be—a vehicle for such opinions, and so expressed, that, for
the peace of the country, it will probably soon be found expedient
to suppress it.
In a former edition of Mr. Wentworth’s book, he clamorously
called for a supreme court of justice and trial by jury; he has them
now, and a legislative council into the bargain; but this council is
designated as ‘ a wretched mongrel substitute for a legislative as-
sembly,’ which he asserts to be their undoubted privilege; or, as
he


he calls it, ‘ right, which they have derived from the valour and
wisdom of their ancestors/ A ‘ Colonial Assembly/ in short, is
the patriot’s toast of Botany Bay; but it is to be hoped that the
experience of such assemblies in some of our old, will prevent
their adoption in any of our new colonies; and that his Majesty’s
government will not readily be prevailed on to constitute bodies,
calculated from their very nature to obstruct and paralyze its own
measures, to create factions and family feuds, and to sacrifice the
public good to private interest. A Governor, assisted by an inde-
pendent Council, but authorized to act on his own responsibility,
according to the model of India, is, we are persuaded, better
adapted to secure the peace and prosperity of the colonies, than
any legislative assembly that Mr. VVentworth and his associates can
devise for them.
Let us not, however, be misunderstood, nor misrepresented;
we are not prepared to deny that, many years hence, the colonists
of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s land may be enabled, if
then so disposed, to set up for themselves, and become indepen-
dent; but, judging from what we yet know of the territorial cha-
racter of these two islands, the population w ill be likely to find its
limit of supply long before it bears any due proportion to their su-
perficial magnitude, as by far the greater portion of what has yet
been discovered consists of rocks, sands, swamps, and barren soils,
unfit for either agricultural or pastoral purposes. There is scarcely
indeed a single spot on the whole western and southern coasts of
New Holland, which is not absolutely untenantable by man, on
account of the rocky or sandy shores, the desert plains within them
destitute of water, or the vallies choked up with mangrove swamps.
These insuperable obstacles to a dense population on full three-
fourth parts of the sea coast may, and in all probability will, in the
course of time, compel the colonists to cast their swarms, and to
form establishments on some of those numerous, beautiful, and
more fertile islands which we have already alluded to, and which,
stretching from north-w ? est to south-east, embrace an extent of lati-
tude from the Equator to the 48th degree south; that is to say,
from the northern extremity of Papua or New Guinea to the
southern extremity of New Zealand; including the several groups
of New Britain, New Ireland, New Georgia or Solomon’s Archi-
pelago, New Hebrides, New Caledonia, and Louisiade, all of
which encircle the northern and eastern coast of New Holland,
and the most distant of wdiich does not exceed 300 leagues from
its shores.*
Leaving,
* It will be seen, from our Article on New Zealand, (in No. LXI.) (hat the work
of civilization has already commenced on the northern part by means of the missionaries,
the


Leaving, however, anticipations of the future aggrandizement
of these Australian colonies, and instead of what they may be,
confining our view to what they are, proceed we to glean from the
works before us, and other sources within our reach, a brief state-
ment of the recent geographical discoveries, and the new establish-
ments formed in consequence thereof; the state, condition, and cha-
racter of the present population; and the prospects held out for
an extensive emigration, which will be the probable consequence
of the two Associations, established by Act of Parliament for
that and other purposes, and of the intention of government,
as announced in the House of Commons, to encourage emigra-
tion from the South of Ireland to the British colonies.
It will be recollected that, until about ten or twelve years ago,
and five-and-twenty years after the first establishment of the colony
the constant intercourse with our shipping, and the frequent visits of the chiefs and
others to Sydney, and occasionally to England. The southern part of this island is as yet
little known, but it is said to contain two or three fine harbours into which rivers ot con-
siderable magnitude flow. The chieftain of this district, Tippahee Cupa, is, or was
recently, in London, and the history of his visit marks strongly the bold and resolute
character of these islanders.
Captain Reynolds of the Urania, when rounding the south end of the island, observed
three large canoes containing seventy or eighty men, making for his ship with all haste,
the first of which having approached within a short distance, Tippahee the chief stood
up, and by signs desired to come on board. Captain Reynolds, suspecting some
treacherous design, returned signs of refusal, but on the canoe reaching the side of the
ship, the resolute savage sprung from the canoe, and in an instant was on the deck, and
from thence waved off all the three canoes. Being asked what he wanted, he replied
in broken English, ‘Go Europe, see King George.’ The Captain, however - , not wish-
ing to be embarrassed with such a guest, and knowing how well all these islanders
swim, ordered three of the stoutest seamen to throw him overboard, Tippahee, under-
standing their design, threw himself flat on the deck, and seizing hold of two iron ring-
bolts, grasped them with such surprizing force, that it was found impossible to remove
him, without maiming him, which of course Captain Reynolds would not permit.
He still persisted ‘ to go see King Georgeand as the canoes were now out of reach.
Captain Reynolds seemingly consented to take him, intextding, however, to leave him
on some part of the coast, but the wind and weather would not allow of this, and he had
no resource but to bring his unwelcome guest to Europe. He soon became a favourite
among the crew, and evinced a strong attachment to Captain Reynolds, who subse-
quently owed his life to him. Near Monte Video, he fell overboard, and being unable
to swim soon disappeared, but Tippahee plunged at once into the waves, brought up
his friend, and, swimming after the ship with one hand while he supported Captain
Reynolds with the other, both were got safe on board.
Tippahee possesses a good set of features, and great muscular strength ; is gentle in
his manners and very tractable, but easily roused at the slightest affront. A stout
sailor oixce designedly began to tease him, but Tippahee perceiving it, seized the
culprit by the neck and trowsers, and holding him above his head for some moments,
dashed him on the deck with great violence. His observations on the various objects
that presented themselves, all new and wonderful to him, show that his intellectual facul-
ties require only the aid of instruction to make him a great character. Being asked
what he had observed in England which struck him most, his reply was remarkable.
‘ England all good, no cookies (slaves), every body look up.’ If the ‘ New Zealand
Associatioix’ be not a thing of straw, we would recommeixd the members to cultivate the
friendship of Tippahee and to visit that part of the island in the possession of his tribe.
of


of New South Wales, the Blue Mountains had been considered
as an impassable barrier, which completely shut out the colonists
from all access to the interior. A load was at that time first made
across them; and though steep,difficult and dangerous, the town
of Bathurst on the other side was rapidly established, and the ex-
tensive grassy plains are now studded with farm-houses, and
enlivened with large Hocks of sheep and herds of cattle; most of
the substantial agriculturists of what may be called the cisalpine
districts having their grazing farms upon these plains. Two large
streams, named the Lachlan and the Macquarie, were traced
across them by Mr. Oxley, the former running to the W. S. W.
and the latter to the N. W. till they appeared to lose themselves
in large lakes or morasses. Since that time there has been disco-
vered, a little farther to the northward (between lat. 31° and 32°),
a line open elevated country, possessing a rich soil, well clothed
with grass, and free from timber, to which the name of the Liver-
pool Plains has been given, and a detailed description of which
will be found, in Mr. Field’s compilation, by Mr. Cunningham
the botanist.
Two other passes, preferable to the first, have since been dis-
covered across the Blue Mountains, which will add considerably
to the value of the extensive plains of Bathurst and Liverpool in
the interior. From the extreme eastern and western boundaries of
the Liverpool plains, and running to the northward, are the rivers
Castlereagh, York and Peel, besides several inferior streams. If
these waters should be found to unite in the Brisbane river, re-
cently discovered to fall into Moreton bay, Liverpool plains, and
the country through which these streams hold their course, will
become of the utmost importance to the wealth and prosperity
of the colony.
The discovery of the Brisbane was purely accidental. Mr.
Commissioner Bigge had recommended three new settlements to
be formed on the eastern coast, at Moreton Bay, Port Bowen,
and Port Curtis, all to the northward of Port Jackson ; to which
the convicts, not usefully employed at the old settlements, should
be sent, as w'ell as all convicts of idle, refractory, or other bad
conduct and habits; there to be employed in the clearing and
cultivation of land, in cutting and preparing wood, &c. for the use
of government. Acting on this recommendation. Sir Thomas
Brisbane, in September, 1823, dispatched Mr, Oxley the surveyor,
and Mr. Uniacke, to examine the ports Curtis and Bowen, with
the view of removing to one or both the convicts then stationed
at Port Macquarie, which had been settled about two years
before as a penal establishment, and which, from the excellence
of the soil, the fineness of the climate, and its convenient distance
from


from Sydney, the governor was desirous of throwing open to free
settlers. Their first visit on the voyage was to this establishment,
which they found in a most flourishing state. It consisted of a
town laid out in streets of straight lines, a handsome esplanade, a
barrack for 150 men, neat and substantial cottages for officers’
quarters, smaller cottages and gardens for the married men, com-
fortable huts for the convicts, constructed of split wood, lathed,
plastered, and whitewashed, with a garden attached to each, in
which fruit trees, maize, and sugar-cane were growing very
luxuriantly. The natives there were observed to mix kindly with
the military; they are described as a much finer race than those
about Sydney, many of them being upwards of six feet high, with
features more expressive of intellect, and limbs much better termed.
Several of them are victualled from the king’s store, and in return
perform the duties of constable more efficiently than any Europeans
could do; for on the escape of any of the convicts into the woods,
they are instantly pursued by this black police, who seldom fail
to bring them back, dead or alive, and are rewarded accordingly.
The next visit was to Port Curtis, which they found a diffi-
cult harbour to enter, and the adjoining country composed chiefly
of stony ridges and sandy valleys ; the vegetation scanty, and the
few straggling trees dwarfish, and fit only for fire-wood. They
met with no fresh water nearer the shore than twelve or fourteen
miles, where the rapid river, to which they gave the name ot the
Boyne, was fresh : beyond this they passed a succession of rapids;
the banks became highly picturesque, the hills were covered with
wood, and the plains well-clothed with grass. The result, however,
of the examination was, that this part of the coast did not hold
out any promise of being convertible into a prosperous settlement,
and that convict labour employed there would be w'holly thrown
away.
The lateness of the season induced them to return to the
southward, in doing which they entered Moreton bay, discovered
by Cook, and afterwards visited by Flinders. Scarcely had the
vessel anchored, w hen a number of natives w ere seen rushing down
to the shore, and among them one person who appeared of a larger
size and much lighter colour than the rest, who, on advancing
to a point opposite to the vessel, hailed her in English. On
their approaching the shore in a boat, the natives showed many signs
of joy, dancing and hugging the white man, who appeared nearly
as wild as themselves, being perfectly naked and daubed all over
with white and red paint. He was soon discovered to be an
Englishman, but was so bewildered with joy that little could be
made of his story that night; on the following day, however, Mr.
Uniacke took down in writing his narrative, which is by far the
most


most curious and interesting paper in Mr. Barron Field’s Collec-
tion. His name, it appeared, was Thomas Pamphlet; he had
set out with three others, Richard Parsons, John binnegan, and
John Thompson, in a large open boat, for Illawarra, or the bive
Islands, to the southward of Sydney, to take in cedar-wood; but a
violent gale of wind, which lasted for live days, drove them, as they
imagined, to the southward as far as Van Diemen’s Land. Under
this idea they kept to the northward, till after having suffered in-
conceivable hardships, and being for twenty-one days without water,
in the course of which time John Thompson died of thirst, they were
wrecked on Moreton Island, which they still thought was to the
southward of Port Jackson. His two surviving companions.
Parsons and Finnegan, had about six weeks before resolved to pro-
secute their way towards Sydney; in which he had accompanied
them about fifty miles to the northward, when he returned on
account of his feet becoming so sore as to render him unable
to travel any farther; a few days afterwards. Parsons and Finne-
gan having quarrelled, the latter also returned, and was then
absent, at no great distance, on a hunting expedition with the
chief of the natives; but Parsons had not been heard of since his
departure. #
On the day after the Mermaid’s arrival at Moreton Bay, Finnegan
returned from his expedition; and as Pamphlet and he both con-
curred in their account of a large river falling into the south end
of the bay, Mr. Oxley proceeded in the whale boat to examine it.
The muddiness of the water, and the abundance of fresh water
molluscs®, convinced him that he was entering a large river, which
in a few hours was no longer doubtful, the water having become
perfectly fresh.
*At sunset we had proceeded up the river about twenty miles. The
scenery w T as peculiarly beautiful —the country on the banks alter-
nately hilly and level, but not flooded—tbe soil of the finest description
of brush land, on which grew timber of great magnitude, of various spe-
cies, some of which were unknown to us. Among others a magnificent
species of pine was in great abundance. The timber on the hills was also
good; and to the south-east, a little distant from the river, were several
brushes or forests of the common Australian cypress-tree (Callitris Aus-
tralis) of large size. Up to this point the river was navigable for vessels
of considerable burthen, if not drawing more than sixteen feet water.
The tide rose about five feet, being the same as at the entrance.
‘ The next day the examination of the river was resumed; and, with
increased satisfaction, we proceeded about thirty miles farther, no dimi-
* In the course of last year Parsons reached Sydney; he had travelled 500 miles to
the northward, till the heat of the weather convinced him he was taking a w'rong
direction; he was kindly treated every where by the natives, and well fed by them,
as his fat, plump and sleek appearance abundantly testified.
notion


tuition having taken place either in the breadth or the depth of it, except
that in one place, to the extent of about thirty yards, a ridge of detached
rocks stretched across, having not more than twelve feet at high water.
From this point to Termination Hill, the river continued of nearly
uniform size ; the country being of a very superior description, and
equally well adapted for cultivation and for grazing ; the timber abun-
dant, and fit for all the purposes of domestic use or exportation, while the
pine-trees, if they should prove of good quality, were of a scantling suffi-
cient for the topmasts of large ships. Some were measured upwards of
thirty inches in diameter, and from fifty to eighty feet without a branch,
— Field, pp. 13 —15.
He further adds.
‘ The nature of the country, and a consideration of all the circumstances
connected with the appearance of the river, justify me in entertaining a
strong belief that the sources of the river will not be found in a moun-
tainous country, but rather that it flows from some lake, which will
prove to be the receptacle of those interior streams crossed by me during
an expedition of discovery in 1818; but whatever maybe its origin, it is
by far the largest fresh-water river in New South Wales, and promises
to be of the utmost importance to the colony, as it affords communication
with the sea to a vast extent of country, a great portion of which
appeared to me capable of raising the richest productions of the tropics,’
—p. 17-
The name given to this important river is, the Brisbane- That
it derives its waters from the lake or morass into which the
Macquarie falls, and from those numerous streams which were
crossed by Oxley in 1818, all running to the northward, seems
a very reasonable supposition. He was able to trace its course
forty miles beyond a hill which was fifty miles from its mouth;
and he could see in the same direction, namely, in the S. W.,
the abrupt termination of the coast range of mountains; and
the distance from Moreton Bay to the lake or morass of the
Macquarie, is not more than 300 miles. The discovery of this
river may cause those to hesitate, who so positively assert that
none of any magnitude fall into the sea from New Holland-
Captain Cook discovered Moreton Bay; it was well known to
Captain Flinders, who anchored his vessel both above and below
the mouth of this great l iver, and passed it twice in his boats, but
it was concealed from him by two low islands- How, then, can it
be affirmed, that in an extent of coast exceeding 6000 geogra-
phical miles, there is no river of any magnitude ? We shall
speedily see that another fine stream has been discovered on the
southern coast, and we have no doubt many more will yet be found
on all the coasts of this immense island.
It appears from Pamphlet’s account that nothing could exceed
the kind attention paid by the natives to the shipwrecked seamen;
vol. xxxn. no. Lxiv. x they


they lodged them in their huts, hunted and fished for their sub-
sistence, and the women and children gathered fern root lor them.
They regularly painted them twice a day, and would have carried
their favours even to the scarifying their bodies, and boring the
cartilage of their noses, had they not signified their desire to dis-
pense with such decoration however fashionable. Nor was this
friendly conduct confined to the natives of Moreton Bay; they
experienced the same kind treatment from every horde through
which they passed in journeying to the northward, the people
making fires to warm them, and catching and broiling fish for their
use. Of the process of boiling water, these poor people, it seems,
were entirely ignorant; and had no more idea that water could
be made hot than that it could be made solid. Pamphlet
had saved a tin pot, in which he had an early occasion to heat
some water; as soon as it began to boil, the whole tribe, who had
anxiously watched the process, took to their heels, shouting and
screaming with all their might; and they could not be persuaded
to approach the fire until he had poured the water out and cleaned
the pot; nor were they ever reconciled to this operation of boil-
ing water.
In their dispositions and manners, Mr. Uniacke considers the
natives of Moreton Bay by far superior to those of Sydney ; the
women in particular, many of whom he describes as being tall,
straight, and well formed; the features, also, of some being as
regular and expressive as those of Europeans. Both sexes go per-
fectly naked, nor were the females in the least abashed by appear-
ing in that state before strangers. Each individual had the car-
tilage of the nose perforated, and many of them wore large pieces
of stick or bone thrust through it in such a manner as completely
to stop the nostrils. The women, as at Sydney, had all lost the
first two joints of the little finger of the left hand, but the men,
on their approach to puberty, had not here, as at Port Jackson,
one of their front teeth extracted. The women are daily em-
ployed in seeking dingowa or fern root, a chief article of their
subsistence, and in weaving neat baskets of net-work made from
rushes. The men weave the nets used for fishing and catching
the kangaroo, which are made from the bark of the kurrajong
(hibiscus heterophyllus), growing abundantly in swampy places.
The chief employment of the men is hunting or catching fish;
and it appears from the narrative of Pamphlet that they are ge-
nerally successful, and seldom without provisions, though they
lay up nothing in store, but subsist from day to day. r l he several
hordes, it would appear, have each their dwelling huts and tem-
porary fishing stations, which are generally at the distance of
three or four miles asunder, changing their residence from one to
the


the other as the fish or game fail them. Their huts are of
wattles bent into the shape of an arch, interwoven with wicker-
work, and covered with tea-tree bark (melaleuca armi Haris), so
as to be quite impervious to the rain; they, are sufficiently spa-
cious and commodious to contain ten or twelve persons.
The men are friendly to each other, and, contrary to the general
conduct of savages, and to those of Sydney in particular, are kind
to the women. Pamphlet declares that during his residence of
seven months nearly he never saw a woman struck or ill-treated by
a man. The quarrels between neighbouring hordes are frequent,
and often end fatally. The common practice is for a champion
on either side to fight it out fairly, in a ring made for the pur-
pose. Pamphlet describes one of these duels which he witnessed.
A man of the horde, with whom he was living, had been wounded
in the knee by a spear thrown at him by a person belonging to a
neighbouring horde. He sent, as soon as cured, to demand sa-
tisfaction. At the spot pitched upon was a ring about twenty-five
feet in diameter, three feet deep, and surrounded by a palisade of
sticks. About 500 men, women, and children attended, the men
all armed with five or six spears each. The two combatants entered
the ring, and after a short parley, accompanied with violent ges-
tures, they took their spears from the ground, and after each ol
them had thrown two, the third hurled by Pamphlet’s friend
went through the shoulder of his adversary, who fell, and was
carried off by his friends, and the company departed with loud
huzzas from all sides. A reconciliation then took place, which
was announced by shouting, dancing, and wrestling, after which
both hordes joined in a hunting excursion, which lasted a week.
Finnegan had just returned from one of these tournaments,
which had ended more disastrously. It commenced by a battle
between two ladies, who fought desperately with sticks, after
which two men engaged, when the one belonging to Finnegan’s
party was mortally wounded. He was carried to the women,
and as soon as dead was skinned by them. In the mean time a
tremendous shout was set up, which Finnegan, who had been
forced to remain with the women, understood to be the signal of
foul play between some other combatants, which was immediately
followed by a general battle between the parties. Finnegan’s
friends at length ran away, having another man killed, but they
contrived to carry off the dead bodies, which, after skinning the
second, they burned. Their skins were carefully preserved and
hung over the tire to dry, but he knows not what finally became
of them.
It is evident, from the account of these men, that the aborigines
along this part of the coast are of a less savage and ferocious
x 2 cha-


character than those in the neighbourhood of our first and chief
settlement continue to exhibit even at this day. This may be oc-
casioned by their never having been brought into hostile contact
with foreign invaders. Both in Van Diemen’s land and at Port
Jackson, the Europeans have been singularly unsuccessful in
their endeavours to advance the natives in civilization; nay,
they have given them new vices, from which they were wholly
free, particularly that of drunkenness. ‘ltis a melancholy sight
(says a lively writer in Mr. Barron Field’s book) to witness the
drunken quarrels and fightings of the simple natives of Australia
in the streets of Sydney.’ Bad as the Botany Bay school has
undoubtedly been for their instruction, it is not for want of at-
tention on the part of government or an earnest desire on that
of the settlers generally to better their condition; but they
cannot be prevailed on to work, and to serve in any capacity ap-
pears to be hateful to them. Their power of undergoing fatigue
is inexhaustible; yet such is their natural disposition to idleness
that not even the keen cravings of appetite can always subdue it;
and so great is their dislike of any restraint, that those who
have been taken into families while children are almost sure, sooner
or later, to betake themselves again to the woods. Comfortable
huts have been built for them, and land given to induce them to
settle, but they have seldom had patience to wait till the maize
and the cabbages that were planted to their hands were fit to be
gathered. A school was instituted by Governor Macquarie, for
the education of native children, and they are found to be as
capable of receiving instruction as the children of Europeans.
One of the girls, of fourteen years of age, and between three and
four years in the school, bore away the second prize; but the
writer before mentioned states, that their parents usually steal
them away from their instructors, and that they rarely return. Yet
it is agreed on all hands that their conceptions are quick, and their
powers of imitation very remarkable. ‘ They are,’ says the writer
last quoted, ‘the Will Wimbles of the colony; the carriers of
news and fish; the gossips of the town; the loungers of the
quay. They know every body, and understand the nature of
every body’s business, although they have none of their own, but
this.—They have a bowing acquaintance with every body, and
scatter their How d’ye do’s with an air of friendship and equality,
and with a perfect English accent.’ Of their persons, he thinks
Col. Collins has given too unfavourable a picture. ‘ Their faces
(he says) have generally too much good nature to be absolutely
hideous. Their hair is not woolly; their heads are not dog-like;
nor are their legs baboonish.’
We a v e not in the number of those who hold the doctrine


that the habits and dispositions of the parents must infallibly
descend in hereditary succession to their offspring; we are con-
vinced, on the contrary, that man, through all the modifications
of the species, is very much dependent on circumstances, and that
his feelings, inclinations, and conduct in life, are generally the
result of education and example. Speaking of the school in ques-
tion, Mr. Wentworth says,
‘ About two years since, four or five of the native girls were married
out of this institution ; but, as it contained at that time no youths who
were of sufficient age to be their husbands, some of the best disposed of
the young bushmen were necessarily selected for this purpose. On this
occasion. Governor Macquarie gave each of the young couples a little
cottage, with a suitable allotment of ground, the requisite implements,
and a cow j and it appears, that they are all residing on their farms, and
doing better than could be reasonably expected, considering the uncivi-
lized habits in which the male portion of this interesting little colony
were educated. The warmest friends of this institution, however, are
not very sanguine as to the success of this experiment: for, should it
even prove a complete failure, it evidently will not afford any fair crite-
rion, by which to judge of the future results of this philanthropic esta-
blishment. Husband and wife must both be brought up in it, before a
fair instance can be had of its probable consequences/ — Wentworth , v. i.
p. 63.
But if little or nothing has been done, or is capable of being
done, for improving the condition of the original natives, that
of every description of settlers, whether voluntary emigrants or
emancipated convicts, has been most materially improved. Wealth
and prosperity have very generally been diffused throughout all
classes, of which one great proof is the remarkable extension of
the geographical limits of the colonial establishments. In con-
sequence of the discovery of the Brisbane, and conformably with
the plan of employing the re-convicted felons in clearing the
ground for future settlements, the original establishment of
these persons at Newcastle, in Port Hunter, into which the
Paterson river Hows, was moved northwards to Port Macquarie
and the banks of the Hastings. But this latter beautiful, well-
timbered, and romantic country, being too tempting to be
continued as a penal establishment. Sir T. Brisbane determined,
in September last, to throw it open to settlers, and to move
the prisoners still farther northwards to Moreton Bay, to form
a settlement on lledcliff point near the mouth of the Bris-
bane. On this occasion the surveyor, accompanied by Mr.
Cunningham, the botanist, advanced up the river about forty
miles higher than on the former visit, nearly ninety all together;
the navigation was stopped in several places by beds of gravel
and ridges of rocks running across from bank to bank. It was still
x 3 a fine


a fine stream, the line of which could be traced from an eminence,
continuing to point towards the quarter where the Macquarie lost
itself in (he lake or morass. It remained however in doubt whether
it might be considered as the outlet of the Macquarie, the Castle-
reagh, the Peel, and other streams which were discovered running
to the northward.
About the time that this establishment w as forming, a new set-
tlement, by orders from home, w ; as planted on Melville Island,
at the northern extremity of New Holland, which, in a commer-
cial point of view, as an intermediate station between the esta-
blishments on New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land and
the ports of India and China, is likely to become of great import-
ance in the eastern world. It is in this neighbourhood that the
annual fleet of Malay proas fish for the trepang or sea-slug, an
article of great consumption in China, and sent chiefly to that
market; not, however, without passing through the hands of the
Dutch, who beside laying high duties upon the article im-
ported into their settlements, fix an enormous advance on the
prices of the goods given in exchange for it. This impolitic
conduct will probably have the effect of driving the Malays to
our new settlement of Fort Dundas, on Melville Island, where
our merchants w ill treat with them on more liberal terms than
they have been accustomed to at the Dutch settlements; and in
this view we think it would be politic to allow these industrious
people to establish themselves in the neighbourhood of their tre-
pang fishery.
It has been said, that the Dutch feel annoyed at the formation
of this new' establishment so near to some of their own ; and the
more so as they had themselves taken measures for anticipating us
in the same quarter. We would not willingly impute to them
such unworthy feelings ; for, without adverting to our ancient and
only settlements on the island of Sumatra, which they know that
we consented to transfer to them upon a plea totally unfounded
in fact,* they can scarcely have forgotten that w'e voluntarily sur-
rendered to them every island in the great oriental archipelago,
which the fate of war had wrested from them when in alliance
with France, nor that to our generosity they are indebted for every
foot of land which they now hold in the east.
The two islands of Bathurst and Melville are not only admi-
rably situated with regard to the general commerce of the east.
* The plea was, that we had usurped possession of the island of Singapore. Now
that island they had never held, or even claimed, and its name even does not appear as
one of the dependencies of Malacca, (the only ground on which they could pretend a
right to it,) in the minute statistics of their authentic and voluminous historian, Va-
lentyn.
but


but the soil and climate are precisely adapted for the production of
the various valuable spices and other articles which are at present
solely supplied by the eastern archipelago. Two species of nutmeg
and the pepper plant are found growing wild in the woods, and the
cabbage-palm and betel-nut are occasionally met with ; the sego-
palm also grows abundantly on all parts’of the northern coasts.
The woods abound with excellent timber, and there is plenty of
good fresh water, both from wells and rivulets. In the course
of two months the settlers, consisting of a detachment of troops, a
party of marines, a few women, and forty-five convicts, in all
one hundred and twenty-six individuals, had given to the spot the
appearance of a populous village; a fort had been constructed,
containing quarters for the officers, and a large storehouse; thirty
huts raised for the soldiers and convicts; gardens cleared and
planted, and all kinds of culinary vegetables and maize flourishing
in great vigour. Pigs, ducks, and fowds were doing well, and
fast increasing their numbers. The natives, accustomed to hos-
tilities with the Malay visitors, were for some time troublesome,
by making ferocious attacks on detached parties; but a timely
'chastisement, to convince them of our superior power, had appa-
rently checked their hostile conduct. Thus, then, our occupancy
of New Holland may now be considered to extend from Cape
Van Diemen to the gulf of Carpentaria, on the northern coast;
and from Cape York, in lat. 11 9 , to Bass’s Strait, in lat. 39°, on
the eastern coast; which latter coast abounds with numerous
bays and harbours, into which a more minute research will no
doubt discover many fine streams flowing. All these might, we
think, be settled with advantage, forming so many points of com-
munication along this extensive line of coast, and creating, as they
would speedily do, a very considerable coasting trade.
The latest accounts from New' South Wales mention a discovery
that cannot fail to be of the utmost importance to the prosperity
of the colony. Two travellers, of the names of Howell and
Hume, set out from Sydney with a determination, if possible, to
reach the southern coast in Bass’s Strait. After passing several
ranges of mountains, some of which were so high as to be covered
with snow even in summer, they reached a beautiful country,
which they describe as ‘ the first in respect of soil, and the most
English in point of climate.’ Though shut out by these moun-
tains from all access to the eastern coast, it is easily approachable
either by land, or by a navigable river of considerable magnitude,
falling into Port Western, which affords a safe and convenient
anchorage for shipping. This port in Bass’s Strait will therefore
undoubtedly soon become the head-quarters of a new settlement,
tmd not only prove, at some future period, a commanding position
x 4 for


for protecting the navigation of the Strait, but also afford the
means of a speedy communication with the second principal port
of Van Diemen’s Land. It appears to us that a thousand con-
victs might advantageously be employed in preparing this newly-
discovered district for future free settlers.
The discoveries in Van Diemen’s Land, small as the whole
island is, have been of late years so trifling as scarcely to deserve
mention. The line of country which connects the two great
harbours on the northern and southern extremities, and which
includes the two rivers that, running in opposite directions, are
discharged into those harbours, is occupied and tolerably well in-
habited. It forms a broad belt through the heart of the country,
being in its superficial contents about two-seventh parts of the
whole island; but all the rest is yet a terra incognita, with the ex-
ception of Macquarie harbour, about the centre of the western
coast, into which fall two rivers not yet traced to any great dis-
tance. The land surrounding this harbour, as well as that along the
banks of the rivers, as far as it is known, is well adapted for all the
purposes of cultivation, and abounds with coal and fine timber,
for the procuring of which an establishment of convicts has re-
cently been formed. The improvements on this island, however,
are not the less progressive, but probably more so, on account
of the increased density of population ; and when the capital of
the two great companies, which have been formed in England for
the extension of the trade and agriculture of New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land, shall have been brought into operation,
there can be little doubt that the whole surface of the latter island
will very speedily be occupied. The natives are few in number,
and not likely to occasion much trouble to the settlers; though,
in consequence of an unfortunate misunderstanding by which
several of them lost their lives some years ago, they have occa-
sionally shown a spirit of ferocious hostility. Recently, however,
it appears, a party of them came voluntarily to Hobart Town,
and the friendly reception and kind treatment they met with from
the inhabitants may be the means of restoring confidence. From
all accounts they appear to be a degree lower in the scale of
humanity than those even of Port Jackson; and so far differ from
them in their persons as to have woolly hair, which in the other is
wiry. They have not the art of taking fish either by the net or the
hook; and the rude bark canoe is entirely unknown to them, a
clumsy and ill-constructed raft serving them to cross a river or
sheet of water. They have spears of wood, and not of bulrush
pointed with wood, as in New South Wales, in using which they
grasp the centre; but, having no womera or throwing stick, they
neither


neither throw them so far, nor so dexterously, as the natives of
the sister-colony.
When Botany Bay was first established as a penal settlement
thirty-seven years ago, we believe it never entered into the con-
templation of those who recommended the measure, that such a
population and such a state of society, as now exist in the two
colonies, could have been created within the first hundred years.
Yet in a single generation we find the wilderness converted into
the finest gardens, orchards and corn-fields, and those lonely spots
where a few straggling, half-famished and naked savages might
be seen prowling about in search of sustenance to preserve a mi-
serable existence, are now covered with towns, villages and de-
tached farm-houses. The town of Sydney has 1200 houses, and
7,000 inhabitants; and such is the demand for land and new build-
ings, that the former in many places is stated to be worth *£looo
an acre; and that houses let for from o£loo tOo£sooa year. No-
thing can be more delightful than the commanding situation of
this capital of the Australian world. Its noble harbour, with
its ‘ hundred coves,’ capable of containing all the shipping in the
world, its warehouses, and its quays, and the number of ships
which visit it, give to it the appearance and the bustle of an
English seaport. It has tw r o churches, two Wesleyan chapels, and
a Roman Catholic chapel; an excellent market, held three days
in the week, in a large oblong square, with commodious public
stores for the reception of unsold goods; in return for which
trilling dues are levied, amounting in the year 1817 to £ 130; and
in 1822 to £oQS. This market is well supplied with grain, ve-
getables, poultry, butter, eggs, and fruit, but some of them sold
at higher rates than might be expected.
* By the late accounts of the colony, which reach down to the latter
end of last year, (1823) which was a year of remarkable abundance, it
appears that good mutton, beef, and pork were to be had from the
butcher from 6d. to Bc/. per lb. ; that wheat was selling in the market at
4v. 7d. per bushel; oats at 2s. 9d. ; barley at 35.; maize at 2s. 6d. ;
potatoes at Bs. per cwt.; fowls at 2s. 9 d. per couple; eggs at Is. 9d.
per dozen; butter at 2s. 3d. per lb.; cheese at Is. 3d. per lb. The
price of the best wheaten bread was fixed by the assize at 3\d. for the
loaf weighing 2lbs.’— Wentworth, vol. i- p. 450.
A chartered bank is established at Sydney, which has shared
dividends among the proprietors of 12 to 15 per cent., and there
is also a saving bank, instituted by Governor Macquarie. They
have * the Australian Magazine,’ ‘ the Australian Newspaper,’ and
‘ the Sydney Gazette.’ They have also a Philosophical, an Agri-
cultural, and a Horticultural Society. Neither has the religious
and moral education of adults nor of the children of the poor
been


been neglected. They have various schools for both sexes, sup-
ported from the public revenue of the colony; besides Sunday
Schools for the gratuitous instruction of the poor : of which the
Wesleyans alone have live, attended by three or four hundred
children. They have private seminaries for the more opulent
classes, two of which are kept by clergymen of the established
church; and there are several schools in Sydney for the board and
education of young ladies.
On the banks of a fresh water stream at the head of Port Jackson
harbour, we lind the town of Paramatta with a population of
1300 souls, having its church and chapels, its government house,
orphan house, hospital, manufactory of coarse cloth, (in which
about 160 unruly female convicts are employed,) besides other
substantial buildings, and among them two inns, where, it is said,
all the comfort and accommodations, that are met with in similar
establishments in England, are to be found. It has its two half
yearly fairs, for the sale of cattle and other stock. It has, be-
sides, an institution which reflects the greatest credit on its
founder, the late Governor Macquarie—a school for the educa-
tion and civilization of the aborigines of the country. Its success
may be doubtful, but the intention is so praiseworthy, that it
would be well to continue it in spite of some trifling circum-
stances, of a discouraging nature, which happen to all new insti-
tutions. It appears, by the latest accounts from Sydney, that
not less than 400 natives attended and were feasted at the late
Paramatta fair.
The town of Windsor, on the river Hawkesbury, is also in an
improving condition, with its population of 800 or 900 souls ;
and Newcastle, on the Coal river, with a larger population,
and a neat church, is likely, at no great length of time, to be-
come a valuable settlement on account of its coal, its shell-lime,
and good timber, chiefly cedar and rose-wood. Put the flourish-
ing condition of the towns is not the criterion by which we are
to judge of the prosperity of the colony; we must look to the
state of the farms, the progress of agriculture, and the rapid in-
crease of the flocks and herds, before we can duly appreciate the
resources and the wealth of the colony. The wool alone is ot in-
finite importance, being of a staple equal to any and superior to
most of the samples brought to market. The cattle ot the co-
lonists will produce them hides and tallow in abundance; be-
sides wheat, barley, rye and oats, they have the finest and never
failing crops of maize ; the vine flourishes in the southern, and
sugar, coffee, and all the tropical fruits may be raised in the nor-
thern settlements. In short, every vegetable product, from the
pine-apple to the potatoe, may be obtained in this single colony.
The


The progress of civilization and improvement has been still
more rapid on the little island of Van Diemen, though fifteen
years later in its commencement, and though the original colo-
nists were the re-convicted felons that had been banished to
Norfolk island, who were subsequently recruited with convicts
of the very worst description. But its fine climate, its beautiful
appearance, its rivers and magnificent harbours, soon procured
for it the preference of voluntary emigrants, which was strength-
ened by a striking resemblance of many of its features to Great
Britain. Between the years 1818 and 1820, the population and
produce were nearly doubled. In the latter year alone 1,060 free
settlers arrived. The number of convicts at this time was 3,477,
of which 3,107 were men, and 370 women; and the total popula-
tion amounted to 6,178 souls. In 1821, the population had in-
creased to 7,185, of which 3,246 were free persons, and 3,939
convicts; since that time 300 respectable families have emigrated
to this island; and an additional number of convicts have been
sent thither, so that the population at this moment cannot be far
short of 12,000 souls. In the year 1821, (since which we believe
there have been no returns,) the amount of live stock in the
colony was 170,391 sheep, and 34,790 head of horned cattle;
and the value of the annual produce was estimated atc£234,975,
of which was exported to the amount of about Jl 60,000; and
of this sum more than half was for the supply, chiefly in grain,
of the sister-colony of New South Wales. In Hobart Town, the
number of houses were 600, containing 3,500 inhabitants, and
new buildings are rising up every day : yet rents, in the two capi-
tals at least, are high, being from T6O to .T2OO a year, for a single
house. At the other extremity of the island is Launceston, con-
taining about 230 houses and 1,200 inhabitants. It stands upon
the river Tamar, as Hobart Town does upon the Derwent, both of
them magnificent rivers, terminating in bays and harbours, the
latter not excelled in the world besides. George Town has also
been recently established on the banks of the Tamar, as a place of
secondary banishment, and has a manufactory of cloth. See. for the
employment of female convicts. It contains about 600 inhabitants..
Here, too, as in New South Wales, churches, chapels and schools,,
have been erected and endowed; and banks, markets, and other-
conveniences, quite equal to those of the sister-colony.
In point of fact there is very little choice between the two
colonies; that of Van Diemen, having on an average a lower tem-
perature of about ten degrees, assimilates more nearly with Eng-
land in its climate and productions. Fortunately the settlers,
or the leading men at least, seem best pleased each with their
own island. A discussion on their relative superiority by the Pre-
sidents


sidents of the respective Agricultural Societies somewhat amused
us. He of New South Wales boasted of the superior advantages
of that colony in water, in climate, and in unbounded extent, to
say nothing of Van Diemen’s land being twenty years behind in
civilization. To which the other answers, by denying the truth of
the first position, as to water; and by asserting that, as to climate.
Van Diemen’s land has undoubtedly the advantage, its summer
heat being as 70 to 90 of New South Wales, and the winters never
severe; he admits, indeed, that they have no tropical fruits, but
says, on the other hand, that they have all the fruits and vegetables
of the mother-country, and may therefore well afford to resign the
orange and the citron, when their potatoes and grain, in sub-
stance, produce and quality, are beyond comparison superior to
those which New South Wales produces; and if the wool be at
present inferior, in respect of which article the elder colony
boasts so much, the experiment is only in its infancy in Van Die-
men’s land, but there is no reason to doubt that the climate is
equally favourable for the breed of fine woolled sheep. To the
assertion of superior civilization, the President observes, that, till
eight years ago, no vessel was permitted to enter the ports of Van
Diemen’s land, nor any thing to be imported, but by way of Port
Jackson; that thence also were received her refuse treble-con-
victed felons, out of whom, as might be expected, bands of robbers
were formed, who, under the name of bush-rangers, for years deso-
lated the colony; but that these depredators have now been happily
destroyed, and that, with the occasional exception of a few sheep
being stolen from the solitary farms, where the flocks stray over a
wide extent of country, persons and property are perfectly safe in
every settled part of Van Diemen’s land. It is almost superfluous
to add that both these colonies are purely English; that all the feel-
ings and habits of the settlers, their religious, moral and econo-
mical institutions, are modelled on those of the mother-country;
that their sports and recreations, their fairs and their cattle-shows,
their balls, assemblies and races differ only in degree from those
which they left behind. Even in their hunting and shooting they
are not satisfied without an English pack of hounds and English
game. In this last refinement Van Diemen’s land appears to take
the lead; for, not contented with hunting emus, kangaroos and
bandicout rats, and shooting quails, snipes, pigeons, plovers, cur-
lews and ground-parrots, an association has been formed to intro-
duce from England deer, hares, pheasants, grouse and partridges;
which will of course be followed by an enactment for the preser-
vation of game on Van Diemen’s land. It appears also that the
conveniences, refinements and luxuries of life are by no means lost
sight of. IJobartTown, like London, is watered by pipes. It


has not only its banks and its ball-rooms, but can already boast of
about sixteen breweries and distilleries; various manufactories of
clothing and other articles of domestic use; and its citizens ate
enlightened by the * Tasmanian Gazette’ and * Launceston Ad-
vertiser.’
The separate government and jurisdiction which has lately been
given to Van Diemen’s land will put an end, it is to be hoped, to
any little jealousy that might exist between the two colonies, and
at the same time be the means of allaying those squabbles and
Contentions for place and precedence which occupy so large a
space in the first voluminous Report of Mr. Bigge.
That a spirit of party, that feuds and animosities should exist
in all their violence among a people composed of such materials
as that of Australia, was to be expected ; the wonder is that they
have amalgamated so well. For some time there were but two
classes—the civil and military officers, and the convicts, —between
whom the line of distinction was so broadly drawn, as never to be
passed; the leading, and indeed the only principles of government,
were necessarily command and obedience; but in the course of
a few years, in addition to the voluntary settlers, a third class
sprung up, composed of convicts who had become free by the ex-
piration of the time for which they had been sentenced, and of
such as had been made so by pardon. They were distinguished
by the appellation of ‘ emancipists,’ a name by which they are still
known, in contradistinction to the voluntary emigrants. Till the
time of Governor Macquarie, these people, though they had be-
come important by their numbers, and more so by their reformed
habits and property, still possessed little or no visible influence in
society; they were looked upon as a degraded class ;• but as they
had either paid the penalty of the law, or received a full pardon for
their offences, this officer thought it but just that they should be
rescued from the state of degradation in which he found them : he
therefore laid down a rule, on which he acted, * that it was good
policy to restore the deserving emancipist to that rank in society,
which he had occupied previously to his conviction,’ It will readily
be supposed that the encouragement thus given to the emancipists
only served, in the first instance, to widen the separation between
them and the aristocratic party, or ‘ vile faction,’ as Mr. Wentworth
calls all those, whether free settlers or functionaries, who resisted the
governor’s plan, and whose ‘ unrelenting and systematic hostility’
was soon directed against that officer himself and his government.
To ascertain the true state of the colony, and to tranquillize the con-
flicting parties, Mr. Bigge was sent out, armed with full powers as
King’s commissioner, to inquire into and report on all grievances,
&c. that might be brought before him. He sanctioned, rather un-
fortunately


fortunately as we think, a directly opposite line of conduct to that
which had been pursued by Governor Macquarie; not, however,
by any means to the extent which Mr. Wentworth has been
pleased to impute to him, who charges him, * instead of healing
those wounds, and allaying those animosities, which have so long
distracted this unhappy community,’ with sowing, ‘ with a prodigal
hand, the seeds of new, and still more inveterate dissensions. In-
stead, adds this writer, of confining his report to public objects and
public interests, he has polluted every page of it with private scan-
dal and vituperation, as if these had been the exclusive ends of his
appointment.’ Without attempting to exculpate Mr. Bigge from
the charge of entering into a too minute detail of private trans-
actions, we must say that he had a most arduous and delicate task
to perform, and are far from thinking that he has merited the
abusive and opprobrious terms which this young man has lavished
upon him—such as ‘ booby commissioner,’ one who ‘ raked to-
gether all the dirt and filth, all the scandal, calumnies and lies
that were ever circulated in the colony.’ That Mr. Wentworth
should espouse the cause of the emancipists is natural enough,
and we are far from blaming him for it; but youth and folly only
can make him suppose that the abusive and scurrilous language
which runs throughout his book, wherever this part of the subject
occurs, adds any strength to his arguments in favour of one party
or against the other. The following statement which he has given,
if founded on facts, demonstrates the justice of removing any legal
disabilities from that class whose cause he espouses, more forcibly
than all his opprobrious epithets on the opposite party.
‘ From a census taken by some of the leading men among the peti-
tioners with the greatest care and accuracy, it appears that the emanci-
pists in that year amounted to 7,556, and their children to 5,859 ;
while the number of voluntary emigrants were only 1,558, and their
children 878. It appears too from the same document, that the pro-
perty, whether real or personal, held by the two classes was pretty
nearly in relative proportion to their respective numbers ; the emanci-
pists possessing 29,028 acres of land in cultivation, 212,335 acres in
pasture, 1,200 houses in towns, 42,988 head of horned cattle, 174,179
sheep, 2,415 horses and 18,563 swine, 15 colonial vessels of various bur-
dens, and capital invested in foreign trade, and domestic, to the amount
of .£150,000: —while, on the other hand, the emigrants possessed
only at that time 10,737 acres of land in cultivation, 198,369, acres in
pasture, 300 houses in towns, 28,582 head of horned cattle, 87,391
sheep, 1,553 horses and 6,304 swine, 8 colonial vessels, and capital invested
in trade and commerce, to the amount of £100,000; the estimated ag-
gregate value of the property of every description possessed by the eman-
cipist Colonists amounting to £1,123,600 and that of the emigrant
Colonists to £526,136, leaving an excess in favour of the former of
£597,461.’ — Wentworth , vol. i. p. 414.


The vast importance of the emancipists to the colony appears
obvious enough from this statement; but why should Mr. Went-
worth do the very thing of which he accuses Commissioner Bigge;
at the same moment too in which he admits that * already is the
equality of every free colonist, whether emigrant or emancipist,
distinctly recognized by that clause of the act passed in 1823,,
which regulates the trial by jury’? If not kept up by that spirit
which appears in his book, the distinction of the two classes will
probably soon cease; and the descendants of the voluntary emi-
grant and the convict will not despise nor entertain antipathies
against each other, as is said to have been the case in the early
periods of some of the North American settlements.
But there is another and a greater evil besetting these colonies,
which w ill require a longer time to correct; we allude to the
enormous disproportion that exists between the male and female
part of the population.
‘ The young men are almost invariably temperate, chaste, frugal, and
laborious ; and if unhappily this character be not generally applicable
to the native-born females, this exception on their part is to be traced
not to any innate depravity, but to that vast and alarming disproportion
which exists between the sexes ; the number of males being to the num-
ber of females nearly as four to one. Hence it happens, that the instant
a young woman arrives at the age of maturity, and often, indeed, long
before, she is beset with all the arts, and played upon with all the artil-
lery of seduction ; and being, perhaps, under the roof of a mother, her-
self not wdiolly reclaimed from the vicious practices of her youth, and
thus the insidious underminer of her daughter’s chastity, what wonder
that the poor girl at length gives w r ay, and that her after-life continues
an uninterrupted scene of riot and debauchery ?’— lVcntworth, vol. i.
p. 3C4.
We might here ask Mr. Wentworth who these artillerymen of
seduction are, since he tells us that the young men are almost
inyariahlif chaste—but let it pass. The disproportion among the
convicts is much greater than that stated above, the number of men
in 1821 W'as no less than ten to one woman, and since that period the
inequality has nearly doubled. Mr. Wentworth is disposed to think
that it arises from the disinclination of our government to transport
female offenders, since the general introduction of something like
the penitentiary system into England; and more particularly since
Mrs. Fry undertook the management of the female prisoners in
Newgate. Now the fact is, that a whole cargo of Mrs. Fry’s
converts W'ere shipped off for the colony, who, in spite of all the
care which had been taken with them, happened to turn out more
refractory and abandoned than any which had before been trans-
ported. But even women such as these are much better dis-
posed


posed of in New South Wales than by being turned loose on
society in England. A great deal was said of the abandoned
and incorrigible characters of the females who were sent to the
penitentiary of Paramatta, and of the enormous expense of that
establishment; but Mr. Wentworth thinks that both were grossly
exaggerated, and we are inclined to believe that such was the case.
At all events we agree with him in hoping that the state of this
factory will not be brought forward ‘ as an argument against the
transportation of women to this colony, seeing the horrible dis-
proportion which already exists there between the sexes, and the
lamentable consequences that must ensue, unless some speedy
means of equalizing them be adopted.’
Frequent doubts have been entertained as to the efficiency
of these colonies considered as ‘ a school of correction and re-
form.’
On this part of the subject, however, as well as on the policy
of encouraging the emigration of the poor to the Australian
colonies, Mr. Wentworth has published three letters addressed
to Mr. Peel by a gentleman who is evidently well versed in the
matters on which he treats, and who, to an intimate knowledge of
the colonies, adds full information regarding the state of the pri-
sons, penitentiaries, and condition of the labouring poor at home :
these letters form the best portion of Mr. Wentworth’s work.
The following is a striking view of the effects produced by the
colonization of convicts.
* The extent to which reform has been effected among the convicts
heretofore sent to New South Wales is not, I believe, generally or in-
deed at all known ; I shall therefore just give a sketch of it. The num-
ber of persons transported to New South Wales, from its establishment
in 1788, to the end of the year 1815, was 13,801 men, and 3,265
women, total 17,066 ; of these 6,067 became free by pardon, and service,
1,688 held tickets of leave, 3,813 still continue convicts, and the x’emain-
der 5,498 had died, having a considerable number previously become
free. Those who had become free with their children who had come
to maturity, 1,947 persons, formed in 1821, 3,478 families, having 7,212
children, and possessed 251,941 acres of land in pasture, 34,769 acres
in cultivation, 2,447 horses, 59,466 head of horned cattle, 168,960 sheep,
25,568 swine, 3,478 houses, 15 decked vessels, of various burthen,
87,000/. worth of agricultural dead stock, and 300,000/. invested in trade;
the estimated value of their entire property being 1,562,201/. sterling,
all the creation and fruit of their own industry ; and they employed and
subsisted 4,640 convict labourers, making thereby a saving to the go-
vernment of 116,000/ per annum; as appears by the colonial general
muster of population and property, for the year 1821. Here the re-
formation that has taken place among the convicts, transported to New
South Wales, appears both in its nature and degree. Of 17,000 per-


sons transported in thirty years, nearly 5,500 have died; 3,800 are still
convicts; 1,700 are so far reformed as to have obtained the first degree
of reward and indulgence, and 6,067 have become heads of families,
householders, and proprietors of landed and other property, to the value
of above one million and a half sterling; have upwards of nine thousand
children, who are in the course of being educated in industrious habits,
and employ, and subsist, and thereby relieve the crown from the ex-
pense of subsisting more than 4,600 convicts. Whatever the private
morals or failings of these people may be, and the greater number of
them are not worse in this respect than their unconvicted fellow colon-
ists, they have been politically, and as far as human laws are concerned,
morally reformed. They have become fathers of families, they possess
considerable property, created and acquired by industry and honest ex-
ertion, and fulfill all the political, social, and domestic duties of citizens;
and their children are in the course of becoming, and will become, equal
to any other description of people in any part of the king’s dominions.
I do therefore conclude, upon consideration of these facts, that New
South Wales, as a penal settlement, has been productive, in an eminent
degree, of substantial and beneficial reform in the persons transported
thereto.’— Wentworth, \ ol. ii. p. 156, 158.
Then with regard to economy or the expense of the system,
he finds, from the reports of parliamentary committees, that the
average expense per man transported to New South Wales is con-
siderably below that in gaols, penitentiaries, houses of correction,
or hulks. Thus the average annual expense of each man in the
hulks for thirty-four years is 28/. 7s. 4c/.; an estimate for the same
period, in penitentiaries (had they existed so long) 32/. l6s. 2</.;
in nine gaols, houses of correction, and bridewells, (including Mil-
bank, the average of which alone is 5 61. 1 55.) 38/. 145.: while an
average for the same period for each convict transported to New
South Wales has been no more than 20/. 14s. o\d. } and this in-
cludes subsistence, clothing, superintendence, the civil govern-
ment, and the naval and military expenses of the colony, as well as
the transport of the convicts out. The following is a condensed
comparative view of the total expenditures of the three systems.
f The entire expense of New South Wales, from its settlement in
1788, to December, 1821, has been 5,301,023/. 16s. 6d., for which
33,155 persons have been transported, and subsisted, and all the civil,
naval, military, and other expenses of the colony paid. To have kept
the same number during the same period, in hulks, would have cost the
nation, including the fitting up of the necessary number of hulks, forty
at least, 7,214,486/. 3s. 6d. And to have subsisted and managed them
in penitentiaries, erected and supported, not at the same rate of expense
as Milbank Penitentiary, but, upon the most economical plan, would
have cost for superintendence and subsistence only, 7,943,221/., and the
expense of erecting the necessary number of penitentiaries, forty at
least, upon the least expensive plan yet effected, I mean the plan of the
< vor,. xxxn. no. LXIV. y Maidstone


Maidstone Gotd and Penitentiary, the erection of which, for the accom-
modation of 450 prisoners, notwithstanding the utmost attention to
economy, and simplicity of style, cost 192,000/,, would have cost the
further sum of 8,366,640/-, making a total, for penitentiaries, of
16,309,861/, sterling.’—vol. ii. p.- 164.
Besides,- he argues, and we think fairly enough, that the labour
performed in New South Wales is much more valuable than
that of prisoners in hulks or penitentiaries; that, in fact, the em-
ployment of convicts at home, where there is a superabundance
of free labourers, is of no benefit whatever to the country, but,
on the contrary, a serious evil, as it must throw out of employ-
ment rfn equal number of free labourers, who will come on the
poo/s rate for subsistence; that allowing, however, the labour
of convicts in hulks and penitentiaries to be of all the value that
the favourers of the system may be pleased to make it, its
amount is a mere trifle in comparison with that of New South
WaleSj
* That colony is Certainly the fruit of the convicts’ labour. It now
contains a population of more than 40,000 souls, who occupy upwards
of 700,000 acres of land, and possess upwards of 5,000 horses, 120,000
head of horned cattle, and 350,000 sheep ; it contains five thriving
towns, and several villages; it consumes British manufactures annually
of the value of 350,000/; its exports amount to 100,000/. per annum;
it employs upwards of 10,000 tons of shipping, and yields a colonial
revenue of more than 50,000/. a year; whereas if the same convicts
had been kept in England, either in hulks, penitentiaries, or any other
better system of correction, and employment, their labour, instead of
being productive and valuable, would have been in itself of very little
value, and, as coming in competition with free and unconvicted labour,
Wofdd have created a far greater expense in the shape of poors-rates,
for the subsistence of those whom it would have thrown ont of employ-
ment, than any possible saving that would have been derived from it.
The convict in England, so far as his labour is concerned, becomes
a competitor with the free labourer; the convict of New South Wales
becomes not a competitor with, but an employer of the free labourer of
England, to the full extent of the expense of his, the convict’s, main-
tenance ; because all the money expended in New South Wales has been,
directly of indirectly, expended in the purchase and consumption of
British manufactures.’ —vol. ii. p, 155, 156.
Another most important advantage is secured by sending the
convicts to New' South Wales. There the culprit has the chance
of becoming au honest and useful citizen ; and that these chances
are equal in his favour is evident from the fact, that 4 one half the
number of persons transported to New South Wales, up to
1815, had, in 1821, become free, and were heads of families,
householders and settlers.’ But it is impossible, or very nearly


so, that, in the present state of the labouring population of Eng-
land, convicts discharged from hulks and penitentiaries can, how-
ever reformed they may appear to be, continue honest. ‘ How
can a man/ asks this writer, stating his case however a little too
strongly, ‘ coming out of a hulk or penitentiary, with necessarily
a tainted character, claim honest employment and subsistence in
a country, Where men of untainted character and the most sober
and industrious habits cannot, with all their obtain em-
ployment to subsist by ?’
We remember, not many years ago, a good deal of pseudo-
philanthropy, if we may use such a term, in parliament and out
of it, on the hardship and cruelty of not accommodating the con-
victs of New South Wales with a passage home at the expi-
ration of their servitude. The facts above stated show the value
of such complaints, and confirm us in the justness of the opinion
expressed by the Writer above mentioned, 1 that the very circum-
stance of the difficulty of the convicts returning after the term
of transportation expires, is the peculiar advantage Of trans-
portation.’
Some sensible observations are made in these letters as to the
mode of distributing and employing the convicts. He recommends
the local government to remove them as far from the towns as pos-
sible, to be employed by those Settlers who are engaged in agri-
culture and grazing. ‘ The convict assigned to the settler is
compelled to continual labour; he is out of the way of evil
example; he cannot indulge in habits of idleness, dissipation or
theft; he gradually acquires habits of industry and sobriety; his
labour is turned to profitable account; and the government is
entirely relieved from the expense of his Subsistence.’ The diffi-
culty is, that there are not settlers sufficient to give employment
to all the convicts, who in 1823 probably exceeded ten thousand.
Upon this he observes that the most advantageous way would
be to employ them in clearing and preparing farms for emigrants;
that is to say, felling and burning timber, fencing in the ground,
building huts and sheds; and as emigration is likely to take place
on a great scale as soon as the capital of the two Australian
companies shall be brought into operation, we do think that as
many convicts as can be spared might be employed with great
advantage in this manner, by which a whole year would be gained
to the new settlers. If something of this kind be not done, the
increasing number of convicts, as appears from the following
abstract, must be an enormous expense to the government and
a dead weight upon the colony.
* At the colonial muster, or census, of 1821, the number of male con-
victs was found to be 16,210 ; of those there were distributed among and
v . v 2 employed


employed by the colonists in every way 6,927, and 1,378 held “ tickets of
leave,” leaving at the disposal of the government 7,905 labourers. Since
that period, upwards of 3,500 male convicts have been sent out, and there
are now therefore upwards of 10,000 crown labourers, who really are,
in a measure, in want of employment, in the colony. It is to be observed
that the government has to feed, clothe, and lodge all the convicts not
distributed among the colonists. Now if those 10,000 crown labourers,
or even a part of them, were employed in clearing and fencing farms,
and erecting houses on them, they would clear and fence a sufficient
quantity of land every year, for several thousand farms, and besides erect
a house on each farm.’—vol. ii. p. 230, 231.
It is then shown, by a detailed estimate, that the labour of
preparing a farm of thirty acres, fenced with a three-rail fence, one
acre cleared for a garden, and five for agricultural cultivation, with
a cot-house twenty-four feet long, twelve feet wide, and eight feet
high, weather-boarded and shingled, could be completed by one
convict in one year atari expense, including the materials, of £ 19*
This being the case, it is further shown, by a number of detailed
estimates, what an advantage it would be to the labouring poor of
England and Ireland, and what a relief to the parishes, if 5,000
families should annually emigrate from each of the two countries
to New South Wales, for the reception of whom 10,000 such
farms as above-mentioned could be prepared by the convicts
already there, and to whom, it is supposed, the government have no
means of giving profitable employment. This is a point worthy
at least of serious consideration: for we are satisfied, that the
Australian colonies are, of all others, those in which pauper emi-
grants can be settled with the least expense to the public, and
with the greatest advantage to themselves.
Mr. Curr, whose account of Van Diemen’s Land we have
placed among others at the head of our paper, is anxious that
the English farmer should not be misled when he reads of Aus-
tralian farms and farm-houses.
‘ The cottage,’ says he, ‘ is usually built of sods, logs, or mud, and
thatched with straw; a few logs laid together in the style of the American
fence perhaps compose a pig-sty : and an open detached yard of the same
materials serves to contain the working cattle.
‘ These are, in a majority of cases, the only features of a farm-house in
Van Diemen’s Land, unless, indeed, we think proper to add the disgust-
ing appearance of wool, bones, sheep-skins, wasted manure, and the
confused heaps of ploughs, harrows, carts, fire-wood, and water-casks,
with a few quarters of mutton or kangaroo hanging on a neighbouring
tree, and a numerous tribe of dogs and idlers; the former barking, the
latter lounging about. Every thing betokens waste and disorder, the total
absence of industry and economy. As to the thrifty mistress of the
house, her place is too frequently supplied (among the lower classes in
particular)


particular) by a being of a different nature, geneially a convict, or one
free by the expiration of her term of transportation. In respect to the
dairy and poultry, the latter are indeed generally to be met with ; but
the possessor of a hundred head of cattle often cannot command milk to
his tea.’—p. 14, 15.
We should regret, as much as Mr. Curr, the dissemination of
any false or exaggerated notions on this subject, but this account
of the farm-house. Sic. is so far from being generally true, that
he himself admits, in another place, (p. 33,) that ‘ many farms would
do credit, in every instance, to the best agricultural districts in
England.’ And in cases, which the picture really resembles, all
that can be said, is, that if the farmer chuses to live amidst filth
and garbage; if he suffers his cattle to run wild over the plains, as
in South America, and the calves to suck their mothers, until they
bear calves themselves, (at the age of eighteen months,) instead of
taking the trouble to milk them for the dairy—if he confines his
sheep in hot yards in summer, and in dirt and dung in winter;
it is neither the fault of the soil nor the climate, but of that
slovenly indolence which seeks nothing beyond the gratification
of the appetite by gross feeding. These are not the necessary
evils of a new settlement; they are not evils which a sensible, clean,
and industrious family need fear. That something better might
be obtained is evidently the opinion of Mr. Curr himself. In an
excursion from Hobart town, he says.
c Passing over these beautiful tracts, the most enchanting views, the
brightest verdure, and the greatest fertility, combine to delight the eye
and to invite the husbandman. It has often been to me a subject of
regret, that I could not take up my final residence upon it; and I have
often reflected, (I had almost said, exclaimed,) How happy might I be
here in the bosom of my family, the possessor of all the acres my eye
beholds; my flocks and herds grazing around me, and depending on them
alone for subsistence :—far above want, —perhaps in affluence, and sure
at last of leaving an independence to my children ! Such will often be
the exclamation of the traveller, as he roams over these plains in search
pf a spot on which to fix himself.’—p. 28—29.
Of such a country as this, a better race of settlers, with more or-
derly and industrious habits than the emancipated convicts, would
soon change the aspect, improve the breed of sheep and horned
cattle, and produce plenty, with all the comforts and conveniences
of life. There is no apprehension for many years to come, espe-
cially in New South Wales, of overstocking the country with
population; * J have made an estimate’ (says the able writer of
the ‘ letters’)
‘ of the quantity of good land, fit for agricultural purposes, the growth
of grain, hemp, flax, and tobacco, contained in the line of country ex-
plored by Mr. Surveyor-General Oxley, in his expeditions into the inte-
v 3 rior.


rlor, in the years 1817 and 1818, and the result is, that it forms a square
area of 250 miles every way, or 62,500 square miles, and 40,000,000
acres, and contains, at least, ten million acres of land upon the banks of
rivers and streams, well watered, rich, fertile, and valuable lor all pur-
poses of grazing, cultivation, and settlement, and capable of producing,
in the greatest abundanpe, wheat, barley, oats, Indian corn, tobacco, flax
and hemp, and of rearing and feeding horned cattle, horses, and fine
woolled sheep without number. A country certainly sufficient, in point
of extent and fertility of soil, for the reception of all the redundant popu-
lation of Great Britain and Ireland.’ —Wen (worth, vol. ii. p. 229.
The soil, too, is admirable, especially in the vicinity of the
rivers, and found so productive, as to yield abundant crops of
wheat, maize and barley, in some places for thirty, and in others
for twenty and fifteen successive years without manure and with-
out rest; and, what is not of less importance, the climate is most
desirable, without that scorching heat which renders the Euro-
pean unfit for toil, or those frosts and snows which defy all agri-
cultural labour for five or six months in the year; the tracts too
to which we allude are free from those swamps and morasses,
which engender fevers to debilitate and destroy the human frame.
* The first requisite in any country, and more especially in a ne\v
colony, is a good climate. In this particular. New South Wales, in
jyhich 1 always include Van Diemen’s Land, is in no respect inferior to
any other country in the world. We have now bad the experience ot
five-aud-thirfy years, and it serves to show, not only that the climate is
most congenial to the human constitution in preserving health, but that
did arid unhealthy persons have recovered and preserved a state of health
seldom to be found in other countries. It is a well ascertained fact that
inflammatory and febrile diseases have not hitherto been observed in New
South Wales. There is no trace to be found of the diseases that prevail
in the back woods of America. And as to those fatal diseases of chil-
dren, small-pox, measles and hooping-cough, not one single case has
been known to exist. The climate is equally favourable for all domestic
animals. Horned cattle, horses, sheep, swine, and every description of
poultry, thrive and multiply to a degree I believe seldom known, cer-
tainly never exceeded elsewhere. In short, with respect to climate, there
is not a healthier or finer in the world, for man or beast, than that of
New South Wales.’ — Wentworth , vol. ii. p. 327.
On a review of what has been done by convicts, both for the
colony and themselves, the success of industrious families of
vqluntary emigrants can, we think, be no longer doubtful; and
it will become a question for serious consideration, how far it
may be advisable for parishes to be at the expense of the trans-
port of a certain number of those families which are annually
relieved by the poor rates, to New South Wales and Van
Jjiemep’s Laud. The writer of the letters to Mr. Peel proposes
to


to send out annually five thousand families, consisting of twenty-
five thousand souls, for whose reception the convicts can with
ease prepare five thousand habitations and farms; that for each
family of five persons a contribution of £lO a year should be
paid to the emigration fund from the poor’s rate, for fourteen
years, and that the annual rent to be paid by each emigrant settler
shall also be £\o a year, to commence the third year of his set-
tlement, when it is concluded he may with ease afford to pay so
much. We cannot follow him through all the estimates by which
he arrives at his conclusions, but the result is that a permanent
reduction and relief w'ould be afforded in the parish rates of .£3O
a year, on an average, for every family of five persons subsisted
wholly or in part by the poor’s rate. We see but one objection to
this scheme. The emigration contemplated can only be volun-
tary; in crowded manufacturing parishes there might perhaps be
no insuperable difficulty in procuring emigrants—these, however,
would be the least useful class of persons for the purpose in view.
But in agricultural parishes, in which the love of the native soil
has all its primitive hold on the affections, and where the idea of
transportation to Botany Bay as a punishment is still regarded
with salutary horror, we doubt exceedingly whether families of the
class alluded to, that, is subsisted wholly or in part by the poor’s
rate, would be found in any considerable number willing to avail
themselves of the advantages held out to them. These persons
look to the poor’s rate as a source of support legally their own,
and would listen with great distrust and jealousy to any proposi-
tion coming from the overseers, calculated to relieve the rate, as
they would think, at their expense.
If, however, as is probable, a committee of the House of Com-
mons, in the next session, shall be appointed to examine into the
question of emigration from the United Kingdom, and from Ire-
land in particular, we w'ould strongly recommend to its particular
attention the three letters from which we have made extracts’; and
if the documents therein referred to, and the estimates grounded
upon them be correct, we cannot help subscribing to the follow-
ing conclusion, strongly as it is expressed.
* If the Irish land proprietors, from any ill-grounded fears of the mis-
chief of poor’s rate, will not agree to the adoption of some such means
for promoting the emigration of the redundant population of Ireland,
but will be looking to the imperial government, or in other words to
taxes to be levied on the people of England, (who have, certainly, no
right to pay for the emigration, or otherwise support the redundant po-
pulation of Ireland,) to keep up the excessive rents and increase the
incomes of the Irish gentry, they will give just reasons for suspecting
that they are influenced rather by motives of private and individual,
y 4 though


though mistaken interest, than by patriotism and humanity : and their
increasing distresses will meet with little commiseration, as they may be
fairly attributed to themselves. If every poor family of five persons can
be comfortably settled in New South Wales, at the very trifling ex-
pense to the country of two pounds twelve shillings per annum, for forty-
two years , I think the mouths of the Irish gentry, as to all claims of
relief from the imperial parliament, must be stopped; and if they will
not consent to incur so trifling an expense for such a purpose, perhaps
it will be said, they deserve to suffer all the mischiefs of a redundant,
unemployed, starving population.’ — Wentworth , vol. ii. p. 286.
Art. lII. Voyage Historique et Litteraire en Angleterre et en
Europe. Par Amadfie Pichot, D. M. Paris, 1825. 3 vols.
Pichot seems to be a hack translator for the Pari-
sian booksellers, who has thought it necessary, in the way
of his trade, to visit the country whose language and manners
he pretends to understand; and, it must be confessed, that
the title of translator (little as he knows of English) is much
better suited to him than that of traveller, for, in fact, his travels
are little else than translations: and of the 1500 pages which com-
pose the three volumes before us, there are not 200 which might
not have been written though the Doctor had never quitted his
entresol in the Hue des Morfondus.
We shall begin our observations with a few specimens of the
Doctor’s recipe for making a book of travels. When about to
describe the style of the English Bar, (an interesting subject, and
one on which we should like to have the opinion of a competent
foreigner,) it happens that the word Ershine falls from his pen.
Adieu in a moment to the Bar and its various styles! The Doer
tor immediately sets about translating a common-place life of
Lord Erskine after this manner:
* Thomas Erskine, third son of the Earl of Buchan, was born in
Scotland, about the year 1750. After acquiring the rudiments of learnr
ing at Edinburgh, he completed his education at the University of St.
Andrew’s,’ &c.—vol. ii. p. 112.
Theq follow translations of scraps of his speeches for thirty
pages, at the end of which the Doctor reluctantly
‘ renounces the pleasure of citing other passages of an orator whose in-
genuity of discussion, whose elevation of style, and whose purity of taste,
give his works an air entirely French’ —vol. ii. p. 148.
The mention of Mr. Campbell fortunately enables Doctor
Pichot to get through seventeen pages, by doing into French
so much of Gertrude of Wyoming; a poem soothing enough
in the original, but an absolute narcotic in the hands of the
Doctor.
