

The Story of
B ennett and Wood
PTY. LTD
SYDNEY
A U STRALIA
Established 1882




The Story of
B ennett and Wood Pty Ltd


HEAD OFFICE: PITT AND BATHURST STREETS, SYDNEY


The Story of
Bennett & Wood Pty. Limted
INTRODUCTION
Synonymous with the growth of road
transport in Australia has been the development
of Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. Just as road
transport has progressed since 1882 from
the stage of horse - drawn vehicles and
pennyfarthing bicycles to an industry contri-
buting a great share to the national income and
prosperity of this country, so too has Bennett &
Wood Pty. Ltd. riven from modest beginnings to
become one of the most successful of Australia’s
commercial enterprises.
The aim of this booklet is to present a
record of the Company’s activities and to give a
picture of the scope of the road transport
industry in Australia.


Mr. JOSEPH H. MOSTYN
Assistant Manager
Mr. W. HAROLD WATSON
The Board of Directors
Mr. KENNETH A. BENNETT. Governing Director.
Mr. ARTHUR J. NEUSTADT
General Manager
Mr. GEORGE FLYNN
Mr. HAROLD S. MOTLEY


Outline of...
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd's Activities
To show how far-reaching
has been the connection of
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. with
the development of road trans-
port in Australia, it may be
mentioned that when the Com-
pany first commenced, six
years were to elapse before J.
B. Dunlop invented the pneu-
matic tyre. Many more years
were to pass before the intro-
duction of the first motor cycles
and automobiles.
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. not
only saw the birth of these great
inventions which have done so
much to alter the habits and
outlook of people the world
over, but took the outstanding
part in furthering their develop-
ment in this country. So rapid
was the progress of the Com-
pany that several changes of
premises were necessary in the
nineteenth century and, in 1908,
the Company moved to the site
of its present Head Office.
Many additions to the original
premises have been carried out,
and the well known Pitt and
Bathurst Streets corner has
become noted as the leading
landmark of the Sydney motor
and cycle trade.
The Governing and Managing
Director of Bennett & Wood Pty.
Ltd. is Mr. Kenneth A. Bennett,
son of the founder, the late Mr.
Charles W. Bennett. Mr. K. A.
Bennett has been Managing
Director since 1932. Supporting
Mr. Bennett in control of the
Company is an experienced
Board of five Directors. Each of
these Directors has served for
many years with Bennett &
Wood Pty. Ltd. and has an inti-
mate knowledge of
all divisions of the
M
Company's opera- Jm
tions.
Mr. S. R. LAWSON, A.C.I.S.. A.A.A.,
Secretary


BRANCHES SUPPLEMENT
HEAD OFFICE SERVICE.
The greatest part of the Com-
pany's field of activity is centred
in New South Wales, the oldest
and most populated State in
Australia. Early in the devel-
opment of road transport, it was
realised by Bennett & Wood
Pty. Ltd. that New South Wales
was too vast an area to be
adequately served from Sydney
alone, and a number of branch-
es throughout the State were
progressively developed. In
1898, the first branch was estab-
lished at Newcastle, the largest
city outside Sydney. To-day,
there are eight branches so
situated as to be able to cater
for the needs of all leading
country districts. An Overseas
Trade Department handles
sales through the Far East, in-
cluding China and the Pacific
Islands.
To-day, the Company's em-
ployees total nearly 1,500. In
these troubled times Australia,
like other countries in the world,
has its share of industrial unrest,
but so harmonious has been the
relationship between manage-
ment and employees that no
industrial hold-up has ever
occurred in the long history of
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
Heavy motor transport is widely used by Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. for deliveries to country traders.
Trucks are here shown being loaded with motor parts, cycles, motor cycles and refrigerators for country
hauls which often cover distances of over a thousand miles.


WIDE SCOPE
OF ACTIVITY.
From being a pioneer in the
sphere of cycles, motor cycles
and motoring needs, including
the distribution of replacement
parts and accessories for all
makes of cars and trucks, as
well as garage and service
station equipment, the Com-
pany has branched out into
many other avenues of enter-
prise. One of the earliest im-
porters in the Australian radio
industry, Bennett & Wood Pty.
Ltd. to-day ranks as a leading
distributor of radios and domes-
tic refrigerators. Tools, station-
ary engines, lubrication equip-
ment, lawn mowers, portable
power equipment are a few of
the many lines distributed for
industry in general.
Elsewhere in this booklet, the
leading departments of the
Company are treated in greater
detail. It will, however, be
readily seen from the foregoing
resume that Bennett & Wood
Pty. Ltd., as a result of six
decades of continuous develop-
ment, comprises a vast distribu-
ting organisation with many
specialised departments equip-
ped to handle an ever-growing
range of products required by
a country which is expanding
year by year in the march of
progress.
Section of main showrooms at Head Office.


Facts About New South Wales
New South Wales is the oldest and wealthiest
State in the Australian Commonwealth. With a
seaboard of 700 miles and an area of 309,433 square
miles, New South Wales is larger than Great Britain,
Germany and Austria put together.
The population of the State is 3,065,000 and
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, has a
population of over If million people, being the
fourth city of the British Empire or, among the
cities of a purely white population, second only to
London.
TRADE AND PRODUCTION STATISTICS.
Number of registered Motor Vehicles:
Cars and Commercial Vehicles 391,475
Motor Cycles 33,772
Total 425,247
Garages and Service Stations 5,000
Cycle Agents and Builders .. 2,000
Radio & Refrigeration Dealers 8,000
Annual value of agricultural products, £37,452,-
000; 46,065,000 sheep produce 446,683,000 lbs. of
wool annually. Annual wheat production,
95,230,000 bushels.
Annual production of other pastoral and dairy-
ing products ;
Cheese 4,967,776 lbs.
Butter 78,280,087 lbs.
Bacon and Ham .. 37,638,325 lbs.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES.
14,000 factories pay £103,587,559 in salaries and
wages, and their product output is valued at
£367,092,216 per annum.
Value of minerals produced, £30,794,000 annu-
ally.
OVERSEAS TRADE.
Imports £5tg.77,061,000
Exports £A 76,841,000


New South Wales
Branches
NEWCASTLE Second city and
seaport in the State, Newcastle is the
home of Australia's Iron and Steel Indus-
try, and centre of the richest coal mining
area in the Commonwealth. The Bennett
& Wood Pty. Ltd. branch was established
in this city in 1898 and caters for trans-
port requirements in this great industrial
area.
TAMWORTH In the heart of the
North-west Tablelands district, embrac-
ing an important pastoral and agricul-
tural area.
WOLLONGONG Headquarters
of one of the State's most rapidly expand-
ing areas. Adjacent to both the rich
South Coast coalfields and the ever-
growing Port Kembla iron and steel
works, around which vast industrial
expansion is planned.
GOULBURN One of the State's
leading inland cities and gateway to a
vast pastoral area. The third largest
town in N.S.W., and this branch serves
an area where trade requirements are
particularly heavy.
European Office
WAGGA Headquarters of one of
Australia's leading primary-producing
areas the Riverina. Extensive irriga-
tion schemes add to the great natural
advantages of this district.
ORANGE Strategically placed at
the entrance to the vast areas of Western
New South Wales, one of Australia's
most important primary-producing zones.
Wheat and wool are the chief products
of this wealthy district.
LISMORE Leading North Coast town,
the centre of one of the State's leading
agricultural and dairying districts, pro-
ducing many crops of a semi-tropical
nature. Situated over 500 miles from
Sydney, this branch acts as a supply
headquarters for the trade in the northern
coast area.
PARRAMATTA An important city
which flourishes as an offshoot of Sydney.
Centre of a big outlying residential area,
many industries are springing up in
Parramatta to help in solving the problem
of overcrowding in Sydney itself.
For many years Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. have maintained a branch at Birming-
ham, England, which keeps the Company in close touch with European manufacturing
centres.
Fleet of moto r cycle co mmercial outfits
us ed by Bennett & Wood pty. Ltd. for fast
sydney and suburban trade deliveries, as
well as urgent rail and air freight deliveries.


Peak-hour traffic approaching the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
UNIVERSAL PROVIDERS TO THE MOTOR TRADE
Soon after the invention of the automobile and
when early motor car models were still in the experi-
mental stage, Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. pioneered this
new form of transport by importing the first automobiles
to be seen in Australia. These were French De Dion
cars and the Company quickly began to lay the
foundations of its present extensive activities in the
varied services it- now offers to the motor trade.
In this country, the average garage does not con-
centrate on providing services for any one make of
car and, therefore, in their capacity of universal pro-
viders to the motor trade, Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
have to cater for a varied range of motor vehicles
’from America, England and Continental sources and
■■me different systems which these vehicles employ.
As Australia is far removed from the sources of
manufacture of original equipment and problems of
transport, trading restrictions, etc., have to be over-
come, vehicles tend to remain on the road for a longer
period of time than is the case in countries closer to
the world's automobile manufacturing centres. There-
fore, difficulties are often encountered where overseas
factories regard parts for some models as obsolete and
discontinue manufacture, whereas there is still a
demand for these parts in this country. Such problems
have to be overcome, either by manufacturing parts
or by substituting other suitable parts.
EXPERIENCED STAFF AND
EFFICIENT STOCK CONTROL.
In training staff to give maximum service to the
motor trade, Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. cannot merely
have specialists in any one make of car, but its staff
must be as fully conversant as possible with systems
and parts required for the leading automobile makes
from America, England and Continental countries.
From many years of experience, a highly efficient
system of parts stock recording has been perfected,
and from the elaborate card index system of auto-
mobile parts and accessories maintained by the
Company it is possible to immediately satisfy almost
any enquiry for paits for any particular vehicle.


The demand on this section of Bennett & Wood
Pty. Ltd. is so heavy that the department has recently
been considerably extended, and the entire lower
ground floor of the Company's Head Office premises
is now occupied by the Replacement Parts and Equip-
ment Sections. The most modern display and lighting
systems available have been installed, and the staff
greatly increased to give the maximum service
possible to trade clients. It need hardly be stated that
this section is the Mecca of motor traders from all
parts of the State. Here, too, is displayed under the
most favourable conditions, the latest in motor
engineering and service station equipment. Realising
that modern automotive vehicles need specialised skill
and equipment to give the maximum performance
intended by manufacturers, Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
have for many years fostered the trend of garages and
service stations utilising specialised equipment. To-
day, Australia's modern service stations compare
favourably with service and equipment offered to
motor vehicle users anywhere in the world.
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. distribute the largest
range of garage equipment servicing systems and
tools of any wholesale house, and have always been
acknowledged by the motor trade as the leader in
this field.
SKILLED TRAVELLING
REPRESENTATIVES.
The service the Company offers to the motor trade
in New South Wales from its Head Office and
branches is carried a step further by a skilled staff
of forty travelling representatives.-/. Only the larger
service stations can afford to employ a spare parts
expert for stock control. Because of this, the travelling
staff of Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. needs a specialised
knowledge of all lines required by the motor trade, as
in reality the travellers act for their own clients as
stock advisers in selecting the lines the trade should
keep on hand to satisfy the needs of the general motor-
ist, It will be obvious .that business relations such as
these are only achieved from years of goodwill estab-
lished by offering careful and accurate service.
A modern Australian Service Station.


AUTOMOTIVE ELECTRICAL
SERVICE STATION.
An important function of the Company is the
supplying of parts and specialised service to the trade
on the many and varied electrical, mechanical and
fuel systems employed in automotive vehicles.
The association of Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. with
automobile electrical services began in 1904, when
they commenced charging accumulators for battery
ignition purposes. To mention two other examples,
the Company was also first in the field with magneto
and speedometer services.
RAPID ELECTRICAL
SERVICE EXPANSION.
The rapid development of the use of motor
vehicles during the 1914-18 war meant that the servic-
ing of electrical systems became an important branch
of the motor trade. To cater tor this class of work,
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. established, in 1917, the first
local specialised battery and electrical service station.
Originally located alongside the Head Office premises,
this service station proved, within a few years, to be
inadequate. In 1926, the Company completed the
erection of a separate service station, which has been
progressively enlarged to cope with ever-growing
trade demands.
The foundations of these premises were so
designed that the building could be raised to the full
height of the city building limits to meet the needs
of future expansion. Already three floors are occu-
pied in providing sales and service facilities.
At this service station are centralised the special-
ised machinery and highly skilled staff necessary to
provide accurate and efficient warranty service for
makers' original equipment installed in vehicles
operating on the Australian market.
One of the most important activities of the Service
Station is the Sales and Service of C.A.V. Lucas
Electrical and Fuel Injection systems, Bennett & Wood
Modern display methods and the latest fluorescent lighting are features of the Replacement Parts
Department on the lower ground floor at Head Office.


Pty. Ltd. being official N.S.W. Distributor and Auth-
orised Service Representative for all Lucas systems.
Other famous manufacturers for which the Company
acts in a similar capacity are Delco Remy, Lovejoy,
A.C., North-East, Stewart Warner, Autolite, etc.
The services to the trade carried out include
the overhauling and complete adjustment of
ignition and starting systems, oil and fuel gauges,
ammeters, fuel pumps, electrical horns, magnetos, etc.
A special department caters for calibrating, overhaul-
ing and adjusting of automotive, industrial and marine
fuel injection equipment. Service is also undertaken
for speedometers, shock absorbers, armature rewind-
ing, petrol pump repairs, etc.
SPECIALISED ELECTRICAL
SALES SECTION.
In addition to the large repair staff employed in
the workshops of the electrical service station, a staff
of forty specialists is maintained in the sales and
stores section of the Wentworth Avenue Service
Station to handle the classification and sale of electrical
and other specialised spare parts, A similar extensive
system of cataloguing and stock control is employed
to that in the general spare parts section at Head
Office.
SPECIAL FACILITIES
FOB PROMPT SERVICE.
Service has been the foundation stone on which
the motor trade section of Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
has been built. The specialised Country Order
Department handles and despatches over 1,000 orders
each day. Country telephone orders are received in
a soundproof trunk telephone room by a staff of trained
Another view of the Replacement Parts Department. This section caters exclusively for genuine parts
and accessories for Ford and General Motors vehicles, the Company being an Authorised Distributor
for both organisations.


shorthand writers familiar with trade requirements.
Such a volume of telephone calls and telegrams are
handled by the Company that it has installed two of
the most modern services used by any business in
Australia. A private automatic PABX telephone
exchange with 400 extensions enables all outgoing
calls to be made independently of the switchboard.
Telegrams are received automatically by a teleprinter
service operating twenty-four hours a day. This ser-
vice is extensively used by traders who discover after
the close of business that they urgently need parts to
put a vehicle on the road next day. By sending an
overnight telegram to BENTWOOD, SYDNEY, they
know it will be received on the teleprinter and will be
waiting for immediate attention when Bennett & Wood
Pty. Ltd.'s Head Office opens next morning.
Urgent orders are despatched by the most expe-
ditious means available. All forms of transport are
used, passenger and goods rail, modern road
transport services and air freight. A fleet of over
twenty-five vehicles maintains regular delivery sched-
ules to all suburban traders.
Thus, the service offered to the Motor Trade by
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. has been progressively
developed to its present high standard, and as a dis-
tributing organisation for motor trade products, the
Company cannot be excelled, either for completeness
of coverage of the market, or for efficiency in handling
and despatching of stocks.
A section of the Garage Equipment Showrooms.


Above: Wentworth Avenue premises, compris-
ing the Automotive Electrical Service Station,
the Motor Cycle Factory and Repair Depart-
ment.
Above: The Bulk Store, a Department which plays
an important part in maintaining immediate trade
service.
Left: Portion of the Electrical Sales Section at the
Wentworth Avenue Automotive Electrical Service
Station.


Commonwealth Street entrance.
Comp lete Trade Service
at the
Wentworth Avenue
Electicai Service Station
Adjusting C.A.V. Fuel Injection units In the Diesel
Service Section.


Calibrating Speedometers in the Instrument Repair
Department.
The Machine Shop is fully equipped to handle all
classes of repairs.
Modern Equipment gives quick service in the
Armature Rewinding Section.
Electrical Testing, Machine Shop and Arma-
ture Rewinding Section.




AUSTRALIA A CYCLE-MINDED NATION
Australia ranks high among cycle-minded nations. It is the
aim of the majority of young children to own a bicycle in their
early 'teens, then when they start income earning themselves,
they usually purchase their own first adult size machine. All
young Australians being particularly fond of open-air sport, the
cycle becomes their chief aid in seeking week-end sporting
recreation.
The popularity of cycling is, however, far from being confined
to juveniles. Suburbs in Australian towns and cities being exten-
sive in area, many working people live quite a distance from
their place of employment and cycles are widely used for economy
and convenience in transport. In fact, it is this utility aspect of
the bicycle which accounts for the majority of sales in this market.
MANUFACTURE OF SPEEDWELL CYCLES.
The name of Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. has always been
prominent in the Australian cycle trade. Before the advent of
any form of motor transport, the importation of cycles and parts
formed the principal part of the Company's business. With the
great increase in popularity that followed the introduction of
pneumatic tyres, it became necessary to produce cycles locally.
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. then commenced the manufacture of
Display of
Speedwell Cycles.


the cycle with which the Company's name has ever since been
associated the Speedwell. This enterprise met with immediate
success and the popularity of Speedwell Cycles has steadily
increased with the passing years.
THE NEW SPEEDWELL FACTORY.
After World War 11, Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. found the
demand for Speedwell Cycles to be greater than ever before and
commenced planning an entirely new factory to cope with the
needs of the cycle trade. Now in full production, the new Speed-
well factory is the most modern production unit in Australian
cycle manufacturing. Embodying the experience gained from
many decades of manufacturing cycles for Australian conditions,
allied with the latest overseas methods, it has been carefully
designed to give maximum ease and efficiency of production.
The most modern equipment obtainable, together with the high
standards of accuracy insisted upon at all stages, combine to
give, a product of exceptional quality.
CYCLE ACCESSORIES & SPARE PARTS.
In addition to manufacturing and distributing Speedwell
Cycles, the Company also distributes a complete range of cycle
accessories and spare parts —in fact, everything that is used
by cyclists. These products are distributed not only through more
than 600 Speedwell agents, but to all other cycle retailers, totalling
approximately 2,000.
The Speedwell Cycle
Factory at Redfern,
N.S.W.


SPEEDWELL CYCLES
in the Racing Field
International cycle racing demands the utmost quality and endurance from
the bicycle, and on this hard testing ground Speedwell cycles have come through
with flying colours. E. L. (“Dune'') Gray, for many years Australia's leading
cyclist at Olympic Games and British Empire Games contests, used Speedwell
cycles throughout his long and successful career. Arie van Vliet, of Holland,
World Champion Cyclist, paid Speedwell cycles a very flattering compliment on
a visit to Australia some years ago. With the pick of the world's cycles at his
command, he chose to ride a Speedwell in his successful race for the World's
Championship title.
In keeping with the Company's policy of assistance to the cycle trade by
fostering public interest in cycling in every possible way, in 1903 Bennett & Wood
Pty. Ltd. commenced sponsorship of the Annual Speedwell Road Race, which,
over the years, has become a classic event for New South Wales cyclists.
The honour of winning the Speedwell event is one keenly
fought for each year by Australia's leading cyclists and
fields of up to five hundred compete.


Lining cycle rims mechanically to give an oven width
of line.
Milling the slots for outriggers on the latest type
milling machine.
Absolute trueness is ensured by this wheel-trueing
machine using spot light.
Scenes From the
Speedwell
Cycle Factory
Individual attention to the assembly of each Speewell
is given by expert cycle builders for accuracy and
safety.
Continuous air-circulating baking oven, showing
conveyor track.


Pinning of the cycle frame prior to brazing, ensuring
perfect accuracy.
Hand polishing of handlebars before plating.
Section of the plating room.
Speedwell cycles are noted for their bright and attractive
finish. Hand lining the frame.
Hearth brazing of the lugs and tubes. Dip brazing
is also used.
The tool and cutter grinder in the tool room.




Motor Cycles
The association of Bennett & Wood
Pty, Ltd. with the motor cycle trade
dates back to the very earliest days.
In 1898, the Company imported the
first motor cycle to be seen in Aus-
tralia. Over the years, the Company
has imported a wide variety of models
from many overseas sources, and has
taken a leading part in popularising
this form of transport in Australia.
By designing many types of deliv-
ery bodies for different trades, the
commercial side of motor cycling has
been developed to a high degree,
whilst the Company has also fostered
motor cycling as a sport and relaxa-
tion by encouraging clubs and com-
petitive open events.
INTRODUCTION OF HARLEY DAVIDSON MOTOR CYCLES
The use of the motor cycle in Aus-
tralia made an important advance in
1915, when Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
commenced the importation of Harley
Davidson motor cycles from the U.S.A.
These machines brought with them
many new features, and were an
instant success in this country. Their
rugged construction proved ideally
suited to Australian needs. Giving
the performance of a light delivery
van for motor cycle cost of operation,
these machines have proved exceed-
ingly popular in the commercial world.
Harley Davidsons are distributed by
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. throughout
New South Wales, Queensland and
Tasmania.
B.S.A. POPULAR WITH ALL CLASSES OF AUSTRALIAN RIDERS
For more than a quarter of a
century, Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
have imported B.S.A. motor cycles
from England. These machines have
proved extremely suitable for a wide
variety of Australian transport needs
sporting, pleasure and utility pur-
poses. Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd.
distribute B.S.A. motor cycles in
Queensland as well as in New South
Wales. Other products of the B.S.A.
factory Sunbeam motor cycles and
New Hudson auto cycles are also
distributed by the Company in N.S.W.
and Queensland.


Harley Davidson motor cycles and commercial delivery outfits at the
Wentworth Avenue Showrooms.
Motor Cycles Work and
Service Station
Infra-red Drying Ovens in the Spraying Section
at the Motor Cycle Factory.
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. has always
provided full service facilities for the
motor cycles they distribute. Over ten
years ago, to more efficiently handle this
work, the Company established a separ-
ate motor cycle repair and service station
in the heart of the motor trade, in
Wentworth Avenue, Sydney.
Fully equipped with modern plant and
staffed by expert repair specialists, these
workshops have facilities to execute all
classes of trade repairs and are naturally
used extensively by all branches of the
motor cycle trade.
The Company's motor cycle sales sec-
tion includes a complete range of motor


cycle spare parts and accessories. As
with the automobile spare parts section,
modern bins, storage and classification
methods are used in this department and
the Company enjoys the reputation of
being the largest parts and accessory
distributor.
AGENTS THROUGHOUT TERRITORY.
Throughout the territory which the
Company serves, Bennett & Wood Pty.
Ltd. have established a complete dis-
tributing organisation of agents experi-
enced in all sections of the trade, who
are able to attend to the local needs of
all motor cycle users.
At Right: Motor Cycle Replacement Parts and Accessory Sales
Department at Wentworth Avenue.
At Left: Display of B.S.A. Motor Cycles at the Wentworth
Avenue Showrooms.


Radio and Electrical
Radio receivers and domestic refrigerators are distributed by Bennett &
Wood Pty. Ltd. through a large number of retailers. Pictured below is
a section of the Company's Head Office showrooms where these
products are attractively displayed.


World-famous Kelvinator refrigerators are distributed by Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. throughout New South
Wales. The illustration at the fop of the page shows portion of the Company's refrigerator showrooms, and
the lower illustration shows a heavy trailer load of Kelvinators being prepared for despatch to country
retailers.


Publicity
Extensive advertising is carried out
by Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd. for pro-
ducts the Company distributes.
Newspapers, magazines, trade journ-
als and radio networks are among
the media used to publicise auto-
mobile, cycle, motor cycle, radio and
engineering supplies. Samples of
advertisements, posters and cata-
logues are here shown,, together with
attractive window displays a fea-
ture of the Company's Head Office
and Branch premises. The Com-
pany, for over seventeen years, has
published a trade journal, " The
Bentwood Review ", with a circula-
tion of 7,000, among traders through-
out New South Wales, Queensland
and Tasmania




Bennett and Wood
PTY. LTD
AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY CNR. PITT AND BATHURST STS.
HEAD OFFICE:
Pitt and Bathurst Streets, Sydney,
New South Wales.
POSTAL ADDRESS:
Box 4255, G.P.0., Sydney,
New South Wales.
CABLE ADDRESS:
" Bentwood ", Sydney.
EUROPEAN OFFICE : BANKERS :
Bennett & Wood Pty. Ltd., Birmingham, Bank of Australasia, Sydney and London.
England.
Cables: ” Bentralia ", Birmingham.
