

f 1
THE
CONSTITUTION ACT
iw;ia.
WITH THE ACT OF PARLIAMENT
il
ACCOMPANYING DESPATCH
FROM THE SECRETARY OF STATE.
SYDNEY:
THE EMPIRE GENERAL STEAM PRINTING OFFICE, 173, GEORGE STREET.
[PRICE Is.]


\
%


DESPATCH
FEOM THE
SECRETARY OF STATE.
Downing-street, 20th July, 1855.
Sir—l transmit to you the Act “ to enable her
Majesty to assent to a Bill, as amended, of the Legisla-
ture of New South Wales, to confer a Constitution on
New South Wales, and to grant a Civil List to her
Majesty,” which has now received the Royal assent.
2. Former communications from this Department will
have made you acquainted with the causes of the delay
which has occurred in passing this measui'e into law.
The Bill of the Colonial Legislature of Victoria did not
reach this country until May last; at too late a period
in the Parliamentary session of 1854, to enable her
Majesty’s Government to introduce any measure to
Parliament, with that full consideration, and that care-
ful comparison with the Bills of a like character passed
by the other Colonial Legislatures of Australia, which the
great importance of the subject required.
3. In the form which they have chosen for the
legislative measure now passed into law, her Majesty’s
Government have in substance followed the
precedent of the Act passed on a somewhat
similar occasion to meet the wishes of the Legislature of
Canada, for altering the Civil List established by the
Canada Union Acts, namely the 10th and 11th Vic.,
cap. 73.
4. It was their opinion and that of Parliament, that,
although the Legislature of Now South Wales had
exceeded the powers conferred on it in passing their Bill,
and although, therefore, Parliamentary enactment was
necessary, it was more expedient to preserve in form, as
well as in substance, the measure which had been fully
considered and finally enacted by that Legislature, than
to supersede its provisions by direct Parliamentary
legislation.
5. In rigorous adherence to the same principle, no
alteration has been made in any of those provisions
which are simply of a local character. It has been the
conviction of Parliament that, in regard to all points
affecting internal government in colonies having local
representation, the general principles common to Great
Britain and her colonies must be applied with the
knowledge of circumstances which can only belong to
the colonies. Her Majesty’s Government have every
reason to hope that the measure before them will form a
desirable foundation for the social prosperity
and good government of New South Wales.
But the responsibility for its introduction will rest, as it
ought to do, with the members of the Council by whom
it was, in all substantial points, prepared and discussed.
6. But those portions of the Provincial enactment
which controlled and regulated the future power of the
Crown as to the reservation and disallowance of Colonial
Acts, and as to the instructions to be given to Gover-
nors respecting them, have been omitted by Parlia-
ment. These portions were plainly not of a local
character, but regarded the connection of the colony
with the body of the Empire. I will not now enter into
the very important subject of discussion which the
omitted clauses afford; it is sufficient for me, on the
present occasion, to observe, that her Majesty’s advisers
were of opinion that a change of such vital consequence
ought not to be effected by partial legislation in the way
proposed, and that, even if this were otherwise, the
particular clauses in question were open to difficulties
of an insuperable kind.
7. With respect to the instructions given to Governors,
lam not sure that some amount of misapprehension
does not prevail. It has been the uniform practice, not
in Australia only, but throughout the Colonial Empire of
Great Britain, for her Majesty’s Government to issue
general directions to Governors as to the classes of Acts
which should be reserved by them for the assent of
the Crown; sometimes by the formal instruments ac-
companying their commissions, sometimes merely by
despatch. But these instructions, however binding on
the Governor’s discretion, are not in the nature of legal
conditions, the non-observance of which in any way
affects the validity of Colonial Acts. The clauses in
question would, therefore, have removed no substantial
legal impediments, while they would have fettered the
supreme executive authority in a manner wholly incon-
sistent with the preservation of the general interest and
unity of the empire.
8. The only otherportions omitted are clauses 53 and 54
of the Colonial Act, according to the original numeration,
which went beyond the functions of the Legislature, relat-
ing as they did to other colonies besides New South Wiles,
and might have become inconvenient from possible
conflict with other local enactments if they had been
ratified by Parliament.
9. It is now necessary that I should direct your
attention to a few particular clauses of the Act of Parlia-
ment, authorising her Majesty’s assent to the Colonial
enactment, which follows in the schedule.
10, The necessity for some provision, such as that
embodied in section 4, is evident when the framework
of the Colonial Bill is considered.
11. By section 17 and 42 of the Bill (referring to the
original numeration) power was given to the new Legis-
lature to alter the Constitution of the Council, subject to
certain provisions as to the majority. But the framers of
the Constitution appear to have omitted altogether any
special provision reserving to the future Legislature
power to alter any other provisions of the Bill what-
ever.
12. Of course, if this Bill had been passed in the
exercise of the legitimate functions of the
Council, and required only the assent
of the Crown to give it force, this power would have
been implied. The new Legislature might alter any-
thing done by the former. But, inasmuch as the
sanction of Parliament was required, the several pro-
visions of the Bill would have become, in a legal point of
view, sections of an Act of Parliament, and it might be
very doubtful at least whether, in the absence of
special provision, the new Legislature could have in
any way meddled with them.
13. The effect of this provision as now introduced
will, it is conceived, be as follows : —ln the first
place, the new Legislature will have full power to
alter all the provisions of the Bill not specified
in clauses 17 and 42 aforesaid. In the next place, it
will have power to alter the portions specified in those
clauses, subject to the conditions imposed by those
clauses; and, finally, it will have power to repeal those
conditions themselves, if it shall think proper,
by enactments passed by simple majorities.
By this provision her Majesty’s Government
conceive that the purpose of the Council will
be most effectually answered, because, if the Bill had
been passed under their ordinary powers, it is clear that


although they might have imposed these condi-
tions, any subsequent Legislature might have repealed
the clauses imposing them by simple majorities. But in
any case of a Bill being offered for your assent repealing
these conditions, you will reserve such Bill for her
Majesty’s pleasure.
14. In this way also her Majesty’s Government con-
ceive they are but fulfilling the very important purpose
of allowing full and free reconsideration of the Consti-
tution of the Legislative Council or Upper House.
They have no wish whatever to prejudice the question.
15. Section 5 has been introduced in pursuance of the
opinion given by the law advisers of New South Wales,
and communicated by Sir Charles Fitz Roy’s despatch
of 20th December, 1853* No. 160, and of the
wishes of the Executive Council therein expressed.
It is hoped that the power given to the two Legislatures
to alter this provision by concurrent laws may obviate
any inconvenience which might otherwise be found in
its application.
- 16. Sections 6 and 7 are necessary in order to enable
her Majesty to carry at any future time into effect the
power given by former statutes, and continued by the
local Bill in different words, of separating from New
South Wales such portions of its northern territories
as may appear to require the establishment of an inde-
pendent Government.
17. With respect to the schedule containing the Civil
List, as it is popularly termed, although in effect only an
enactment withholding certain portions-of the regular
expenditure of the colony from being voted in the
annual estimates, her Majesty’s Government have the
fullest reason to recognise the ample nature of the
provision therein made, and to admit that the Legislature
have acted on a very liberal understanding of the
mutual engagements which formed the basis of the
present enactment.
18. It is, however, by no means their wish to enforce
on the colony the observance of the present arrangements
as final. They believe it to be of great importance to
the political well-being of a community, that certain
services of the higher class should be provided for by
law, and not subject to annual vote. But they regard
this as a subject of strictly local, however high, concern,
and they would not be justified in throwing other
obstacles in the way of its reconsideration than what the
local Legislature have themselves thought proper to
raise.
19. But with respect to the holders of present inter-
ests, whether in the salaries or pensions provided for
therein, her Majesty’s Government entertain the opinion,
in which they do not doubt the concurrence of yourself
and the Legislature, that the maintenance of those inter-
ests is incumbent on the Crown in order to keep faith with
individuals, and incumbent on the Legislature in due
execution of its compact with the Crown. I have, there-
fore, to instruct you to reserve for the assent of the
Crown any Bill which may affect such interests (those
namely, of present incumbents) either in such salaries,
or pensions, unless in your discretion you think proper
to negative it.
20. With respect to all other Bills I have no instruc-
tions to convey, other than those implied in the general
rule, that her Majesty’s Government fully recognize in
practice the expediency of leaving local questions to he
dealt with by the local Legislature, although they are not
prepared to admit the practicability of the scheme devised
by the Legislature of New South Wales for classifying
such questions.
21. The only remaining instructions which I have to
convey relate to the introduction of responsible Govern-
ment ; but it is so evident from the provisions of the Co-
lonial Bill before me, that your advisers and the
Legislature have had fully in view the exigencies
of that system, that I am not aware that any special
directions are required from myself. You will shortly
receive a fresh Commission and Instructions, amended in
those particulars which the introduction of that system
renders it necessary to change. There need be no delay
in your bringing the Act into operation, as these docu-
ments will arrive in time for the assembling of the new
Legislature.
23, I need scarcely say that the question of intro-
ducing into the measures lately before Parliament
clauses to establish a Federal Union of the Australian
Colonies for purposes of common interests, has been
very seriously weighed by her Majesty’s Government,
but they have been led to the conclusion that the pre-
sent is not a proper opportunity for such an enactment,
although they will give the fullest consideration to any
propositions on the subject which may emanate in con-
currence from the respective Legislatures.
23. I will now conclude with' the expression of my
sincere hope, and that of her Majesty’s Government, that
the new Institutions thus conferred on New South
Wales, greatly extending, as they do, the powers of self-
government now possessed by its community, may
prove a permanent and solid advantage. It
has been a source of deep satisfaction to her
Majesty’s Government, and to all classes in the mother-
country, to mark the practical evidence which has been
afforded by their Australian fellow-subjects, and fore-
most amongst them, by the people of New South Wales,
of their deep sympathy with her fortunes throughout the
arduous struggle in Which she is now engaged. And at
the same time, the colonists of New South Wales, by
their avowed desire to assimilate their institutions, as
far as possible, to those of the Parent Country, have
proved that this sympathy was not merely the expression
of a common sentiment arising from common origin
but connected with a deliberate attachment to the
ancient laws of the community from which their own
has sprung. Whilst continuing, therefore, to pursue
their present independent career of progress and
prosperity, I have the fullest confidence that they will
combine with it the sedulous maintenance of ties thus
cemented alike by feeling and principle.
I have, &c.,
(Signed; J. RUSSELL,
Governor Sir William Denison,
&c., &c., &c,,
New South Wales.
4


AN ACT
enable JHafcstj) to assent to n 23111, as amenbeb, of tfje of
®lates, “®o confer a Constitution on Scales, anb to grant a Clbll
Hist to JWajestp.”
[l6*A July, 1855.]
WHEREAS the Legislative Council of the Colony of
New South Wales, constituted and assembled by
virtue of and under the authority of an Act of Parliament
passed in the fourteenth year of Her Majesty, chapter
Fifty-nine, intituled “ An Act for the better govern-
ment of her Majesty’s Australian Colonies,” did, in
the year one thousand eight hundred and fifty-three,
pass a bill, intituled “ An Act to confer a Constitution on
New South Wales and to grant a Civil List to Her
Majestyof which Bill, amended as hereinafter provided,
a copy is contained in Schedule (A) to this present Act
annexed: And whereas the said Bill was presented for
Her Majesty’s assent to the then Governor of the said
colony of New South Wales; and the said Governor did
thereupon declare that he reserved the said Bill for the
signification of Her Majesty’s pleasure thereon ; And
whereas it is by the said reserved Bill provided, that the
provisions thereof shall have no force or effect until so
much and such parts of certain Acts of Parliament in
the said Bill specified as relate to the said Colony, and
are repugnant to the said reserved Bill, shall have been
repealed, and the entire management and control of the
Waste Land belonging to the Crown in the said Colony,
and also the appropriation of the gross proceeds of the
sales of any such lands, and of all other proceeds and
revenues of the same, from whatever source arising
within the said colony, including all Royalties, mines,
and minerals, shall be vested in the Legislature of the
said Colony: And whereas it is not competent to Her
Majesty to assent to the said reserved Bill without the
authority of Parliament for that purpose : And whereas
it is expedient that Her Majesty should be authorized to
assent to the said reserved Bill, amended by the omis-
sion of certain provisions thereof, respecting the assent
of the Governor to the Bills which may be passed by the
Legislative Councils and Assemblies of the said Colony,
and Her Majesty’s power to disallow the same, and
respecting the boundaries of the Australian Colonies ;
and that so much and such parts as aforesaid of the said
specified Acts of Parliament should thereupon be re-
pealed ; and that the entire management and control of
the said waste lands and proceeds should be vested in
the Legislature of the said Colony: And whereas a copy
of the said Bill as amended as aforesaid is set forth in
the Schedule (1.) to this Act; Beit therefore enacted
by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the authority of the same, as follows :
I. It shall be lawful for Her Majesty in Council to
assent to the said reserved Bill as amended as aforesaid,
and contained in Schedule (1.) to this present Act
annexed, anything in the said specified Acts of
Parliament, or any other Act, Law, Statute, or Usage
to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding.
11. From the day of the proclamation of this Act in
the said Colony of New South Wales, (the said reserved
Bill, as amended as aforesaid, having been previously
assented to by Her Majesty in Council as aforesaid, ) so
much and such parts of the several Acts of Parliament
mentioned in the Schedule (2.) of this Act as severally
relate to the said Colony of New South Wales, and are
repugnant to the said reserved Bill, amended as afore-
said, shall be repealed; and the entire management and
control of the Waste Lands belonging to the Crown in
the said Colony, and also the appropriation of the gross
proceeds of the sales of any such lands, and of all other
proceeds and revenues of the same, from whatever source
arising within the said colony, including all Royalties,
mines, and minerals, shall be vested in the Legislature
of the said colony : Provided, that so much of the Acts
of the thirteenth and fourteenth years of Her Majesty,
chapter fifty-nine, and fifth and sixth years of Her
Majesty, chapter seventy-six, mentioned in the said
Schedule, as relates to the Constitution, Appointment,
and Powers of the Legislative Council of the said Colony
of New South Wales, shall continue in force until the
first Writs shall have issued for the election of Members
to serve in the House of Assembly, in pursuance of the
provisions of the said reserved Bill, amended and
assented to as aforesaid, but no longer : Provided, that
nothing herein contained shall affect or be construed to
affect any contract, or to prevent the fulfilment of any
promise or engagement made by or on behalf of Her
Majesty with respect to any lands situate in the said
Colony, in cases where such contracts, promises, or
engagements shall have been lawfully made before the
time at which this Act shall take effect within the said
Colony, nor to disturb or in way interfere with, or
prejudice any vested or other rights which have accrued
or belong to the licensed occupants or lessees of any
Crown Lands, within or without the settled districts,
under and by virtue of the provisions of any of the Acts
of Parliament so repealed as aforesaid, or of any Order
or Orders of her Majesty in Council issued in pursuance
thereof.
111. The provisions of the before-mentioned Act of
the fourteenth year of Her Majesty, chapter fifty-nine,
and of the Act of the sixth year of Her Majesty, chapter
seventy-six, intituled “An Act for the Government of
New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land,” which
relate to the giving and withholding of Her Majesty’s
assent to Bills, and the reservation of Bills for the
signification of her Majesty’s pleasure thereon, and the
Instructions to be conveyed to Governors for their
guidance in relation to the matters aforesaid, and the
disallowance of Bills by Her Majesty, shall apply to Bills
to be passed by the Legislative Council and Assembly,
constituted under the said reserved Bill and this Act,
and by any other Legislative body or bodies which may
at any time hereafter be substituted for the present
Legislative Council and Assembly.
IV. It shall be lawful for the Legislature of New South
Wales to make laws altering or repealing all or any of
the provisions of the said reserved Bill, in the same
manner as any other laws for the good government of
the said Colony, subject, however, to the conditions
imposed by the said reserved Bill on the alteration of
the provisions thereof in certain particulars, until and
unless the said conditions shall be repealed or altered
by the authority of the said Legislature.
V. And whereas, by the before-mentioned Act of the
fourteenth year of Her Majesty, chapter fifty-nine, it is
amongst other things enacted that the territories therein
described as bounded on the North and North-east by a
straight line drawn from Cape Howe to the nearest source
of the River Murray, and thence by the course of that
river to the Eastern boundary of the Colony of South
Australia, should be erected into a separate Colony, to
be known and designated as the Colony of Victoria:
And whereas doubts have been entertained as to the
true meaning of the said description of the boundary of
the said Colony, it is hereby declared and enacted, that
the whole watercourse of the said River Murray,
from its source therein described to the eastern
boundary of the Colony of South Australia, is,
and shall be, within the territory of New South
Wales: Provided, nevertheless, that it shall be
lawful for the Legislatures, and for the proper officers of
customs of both the said Colonies of New South Wales
and Victoria, to make regulations for the levying of
Customs Duties on articles imported into the said two
Colonies respectively by way of the River Murray, and
for the punishment of offences against the customs laws
of the said two Colonies respectively committed on the
said river, and for the regulation of the navigation of the
said river, by vessels belonging to the said two Colonies
respectively: Provided also, that it shall be competent
for the Legislatures of the said two Colonies, by laws
passed in concurrence with each other, to define in any


different manner the boundary line of the said two Colo-
nies along the course of the River Murray, and to alter
the other provisions of this section.
YT. If Her Majesty shall at any time exercise the
power given to her by the said reserved Bill, of altering
the Northern boundary of New South Wales, and if she
shall, in the exercise of such power, separate from the
said Colony any entire Electoral Districts, the Electoral
districts so separated shall cease to return Members to
the Assembly of New South Wales; and if she shall, in
the exercise of such power as aforesaid, separate from
the said Colony any portions of Electoral Districts, the
remaining portions not separated shall continue to return
to the said Assembly the same number of Members as if
no such separation had taken place, until the Legislature
of New South Wales shall otherwise provide; and the
said Assembly shall retain, so far as concerns the Colony
of New South Wales, as constituted after such separation,
all the powers and functions vested in it, though it may
not thereafter consist of the same number of Members as
before.
VII. It shall be lawful for Her Majesty, by Letters
Patent, to be from time to time issued under the Great
Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
to Erect into a separate Colony or Colonies any Territories
which may be separated from New South Wales by
such alteration as aforesaid of the Northern boundary
thereof; and in and by such Letters Patent, or by Order
in Council, to make provision for the Government of
any such Colony, and for the establishment of a Legis-
lature therein, in manner as nearly resembling the
form of Government and Legislature which shall be at
such time established in New South Wales as the
circumstances of such Colony will allow; and full power
shall be given in and by such Letters Patent or Order in
Council to the Legislature of the said Colony to make
further provision in that behalf.
VIII. This Act shall be proclaimed in New South
Wales by the Governor thereof, within one month after
a copy thereof shall have been received by such
Governor, and this Act and the said reserved Bill as
amended as aforesaid (such Bill being first assented to
by Her Majesty in Council), shall take effect in the said
Colony from the day of such Proclamation.
IX. In the construction of this Act the term
“ Governor” shall mean the person for the time being
lawfully administering the Government of New South
Wales; and the word “Legislature” shall include as
well the Legislature to be constituted under the said
reserved Bill and this Act, as any future Legislature
which may be established in the said Colony, under the
powers in the said reserved Bill and this Act contained.
An Act to confer a Constitution on New South
Wales, and to grant a Civil List to Her Ma-
jesty.
[Reserved for Her Majesty’s Approval.]
WHEREAS by the thirty-second clause of the Imperial
Act, passed in the Session holden in the thirteenth and
fourteenth years of the Reign of Her present Majesty,
intituled “An Act for the better Government of Her
Majesty’s Australian Colonies," it was among other
things enacted, that notwithstanding anything therein
before contained, it should be lawful for the Governor
and Legislative Council of this Colony, from time to
time, by any Act or Acts, to alter the provisions or laws
for the time being in force under the said Imperial Act
or otherwise, concerning the Election of the Elective
Members of such Legislative Council, and the qualifica-
tion of Electors and Elective Members, or to establish
ip the said Colony, instead of the Legislative Council, a
Council and a House of Representatives, or other
separate Legislative Houses, to consist of such Members,
to be appointed or elected by such persons and in such
manner as by such Act or Acts should be determined,
and to vest in such Council and House of Repre-
sentatives, or other separate Legislative Houses, the
powers and functions of the Legislative Council for
which the same may be substituted ; And whereas it is
expedient that the powers vested by the said Act in the
said Governor and Legislative Council should be exer-
cised, and that a Legislative Council and a Legislative
Assembly, as constituted by this Act, should be substi-
tuted for the present Legislative Council, with the
increased powers and functions hereinafter contained :
Be it therefore enacted, by His Excellency the Governor
of New South Wales, with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council thereof, as follows :
I. (Parliament of New South Wales. General powers
of the Parliament. Assent to Bills. Taxation and Ap-
propriation Bills to originate in Assembly. Bills affect-
ing Imperial Subjects.) There shall be, in place of the
Legislative Council now subsisting, one Legislative
Council and one Legislative Assembly, to be severally
constituted and composed in the manner hereinafter
prescribed; and within the said Colony of New South
Wales Her Majesty shall have power by and with the
advice and consent of the said Council and Assembly to
make laws for the peace, welfare, and good Government
of the said Colony, in all cases whatsoever; and all such
laws being passed by the said Council and Assembly,
and assented to by Her Majesty, or assented to in Her
Majesty’s name by the Governor of the said Colony,
shall be valid and binding to all intents and purposes
within the said Colony : Provided that all Bills for
appropriating any part of the Public Revenue, for im-
posing any new rate, tax, or impost, subject always to the
limitation contained in Clause sixty-two of this Act,
shall originate in the Legislative Assembly of the said
Colony; and further, that all Bills affecting any Imperial
subject may in the discretion of the Governor for the
time being be reserved for the signification of Her
Majesty's pleasure thereon, and if assented to by such
Governor in the first instance, on behalf of Her
Majesty, may be disallowed by Her Majesty in the
manner and within the period hereinafter limited.
11. ( What Bills may be reserved for the signification,
of Her Majesty’s pleasure.) The Bills on Imperial
subjects which may be reserved for the signification of
Her Majesty’s pleasure, or which, after being assented
to by the Governor in Her Majesty's name, may be after-
wards disallowed by Her Majesty within the period
hereinafter specified, are as follow ; that is to say i
1. Bills touching the Allegiance of the Inhabitants
of this Colony to Her Majesty’s Crown.
2. Bills touching the Naturalization of Aliens.
3. Bills relating to Treaties between the Crown and
any Foreign Power.
4. Bills relating to Political Intercourse and Com-
munications between this Colony and any
Officer of a Foreign Power or Dependency.
5. Bills relating to the employment, command, and
discipline of Her Majesty’s Sea and Land
Forces within this Colony, and whatever relates
to the defence of the Colony from foreign ag-
gression, including the command of the Muni-
cipal Militia and Marine.
6. Bills relating to the crime of High Treason.
111. ( Question as to Governor’s right to reserve a Bill,
or of Her Majesty’s right to disallow a Bill, to be de-
termined by Judicial Committee of Privy Council.)
Whenever any question shall arise as to the right of the
Governor to reserve any Bill for the signification of Her
Majesty’s pleasure thereon, or as to the right of Her
Majesty to disallow any such Bill, the same shall be
determined by the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council, and in no other manner except by the consent
of the said Legislature of New South Wales ; and such
question shall be raised by an Address to Her Majesty
in Her Privy Council by both Houses of the said Legis-
lature, setting forth the question so to be determined :
Provided, that all such Bills shall be absolutely in
abeyance pending any such determination, and that they
shall be afterwards submitted for the signification of
Her Majesty’s pleasure thereon, or remitted to the
Colony for the exercise of the Governor’s discretion,
according to the decision of the Judicial Committee in
each such case.
IV. {Appointment of Legislative Councillors.) For
the purpose of composing the Legislative Council of
New South Wales, it shall be lawful for Her Majesty,
before the time to be appointed for the first meeting of
the said Legislative Council and Assembly, by an
Instrument under the Sign Manual, to authorise the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, in
Her Majesty’s name, by an Instrument or Instruments
under the Great Seal of the said Colony, to summon to
the said Legislative Council of the said Colony, such
persons, being not fewer than twenty-one, as the said
Governor and Executive Council shall think fit; and it
shall also be lawful for Her Majesty from time to time
to authorize the Governor in like manner to summon to
the said Legislative Council such other person or persons
as the said Governor and Executive Council shall think
fit; and every person who shall be so summoned shall
thereby become a Member of the Legislative. Council of
the said Colony : Provided always, that no person shall
be summoned to'the said Legislative Council who
shall not be of the full age of twenty-one
years, and a natural born subject of Her Majesty, or
naturalized by an Act of the Imperial Parliament, or by
an Act of the Legislature of the said Colony : Provided
also, that not less than four-fifths of the Members so
6


summoned to the Legislative Council shall consist of
persons not holding any office of emolument under the
Crown, except Officers of Her Majesty’s Sea and Land
Forces on full or half-pay, or Retired Officers on Pen*
sions.
V. {Tenure of office of Councillors.) The Members
of the first Legislative Council of the said Colony who
shall be so summoned by the Governor, with the advice
of the Executive Council, shall hold their respective
seats therein for live years, from the date of the first
Summonses to the said Legislative Council; but all
future Members of the said Legislative Council who
shall he summoned thereto, after the expiration of the
said five years, by the Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council as aforesaid, shall hold their seats
therein for the term of their natural lives, subject,
nevertheless, to the provisions hereinafter contained for
vacating the same, and for altering and amending the
future Constitution of the said Colony as established by
this Act.
VI. {Resignation of Councillors.) It shall be lawful
for any Member of the Legislative Council to resign his
seat therein, by a letter to the Governor, and upon the
receipt of any such letter by the Governor the seat of
such Legislative Councillor shall become vacant.
VII. {Vacating seat by absence.) If anjr Legislative
Councillor shall for two successive Sessions of the
Legislature of the said Colony fail to give his attendance
in the said Legislative Council, without the permission
of Her Majesty: or of the Governor of the Colony, sig-
nified by the said Governor to the Legislative Council,
or shall take any oath or make any declaration or
acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence
to any Foreign Prince or Power, or shall do, concur in,
or adopt, any Act whereby he may become a subject or
citizen of any Foreign State or Power, or whereby he
may become entitled to the rights, privileges, or immu-
nities of a subject or citizen of any Foreign State or
Power, or shall become bankrupt, or take the benefit of
any law relating to insolvent debtors, or become a public
contractor, or defaulter, or be attainted of treason, or be
convicted of felony, or of any infamous crime, his seat in
such Council shall thereby become vacant.
VIII. ( Trial of questions of vacancy.) Any question
which shall arise respecting any vacancy in the Legisla-
tive Council, on occasion of any of the matters aforesaid,
shall be referred by the Governor to the said Legislative
Council, to be by the said Legislative Council heard and
determined : Provided always, that it shall be lawful
either for the person respecting whose seat such questions
shall have arisen, or for Her Majesty’s Attorney-General
for the said Colony, on Her Majesty’s behalf, to appeal
from the determination of the said Council in such case
to Her Majesty ; and that the judgment of Her Majesty,
given with the advice of Her Privy Council, thereon shall
be final and conclusive to all intents and purposes.
IX. (Appointment of President. President may take
part in debates.) The Governor of the Colony
shall have power and authority from time to
time, by an Instrument under the Great Seal of the
said Colony, to appoint one Member of the said Legisla-
tive Council to be President thereof, and to remove him
and appoint another in his stead; and it shall be at all
times lawful for the said President to take part in any
debate or discussion which may arise in the said Legis-
lative Council.
X. {Quorum, division, casting vote.) The presence
of at least one-third of the Members of the
said Legislative Council, exclusive of the Pre-
sident, shall be necessary to constitute a
Quorum for the dispatch of business; and all
questions which shall arise in the said Legislative
Council shall be decided by a majority of votes of the
Members present, other than the President;, and when
the votes shall be equal,, the President shall have the
casting vote : Provided always, that if the whole number
of Members constituting the said Legislative Council
shall not be exactly divisible by three, the Quorum of
the said Legislative Council shall consist of such whole
number as is next greater than one-third of the Members
of the said Legislative Council.
XI. {Convoking Assembly.) For the purpose of con-
stituting the Legislative Assembly of the said Colony, it
shall be lawful for the Governor thereof, within the time
hereinafter mentioned, and thereafter from time to time,
as occasion shall require, in Her Majesty’s name, by an
Instrument or Instruments under the Great Seal of the
said Colony, to summon and call together a Legislative
Assembly in and for the said Colony.
XII. {Number of Members of Assembly.) The Legis-
lative Assembly shall for the present consist of fifty-four
Members, to be elected by the Inhabitants of the said
Colony, having any of the qualifications mentioned in
the next succeeding clause of this Act.
XIII. {Qualification of Electors.) The qualifications
for Electors of the Legislative Assembly shall he as
follows: —Every man of the age of twenty-one years,
being a natural born or naturalized subject of Her
Majesty, or legally made a denizen of New South Wales,
and having a freehold estate in possession, situate
within the district for which his vote is to be given, of
the clear value of one hundred pounds sterling money,
above all charges and incumbrances in any wap affecting
the same, of or to which he has been seised or entitled,
either at Law or in Equity, for at least six calendar
months next before the last registration of electors ; or
being a householder within such district, occupying any
house, warehouse, counting house, office, shop, or other
building of the clear annual value of ten pounds sterling
money, and having occupied the same for six calendar
months next before such registration as aforesaid ; or
having a leasehold estate in possession, situate within
such district, of the value of ten pounds sterling money
per annum, held Upon a lease which at the time of such
registration has not less than three years to rUn, or
having a leasehold estate so situate and of stich value as
aforesaid, of which he has been in possession for three
years or upwards next before such registration; or hold-
ing at the time of such registration a license from tire
Government to depasture lands within the district for
which his vote is to be given; or having a salary of
one hundred pounds a year, and having enjoyed the
same for six calendar months next before such registra-
tion ; or being the occupant of any room or lodging, and
paying for his board and lodging forty pounds a year, or
for his lodging only at the rate of ten pounds a year, and
having occupied the same room or lodging for six
calendar months next before such registration as afore-
said, shall be entitled to vote at the election of a Mem-
ber of the Legislative Assembly: Provided always, that
no man shall be entitled to vote who has been attainted
or convicted of treason, felony, or other infamous
offence, in any part of Her Majesty’s Dominions, unless
he have received a free or conditional pardon for such
offence, or have undergone the sentence passed on him
for such Offence ; and provided also, that no man shall
be entitled to vote, unless at the time of such registra-
tion of electors, he shall have paid up all rates and taxes
which shall have become payable by him as owner or
leaseholder in respect of such estate, or as occupier in
respect of such occupancy, or as the holder of a license
in respect of such license, except such as shall have
become payable during three calendar months next
before such registration.
XIV. ffVhen joint owners and occupiers shall he
entitled to he registered as voters and to vote.) Where
any premises are jointly owned, occupied, or held on
lease within the meaning of the last preceding clause,
by more persons than one, each of such joint owners,
occupiers, or leaseholders shall be entitled to be regis-
tered as a voter and to vote in respect of the said
premises, in case the value of his individual interest
therein, separately considered, would, under the first
four provisions of the said last preceding section, entitle
such owner, occupier, or leaseholder to he registered as
a voter and to vote.
XV. {Division of the Colony into Electoral Districts,
and the number of Members to be returned by each.)
Until further provision shall be made by the Legislature
of the said Colony, all the provisions contained in “ the
Electoral Act of 1851,” passed by the late Legislative
Council in the fourteenth year of Her Majesty’s reign,
numbered forty-seven, except so much of the first
clause thereof as relates to the number and
constitution of the present Legislative Council, and
so much of the third and other clauses thereof
as is repugnant to this Act, shall be in force and apply
to the election of Members to serve in the Legislative
Assembly constituted under this Act, except as
follows :
f Electoral Districts.) The Electoral Districts of East
Camden and West Camden shall each return two
members instead of one member to serve in the
said Legislative Assembly ; the Electoral District of
the United Counties of Cook and Westmoreland
shall return two members ; the Counties of
Murray, Saint Vincent, Roxburgh, and Wellington,
shall each form an Electoral District, and each
return one member; the County of Cumberland
shall be divided into two Ridings, to be called the
North and South Ridings ; the North Riding com-
mencing where the Great Western Road crosses
Johnstone’s Creek, and bounded on the south by
the centre of that road, bearing westerly to where
it crosses the southern boundary of the Electoral
District of Parramatta, near Beckett’s Bridge ;
thence by part of the southern, by the eastern,
northern, and western boundaries of the said Elec-
toral District, to the Great Western Road near the
7


Toll-bar ; thence again by the centre of that road,
bearing westerly to Emu Ferry on the Nepean
River; on the west and north by the Nepean and
Hawkesbury Rivers to Broken Bay; and on the
east by the sea coast and the southern shores of
Port Jackson to Johnstone’s Creek, and by John-
stone’s Creek to the point of commencement; exclu-
sive of the Hamlets of Saint Leonard’s and Bal-
main, and also, excluding so much of the Cumber-
land Boroughs as is embraced by the Towns of
Windsor and Richmond, and also so much of the
Borough of Penrith as is situated on the north side
of the Western Road ; and the South Riding, com-
mencing where the Great Western Road crosses
Johnstone’s Creek, and bounded on the north by
the centre of that road; bearing westerly to where
it crosses the southern boundary of the Electoral
District of the Town of Parramatta, near Beckett’s
Bridge ; thence by part of the southern boundary
of the said Electoral District, bearing westerly to
the Great Western Road near the Toll-bar ; thence
again by the centre of that road, bearing westerly
to Emu Ferry on the Nepean River ; on the west by
that river upwards to the confluence of the Cataract
River ; on the south by that river upwards to its
source, and thence by,a line bearing east twenty
degrees south to the coast at Bulli, being the
southern boundary of the County of Cumberland ;
on the east by the sea coast to Port Jackson; and
again on the north by the southern shores of Port
Jackson to Johnstone’s Creek, and by Johnstone’s
Creek to the point of commencement; exclusive of
the City of Sydney, and the Hamlets of Paddington,
Surry Hills, Redfern, Chippendale, O’Connell
Town, Camperdown, and Glebe, and also exclud-
ing so much of the Cumberland Boroughs as is
embraced by the Towns of Liverpool and Campbell
Town, and also so much of the Borough of Penrith
as is situated on the south side of the Western
Road ; and each of the said Ridings shall return
two members ; the United Counties of Northumber-
land and Hunter shall return three members
instead of two ; the County of Durham shall
return three members instead of two ; the City
of Sydney shall return four members instead of
three; the Sydney Hamlets, the Town of Parra-
matta, the Northumberland Boroughs, and the
Stanley Boroughs shall each return two members
instead of one member ; the Electoral Districts of
the Pastoral Districts of the. Murrumbidgee, of the
.Lachlan and Lower Darling, of Liverpool Plains
and the Gwydir, and of New. England and the
McLeay, shall each return two members instead of
one member to serve in the said Legislative Assem-
bly as aforesaid.
XVI. {Electoral Lists.) The new classes of Electors
entitled to vote by this Act at the election of Members
of the Legislative Assembly, shall be inserted in the
Electoral Lists, appointed to be made by “ the Electoral
Act of 1851,” in the Electoral Districts in which they
shall be respectively resident; and all such lists shall
specify the Christian and Surnames of all such Electors,
the nature of the qualification, and the place where they
respectively reside ; and all such lists shall be signed,
delivered, printed, and hung up for public inspection by
the persons and in the way in the said Act prescribed,
and shall be subject to the like claims
and notice from, any person whose name shall
have been omitted therein, and to the like
objections and notice as to the names of any person
inserted therein, and to the like modes of altering,
amending, or continuing any such lists, as are in these
said several respects provided for in the said “ Electoral
Act of 1851,” as nearly as may be, consistently with the
rights of such new Electors.
XVII. (Power to alter System of Representation.) It
shall be lawful for the Legislature of the Colony, by. any
Act or Acts to be hereafter passed, to alter the divisions
and extent of the several Counties, Districts, Cities,
Towns, Boroughs, and Hamlets, which shall be repre-
sented in the Legislative Assembly, and ,to establish new
and other divisions of the same, and to alter the
apportionment of Representatives to be chosen by the
said Counties, Districts, Cities, Towns, Boroughs,., and
Hamlets respectively, and to alter the number of Eepre-
sentatives to be chosen in and for the Colony, and in
and for the several Electoral Districts in the same, and
to alter and regulate the appointment of Returning
Officers, and make such new and other provision
as they may deem expedient for the issuing and return
of Writs for the election of Members to serve in the
said Legislative Assembly, and the time and place of
holding such Elections: Provided always that it shall not
be lawful to present to the Governor, of the Colony, for
Her Majesty’s Assent, any Bill Ly which the number or
apportionment of Eepresentatives in the Legislative
Assembly may be altered, unless the second and third
readings of such Bill in the Legislative Council and the
Legislative Assembly respectively shall have been
passed with the concurrence of a majority of the Mem-
bers for the time being of the said Legislative Council,
and of two-thirds of the Members for the time being of
the said Legislative Assembly ; and the Assent of Her
Majesty shall not be given to any such Bill unless an
Address shall have been presented by the Legislative
Assembly to the Governor, stating that such Bill has
been so passed.
XYIIL {Qualification of Members of Assembly.) Any
person absolutely free (except as is hereinafter excepted)
who shall be qualified and registered as a voter in and
for any Electoral District within the said Colony, shall
be qualified to be elected a Member of the Legislative
Assembly for any Electoral District within the said
Colony.
XIX. ( Members of Legislative Council incapable of
being Members of Legislative Assembly.) No person
being a Member of the Legislative Council shall be
capable of being elected or of sitting or voting as a
Member of the Legislative Assembly.
XX. {Disqualifying clause of Members of Assembly.)
Any person holding any Office of profit under the
Crown, or having a Pension from the Crown during
pleasure, or for term of years, shall be incapable of
being elected or of sitting or voting as a Member of
the Legislative Assembly unless he be one of the follow-
ing Official Members of the Government, that is to say,
the Colonial Secretary, Colonial Treasurer, Auditor-
General, Attorney-General, and Solicitor-General, or
one of such additional Officers, not being more than
five, as the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, may from time to time, by a notice in the
Government Gazette, declare capable of being elected a
Member of the said Assembly.
XXI. {Further disqualifying clause of Members of As-
sembly. Pensions of Officers of the Navy and Army.) If
any Member of the said Assembly shall accept of any
Office of profit or Pension from the Crown during plea-
sure, or for term of years, his election shall be there-
upon and is hereby declared to be void, and a Writ shall
forthwith issue for a new election : Provided that no-
thing in this Act contained shall extend to any person
in receipt only of Pay, Half-pay, or a Pension as an
Officer in Her Majesty’s Navy or Army, or who shall
receive any new or other Commission in the Navy or
Army respectively, or any increase of pay on such Com-
mission; ..or to any of the official members of the Go-
vernment, or other Officers referred to in the last pre-
ceding clause 'of this Act who may accept any other
office.
XXII. ( Disqualifying Ministers of religion.) No per-
son shall be capable of being elected a Member to serve
in the said Assembly, and of sitting and voting therein,
who shall be a Minister of the Church of England, or a
a Minister, Priest, or Ecclesiastic, either according to
the rites of the Church of Rome, or under any other
form or profession of religious faith or worship.
XXIII. {Duration of Assembly.) Every Legislative
Assembly of the said Colony, hereafter to be summoned
and chosen, shall continue for five years from the day of
the return of the Writs for choosing the same, and no
longer, subject, nevertheless, to be sooner prorogued or
dissolved by the Governor of the said Colony.
XXIV. (Election of the Speaker.) The Members of
the Legislative Assembly shall, upon the first assem-
bling after every General Election, proceed forthwith to
elect one of their number to be Speaker; and in case of
his death, resignation, or removal by a vote of the said
Legislative Assembly, the said Members shall forthwith
proceed to elect another of such Members to be such
Speaker; and the Speaker so elected shall preside at all
Meetings of the said Legislative Assembly, except as
may be provided by the Standing Rules and Orders
hereinafter authorized to be made.
XXV. ( Quorum , division, casting vote.) The presence
of at least twenty Members of the Legislative Assembly,
exclusive of the Speaker, shall be necessary to consti-
tute a meeting of the said Legislative Assembly fdr the
dispatch of business; and all questions (except as herein
is excepted) which shall arise in the said Assembly
shall be decided by the majority of votes of such Mem-
bers as shall be present, other than the Speaker ; and
when the votes shall be equal the Speaker shall have
the casting vote.
. XXVI. {Assembly may proceed to business, although
Writs not exceeding five shall not have been returned.)
Upon any General Election the Legislative Assembly
shall be competent to proceed to the dispatch of business
at the time appointed by the. Governor for that purpose;
notwithstanding that any of the Writs of Election (not
8


exceeding five) shall not have been returned, or that in
any of the Electoral Districts the Electors shall have
failed to elect a Member to serve in the said Assembly.
XXYII. ( Resignation of seats in the Assembly.) It
shall be lawful for any Member of the Assembly, by
writing under his hand, addressed to the Speaker of the
said House, to resign his seat therein, and upon the
receipt of such resignation by the Speaker, the seat of
such Member shall become vacant.
XXVIII. {Vacating seats of Members of Assembly in
certain cases.) If any Member of the Assembly shall
for one whole Session of the Legislature, without the
permission of the Assembly, entered upon its Journals,
fail to give his attendance in the said House, or shall
take any oath or make any declaration or acknowledg-
ment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence to any
Foreign Prince or Power, or do or concur in or adopt
any act whereby he may become a subject or citizen of
any Foreign State or Power, or become entitled to the
rights, privileges, or immunities of a subject of any
Foreign State or Power, or shall become bankrupt or an
insolvent debtor within the meaning of the laws in force
within the said Colony relating to bankrupts or insolvent
debtors, or shall become a public defaulter, or be at-
tainted of treason, or be convicted of felony or any in-
famous crime, his seat in such Assembly shall thereby
become vacant.
XXIX. {Election to take place on vacancies.) When
and so often as a vacancy shall occur as aforesaid, upon
a Resolution by the Assembly declaring such vacancy and
the causes thereof, the Speaker shall cause a Writ to be
issued for supplying such vacancy: Provided that the
Speaker may issue such Writ without such preceding
Resolution, when the Assembly is not in Session.
XXX. {Disqualifying contractors and persons inter-
ested in contracts from being members of either House.
Proviso exempting from disqualification members of com-
panies exceeding twenty in number.) Any person who
shall directly or indirectly himself, or by any person
whatsoever in trust for him, or for his use or benefit, or
on his account, undertake, execute, hold, or enjoy, in
the whole, or in part, any contract or agreement for or
on account of the public service, shall be incapable of
being summoned or elected or of sitting or voting as a
Member of the Legislative Council or Legislative As-
sembly during the time he shall execute, hold, or enjoy
any such contract, or any part or share thereof, or any
benefit or emolument arising from the same; and if any
person being a member of such Council or Assembly
shall enter into any such contract or agreement, or
having entered into it shall continue to hold it, his seat
shall be declared by the said Legislative Council or Le-
gislative Assembly, as the case may require, to be void,
and thereupon the same shall become and be void ac-
cordingly : Provided always, that nothing herein con-
tained shall extend to any contract or agreement made,
entreed into, or accepted by any incorporated company
or any trading company consisting of more than twenty
persons, where such contract or agreement shall be made,
entered into, or accepted, for the general benefit of such
incorporated or trading company.
XXXI. {Election of disqualified persons void. Penalty
on their sitting or voting.) If any person by this Act
disabled or declared to be incapable to sit or vote in the
Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly, shall never-
theless be summoned to the said Council or elected and
returned as a Member to serve in the said Assembly for
any electoral district, such summons, or election," and
return, shall and may be declared by the said Council or
Assembly, as the case may require, to be void, and there-
upon the same shall become and be void to all intents
and purposes whatsoever; and if any person under any
of the disqualifications mentioned in the last pre-
ceding section, shall whilst so disqualified presume to
sit or vote as a Member of the said Council or Assembly,
such person shall forfeit the sum of five hundred pounds,
to be recovered by any person who shall sue for the
same in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
XXXII. (Place, and time of holding Parliament.) It
shall be lawful for the Governor of the Colony for the
time being, to fix such place or places within any part of
the Colony, and such times for holding the first and every
other Session of the Legislative Council and Assembly
of the said Colony, as he may think fit, such times and
places to be afterwards changed or varied as the Gover-
nor may judge advisable and most consistent with gene-
ral convenience and the public welfare, giving sufficient
notice thereof; and also to prorogue the said Legislative
Council and Assembly from time to time, and to dissolve
the said Assembly by Proclamation or otherwise, when-
ever he shall deem it expedient.
XXXIII. {One Session of Parliament to be held in each
year.) There shall be a Session of the Legislative
Council and Assembly once at least in every year; so
that aperiod of twelve calendar months shall not intervene
between the last sitting of the Legislative Council and
Assembly in one Session, and the first Sitting of the
Legislative Council and Assembly in the next Session.
XXXIV. {First calling together of Parliament.) The
Legislative Council and Assembly shall be called toge-
ther for the first time at some period not later than six
calendar months next after the Proclamation of this Act
by the Governor of the said Colony.
XXXV. {No Member to sit or vote until he has taken
the following Oath of Allegiance.) No member, either
of the Legislative Council or of the Legislative Assem-
bly, shall be permitted to sit or vote therein until he
shall have taken and subscribed the following oath before
the Governor of the Colony, or before some person or
persons authorized by such Governor to administer such
oath:—
“ I, A. 8., do sincerely promise and swear, that I will
“ be faithful and bear true Allegiance to Her Majesty
“ Queen Victoria, as lawful Sovereign of the United-
“ Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of this
“ Colony of New South Wales, dependent on and belong-
“ ing to the said United Kingdom. So help me God.”
And whensover the demise of Her present Ma-
jesty, (whom may God long preserve,) or of
any of Her Successors to the Crown of the said
United Kingdom, shall be notified by the Governor of
the Colony to the said Council and Assembly respectively,
the Members of the said Council and Assembly shall,
before they shall be permitted to sit and vote therein,
take and subscribe the like Oath of Allegiance to the
Successor for the time being to the said Crown.
XXXVI. {Affirmation maybe made instead of oath.)
Provided that every person authorized by law to make
an affirmation instead of taking an oath, may make such
affirmation in every case in which an oath is herein-
before required to be taken.
XXXVII. {Standing Rules and Orders to be made.)
The said Legislative Council and Assembly, in the first
Session of each respectively, and from time to time
afterwards as there shall be occasion, shall prepare and
adopt such Standing Rules and Orders as shall appear
to the said Council and Assembly respectively best
adapted for the orderly conduct of such Council and
Assembly respectively, and for the manner in which such
Council and Assembly shall be presided over in case of
the absence of the President or the Speaker, and for the
mode in which such Council and Assembly shall confer,
correspond, and communicate with each other relative to
Votes or Bills passed by or pending in such Council and
Assembly respectively, and for the manner in which
notices of Bills, Resolutions, and other business
intended to be submitted to such Council and Assembly
respectively, at any Session thereof, may be published
for general information, and for the proper passing,
entitling, and numbering of the Bills to be introduced
into and passed by the said Council and Assembly, and
for the proper presentation of the same to the
Governor for the time being, for Her Majesty’s Assent ;
all of which Rules and Orders shall, by such Council and
Assembly respectively, be laid before the Governor, and,
being by him approved, shall become binding and of
force.
XXXVIII. {Bills presented to the Governor for Assent.)
Every Bill which has been passed by the Legislative
Council and Assembly, shall be presented for Her
Majesty’s Assent to the Governor of the said Colony,
and the Governor, in all Bills relating to the local or
municipal affairs of the said Colony, shall declare at once
according to his discretion that he assents to such Bill
in Her Majesty’s name, or that he withholds Her
Majesty’s Assent; and in all Bills touching or affecting
any Imperial subject, the Governor shall declare accord-
ing to his discretion, but subject nevertheless to the
provisions contained in this Act, and to such Instructions
as may from time to time be given in that behalf by Her
Majesty, Her Heirs, or Successors, that he assents to
such Bill in Her Majesty’s name, or that he withholds
Her Majesty’s Assent, or that he reserves such Bill for
the signification of Her Majesty’s pleasure thereon.
XXXIX. (Disallowance of Bills Assented to.) When-
ever any Bill affecting any Imperial subject which shall
have been presented for Her Majesty’s Assent to the
Governor of the Colony, shall by such Governor have
been Assented to in Her Majesty’s name, the Governor
shall by the first convenient opportunity transmit to one
of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, an
authentic copy of such Bill so assented to ; and it shall
be lawful at any time, within six calendar months after
such Bill shall have been so received by the Secretary of
State, for Her Majesty by Order in Council to declare
Her disallowance of such Bill; and such disallowance,
together with a certificate under the hand and seal of
the Secretary of State, certifying the day on which such
Bill was received as aforesaid, being signified by the
9


Governor to the Legislative Council and Assembly of the
said Colony, by Speech or Message to the said Council,
or by Proclamation in the New South Wales Government
Gazette, shall make void and annul the same from and
after the day of such signification.
XL. (Reserved Bill not to have force until Governor
shall signify Her Majesty’s Assent thereto.) No Bill which
shall be so reserved for the signification of Her Majesty’s
pleasure thereon shall have any force or authority within
the said Colony until the Governor shall signify either
by Speech or Message to the said Legislative Council
and Assembly, or by Proclamation, that such Bill has
been laid before Her Majesty in Council, and that Her
Majesty has been pleased to assent to the said Bill; and
no Bill which shall be so reserved as_ aforesaid, shall
have any force or authority in the said Colony unless
Her Majesty’s Assent thereto shall have been so signified
as aforesaid, within the space of eighteen calendar
months from the day on which such Bill shall have been
presented for Her Majesty’s Assent to the Governor as
aforesaid.
XLI. (Entry of Message or Proclamation notifijing
Disallowance of Bills or Assent to reserved Bills to be
made in Journals.) In either of the cases mentioned in
the last two preceding clauses, an entry shall be made in
the Journals of the said Legislative Council and Assembly
of every such Speech, Message, or Proclamation, and a
duplicate thereof, duly attested, shall be delivered to the
Registrar of the Supreme Court, or other proper officer,
to be kept among the Records of the said Colony.
XLII. ( Legislature, as constructed by this Act,
empowered to alter any of its provisions.) Notwithstand-
ing anything hereinbefore contained, the Legislature of
the said Colony as constituted by this Act shall have
full power and authority, from time to time, by any Act
or Acts, to alter the provisions or laws for the time being
in force under this Act or otherwise, concerning the
Legislative Council, the nomination of election of another
Legislative Council, to consist respectively of such
Members to he appointed or elected respectively by such
person or persons, and in such manner as by such Act or
Acts shall he determined : Provided alw r ays, that it shall
not he lawful to present to the Governor of the said
Colony, for Her Majesty’s Assent, any Bill by which any
such alteration in the Constitution of the said Colony
may he made, unless the second and third readings of
such Bill shall have been passed with the concurrence
of two-thirds of the Members for the time being of the
said Legislative Council and of the said Legislative
Assembly respectively ; Provided also, that every Bill
which shall be so passed for any of such purposes, shall
he reserved for the signification of Her Majesty’s pleasure
thereon, and a copy of such Bill shall be laid before
both Houses of the"lmperial Parliament for the period
of thirty days at the least before Her Majesty’s pleasure
thereon shall be signified.
XT JIT. (Governor in certain cases to conform to Her
Majesty’s Instructions.) It shall he lawful for Her
Majesty, with the advice of Her Privy Council, or under
Her Majesty’s Signet and Sign Manual, through one of
Her Principal Secretaries of State, from time to time to
convey to the Governor of New South Wales such In-
structions as to Her Majesty shall seem meet for the
guidance of such Governor in the exercise of the powers
hereby vested in him of assenting to or dissenting from,
or for reserving for the signification of Her Majesty s
pleasure, Bills to he passed by the said Legislative
Council and Assembly, affecting any Imperial Subject,
and so that such Instructions do not in any way fetter
the Governor’s discretion in giving or refusing Her
Majesty’s Assent to Bills of mere local or municipal
concernment.
XLIV. (Appointment to offices under the Government
of the Colony to be vested in the Governor.) The appoint-
ment to all Public Offices under the Government of the
Colony hereafter to become vacant or to he created,
whether such offices be salaried or not, shall be vested
in the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, with the exception of the appointments of th e
Officers liable to retire from office on political grounds
as hereinafter mentioned, which appointments shall be
vested in the Governor alone : Provided always, that
this enactment shall not extend to minor appointments,
which, by Act of the Legislature or by order of the Go-
vernor and Executive Council, may be vested in heads of
Departments, or other officers or persons within the
Colony.
XLY. (Judges continued in the enjoyment of their
offices during their good behaviour, notwithstanding any
demise of the Crown. ) The Commissions of the present
Judges of the Supreme Court of the said Colony, and of
all future Judges thereof, shall be, continue, and remain
in full force during their good behaviour, notwithstand-
ing the demise of Her Majesty, (whom may God long
preserve,) or of Her Heirs and Successors, any law,
usage, or practice to the contrary thereof in anywise
notwithstanding.
XLYI. (But they may be removed by the Crown on the
Address of Parliament.) It shall he lawful, nevertheless,
for Her Majesty, Her Heirs, and Successors, to remove
any such Judge or Judges upon the Address of both
Houses of the Legislature of this Colony.
XLVII. (Their salaries secured during the continuance
of their Commissions.) Such Salaries as are settled upon
the Judges for the time being by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise, and also such Salaries as shall or may be in
future granted by her Majesty, Her Heirs, and Succes-
sors, or otherwise, to any future Judge or Judges of the
said Supreme Court, shall in all time coming be paid
and payable to every such Judge and Judges for the
time being, so long as the Patents or Commissions of
them, or any of them, respectively, shall continue and
remain in force.
XLYIII. (Existing Laics saved.) All Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances which at the time of the passing of this
Act shall be in force within the said Colony, shall
remain and continue to be of the same force, authority,
and effect, as if this Act had not been made, except in
so far as the same are repealed or varied by this Act, or
in so far as the same shall or may hereafter by virtue
and under the authority of this Act be repealed or
varied by any Act or Acts of the Legislature of the said
Colony.
XLIX. (Courts of Justice, Commissions, Officers, <&c.)
All the Courts of Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction within
the said Colony, and all charters, legal commissions,
powers, and authorities, and all officers, judicial, admin-
istrative, or ministerial, within the said Colony
respectively, except in so far as the same may be
abolished, altered, or varied by, or may be inconsistent
with, the provisions of this Act, or shall be abolished,
altered, or varied by any Act or Acts of the Legislature
of the Colony, or other competent authority, shall con-
tinue to subsist in the same form and with the same
effect as if this Act had not been made.
L. ( Legislature empowered to make laws regulating
sale and other disposal of Waste Lands.) Subject to the
provisions herein contained, it shall be lawful for the
Legislature of this Colony to make laws for regulating
the sale, letting, disposal, and occupation of the Waste
Lands of the Crown within the said Colony.
LI. (Duties not to be levied on supplies for Troops, nor
any duties inconsistent with Treaties.) It shall not be
lawful for the Legislature of the Colony to levy any duty
upon articles imported bona fide for the supply of
Her Majesty’s Land or Sea Forces, nor to levy any duty,
impose any prohibition or restriction, or grant any
exemption from any drawback or other privilege upon
the importation or exportation of any articles, nor to
enforce any dues or charges upon shipping contrary to
or at variance with any treaty or treaties concluded by
Her Majesty with any Foreign Power.
LII. (Customs Duties may be imposed not differential
though contrary to existing Acts of Parliament.) Subject
to the provisions of this Act, and notwithstanding any
Act or Acts of the Imperial Parliament now in force to
the contrary, it shall be lawful for the Legislature of the
Colony to impose and levy such Duties of Customs as
to them may seem fit, on the importation into the Colony
of any goods, wares, and merchandise whatsoever,
whether the produce of, or exported from, the United
Kingdom or any of the Colonies or Dependencies of the
United Kingdom, or any Foreign country: Provided
always that no new duty shall be so imposed upon the
importation into the said Colony of any article the pro-
duce or manufacture of, or imported from, any particular
country or place which shall not be equally imposed on
the importation into the said Colony of the like article
the produce or manufacture of, or exported from, all
other countries and places whatsoever.
LIIL (Boundaries of the Colony.) For the purpose of
this Act, the boundaries of the Colony of New Soittb
Wales shall, except as hereinafter excepted, comprise all
that portion of Her Majesty’s Territory of Australia or
New Holland lying between the one hundred and
twenty-ninth and one hundred and fifty-fourth degrees
of East longitude, reckoning from the Meridian of
Greenwich, and northward of the fortieth degree of
South latitude, including all the Islands adjacent hi the
Pacific Ocean, within the latitude aforesaid, and also
including Lord Howe Island, being in or about the
latitude of thirty-one degrees thirty minutes South, and
the one hundred and fifty-ninth degree of East longi-
tude, reckoning from the said Meridian of Greenwich,
save and except the Territories comprised within the
boundaries of the Province of South Australia, and the
Colony of Victoria, as at present established : Provided
al ways, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to prevent Her Majesty from altering the boundary of
the Colony of New South Wales, on the North, in such
10


maimer as to Her Majesty may seem fit ; nor from
detaching from the said Colony that portion of the same
which lies between the Western boundary of South
Australia and the one hundred and twenty-ninth degree
East longitude, reckoning from the said Meridian of
Greenwich.
LIV. {Boundaries of the Colonies of Neiv South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia, not to be altered without
Legislative sanction of the Colony parting with its
territory.) No alteration, except as is provided in the
last preceding clause, shall take place in the boundaries
of the respective Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria,
or South Australia, unless the Assent ef the Colony
losing any portion of its territory by such alienation
shall be expressed in some Legislative provision of such
Colony,
(Preamble to Civil List Clauses.) And whereas the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, constituted
under the Imperial Act passed in the Session holden in
the thirteenth and fourteenth years of the Reign of
Her present Majesty, intituled, “An Act for the better
Government of Her Majesty's Australian Colonies,” are
desirous that Her Majesty should owe to the sponta-
neous liberality of Her people in this Colony such grant
by way of Civil List, in lieu of the provision contained
in the Schedule to that Act, as shall be sufficient to give
stability and security to the Civil Institutions of the
Colony, and to provide for the adequate remuneration of
able and efficient Officers in the Executive, Judicial, and
other departments of Her Majesty’s Colonial Service;
the granting of which Civil List belongs constitutionally
only to Her Majesty’s faithful people, through their
Representatives in the said Legislative Council; and
Her Majesty’s most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Mem-
bers of the said Legislative Council, in Council assembled,
being desirous that a certain competent revenue for the
purpose may be settled upon Her Majesty, (to whom
may God grant a long and happy reign,) as ta testimony
of their unfeigned affection to Her Majesty’s person
and Government, have accordingly freely resolved, in
lieu of the aforesaid statutable provision for the like
purpose, to grant to Her Majesty, Her Heirs and Suc-
cessors, a certain revenue payable out of the con-
solidated Revenue Lund of this Colony: Be it therefore
further enacted as follows :
LY, (All duties and revenues to form Consolidated
Revenue Fund.) All taxes, imposts, rates, and duties, and
all Territorial, Casual, and other Revenues of the Crown
(including Royalties) from whatever source arising
within this Colony, and over which the present or future
Legislature has or may have power of appropriation,
shall form one Consolidated Revenue Fund, to be appro-
priated for the public service of this Colony, in the
manner and subject to the charges hereinafter men-
tioned.
LVI. {Such fund permanently charged with expenses of
collection.) The Consolidated Revenue Fund of this
Colony shall be permanently charged with .all the costs,
charges, and expenses incident to the collection, manage-
ment, and receipt thereof, such costs, charges, and
expenses being subject nevertheless- to he reviewed and
audited in such manner as shall he directed by any Act
of the Legislature.
LVII. {Civil List of T 64,300 payable to Her Majesty.)
There shall be payable in every year to Her Majesty,
Her Heirs and Successors, out of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund of this Colony, the several sums not
exceeding in the whole the sum of sixty-four thousand
and three hundred pounds, for defraying the expense of
the several services and purposes named in the Schedules
A, B, and C, to this Act annexed; the said several sums
to he issued by the Colonial Treasurer in discharge of
such Warrant or Warrants as shall be from time to time
directed under the hand of the Governor ; and the said
Treasurer shall account to Her Majesty for the same
through the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s
Treasury, in such manner and form as Her Majesty
shall be graciously pleased to direct.
LYIII. (Civil List to be accompanied by surrender of
all Revenues of the Crown.) The said several sums
mentioned in Schedules A, B, and C, shall be accepted
and taken by Her Majesty, Her Heirs, and Successors,
by way of Civil List, instead of all Territorial, Casual,
and other Revenues of the Crown (including all
Royalties ) from whatever source arising within the said
Colony, and to the disposal of which the Crown may
be entitled either absolutely or conditionally, or other-
wise howsoever.
LIX. {Pensions payable to Judges of Supreme Court.
Pensions payable to certain officers liable to removal from
office on political grounds. Provisoes in reference to
Judges and such officers.) Not more than four thousand
five hundred and fifty pounds in each year shall he pay-
able for Pensions to the Judges of the Supreme Court,
out of the sum set apart for Pensions in the said Sche-
dule B ; and not more than five thousand nine hundred
pounds in each year shall be payable by way of Pension
or Retiring Allowance for the present incumbents <jf
any oiiice or department mentioned in the said Schedule
B, who, on political grounds, may retire or be released
from any such office or department; Provided always,
that Pensions shall be demandable by such Judges, to
the amount of seven-tenths of their actual salaries on
permanent disability or infirmity, or after fifteen years
service as such Judge in this Colony ; and that, so far
as the present Judges are concerned, every three years
service in any Judicial Office in this Colony, other than
the Office of a Judge of the Supreme Court, shall he
equivalent to one year’s service as such Judge of the
Supreme Court: Provided also, that the Officers so lia-
ble to retire or be released shall be the Attorney-
General apd Solicitor-General, the Colonial Secretary,
Colonial Treasurer, and Auditor-General; and upon
the retirement or release from Office of any of the
present Officers, they shall be entitled by way of Pen-
sion or Retiring Allowance to the full amount of the
salaries respectively received hy them at the time of
the passing of this Act :■ Provided also, that if, after the
assignment of any such Pension or Retiring Allowance,
any of such Judges or Officers shall accept any new ap-
pointment under the Crown, then and in every such
case the Pension or Retiring Allowance of any such
Judge or Officer shall merge or be reduced pro tan to,
during the tenure of such appointment, according as the
salary or emoluments of any such new appointment are
of greater or less amount than the Pension or Retir-
ing Allowance of such Judge or Officer.
LX. {Superannuation Pensions to certain other officers
not liable to removal upon political grounds. To be regu.
lated by Superannuation Act, 4 and 6 Williavi IV., cap.
24.) Not more than three thousand five hundred pounds
in each year shall be payable for Pensions to Super-
annuated Officers : Provided always, that the amount of
all such Pensions for such Superannuated Officers shall
be according to the several scales and rates fixed by the
Superannuation Act of the Parliament of Great Britain
and Ireland, passed in the session of the fourth and
fifth years of the reign of his late Majesty Ring William
the Fourth, and that a list of all Pensions granted under
this Act, and of the persons to whom the same shall
have been granted, shall he laid, in every year, before
both Houses of the Legislature of the Colony.
LX J. (Consolidated Revenue to be appropriated by Act
of the. Legislature, Debentures or any other charges on
Consolidated Revenue Fund not to be affected by such
consolidation,) After and subject to the payments to be
made under the provisions hereinbefore contained, all
the Consolidated Revenue Fund hereinbefore men-
tioned shall be subject to be appropriated to such speci-
fic purposes as by any Act of the Legislature of the
Colony shall he prescribed in that behalf; Provided
that the consolidation of the Revenues of this Colony
shall not affect the payment of the annual interest, or
the principal sums mentioned in any outstanding De-
bentures or other charge upon the Territorial Revenue,
as such interest, principal, or other charge severally
becomes due ; nor .shall such consolidation affect the
payment of any sum or sums heretofore charged upon
the taxes, duties, rates, and imposts, now raised, levied,
and collected, or to be raised, levied, and collected, tp
and for the use of this Colony, for such time as shall
have been appointed hy any Acts of the said Legislature
by which any such charge was authorized,
‘ LXII. {No money Vote or Bill lawful unless reeom-
mendedby Governor.) It shall not be lawful tor the Legis-
lative Assembly to originate or pass any Vote, Resolution,
or Bill, for the appropriation of any part of the said Con-
solidated Revenue Fund, dr of any other tax or impost to
any purpose, which shall not have been first recom-
mended hy a Message of the Governor to the said Legis-
lative Assembly, during the Session in which such Vote,
Resolution, or Bill shall be passed.
LXIII. {No part of Public Revenue to be issued ex-
cept on Warrants from Governor.) No part of Her
Majesty’s Revenue in the said Colony, arising from any
of the sources aforesaid, shall be issued, or shall be
made issuable, except in pursuance of Warrants under
the hand of the Governor of the Colony, directed to the
public Treasurer thereof.
LXIV. {Proclamation and Commencement of Act.)
This Act shall be proclaimed in New South Wales by
the Governor thereof, within one calendar month after
official information of the Royal Assent thereto shall have
been received by such Governor, and shall take effect
within the said Colony from the day of the Proclamation
thereof.
LXV. {lnterpretation of term “ Governor.”) In the
construction of this Act, the term “ Governor ” shall
mean the person for the time being lawfully administer-
ing the Government of the Colony of New South Wales.
11


LX'VI. {Provisions of this Act to have no force until
so much of 13 <& 14 Viet., cap. 59 : and so much also of
5 <£• 6 Viet., cap. 76; 5 efi 6 Viet., cap. 36: and of
7& 8 Viet., cap. 73 ; 7 efi 8 Viet., cap. 74; 9 Geo. IV.,
cap. 83 ; and 9 <& 10 Viet., cap. 104., as relates to this
Colony, and is repugnant to reserved Bills, be repealed.
And the entire management of Crown Lands and all Reve-
nues thence arising be vested in the Local Legislature.
This provision not to affect any previous contracts of
Her Majesty respecting any such lands, nor any vested
rights which have arisen under 9 &10 Viet., cap. 104,
nor any vested right or interest which has accrued under
any Order of Council issued by Her Majesty in Council
in pursuance thereof.) The foregoing provisions of this
Act shall have no force or effect until so. much and such
parts of the Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland, passed in the thirteenth
and fourteenth years of Her Majesty’s reign, intituled,
“An Act for the better Government of the Australian
Colonies,” and the first, second, and third parts of the
Schedule A therein referred to; and of another Act
passed in the fifth and sixth years of Her Majesty’s
reign, intituled, “An Act for the Government of New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land; ” and of another
Act passed in the said fifth and sixth years of Her Ma-
jesty’s reign, intituled, “An Act for regulating the Sale
of Waste Land belonging to the Groivn in the Australian
Colonies ; ” and of another Act passed in the eighth year
of Her Majesty’s reign, intituled, “An Act to clear up
doubts as to the regulation and audit of the Customs of
New South Wales;” and of another Act passed in the same
year, intituled, “ An Act to explain and amend the Act
for the Government of New South Wales and Van Die-
men’s Land; ” and of another Act passed in the ninth
year of the reign of His late Majesty King George the
Fourth, intituled, “An Act to provide for the Adminis-
tration of Justice in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, and for the more effectual Government thereof, and
for other pmposes relating thereto and of another Act
passed in the ninth and tenth years of Her Majesty’s
reign, intituled, “ An Act to amend an Act for Regulating
the sale of Waste Land belonging to the Crown in the
Australian Colonies, and to make further provision for
the management thereof,” as severally relate to the Colony
of New South Wales, and as are repugnant to this Act, shall
have been repealed; and the entire management and
control of the Waste Lands belonging to the Crown
in the said Colony of New South Wales, and also the
appropriation of the gross proceeds of the sales of any
such lands, and of all other proceeds and revenues of
the same, from whatever source arising within the said
Colony, including all Royalties, mines, and minerals,
shall be vested in the Legislature of the said Colony :
Provided that nothing herein contained shall affect or
be construed to affect any contract, or to prevent the
fulfilment of any promise or engagement made by or on
behalf of Her Majesty, with respect to any lands situate
within the said Colony, in cases where such contracts,
promises, or engagements shall have been lawfully made,
before the time at which this Act shall take effect within
this Colony, nor to disturb or in any way interfere with
or prejudice any vested or other rights which have
accrued or belong to the licensed occupants or lessees of
any Grown lands within or without the Settled Districts,
under and by virtue of the aforesaid Act of the Parlia-
ment, passed in the ninth and tenth year of Her
Majesty’s Reign, or of any Order or Orders pf Her
Majesty in Council issued in pursuance thereof.
Passed the Legislative Council,
this twenty-first day of De-
cember, One thousand eight
hundred and fifty-three.
CHARLES NICHOLSON,
Speaker.
WM. MACPHERSON,
Clerk of the Council
In the name and on the behalf of Her Majesty, I
Reserve this Bill for the signification thereon of Her
Majesty’s Pleasure.
CHS. A. FITZ ROY,
Governor-General.
Government House, Sydney,
23nd December, 1853.
SCHEDULE A.
Salaries payable gaiarie. to be
Tea Incunt P aid “
bents are in as vacanc.es
Office. ocom.
£ s. d.
£ a. d.
7.000 0 0
2.000 0 0
7.000 0 0
2.000 0 0
4.500 0 0
2,000 0 0
1,250 0 0
900 0 0
1.500 0 0
1,000 0 0
400 0 0
4.500 0 0
2,000 0 0
1,250 0 0
900 0 0
1.500 0 0
1,000 0 0
400 0 0
1,000 0 0
800 0 0
20,550 0 0
22,350 0 0
SCHEDULE B.
£ s. d.
4,550 0 0
5,900 0 0
3,500 0 0
13,950 0 0
SCHEDULE C.
Public Worship I 28,000 0 0
To be placed at the disposal of
Her Majesty, for the Salary
of the Governor-General, if
Her Majesty see lit; other-
wise to revert to the Conso-
lidated Revenue Fund
One Chief Justice
Three Judges, including one
for Moreton Bay
Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer
Auditor-General
Attorney-General
Solicitor-General
Governor’s Private Secretary ..
Master in Equity and Curatoi
of Intestate Estates and Chie:
Commissioner of Insolvem
Estates
Chairman of Quarter Sessions
and Commissioner of Court
of Requests
Pensions to Judges, on their ceasing to hold
office (Until demandable and claimed, this
amount, or any unclaimed portion of it, to re-
vert to the Consolidated Revenue Fund.)
Pensions to existing Officers of the Government
liable on political grounds to retire or be re-
leased from office, upon their retirement or
release. (Upon the demise of these Officers, or
until their retirement or release, their respec-
tive Pensions, orthisamount, (as the case may
be,) to revert to the Consolidated Revenue
Fund)
Pensions to Officers of Government not liable
on political grounds to retire or be released
from office, according to the Scales and Rates
fixed by the Superannuation Act of the Impe-
rial Parliament 4th and sth Wm. IV., c. 24.
(Any portion of this fund which may not be
drawn during any year, to revert to the Con-
solidated Revenue Fund)
—<£— i @ —A--
12
