

c , T
D V
So3«r
. Cbe .
legibilities
of tbc
IDainnng
Tnbustrv
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Issued by direction of the Hon. the Minister for Lands.
EDITED BY L. LINDLEY-COWEN, SECRETARY FOR AGRICULTURE
FEBRUARY, 1898.
. ■s>
pcrtb:
E. S. WIGG & SON, PRINTERS, HAY STREET.
co
to


.
>a i t;
'> \ \ ■. ■ '


THE POSSIBILITIES OF THE
DAIRYING INDUSTRY
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
This pamphlet is issued in order that settlers throughout the country
may be made aware of all that has taken place up to date in developing
activity in the dairying industry. A perusal of the following pages will
show that recently there has been a great revival of interest in the
subject and also that the Hon. the Minister for Lands, presiding over the
Department of Agriculture, is fully alive to the necessity of affording this
industry every encouragement and protection. The Minister has
approved of the appointment of Mr. Alex. Crawford as dairy expert, and
this gentleman will commence his duties on the ist March. It is pro-
posed that Mr. Crawford shall travel about the country and endeavor to
organise the factory system and at the same time give instructions
in dairying. Part VI. of the Settler’s Guide is written by Mr.
Crawford and devoted entirely to dairying for the farmer and the
factory and profusely illustrated, and may be had on application to the
Department. The dairying industry is of vital importance to this colony,
as will be seen on perusal of the following pages, and it behoves every-
one who has the interests of the colony at heart to do his level best to
assist in its development. No effort will be spared by the Hon. the
Minister and by this Department, and it is to be hoped that settlers will
make known their wants and desires so that the Department will be in
close touch with them in this matter.


THE DAIRYING QUESTION.
The following minute was addressed by the Hon. the Minister for
Lands to the Under-Secretary, on the 19th January last, and forwarded to
the Secretary of the Bureau to take action. Mr. Throssell says :
“ As a discussion has arisen in the columns of the West Australian
relative to the quarantining of dairy cattle, and also upon the dairying
question generally, I think these matters should be referred to the
Secretary of the Bureau of Agriculture for his recommendations. The
Bureau possesses machinery which, properly directed, should enable us
to deal successfully with this and other matters of a cognate character.
I recall with pleasure the fact that it was largely owing to the
enthusiastic and wise efforts of the present Secretary to the Bureau in
the West Australian that fruit culture has been brought so prominently
to the front. lam sure the Secretary is impressed with the importance
of establishing the dairying industry upon enlarged and modern lines, as
I have told him in an interview I expect this from him and place the
responsibility of accomplishing it upon his shoulders. lam confident we
shall before long see the question dealt with in a practical fashion. I
shall be pleased if Mr. Cowen will give me his views as early as
possible, as I have to write to Mr. A. H. Padley, who is endeavoring
to initiate a butter factory. I have told him that one of the first things
to be done in this direction is to obtain reliable returns of the number
of those who would be contributors of cream, the quantity they would
undertake to supply, and the period of the year d iring which the supply
would continue. (Signed) Geo. Throssell, Minister for Crown Lands.”
The Secretary replied to the minute as follows :
Perth, January 24, 1898.
To the Hon. the Minister for Lands.
Sir,— ln reply to your minute of January 19 on the subject of dairy-
ing in this colony, permit me, lirst, to thank you for your flattering
references to myself and the action that I took, when employed by the
proprietors of the West Australian newspaper, in first bringing the
possibilities of fruit and vine-growing in Western Australia prominently
before the public. I consider it an additional compliment to whatever
abilities I may possess that you should now practically throw upon me
the onus of galvanising into life in this colony a second a ,cl equally
important, but almost utterly neglected, rural industry. I can assure you
that I am fully seized of the great importance of the work you have
entrusted to me, and that no efforts will be wanting on my part to give
practical effect to your most laudable desire that the stigma should, as
speedily as possible, be removed from the agricultural community of this
colony of not being able to supply the local demands of its people in
four of the most important necessaries of life —milk, butter, cheese, and
bacon, the last named being a natural corollary of the dairying industry.
During the years 1890-97 inclusive —the first quarter only of the
latter year being included in the calculation —butter to the value of
(vide the Customs returns), cheese to the value of ,£79,737,
milk (preserved) to the value of 152,231, bacon and hams to the value of
and eggs to the value of ,£65,142 were imported into this colony
—a grand total of ,£872,883 actually lost to the farming community.
74
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


If the importations of these commodities in 1897 are based on the first
quarter’s returns, the only figures at the moment available, another
quarter sterling sent out of the colony during the last eight years for
commodities which could have been produced here far better. Much of
this stuff, as shown by investigations made by the agricultural chemist of
the Bureau, was of inferior quality and not equal to even the second-rate
productions of Western Australia. Again, it was shown by these
investigations that the favorite method of adulteration practised upon
the unfortunate people of this colony by the unscrupulous exporters of the
east was short weight, and it is quite safe to say that in one item of
butter alone at least has to be added to the above bill as money
paid for a commodity actually never received.
In a minute to you the other day in reference to the work of this
department, I said that in my opinion it must always be protective and
educative ; and I wish to now put it emphatically on record that before
any one of our chief producing industries can be said to be firmly estab-
lished on a thoroughly sound basis, both producers and consumers must be
protected against fraud. I maintain respectfully, but firmly, that the first
duty of good government is to ensure to its people a plentiful supply of
pure food, and I maintain equally firmly that this can only be done when
every possible means of protecting the honest producer has been exhausted,,
and that not until then will it be possible to ensure the stability and pros-
perity of any industry. To confine myself to the dairying industry, what
possible chance of success will our future factories have of competing
against the unscrupulous vendors of eastern butter who give only noz. to
the pound ? When the time arrives here for the manufacture of concen-
trated milks for use on our goldfields, how can our producers be expected
to successfully overcomd the competition of the mixture of skim milk and
beef fat made in Germany, and which now forms the chief sample of tinned
milk in the West Australian market ? The imposition of fiscal duties is of
little avail against these short weight and adulterated products, and I trust
that whatever the future of the Department may be it will not be forgotten
that attention has been given to urging upon the Government the necessity
of protecting our producers in this respect.
The first question that demands an answer in the discussion of the
possibilities of dairying here is—ls the country naturally suited to it ?
My reply, founded on an experience of nine years of the South-west
division, is most emphatically yes. There are, I freely admit,
natural drawbacks and obstacles, but I do not know of one that cannot
be overcome or removed ; and I ma ntain they are not greater in
number or more insuperable than those which originally confronted the
settler in what are, in my humble opinion wrongly but invariably, styled
the more favoured colonies of the east. Our geographical position and
the length of our coast line and the many excellent harbors are all
points in our favour when the day of export arrives. The climate of the
South-west land division, even taking it from its extreme northern
boundary, is unsurpassed in Australia, while that of the south-west could
hardly be improved upon from a dairyman’s point of view. Science,
with its separators and coolers, has completely conquered heat in the
matter of dairying, and if it is possible to make good butter and good
bacon in Queensland and in the torrid heat of the summers of northern
Victoria and New South Wales, surely it is possible in the milder climate
of Western Australia. The means of transit provided by a progressive
75
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


Government from the producing centres to the chief markets of the
colony are good, and are being continually and rapidly extended.
Speaking generally, the roads of the South-west division leading to
the railways are fairly good, but their maintenance in a state
of repair, in spite of the liberal subsidies of a generous Govern-
ment, I have always maintained leaves much to be desired, and
shows a penny wise and pound foolish policy on the part of the agricul-
tural producers who control these matters through their elected roads
boards. While on the subject, I regret to say it, but wish it to be
recorded as my opinion, both as Secretary to the Department and as a
producer, that the railway management leaves much to be desired in the
handling of perishable products, and before the fruit and dairying
industries can be said to be thoroughly and permanently successful
reformation is essential in this respect.
The chief drawbacks to the immediate foundation of a comprehensive
system of dairying on modern scientific principles in this colony are the
inferiority of natural pastures ; the presence, in those districts best suited
to dairying by reason of their equable climate and prolonged period of
growth, of plants injurious to cattle ; the ailments and diseases to which
stock are subject, chiefly due to the consumption of this noxious
vegetation ; the average inferiority of the dairy cattle, their fewness in
number, and the scarcity and high price of suitable labor. A moment’s
consideration will, however, serve to show that not one of these obstacles
is insurmountable. The Department has overwhelming evidence in its
possession to prove most conclusively that ring-barking cheaply and
expeditiously improves the natural pastures, and the cost of eradicating
the zamia and other objectionable plants cannot be considered excessive
when the profits to be derived from dairying are reckoned with. Most
of the diseases and ailments to which cattle are subject in the south are
due to the inferiority of the natural herbage and the presence of plants
of a distinctly toxic nature. Admit the generous sunlight to the sombre
shade, eradicate the poisonous plants, and the diseases will disappear.
The scarcity and high price of labor and the general inferiority and few-
ness in numbers of the cattle are only artificially-created obstacles which
will disappear as soon as a thoroughly systematic and truly earnest effort
is made to establish dairying as a national industry. While, speaking
generally, the dairy cattle of the colony must be described as a poor lot,
there are undoubtedly pure strains from some of the best herds in
Australasia, but their influence is not felt to any extent, and I regret to
say that the tendency is to breed down and, worse still, feed down, rather
than feed up and breed up. Until stock owners realise that it is as
important to feed as well as breed, I am afraid that dairying will never
be as successful as it should be in this colony. It would take many years
to breed up good herds from the present small nucleus of desirable stud
stock now in the colony, and I am peisonally strongly in favor of the re-
moval of the quarantine on imported dairy cattle. With anything like
careful inspection at port of entry, and power to quarantine, and
if necessary destroy in doubtful cases, there is little to be feared from the
introduction of contagious diseases, and the assertion that only the worth-
less scrubbers of the other colonies would be sent over here is too absurd
to be worth combating. In this connection I should like to mention two
facts. In 1896 I was the secretary to the Royal Agricultural Society.
Some time before the annual show I communicated with the Hon. J. H.
Angas, the widely-known and justly celebrated stock breeder of South
76
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


Australia, and asked him to exhibit. He agreed to send over a large num-
ber of pure bred stock, but unfortunately shortly afterwards the existing
quarantine regulations came into force and naturally the project had to be
abandoned. It is safe to say that every head of stock Mr. Angas was pre-
pared to send over would have remained in Western Australia, and our
herds would have been enriched by some of the best blood in the country.
Again, when the Bureau of Agriculture published the results of its
investigations into the milk supply of Perth, a syndicate was actually
formed and the capital subscribed to establish within a short distance of
Perth a dairy farm to supply the city with milk. It was intended to start
with 300 cows, about 200 of which would have been always in milk.
These cows could not be obtained in the colony, the quarantine regulations
practically prohibited the importation, the whole scheme was abandoned,
and the town pump still remains the chief source of supply of so-called
milk to Perth. I have no doubt numerous other instances of a similar nature
could be given. I would ask you, Sir, to consider for a moment the immense
cattle industry of the United States. The daily migration of horned
stock from one state to another amounts to thousands (at certain seasons
of the year to tens of thousands), and I am not aware of any inter-state
restrictions. There is nothing to prevent a dairy cow going from New
Jersey to Ohio and from Ohio on to California to serve her time at giving
milk, and then being sent down to Texas as a breeder, and finally getting
back to Chicago, and eventually to Coolgardie, perhaps in the form of
tinned sausages. Fremantle would present the only obstacle to that
cow’s triumphal utilitarian march.
As a means of ascertaining the opinions of those most vitally
interested in the subject, I would suggest you should permit me to issue
a circular to the seventy agricultural and kindred societies which are in
touch with, and to a certain extent under the aegis of, the Department.
They represent roughly some three thousand persons, either directly or
indirectly interested in agriculture. I would ask for the question to be
brought before the society and a direct vote taken on the .maintenance
or abolition of the existing quarantine regulations The subject might
also be discussed at the Producers’ Conference to be held in April next,
when I hope the dairying question generally will receive a liberal share
of attention.
There are two aspects of the dairying question which have yet to be
considered. The first, and one of primary importance, is—will it pay ?
The second is—is now the time to commence systematic and active
measures to put the industry upon a sound basis and endeavour to estab-
lish it for all time ? My answer to both these questions is in the affirma-
tive. If one considers for a moment the figures given in the opening of
this minute the answer is so painfully apparent that it appears almost idle
to ask the first question. If it pays the Eastern Australian farmer to sup-
ply Western Australia with butter, cheese and bacon, paying several com-
missions, heavy freights, duty and incidental charges, surely it will pay the
Western Australian farmer to produce these articles of consumption. If,
as we see, have been sent out of the colony during the last
eight years to buy these commodities, would it not be wise to spend any
sum, even an amount equal to this enormous leakage, in order to
firmly establish such a valuable industry in our midst ? Butter can be
made as cheaply and as well in Western Australia as in Victoria, when the
same perfection of system and management has been obtained. Victoria’s
perfection in this particular is the result of her adversity. West Australia’s
77
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


adversity in this particular is one of the consequences of her prosperity. I
fail to see that prosperity is incompatible with more prosperity, and must
of necessity be the product of adversity. I maintain, Sir, that it can be
shown that the making of butter, cheese and bacon, will be most profitable
pursuits here, and that the time is now ripe for the Department to make a
most earnest effort to establish these industries.
When the Bureau was first established in 1894, and for some long
time afterwards, enquiries relating to dairying were in the proportion of
perhaps Ito 200 of enquiries on other agronomic subjects. During the
last twelve months they have become much more frequent, and the
consulting expert has had quite enough to do to answer them, as well as
make frequent examinations of the butters sent to him. By reference to
Mr. Crawford’s report you will see that since the discussion arose in the
public press on the possible development of the industry he has
received numerous letters asking for advice as to the best way of
establishing factories. Straws show which way the wind blows, and there
is a manifest desire on the part of many people to obtain the necessary
knowledge which will bring them up to date in dairying matters.
There is now in the press a pamphlet by Mr. Crawford, being issued by
direction of the Department, and this will prove of great use until more
explicit and practical instructions can be given. I know for a fact that
one of the largest bacon-curing firms of Australasia is prepared, the
moment pigs are produced in sufficient numbers to warrant the step being
taken, to erect bacon-curing factories in this colony, and once dairying
commences in earnest the pig will most assuredly follow.
It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to point out that the farmers of this
colony are not altogether to be blamed for the present state of affairs.
Prior to the discovery of the Coolgardie goldfields they had little induce-
ment to dairy systematically, and when the great influx of population came
they naturally followed the lines of greatest profit, which in this case meant
the lines of least resistance. Hay growing was the most lucrative branch to
follow up, and no matter how willing the farmers might have been to extend
dairying operations, they could not have done so, as we know that it was
with the greatest difficulty sufficient labor was obtained to put in the crops.
Dairying is essentially a laborious occupation. No machine yet invented
can satisfactorily take the place of the human hand as a me ins of getting
the milk out of the cow, and had there been the desire and sufficiency of
dairy stock in the colony to give effect to the desire, there would not have
been the hands to do the milking. Now, however, the labor market is
equalising itself, and we have settled down to a calm prosperity, which has
given place to the fever and excitement of a few years ago. We are often
reproached by unthinking people for our tardiness in the matter of pro-
ducing dairy supplies, but I am inclined to the belief that, all things
considered, Western Australia has done quite as well in the time, and is
likely to do much better in the future, in the matter of supplying her own
needs, than California and Victoria did in the years immediately following
their great gold discoveries. When the Victorians did start to make
butter in real earnest, the produce was, generally speaking, such inferior
stuff that it was often unsaleable in Melbourne at 3d. per lb. Then the
Government stepped in, and Mr. David Wilson and Mr. Alex. Crawford
(now the Western Australian consulting expert) went to the front and
taught the people the factory system and how to make butter and
hundreds of thousands of pounds sterling.
78
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


When I was engaged some few years ago in writing up the “ Future
of Our Fruits,” I was often told that I might talk and write, but nothing
would ever come of it ; that people would not invest capital in fruit-
growing. The utter fallacy of these assertions has been amply proved,
and exactly what I anticipated happened, that men of capital, intelligence
and industry, unhesitatingly embarked in this industry, who had
previously never had a thought of land settlement and agronomic pursuits.
Exactly the same thing will happen in regard to dairying. Once it is
known that every facility will be offered in establishing the industry, that
a wise Government is prepared to give advice and encouragement and
pecuniary assistance if necessary, and protect the industry in its infantile
stages, I am quite sure that many will be attracted towards it and be
the means of encouraging others to come in. Want of knowledge of
what to do and how to do it and ignorance of the vast possibilities of the
industry are keeping many from embarking in it now. There is nothing
so attractive to the intelligent man who has a love for animals —and what
man has not ? —as the breeding of live stock, and I am convinced that the
establishment of the dairying industry will see not a few of our capitalists
investing their surplus cash in stud stock, and that we shall before long
be able to point with pride in our show rings to Western Australian
bred heifers of pure milking strains.
The vast and national importance of the subject must, Sir, be
my excuse for this somewhat lengthy preamble to the practical sugges-
tions you are good enough to ask me to make. I only wish to add in
conclusion that the old method of dairy farming must be completely
abandoned before the factory system can successfully be established.
A factory once erected must be kept going all the year round, not for
three months only, and in order to do this a radical change is necessary
in our system of dairy husbandry. The old method here —or, perhaps,
to be correct, the existing method —may be described by using the
expression, “ A lot and a little.” This is exactly the reverse of the
doctrine I have always preached, u A little and a lot.” The first means
a lot of land and a little off it, the second, a little land and a
lot off it. I do not see any economy in running 50 mongrel cows
on 3,000 acres when 50 real good cows can be better fed and
made to produce more on the produce of 200 acres. Land here
is costly to clear and get into cultivable order by comparison with
similar land in the Eastern colonies, therefore as much should be made
of it as possible. An American of wide agronomic experience once said
to me, when visiting this colony some years ago, “ You’ve a heap of land
to the acre in this country of yours.” That was his quaint way of
expressing my doctrine of the “ little and the lot.” As soon as active
steps are taken, which I hope will be the case shortly under your able
guidance, to establish the dairying industry here, the “ overdone ”
croaker or the croaker of the “ overdone ” school will rise phoenix like
from the ashes, as he always does when any new avenue of industry is
opened up. The following figures, Sir, taken from an address delivered
at the Colonial Institute in March last by Mr. S. Lowe, will serve as a
brief text for the homily necessary to floor the “ overdone ” man when
he arises ;
In 1891 New South Wales, Victoria and New Zealand had 943,373
cows for dairying purposes. In 1895 they had increased to 1,100,000 for
the three colonies. In 1891 the three Australian colonies produced 23,000
tons of butter ; in 1895 36,000 tons. Canada had T ,857,1 12 cows in 1891,
79
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


and 1,950,000 in 1895. Its butter yield rose from 51,700 tons to 52,000
tons. In 1895 Great Britain imported 151,897 tons of butter, valued at
_£i5,344,000. Australia and Canada supplied of this 15,368 tons, valued
at Britain’s cheese imports in 1896 were 112,227 tons, valued
at J~4,900,000, the colonies supplying 64,472 tons, value Thus
in one year, 1896, the home market took of colonial cheese and butter
80,000 tons, worth In spite of this, foreign countries supplied
136,529 tons of butter, worth and 47,755 tons of cheese, worth
British colonies thus supplied a little over one-tenth of the
butter, but received a little less than one-tenth in money, and four-sevenths
of the weight of cheese, but slightly less than that in value.. The con-
sumption of butter in England is increasing at a greater ratio than the in-
crease in population. The people consume now about two pounds per
head more than they did some three years since. We have, therefore, an
ample market, but must compete with those in other countries, who so far
have the preference slightly in price.
I now, Sir, beg to make the following suggestions for your considera-
tion :
1. That a thoroughly qualified practical dairy expert should be per-
manently appointed, to tour the country in order to exactly ascertain the
present position of the industry, the disabilities under which it is suffer-
ing, the nature and general adaptability of the country to the industry,
the possibilities of growing succulent crops in the summer, and the future
of ensilage ; approximate number and quality of the cattle ; the state of
feeling of the settlers and the support they are likely to give the factory
system ; to note likely sites for future factories ; to examine the methods
and machinery now in use ; to convey what instruction he can in the time
at his disposal ; to distribute that part of the Settler’s Guide dealing
with dairying ; and to generally make such notes that will be useful in the
future.
2. That the information gathered by the expert in his travels should
be made public from time to time in order that it may be of use to
intending settlers and capitalists prepared to embark in the industry.
3. That after the expert has made his preliminary tour he should, if
sufficient encouragement is offered, immediately set about the organisa-
tion of the factory system.
4. That if he considers the time is not ripe for the establishment of
factories, he should be sent round with a portable plant (as in Victoria) to
demonstrate to the farmers how to make really first-class butter and
cheese.
5. That the development of a copious and healthy milk supply for
the metropolis should engage his attention.
6. That a qualified veterinary surgeon should report upon the
“ indigenous ” diseases of cattle in the South-west, the origin and cure.
7. That reports should be obtained from each of the societies under
the aegis of the Department as to the possibilities of dairying in their
respective districts, and the form of encouragement, if any, that should
be extended by the Government.
8 That when the expert has sent in his completed report a conference
of representative dairyman from each district in the South-west land division
should be held under the auspices of the Department, and that Govern-
ment action should be guided in a great measure by the deliberations of
this body.
80
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


9. That the Government should take immediate measures, if possible, to
protect both consumers and producers from the importation of adulterated,
inferior and short-weight dairy products.
10. That as farmers, all the world over, though quick of comprehension
are slow to act, the Government is justified in taking immediate steps to
develop what, it is to be hoped, will shortly become one of our most im-
portant industries, and that, as our breakfast bill for milk, butter, bacon,
cheese and eggs has averaged for the past eight years something like
per annum, the Government should have no hesitation in
liberally supplying funds to promote the industry.
The consulting dairy expert in his report (attached) makes certain
suggestions as to bonuses and subsidies. Personally, I am strongly
averse to anything of the kind. I will only go so far as to recommend
the lending of money by the State at low rates on long terms, under the
Agricultural Bank Act, the provisions of which might be safely extended
for the purpose, to congeries of farmers willing to provide the land and
put up factories on a purely co-operative basis. My reasons for not
advocating the bonus system are briefly as follows ;
( a .) Victoria, when the factory system was first inaugurated, was up
to the neck in a slough of despond. Severe diseases require drastic
remedies. Western Australia, on the contrary, is prosperous, and, as I
have shown on the average of the past eight years, per annum
(admitting no increase of population) is awaiting the butter, cheese and
bacon producers.
(b.) The fruit and vine-growing industries of this colony, without
any State aid, have quadrupled their value in the last four years. Before
these industries were started on a business and commonsense basis a
bonus was offered by thp Government for the production of so many
tins of jam. This did absolutely no good, so far as developing the fruit
industry was concerned.
(c.) Agriculturists should be encouraged to rely on their own brains
and brawn, and not encouraged to run bucket in hand to the State cow
whenever they want assistance.
(d.) The duty of the State is not to coddle, but to encourage and
assist, and that there is ample inducement to private investors to go into
the dairying business, and that the State can better employ its cash in
providing easy, rapid, and cheap means of transit in opening up new
markets as established ones become congested, and in technical education
in new industries.
(e.) That bonuses at best are but frail props for an industry to lean
upon. That the commercial history of the world proves most
conclusively that when bonuses are withdrawn, as they must be some time
sooner or later, the industry they were designed to permanently establish
either goes to pieces—too often the case—or continues to prosper, and,
in the latter case, that it would have prospered just as well if the State
had kept its money in its treasury-chest.
I attach the condensed reports of the consulting dairy expert and
the consulting veterinary surgeon for your information, and would make
the final suggestion, that your initial minute, my reply, the above reports,
and your reply should be given to the public Press and also published in
the official organ of the Department, in order that discussion on this
important subject may be stimulated.
(Signed) L. Lindley-Cowen,
Secretary.
81
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


Report of the Consulting Dairy Expert.
It is clearly apparent to my mind that the time has arrived when,
in the interests of the colony generally, more particular information and
deiinite instruction should be afforded the farming community on the
subject of dairying in all its branches. It is manifest from the interest
taken in the subject by the public Press, and also by the number of persons
who have recently applied to me for information, their questions ranging
from the treatment of milk to the erection and management of creameries
and factories, that the present time is opportune for the dissemination of
knowledge on the subject. I enclose a letter from Mr. Weaver, of the
Vasse, as evidence of the general desire to obtain correct and particular
information on the subject of establishing creameries and factories. Many
other letters on the same subject have been received, although not so
concisely put. Samples of butter have also been frequently sent to me
to report upon, and I regret to say that nearly all I have seen left much
to be desired, and showed that those engaged in the manufacture have
still much to learn. This shows that dairying, even under the old rule of
thumb methods, has not reached that state of perfection which one would
naturally expect from the amount of information that has been afforded
by the Bureau in its Journal , or from that provided by the public Press of
the colony. The question as to how best to supply the information now
being sought after I leave to you, as you are more intimately in touch with
the producers than I am. I would, however, take the liberty of reminding
you that it is not only information on the handling of milk and butter
that is required, but knowledge must be imparted on the subject of first
producing the milk before the butter can be extracted. In other words,
instruction on the economic feeding of dairy cattle, so that a supply of
milk can be produced all the year round, is of primary importance.
Under existing methods, during summer there is little or no butter pro-
duced, and the cows are allowed to go dry until they come in again in
the winter, whereas, with very little additional cash outlay a good supply
of milk could be obtained all the year through. There is one lact that
causes many people, who would otherwise do so, not to milk in the hot
weather, and that is the difficulty of making butter without the proper
appliances for cooling the dairies when the thermometer, like Katisha,
is over 80 degrees in the shade. Under ordinary circumstances the mak-
ing of butter under such conditions would be an absolute impossibility,
but fortunately there is a simple remedy at hand in the establishment of
a factory or creamery, or even failing this, the use of the separator at
home and sending the cream to the nearest factory. By this means, with
a little care, dairying can be made a most remunerative occupation all
the year round. In order to give effect to the foregoing suggestions it
would, I respectfully submit, be necessary for some one with practical
knowledge to go about among the farmers, visiting them individually or
meeting them at central points -where all things dairying could be
discussed. While thoroughly sanguine that ultimately the colony is
destined to supply more than its own wants in the matter of
dairy produce, it is quite possible that it will take some little time for the
farmers to realise the immensity of the industry, and too great a degree
of progress must not be expected in the initial stages of the crusade.
Much depends upon the rapidity with which the herds can be increased
and multiplied, but over all one thing is certain, that once the farmers of
this colony realise the tremendous saving of labor and the great increase
of money return resulting from the establishment of the new order of
82
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


things, it will be difficult for the Department to cope with the rush of
applicants for information. There is one branch of the dairying industry
—cheese-making —now comparatively neglected which, with the main-
tenance of the present duty, would be a perfect gold mine to anyone
entering upon it. Immediate steps should, in my opinion, be taken to
encourage this industry. lam convinced that no other form of agricul-
ture at the (present time will pay anything like so well. Several who
have been writing to me lately have asked if they can dairy successfully
in the warmer districts of the colony, such as Beverley, York, Northam,
and Newcastle. I have always replied, Yes, provided that the factory
or creamery system is established, and that sufficient fodder is grown in
the winter to make silage to last during the summer months. In fact my
experience in Victoria has shown me that some of the best
keeping butter comes from the dry districts of the Goulburn Valley
and Kerang, where the mean temperature is about the same, if not
hotter, than that of the districts I have just mentioned. As regards the
growth of the dairy industry in Victoria, I perhaps cannot do better than
quote my own experience. At the time I was appointed dairy expert
to the Department of Agriculture in Victoria there was not a single
butter factory in the whole colony, and the bulk of the butter made
privately and coming to market was so inferior that three-fourths of it
did not even bring the market price for good butter. In twelve months’
time the Melbourne salesmen reported that the butter coming from those
districts where instructions had been given had improved greatly in
quality, and that fully 60 per cent, of it brought full market rates, while
much of it brought special prices. During this period I was instrumental
in having 30 creameries and 9 butter factories erected. The following
year the number of creameries was increased by 200 and the factories
by 30, and from that time lihtil the present the growth has been a con-
tinual one, although now it is not nearly so rapid as it was formerly, on
account of most of the districts being more or less supplied with factories
for getting rid of their milk. There is also another cause that has
checked the growth of creameries. Farmers have found that there is a
considerable saving of time and horseflesh in having separators at home
and separating the cream from the milk there, and only'forwarding
the cream to the factory. They also gain greatly in being able
to give the separated milk warm and fresh to their calves, which
thrive very much better on the freshly skimmed warm milk than
when it has been carted to the factory and back again. The suppliers
living a considerable distance away from the creameries, again, run no
risk of their milk being returned on account of its being in bad con-
dition. This not infrequently occurs in the very hot weather, when the
whole milk is carted to the factory, but such a disability entirely dis-
appears when only the cream is sent. The dairying industry in Victoria
is still steadily and surely growing, and after it had been put on a sure
footing I resigned my appointment to take the management of the
largest dating company, with one exception, in Victoria, or in fact in
the world. I can safely say that dairying and the cognate industries of
pig and poultry rearing saved hundreds, if not thousands, of farmers in
Victoria from bankruptcy and the loss of their holdings. In fact these
industries for the last four years have been the salvation of Victoria. It
is to be hoped that the day is far distant when Western Australia, with
its boundless resources, will be dependent on the dairying industry for
the well-being of its settlers, but times of drought or overmuch rain will
83
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


come, and crops will be failures, yet with dairying as a stand-by the
farmer may always count, with good management, to w T eather the storm.
I may also say that I have a good knowledge of the dairying capabilities
of Western Australia, as I spent some months, two years ago, in the
Bunbury, Vasse and Blackwood districts, visiting the farmers and inspect-
ing their cattle, and I was in many instances surprised to lind occasion-
ally such good strains.
As regards the land and its suitability to dairying, much of it could
scarcely be surpassed, although the really good land is patchy, but in the
good patches enough fodder could be grown to feed thousands of cattle
all the year round if the winter and spring crops were made into
silage. The same also applies to much of the land I have seen in the
eastern districts, and also around Gingin, and in places as far up as the
Greenough. Also in the Arthur and Williams districts.
Combined with the extension of the dairy system two other closely
allied industries would receive an immense impetus—poultry breeding
and pig raising. The amount of money sent out of this colony for eggs,
poultry and bacon during the past eight years amounts to something like
and there is no reason why this should not be kept in the
colony.
The question of how best to encourage the dairying industry n >w
arises. In Victoria this was done in two ways. First, a bonus was given
for each creamery or factory erected. The amount of the bonus was in
proportion to the cost of the building and plant, with the maximum of
for a creamery and for a factory. A further bonus was given
of 3d. per pound for each pound of butter exported. This was gradually
reduced to id. per pound. By that time the industry was on a sufficiently
good footing to stand without aid and all bonuses were stopped.
No ill effects were felt by the suspension, nor did any check occur
in the spread of the industry. As to starting the industry here,
probably for the first two or three factories the best way would be to
give pound for each pound expended by the company on actual build-
ings and plant, provided that a certain amount of butter was made
within twelve months from the time of the factory’s completion or its
being put into working order, the quantity to be in proportion to the
amount of money spent. The plant to be subject to the approval of the
dairy expert or some other competent person authorised by the Depart-
ment.
The money could be advanced as a loan in the first instance at
interest, the same to be remitted, together with the amount advanced, if
the conditions were carried out in the first twelve months. Some pre-
caution is necessary, as it was found in Victoria that factories were put
up in districts that were not ripe for them, and the bonus obtained, the
factory, or a great part of it, was nominally sold and erected somewhere
else, and a second and even a third bonus obtained on the same plant,
so that a big profit was made by the promoters. It was after this
experience that the Government made a regulation that a certain
quantity of milk should be paid for and passed through the separators.
It would also be essential that the dairy expert, or someone appointed by
the Department, should have power to check or modify the estimated
cost of the plant, etc., as otherwise it might be put in at such a high valu-
ation that the bonus would practically pay for the whole building and plant,
and if the factory proved a failure, a profit would be made out of a sale
of the assets.
84
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


In conclusion let me add that I am thoroughly convinced that the
dairying industry, if established on a proper basis, is destined, in spite of
detractors, to become one of the brightest and most profitable ornaments
in Western Australia’s crown of many jewels.
(Signed) Alex. Crawford,
Consulting Dairy Expert to the Department of Agriculture.
Consulting Veterinary Surgeon’s Report.
Not wishing to weary you with too much reiteration, I only furnish
you with the salient features of the consulting veterinary surgeon’s views
on the subject under notice. Mr. Edwards says, inter alia-. —
I have the honor, in compliance with your request, to submit a few
remarks concerning dairying in this colony. lam able to write upon
this subject unhesitatingly, for not only have I had five years experience
here as a veterinary surgeon (all this while being connected with the
settlers of the Southern districts, which must of necessity be considered
the home of the dairying industry in this colony), but I also kept for two
years a herd of Jersey cattle, imported from Victoria, with very en-
couraging results.
Dairying, conducted on scientific lines, is universally recognised as
an industry of exceeding importance. In this colony, with proper
guidance, it can be made a means of maintaining and, perhaps, enriching
the settlers, and of preventing costly importations. It seems to me first,
however, that our settlers need to be told what has been done in the
other colonies, and what they are capable of doing in this matter.
In regard to the herds of cattle now being used for dairy purposes
down south I shall say nothing, except that there is room for much
improvement. All that relates to the selection, breeding, care and
management of dairy stock will be dealt with more fully at a later date.
Far is it from my inclinations to write disparagingly of the colony, but I
must say that so far as the dairyman is concerned there are at least two
obstacles in his way, viz., noxious vegetation and want of summer rains.
It is unfortunate that, although we have extensive areas of good lands,
the indigenous flora does not provide wholesome food for cattle all the
year round, for when the dry season sets in, and the edible grasses
become perished, the cattle are forced to eat those evergreen and ever-
noxious members of the vegetable kingdom, which the southern settlers
know to their sorrow. But these difficulties can be overcome, in a great
measure at all events. To be a successful dairyman one must have
succulent food, and plenty of it, at all times, and with silage and a little
irrigation, which, seeing that water is obtainable anywhere in the
south by sinking would not be costly, one could provide him-
self very comfortably. There is another matter which must be mentioned.
The summer once having set in the grasses dry off rapidly, and no reliance
can be placed on them after the beginning of the year. For this reason
taprooted evergreen herbs and shrubs are required to provide whole-
some food to grow in opposition, as it were, to the indigenous noxious
evergreens. It may not be generally known that the mortality amongst
cattle in the south-western portion of the colony is exceedingly heavy,
and it seems to me that if a good system of dairying was adopted the
death rate would at once be lessened, as people would take more interest
in their cattle, and the welfare of the milking herd would of necessity be-
come a matter of first importance. One cannot attempt to treat a subject
85
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


so important as this hurriedly, but what I have striven to point out is ;
that, in spite of obstacles, I am convinced that a properly instituted
system of dairying in the southern and eastern districts would meet with
great success, and every effort on the part of the Government must meet
with reward.
(Signed) H. H. Edwards, Consulting Veterinary Surgeon.
The Minister has penned the following minute on the report by Mr.
Cowen :
“ I have perused the report of the Secretary of the Agricultural
Bureau with great interest. With much of what he puts forward I am
altogether in accord. I desire at present to withhold full comment, but
speaking in general terms I may say that Mr. Cowen shows such an
intelligent grasp of the subject, and his views are of so eminently practical
a nature, as to fall me with hope that we shall ultimately succeed in
establishing the all-important dairying industry on a permanent basis.
The reports of the consulting dairy expert and the consulting veterinary
surgeon go to show, as I anticipated, that the Bureau is already in com-
mand of officers possessing the necessary qualifications to successfully
initiate and carry on the work under the intelligent direction of the
Secretary. I propose dealing fully with the report and its recommendations
in a few days after I have further considered them. I will discuss that
matter fully with Mr. Cowen, and arrive at some definite line of action.
Mr. Cowen will be glad to know that the Chief Inspector of Stock has
already recommended the discontinuance of the quarantine regulations
for dairy stock. The suggestion that the various societies in touch with
the Agricultural Bureau shall be consulted is an excellent one and should
be carried out at once. Their views on the whole question might be
ascertained, and this data would be of great value in determining our
future action. lam very much pleased with the whole report.”
PROPOSED BUTTER FACTORY AT THE YASSE.
The following letter, covering the report of Mr. Crawford, has been
addressed by the Secretary to the Hon. the Minister of Lands ;
“ I have the honor to inform you that, in company with Mr. Alex.
Crawford, the consulting dairy expert, I visited Bunbury on the 31st ult.,
in order to ascertain what encouragement is likely to be forthcoming in
the matter of establishing butter factories in that neighbourhood. We
met a good number of farmers, and I am pleased to say a most decided
interest is being taken in the question. I had to return to Perth on
Thursday, and sent Mr. Crawford on to the Vasse. He returned yester-
day and has furnished me with a report of his tour, which I now attach
for your information. As you will see, Mr. Crawford is greatly encouraged
by the results of his investigations, and it appears it is not a question of
time at all, but money only, before the first factory is established. It is
by all means desirable that the factories should be established on a
co-operative basis, that the middleman and speculator should be kept
out of them if possible, and I cannot too strongly urge upon you
the necessity of at an early date considering some form of State
aid which will enable the farmers to establish co-operative factories
on a basis devoid of the weak points of the bonus system, and
one that will enable them to realise they are dealing with the State
86
THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


on strictly commercial principles. I would draw your attention to
Mr. Crawford’s remarks on a disease prevalent among the cattle in the
south-west division. I have every reason to believe that this disease is
not confined solely to the district reported upon by Mr. Crawford, but
extends over a wide range of country. I would respectfully urge upon
your attention the fact that the dairying industry will make little progress
in the south so long as the herds are decimated by diseases of this kind.
As this and other ailments are apparently native to the soil, and not the
result of folly or neglect on the part of the settlers, I respectfully main-
tain that if it is the duty of the State to foster and encourage
rural industries, it is of primary importance that every effort
should be made by the State to remove the natural disabilities
under which the settlers are suffering. In my communication to you
of the 25th ult. on the dairying question, I advocated the thorough
investigation of these ‘indigenous’ diseases in stock, and Mr. Crawford’s
remarks emphasise my point. There is little use in advocating and
encouraging the establishment of butter factories so long as the settler
is liable, through no fault of his own, and from causes of which he is
entirely ignorant, to lose the whole of his dairy herd in a week.”
Mr. Crawford’s report is as follows :
I have the honor to submit the following report on the prospects of
establishing a butter factory in the Vasse district. During the past week
I have been going round among the farmers within a radius of about ten
or twelve miles of Busselton, and have interviewed some 35 or 40 of them
with most favorable results. In many cases I found that there was a great
want of knowledge as to how butter factories are conducted, who they
belong to, and for whose benefit they exist. In every case, after
explaining the working of the system, the farmers agreed to
support it, at least to the extent of sending their milk or cream,
provided that it was established somewhere in the district. As
to sending their cream to Perth, they were unanimously against it
and would not entertain the idea at all. If they could send their
milk to Perth and dispose of it for domestic supply purposes they
would have no objection, but at the distance they are situated it would be
out of the question, under the existing circumstances, as the milk would
not keep sufficiently long for household use unless preservatives were
used —a thing to be avoided, and, as in England, made illegal. During the
time at my disposal I visited nearly all the larger dairymen, but there are
many others, who milk a small number of cows, that I had not time to see.
Amongst the places visited the milk or cream of over 500 cows was
actually promised. This was on the basis of the number of cows actually
milked during the past season, many said they would probably be milking
more, and others said that if they had no butter making to do they would
certainly milk more as soon as they could procure the cattle. From
enquiries made I should say that in the coming winter and spring there
would be the milk of at least 800 cows available —a quantity more than
sufficient to keep a factory going. Under present arrangements few of
the dairy formers milk the year through, but this is chiefly on account of
the difficulty of making butter during the summer months, and, given a
market for their milk or cream during that period, many of them expressed
their willingness to milk right through the year. There need be little
difficulty in doing so, as maize grows luxuriantly all through the district,
and on the rich swamp land enormous crops of maize or root crops
could be grown, while many of the flats are admirably adapted for
87
PROPOSED BUTTER FACTORY AT THE VASSE.


growing lucerne, either with or without irrigation, as in many cases water
is only from eight to ten feet below the surface, and the routs of the
lucerne would soon find their way down to it. As to the breed of cattle
at present in the district, it is better than I anticipated, and many of the
farmers have gone to considerable expense in providing good bulls of the
Alderney or Ayrshire breeds to cross with their red shorthorn stock, and
many of the cattle are half or three-quarter bred, and have all the
appearance of good dairy cows. In one instance I found that a Holstein
bull was being used. All this tends to show the practical interest that is
being taken in dairying matters, and the willingness of the farmers to
improve their cattle. On most of the farms visited the amount of clearing
done is comparatively small, and if this work was more vigorously pro-
secuted at least four or five times the number of cattle could be kept ; I
have no doubt that once the advantages of the factory system are
thoroughly appreciated the improvement of the farms will proceed
rapidly. I may here mention that owing to the distance of the farms
from each other, bad roads, and the immense tracts of country that are
locked up, the creamery system is not likely to be successful, but the
private separator will come into general use and the farmers will send
their cream into the factory. On the whole this will be rather a benefit
to the farmers than otherwise, and be more economical besides ; better
calves will be reared, as they can then be fed on the new sweet skim
milk twice daily instead of on sour milk, as would be the case if the milk
were taken to the creamery. There would also be a saving
in wear and tear of harness, horseflesh and labor. Of course
those living near the factory could take their milk in and have it separ-
ated there, but it certainly would not pay to cart a large quantity from a
distance. I have spoken of the probable success of a factory from a
supply point of view, but when it comes to the establishment of a factory
viewed from a financial point, I am not so sanguine. Although the small
farmers, who are in reality the backbone of the dairy industry, are com-
fortably off as far as good farms and the immediate necessities of life
are concerned, they have no surplus cash for the establishment of a
factory, and I am afraid the funds required will not be forthcoming, not
so much from want of will but from want of ready money. A factory
would cost from to and to start one on a purely co-oper-
ative principle would, I fear, be beyond the means of the majority of the
farmers. Doubtless shares could be sold to outside people, but then
trouble might ensue between the producing and non-producing share-
holders, one wanting as high a price for milk as possible, and the other
wanting good dividends. In Victoria, in some cases, when the farmers
could not raise sufficient money to ktart a creamery or factory, some of
the large produce merchants financed them on condition that so long as
the debt remained all the produce was to be sent to that particular firm
which found the money. So far as lam aware there are no firms here
at present who would do this, and even if there were it would not be
wise for the factory to be tied to any particular firm. In all probability
assistance would be required for the establishment of the first few
factories, but, after that, when their advantages are fully understood,
there should be no difficulty in establishing others. The assistance
might be given as a bonus, or as an advance for a number of years at a
low rate of interest. There is one other subject I would like to touch
upon and one that is a very serious matter to the farmers along the coast;
this is a disease that attacks their cows and rapidly proves fatal. It is
88
PROPOSED BUTTER FACTORY AT THE VASSE.


called by some “enlarged gall,” and is supposed to be caused by the cattle
eating some plant, but as to exactly what plant there is a great diversity
of opinion. Some blame the palms for it, and others have told me that
their cattle died of it where are no palms. The disease is most des-
tructive, one farmer assuring me that he lost 21 cows last year, and
another, 12. So far as I could find it is only along the coast the cattle
suffer, a few miles inland it is almost unknown ; one farmer told me he
believes it is a plant that comes into seed about this time of the year. I
tried to get a specimen of it, but he said there was none of it in the home
paddocks. In conclusion, I may say that the land, the cattle, and
disposition on the part of the dairymen, are present, and all that is
required is to secure united, and, perhaps, some financial help.
GOVERNMENT HELP TO DAIRY FARMERS.
The Secretary has addressed the following minute to the Under-
secretary for Lands with reference to the subject of Government help
for dairy farmers.
“ I am forwarding herewith for the information of the Hon. the
Minister suggestions from the dairy expert attached to this Department
on the importation by the Government of stud dairy bulls, and the estab-
lishment of a Government stud farm for breeding these animals. I wish
to add that I approve of Mr. Crawford’s suggestion and that I consider
that a tax should be levied on all bulls in the south-west. This would
mean the unsexing of a lot of worthless brutes now at large, and the tax
would contribute towards the maintenance of good bulls introduced by
Government.”
The following is Mr. Crawford’s report :
In considering the various ways in which dairy farming can be best
assisted I have the honor to suggest that the establishment of a stud herd
would be one of the most valuable helps the Government could afford at
the present time. Many farmers who have done little or no dairying
hitherto, but confined themselves to grain or hay growing, have come to
the conclusion that it is not wise to have all their eggs in one basket, and
are now looking forward to their cows to provide them with a regular
weekly income. In most cases the cows they possess are more suitable
for beef than for butter, and they have great difficulty in getting dairy
cattle for their purpose. Bulls suitable for getting dairy stock are few
and far between in this colony. The expense of importing from the
other colonies is more than the majority of farmers can afford, conse-
quently they must continue breeding stock not at all suited to dairying,,
and in many cases stock that will not as dairy cattle actually pay for the
feed and attention bestowed upon them. There is no royal road to the
establishment of a really first-class dairy herd, except at a most enormous
cost, for no farmer, unless compelled by dire necessity, will sell a good
cow so long as he has an inferior one to dispose of. The only way to
get a first-class herd together is to breed it and to keep on culling
regularly. Unless very great care is exercised many valuable years may
be lost, as if a good bull is not available the offspring may all be culls and
not worth keeping. It will take at least three years to find that out, and
that is three years lost absolutely. In getting a bull it is not always
advisable to go in for show beasts, as they may not come from good
milking strains. What is wanted is first of all a pure bred animal, under
89
PROPOSED BETTER FACTORY AT THE VASSE.


no circumstances is it wise to breed from any other kind of sire; secondly,
if is imperative that he should come from a good milking strain, that his
mother and grandmother should have been good milkers, and the same
on his sire’s side. He may not have all the points tit to enable him to
win in a show yard, but that will not signify as far as his utility as a getter
of good stock is concerned. The strain is there, and his offspring should
all be better milkers than their dams. In two ways the Government
could help greatly, first, by importing either from the other colonies or
England a few good bulls and putting one of them in each of the various
districts where they are most required, and charging a small fee for their
services. The animal might be placed in charge of a trustworthy farmer,
who might be allowed a sum weekly for its keep, and who would be
required to stable feed it and look after it well. A few bulls from the
eastern c lonies might be obtained at once, and the benefit of their
introduction would make itself immediately felt. Some years ago similar
Government help of this nature was given to Ireland by placing first-
class entire horses in the chief horse breeding districts. This has been
cont nued until the present time with the most encouraging results.
The second way would be the establishment of a Government stud
farm, where bulls and cows would be bred for sale, as has been done in
Victoria and New South Wales, the surplus stock being sold by auction
annually. In this case a few pure bred bulls and cows should be im-
ported from the United Kingdom and goed well bred cows from the other
colonies. A record would be kept of each cow’s milk, the quantity daily
and annually, the quality and the time she continued in milk, so that
purchasers could tell exactly the class of animal they were buying. I
may mention that this system has been carried out by Messrs. Lamb and
Co , of Albany, State of New York, for many years, and whose establish-
ment I visited, with remarkably good results financially, farmers coming
or sending from all parts of the United States, and giving very high prices
for the bulls. A stud farm conducted on the above lines would probably
very early be self supporting, and be of no expense to the colony, and
be the means of helping the small farmers quickly to an end that would
probably take them many years otherwise to attain. As to the cattle, the
most successful would probably be the Ayrshire and Channel Island
breeds, but the utmost care should be taken to see that they came from
really good milking stock. It would not answer the purpose required to
simply buy the first prize or champion bulls from first class shows, but
the most careful inquiries should be made as to their antecedents. The
Kerry and Dexter Kerry breeds of cattle in my opinion would be one of
the best suited to the colony that could be introduced, as scarcely any
other breed will yield so much milk in proportion to its weight. They
are small, often not more than three feet high, and can live and thrive
where other breeds would die of starvation. In their native home they
may be se n feeding on the mountain sides, and thriving where one
would think there was scarcely enough to keep a goat. They are
essentially a poor man’s cow, and although the steers are small the beef
is the most juicy and delicate of any, fetching the highest prices on the
market, and the proportion of bone and offal is very small. At least
three of these little steers could be fattened where one shorthorn or
Hereford would not get into higher condition than that of a forward
store.
I speak from personal experience in regard to this breed and have
found them the most profitable dairy cattle to keep.
90
GOVERNMENT HELP TO DAIRY FARMERS.


NECESSITY FOR REGISTRATION OF DAIRIES.
The following letter and report has been addressed by the Secre-
tary to the Under-Secretary of Lands for the Hon. the Minister’s con-
sideration :
Attached please find further suggestions from the dairy expert for
the Hon. the Minister’s consideration. It is perhaps somewhat early in
the day to consider the hygenic purification of the dairies, but Mr. Craw-
ford knows whereof he speaks, and he was the originator of the measure
which now is so generally approved in Victoria. The Bureau having done
so much in the past in demonstrating the general inferiority and beastly
filthiness of the Perth milk supply and the utter supiness ot the municipal
authorities in the matter, I am inclined to think it would not be a bad
nor unpopular move for the expert to make a tour of inspection of the
dairies supplying so-called milk to the metropolis. Mr. Crawford has on
several occasions contributed articles to the public press on this import-
ant subject, and I am with him in any deduction he may make which
supports the contention that one of the chief functions of good govern-
ment is the hygenic care of its people. Statistics show that infant mor-
tality is abnormally large in Perth, and medical testimony points to the
fact that this is largely due to the milk upon which these unfortunates
are fed. lam sure the results of the expert’s investigations would pain-
fully emphasise the necessity of developing a healthy milk supply for
Perth and give an impetus to the production of milk in the immediate
neighborhood of the capital. I maintain with intense culture it is pos-
sible to produce milk on the so-called sandy wastes around Perth, and,
with the present inadequate accommodation on our railways, if Perth
is to be supplied at all with milk, it must come from near hand. I should
much like the Hon. the Minister’s views on the subject.
The suggestions referred to as made by Mr. Crawford, are as
follows :
The registration and periodical inspection of all dairies, both in
town and country, is a matter of supreme importance to- the dairying
industry. From want of education, or from carelessness and innate
filthiness, many persons are not lit to keep dairies except under the
strictest supervision. To successfully carry out the inspection it would
be necessary that every dairy in the colony should be registered, for
which a fee of ss. annually might be charged to go towards the expenses
incurred in inspection, together with a proportion of any lines inflicted.
In Victoria this registration is compulsory and in all the dairying countries
of Europe it is the universal practice.
The following information should be given when registration takes
place :
1. The number of cows kept.
2. The situation of the dairy.
3. The use to which the milk is put.
4. If any disease had been among the cattle for the past 12
months. If so, what the disease or diseases were. If any
cows died, and how many, and if they were seen by a
veterinary surgeon.
Any person offering for sale any milk product produced in this
■colony and not thus registered should be liable to a penalty.
91
NECESSITY FOR REGISTRATION OF DAIRIES.


An Act of Parliament would be required to secure the registration
of dairies outside municipalities. There should be power to appoint
local inspectors, and in cases where the local inspectors did not act the
dairy expert should have power to prosecute.
It was found in Victoria that the local governing bodies often neglected
to institute proceedings, consequently the dairy expert was empowered
to act. Local health officers often do not take proceedings when they
should, and the chief inspector under the Board of Health in Victoria
has power to act anywhere in town or country.
That the public health depends so much upon the milk and butter
supply is in itself sufficient to warrant a close and careful supervision of
all dairies.
ANOTHER OPINION ON THE DAIRYING QUESTION-
In an article signed “Cockatoo” appearing in the West Australian
of Bth February, is some interesting reading. The suitability or otherwise
of the eastern districts for the production of butter is discussed briefly,
though proving the writer to be fully acquainted with the possibilities of
the Avon Valley. In the course of his article he says : —lt may, with
confidence, be said that dairying will never be possible to its maximum
extent where stripping wheat and burning straw are the custom of the
agriculturist.
The by-products of the wheat farm bid fair to grow in importance
in this colony. Speaking generally, wheat-growing is possible where
good indigenous grasses thrive. That is to say that the most wasteful
use of the land is to leave it in natural grass. The contention is that
wheat grovdng and dairying are essentially cognate industries. The one
is the complement of the other. In order to utilise to the greatest degree
the ,whole wealth of a wheat harvest the reaper and binder must be
exclusively used. The crop should be allowed to get just beyond the
dough stage. The wheat will then ripen in the stacked sheaves, while
the straw will be moderately green and wholesome. A new implement
called the header can then be worked in conjunction with the chaff-
cutting plant. By this means the whole of the crop will be turned into
coin. The agriculturist’s surplus wheat will go to market. The chaffed
straw can be similarly treated if desired ; but it is my firm conviction
that it will pay the farmer better to feed it to dairy cows and convert it
into milk and butter. The screenings coming from the winnowing of
the headed wheat are also useful, while Mr. Robinson, of Grass Valley,
informs me, and gave me ocular demonstration of the fact, that the chaff
dust falling through the riddle of the chaff-cutter is a valuable dairy
fodder. In this way it is claimed that every wheat farmer has at his
hand much valuable fodder that under existing conditions is utterly
disregarded. Mixed liberally with bran and touched up with refuse
molasses these fodders have great value for dairying purposes.
But this is not all. There are few places in the eastern districts where
every farm has not a slightly moist spot. In an average season sorghum
or other summer crops could be grown on most farms, if only for an acre
or two. Summer cultivation would be necessary and wide planting. In
the eastern colonies both ensilage and summer fodder are extensively
varied for dairy purposes. I fancy that ensilage is advantageous only ifi
92
NECESSITY FOR REGISTRATION OF DAIRIES.


the case of dirty fields. With a clean wheat crop the treatment already
described is one that seems to me to be the one best adapted to the
requirements of the Avon Valley farmer.
Having thus indicated how dairy fodder may be obtained all the
year round in our dry wheat districts, I feel impelled to say something
on the subject of dairy stock. The trouble of importation from the
eastern colonies is not the trouble that it appears to be, for the simple
reason that decent dairy cattle are very hard of procurement there.
Firstly, the cattle are not there, and, secondly, the few good ones are
religiously kept in the country. In proof of the statement that good
dairy cows are scarce in Australia, it may be mentioned that the
average gallonage yield per dairy cow is much lower than that of
the great dairy countries of the world. This fact was the subject
of a discourse to New South Wales dairymen by the Minister of Agri-
culture last year. Further, last year the Queensland Government,
with a view to improving the dairy stock of the colony, sent
an expert to New South Wales to buy up sixteen good Jersey cows.
This expert travelled the parent colony far and wide. A condition of the
purchase was that every cow should stand the tuberculine test. After
all his efforts, the expert was only able to buy half the number. There
was a herd where he might have obtained others, but the owner would
not consent to the tuberculine test. It may also be pointed out that at
the present moment the South Australian Government is buying Jersey
cows in England with a view to improving the butter possibilities of the
country. I am convinced that everyone who studies the matter will
conclude that good dairy herds are few in Australia. In that event the
wisdom of looking to the eastern colonies as a source whence good dairy
stock can be procured is somewhat doubtful.
In my opinion we should be up to date in the butter
question. We should, so far as possible, have the best cows and the best
methods of fodder and butter making. In America, nowadays, certain
breeds of cows are barred by the butter factories because of the low
percentage of the butter fat contained in the milk. Although milk is
bought on the basis of its test, still it is found that a mHk containing a
small percentage of butter fat does not make such good butter or cheese
as its richer neighbor. It was only the other day that I read in the
American Agriculturist of a prominent New York factory which informed
its suppliers that milk from Holstein cows would not in the future be
accepted. Every advancement in recent dairying science points
emphatically to the need of good cows, and the Jersey as now reared in
the best dairying countries is universally allowed to be at the top of the
tree as a butter producer.
I am of opinion that the Government will need to import some good
stock if dairying is to rise to its best possibilities. These, combined with
a system of grading up of the present stock in the colony might, in a few
years, put our dairy herds on a good basis. A Government that has
regularly given bonuses for racing stock, as in the Queen’s Plate, has an
excellent precedent for importing, say, three dozen best Jersey stock and
distributing them throughout the colony. The eastern colonies are
doing it, and we must follow suit if we wish the industry to be placed on
a proper footing. For it is useless thinking we have only our local
demand to catch up. So soon as we get our dairies in full swing, so
soon we must be prepared to face the world and export our surplus pro-
duction to the markets of the world. A hen we will have to meet the
93
ANOTHER OPINION ON THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


keenest and most scientific dairymen in the world, and, unless we can
meet them on an equal footing, success will not attend our efforts.
Some may smile at the possibility of butter export from Western Australia.
Those, however, who see and know how the development of our rich
agricultural lands is going on apace will see that the forecast is well
grounded.
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.
QUESTION OF FUTURE CONTROL.
The Bureau of Agriculture having, in accordance with a resolution
passed by the Legislative Assembly last session, passed under the control
of the Commissioner of Crown Lands, a meeting of the council of the
Bureau and the Minister was held in the board room, on January 27th,
to consider on what basis the future administration of the Bureau should
be carried out. Mr. George Throssell, Commissioner of Crown Lands,
was invited by the president, Mr. Charles Harper, M.L.A., to take the
chair at the head of the room. There were also present —Mr. E.
McLarty, M.L.C., Mr. Frank Craig, and the Secretary.
The President : I think it will put the proceedings in order if I read
the letter conveying the resignation of Mr. George Throssell as a member
of the council of the Bureau. The letter is as follows :
“ Crown Lands Department,
“ Perth, January 19th, 1898.
“The Secretary to the Bureau of Agriculture,—
“ Sir, —Under the new regime I deem it to be my duty to ask you to
convey to the president of the Bureau my resignation as a member of the
council of the Bureau. Will you express my regret at the severance of
my connection with a board with whom relations have at all times
been of so harmonious a character, and which has been so ably presided
over. (Signed.) Geo. Throssell.”
The President : I am sure that every member of the board recipro-
cates the regret which Mr. Throssell expresses at his retirement as a
member of the council. (Hear, hear.) I wish it to be recorded on the
minutes that we are sorry to take our leave of Mr. Throssell as one of our
members. (Hear, hear.) If that be the desire of the members we shall
regard this expression of opinion as a formal resolution. Carried nem con .
The President : It now becomes our duty to consider what will be
the effect of the Bureau of Agriculture having become one of the sub-
departments of the Crown Lands department. There is one aspect of the
alteration that has been made in the control of the Bureau to which I
think attention should be drawn, namely, that the validity of some Acts,
notably the Destructive Birds and Animals Act, depends upon the pro-
ceedings under that Act being taken by the Secretary of the Bureau. Of
course, when Parliament meets again there can be an amendment of the
law to fit in with the administration being under the Lands department,
but in the meantime if the Board which is charged with the carrying out
of the provisions of the Act dies, the enforcement of the Act, for the
time being, dies also.
Mr. Craig : I concur with that view of the case.
94
ANOTHER OPINION ON THE DAIRYING QUESTION.


The President : If the Minister will favour us with his views, we
shall then have something to confer upon.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands : I thank you cordially, Mr.
President and members of the council, for the fraternal sentiment with
which you have received my resignation. I did not pen, I assure you,
the expression of my regret at ceasing to be a member of the council as
a matter of lip service only, but I spoke from the heart at bidding
good-bye as a colleague on this representative board of men, who, unlike
myself, have given much self-denying labor in this direction to promoting
the producing interests of the country. We have now to look to the
future of the Bureau, which has done a great deal of good work, and it
will be a pleasure to me to have the future scope of action fully discussed.
Although circumstances have prevented me from closely identifying
myself with the Board, I have always taken the warmest interest in the
sphere it has tilled in helping forward the development of successful
land settlement, and smoothing the way of the new comer with all the
helping hand that able guidance can give. I come now to the change
of management, and so far as I understand the situation, I do not see
that that change will interfere very greatly—at any rate at the present
time —with the functions of the council. It is my wish that the change
shall interfere with the existing state of things as little as possible —just
now at all events. I hope I shall not be misunderstood when I say
that circumstances may crop up which will alter the present mode
of work later on as the result of the Bureau being controlled
by the Minister. I am sure you will be too conscious of the
good work that has been done by the board in the past to wish to retain
the board if it should prove to be unworkable in the future. The view
of the President, as expressed in an interview he was good enough to
have with me, that the council should retain its position as an advisory
board is quite in accord with my view, for there are many subjects on
which the Board can give the Commissioner of Crown Lands valuable
counsel and much practical assistance for the benelit of the colony in that
capacity. There may be a thousand and one things which you, through
your capable and energetic secretary, may bring under the notice of the
Government for the creation of national wealth and the promotion of
the prosperity of the people, and for the present I think it would be
better to leave the question of the future administration there —that the
council shall hold its place as an advisory board as your President has
proposed, and leave the actual government of the Bureau to the Minister
and the Secretary. In saying this I want also to say that later on it may
be found that the Board may not be necessary, or possibly that it will
not work. To illustrate what I mean, and how far lam from conveying
the slightest reflection on the Board—of whose services I am very
sensible —in saying what I have said, I will explain that the Secretary
(Mr. Lindley-Cowen) has made some suggestions to me. It bears upon the
point that we are considering that he has asked, “ To whom am I to be
responsible ? ” “From whom am I to receive instructions? ” “Who are the
finances to be managed by ?” All these questions have to be thought out
and talked out. With regard to the Secretary, although Ido not think
we need go into details of this kind at this stage, I would draw attention
to the fact that we have the Stock department and the Forestry depart-
ment as sub-departments of the Crown Lands department, whose heads
communicate with the Commissioner of Crown Lands through the Under-
secretary for Lands, and I do not see how any different practice can be
95
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


adopted with the Department of Agriculture, as it is proposed the
Bureau of Agriculture shall in future be called. That is, I do not
see how any different practice can be permanently adopted, although
we might make a difference at the outset. In regard to details,
I would suggest that the intelligent Secretary (Mr. Cowen) should
have an interview with the Under-Secretary for Lands as to the
pros and cons of the procedure that is to be approved, discuss the
question, and arrive at some proposal that will be pleasing to them both.
It will be better for them to do so than for us to talk over details. The
better the Under-Secretary and the Secretary do this work of settling
points of etiquette the better will they solve the financial and other
questions that are involved in the change of regime that has taken
place. As Mr. Cowen has pointed out, you have been in the habit of
expending, by drawing your own cheques, the funds which each
year have been voted by Parliament to the Bureau of Agriculture,
and I would suggest that as regards the vote of the current year,
which has been placed at your disposal and not at that of
the Commissioner of Crown Lands, this arrangement should be left in
slain quo , for the money has been provided for good purposes, aud,
doubtless, you have made up your estimates for the year. I think that
if the council will take up the position of advisory board for the current
year, matters may go on as they have done in the past. It would surely
not be difficult for the Under-Secretary and the Secretary of the Bureau
to come to an understanding on that point. With regard to what you
were discussing, namely, that if the Board dies the Destructive Birds and
Animals Act must die also, I have never given that aspect of the matter
consideration. My opinion is that the carrying out of this protective law
should not die. I take a different view of this phase of the case that the
powers of the Board would merge in the authority to which the powers of
the Board had been delegated, that in fact the Board would still exist, but
in a new form, and with increased power. But lam saying this in passing ;
I have not given the question thought. I should regard it as a calamity
if the enforcement of any of the protective Acts should lapse owing to
the control of the Bureau passing to the Crown Lands department. I
think that consideration should be given to this phase of the case. With
regard to the past work of the Bureau, Mr. President, I wish to bear my
testimony that it has been excellent. I wish to express my appreciation of
the good work that the Board has done for the country, of the many
sterling movements that you have initiated, and I wish to, emphasise how
deep my regret would be if anything should occur that would cause you
to take less interest in this valuable' institution than you have done for
many years. With regard to the future, there is a great deal of good work
for this Board to do in whatever form that work is to be accomplished.
I can only assure you that my desire is not to lessen your work but to
increase it. I believe that, let our private views respecting this change be
what they may, the change will ultimately be found to be of benefit to the
country, and that by having a Minister at your back, and one who is
willing to work for the objects you have in view, and who is a member of
the Ministry that has the interests of land settlement in view, you will find
that you have gained, rather than lost strength, and that the Board will
increase in its power of usefulness.
Mr. Craig : I do not think the change in administration will imperil
the operation of the Destructive Birds and Animals Act so long as you do
not change the title of the Secretary to the Bureau.
9 6
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


The President : You see, Mr. Throssell, it is stated in that Act that
informations under the Act must be signed by the Secretary to the
Bureau ; hence if you alter his title you render the Act inoperative until
Parliament sits again and the law can be amended. That is an argument
for retaining the name of the Bureau for the present. Clearly the name
must be retained. With regard to other points, I do not know what
other members of the council think, but it appears to me that there will
be some difficulty in working on the lines of dual control which the
Minister proposes, if the Minister is to direct the expenditure, while the
council have the responsibility of finding the money. That is rather an
awkward division of control. What do you think ?
Mr. Craig : It would not work at all ; there is a difficulty about
that.
Mr. E. McLarty : Yes, I can see some difficulty about that.
Mr. Craig ; As far as we are concerned we might be almost dead
and yet have a lot of responsibility. Suppose the Minister ordered the
expenditure of a thousand pounds and we did not agree with the
expenditure. Still we should be responsible for the funds and should
have to find the money.
The President: It seems to me there would be some difficulty. We
should be responsible for the funds and for the actions of our officers,
and yet we should have no power of control over them.
The Commissioner : I do not want to interfere with the funds ; they
are in your hands for the current year, but the clearly expressed wish of
Parliament is that the Board shall be advisory and not executive.
Mr. E. McLarty : It is hardly feasible that we should leave the power
of spending while we have the responsibility of the funds. The Minister
might spend more money than we have in hand.
The Secretary ; What the Minister suggests is practically unwork-
able.
The President : The Minister has evidently made his proposal out
of delicacy, a feeling of consideration for us, but for my part I do not
feel sensitive at all.
The Secretary : The plan would not work. The Minister might
authorise the Secretary to expend a certain amount unknown to the
Board. The Secretary, under the present constitution of the Board
would have to ask the Board to sign the cheque, and friction might arise.
The Secretary might to go to the Minister and get the cheque
signed before the Board would sign it. It would be an everlasting worry
to the Minister, the Board, the Secretary and to the creditors of the
Bureau. It would never work. There might be friction about the
expenditure of the money.
The President : I think the most workable scheme is that we should
retain only powers as an advisory board in important matters, and in
defence of the interests which we represent.
Mr. Craig : Yes, we will always undertake to do that.
Mr. McLarty : I am afraid it would not be satisfactory for one depart-
ment to order expenditure in another.
Mr. Craig : We do not see how we can hold executive powers jointly
with the Minister.
The President: We shall be quite content to be an advisory board
upon any matters that the Minister may require our advice upon.
The Commissioner : Are you willing that financial matters shall come
through the Minister?
97
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


The President : Yes.
The Commissioner : You would merely formulate suggestions to go
through the Secretary to the Minister as to the mode of expenditure later
on. For instance, it would not do to interfere with the expenditure of
this year.
The President : Would it not be better for you to take over the funds
and the books for the present year and carry out our estimates ? Would
not that be much simpler ? It is only a question of time. You have got
to do it sooner or later.
The Commissioner : I would like that suggestion to come spon-
taneously from yourselves. You understand me ?
The President : I understand that the line you have been taken is
from motives of delicacy.
The Commissioner : Yes. If you want this change I desire the
suggestion to came from you. (At this stage the Hon. J. G. H. Amherst,
a member of the council of the Bureau, entered the board room, and
the point that was being discussed was explained to him by the Pre-
sident.)
Mr. Amherst : I quite agree that the Minister should have control
of the finances.
The President (to the Commissioner) : We are unanimous that there
shall be no division of administration.
The Commissioner : You would still meet as a board ?
The President : Only when required by notice, just the same as we
do now by notice, except that instead of all matters of general adminis-
tration coming before us we should deal merely with matters of policy
which we should be required to advise the Minister upon. That is how
I take it.
Mr. Craig : That is as I understand it.
Mr. Amherst : An advisory board ?
Mr. Craig : Entirely.
The Commissioner : What about the annual Producers’ Con-
ference ?
The President : There is a little difficulty about that, I grant you. I
think the simplest way would be to confer with the Secretary,
Mr. Craig : I think that would get over it.
The President : There is some difficulty.
The Commissioner : I would just like an illustration of what we
understand in your being called together as an advisory board. Let us
suppose that there was an agitation for the abolition of the restrictions
on the importation of fruit, the pi oper thing would be for the question to
be referred to the Board before dealing with it for advice.
The President : Yes ; and in regard to the maintenance of any
existing law, or the operation of a new one for the protection of the pro-
ducing interests of the country, the same rule would apply.
The Commissioner : There is the dairying question, for example,
which the Secretary has addressed me upon with so much painstaking
fullness and grasp that I had to spend the whole of my holiday yester-
day threshing out the subject from his report before it went to the
Under-Secretary. I will send the report back for the advice of the
advisory Board. Are we now all agreed upon the functions of the
advisory Board ?
The President: Yes, quite.
Mr. Craig : It is a very much better plan than divided control.
98
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


The Secretary : Which would not work. The advisory Board is
the only way we can work. There must be one thing or the other, an
administrative board or Minister.
The Commissioner : Before we come to any final decision we can
have another talk. This need not be our final conference, and no doubt
we shall be able to make some practical suggestions as to advising or
otherwise.
The President : I make the suggestion that the Minister might
widen the ground on which he will ask the advice of the board, and hear
what we have to say respecting the stock and forestry interests. It
appears to me that this would not be outside the Minister’s province, or
that of an advisory board. What do you think of that, Mr. Amherst ?
Mr. Amherst : I think an advisory board could do a great deal of
good in that way.
The Commissioner : I agree with you. I take advice from private
individuals ; then, why should it not be welcome from practical men like
those who are members of the council of the Agricultural Bureau ?
Mr. Amherst; As an advisory board we could have a larger field in
which to advise than we have at present.
The Commissioner ; I believe such a mode of getting information
would work well, and, as has been said, would broaden the usefulness of
the Board.
The Secretary : There is only one objection I see to it —the Board
would be always in session.
The Secretary (addressing the Commissioner) : One word occurs to me,
if you will permit me to say it. As this may be the last meeting of the
council of the Agricultural Bureau under the old regime , I want to record
an expression of my thanks, with your permission, to the old board, and to
congratulate you, Sir, upon your attainment of the office of Minister of
Agriculture, an appointment which, before long, I hope to see gazetted,
and so place Western Australia on a plane co-equal with the sister pro-
vinces of Australia. Western Australia may not have made such agricul-
tural strides in the past as some of the neighboring colonies, perhaps
because there was not so much inducement ; but that is no reason why,
under the guidance of the Commissioner of Crown Lands, and of the
members of the council of the Bureau of Agriculture, whom I have
known so long, the colony should not do well in the future. I speak, in
expressing my gratitude to the old board, as practically a Western
Australian, as a producer and as Secretary to the board, and I have no
words in my vocabulary that will adequately express that gratitude and my
sense of the services they have rendered to this colony generally, and to
agriculture in particular. For the work that has been done I take no
credit to myself —I give it all to the Board.
The Commissioner : Mr. President, gentlemen and Secretary. The
meeting of this afternoon would not have been complete had it not been
for these parting words. I have been associated with you, Mr. President,
and members, from the outset, I think, and most West Australians are, I
believe, agreed upon the services which this Board has rendered to the
country, and that it has been ably seconded by the Secretary. I know
that although the Secretary has been good enough to ascribe all the
credit to the Board our common sense will tell us that he has brought to
bear upon his work a zeal and ability to which in no small degree has
been due the success of the Board in accomplishing the purposes for
which the Bureau of Agriculture was formed to achieve, lam sure,
99
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


Mr. President and gentlemen, that you will endorse what I say, that had
we had a less intelligent Secretary, or one less filled with enthusiasm for
his important work, that our success as a Board would have fallen short
of what it has been. These are words that come from my heart with all
the intensity of my nature. Mr. Cowen has been good enough to say
that with the new Department we may do more in the future than we
have done in the past. I hope it may be so ; that, lam sure, is
the wish of all of us. I hope that the proceedings of this, the
last meeting of the Board under the old constitution, and the
expression to you of the thanks of the Secretary, will appear on the
records of the Board. As to the request of the Secretary that his com-
munications shall go direct to the Minister, and not through the Under-
secretary, I cannot promise to be always so indefatigable as I was yesterday
when I spent the whole day over the reports of the Secretary. I find
from one of those reports that the Bureau possesses ample machinery for the
work we have to do, that you have a staff of officers equal to the require-
ments of the Department, and all this organisation has grown up in a few
years from absolutely nothing. I say that with all emphasis. I remember
the time when the Secretary was sent out by the proprietors of the West
Australian to write up the fruit-growing industry that is now assuming
such large proportions, but which was then only in its infancy. Since
then I have visited the other colonies, and I am justified, I think, in saying
that we have established in the Bureau of Agriculture a Department that
is second to none of the kind in the colonies, and I believe that as we keep
going on it will be better in the future. lam sure you agree with me, Mr.
President, that we should use all our powers to push on the settlement
of the land and develop other sources of agricultural industry than
the production of cereals. I can see very clearly now that with the increase
of land settlement and the incoming of so many new people that
we shall soon be brought face to face with the over production
of cereals and chaff, and it is for this reason amongst others
that has induced me to face the position of using the machinery
of the Bureau in order to educate the people in opening up other
channels of industry and profit. If they do not do so I feel sure that not
only myself but all West Australians will come in for much blame that
we shall not deserve. I thank you, Mr. President, gentlemen and
Secretary, for the kind sentiments you have expressed to-day, and I hope
all our relations will be as pleasant in the future as they have been in the
past, and that we shall be able to look back on a prosperous time. With
regard to the details of the work that have been threshed out with the
Secretary, I want to say in conclusion that we are doing nothing hastily
—nothing that will humiliate in the smallest degree any member of this
Board. I say that advisedly, for if we are not working unitedly, friction
would very soon come in. My whole desire is that we shall all pull
together. My desire is to place the affairs of the Bureau on a footing
that will enable the Secretary to be brought into touch with the Minister
as much as possible, especially in his relationship between myself and
the Board. We shall talk over the matter again, and I daresay we shall
arrive at a workable plan.
Mr. Amherst : I would like now to record my thanks to Mr.
Harper, our President, and my thanks to Mr. Lindley-Cowen, for the
able assistance they have always tendered us as members of the Board
towards carrying on the business of the Agricultural Bureau. We all
know how hard they have worked, and I do not think it out of place
100
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


that I, one of the oldest members, should on this occasion ask to have
recorded our recognition of their services, to Mr. Harper, as President,
and to Mr. Cowen, as Secretary. Mr. Throssell, we have always worked
well with you, and lam sure we shall always work well with you. We
are sure of the cordiality with which you will co-operate with us, and it
will be a pleasure to us to have you as our Ministerial head.
The President : I just wish to say on behalf of the members of the
Board that we thank Mr. Cowen for his expression of high regard for us,
and for the work that we have done. I only wish that we could
imagine that we deserve all that he has said of us. But I can say that,
able and indefatigable as Mr. Cowen has proved himself to be as Secre-
tary to the Board, he is entitled to our best word ; we could never have
achieved the success we have with a less efficient Secretary.
The Commissioner : I endorse that heartily.
The President: lam pleased to know taat in later circumstances,
perhaps the wider held that has been given to Mr. Cowen will give freer
range to his activities. You may be sure, Mr. Throssell, that the Minister
will find that Mr. Cowen will be ready to work if, unhappily, red tape
does not swamp and check his ardour.
The Commissioner : No reflections. (Laughter.) lam quite certain
Mr. Cowen will benefit in his new sphere, and I hope he will live long
to enjoy it.
The President (to the Commissioner) ; I have on behalf of the Board
to express our thanks to you, Sir, for the very kind and cordial manner in
which you have expressed your appreciation of the work of the Board,
and for the assurances you have given of our future united efforts.
The Commissioner: Thankyou,Sir ; thank you very much. I hope our
leave-takings under the old order of things will be recorded on the minutes
The Secretary : Especially about the red tape. If you think, Sir, I have
given the Board more gratitude than they deserve, it was not more than
my affections dictated.
The Conference then closed.
WEATHER NOTES.
The temperature at Perth during January was about normal, the
mean of the maximum readings was slightly below, and the mean of the
minimum slightly above the averages for previous years. It compares to
our advantage with that of Adelaide, where the great heat has continued.
The mean maximum at the Observatory (83*8) was 6-3 below that at the
Adelaide Observatory, and our mean minimum (64-2) was 22 higher. But
whilst we have been favored with ordinary warm summer weather other
parts of the colony have not been so fortunate. The figures showing the
mean maximum readings on the Murchison fields and Menzies speak for
themselves : —lO2-3 at Yalgoo, 105-0 at Cue, 102-0 at Lawlers, and ioo'i
at Menzies. Be it remembered that these are not the records for one day,
but the average of the maximum readings for the month, and that they
represent the standard shade temperature. The highest record for the
month exceeded no at a great number of the stations, the maximum
being 117-0 at Onslow. The south coast is a greatly favored district in
the summer, the mean maximum at the Leeuwin was 74-2, at Albany
73-3, and at Breaksea 69-3. The highest reading was only 81-6 at the
Leeuwin, 82-8 at Albany, and 76-1 at Breaksea.
Printed and Published by authority of the Hon. Geo. Throssell, M.L.A., Commissioner of Crown Lands, by
E. S. WIGG & SON, Hay Street, Perth.
101
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE.


S ■§ 8 ~
-4 O -G G c >-h lO IN •+ 'l' O H n n *■“* In. C'O KO'O^fOQHH
•G Hns3 il C'OC fN Cro 030 ► . > Tt- rt (N ►-< O OO O Pt" CN
u 2
G
’c« w o.S •
QC *g
.S oa c « ~ca n -"2 M *> S' o S' O' 2 w ,2? 2 il S
O 0 O o (O 100 fl tOOO O to 000 ►>. 't'tM NH\O OO'O'TCS
dl .« J 3 g CO cOO to n MH N <-*<-*<<* MtOl-l
oi
1s HHoaoiO'f-ooOHiotoMHwHMoooaotOHHooooaoNO'
. Q MH N« N N PH MtO W MMPI IH p-p ,-, M t-l rt
CO
CD _
CO 8 n OONOOpiflOi-OO'nOoOOOONOOoo iOvO rt- o tt- m ts
>-
DC 1 O tfO N M N N HUI« C"0 w p-p M m O of- rt S' t> t>
| h h H « N H H CM
»
i-
_2 1» . OOOtniOOOO-OOMOOMNNO'WO'OOOvOp 1030 Ji p
< g II g'S 2 2 S rgSS&io So^'R'B
-3 a _ „ _, M ~ ~ -H M ~ » tH KH M ~ rt M ~
(J 'S 43 j lOMPre'pp'pptttolO'-POOtort-tOO'OtNOPt “I'D «X» N +
z •§§ 1 g^irs^Ks^a^i?si3isfeKiis.ss<g
5 ..
3
ST g 4 [ ONOOHifINSPNOO'OO toco Hh N thn i'N pvp P N
D -O' u 35 t+.-> on 30 T+- to io *f >H ioo M O to t’o t(- to •“t" CO NtOO to 00 O HI
CC gg j NO N?.?.NNO'O 0 NNNNxO'O'O'O'O'O muiOvO lfllOvO«
S
o
•—< ft, c -J O 0 0 toO« N'flNO too O H o*o H NOM tt O' to to too
§ 8| 8 S'g'&Sg gS £5 S 'o°S 8 &&&«£■&» ££££ £££
oca
► EC
I _ p. S o • o m in to too 0000 : O' O' ;t^
Oi < rt 2 t 4p tN M tV N « N « <H H : ItHNMfIMMMMWM .O
—5 os o Q
:
oo oo wo tf oco o -to Hifl oO' rt-o S 2 212? 2 S' 2
•J O *3 pi. .fl
a 3 S lO : IT) Ko Io to tf -t ts in It) ;to 'O ; tototo'Oto to ‘O UO Tt- : o
ZH « sj b'’t>c'o'b'b'o'o'o'b'o' O'O' b'b'b'b'b'b'b'b'b'd' 'o
Prt t- O rioioSSScNtNtNMtN N N NfINNWNNNNtI tN
*d -
ri ° "
r; to v n : o»oo»»»HMtiK :sg N w 2- 2 m H ' t ' tH H ;w
r“0-«> re <N : MWNWMMi-IP-IW-CNtS'' ri«r-,PH
CO O- Q
U£ «
u a)
8 ■« ,o m oao w oiftotf tto S; “S 2 ° 'SI P
8 2? P'S or.lOtONtiltiN , tOM Otl M 'tH ti-ro'J-O toO' . N
V- 43 O' IooOO'O'O'O'O'OOO' ;Ohi)mhhhhhhhmh : «
-2 .BP G''o'bb'C'b'b'C'bcb' oooocoooocooo o
U- u j; to to to to to to to to to to to to to to
O 5
re --dg o v afi(itiif)ONOC'fi coo i-'OtoN O O'*h »» O « eg
M o°®_- § Roh S O tON . KO'OtOtl " M 0-C»0» " O .O
w Sg 1 00 * I s * In [n In In 30 30 O'- 30 [n •In 30 30 0 s 0 s 0 s 0 s 0 s 30 0 s O •O n I
Ho "2 r*\ * r*\ cn C> O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O O'
n <N
J fI 0 - S
. ir n rriN no ro>ON- m N -t Nr> N w r, O M O
fo O 'tt>flH UOIO H H HUC't to
t* J © o 12 « CrCr 2 Brt tt^ * ?s 8 s BiB>P>torototoro<otototototo
h~ ::::::::::::
*• : : : • to
b
. O T 3
O Sic | ll'
t-> ~ s m 1-1 u
•43 Si o o- S tOTCcxictco J! c rt y
« rtrT .. _ > c 2 ? « b i>ncs fi Crt i ’2 . « c
o _eU S Cfl % CaS o I- «) O rt C 2 33J Ctocnrt
J "Hoi’ll g-i Sa « § a’E g,*g|| g I
1 ( £ t £4:«!2o!2^|(S ( 3
3
£
o
o
<
c
0)
£
n
p
c
O
W
US
o
o
CJ
H
X
a
X
X
£
102
THE CLIMATE OF W.A. DURING JANUARY, 1898.


Society,
Albany Horticultural Society
Albany and District Settlers’ Association
Beverley Agricultural Society
Beverley Branch Bureau
Brunswick Farmers’ Club
Balingup Farmers’ Association
Boyanup F. and P. Association
Busselton Branch Bureau
•Capel Farmers’ Association
Central Preston Association
Coogee Agricultural and Horticultural Society ...
•Cookernup Farmers’ Association
Cookernup Farmers’ Progress Association
■Coolup and Marinup Farmers’ Association
Darling Range Vine and Fruitgrowers’ Assn, ...
Deepdale Farmers’ and Fruitgrowers’ Association
Drakes Brook Agricultural Association
East Beverley Farmers’ Association
Esperance Agric. and Horticultural Society
Ferguson Progress Association
■Great Southern Pastoral and Agric. Society
Greenough Farmers’ Club
Geraldton Agric. and Horticultural Society
Greenhills Progress Association
Greenhills Branch Bureau
•Goomaliing Farmers' Club
Harvey Agricultural Alliance
Helena Wine and Fruitgrowers’ Association
Irwin Agricultural Society
Irishtown Farmers’ Club
Irishtown Branch Bureau
Jennapullen Agricultural Society
Jandakot Agricultural Society
Katanning Fanners’ Association
Katanning Branch Bureau
Kelmscott and Armadale Agricultural Society ...
Kojonup Agricultural and Horticultural Society
Lower Blackwood Farmers’ and Graziers’ Assn.
Meckering Agricultural .Society
Mombekine Agricultural Society
Murray Horticultural Society
Murray Districts Farmers’ and Fruitgrowers’
Co-operative Association
Northam Agricultural Society
Nelson Agricultural Society
Nelson Branch Bureau ...
Narrogin Agricultural Alliance
Narrogin Branch Bureau
Northerners’ Association
Newcastle Branch Bureau
Newtown Farmers’ Progress Association
Preston Progress Association
Pii gelly Agricultural Society
Royal Agricultural Society
Southern Districts Agricultural Society
South Murray Farmers’ Association
Swan Districts Vine and Fruitgrowers’ Assn.
Toodyay Agricultural Society
Toodyay Vine and Fruitgrowers’ Association ...
Wellington Agricultural and Pastoral Society ...
Wellington Vine and Fruitgrowers’ Association
Wagin Farmers’ Alliance
Wagin Branch Bureau ...
Waigerup Association
Wandering District Agricultural Society
Wandering-Hotham Branch Bureau
Waroona Agricultural and Progress Association
Secretary.
Edward Potts, Albany.
J. Mowforth, Albany.
D. Kilpatrick, Beverley.
D. Kilpatrick, Beverley.
J. Partridge, Brunswick.
F. W. F. Lukis, Balingup.
W. K. Salter, Boyanup.
Percy Carter, Vasse.
F. O. Maitland, Coolingup, S.W.R.
J. L, Bentley, Preston.
W. H. Allen, Stockdale, Coogee Lake,
M. A. Wickham, Cookernup.
Geo. Bridle, Flowerheld, Cookernup.
J. W. Phillipe, Coolup.
vV. Swindells, Gooseberry Hill.
A. E. Stevens, Avondale, Toodyay.
John Sutton, Drakes Brook.
H. Morgan, East Beverley.
John Rushton, Esperance.
W. Bdcker, Dardanup.
C. T. Morgan, Broomehill.
Geo. E. Morrall, Greenough.
H. T. H. Morris, Geraldton.
W. B. Parker, Greenhills, York.
W. B. Parker, Greenhills.
R. M. Eaton, Margerin, via Northam,
J. E. Knowles. Harvey.
M. H. Jacoby, Mundaring.
Thos. Hughes, Dongarra.
B. M’Manus, Irishtown, Northam.
B. M’Manus, Irishtown.
J. Morris, Northam.
G. J. Morgan, Beaconsfield P.O.
F. T. F. Crosby, Katanning.
F. T. F. Crosby. Katanning.
J. L. .Lockyer, Kelmscott.
J. M. Flanagan, Kojonup.
E. C. MAtee, Lower Blackwood.
G. F. Halbert, Meckering.
Alex. Glass, Mombekine.
Mrs. Fawcett, Pinjanah.
Ernest Fawcett, Pinjarrah.
H. Hall, Northam.
R. C. Williams, Bridgetown.
R. C. Williams, Bridgetown.
W. H, Ingram, Narrogin.
H. Winzor-Lovelock, Narrogin.
T. R. Lowe, Perth.
W. A. Demasson, Newcastle.
Thos. A. Thurkle, Woodlands, Vasse.
T. B. Jones, Rock Hill, Upper Preston.
W, Chas. Strickland, Pingelly.
G. W, E. Broome, Guildford.
P. Carter, Vasse.
Chas. Matheson, Waigerup.
A. Despeissis (acting), Perth,
E. J. Hasson, Newcastle.
W. A. Demasson, Newcastle.
W. S. Hales, Bunbury.
E. E. Tyler, Bunbury.
O. R. Taylor, Wagin.
J. G. Taylor, Wagin.
T. Crogan, Waigerup.
W. B. Smithson, Wandering.
W. B. Smithson, Wandering.
J. H. Bray, Waroona.
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETIES.


Agricultural Societies ( Continued ).
Wongamine Farmers’ Club ... ... G. W. B. Sir
Wongamine Farmers’ Club ... ... G. W. B. Smith, Wongamine.
W.A. Horticultural Society ... ... G. Fuchs, Perth.
Warterloo Farmers’ Protection Association ... E. Y. Clifton, Waterloo.
Williams Branch Bureau ... ... S. E. Tribe, Williams.
York Agricultural Society ... ... H. J. Horley, York.
York Branch Bureau ... ... ... J. S. Durlacher, York.
ANALYSES OF SOILS.
The Bureau ok Agriculture is now prepared to make analyses of soils, and furnish a full report orr
same, for the sum of ios. 6d for each analysis. All samples to be delivered free at the oflices of the Bureau.
West Australian Chambers, St. George’s Terrace, Peith, accompanied by the above-named fee. The follow-
ing instructions should be adhered to in taking samples >
When the soil in a field is uniform, or nearly so, a spot is chosen from which to take the sample, or if
an average sample is desired several spots are chosen. First scrape the surface lightly with a sharp tool to
remove surface vegetation and half-decayed vegetable matter that has not as yet become part of the soil.
Dig a hole 12 to 18 inches square and 12 inches deep. The sides of this hole must be perpendicular, and the
bottom nearly horizontal. From one side cut vertical slices until about 10 lbs. of soil has been obtained,
and place on a sack. The same thing is done at the other spots chosen All the lots of soil are to be then
thoroughly mixed together and about 10 lbs. taken from the heap for a sample. This should be packed in
canvas or a wooden box. A metal box must not be used. If a sample of the subsoil is to be sent for
analysis it can be taken from the same hole, or holes, as the surface soil, and in the same manner, going
down 12 inches deeper. Persons sending soils for analyses should state briefly, in the case of virgin land,
the character and variety of timber growing on the land ; the purpose to which the land is to be put ; the
configuration of the surface ; natural drainage ; average rainfall ; whether it is proposed to irrigate ; and
any other particulars which may assist the analyst in prescribing manures. When samples are sent from
old land it should be stated, in addition to the above particulars, whether the land has ever received.any
dressings of manures, when, and of what kind, and the crops that have been principally grown on the land
since it was first cleared.
ANALYSES OF WATERS.
Analyses of waters for irrigation and stock purposes will also be made by the Bureau of Agriculture for
a fee of ss. for each sample. The following instructions should be observed in taking the samples :
If it is proposed to irrigate with the water, such must be stated, and the crops it is proposed to irrigate.
Not less than three quart bottles of the water must be sent, and in taking the sample the bottles should be
half filled from the source of supply and thoroughly rinsed twice, and then filled quite full and securely
corked.
ANALYSES OF FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS.
Regulations—(Gazetted June 5, 1896.) “ Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1895.”
By virtue of the provisions of Section 4 of ‘The Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1895,” His Excellency
the Governor in Council has been pleased to make the following regulations:—
1. The fee payable to the Agricultural Analyst of the Bureau of Agriculture by the buyer or seller of
any article manufactured or found in the colony of Western Australia, or imported from abroad, used for
fertilising the soil, for an analysis of same, shall be as follows ;
s, d.
For determining percentage of nitrogen .. .. ... ..76
„ „ „ potash .. .. .. .. 76
„ „ „ phosphoric acid in soluble form .. .. 12 6
„ ~ „ phosphoric acid in insoluble form .. .. 12 6
2. The fee payable to the Agricultural Analyst by the buyer or seller of any article used as food for
live stock, which has been artificially' prepared or manufactured in the colony of Western Australia, or
imported from abroad, for analysis of same, shall he as follows :
For determining percentage of water .. .. .. .. .. 26
„ „ „ albuminoids .. .. .. .. 79
„ „ „ oil .. .. .. .. ..5 3
„ „ „ fibre .. .. .. .. .. 53
, „ „ ash .. .. .. .. .. 26
3. Every seller and every buyer of any article used for fertilising the soil shall be entitled, on payment
to the analyst of the fee or fees in accordance with Regulation 1, to have the article analysed by the analyst,
and to receive from him, within 14 days, a certificate of the result of his analysis.
The certificate of the analyst shall be in the following form :
I, the undersigned A. 8., analyst, do hereby certify that on the day'of 18 . I
received a sample labelled {here state name of fertiliser, and of the manufacturer or importer , his
place of business, trade mark , or figure (if any j ] for analysis, the result of which is as follows
Hercentage of nitrogen.
Percentage of soluble phosphates.
Percentage of insoluble phosphates.
Percentage of potash.
4. Every seller and every buyer of any' article used as food for live stock, which has been artificially
prepared or manufactured in the colony of Western Australia or imported from abroad, shall be entitled, on
payment to the analyst of the fee or fees in accordance with Regulation 2, to have the article analysed by the
analyst, and to receive from him, within fourteen days, a certificate of the result of his analysis.
5. The buyer, on receiving delivery of any fertiliser or feeding stuff, and before otherwise breaking the
bulk thereof, shall, in the presence of the analyst, a Justice of the Peace, or a police constable, take three
samples of article and cause them to be marked with the date and place of sampling, the names of the per-
sons present, the figures or trade mark on each package, sealed, and fastened up. and shall deliver or send
by post (prepaid), one sample with the invoice or a copy thereof, to the analyst, and shall deliver or send by
post as aforesaid another sample to the seller, and retain the third sample for future comparison,
6. On the request of the buyer or seller of any' fertiliser or feeding stuff, and on payment of the fee
prescribed by Regulations Nos. 1 and 2, the anah’st, or some person appointed by him in that behalf, before
or at the delivery of the article, shall take the samples on behalf of the buyer.
L. LINDLEY-COWEN,
sth June, 1896. Secretary Bureau of Agriculture.
