

PRICE SIXPENCE.
THE TRUTH
ABOUT
THE UNEMPLOYED AGITATION
OF 1890.
S . A. BOS A,
Author of “ Social Democracy Explained and Defended.”
WITH
PEEPACE BY H. H. CHAMPION.
■JBclbourne:
PUBLISHED BY S. A, ROSA,
SOLD BY T, SHORT, 191 ERROL STREET, N. MELBOURNE.




I am asked by Mr. S. A. Rosa to write a few words to
the readers of this account of the unemployed agitation
in Melbourne during the winter of 1890. I knew Mr.
Rosa slightly in the Socialist movement in London some five
years ago, and am glad to find that he has been so persistent-
in calling attention to the fundamental wrongs which, here
as in every civilized country, threaten the stability and the
peace of society. In doing this he has met with the oppo-
sition and calumny which is the lot of every man who
refuses to join in the chorus of “ Peace, peace, when there
is no peace.” It is quite possible that he might have got a
better hearing had he refrained from using language which
he very frankly admits may be called strong. But I have
not the slightest sympathy with anyone who has to make
the way in which a right thing is advocated an excuse for
doing the wrong thing. In this matter the wrong thing is
most emphatically to shut the eyes to an evil which exists ,
for its existence has been amply proved by events since this
agitation subsided. And if it is a question whether lam
to shout the truth with Mr. Rosa in a way shocking to ears
polite, or to lie in respectable whispers, I elect to be on his
side. Let those who blame him, ask themselves why they,
who quarrel with his manner of doing things, did not com-
pete with him in his most excellent work.
In any case, few Australians will on this 10th day of
September, 1890, dare to deny that the social problem exists.
Before twelve months are over it will be again before you
demanding a solution The crux of that problem is this
verv unemployed question—-Das Recht auf Arbeit, which
even Bismarck has been compelled to assent to. Use this
year well and you Australians may do much. Shut your
ears to the truth, and the truth will demand a hearing in
language much more shocking than you have yet heard.
IT. IT. Champ ion.
Yquick Club, Melbourne,




THE TRUTH
About the Unemployed Agitation
OF 1890.
the winter of 1889, a few Social Democrats, including Mr*
Jl, W. D. Flinn and the writer of this pamphlet, carried on an
agitation in favor of the starting by the Government of works
of a special character in order to relieve the distress which then
existed. At the same time these “agitators” established a
temporary Free Labour Exchange, and by the collection of
public subscriptions provided a large number of destitute men
with food and other assistance. The determined refusal of the
Government to start special work, the silence of the plutocratic
press which was only broken occasionally by a paragraph or two
misrepresenting the movement and abusing its leaders, the
apathy and want of spirit of the majority of the unemployed
themselves, and the outrageous conduct of those peculiar pro-
ducts of our “ glorious civilization ” —the loafers, combined to
cause Social Democrats to hesitate about taking up the move-
ment in the winter of 1890. Sparsely attended meetings were
held however by some of the unemployed, and at one of these
it was decided to ask the Salvation Army to organize the relief
of the distress, which that body consented to do. Meetings of
the unemployed then ceased to be held for the time being, the
Secretary of the movement becoming a member of the Salvation
Army.
The fact that the “ Army ” had undertaken the distribution of
charitable relief to the unemployed caused us to believe that if
meetings were held at about the time that the officers of the
Salvation Army were distributing food we should at least be
relieved of the comparatively small but troublesome class of
poor loafers. The rich loafers we did not fear as we knew that


they would be engaged elsewhere, gambling on the Stock Ex-
change or otherwise exploiting labour. Therefore, when on
June 30th Mr. J. W. Fleming held a meeting of the unem-
ployed on the vacant land next to the Workingmen’s College,
several members of the Social Democratic League attended and
took an active part in the proceedings. Addresses were delivered
hy Mr. John White, Mr. Fleming, Mr. Rosa, and others, and a
deputation of six appointed to immediately wait on the Minister
of Works and the Premier. On the breaking up of the meeting
the deputation (consisting of Messrs White, Fleming, Rosa and
others) accompanied by those who had formed the audience at
the meeting, proceeded to the Treasury. The men however did
not walk in procession, as the plutocracy have provided against
possible processons of the unemployed by declaring illegal,
processions unauthorised by the Mayor.
On arriving at the Treasury the deputation attempted to see
the Minister of Works, but that individual commenced a bad
course of action bjr giving a point blank refusal to the request
for an interview. The deputation then proceeded to the office <>t
the Premier, who proved to be absent; on going down stairs
however they saw the Premier coming in and followed him to
his office; he also refused to see the deputation, but when they
sent in word that they would wait until he came out, he consented
to see one of them, no doubt thinking that it would be easier to
browbeat or befool one than six. They however selected one,
Mr. John White, who, though he has a natural antipathy to
capitalistic Premiers, has too much wit and shrewdness to be
easily worsted in argument by them Mr. White reminded
Mr, Gillies of the promise he gave last year that every effort
would be made to find employment for bona fide workmen, and
added that there were 100 men completely destitute, and Mr.
Gillies gave the stereotyped reply that “ no doubt distress
“ existed, but if the men went into the country districts they
“ would find plenty of employment. Under the circumstances
“ the best plan to adopt was for the men to sign their names to
“ a statement showing the kind of work they were able to perform
<f and to submit it to the consideration of the Commissioner of
Public Works.” • . ( . y ,
Mr. White remarked that this would take time, and. that
meanwhile the men would be left-to die-in the streets. He knew
he said of six of his. old mates-wffio J h^d-been driven to suicide,
through want of employment. To this Mr. Gillies rejoined that


if it were true, it would, have became known at the inquest.
Mr. White said that the verdicts were simply l ' found drowned,”
The interview was then concluded.
Another meeting was held the next day, which was attended
bv about 1800 men, the “ Ananias,” as the Age was once, and
should still be called, stating that there were but 300. The
result of the interview with Mr Gillies was given, and it was
resolved to ignore the suggestion that the men should all sign
their names to a statement asking for work, as that had been
done last year, and plain-clothes policemen had been sent round
to the addresses given, to “ make inquiries,” the inquirers well
knowing that they were to report adversely, made careful note
of any tittle tatle of the neighbours as to the moral character of
the applicant for employment. If (owing to the fact that some
of the men being destitute, they had been unable to pay rent in
town and bad left) the inquirers could not find the man they sought
they reported the signature as false. The result was that a large
per-centage of the signatures were declared not genuine ,and most
of the others were stated to be those of men of bad moral
character. In the opinion of our sapient Government apparently,
it is better that a man who has once been guilty of a moral lapse
should be made worse by want of employment, than that he
should be given a chance of becoming valuable to the community
as w r ell as to himself by being provided with reproductive em-
ployment.
The same gentlemen were appointed to wait on J. B Patterson
the Minister of Public Works, and as this man has to sustain
his reputation as the Government’s bully-in-general, he no doubt
considered that he would have to show that he was equal to
twice as much in that line as Gillies, ao he consented to see two
members of the deputation. Messrs. White and I leming were
selected, and repeated what Mr. White had said to the Premier
the previous day. What Mr. Patterson said I abridge from the
Age, which together with the other organs of bourgeois opinion
exulted in the insolence and brutality of his reply.
Mr. Patterson said —“ He trusted they wmuld go away with-
out mistaking the fact that he did not intend to provide a system
of labour wiiich wnuld reduce Victoria to a huge workhouse.
The Salvation Army, for which they had expressed such unjust
contempt, had come forward in a magnanimous manner with the
object of assisting the unemployed to find work. He thought
the “ army ” was doing good work, because it was rescuing


men from ruin, and alleviating their distress or suffering. Tie
regretted to see two men endowed with certain gifts and talents
turning them to the worst possible account. When their labors
were compared with those of the Salvation Army, whom they so
unjustly derided, they would be found to be low down on the
ladder of fame. They must remember that there were people
out of employment at Ballarat, Sandhurst, and Castlemaine.
Mr. White : They will also have to be provided with work by
the Grovernment.
Mr. Patterson: No. They were not beggars. They had
British pluck, and like many more who came to the colon v in
the fifties, had shouldered their swags and marched off to the
diggings without being hampered with fine notions about dwelling
houses, bath houses and many other of the things they were
asking for. In the early days men went forward bravely and
fought the battle of life in a manly way. If the deputation
went outside and taught their fellow men lessons of self-reliance,
temperance and general thrift, and counselled them to enter the
field of open competition, then they would be doing some good,
but instead of that they became noisy and boisterous agitators
who led innocent men astray,
Mr. .Fleming : You were once an agitator yourself.
Mr. Patterson said there were agitators and agitators, but he
had no sympathy with that class to which they, as representatives
of the men outside belonged. In a word, he had no respect for
them whatever, and if the Grovernment was to encourage them
it would be doing a national evil.
The reply of this man to the courteous request of two respec-
table workmen who are at present (August 1890) both at work
at their respective trades was not only insolent but untruthful.
As however Mr. Patterson surpassed himself at a later date, I
will not deal with him as he deserves, at present.
It may be imagined that the unemployed, many of whom were
destitute, did not receive Mr. Patterson’s remarks in a very
friendly spirit. Hitherto the speakers had been moderate in tone
but it was felt that it was now about time to ‘‘ bit out straight,’ 7
and that some of the speakers did so, the following report from
the Argus of July 4 will testify. I must however premise that
in all the newspaper reports considerable allowance must be
made for the luxurient imaginations of the reporters, 1 must
also mention that the previous day we had been prevented by the
police from interviewing Messrs. GHllies and Deakin.


MEETING- OF THE UNEMPLOYED.
WILD ALLUSIONS TO MUSKETS AND DYNAMITE.
-A nother meeting of the unemployed was held yesterday
morning in Latrobe-street' The numbers assembled were small
as compared with the gathering of the previous day. There
could not have been more than 300 men present.
Mr. Fleming, who opened the proceedings, explained that he
would only be enabled to devote another day to the organization
•of the unemployed, as he had arranged to go to work on Monday
next. It was the duty of the men to make demonstrations each
day in order to force the Government to do something for the
relief of the present distress.
Another speaker, Avhose name did not transpire, related the
instance of a strike amongst miners ip a Cornish village many
years ago. The demands made by the men, which were just,
were refused, and they decided one market day to seize the
farmers’ produce as it was brought into the town, and sell it at a
fair value amongst the distressed families. He recommended that
the men in Melbourne should adopt similar action, as it was quite
easy to carry out such a plan if its execution were only decided
upon It was useless to continue speaking; what was wanted
was action.
Mr. Kosa felt that they were forced to adopt a policy of des-
peration. Expelled by force from the Government offices, denied
the constitutional right of interviewing the Ministers of the
Crown, they were unable to adopt any other policy. He believed
that if the men were driven to despair the men had the right to
loot. But it was to be remembered that raids should only be
made on the shops of the rich men, and not on those of the
poor. It Avould be well to force the gun-shops first, if this could
be done without bloodshed. It was useless to ask the men to make
themselves the possessors of muskets, as they were at present in
a destitute condition. However, when the pinch of poverty was
overcome and they secured work they ought to reserve a certain
sum out of their weekly earnings for the purpose of buying
muskets. It Avould be Avell, too, if they Aventout into the outlying
districts and there practised military drill and firing exercise.
It Avas the active and energetic minority Avho always succeeded in
■converting the negligent and easy going majority to a sense of
their responsibilities. If 5000 Avell-armed and well-drilled mem-


bers of the unemployed paraded the principal streets of Melbourne
they would be able to displace any Government that neglected to
realise its duty in dealing with distress in its midst. The atten-
tion of the unemployed should also be directed to the use of
dynamite, nitro-glycerine, and melinite as elements likely to aid
them in their struggles against the plutocratic classes. It would
be well if the men paraded the “ block ” in or Jer to make their
presence felt there, if they could not secure any aid from the
Government,
Other speakers having followed, the meeting dispersed, the
greater number of the men travelling in the direction of Swanston
Street and Bourke Street, where, however, no trouble was-
created. A deputation was sent to interview ministers, but Mr.
Gillies, Mr. Deakin. and Mr. Patterson intimated through the
police that they were unable to receive any of the representatives
of the men.
The effect of speeches of this character was soon seen by the
fact that most of the capitalistic papers abandoned the
“ conspiracy of silence,” and became alarmed for the safety of
their clients, the land “boomers” employers, capitalists, and others
whose interest it is to have a large number of men out of work in
order that competition of these men shall keep down the wages
of those who are employed. The Argus published an article
drawing attention to the speeches of the “ gasconading fire-
brand ” Rosa and beseeching employers all over the colony to
provide as much work as they conveniently or inconveniently
could, while the Standard which had been rendered particularly
savage by the fact that I had carried a resolution at several
meetings, boycotting it for its attacks upon the unemployed,
expressed strangely sudden sympathy for those out of work,
but with regard to the boycotter, expressed its conviction that
“ the working-men, staunch and true as they are, would hunt
the vile ranters of this noxious type” from their midst. It did
not come off however, and the following appeared in the Herald
for the evening of July 4th.
THE UNEMPLOYED,
VERY VIOLENT LANGUAGE.
Rosa said he was an agitator, and he was proud of the title.
He was in favor of night meetings, because by means of them
they could scare the rich. He was not advising looting the


shops, bat he did advise them to scare the rich. It was only the
tear of the mob that would move the rich, and he therefore
advocated mob fear in order to terrify the wealthy, A genuine
mob put the fear of man into rich men’s hearts, for the fear of
God never affected them, i'hree days ago the Argus had a vile
article about the unemployed, but this morning it came out with
one that was dictated by fear—the fear of agitators such as
himself, and the fear of an infuriated and desperate mob. But
even in this morning’s article in the Argus, the cloven hoof of
the capitalist was to be seen, for it suggested that the
unemployed should be treated to the “sweating system.”
Other speakers followed, and finally it was resolved that a
public meeting be held. Also, that an effort be made to secure
the Town Hall for the meeting. Also, to endeavour to get
members of Parliament to be present, and assist at the meeting.
Also, that a deputation of five wait on the Trades Hall Council
this evening, for the purpose of asking them to interest them-
selves in the unemployed movement. It was resolved, more-
over —that the unemployed walk up and down the Block all this
afternoon, but not form into a procession or loiter on the
path.
ALARMING RUMORS,
In consequence of wild and reckless statements made by
certain of the so-called leaders of the unemployed, it was feared
by the police authorities that a raid might be made on some of
the jewellers’ shops in Collins street. The Chief Commissioner
of Police issued an order directing all the detectives available to
proceed to Collins street ani keep watch for the unemployed.
Inspector Larkin, with a number of constables, was also on the
look out. Detectives Ward, Nixon, Cawsey, D. G. O’Donnell,
Macmanamy, Wardley, and other well-known detectives keep
watch in Collins street, ready for any emergency. The antici-
pated procession along that street did not take place, and no
disturbance whatever ensued.
We succeeded in getting one M.L.A. to speak at the public
meeting on July 6th, (for which of course we could not get the
Town Hall), that gentleman was Dr. Maloney, an honest man,
who it is a pity to see in such bad company as that of most of
the members of the Legislative Assembly. His speech thus
-appeared in the Argus-. —


Dr, Maloney, M.L.A., quite understood that tlie men had no-
desire to receive charity, which once had been defined as the
makeshift of the rich to still remorse. If there had been
any disposition on the part of the Government to open relief
works this could easily have been managed. The West
Melbourne swamp was in a disgraceful state, and could not
some of the men be engaged, there P The Minister of Public
Works had returned a candid no to the deputation which waited
upon him, and since then he bad refused to see the representa-
tives again. If he were in a destitute condition like some of the
men around him, he would know how to act, If he were
starving he would thieve, and if he had little ones depending
upon him he would do worse. It was useless to talk about
fighting; that must be the last resort of the unemployed, and
he trusted they would never be forced to adopt it in this colony.
They had a perfect right to insist upon the opening of relief
works.
Meanwhile the “ press-gang ” became quite frantic at the
proceedings of the “ruffianly agitators.” The Argus called
upon the Chief Commissioner of Police to order my arrest,
while the Telegraph said, “ the man Rosa has said things during
the last week, which should properly lodge him in the public
pillory, if not land him permanently in gaol.” However “the
man Rosa” still continued to “say things,” and the following
report appeared in the Argus of July 9th.
A meeting of the unemployed was held yesterday in Latrobe
street, near the Working Men’s College.
Mr. Rosa, referring to the offers made by the Government to
issue passes to workmen willing to go into the country, advised
them not to leave the city. The distress was almost as great in
the country districts as in the city, and the chances of finding
employment were not to be reckoned upon. Some of the men
who had gone into the country last winter in the hope of finding
w r ork had informed him that not only had they failed to get em-
ployment, but some of them were hounded out of the districts
visited, by the police- Mr. Davies, M.L.A., had stated to the men
some time ago that it was hopeless to seek for work in the
country. The fact that distress did exist among the workers was
demonstrated by the instructions given to the Commissioner of
Railways, and the efforts made by the Harbour Trust Commis-
sioners to find work for the men. The obstinacy of the Govern-


ment in refusing to open relief works would only accelerate the
rapidly approaching social revolution- In The Argus of that
morning might be seen cable messages that clearly indicated the
nature of the writing on the wall. The London police, led by
Mr. John Burns, and the London postmen, led by Mr. Fred
Henderson, both of whom were socialists, indicated the direction
the labour movement was taking. Policemen as well as postmen
were merely wage-earners, like the average workmen, and they
were entitled to equal consideration. He trusted that the
Victorian workman would not lag behind the Londoner in the
forward march of Socialism, and he hoped that they would act as
pioneers in the movement. They must, however, remember that
force was the basis of all government, and if they wished to have
their grievances attended to they must be prepared to use force.
A dozen disciplined men would scatter to the winds any un-
diciplined mob, and the native Australian who received a thorough
knowledge of drilling at school would in the future be a principal
factor in righting the wrongs that at present existed.
Mr. Gillies had stated that instructions had been given to the
Railway and Harbour Trust Commissioners to provide as much
work as possible, but as they could not provide work for even
one tenth of the unemployed, the “ agitators” were by no means
satisfied.
On July 9th I determined to take a step which would not only
attract extraordinary attention to the case of the unemployed,
but would also cause considerable commotion in the minds of the
the many snobbish parvenus who infest Melbourne, and whose
peculiar “cult ” is the worship of “His Excellency the Governor.”
The following report of what took place is from the Telegraph.
The numbers were, however, twice as many as those given by
the D. T . reporter.
THE UNEMPLOYED.
EXCITING PROCEEDINGS.
THE GOVERNOR INTERVIEWED AT GOVERNMENT
HOUSE.
THE GATES GUARDED BY MILITARY AND POLICE,
Yesterday’s proceedings of the unemployed were of a more
special kind than heretofore. Between 600 and 700 men met on


fhe vacant space near tlie orking-men s College, in tlie mornm ir ,
and. it was at once seen that something out of the common was
to take place.
Mr, Rosa, who has taken a prominent part in the agitation so
far, referred in strong terms, to the inability of the majority of the
unemployed to undertake such work as that provided by the Har-
bour 1 rust, which was only fitted for very strong and experienced
men. He also referred to the lack of provision for either food or
tools for those engaged, although it was proved afterwards that
tools were available had the trust chosen to give them.
Mr. Beath said he had written to the leading citizens of
Melbourne, and to Mr. Gillies, representing the distress, and had
not received any reply. It showed they had nothing to expect
from either the Government or people. Something must be
done.
Mr, Rosa moved—“ That, in opinion of this meeting, it is
utterly impossible for the Commissioners of the Harbour Trust
and the Commissioners of Railways to provide employment for
the large number of men out of employment, and it strongly
urges on the Government the absolute necessity of starting re-
productive relief works in order to give them employment’ or,
in the event of this not being done, the meeting will not be
responsible for the result.”
He said that if they let the Government see that if they did
not give them work they themselves would make work, they
would get it.
A number of other speakers followed, all hinting at desperate
measures being desirable if all appeals to Government failed.
The motion was put to the meeting, and unanimously carried.
Mr Rosa moved—“ That a deputation, consisting of Messrs,
h linn, Beath, Paul and himself, wait on a distinguished person-
age.”
He declined to mention the name as inadvisable.
The motion was put, and carried unanimously.
Mr. Rosa then said the deputation were going to start at once
on their mission, and if those present chose to follow there was
nothing to prevent them.
The crowd took the hint, and a long procession followed the
leaders down Swanston-street. towards the Town Hall.
Several plainclothes police, including Senior-Constable Glees -»n,
and Constables Canty and Scott, as well as others in uniform,
first surmised they were going to interview the Mayor, and took


measures accordingly, but on the procession passing the Town
Hall, the ultimate destination was guessed, and communication
was at once established by telephone with the Russell-street
station and the depot on the St. Kilda-road, with the result that
cab after cab laden with police quickly proceeded to Government
house, while the military and police stationed at the deput
hastened to form an extra guard at the outside gates, so that
when about 500 odd of the unemployed, headed by their deputies,
arrived there, they found their way strongly barred,
For a time their request for admission was denied, on the
ground that they had made no arrangement for seeing his
Excellency.
A discussion commenced among the crowd, during which the
deputies drafted a message to the G-overnor. claiming their right
to an interview. Prior to this being completed, however, Capt.
Wallington, who had been advised of the deputation, arrived at
the gate and interviewed Rosa and his colleagues.
Captain Wallington treated them with courtesy, and after a
little delay announced that the Governor would receive them
with pleasure, the passing of the deputies through the gates
being greeted with exultant cheers by the crowd.
Lord Hopetoun received the deputies very courteously,
shaking hands with each
Mr. Rosa stated that the deputation had waited upon his
Excellency in order to represent that there was a terrible amount
of distress in Melbourne. The Prime Minister had promised to
use his influence with the Commissioners of Railways and Harbour
Trust, to find work for the unemployed, but these bodies could
not possibly find work for them, as the people, who were mostly
artisans and clerks, could not undertake the herculean physical
labour required by these departments, It was, therefore, neces-
sary that the Government should provide relief works, and if
such were not provided the leaders would lose their influence
over the men, and they would commit acts of desperation. He
could assure his Excellency that the distress in Melbourne was as
serious in proportion to the population, as that which existed
among the poor of London.
Mr. Flinn followed, and after endorsing Rosa’s remarks, said
he had made every effort to obtain employment, but had failed.
Since the collapse of the land boom numbers of carpenters,
masons, and other artisans had been thrown out of work, and it
was impossible to obtain it unless relief works were established.


lie said Mr. Patterson had acknowledged that there were many
unemployed in Castlemaine, Ballarat, and other places, and,
accepting his word for it, it showed it would be useless for those
in the City to go into the country to seek work This was the
worst time of the year in the country, and married men, at any
rate, would not leave Melbourne without a guarantee that they
could find wprk to support those they left behind. The Eailway
and Harbour Trust work was totally unfitted to many of the un-
employed, who were, some of them, used to other lines of life,
some being old men who had helped to make the colony, but
were now unable to find work. They did not want charity, nor
work which would interfere with private firms; but if the
Government would arrange for even half a day’s work each day
at the standard prices, this would help them to tide over the
difficulties for a time.
Mr. Paul, a carpenter and joiner, said he had been out of work
for a considerable time, though he had done his utmost to obtain
employment. Very recently he had tendered for a very ordinary
contract, but was assured that the caller of the tenders had a
cement cask full of tenders, On another recent occasion 200
men waited outside an establishment in the rain for two hours,
while two mer were selected out of their number to work for 6s.
a day, though Bs. a day was the standard wage. He strongly
objected to the system of applying to the Salvation Army, and
thought it an insult to workmen to be told by Government, when
they were in need, to go to the Salvation Army, and associate
with criminals and thieves,
Mr. Beath said he was a colonist of fifteen years’ standing,
and a wood-turner and musician by trade. He had excellent
testimonials to prove his character and ability, yet he could not
obtain work. He endorsed the views of former speakers with re-
gard to the existing distress in Melbourne, and thought his
Excellency would understand what might happen if work was
not provided. He trusted he would not listen to the Press, but
only to what he had heard within his own four walls.
Mr Eosa suggested with regard to relief works that many of
the old buildings in Little Bourke-street and Little Lonsdale
street could be pulled down, and artisans’ dwellings erected.
Lord Hopetoun said : Well, gentlemen, I am sure I need
hardly say I leel the very greatest sympathy with those who are
in distress through no fault of their own. You can easily under-
stand that in my position here I cannot say much to you to-day.


because I am entirely in the hands of my advisers ; hut I shall
take the very first opportunity of laying before my advisers the
matters you have brought before me to-day, and I am certain
thev will receive careful consideration.
Mr Rosa: We are sure we have your sympathy, your
Excellency,
Lord Hopetoun : Entirely.
The deputation then withdrew. On arriving at the gate, some
anxiety was evinced as to what reception the deputation had met
with, and on Messrs. Rosa and Beath explaining what had been
done, three cheers were given for the Governor, and the crowd
dispersed.
The following report of the proceedings on July 10th is also
from the Daily Telegraph. The remarks as to the numbers
given in the previous report apply to this one also.
THE UNEMPLOYED.
SURPRISE MARCHES.
EPUTATIONS TO MINISTERS AND THE BISHOP
OF MELBOURNE
Yesterday morning the gathering of the unemployed at Latrobe
itreet was exceptionally large, at one time about 1000 men being
present.
Speeches were made by various leaders, and the proceed-
ings were very orderly.
Mr. Rosa denounced the Press for the opinions they had ex-
pressed, and after describing the transactions of the previous
day, moved—“ That the Government be asked to place £lO,OOO
on the estimates in order to provide for the opening of reproduc-
tive relief works for the benefit of those out of employment ”
He also advocated the principle of building artisans’ dwellings
by means of credit notes.
Several speakers followed, and the motion was unanimously
carried.
Mr Rosa then moved—“ That a deputation, consisting of
Messrs- Rosa, Flinn, Sharpies and Clayton, wait upon a certain
distinguished personage.”
This was agreed to.
The usual mystery was adopted, and the crowd of unemployed
followed the deputies with blind confidence along Swanston.


Street, into Bourke-street, thence along Elizabeth-street, and up
Collins-street to the Treasury Buildings, closely accompanied by
numbers of policemen in uniform and in plain clothes, and by an
ever-increasing crowd of spectators, until the number reached
some 2000 persons. Groans were indulged in as the newspaper
offices were passed in Collins-street, but whether for their special
benefit or for tbe police, some of whom were entering cabs to
proceed in front of the procession, was not apparent.
Arrived at the Treasury-buildings a long line of policemen
barred further progress. A momentary halt was made, but a
disposition was shown by a number of those accompanying the
deputies to break through the barrier, but their enthusiasm was
checked by a prompt display of handcuffs, which each constable
produced in readiness to resent any interference with their duty.
In the meantime a large number of people had mounted the
terrace of the Treasury-buildings to watch the proceedings,
which at one period seemed likely to be serious.
A parley between the deputies and Inspector Larkin, who was
in charge of the constabulary, ensued, Eosa stating the object of
the deputation as embodied in the resolution passed at the mass
meeting. Inspector Larkin then took in a message to Mr. Gillies
and to Mr. Patterson, requesting an interview.
Inspector Larkin returned with the information that the
Ministers would not receive them. A subsequent request to Mr.
Peakin met with a similar result.
As the crowd continued to block the roadway, Eosa was re-
quested to tell them to disperse. Eosa asked permission to
address the crowd from the balcony. This was, of course,
refused, and he then said he had no influence over the men, and
refused to interfere.
The Commissioner of Police, who was present with Superin-
tendent Sadlier, was about ordering the dispersion of the crowd
by the police, when Eosa announced the result of the parley.
A move was then made to tbe residence of the Bishop of
Melbourne, the police still accompanying them in strong force,
Here the rights of privacy were guarded by the police, and no
one was admitted through the gate until the bishop's willingness
to receive the deputation was ascertained by Inspector Larkin,
The four deputies were then admitted and courteously received
by his lordship, who expressed regret at the cause which brought
them there.
Mr. Eosa stated that the object of the deputation was to as’


the Bishop to use his influence with the G-overnment in order to
induce them to open reproductive relief works for the distressed
workmen out of employ. He repeated the statements he had
made to Lord Hopetoun on the previous day, and said by mere
indiscriminate charity there was a risk of making men permanent
mendicants. They wanted the Government to make such relief
works as the demolishing of the rookeries in Melbourne and the
-erection of artisans’ dwellings, the erection of bath an 1 wash-
houses, and the starting of irrigation works.
Mr- Flinn advocated the establishment of a State Labour
Agency, the present registry offices being sinks of iniquity. He
denied that Melbourne was the paradise of the working men,
and said they on an average only obtained about 355. per week,
artisans receiving an average of not more than £2.
The Bishop asked if such a labour agency had ever been suc-
cessfully formed.
Mr. Flinn said there was such an institution in New York,
The Bishop asked if the majority of those 10,000 men, which
it was said were out of employment, were able-bodied men ?
Mr. Eosa said yes, but not accustomed to such work as that
supplied by the Harbour Trust, which was exceptionally hard.
He believed if the Government instituted works such as he had
proposed, work would be provided for all the unemployed.
The Bishop said he understood a number of the man were
■clerks, and there were too many clerks in the City, yet people in
the country were continually sending their children to the City
and making clerks of them, supposing it to be more genteel to sit
■behind a desk with a pen behind the ear than to labour as an
artisan, But he did not think there were too many artisans.
Mr. Rosa said he was mistaken, and there were 200 composi-
tors alone out of employment. He thought work should be
supplied to all, and those who were unable to do harder work
should be aided in undertaking the agricultural work. He
thought the Government had got an impression that if relief
works were instituted it would encourage an influx of unemployed
from the other colonies. He contended it would not do so to
any great extent, but even if it did it would be to the benefit of
the colony, as a man in work was a producer, and produces more
than he consumes.
The Bishop assented to this, but asked if a clerk could be
considered a producer.
Mr. Rosa said every man was of value to a colony if his work


were needed, and lie thought every man should be considered by
the Government
Each of the other deputies expressed his views on the unem-
ployed question, after which—
The Bishop assured them they had his entire sympathy, and
they should have the benefit of any influence he possessed.
What had been said had convinced him that it was the duty of
the Government to do something, and that nothing except a scheme
of relief works on a large scale would cope with the difficulty-
The deputation then withdrew, and after Mr, Rosa had
informed the crowd of the result of the interview, they moved
away with the intention of dispersing, but it was suddenly decided
to visit his Grace Archbishop Carr, of the Catholic Church.
DEPUTATION TO ARCHBISHOP CARR.
A considerable number of the unemployed followed their depu-
ties, and on arriving at the residence of Archbishop Carr, he at
once expressed bis willingness to receive the deputation. The
different statements made to Bishop Goe were repeated, and in
reply Archbishop Carr said he fully sympathised with the distress
existing, and his clergy were doing all in their power to deal with
the cases coming within their charges, but he was unable to offer
any general opinion as to what should be done in the matter of
relief works.
The deputation then retired, and the meeting dispersed.
A NIGHT MEETING.
At night the unemployed held a meeting on the vacant piece
of ground next to the ruins of the former warehouse of Messrs.
George & George. An impromptu platform was erected, a couple
of powerful torches were held over it, and the block of ground was
completely filled by a motley throng. Upon the “ platform ”
were Fleming, Rosa, Edwards, and Flinn, men who are well
known in connection with these agitations. The police authorities
had made ample provision for any disturbance, but in justice to
the gathering it must be said it was perfectly orderly. The crowd
heartily applauded the references of the speakers to the members
of the Ministry (particularly Mr. Patterson, who was acused of
having acted in a cruel and heartless manner), and the references
to the Governor, Bishop Goe, and Archbishop Carr, whom the
speakers said had acted in a gentlemanly and considerate manner.
Superintendent Sadlier, Inspector Perry, and Sub-Inspectors


Larkin and Hamilton were present, and a number of police had
been drafted into the City from the suburbs, in addition to about
twelve mounted men from the depot. Some of the force were kept
in reserve at the City watchhonse and some at the Russell-street
barracks, whilst the remainder were stationed at the scene of the
meeting. Several resolutions were carried calling upon the Govern-
ment to initiate relief works, and it was announced that a monster
meeting will be held next morning, when another attempt would
be made to interview the members of the Government. The
crowd afterwards dispersed quietly, and the police were with-
drawn.
The report of the proceedings on July 11 is taken from the
Herald of that date, a newspaper which is deserving of thanks
for having most of the time given fairly accurate reports of the
movement.
A still larger gathering than on any previous day was held this
morning on the vacant land near the Workingmen’s College.
Mr. Eosa again acted as chairman, and after stating what the
deputation had done yesterday, severely criticised the morning
journals for misrepresentation in leading articles.
He strongly urged the men to behave orderly and give
nothing by disorder or riot for their enemies to take advantage
of to the discredit of the unemployed. He stated that several
of the papers had libelled him. He had, however, put these
papers in the hands of a solicitor, and if there was justice to be
had he intended to have it. He also denied that he was a mere
agitator, who lived on the movement, but was in partial employ-
ment. Mr. Beath also rose and denied the statement made by a
morning paper that he had been robbed while in the company of
disreputable women. He had been set on by five larrikins, gar-
rotted and robbed. Mr. Paul stated that he had been told that
in 1855 Mr. James Service had acted as chairman for an unem-
ployed meeting. On the motion of Messrs. Rosa and Paul, the
following motion was passed—“ That in the opinion of this
meeting it is impossible for the Harbour Trust and Railway
Commissioners to provide employment for the number of men
now out of employment, and the meeting urges the Government
to start reproductive relief works.”
A number of other speeches were made of a tenor reported
on previous days, but there was a marked absence of any incite-
ment to illegal or disorderly measures, the most extreme expres-
sion being that if a man were starving it was not morally


criminal to steal.
Mr. Rosa stated during the meeting that he had received a
message from Dr. Singleton offering the unemployed the use of
his hall if they desired to use it.
At the close of the meeting, Mr. Rosa stated a deputation was
going to visit a few gentlemen, the first being Mr. Gillies, and he
begged the meeting not to break the law in any way, or be at all
disorderly.
The meeting then separated, and proceeded to the Treasury,
again causing considerable sensation as they proceeded through
the streets.
On the meeting ending Mr. Rosa and the deputation proceeded
to the Treasury to see Mr. Gillies. On arriving there they found
the police under Inspector Larkin, again catting off their pro-
gress, On the deputation halting Inspector Larkin said, “ Now,
Mr, Rosa, you cannot stay here,” adding to the police, “ Move
them away.” Mr. Rosa protested he had left notice he desired
to see Mr. Gillies on behalf of the unemployed. But Inspector
Larkin said, ‘ £ There has been no answer received. Move them
away.” The police then commenced to push the crowd back
into the street, and Mr. Rosa turned round and left, although
many present for a few moments hung round as if half determined
to resist. The deputation, and crowd then headed down Collins
street en route for Mr. Speight’s office at Spencer-street Railway.
The deputation, with the crowd and police following, proceeded
to Spencer-street, where they asked to see Mr, Speight. Mr.
Speight was at the Treasury, and eventually Mr. Labertouche
was seen and asked by Mr. Rosa to find work for the unem-
ployed. Mr. Labertouche promised to lay the matter before the
Commissioners, and the deputation left. As they were leaving
Superintendent Sadlier met Mr. Rosa, and told him that he would
be held responsible for any trouble that ensued. Mr, Rosa
addressed the crowd, complaining that although the unemployed
had not broken the law, the police had in their 4 ‘ brutal conduct”
at the Treasury. Rosa said he was “ dictated to ”by the police,
and told to disperse the crowd. He advised them to go home
orderly. The crowd then broke up, giving “ three cheers for
Rosa,” and “ three groans for the police.”
The action of the police was, in my opinion, deliberately inten-
ded to provoke a disturbance, during which they would have
arrested Mr. Elian and myself, and charged us with some
trumped-up offence, of which a capitalistic bench of magistrates


would have been sure to convict us. We proved ourselves,
however, too wary for the police authorities that time, and at a
meeting of the Social Democratic League, held in the Trades’
Hall that evening, the following resolution was moved by the
Rev. W. Hopkins, and carried by acclamation —“ That this meet-
ing expresses its indignation at the unconstitutional treatment of
the representatives of the unemployed by the officers of the
G-overnment this afternoon, and declares that nothing short of
the establishment by the Government of reproductive relief
works will meet the present emergency,”
The subjoined interview appeared in the Herald for July 14—
ROSA INTERVIEWED.
“THE BITTER CRY” OP UNEMPLOYED MELBOURNE
A Herald reporter on Saturday meeting Messrs. S, A. Rosa
and W. D. Flinn, two of the foremost men engaged in the present
unemployed agitation, it occurred to him that he might quietly
elicit the ideas they had of what should be done for the unem-
ployed without the superfluous talk that often takes place at the
meetings. So after the usual greetings and a little preliminary
conversation as to the agitation the reporter asked —“Well, Mr.
Rosa, what do you want —what are you trying to do.”
u What do we want ? —what are we trying to do?” Great
goodness, man ! you don’t mean to tell me I have been so utterly
incomprehensible that I have not made it clear to an ordinarily
intelligent human being what we want ?
Lots of people are in a fog, anyway, about it.
Yes; but neither Mr. Gillies nor Mr. Patterson is. We want,
first and immediately, work to fill the empty stomachs of some
10,000 people.
Ten thousand ! No gag now—honestly, how many?
Without exaggeration I believe there are fully 10,000 unem
ployed in Melbourne to day —you’d find, nearer that than 5000.
We want relief works for these—reproductive relief works.
First, we would like the State to establish a State Labour
Bureau, where men could go, and get sent to work. When the
present necessity is met, then we would like the Government to
meet representatives of the labouring classes to see if we could
not, by calm discussion, resolve this unemployed problem per-
manently. I think we could.
How? You are taking a big contract. But first as to the


immediate necessity. If work is not given, will there be any serious
consequences—rioting, for instance ?
You ask many questions. The solution of the labour problem is
not so hard a task as it looks, if set about in a proper way. But of
that I’ll tell you afterwards. As to the present, I hope there will
be no rioting I hope not. But—and in the but there is the
possibility—l try to keep them quiet, much as lam libelled by the
Press. I have no desire to shed anybody’s blood, and lam sure I
don’t want to have my own blood shed. But hungry bellies act
faster than heads reason, and if there is trouble, I have no hesita-
tion in saying the Government will be responsible for it. They
seem trying to provoke a breach of the peace. We are
designated “ agitators ” and “ schemers ” It is not so ; it is false.
It’s a lie ; and I nail it down For the immediate present there
are wanted—wanted mind you—drainage works, and any amount
of works, baths, public gymnasia; and the slums of Melbourne need
pulling down and rebuilding. Many of these works could be done
as they built the public market in the Island of Jersey—say the
Government decide to build public baths, and they don’t want to
spend money. They set a number of men to dig out the founda-
tions, At the end of the week the Government does not pay cash,
but gives each workman credit notes representing a pound, ten
shillings, live shillings, etc.—or, in short, issues a bath paper cur-
x*ency. This paper currency would pass at par, because it would so
slightly inflate the present currency that it would hardly be noticed.
When the baths are built, charge for their use at first, and as
fast as the money comes in call in the credit notes and burn them.
They did this in Jersey, and they now have a market there without
getting a loan for a penny. The same principle might be employed
in regard to scores of other works, and the colony be the richer for
it. This is, in short, the American issue of greenbacks over again.
So long as the notes are backed by the faith and credit of the com-
munity, all would be right ; and in a prosperous colony like this
there would be no danger of any repudiation.
That sound* pretty if it would work.
Would work ? It has worked ; why should it not work here ?
I don’t know ; ask something easier. We will suppose it did
work. It’s worth a trial, anyway. The Government could not be
very much out of pocket by backing such a scheme in a small way.
Then, suppose your present distress relieved, what is your big
scheme ?
Ah ! that is a big matter. I am a Socialist, and speak, to a


•certain extent, as one always. If the people would but look at
Socialism, and not think it is a bogey that is going to eat them, I
tell you, man, Socialism would render better the condition of all
alike—rich and the poor. Socialism does not mean taking from the
xich to give to the poor, as ordinarily understood
Yes ; but don’t let,us get on to that, or we’d argue all day.
Oh! no we would not. But leaving that, there is that New
Zealand scheme of Tillage Settlements : They tell me that settled
the unemployed trouble in New Zealand ?
I know it did. I was a reporter at Auckland at the time, and I
Lad to do any number of Village Settlement meetings.
Then you know something about it ?
I know it did its work.
Very well, then, we ask the Government here to adopt the scheme
in Victoria.
But they tell me they have not the land.
Oh ! yes they have, or could easily find it if they were inclined
to try it. Let the Government draft off all the men who would go,
giving them, say, 50 acres, finding them materials to put up
primitive houses, implements, seed, and guarantee them a grocery-
bill for a few months till they could get something out of the ground
to live on. And this would not only settle the unemployed question,
but convert those men into settlers and useful producers on the land
where it is acknowledged settlers are wanted,
You mean to say that Government should give the unemployed
what other people have to pay for ?
No ; I don’t. The settlers would payback every penny advanced,
with fair interest.
Were you ever in America.
Yes, X have seen the States.
Well, then you know how the railways there settle people on their
lands. They don’t do much giving. They do it as a good commer-
cial speculation, and find it pays big The Social Democratic
Federation, London, issued a manifesto. Here it is. And
on this point the manifesto says : —“ All uncultivated Crown lands
or other land or lands now in pasture, which in the opinion of skilled
agriculturalists would pay best to cultivate, be at once worked with
improved machinery by such of the unemployed as are accustomed
to or would prefer agricultural occupation. These labourers to be
paid at the rate of wages which in the judgment of a board of
assessors shall be sufficient to keep them and their families in health
and comfort, or that such necessary food be supplied at cost at a


general meal, lodging being provided on the spot An equitable
portion of the profits, if any, derived from any such farming opera-
tions to be divided from time to time among the people employed/*
Take this section also. “ That any public works of importance in
or near any industrial centre, such as artisan s dwellings, embank-
ments of rivers and construction of other works should be begun
at once, instead of being deferred, and that the same rate of wages
be paid’in proportion to cost of living to the workers employed, and
that their feeding be conducted on wholesale principles as above
And then it goes on to provide for the workers getting an equitable
division of profits. But there are many schemes It is not hard to
find the how, if the Government would only deal with us. But they
won’t entertain us at all. They condemn us for agitating. They
talk about holding me responsible when I go with 5000 unemployed
to ask for work for them. If we don’t agitate, then they say them
is no distress. In the name of God what are we to do ? Do they
want the men to starve and give no sign ? They have not the
strength to do that nor the intention. They are hungry. We know
they produce more wealth than the} get, and we know that it is labour
and labour alone that produces wealth, and we ask the men who have
been enriched through their labour to cow find them what they find
their horses and cattle, food and dwellings. If we are asking any-
thing unreasonable, I’d like to be shown how it is.
W T ell, I don’t see—
You said something about rioting. The men don t want that,
but they were provoked twice on Friday, both at the Treasury and
Speight’s office. Think of the insufferable impertinence of an
Inspector of police coming to me and telling me he would hold me
responsible for any consequences resulting from my asking for work
for hungry men, and the men’s disappointment in not getting a
promise of it. Then at the Treasury. The police pushed, actually
assaulted in cases, workmen who were standing on their own pro-
perty, the street. The police pulled out their handcuffs and
threatened the very men whose servants they are. Policemen paid
to keep the law broke it. If the crowd had chosen they could have
swept aside those policemen like straw. Then look at the indignity
and stupidity of the thing. On Wednesday we saw the Governor.
lam not a lover of lords or aristocrats—but he is a gentleman.
He received us courteously—listened to us and told us he would do
what he could. He told us also we had a constitutional right to
interview any representative of the Queen or Government. On
Thursday we went to try and see Mr. Gillies, Mr, Patterson, or


Mr Deakin, Unlike the Governor, none of them would see us,
..giving as an excuse we had sent no notice—a poor excuse.
Well, to be in order, I told Inspector Larkin, who had carried
the messages to and fro—we would call again on Friday, and
asked him to tell Mr Gillies so, On Friday we held a meeting
near the Workingmen’s College. Inspector Larkin was there.
I then stated publicly that I had an appointment with Mr. Gillies,
and was going to keep it and 1 went. I never invited a man to
follow, but they did. Inspector Larkin went with us. He knew
,where we were going, and he allowed us to walk all the way to
the Treasury, and then when we got there, ordered the police—
I consider in a most brutal manner —to clear us away, and they
‘did it. Now, he could have told us before we started he. would
thwart our object, and so saved us the useless journey ; but he
.did not do so. If that does not look like trying to trap us, to
get us to place ourselves in a false position, or to provoke a
breach of the peace, so as to get an excuse to lock the leaders
up, what does it look like ?
Well, I must go now, Mr Rosa. I’ll try to put what you
bave told me, in print before the people of Melbourne, and leave
rthem to decide between you and the authorities, and upon the
merits of your claim. I’ve not lived very many years in Mel-
bourne, but I am much mistaken in Melbourne people if they
don't insist on your having a fair show any way.
That’s all we want. Mr Patterson says he won’t be “ forced’*
to provide relief works Then Mr, Patterson’s pride is to stand
'before food for the hungry. Perhaps Mr. Patterson’s masters
(the people) may think at the next election that they don’t pay
him to exhibit his pride, but to do their work. If you will go,
good-bye; but say we thank The Herald for its fairness You
don’t give us much, but you seem to try not to misrepresent us,
' and that is more than I can say for all the papers.
That the agitation considerably disturbed the mental equilib-
rium of the “ powers that be.” is made abundantly manifest by
the following extract from the Herald of July 14 :
“Although the authorities have professed unconcern at the
demonstrations of the unemployed, there has in fact been serious
alarm felt about the matter in official circles. There are always
: plain-clothes members of the police force accompanying the
crowd with the object of obtaining information in regard to the
, plan of campaign, and it is the intelligence contained in the


reports of these officers that has occasioned uneasiness to the-
Government. During last week this disquietude became so great
that, for a time, it was seriously proposed to arm all the City-
police. To this end inquiries were made as to the strength of
the reserve of firearms, and evoked the startling statement that
the reserve consisted of only two revolvers. Steps were imme-
diately taken to repair this oversight, but, so far, no extra supply
of weapons has been received at the police depot. The fkct of
the police being thus unprepared for an emergency is a serious
matter, and one in which every effort should be employed to
remedy the error.
The announcement by some of the leaders of the unemployed
that they had a surprise in store for the Government occasioned
no little anxiety amongst the authorities. All sorts of thing's
were supposed, ranging from a fireworks illumination to a whole-
sale assassination of the Ministry. W hat was really intended was
that a prominent member of the unemployed should go to the
Assembly when the House is sitting and address the Members
upon the grievances of his fellows. The idea has now, however,
been abandoned,”
The statement in the second paragraph that it was intended
“ that a prominent member of the unemployed should go to the-
Assembly when the House is sitting and address the Members on
the grievances of his fellows,” is incorrect, but it was proposed
to petition Parliament to allow the spokesmen of the unem-
ployed to be heard at the bar of the House. That idea was,
“ however, abandoned,” as we could scarcely get a member to
even listen to our request that he should present the petition.
The next important event in connection with the movement
took place on July 18, when Sir Bryan O’Loughlin, ex-Premier
of Victoria, brought the matter before the Assembly, and pro-
posed the establishment of relief works. “The Government”
he said Should at once undertake to spend from £IOOO to
£2OOO per week as long as the present distress lasted.’’ Ih the
discussion which followed Mr. Patterson distinguished himself by
the furious scurrility and untruthfulness of his remarks. Ap-
parently under the erroneous impression that the leaders of the
movement were men of Irish birth, he said There *vas a
certain nationality (Irish) which believed that the Government
ought to supply everything, but it was to be hoped that no such
doctrine would prevail here ” And further —“ He trusted
honorable members would not allow the rabble of the colony to


"become stronger than the Government itself, by encouraging a
lot of blasphemous, atheistical, socialistical, communistical,
nihilistical men, who went upon the wharf Sunday after Sunday
to denounce everything that was good and decent, and virtuous.”
During the speech of the Hon. John Woods in favour of relief
works, the pious and reputable Patterson interjected—‘T said the
self-styled leaders of the unemployed came from the sediment of
society ; what about Rosa, defend him if you can ?” to which
** Eosa ” replies that he is inclined to think that his character
requires considerably less defence than Patterson’s, and that the
foot that the scum always rises to the top is probably the reason
why Patterson is Minister of Public Works,
On the 16th the matter of the unemployed was brought up for
discussion by the Hon. D. Melville, he having been asked to do
so by a deputation consisting of Messrs, Paul, Flinn and myself.
During the discussion, the Hon. James Service, an ex-Premier,
and probably the most influential capitalistic politician in Vic-
toria said —The deserving unemployed should not be loft utterly
destitute, even if the Government had to institute relief works,”
The result of the debate was the collection that night of a sum
of £404 in aid of the destitute unemployed, all of it being sub-
scribed in the Council Chamber during the debate. The matter
was also introduced again the same night in the Legislative
Assembly, and, during the debate, Patterson, who sets up as a
model of piety, and a “ pillar of society,” actually made the in-
famously false statement that the unemployed allowed themselves
to be led by men who “ to his own knowledge had been supported
by their wives’ earnings for twelve months past.” The writer of
this pamphlet is unmarried, as were all the other “ leaders,”
except White, who was at work when this cowardly slander was
uttered.
On the 17th an interview took place which was thus amusingly
reported in the Herald :
THE OLD ORDER AND THE NEW.
THE SALVATION AEMY AND SOCIALISM.
But for the pathetic nature of the matter in hand, the inter-
view between the deputation from the unemployed to the
Salvation Army leaders Thursday afternoon would have been, if
it really was not, one of the funniest episodes of the agitation.
We do not know what the theological views of Messrs. Rosa,


FI inn and Paul exactly are, but as a rule men of known strong'
democratic and socialistic views are not usually regarded as
being altogether in exact accord with 4 ' The Thirty mine Articles, ”
and it is a fair presumption that the deputation are not. And a
meeting between such men as Colonel Barker and Mr. Commis-
sioner Coombes, with Dr Bevan thrown in as host and interested
party, of itself, is rather a novelty But it took place neverthe-
less. On the adjournment of the meeting Thursday morning,
after the passing of the resolution delegating the deputation to
wait on Colonel Barker and Commissioner Coombes, the delega-
tion fixed 2 o’clock as the time to wait upon the above officers.
At 2 o’clock they saw both gentlemen, only, however, to have the
meeting fixed for 3 o’clock. At 3 o’clock they were on hand, and
waited in the offices of the Army for some time for an interview.
At about half-past 3 a message arrived for the delegation to go
across to Congregational Hall, where they found Dr. Bevan,
Colonel Barker, Commissioner Coombes and one or two other,
gentlemen, and the interview took place. Colonel Barker sat
quietly in his chair all through, leaving Commissioner Coombes to
defend the citadal. Dr. Bevan motioned the deputation and the
reporters to seats, and then took up his position on the hearth-
rug, alternately standing with his back leaning against the
mantelpiece and advancing to the table and laying down his points
as occasion demanded, and he got more than usually interested.
Mr. Rosa sat on a sofa nursing his right leg most of the time,
while Mr. Flinn practised the position he will assume when he
obtains the seat he desires in tho Bourke-street debating class—
for both men have Parliamentary aspirations —while Mr. Paul
preserved a composed see-all-fair sort of attitude. The debate,
for so it turned out to be, opened by Mr Rosa addressing Dr.
Bevan, Commissioner Coombes and Colonel Barker, stating that he
and those with him had been delegated to ask the officers of the
Salvation Army if they were in favour of the Government start-
ing reproductive relief works. This was the query briefly put.
although it was put with a statement of a variety of circumstances
the delegation thought should be reasons for such works. Com-
missioner Coombes at once took up the attitude that the Salvation
Army were not a political body, and he declined to express an
opinion one way or other, or to show his hand. He stated, in
effect, that the Army were not going to take part in politics, and
the work they were doing was done purely from a humanitarian
standpoint. The Government could do, or not do, what it


pleased ; the Army were going forward with their work all the
same. Dr. Bevan said the Army were doing their own work—
and excellent work it was —in their own way Messrs. Rosa and
Flinn said they had not come there to discuss what the Army
were doing, but to seek an expression of opinion as to starting
special relief works. The deputation took the ground they
alleged was admitted on all sides, that the distress was excep-
tionally great—so great that no one social organisation could
deal with it ; but it called for the Government to step in, as the
only agency capable of grappling with it. And to obtain this
they wanted Dr. Bevan and the Army’s leaders to express them-
selves favorable to such works as had Bishop Goe and several
members of parliament. Dr Bevan said the question was rather
an academic one, and was one that could be better discussed at
one of his lecture evenings, and half suggested that such a course
should be adopted The hint was quite enough, and both Mr.
Eosa and Mr. Klinn jumped at it like a pike at a minnow. When
he saw the way they annexed his offer, Dr. Bevan for the moment
looked as if he wondered whether he was not going into a pretty
big contract. And well he might, for Mr. Flinn, with regard to
Socialism, is like Mr. Dick with King Charles’s head—he can-
not keep it out of his discourse. The worthy Doctor, however,
quickly and laughingly rallied, and there was a sort of tacit
understanding that at no distant date some of Dr. Sevan’s'
debaters will meet the Socialistic champion in public debate.
The Doctor, however, stated distinctly that while he did not
believe in the special relief works “ a bit,” as a State policy,
that it was debatable. Then Mr. Paul threw a bombshell into
the meeting, by declaring that it was through their agitation that
the Government were moving at all. And Mr. Eosa capped his.
remark by saying “Yes, and the Salvation Army have to thank
us for that £4OO contribution and also that it was owing to
their agitation that the Government were going to spend £85,000
for works To this rather unexpected sally, Dr. Bevan, however,
quietly said, “ Certainly we give you credit for all you have'
done ” Mr. Rosa said they knew exactly what the work was the
Army were doing, and had to do. Last year the “ agitators,” as
they had been dubbed, did the same work. They received £l4O,
procured 500 situations, gave out 1700 railway passes, and gave
away 15,000 meals. ‘‘Have you the books?” enquired Dr
Bevan and Commissioner Coombes in a breath “We have the
books,” replied Messrs. Flinn and Eosa The debate then


turned on the distress, the delegation urging that the hungry
men must be fed. And Mr. Flinn urged the necessity of some-
thing after the New Zealand Village Settlement scheme being
entered upon. Mr. Ooombes said the Army were not in a
position to take up a scheme of that sort. Whereupon Mr.
Rosa rejoined—“ General Booth has done it in England.”
Commissioner Coombes said he thought he ought to be in a
position to know something about what General Booth was
doing, but Mr. Rosa insisted that it was a fact that General
Booth was entering into a scheme of colonisation of poor men
on lands. Mr. Coombes then half intimated that the Army had
some project in hand “ on the lines ” of what the Army is doing
in England in this respect The exact scheme or plans were not
yet decided upon, but would be revealed in a week or two. The
were going to “adapt” some such idea to Australian
conditions. On this, Dr. Bevan asked the delegation, “ Suppose
the Army were to endeavour to carry out such a scheme would
the unemployed leaders co-operate with the Army?” Mr Rosa
said they might co-operate in such a work as that, but added
there must be no sectarianism about it. Dr. Bevan advised Mr.
Rosa to join the Salvation Army himself. Dr. Bevan was sure it
would do Mr. Rosa a great deal of good, and he would also see
for himself the method of the Army’s work. Mr. Rosa replied,
“ That is very funny, very funny, Doctor; but if the advice is
good for me it is equally good for you. Why do you, Doctor,
not join the Army yourself?” Dr, Bevan retorted he had joined
them in a measure, and his experience of the Army had shown
him that there were men and women in it living lives and prac-
tising the virtues that were examples to the members of many
other denominations. The question of a State Labour Bureau
came up, when Mr. Coombes said if the Government or any one
else chose to start such an agency the Army would not oppose
them. But let the Government do as they pleased, the Army
were going straight on with their work Dr, Bevan said the
Government had started one once, and it failed, to which Mr,
Flinn rejoined he believed they wanted it to fail so as to use its
failure as an argument against the unemployed. Mr. Rosa asked
how it could do anything else than fail when it was run by the
capitalist classes ? Mr. Coombes said the Army would not
oppose a bureau started by the unemployed. “ Yes, start one
yourselves.” said Dr. Bevan. “Try it!” “We have tried it”
said Mr. Rosa, “ and succeeded as well as the Army have done.


But we don’t want to oppose them ; we are glad the Army have
started their agency. But there were working men who objected
to going to the Army agency because the idea, rightly or wrongly,
was abroad amongst them that it was a place where employers
looked for reclaimed criminals, and expected to pay low wages.”
Mr. Coombes replied, “If that idea is abroad it is a false one.
We do not and will not take wages under the market price. It
was only the other day I refused work offered us because the
wages offered were under the market price, and demanded tte
regular rates.” Mr. Eosa said another objection to the Army
was that they made such minute inquiries into men’s characters.
Mr. Rosa thought if a man wanted work, he was an honest man
so far as ordinary work went, let him have been whatever he
might. Dr. Bevan said that was true as to ordinary manual
labour, but not as to offices of trust. In reply to Mr. Rosa,
Commissioner Coombes said the Army did not enquire into men’s
religion or no religion. Dr. Bevan said he had seen men with
their hats on during the saying of grace. Mr. Paul rejoined,
“Yes, if they did not keep their hats on they would lose them,
he had seen that in the Argus." Dr. Bevan thought that was
scarcely an argument against the Army’s relief, but the men who
went there. To which someone drily agreed. Ihe discussion
then entered upon the Army’s work generally, Dr. Bevan stating
that every large humanitarian movement had always begun at
the bottom, if it ever benefited humanity at large. He thought
if it had a fault the Army was getting to be “ almost too respec-
table,” Mr, Plinn said “Yes, and when any religious sect got
respectable and rich, it went back on its record ” Mr. Rosa said
that was the rock ahead. Dr. Bevan called attention to the fact
that they were wandering, and Mr, Flinn suggested “What about
that debate?” “Yes,” said Mr. Rosa “That is a good idea.”
Dr. Bevan intimated he would arrange for it all in good time
And at this the conference, or wdiatever it might be called, broke
up, Dr- Bevan telling the deputation he should be glad to have
them call on him at any time, as he shook their hands at parting.
He was evidently a little desirous of breaking a lance with the
notorious Socialistic champions. Colonel Barker and Commis-
sioner Coombes looked into the eyes of the deputation as they
exchanged partings in a way that expressed their regret that the
delegation’s abilities were not enlisted in the Army's work. And
so ended a most pleasant little meeting between two diametrically
opposite schools of thought—a meeting the more pleasant because


it demonstrated how much better it was to adopt the “ Come let
us reason together ” kindly style than one of abuse, misrepre-
sentation and wrangling.
At a meeting of the Social Democratic League held in the
Trades’ Hall on the evening of the 18th, the following resolution
was carried by acclamation—“ That this meeting desires to thank
Messrs, Rosa and Flinn for the admirable way in which they are
conducting the unemployed movement, and from personal know-
ledge of those gentlemen desires to express its indignation at the
infamous slanders circulated by J. B, Patterson, and other evilly
disposed persons.’’
The proceedings on the 19th are thus reported in the Daily
Telegraph.
A CALL ON THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE.
On Saturday morning a deputation from the unemployed, con-
sisting of Messrs, tlosa and Flinn, waited upon Mr, H. G. Turner
the President of the Chamber of Commerce.
Mr. Rosa said that they intended waiting upon all the influen-
tial gentlemen in town, to lay before them the sore distress that
existed in Melbourne. There were between 300 and 100 masons
out of work, also 200 compositors, about 1500 painters, and vast
numbers of mechanics, artisans, clerks, and workingmen of all
grades and conditions. They proposed that the Government should
inaugurate some works to give employment to as many as possible
and, if possible, at their own trades, though, of course this latter
condition could not be expected in all instances The work to be
provided by the Harbour Trust could be always obtained by those
who could do it, but the average man was not up to it, so that
the mass of the unemployed were totally unfitted tor such work.
They proposed that the Government should make boulevards
along the Yarra bank from Princes’ Bridge to Richmond, and
also suggested that if possible they should start co-operative
settlements on the land, as had been done in New Zealand, under
a scheme brought about three years ago by the Minister of
Lands, the Hon, Robert Ballance. That plan had been success-
ful in New Zealand, and should work out with equally good
results ip Victoria. If the Goverment were to put the men on
the land, they would be employed all the winter, whereas if only
temporary work were found in the City, they would be out of


employment again next winter.
Mr. Fiinn pointed out that the Government could put men on
to clear the land, even if they did not settle them on it. The
Government would not acknowledge the necessity of opening
relief works for men who could not obtain employment in the
open market, although the principle was not new to the colony,
for such works had been opened in Victoria twelve years ago.
The Victorian workmen, as a rule, did not get sufficient wages to
save for a rainy day, and although some of them might not he
thrifty, they often spent their money in assisting their fellows in
distress.
Mr. Eos a said it had been hinted that the opening of relief
works would injure the borrowing powers of the colony, but they
ventured to think that humanitarian duties should come before
details of pounds, shillings, and pence.
Mr, Turner said that he could not speak for his fellow members
of the Chamber without consulting them, but he thought they
would be almost unanimously opposed to the opening of relief
works by the Government. The Government was never a good
employer of labour, and in that capacity did not get so good a
return as a private individual for the outlay. If the Govern-
ment were to start relief works it would be a cumbersome and
exceedingly costly way of providing relief. The mercantile com-
munity, by reason of the protective tariff, had had their incomes
taxed very severely for the benefit of one class only, and it was
nob fair to ask them to request the Government to open works
which would increase their taxation. He was concerned for the
credit of the colony when he saw these annual demonstrations of
the unemployed, and he could not but think that they were the
results of want of thrift, although there might be a certain
amount of incapacity He had travelled over a great deal of
Victoria, and found that there were numerous works which would
be taken up if it were not for the high prices that had to be paid
for labour. He knew there must be a certain amount of distress
on account of sickness, but he thought the various philanthropic
organisations amply provided for that. It appeared to him that
the Salvation Army were doing very good work in the direction
indicated,
Mr. Eosa said that it was very difficult for a man only earning
30s. a week, with a wife and family to support, to save against a
time of depression.


Mr. Turner said that he would bring the matter before the
members of the Chamber of Commerce, and furnish their reply
in writing.
As it was approaching the hour for the public meeting near
the Workingmen’s College in Latrobe-street, intended interviews
with the presidents of the Stock Exchange and of the Chamber
of Manufactures were postponed.
The following resolutions were carried at the meeting, which
was attended by about 400 men :
“ That while acknowledging the concessions that the Govern-
ment is making to the conductors of this movement by providing
work for some hundreds of the unemployed, we desire to draw the
attention of the Government to the fact there will still remain
thousands of men lacking employment, and we therefore urge
upon the Government the imperative necessity for the immediate
inauguration of special works.”
“ That as the irrigation of the Botanical Gardens will preserve
a number of rare and valuable plants, as well as give employment
to a large number of men, we urge upon the Government that
they press on this work at once.”
They dispersed after the usual speeches had been made.
As the attacks of Mr. Patterson on the characters of the leaders
of the movement had been made under the cowardly cover of
parliamentary privilege, Social Democrats felt that their con-
demnation of Mr. Patterson should be marked in as public a
manner as possible. What took place at the Wharf on Sunday
the 20th, is thus given by the Telegraph.
BURNING ME. PATTERSON’S EFFIGY.
Many th msands of people, including, it is presumed, a large
proportion of the unemployed, gathered on the Queen’s Wharf
yesterday afternoon, and from several platforms, speeches were
delivered by Messrs. Rosa, Flinn, Fleming, Petrie, and others ;
and it was determined to convey the effigy of Mr. J. B. Patterson
to Flinders’ Park, and there, from an embankment beyond the
Morgue, the speakers made further speeches, strongly condemning
the present Administration, and especially the attitude assumed
by Mr. Patterson towards the unemployed. Then the “ effigy ”
of Mr. Patterson —old trousers, coat ditto, stuffed with straw,
and surmounted with a “ belltopper,” was “ decapitated ” amidst
groans and general execrations, set alight, and thrown to the


bottom of the embankment, the remark being male that if Mr.
Patterson were there in the flesh he would be similarly served.
The following resolutions were then carried, proposed by Rosa,
seconded by Edwards :—“ That this meeting has no confidence in
that immoral combination, the Gillies-Deakin Administration,
and condemns J. B. Patterson for the infamous way in which he has
slandered the leaders of the unemployed movement.” Proposed
by Fleming, seconied by Clayton—“ That this meeting declares
that it has every confidence in Messrs. Rosa and Plinn, and the
other gentlemen at the head of the unemployed movement.”
About 8000 persons were present, and there was no dissatisfied
voice. The police authorities sent down several cab-loads of
constables from the Russell-street barracks, but their aid was not
required, as there was no disturbance, and the immense crowd
then wended its way back to the City, leaving the remains of the
effigy smouldering in the ditch near the embankment.
The capitalistic papers were, of course, very furious at the
■“ grave insult ” offered to them favourite bully aud slanderer, but
that did not disturb us very much.
On the 21st we had an interview with Sir Bryan O’Loghlen,
which the Herald reported as follows :
Messrs. Rosa and Plinn had a private interview with Sir Bryan
O’Loghlen, to ask him if he would receive a deputation from the
unemployed. Sir Bryan said he would do so if it were thought
necessary. He sympathised with the object of the movement,
and added that while they were designated agitators now, if the
movement was successful, and they became a political power,
they would be designated statesmen then. It was so with all
movements and leaders
When he was in power he started relief works, and they were
successful, and although they were designated by his opponents,
“ The Kensington Job,” yet they did what they were started for,
and gave relief to the unemployed workmen, as well as benefiting
them. They gave employment to 1500 men. Sir Bryan thought
the Government were not keeping their promises, and promised
to bring the matter before the House again, probably to-night or
some other night this week.
On the 28th a meeting was held, and a deputation appointed
to wait on the Mayor of Melbourne. The Daily Telegraph
reported the proceedings as follows :


At the open-air meeting of the unemployed yesterday morning
reference was made to the statements contained in the news-
papers that there was stone-breaking to he done for which
labourers could not be obtained This, Mr, Eosa said, was a
revelation to most of them. Still, skilled artisans were not such
fools as to leave town, and go a lung distance to break stones, at
which occupation they would not be able to earn a livelihood.
Moreover, stone-breaking injured the bands so as to unfit them
for skilled labour. He mentioned that one man had returned
from stone-breaking at Brajbrook, and had only been able to
earn 6s. 6d, in a week.
At the conclusion of the speeches, Eosa and Flinn, accompanied
by some 400 or 500 of the unemployed, proceeded to the Town
Hall, where the leaders interviewed the Mayor (Councillor
Hang.)
Mr. Rosa drew the attention of the Mayor to statements made
by Mr. J. Winter at the Trades’ Hall Council to the effect that
in one society 500 were out of employment, in another 200, and
in a third half the members ; that according to a report, in The
Daily Telegraph about 25 per cent, of the Tobacconists’ Society
were out of employ, and the rest working half-time. He said, if
such distress existed among union men, it must be much greater for
non-unionists. He knew that there were at least 200 composi-
tors (union and ncn-union), 1500 painters, 500 bricklayers and
about 400 masons out of work. Ihe deputation wished the
Mayor to express an opinion in regard to relief works, and also'
to reconsider his decision not to allow the unemployed to hold a
meeting in the Town Hall.
The Mayor, in reply, said he could not grant the use of the
hall for such a purpose. If he did it would be cabled to England
—“ Large Meeting of the Unemployed in the Town Hall,” and
the financial credit of the colony might suffer. With regard to
the relief works, the Council, as such, had no politics, but all
agreed that there was great distress, and the Council would push
on with their own works as fast as possible to supply work. He
referred to the fact that twenty men had been put on stone-
breaking.
Mr. Rosa pointed out that the earnings from stone-breaking,
were very small.
The Mayor sent for the assistant City Surveyor, Mr. Wilkinson,
who said he thought capable men earned about SOs. per week at
stone-breaking. On inquiry from Mr. Mountain tl e City Surveyor,


that gentlemen said about 7s. per day could be earned by an
■expert band. Reference to the books, however, showed the
average earnings to be only about 11s. 2d. per week. The
Mayor expressed bis personal sympathy with those out of work,
and said in about a month’s time, when the plans are complete,
the new markets would be proceeded with, and this would find
employment for a large number of workmen. The deputation
then withdrew.
From the Herald of the 29th :
INTERVIEW WITH THE PRESIDE N’T OF THE
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES.
Messrs, Rosa and Flinn this morning had an interview with
Mr. H. Poolman, the President of the Chamber of Manufactures.
The deputation opened the interview with Mr. Poolman by
stating the numbers of the unemployed in the various trades, and
then proceeding to outline schemes of amelioration for the present
distress, after which the deputation asked Mr. Poolman for an
■expression of opinion as to the Q-overnment starting public relief
works.
Mr. Poolman, in reply, said the Chamber of Manufactures was
a non-political body, and while the matter might be discussed in
the Chamber, he could not, as President of the Chamber, express
an opinion, but as a private individual he would say that he
thought the G-overnment starting public works would be a
suicidal policy, as it would attract the unemployed from outside
colonies, who, after the stoppage of public works, would stay in
our midst and would make matters worse The public of Aus-
tralia had always their pockets open to relieve distress, but he
thought no man ought to be distressed merely because he was
out of work for a few weeks. The thrifty man was seldom or
never in distress. No man in times of prosperity had a right to
spend his week’s wages on Saturday night, and so begin the week
with nothing. He spoke after the experience of a lifetime, and
he had seldom seen a man who was at all economical, in want.
Mr. Rosa said he thought it was unjust to talk of thrift to a
man who had a wife and family and only received 25s or 30s pet-
week. They were unable to save. He also said that he thought
that if men could be so thrifty it would only tend to injure the
colony by forcing down wages,
Mr. Poolman said it was new to him to learn that such wages


were paid, and asked the deputation if they were sure of their
facts. He had never heard of able-bodied men working for less
than 9d per hour.
The deputation replied by giving the names of factories where
men were working for £1 and 255, and where the highest wage
was 30s per week, and only to old hands.
Mr, Poolman confessed the statements were a revelation to
him, and he was very sorry to hear it.
M r Flinn thought there ought to be a Royal Commission to
enquire as to the wages paid in the colony, as it would open the
eyes of a good many people,
Mr. Rosa said forcing down wages w r as economicallv unsound
and would tend to make men live like coolies, and degrade the
classes that were the basis of the community, which would act
prejudicially on the colony.
Mr. Poolman said that he did not desire to see such a state of
things. He thought 48 hours per week was a fair term of labor.
As to thrift, he did not agree with the saving as practised by the
coolie and miser. At the same time much could be done by
thrift. As to the Village Settlement scheme, he declined to ex-
press an opinion. That w r as a matter that should be brought
before the Chamber, not before himself personally.
Mr. Rosa asked Mr. Poolman to lay the matter before the
Chamber ; but Mr. Poolman requested Mr. Rosa to write a letter
to the Chamber, and lay the matter before them. He would say
that if a man was hungry he should be fed, and he thought the
Government wasnot adverse to doing this. He thought Victorians
were very generous, and would do their duty, Por himself, he
had every sympathy for the unemployed, and told Mr. Rosa that
if he would lay the matter before the Chamber, it should be dis-
cussed thoroughly, and not prejudiced by bis own (Mr. Poolman’s)
views. He was sorry he was not more in accord with them, but
at the meeting of the Chamber on Monday next the Chamber
would express their opinion on the matter.
The statement I made to Mr. Poolman that thrift, if practiced
by all wage-earners, would most probably result in forcing down
wages, and that therefore the doctrine of thrift was as a panaca
for poverty, economically unsound, was a signal for a howl of
indignation from the plutocratic press, and I was denounced by
the Standard as a “ worthless ruffian.” Apropos of thrift I may
mention that on Friday the 26th the Trades’ Hall Council


discussed the unemployed, the discussion having; been forced
upon them by a gift of fifty guineas for the relief of distressed
unionists. Some of the members, alarmed for their fetiches
orthodox trades’ unionism and protection, were in favour of
trying to prove there was no distress by sending the money back
to the donor, while others, including the ex-President, Vtr.
Hancock, expatiated on the virtues of thrift. \he following
resolution was passed the next day at the meeting of the unem-
ployed:—“ That as it is more than three weeks since a deputation
representing the unemployed waited upon the Trades’ Hall
Council, it is about time that that highly respectable circumlocu-
tion office ceased to platitudmise about the credit of the colony
and the absence of thrift, and applied itself in a practical
manner to the task of obtaining work for the unemployed.”
As Mr. Poolman had requested me to write to the Chamber of
Manufactures, 1 took advantage of the opportunity to endeavour
to expose the hollowness of the thrift falacy The letter which
was as follows, was, of course, “ laid upon the table.”
Dear Sir, —In conformity with your request, I hereby make
formal application that the condition of the unemployed be
brought under the notice of the Chamber of Manufactures. In
doing so, I wish to state that I am not an unemployed workman,
as I am engaged in literary and other work, which, however,
leaves me sufficient leisure to advocate the claims of the unem-
ployed, who have asked me to. The distress existing amongst
the unemployed has since the commencement of the agitation
become so generally admitted that it is quite unnecessary to go
into figures, and we have only to consider the best means of
dealing with it. I submit, therefore, that, all private agencies
having failed, it is the duty of the Government to meet the
difficulty by the inauguration of special works. In reply to the
objection that these works would cause an influx of immigrants
from other colonies, I have to point out that every man produc-
tively employed adds greatly to the wealth of the community,
and does not lower the standard of life of other workers by com-
peting against them as an unemployed worker. In answer to
the objection that the workers should have saved their summer’s
earnings, I reply that very few married men outside of the so-
called “ aristocracy of labour” can earn sufficient to save, and
further, that the doctrine of thrift is economically unsound
because, if all workers saved, the operation of what Ricardo
termed “ the iron lav of wages ” would force wages down to the


reduced cost of subsistence, if the workmen lived like Chinese
coolies with a view to obtaining interest on their savings, they
themselves would pay it (for all interest is the result of labour),
the competition of the unemployed for work, forcing wages down
to the cost of subsistence of Chinese coolies. This, in brief, is
Ricardo’s law. Trusting you will pardon me for the length of
this letter,—l am, etc., S. A. Rosa, Chairman of the unemployed,"
The following report appeared in the Age for August 4th :
THE SOCIALISTS AND THE UNEMPLOYED.
MEETING ON THE WHARF,
FOUR MEN ARRESTED.
The Socialist agitation which is carried on in connection with
the unemployed movement was largely in evidence on Saturday,
and the difficulty reached a climax yesterday afternoon in the
arrest of four men for insulting behaviour at the meeting on the
wharf. The meeting near the Working-men’s College on Satur-
day morning was not a large one, and the speeches were mainly
directed to the discussion which had taken place in the Trades’
Hall Council on the previous evening. The speakers declared
that the Trades’ Hall estimate of the numbers of men unem-
ployed was totally unreliable, and they maintained that there
were still 10,000 men in Melbourne who were in want of work.
A resolution casting ridicule on the Trades’ Hall Council was
adopted by the meeting.
On Saturday evening, at 11 o’clock, a meeting was held on the
vacant piece of ground opposite Prince’s-bridge Station, There
was a modeiate attendance, and after half an hour’s speaking it
w T as decided to adjourn to the ground in Latrobe-street in the
hope of attracting additional numbers by making an informal
demonstration through the City. The crowd accordingly passed
along S wanston-street and down Collins-street in order to
traverse Elizabeth-street en route. A large number of police
were in attendance, and followed the crowd as it moved. On the
way there was a little disorder in Collins-stieet, and the leaders
of the agitation state that a man was struck by a constable who
attempted to restore order, but the charge is denied by the
police.


CONFLICT WITH THE POLICE.
MOUNTED TROOPERS IN READINESS,
A large crowd assembled yesterday afternoon on the Queen’s
Wharf Early on Saturday morning it was rumored that Mr.
Gillies, the Premier, was to be publicly burnt in effigy, to mark
the feeling in which he is held by the leaders of the unemployed
agitation. The rumor spread widely, and something like 7000
persons assembled at the wharf yesterday afternoon in expecta-
tion of witnessing a lively scene. In this they were not
disappointed, the meeting being an exciting one from start to
finish. The police were present in fairly strong numbers. A
■clumsily designed effigy of the Premier had been brought down
to the wharf under guard of a number of Socialists, and satu-
rated with kerosene, in readiness for the lighted match to be
applied to it, From this fact it is believed that the Socialist
leaders feared the police would not allow them to burn the figure
in Flinders Park, whither it was their intention to proceed on
the breaking up of the meeting, and so they determined to set
the effigy alight at the wharf, and on the first opportunity, in the
hope that the police officers would let the thing burn when it was
alight. In this, however, they were mistaken. The police
closely watched every movement of the ringleaders
Some speeches having been made, a man named Thomas Green,
a labourer, who has identified himself closely with the movement,
mounted a chair, and announced that it was his intention to
proceed to Flinders Park, and it was generally understood that
as the effigy had not yet been burnt it was intended to commit it
to the flames in that locality. But, reminded of the presence of
the police, Mr. Green explained that he did not invite any of the
unemployed to follow him, though if they elected to do so he
would not of course prevent them. This was looked upon as
the signal for a general move to the Park. By this time —it was
then abont 4,l3—the police had been reinforced by a number of
constables from the Russell-street Barracks, and so serious did
the outlook appear that the authorities determined to hold a
number of mounted troopers in readiness for any emergency
which might arise. Though no trooper appeared upon the scene,
it soon became known or feared that they were in readiness, and
in consequence the crowd appeared to get more and more unde-
cided as to what course of action they should adopt.


In their purpose to visit Flinders Park the men to whom th&
leaders had temporarily deputed the superintendence of the
movement were prevented by an attempt being made by the
police to arrest a man in the centre of the crowd on a charge of
insulting behaviour. The offender, it is alleged, had made use of
objectionable expressions, and the uniform police determined to
arrest him. In this endeavour they were at once seconded by
the plain clothes officers, and on the prisoner being marched off
in the direction of the King-street watch-house, the course of
the whole crowd was diverted from the Flinders Park route to
the locality of the lockup, at the corner of Bourke and King
streets. In King-street the crowd became densely packed, end
extended from Flinders-street to Bourke-street, and there was
but little elbow room between the units making up the crowd.
The arrest of the man came as a surprise to the leaders, but there
was no violent protest. They contented themselves by indulging
in jostling the police and in rough horse-play, calling out at times
to their friends in the rear to push the police into the river or
smash in their helmets. So forcible was the sway of the large
crowd that at one time, when it was charged by Sub-Inspector
Gray and his posse of constables, two of the police—Constables
Geelan and O’Shay—experienced a very narrow escape from
being pushed headlong into the Yarra. To make any headway
at all through the crowd the officers had to draw their batons,
and after a short struggle they succeeded iu lodging several
prisoners in the King-street watch-house, and managed to capture
the effigy of the Premier. This took place at about 4-80 p.m
On the way to the watch-house the officers were subjected to
ridicule by some of the lowest of the low characters of Melbourne,
who had assembled, not with any sympathy for the Socialistic
movement, but from a desire to see what at one time promised
to be a serious conflict between the rabble and the officers of the
law. “ Shoot down the coppers ” was a phrase repeatedly heard
issuing from the throats of numbers of the larrikin class—both
male and female—and under circumstances of a trying nature
the officers maintained their position with as little force as was
possible, though with the greatest difficulty. Mr, Rosa and
other prominent agitators connected with the Socialists, had in
the meantime become lost in the crowd, and personally, so far as
can be gathered, They gave no encouragement to the men to
resist the police.
The men arrested are John Mullally, a navvy; Cornelius


Donoghue, a labourer ; Arthur Clayton, a carpenter ; and Thomas
Green, a labourer. The whole of the men are charged with insult-
ing behaviour, and against Clayton and Green a further charge is
preferred of inciting prisoners to resist arrest. The arresting
officers were Constables Gleeson, Geelan, O’Shay, Rogers and
Coffey. The accused were safely lodged in the watch house soon
after 4-30, but it was long after that hour when King-street and
Bourke-street resumed their ordinary Sunday afternoon appearances.
For an hour or so the crowd patrolled up and down each thorough-
fare, the enthusiasts amongst it contenting themselves with
condemning everyone connected with the maintenance of order—
from the Governor downwards —and especially Mr. Gillies. Then
the chilly breezes of evening blew against them, and with expres-
sions of sympathy for their imprisoned comrades, and indignation
at their arrest, they wended their way home.
LAST NIGHT’S MEETING.
A further meeting was held about 8 o’clock last evening to protest
against the action of the police authorities in arresting the men on
the wharf during the afternoon. The attendance was considerable,
about 700 persons being present. The speeches delivered were of
a very fiery nature, and the people were recommended to form
revolutionary organisations in order that they might protect them-
selves if needful from “ unconstitutional ” action on the part of the
police. The right of free speech was declared to be in danger, and
the liberties of the people were being trodden under foot. In order
to bring about a better state of things it was suggested by one
speaker that a society should be established on similar lines to the
Clan-na-Gael of America. Another agitator recommended the
formation of military clubs. “We do not want to resist the law,”
he said, but the experience of this afternoon has taught us the
value of organisation. There is nothing to prevent you from form-
ing a military club and drilling yourselves to act in concert, and
then if occasion should arise, you will no longer be helpless units,
but you can act together at the word of command, and sweep away
resistance from before you.” During the course of the meeting a
collection was made throughout the crowd in order to raise sufficient
funds to bail out the men who had been arrested. The collection
was vigorously pushed, and after the second round had been made
the total sum received amounted to about £8 At about 10 o’clock
some of the leaders announced that they were going away to bail
Clayton out, and encouraged the meeting to remain on the ground


until they came back from the King-street police station after having
performed their errand. A few minutes later a little band slipped
quietly away from the crowd in order to seek for a magistrate who
would arrange for the bail. The houses of several justices were
visited, but as the hour was getting late and some of them were out
of town, the errand proved fruitless, and the attempt was reluc-
tantly relinquished. The men who were arrested will be brought
before the City Court this morning.
This report is the most accurate of the various reports, but it errs
seriously Thomas Green made no speech whatever ;he was a
complete stranger to us, and has remained a stranger since. The
speech was made by Mr, Clayton. The effigy was seized by a man
slightly under the influence of liquor, a stranger to us, The effigy,
had it not been for the interference of the police, would have been
recovered, but the police at once attempted to arrest the man,
hoping, no doubt, that during the melee they would succeed in
arresting some of the speakers. The action of the police caused
the disturbance. Mr Clayton was arrested while walking slowly
with the writer away from the watch house. It was the opinion of
many that the scheme had been so arranged as to try and cause me
to protest, upon which I would have been arrested upon some
trumped-up charge. That this opinion was pretty general is shown
by the telegrams to the Press in the country and some of the other
colonies, it being stated that “ Rosa escaped.” “ Rosa” did, in fact
escape, by going to try and obtain bail for Clayton, the only one of
of the prisoners I was acquainted with. The following account
the police court proceedings is from the Herald of August 5 :
THE UNEMPLOYED AND POLICE.
YESTERDAY’S FRAY.
INSPECTOR GRAY NEVER SAW ANYTHING LIKE
IT BEFORE.
TO THE RIVER WITH THE POLICE.
POLICE COURT PROCEEDINGS.
THREE FINED AND ONE DISCHARGED
Little Collins-street—that part of it near the City watchhouse


was a scene of bustle and bubbling excitement this morning.
The crowd which blocked the thoroughfare were of the class that
congregates on Sunday afternoon on the wharves to give ear to
to the Socialistic and “ unemployed ” agitators. Four of their
number had been locked up, and it was to catch a glimpse of
them that they had swarmed round the entrance to the watch-
house. They were a motley gathering, but it must be said that
they behaved themselves decorously prior to the proceedings in
Court. At times, however, complaints were heard against the
Government, and especially towards Mr. Gillies, while the men
in durance vile were spoken of as heroes who were suffering
nobly for the “ cause.” Once or twice a cheer was sent up, evi-
dently meant to convince the captives that they had not been
deserted in their time of trouble.
The other cases having been postponed, the four men —John
Mulhally, Cornelius Donahoo, Arthur Clayton, and Thomas
Green —who were alleged to have had a hand in the attempt to
burn the Premier’s effigy, were brought into Court,
The quartette looked crestfallen. Mulhally, with a flaming red
necktie, very much like a Socialist’s flag, and a huge cabbage-leaf
hat, was the first to be hustled in Kext came Donahoo, a little
less “loudly ” dressed. He aspired to a shirt cuff. Clayton was
next. He stood with arms akimbo, looking very fierce and pert.
Green looked serious, and very much as though he wished he had
not been brought so prominent before the public.
Mulhally and Donahoo were charged with insulting behaviour,
Clayton and Green were charged with insulting behaviour and
with inciting prisoners to resist.
Mr. Marshall Lyle appeared for Clayton,
Sub-Inspector Gray: I wish all the charges to be taken
together.
Mr. Lyle: I object on behalf of my client, and as he was not
creating a disturbance, I don’t think his case should be taken
with the others
Mr. Gray : It will facilitate matters, and to try him separately
would be to prolong the time of the Court, I don’t think, if his
case be taken with the others, that it will prejudice your case.
Mr. Lyle: Very well. I will accept that if the case of my
client be not affected.
Sub-Inspector Gray then stated the case. He said the pro-
ceedings arose from the meetings held by Socialists and the
unemployed. Ihe Socialists held a meeting near the Prince’s


Bridge station on Saturday, and subsequently on a piece of
ground near tbe Working-men’s College It was then decided
that on Sunday a meeting would be held on the wharf at 3 o’clock,
and that at this meeting the effigy of the bon. Duncan Gillies
would be burnt. (Laughter.) The publicity thus given to the
affair had the effect of drawing a large crowd to the wharf at 5
o’clock on Sunday. There were about 8000 or 10,000 people
present. The prisoners were of the number. They were stand-
ing round a post on which there was a notice board of the City
Council. To this an effigy was hung, to the clothes of which was
pinned a placard bearing the words in bold characters Gillies.”
Mr. Lyle: 1 object to those statements.
Mr. Gray: I mean to bring it out in evidence. The effigy
was—
Mr, Lyle : What! Have you got an effigy of Duncan Gillies
in court? (Laughter).
Mr. Gray : Yes, we have.
Mr. Lyle : Well, 1 don’t appear for it. (Laughter).
Mr. Gray, continuing, said that Mulhally was standing near
the post near which some speakers delivering fiery speeches were
standing. They condemned everyone who was possessed of a
shilling as not fit to live. One of the orators stopped speaking
and turned round to the effigy, and striking a match applied it
to the “ Guy Fawkes ” The police immediately rushed round,
and extinguished the fire. Mr. Gray and a couple of constables
saw Mulhally standing near the effigy. They believed him to be
the man who had fired the effigy, and Mr. Gray told him if he
repeated the act he would be forced to lock him up. He replied,
“ All right ” At about 4,30 o’clock there were about 10,000
people gathered round. One of the speakers notified the crowd
that he was going “to proceed somewhere with the effigy ot the
traitor Duncan Gillies.” He said he did not wish them to follow
him, but would be glad if they would do so and would not prevent
them. The crowd then started off along Flinders-street, in the
direction of Prince’s Bridge. The yelling and shouting were
something fearful In fact he (the sub-inspector) had not in all
his life heard anything like it before. There were three con-
stables in front shepherding the man Green who was carrying
the effigy. The constables spoke to the man, and were afraid if
they did not make an arrest lives would be lost They cautioned
Mulhally, telling him that if he did not stop his nonsense they
would lock him up. Instead of taking the advice they set the


police at defiance. Consequently the police placed him under
arrest Immediately they put their hands on Mulhally the crowd
turned on them- They yelled and howled horribly, and cried fre-
quently “To the river with them.” They turned the two
constables and the sub-officer in the direction of the river, back
from the way they were going. There were only eight policemen
altogether amongst the crowd. The Sub-Inspector and the other
constables then fought their way into the crowd. He (Mr.
Gray) ordered the men to draw their batons. The fight lasted
five minutes. He spoke to the crowd, telling them they were
creating a breach of the peace, but very little notice was taken
of him The tram traffic in Flinders-street was stopped, so dense
was the throng. At length, after much trouble, in which Clayton,
Green and Donovan incited Mulhally to resist, they landed him
in the King-street watch-house by a strategic move, as several
of the crowd rushed to the gates to intercept the police with
their prisoners. The crowd then hung about the lockup, and
constables had to be called out from Swanston and Russell
streets.
Sub-Inspector Gray then entered the box, and on oath told of
the fiery utterances of the agitators- He grasped by the neck
the effigy of the Premier. This was a little squat figure, and
could have have been made to pass muster as an effigy for
anyone.
Seniar-constable Kissane, Constables Geelan, Rogers, O’Shea,
Coffey, and Detective Williams gave evidence as to the conduct
of the accused and the crowd generally.
Constable Geelan said that Mulhally was half drunk, and that
he kissed the effigy most affectionately, besides pinning to it copies
of two newspapers.
Detective Williams said that Clayton was in the habit of
making most rabid remarks. He had heard him say, “ I have a
little instrument at home, which if I brought out would mean
mischief. I will be prepared to bring it out when the time
comes.”
Mr. Lyle; Did he not tap his head when He said this, as if he
meant that he had an idea by which he could provide employment
for the unemployed P
Detective Williams : I did not take it as that.
Constable Rogers said that Donahoo was one of a knot of
fellows near him when stones were thrown at the King Street
watch-house.


This concluded the evidence on the charge of insulting
behaviour, and Mr. Lyle, for Clayton said that if in this colony
a man held the opinion that the Government is rotten he had a
perfect right to say so He was treating of men in public life,
and the Government were entitled to be criticised.
Mr, Nicholson : That does not admit of argument.
Mr: Lyle then went on to say that Clayton was a respectable
man, and though he was one of those at the head of the unem-
ployed movement, he was not of a drunken, disorderly or
larrikin class.
Percy Shone, a carpenter, was called for the defendant Clayton,
and gave him a good character. Clayton had at one time worked
for him. He saw him on Sunday, and he did not create any
disturbance.
S. A. Rosa, who described himself as the Secretary of the
Social Democratic League, swore that Clayton told the crowd not
to act in an illegal manner, or make any disturbance. TVhen
arrested he insulted nobody, and was walking quietly with wit-
ness when arrested.
Mr. Nicholson, P.M., said, that in considering the case they
were not influenced by the political feeling or discussion by the
defendants, for it was the right of every other British subject to
discuss politics so long at they did not create a breach of the
peace. This had been done yesterday. Clayton was at the head
of affairs and should have known better. He was fined £5, or
one month’s imprisonment. Mulhally was fined 40s, or 14 days’
imprisonment. Green was fined £l, or seven days. Honahoo
was discharged. Charges of inciting prisoners to resist against
Green and Clayton were withdrawn.
T he fines were at once paid and the men released.
If the above report i» accurate, the following untruthful
statements were made by one of the witnesses ;
1. 4 hat it was decided to burn the effigy at the meeting on
the wharf. 2. That the speakers condemned everyone who was
possessed of a shilling as not fit to live. 3. That “ one of the
orators ” applied a match to the clothing of the effigy. 4, That
the police extinguished the fire 5. That Mulhally was “ one of
orators.” One of the things that the report does not mention is
that Sub-Inspector Gray in his cross-examination of the writer
showed that he was very angry that his men had not succeeded
in arresting me the previous afternoon ; he sneeringly asked me
where I went after Clayton was arrested I told him I went to
try to obtain bail for Clayton, at which, he, as Darwin says


revealed man’s kinship with the lower animals by another
sneer
1 carried on the agitation for some time after this, but at
length on August 20, pressure of private business compelled me
to abandon it. The agitation compelled the Government to, ac-
cording to the Premier’s own statement, provide employment for
nearly 1000 men, while many private employers employed more
men than would otherwise have been the case. A member of the
Government, the hon. James Balfour, said in the Legislative
Council, July 16, “ He did not want to say a word against those
who had come forward as spokesmen of the unemployed, because
they had done this good at all events—they had caused the
present condition of affairs in the labour market to be discussed,
they had made it patent that there was a great deal of necessity
and distress in the community, with the result that all generous
minded men in the country were putting their hands in their
pockets to provide the means of relieving the immediate neces-
sities of the distressed, while the Government were doing all in
their power to find work for the unemployed.” The statement
as to what the Government were doing must, of course, be taken
cum grano salts as it was quite within their power to start special
works which would absorb the whole of the unemployed, that
they would not do.
No doubt many who read this account will blame the conductors
of the movement for the use of what they may possibly consider
unnecessarily strong language. I would say to those readers
that I think they underrate the difficulty of attracting attention
to an unemployed movement, without the use of more than ordi-
nary means. The policy adopted by the Victorian Press with
regard to the unemployed is that of the ostrich which is said to
hide its head in the sand, and imagine that no one can see it.
The Press hides in the sand the misery of the poorest workers,
by refusing to report it, and then affirms that it does not exist,
and that Victoria is the “Workmen’s Paradise ”
Victoria is not a democratic colony, for it is ruled by the rich,
Plural voting, which secures to some rich men as many as thirty
votes, the defective systems of registration and balloting which
render it difficult to secure and deposit votes, the great influence
that the rich man has over those who are ignorant, or mentally
or socially weak, the heavy expenses of elections, together with
the fact that every candidate has to deposit £SO on being nomi-
nated, the existence of a second Legislative Chamber, consisting


entirely of men possessing a property qualification which is a
legal condition of membership, and the competition for employ-
ment which forces wage-earners to work long hours, and thus
deprives them of that leisure which is requisite for the adequate
study of the social problem, all combine to make Government in
Victoria plutocratic. No doubt some will tell me that Victorian
workmen work only eight hours a day, but I reply that it is only
the minority who do so, and that even eight hours is far too
long, for by then the workman gets home, which is generally
some miles from his work, washes, changes his clothes, takes tea
and chats with his wife and children he has very little time left
to reap anything but an ordinary daily newspaper, which, as it
requires considerable capital to start it, and the support of
capitalistic advertisements to enable it to continue, writes either
openly, or in most cases, disguisedly, in the interest of the
capitalistic class. At present Victorian capitalists are interested
in negotiating the loan of a large sum from English capitalists,
and therefore desire to maintain an appearance of prosperity ;
for this purpose they denounce as a monstrum horrendum any man
who exposes the hollowness of this sham prosperity. In addition
to this, there is the fact that capitalists do not desire the inter-
ference of the state with their “ private enterprise,” as that
would show that there is not one useful or necessary service
performed by capitalists which could not be done as well, if not
better, by the nation. If too, every unemployed worker were
provided by the State with employment at good wages, there
would be none to force down wages by their demand for employ-
ment, and the wage-earner would then become “ master of the
situation.” Had the Trades-union leaders recognised this fact
during the unemployed movement, they would not in the great
Shipping Strike have to fight a hard battle against non-union
labour. It is to be feared, however, that they do not possess
the economic knowledge which every labour leader should have.
Socialism is the philosophy of the proletariat, as individualistic
economy is the philosophy of the bourgeoisie ; and, therefore,
every man who aspires to become a labour leader should be
familiar with the writings of Marx, Engels, Rodbertus, Lassalle,
and other great Socialistic thinkers of modern times Social-
ism, by which term I mean national, collective ownership of land
and capital, with employment as well as leisure, guaranteed to
every member of society, may be brought about by a gradual
and peaceful change, and one of the first and easiest steps would


be the provision of employment for all who were willing to work,
meanwhile it is well to remember that riots by the unemployed
in France, led the way to the Eeign of Terror which drowned
Feudalism in a sea of blood, and it may be well for the comfor-
table and the well-fed to reflect how applicable are the words
of Shakespeare, in “ Eomeo and Juliet,” to the condition of some
of the destitute unemployed: —
“Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear’st to die ? Famine is in thy cheeks—
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hang upon thy back ;
The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law :
The world affords no law to make thee rich ;
Then be not poor, but break it.”
B. M, Lucas, Printer, corner of Swanston and Latrobe-streets,






Social Democratic League, of Victoria
In order to prepare the way for the Establishment of the
Co-operative Commonwealth, the Social Democratic League of
Victoria demands the following ;
TRANSITIONAL MEASURES.
1. Abolition of Plural Voting,
2, Abolition of the £5O deposit,
3, Annual Parliaments.
4. Abolition of the Legislative Council.
5, All Justices of the Peace and Jurymen to be selected
by ballot from the electoral roll.
6. Codification of the Law.
7. Free administration of Justice,
8. Abolition of all Laws for the Collection of Debt.
9. Establishment by Law of a maximum labour day of
eight hours in all branches of industry.
10. State ownership of all means of transit.
11. All paper money to be issued by the state.
12. Nationalisation of the Land.
13. All proposed constitutional changes to be submitted |
by plebiscite to the people.
o \
Membership of the League is open to all who agree with its
s man tnreepence per weeit.
S. A- ROSA, Secretary,
aims, and subscribe not less than threepence per week.
