

The Goldfish
in the Home
By
T. C. Roughley, F.R.Z.S.
Economic Zoologist
Price 1/-
Bulletin No. 18
Technological Museum
Sydney




Technical Education Branch
Department of Education
Sydney Technological Museum
Harris Street, Ultimo
A. R. Penfold, F.A.C.I., F.C.S., Curator
THE GOLDFISH
IN THE HOME
by
T. C. Roughley, F.R.Z.S.
Economic Zoologist
Bulletin No. 18
Sydney:
Alfred James Kent, I.S.O., Government Printer
1932
*66435—A




The Goldfish in the Home.
Introduction.
HOW often should the water in an aquarium be changed ? How often should
goldfish be fed ? What is the best food ? Will goldfish live in a round
bowl ? How many fish can safely be kept in an aquarium ?
Such are a few of the questions continually being asked by an increasing
army of enthusiasts, who, having fallen under the spell of this beautiful and intensely
interesting fish, have installed an aquarium in the home, with little or no knowledge
of the fundamental principles of aquarium management. There are some very
definite principles to be followed if the fish are to remain healthy, and it is the
purpose of this pamphlet briefly to describe some of those which are essential to the
wellbeing of the fish.
The ancestral home of the goldfish (Carassius auratus) was in the freshwater
rivers of China. There in its wild state it was a more or less drab, oliveaceous or
bronze-green fish, without any specially striking characteristics. But the Chinese
long ago found that even in its natural state the goldfish was subject to considerable
variation. It is a very plastic species; some individuals would appear with
abnormally formed bodies, scales, fins, or eyes, or, perhaps, with marked colour
variations, and with much foresight the Chinese conceived the idea of interbreeding
such abnormally formed fish in an effort to perpetuate, and, if possible, still further
to develop these abnormalities. This careful breeding has been going on for cen-
turies in China with results which have probably not been equalled in any species
of the animal kingdom. Some extraordinary forms have been produced. Fish
with egg-shaped bodies, others with protruding eyes, with fins, especially the caudal,
produced to amazing lengths, with transparent scales and brilliant colours, with a
tumour-like growth over the whole of the head, or, perhaps, with the complete
absence of one or more of the fins, are amongst some of the more striking forms
commonly seen at the present day.
At a later date, probably about 1500 a.l\, the goldfish was introduced into
Japan, and the Japanese enthusiastically carried on the work of selective breeding,
resulting in the development of some entirely new forms. Then followed America,
where further varieties were, developed, and at the present time breeding on a large
scale is widely distributed throughout the world.
In Europe, the principal breeding centres are Germany, Italy and Portugal,
and from there large quantities of fancy goldfish are exported to other European
countries, including Great Britain, which in the past has not taken up the breeding
of goldfish on a really large scale. There is a tradition that the first goldfish to reach


Europe from the East were brought to France as an offering to Madame de Pompadour,
but there is evidence to show that goldfish were kept in England in the seventeenth
century, before Madame was born.
It is impossible to say when the goldfish first reached Australia, but it has
undoubtedly been here for a long period. Until recently the importations from the
East were comparatively small, their sale was casual, and they were only bred locally
on a small scale by a few enthusiastic amateurs. During recent years, however,
the keeping of goldfish in Australia has become very widespread, and the importations
from the East (China and Japan) have increased enormously. Almost every boat
from these countries brings goldfish in thousands, and they are being displayed for
sale in scores of shops in the city of Sydney and its suburbs.
What a familiar sight it is to see a small bowl, filled to the restricted neck
with water, and containing anything up to a dozen goldfish, all gasping for breath
at the surface ! How often the public buy such a bowl under the impression
that it will satisfy the requirements of an almost unlimited number of fish, invariably
with disastrous results. Some may inquire what food to give the fish, and on being
told biscuits, oatmeal, bread, or some other food commonly suggested, place relatively
enormous amounts of these commodities in the bowl adding more and more as the
large amount left over becomes stale. Others, again, imagine that their fish derive
their nourishment from the water, and so the poor creatures are left to die of star-
vation. Is it any wonder that the mortality is a heavy one ? Is it any wonder
that the dealer is so often blamed for selling unhealthy fish ?
Sir Herbert Maxwell, in his “ British Freshwater Fishes,” states the case
against the weedless bowl with the emphasis it deserves. “ A bowl of goldfish !
What an innocent ornament to the parlour window-sill it seems, until one tries to
realise the wants and natural habits of these creatures. Their true home is the
ample pool or gently-flowing river, willow-fringed and with grateful cover of waving
water-weeds. Food is abundant in the shape of succulent young shoots and larvae
of immeasurable variety. They have excellent appetites, and greatly appreciate
the different flavours so liberally provided for them. Sunshine is a thing to be
grateful for, and they love to bask in it for a while; but chiefly by reason that, when
they have had enough, they can sink into the cool depths and sport with Amaryllis
in the shade. Now contrast with this the abode which civilised man provides for the
fishes which excite his admiration, and the fare with which he regales his captives.
A clear glass bowl, with not a spray of weed or a friendly stone to break its monotony
or afford a resting place : such objects would interfere with the display which it is
the sole function of these creatures to provide. Food is seldom given; by some good
people who keep goldfish it is forbidden, for it is apt to sully the water. Actually
when I have remonstrated with kind-hearted women for starving their goldfish, they
have replied confidently, but vaguely, that they fed on the animalculae in the water !
Now I do not suppose that it would be possible to devise a more heartless proceeding
—-that is, it would be heartless were it not utterly thoughtless and brainless than


a family to sit down three times a day and eat hearty meals in a room ornamented
by a bowl of goldfish. Round and round the hapless prisoners swim within their
narrow, dreary limits in vain instinctive quest of food. If it be true, as is believed
from their superior proportion of brain, that these carp possess higher intelligence
than others of the lower vertebrate animals, what must their feelings be towards the
superior vertebrates who come and smack and guzzle and cackle in the presence of
victims slowly dying of starvation ?
“ Yes, dying of starvation ! for although goldfish, like others of the class,
possess great power of abstinence, there must be a limit to that power. Nutriment
is as essential to them as to other organisms; deprived of that, the vital spark must
flicker out, after what degree of suffering we do not know. The cruelty of keeping
live animals under these conditions is not one whit less real because it is founded
on ignorance. lam the last to doubt the genuine desire of people in general to make
their pets happy; but for Christ’s gentle sake let them begin by taking the trouble
to acquire the rudiments of knowledge in what the welfare of these pets consists ! ”
Besides the cruelty of starvation, there is the cruelty of suffocation, and
the cruelty of water polluted with decaying foodstuff. These also are no less real.
Let us, then, endeavour to provide for the goldfish a home as near as possible simu-
lating the conditions under which it lives and thrives in nature, where it may breathe
freely, swim freely, eat freely, and altogether carry on its existence as happily as
in “an ample pool or gently-flowing river, willow-fringed and with grateful cover
of waving water-weeds.’’
Of course, there are many enthusiasts who appreciate the requirements of
their fish, and who provide conditions under which the fish live in perfect content-
ment, There are dealers, also, who have an extensive knowledge of aquarium
management, who stock well set-up tanks, who endeavour to their utmost to warn
their clients against the weedless bowl, and who are ever willing to give advice freely
on the management of the aquarium.
In Sydney, too, there is a very active Aquarium Society at whose monthly
meetings problems incidental to the upkeep of the aquarium are discussed. This
band of enthusiasts, embracing amongst its members both amateurs and professionals,
is doing extremely valuable work in an endeavour to disseminate knowledge on
the principles of correct aquarium management, and I cannot too strongly recommend
all who really seriously undertake to keep goldfish, or any other aquarium fish,
to link up with the Society and avail themselves of the valuable information which
the members are at all times willing to impart.
In March, 1931, the Aquarium Society of New South Wales held a public
exhibition in Sydney where many beautiful tanks were exhibited, and there is no
doubt that this exhibition has given a tremendous impetus to the hobby of aquarium
keeping. It is to be hoped that such exhibitions will be held annually, and that
they meet with an ever increasing success,


There is no doubt that a well set-up aquarium has wonderful decorative
value in the home. If the tank is properly designed and equipped in the first place,
and the fish are not overcrowded, very little attention beyond the regular feeding
of the fish is necessary.
The water crystal clear, the plants vividly green, the fish, rich in colour,
diverse in form and graceful in motion, have a beauty and interest unrivalled by
any other form of home decoration. And a new world of inquiry is opened to the
lover of nature. The habits and emotions of the fish, their courtship, the develop-
ment of the young, their change of form and colour, the varieties of live food, and
many other avenues of exploration incidental to the keeping and rearing of the
fish, open up a new vista, fascinating in all its phases.
Fig 1. An aquarium in the home is not only a source of endless interest, but it
may be a very attractive decoration.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
With the increasing, and very laudable, tendency to develop the study of
nature in the schools, the installation of aquaria is worthy of very serious considera-
tion. Here is an opportunity, at very small cost, of inculcating in the young a love
of the beautiful, a care for the lower animals, an attention to detail, and a study of
some of the lower organisms, which can scarcely be rivalled by any other form of
nature study.
The great bulk of the goldfish sold in Australia are imported from Japan
and China, where goldfish breeding is an extensive industry. The long sea voyage


under very unsuitable conditions, such as overcrowding, and the lack of sufficient
aeration and suitable food, in many cases undermines the constitutions of the fish.
Frequently a considerable number do not survive the voyage, and, amongst those
that do, many are so weakened that, in the hands of any but experienced aquarists,
considerable loss eventually ensues. A similar condition obtained in America in
the days when most of the stock was imported from the East, but since the importa-
tions were replaced for the most part by locally-bred fish, an enormous improvement
in the hardiness of the stock has been effected. A realisation of this has led to several
aquarists laying out extensive breeding ponds in the vicinity of Sydney whence
supplies of hardy stock may in future be drawn.
The Choice of Tank.
There can be no question but that rectangular tanks are infinitely superior
to the ordinary round bowl for stocking goldfish. It is not a question of the
distortion inside the bowl driving the fish mad, or the continual swimming round
and round upsetting the fish, as is frequently maintained by the novice. The whole
question is one of accommodation and aeration. Just as we breathe air from which
our lungs extract the oxygen, so the fish breathe the water, which, passing in a stream
over the gills, supplies the life-maintaining oxygen to the fish. The water, therefore,
must contain sufficient oxygen to satisfy the needs of the fish. Now, the oxygen
in the water is derived from two sources; it is continually being absorbed at the
surface from the air which circulates over it, and this, unless the surface is a very
extensive one, as in an outside shallow pond, must be augmented by that given
off from plants growing in the water. Both are necessary sources of supply. The
ordinary round bowl is so constricted at the neck, which is usually the height to
which it is filled, that the surface of water exposed to the air is hopelessly inadequate.
Many bowls offered for sale for aquarium purposes contain little more than half
a gallon of water, with a diameter at the neck of about 6 inches. Frequently as
many as half-a-dozen fish, each about 2 inches long, are placed in such a bowl, and
the owner wonders why his fish are short lived. Obviously, they die of suffocation.
This bowl will scarcely maintain more than one fish an inch long (exclusive of tail)
even if it is stocked with thriving water plants.
Moreover, the uneven, circular glass distorts the appearance of the fish,
and for this reason alone is far from satisfactory. Rectangular tanks, on the other
hand, are made of plate glass, which gives an undistorted view of the contents, but
their greatest advantage lies in their relatively greater water surface. Their length
should be twice their width and height.
Large rectangular jars of the all-glass accumulator type are frequently used
as aquaria, but they are really not well adapted for the purpose. The glass is very
uneven, rendering a clear view of the contents quite impossible, and they are usually
of such a shape that when filled with water the depth is greater than the length,


and far greater than the width. A comparatively small area of water is exposed
to the air, and an insufficient amount of oxygen is absorbed to supply the whole
of the water it contains. Of course, this may be largely counterbalanced by a
prolific growth of weed, but nevertheless such tanks can rarely be made to look
attractive, and generally may be regarded as a poor substitute for a plate glass tank.
Well constructed tanks of the correct proportions, with plate glass and metal
frames, may be had at very reasonable cost from most aquarium dealers, but, should
the reader desire to construct his own, the following directions may be found adequate
for the purpose.
Fig. 2. Slanting rays of sunlight lend the aquarium an entrancing beauty.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
The Construction of the Tank.
The framework of the tank may be made of galvanised iron, brass, copper,
or aluminium. Galvanised iron is most generally used, and when the tank is
completed is usually coated with paint or bronze powder. The galvanised iron
should be of 24 gauge. If an oxidised or nickel-plated finish is desired, either
copper or brass must be used.
In the following description details are given for the construction of a gal-
vanised iron plate-glass tank measuring 20 inches long, 10 inches wide, and 10 inches
deep, a popular size, which, with a layer of sand about inches deep, and filled to
within % an inch of the top, holds about 7 gallons of water.
For the base a piece of galvanised iron should be obtained measuring 2i|
inches by ii|- inches, and for the upright supports and top horizontal piece, a length
of 100 inches, ij inches wide, which should be turned at right angles along the
middle, each side of the angle then being f of an inch wide.


The corners of the basal piece are cut § of an inch from the edge, leaving a
f-inch square. The free edges, |of an inch wide, are now turned up at right angles
to the base. This may be done by hammering them against a piece of hardwood
with a square edge, but preferably should be turned in a machine by a tinsmith.
The four columns should be cut io inches long, and laid vertically against the turned
up edges on the inside of the base, one at each corner. Care must be taken to see
that each is exactly perpendicular. They are secured to the turned up portion
of the base by means of solder.
The top of the frame may be made from one piece of galvanised iron, 60
inches long. Ten inches from one end a right angle cut is made in the horizontal
edge; this allows the two edges to make perfect contact when the frame is turned
at right angles. Similar cuts are made 20 inches, and then 10 inches farther on.
The iron should now be folded over at right angles at each joint, making a perfect
rectangle. This is laid on the four upright supports, on the outside of each, and all
four joints soldered together and to the uprights. The framework is now completed,
and is ready for glazing.
Plate glass of an inch thick should be used. Five pieces are required, one
for the base measuring 19! by 9! inches, one each for the front and back measuring
1 9l by 9f, and one each for the sides measuring 9! by 9f.
First, the glass for the base of the tank is laid on the base of the frame; the
surfaces of the frame to which the front glass is to be attached are then coated with
putty, and the glass is pressed tightly against the frame, squeezing the surplus putty
out; the glass for the back is similarly placed in position, and a stick is firmly
wedged between them to hold them securely until the putty sets. The side pieces
are similarly treated and wedged. Surplus putty should be then cleaned off with
a knife. When the putty has set, the time varying with the type of putty used,
the glass should be thoroughly cleaned, any adhering putty being carefully scraped
off.
When the putty is quite hard the tank should be filled with water which
should be changed about every second day for about a fortnight. The tank is then
ready for the introduction of sand and water plants.
Water should always be siphoned from an aquarium, and the aquarium
should never be lifted when full of water.
Putty may be made from a number of ingredients. I have found one
consisting of lb. of whiting, \ lb. of plaster of Paris, J lb. of litharge, \ lb. of fine
sand, and 1 oz. of resin, worked to the consistency of ordinary putty with the
addition of a good varnish excellent for the purpose. It dries very quickly and
water may be introduced to the tank two or three days after its application. Boiled
linseed oil may be substituted for the varnish, but in this case the putty will harden
more slowly; it should be allowed about two weeks to set before water is run into
the tank. Only oil of the very highest quality should be used.
*66435— 8


lhe making of a tank is not difficult for anyone who is at all mechanically
inclined. Nor is the method rigidly confined to that described here. For instance,
the glass base may be dispensed with, the sand then lying direct on the metal. This
is not to be preferred, however, for in time the metal corrodes. Then, again, the
metal base may be dispensed with, the glass lying on a metal frame. There is some
loss of solidity in this type, and the aquarium is more easily strained.
A description of the method of construction of a galvanised iron tank has
been given because by far the greatest number of tanks used here are made of that
material. Brass or copper have a far more handsome appearance, but are somewhat
more costly. If copper or brass is used it must nowhere be exposed to the water,
while, if aluminium is the metal chosen for the frame, the joints must be rivetted.
It is highly desirable that a glass cover be placed over the aquarium to keep
out the dust. This should preferably consist of plate glass, with rounded and
polished edges. It should be raised about a quarter of an inch above the metal
surface by means of small corks stuck to the corners of the frame.
Dust on the surface of the water must not be confused with a scum which
develops from dead and decaying plants. This scum may be removed by drawing
a piece of newspaper or brown paper quickly over the surface, repeating with a fresh
piece two or three times. Some will adhere to the paper, and the remainder, now
concentrated here and there in whitish masses, may be removed by means of a
medicine dropper.
All dead plants should be removed at once; they are harmful to the water,
and the formation of the scum on the surface interferes with the absorption of oxygen.
For outside aquaria concrete has many advantages, not the least of which is
the scope for artistic design and arrangement.
Setting up the Tank.
An aquarium must be well stocked with aquatic plants, and a suitable
material must be provided for them to root in. Of these there are three commonly
used: —(i) coarse sand, (2) shell-grit, and (3) gravel. Shell-grit and gravel, although
more pleasing to the eye than coarse sand, suffer from the disadvantage that particles
of uneaten food may become concealed amongst them, and by their putrefaction,
pollute the water. Fine beach sand is not suitable because in the wet state it mats
so firmly that the delicate roots of the aquatic plants have difficulty in pushing their
way through it. Coarse sand, ideal for the purpose, is obtainable in unlimited
quantities along the banks of the Nepean River. It should be thoroughly washed
in running water till free from sediment. When the water comes awav quite clear,
the sand may be placed in the aquarium to a depth of i| to 2 inches. Water is run
into the tank to a depth of 3 or 4 inches, and the plants may then be arranged in
position.


There is a choice of a number of plants suitable for aquarium use, several of
which may be obtained from aquarium dealers. Amongst these may be mentioned
Anacharis {Elodea), Vallisneria, Sagittaria, Ludwigia, Myriophyllum, and the
small floating plants, Duckweed {Lemna) and Azolla.
Anacharis and Vallisneria are undoubtedly amongst the best plants for the
purpose, and are always to be had. They are hardy, decorative and good oxy-
genators. Equally valuable is Sagittana, but it is frequently unprocurable.
Anacharis gives off an abundance of leaves arranged in whorls of three or
four with finely serrated edges, and will grow from cuttings. Pieces about a foot
long should be stuck well into the sand; they may be anchored by tying a small
stone to the base. Roots frequently develop from the stem and grow downwards
Fig. 3. A successful aquarium must have a copious supply of thriving water plants.
The ribbon-shaped plants in the foreground are Vallisneria; in the background
is an abundance of Anacharis (Elodea).
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
till embedded in the sand. As Anacharis ages it deteriorates from the base upwards.
The dead or dying portion should be removed, and the newer, healthy growth
replanted. Goldfish occasionally eat the leaves with relish.
Vallisneria is ribbon-shaped, and is planted by the roots, which are inserted
and distributed by the fingers well under the sand, so that the crown of the plant
is just above the surface. It increases by runners. A great thread-like stem
with whitish tip grows out from near the base of the plant and extends in a hori-
zontal direction until slender roots strike from it into the sand.
Sagitiaria, like I ''allisneria, has a well-developed root system, and long,
grass-like leaves, which are frequently expanded at the tip. It reproduces principally
by means of runners, and by the production of tubers, or corms, amongst the roots,
from which new shoots develop.


Ludwigia, though only occasionally obtainable, is a very decorative aquarium
plant and a good oxygenator. It requires a bright light, and when well grown the
under-surfaces of the leaves turn a distinct red. Under average aquarium conditions
it is much less hardy than those previously described.
Myriophyllum is characterised by a much branched stem and an abundance
of very fine leaves. As an oxygenator it is probably not of much value, but it is
frequently added to aquaria to lend variety to the plant life. Its value as a spawn-
catching plant is referred to under the heading “ Spawning of Goldfish.”
Duckweed and Azolla are minute plants, used mainly for their decorative
effect on the surface of the water, though they may serve a useful purpose, when
abundant, in providing a certain amount of shade in situations where the aquarium
receives much sunlight. Duckweed is occasionally eaten by goldfish, and provides
a valuable change of diet when the fish are fed exclusively on animal food.
Having arranged the plants in position, the aquarium may be filled by pouring
water from a dipper on to a saucer held at the level of the water in the aquarium.
By this means the sand and plants remain undisturbed. The aquarium should now
remain about a week before fishes are introduced into it.
The plants in bright daylight are continually giving off oxygen, much of
which is dissolved in the water and is then available to the fish. The fish, in turn,
give off carbon dioxide, which the plants are able to convert into starch for their own
nourishment. For this reason an aquarium containing plants and fish is frequently
called a balanced aquarium—the oxygen from the plants is available to the fish
and the carbon dioxide from the fish is utilised by the plants, holding a sort of
balance between them.
Water should not be Changed.
If there is a sufficient supply of weeds, and their growth is vigorous, the
water in the aquarium never requires to be changed, a little being added occasionally
to replace the loss by evaporation. Under good conditions of light and plant
growth the same water will maintain fish in a healthy condition for years, and is
far healthier for the fish than tap water. Fish kept in bowls without plants, how-
ever, quickly exhaust the available oxygen, rendering frequent changes of water
necessary, and also introducing another factor which is very dangerous to fish,
that is the possibility of sudden changes of temperature. Fish in nature are never
subjected to sudden changes of temperature, and their powers of resistance to it
are not developed, with the result that the shock causes endless trouble, leading
to disease and death. Care must always be taken to see that there is little variation
between the temperature of the water from which fish are removed and that to
which they are transferred.


Placing the Tank,
A suitable choice of location for the tank is very necessary, and this is
regulated primarily by the amount of light it receives. The brighter the light the
more oxygen is produced by the plants, and in direct sunlight they may be seen
to give off continuous streams of bubbles of oxygen, which follow each other in
rapid succession to the surface. Too bright a light, however, causes the development
of minute green algae, which cover the inside of the glass and obscure the contents.
A considerable growth of algae and confervse may also develop in the water itself
rendering it a distinct green. Such a condition is frequently described by aquarists
as “ green water.” It is very healthy and stimulating to the fish, but is unsightly
in a show tank. The algae attached to the glass may be removed by scraping' the
glass with a safety-razor blade, or with a rubber scraper made specially for the
purpose. It is a good plan to have a number of pond snails in the aquarium; they
ceaselessly wander over the surface of the glass, consuming the algae as they proceed,
and help in no small measure to keep the glass clean.
If the light is not sufficiently bright the plants in the tank will not thrive,
and their output of oxygen will be dangerously curtailed. A happy medium must
therefore be found—the light should be sufficiently bright to promote vigorous
growth of the plants but not sufficiently bright to allow of the development of algae*.
The plants will thrive in the entire absence of sunlight, but an hour's sunlight in the
early morning tends to stimulate vigorous growth.
Stocking the Aquarium.
There is a sufficient variety of goldfish to satisfy the whims of the most
fastidious aquarist. Space will only allow of a mention of a few of the most striking
types. Perhaps the greatest diversity lies in the development of the caudal (tail)
fin. This fin may be single and normally developed, or, on the other extreme, it
may hang in long, graceful folds, its length much greater than that of the rest of
the fish. Such a fish is known usually as a veiltail or fringetail. Between these
extremes one may find the upper half of the tail single and the lower half double
(tripod tail); a double tail joined along the upper surface (web tail); or a double
tail, each half of which is completely separated from the other (fantail). In some
fish more or less abnormal development of the other fins, both paired and unpaired,
may be seen. The whole of the fins may be developed to an abnormal length; in
other cases, one only, such as the dorsal, may be unduly elongated. Further
variations occur in the development of a paired anal fin, or in the complete absence
of either (or both) the dorsal or anal fin.
The shape of the body varies from the normal, laterally compressed, slender
type, to one in which it is almost globular or egg-shaped.
The eyes, too, have in some varieties undergone extraordinary development,
and large, protruding eyes, known as telescope eyes, are very common. There is a
♦66435 —c


prevalent impression that such eyes were developed as the result of keeping the
fish in a dark tank admitting only a narrow, bright beam of light at the surface,,
thus forcing the development of the protruding eye. It need scarcely be stated
that such a theory is quite ridiculous. As in other types, the telescope eye has
been developed purely by selective breeding. Goldfish in the wild state have been
found with protruding eyes, and have been bred with others showing the same
characteristic. Discriminate breeding along these lines through the centuries has led
to a partial fixation of the type. A word of explanation should be given, also, about
the popular term “ telescope ” eye. These eyes have not a telescopic effect; on
the contrary, they render the fish very short-sighted.
In extreme cases the elongated eyes may be turned upwards (celestials), a
condition which places the fish at a great disadvantage in the procuring of its food.
One of the most extraordinary developments in cultivated goldfish is a warty or
tumour-like growth w r hic,h covers the whole of the head. Such a fish is popularly
known as a “ lionhead,” and is regarded by many as perhaps the greatest attainment
Fig. 4. Lionhead goldfish. This variety of goldfish, although far
from handsome, is considered by many to be the greatest
achievement of selective goldfish breeding. The tumour-like
growth covering the head, and the complete absence of the
dorsal fin, are remarkable features.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
of selective goldfish breeding. Its body is almost round, and the dorsal fin is
entirely absent. The growth on the head does not usually develop until the fish
is several years old.
Resembling the “ lionhead ”in many particulars is the oranda , it, also,
has a tumour-like growth on the head, but it differs from the lionhead mainly in the
possession of a well-developed dorsal fin, and usually a- well-developed tail. Its
colour is generally a pale yellow or pearly white.
Equally striking are the diversities of colour to be seen in cultivated goldfish.
From the ordinary reddish-gold, metallic lustre, the colour may vary rom white
to black (moor), with a range of mottled colours between. Many are seen with
scales so transparent that strikingly beautiful colours, blue, mauve or pink, show'
clearly beneath them. Such fish are known popularly as scaleless types, and when
the colours are bright and contrasting, the fish is often referred to as a “ calico.


In the choice of lish for an aquarium, it should be borne m mind that the
farther the divergence from the ancestral type the less hardy the fish usually become.
Now, the question arises as to how many fish the aquarium will maintain
with safety. Here a universal rule should always be followed— allow an inch of fish
to a gallon oj water, the fish being measured from the tip of the snout to the base of
the tail. In aquaria with a large area of water surface exposed to the air an an
abundance of thriving weed, this rule may be somewhat exceeded, especially i the
fish are not of the fancy variety, but it is always better to err on the side of under-
rather than over-stocking the aquarium. Much trouble and loss may thereby be
avoided.
The volume of water in a rectangular tank may be calculated by multiplying
the length, breadth and height (in inches) together, and dividing the result by 231.
The quotient will give the number of gallons in the tank.
Another useful guide to the carrying capacity of the aquarium may be
obtained from a calculation of the area of water exposed to the air. There shou
be not less than 24 inches of surface to an inch of fish. This is a particularly use u
guide for round bowls of uneven diameter where the calculation of the volume ot
water is impracticable without emptying the bowl.
When transferring fish from one tank to another a small net, to be had from
aquarium dealers, should be used. Care must be taken not to damage the scales
of the fish, otherwise the damaged part is likely to become infected with dangeious
fungus.
Feeding the Fish.
The feeding of goldfish calls for a good deal of discretion, and here again
there is a golden rule which should always be borne in mind. Do not overfeed the fish.
Live food is far and away the best food for goldfish. Mosquito larva: and the
crustacean known as Daphnia (water flea) are without a superior, and both abound
in many freshwater pools, where they are captured by sweeping with a fine net
An excellent diet consists of chopped-up earthworms, to be found m damp soil
everywhere.
Prepared foods, consisting of dried shrimps, roe, liver, insects, &c., may be
had of dealers, and are very nourishing, but it should not be overlooked that dried
animal food is very concentrated, at least two-thirds of the original bulk having
been extracted as water, and such food should be fed sparingly. It is perhaps
advisable to soak this type of food in warm water for some time before feeding it to
fishes. Eaten in the dry state it absorbs moisture and swells m the stomach, with
the liability of causing constipation.
Goldfish will also subsist on fish bread (imparted from Japan), oatmeal,
ordinary bread crumbs, wheatmeal, biscuits, and the like, but they rarely thrive on
a diet of this nature; moreover, any unconsumed food tends to render the water
cloudy.


Feed once a day in summer and once every second day in winter. Always
feed sparingly, and remove, by means of a glass tube, any food left unconsumed
after, say, ten minutes. Unconsumed food putrifies and quickly fouls the water,
leading to unhealthy conditions and disease. I have fed a pair of goldfish, 2 inches
long, on one large or two small chopped-up eathworms once a day for many months,
and on this diet the fish have put on rapid growth and remained in perfect health;
moreover, the whole of the worm is invariably consumed in a few minutes. The
morning is the best time to feed.
A change of diet has a stimulating effect on the fish.
The amount of food required by the fish can soon be determined by the
amount remaining after, say, ten minutes’ feeding. If at the end of that time any
food remains unconsumed, give about that much less the following day. Overfeeding
is one of the principal faults amateur aquarists are prone to. The fish always appear
to be hungry; they are ever sifting over the sand in search of food, and this leads
to the impression that they are starving, with the all too frequent result that more
and more food is supplied to them. This tendency must, however, be resisted for
the sake of the health of the fish, and no matter how appealing the fish may be,
feeding must be rigidly kept to one meal a day.
Spawning of Goldfish.
Goldfish begin to spawn in the spring, usually about September, though
occasionally as early as August, and further spawnings may occur at any time from
then till about January. I have a pair of goldfish which have spawned six times
between nth August and 12th November.
Except at the spawning season it is very difficult to distinguish the male
from the female fish. As the spawning season approaches, however, the abdomen
of the female becomes much swollen and rounded as the ovary fills with eggs, and the
male usually develops small, whitish tubercles on the gill-covers and pectoral fins.
Indications of a spawning may sometimes be given a day or two before it actually
happens. The male will be noticed chasing the female about the tank
at intervals during the day, and a day or two afterwards, when spawning actually
takes place, will pursue the female without any respite. At other times no pre-
liminary warning will be given. Spawning usually begins at daybreak and lasts till
midday, or, in some cases, well info the afternoon. The male continually bumps
his head against the abdomen of the female as he chases her relentlessly from place
to place. If a careful watch be kept, batches of semi-transparent eggs will be seen
to fall at intervals from the vent of the female, the male at the same time ejecting
a quantity of milt, by means of which the eggs are fertilised. As they fall they
attach to any object, such as weed or stone, which they touch, and remain attached
till the young hatch out. It is necessary, therefore, that the tank should contain
an abundance of plants to catch the maximum number of eggs. The fine leaves
of the water plant known as Myriophyllum are excellent for the purpose.


As the fish dash about the tank they search diligently for the attached eggs,
and they eat them with undisguised relish. If the parents are allowed to remain
in the tank very few eggs will escape them, and even if some should, the young are
eagerly devoured when they hatch
from the egg. It is not possible to
rear young goldfish in an aquarium
in which the parents are allowed to
remain. One of two courses must
therefore be adopted; either the
parent fish, or as many of the plants
with eggs attached as it is desired to
save, must be removed to another
tank.
The eggs are round and trans-
lucent, and measure about one-
sixteenth of an inch in diameter. A
large female may deposit upwards of
3,000 eggs at her first spawning for
the season, though the spawning of
an average-sized female does not
usually exceed a thousand. Subse-
quent spawnings during the same
season result in much fewer eggs being
deposited, each generally being more
Fig. 5. Fertilised eggs of the goldfish (Caras-
sius auratus) attached to the fine leaves
of Myriophyllum. X 5.
[Photo. — T. C Roughley.
restricted than the last, till eventually less than 100 eggs may be found.
With a single pair of goldfish a considerable proportion of the eggs remains
Fig. 6. Unfertilised eggs of the goldfish, three days after
spawning, covered with thread-like fungus. X 8.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
unfertilised. An unfertilised
egg soon becomes white and
opaque, and is quickly
attacked by a white, thread-
like fungus, which may grow
to a length equal to the
diameter of the egg in the
course of 24 hours. Eggs
attacked by fungus do not
appear, however, to affect
the other contents of the
tank detrimentally. In
order to procure a greater
number of fertilised eggs,
it is advisable to have two
males for each female.


Spawning may be stimulated by a more liberal supply of nourishing food ;
I have found earthworms excellent for the purpose. The six spawnings referred to
above occurred at the following temperatures :
1. August nth, 63° F.
2. September 17th, 68° F.
3. September 28th, 67° F.
4. October 6th, 67° F.
5. October 16th, 71 0 F.
6. November 12th, 71 0 F.
The eggs in each instance were removed, along with the weed to which they were
attached, to another tank, where they received a good deal of sunlight during the
morning, the highest temperature recorded being 82° P\ The time taken for the
young to hatch out in each case was approximately, 1. 5 days; 2. 4 days; 3. 4 days;
4. between 3 and 4 days; 5. between 3 and 4 days; 6. 3 days.
With a moderately-powerful lens, or, preferably, a low-power microscope,
the development of the embryo may be studied. In a five-day incubation period
the eyes are distinguishable on the third day as two round, dark areas on the sides
of the head; transverse muscle segments can be
seen; pigment spots are irregularly distributed over
the dorsal surface; the yolk-sac begins to show out
prominently; and an occasional contraction of the
body may be noticed. During the fifth day the
heart can clearly be seen beating; the pulsations
are at the rate of 83 to the minute, at a temperature
of 69° F.
As the coiled embryo develops in the egg, its
movements, consisting of sudden contractions, be-
come more and more restless, till it hatches by
bursting the egg in the region of its back; soon
its tail is freed; it then makes an effort to swim,
and quickly frees its head from the egg membrane.
Fig. 7. Young goldfish hatching
from the egg. The goldfish
is born with a very large
yolk-sac, from which the fish
derives its nourishment for
about three days. X 24.
T. C. Roughley, Del.
The newly-hatched goldfish measures about one-fifth of an inch long, and
is very pale olive-green along the back, ornamented with scattered, irregularly-
shaped, black pigment spots, the remainder of the body being translucent or
Fig. 8. Young goldfish immediately after hatching from the egg. The
yolk-sac occupies the bulk of the abdominal region of the body. X 8.
T. C. Roughley, Del.
transparent. A very noticeable feature is the enormous, protruding yolk-sac, which
occupies almost the entire abdominal region. The newly-hatched fish does not


take any food into its mouth, but subsists for about three days on the nourishment
stored in the yolk-sac. Towards the end of the third day the yolk-sac is completely
absorbed, and a few particles of food may be seen in the intestine when the fish is
examined under the microscope. On the .fourth day active feeding begins. As
the yolk-sac diminishes in size, the air-bladder, which, in the newly-hatched fish is
Fig. 9. Young goldfish about eighteen hours after
hatching. The yolk-sac is still very prominent.
X 9.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
almost indistinguishable, gradually increases in size, and, at the end of the third day,
becomes quite conspicuous as an oval, glistening, silvery sac, situated about a third
of the length of the fish from the anterior end. On account of the undeveloped
state of the air-bladder in the newly-hatched fish, swimming is very laboured, for
Fig. 10. Young goldfish at the end of the third day. The whole of the yolk-
sac has been absorbed, and the fish now begins to feed. The air-bladder
has developed rapidly, and enables the fish to swim freely at various
depths. X 1 8.
T. C. Roughley, Del.
the fish lacks that buoyancy which a well-developed air-bladder gives. The young
fish for a couple of days mostly rests with the head attached, apparently by a
mucous secretion, to the glass sides of the aquarium, to the leaves of plants, or
suspended from the surface film, occasionally swimming or rather, wriggling, for
short distances.


The only fins which at this time are sufficiently developed to function are the
caudal (tail) and the paired pectorals. The remainder are either entirely undeveloped
or are in a primitive state of development.
Most of the abnormal developments characteristic of fancy goldfish take
place much later in life, but the type of caudal fin can be distinguished immediately
after the fish hatches out. From the inception it is either single or double, for its
double form is not a mere superficial splitting of the soft parts, but represents an
actual bilateral separation of the bones from which this fin arises.
The eyes of the telescope variety become fairly prominent soon after birth.
Rearing the Young Fish.
In order to obtain rapid growth of the young fish, they should be placed in
outside ponds through which water trickles, and they should receive a liberal
allowance of live food. Under these conditions growth is remarkably rapid. The
natural food of the very young fish consists of minute animal life, mainly infusoria,
which abounds in freshwater pools. As the fish begin to grow, say, after two or three
weeks, young Daphnia should be introduced, and, when the fish are able to consume
them, young mosquito larva; should bemadded.
If, however, it is impracticable to procure a pond suitable for the purpose,
the fish may be reared indoors in a tank of moderate size. Here growth is much
slower, and the mortality is usually fairly heavy.
Although minute forms of animal life are always found in tanks containing
water plants, the amount normally present will not sustain the fish for long; they
must, therefore, be either cultivated or recourse had to artificial food. Infusoria may
be developed by pouring boiling water over hay, dead leaves, or even a banana
skin, in a dipper or similar container, and allowing to stand for two or three weeks.
At the end of that time the water will be simply teeming with animal life, which
may be fed to the fish by adding small amounts of the w r ater to the aquarium.
Later, Daphnia and mosquito larvae may be obtained, by means of a fine net, in
ponds where they occur, and dropped into the water. Rapidly-growing young fish
require an abundance of food, and in order to obtain the maximum rate of growth,
the food should be added to the water two or three times a day. Owing to the
transparency of the fish at this stage, the intestine, when it contains food, is clearly
visible, and an indication of the requirements of the fish is thereby obtained.
If, however, live food is not procurable, hard-boiled yolk of egg is one of the
most satisfactory substitutes. A small piece about the size of a match head is
broken off, and, held between the forefinger and thumb, is gently rubbed back and
forth beneath the surface of the water till it diffuses as a fine cloud. Any larger
pieces which break away should be immediately withdrawn by means of a medicine
dropper. Feeding should begin on the fourth day after hatching, when the fish, now
actively swimming, snap up the fine particles of food with alacrity.


When about a month old, prepared food such a dried shrimp, roe, &c., very
finely ground, may be substituted. When this highly-concentrated food is used
a pinch of epsom salts should be dropped into the water about once a week, in order
to counteract its constipating effect, or preferably the food should be soaked in
warm water before being fed to the fish.
Fig. 11. Web-tail goldfish, with telescope eyes, a month old. x 8.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
4
Irrespective of the conditions under which goldfish are reared a very marked
discrepancy in growth will inevitably occur. Stunted fish, or “ runts ”as they are
termed, will always be found, and these should be discarded, for they will never
grow into robust fish. Even amongst the larger fish many different sizes occur,
and these should occasionally be sorted out into their various size-groups.
A constant watch must always be kept for dead fish, some of which will be
found even under the most favourable circumstances. These should be at once
removed in order to prevent them from polluting the water.
All young goldfish are drab, olive green in colour; it is usually not till they
are about six months old that they change to gold or whatever colour they are
destined to assume; "scaleless” varieties, however, may begin to change colour
at the age of six weeks.
Many diverse forms may develop from a single pair of fancy goldfish, the
progeny reverting back to one or another of a long line of varied ancestors. Some
characters are more fixed than others, and the offspring of a pair oi fish with
telescope eyes will almost all bear this characteristic. In many other varieties few
of the offspring may show any resemblance to either parent. For instance, I have
bred from two parents with single, but well-developed tails, young of which 98 per
cent, possessed double tails. A considerable percentage of the offspring frequently
reverts to the drab colour and normal shape of the original wild fish. In this
uncertainty lies one of the greatest fascinations of goldfish breeding.
One of the principal factors contributing to slowness of growth in a home
aquarium is the crowded condition under which the fish are reared. Amateur


breeders almost invariably overcrowd their fish. A hundred or two very young fish
are so inconspicuous in the aquarium, and their aggregate bulk so relatively small,
that it is naturally assumed that they have plenty of room to develop. A little
experience, however, soon shows that they are hopelessly overcrowded, and conse-
quently growth is very slow. Moreover, in such an overcrowded condition,
devastating epidemics are all too frequent, and the risk of losing the whole of the
fish is a very real one. Prominent English aquarists advocate a gallon of water
per fish when a month old, two gallons at two months, and four gallons at three
months; and maintain that strong, healthy fish can rarely be raised if less water is
allowed for each fish.
Diseases of Goldfish.
In an aquarium containing a plentiful growth of thriving water plants,
goldfish may live for years in a perfectly healthy condition, if the principles with
regard to feeding, &c., enunciated in this article, are intelligently applied. If,
however, a radical departure from these principles is made, such as over-feeding,
resulting in an accumulation of unconsumed food; subjecting the fish to sudden
changes of temperature, or the degeneration of the water plants owing to paucity of
light, the resistance of the fish is rapidly lowered, and they become very susceptible
to disease, which, if untreated and the conditions not improved, inevitably results
in their death.
In addition to diseases brought about by unfavourable conditions in the
aquarium, goldfish may be attacked by a number of other diseases, usually of an
infectious or parasitic character, even when conditions are otherwise ideal.
Space will allow of only the more common of the diseases of goldfish being
referred to here, with brief instructions in the remedial measures to be adopted.
Indigestion (Constipation). —This usually results from overfeeding, or the
constant use of artificial foods, such as the highly concentrated dried flesh of
prawns, liver, fish, roe, &c. Constipation in goldfish is usually accompanied by a
distended abdomen, the fish becomes sluggish, and rests on the bottom for long periods,
or may even be found resting head downwards. A cure is usually effected by adding
a pinch or two of Epsom salts to the water; the crystals are readily snapped up as
they fall to the bottom. The fish should also be fasted for two or three days, and
if the use of the same food is then continued, a pinch of Epsom salts should be added
to the water about once a week. Chopped up earthworms have a mildly laxative
effect.
Fungus (Saprolegnia). —This fungus consists of white cottony tufts, the
threads of which are so fine that in the mass they have a scum-like appearance.
The spores of Saprolegnia appear to be always present in the water, but normally
healthy fish are able to resist their attacks. Should, however, the resistance of the


fish be lowered by some unhealthy condition operating in the aquarium, the fungus
quickly gains a foothold. It usually attacks the tail first, then the othei fins,
rapidly spreads over the body, and when it reaches the gills generally proves fatal.
On the appearance of fungus amongst the fish the whole of them should be removed
from the aquarium and given a progressive salt bath. Begin by immersing them
in a flat dish containing one ounce of salt to a gallon of water, increasing the
concentration by a quarter of an ounce daily till it reaches one and a half ounces
to the gallon. Should the fungus not clean up readily by that time, the salt should
be increased to two ounces to the gallon of water. The fungus is usually combated
very effectively by this treatment, and, unless the disease is too far gone, complete
cures are the general rule. Care must always be taken to see that no marked changes
of temperature occur when the fish is changed from one water to another. If, at the
end of four or five days to a week, the fungus has been completely eliminated, the
salt water should be gradually broken down to fresh by means of a dripping tap,
water being allowed to trickle into, the dish containing the fish for from twelve to
twenty-four hours. The fish may then be replaced in the aquarium, which should
in the meantime have been sterilised by soaking it with permanganate of potash
(three grains to a gallon of water) for about four hours. The plants should also be
sterilised by immersion for an hour or two in a similar solution. Every effort must
be made to discover what condition or combination of conditions affected the
health of the fish. If the cause is not removed the disease is sure to recur.
Fin Congestion. —When this disease develops in the fish the fins droop,
the blood vessels become swollen and show as prominent red streaks; the fish
gradually becoming listless and inactive. Fin congestion may result from a number
of causes, such as unsuitable diet, overfeeding, insufficient aeration, protracted low
temperature or sudden changes of temperature. Ihe salt water treatment,
discussed above, is an efficient remedy.
With this, as with most other diseases of goldfish, the first symptom to show
that the fish is not in good health is indicated by the drooping of the fins, particularly
the dorsal fin (situated on the upper surface of the body). Instead of being distended,
with the fin rays well separated, the fins tend to close up, as it were, and the rays to
lie close together. The display of the fins should always be carefully watched, for
their drooping serves as a very valuable warning that there is something wrong
with the fish. Their condition has been well described as a barometer serving to
indicate the state of health of the fish.
Tail Rot —This is a highly infectious bacterial disease, in which blood
streaks first appear in the tail, usually with a thin white line along the edges. The
tail then begins to fray, becomes somewhat stringy, and finally rots completely away.
Again, adverse conditions leading to a lowered resistance are a contributing cause.
If not too advanced the salt water treatment usually effects a cure.


fail rot is a. very common disease amongst young fry, especially when they
are overcrowded. I have found the salt-water treatment fairly effective with fish from
one to three months old, but the initial strength of the salt should be weaker (half
Fig. 12. Goldfish, a fortnight old, attacked with tail rot. x 9.
[Photo. — T. C. Roughley.
an ounce to the gallon), and should not be increased beyond a concentration of one
ounce to the gallon. I always follow the salt bath by allowing fresh water to trickle
for several days into the dish containing the fish.
Gill Congestion. —This disease is characterised by a considerable swelling
of the gills, with milky areas in their vicinity. A cure may be effected by placing
the fish in a strong salt bath (three and a half ounces to the gallon), till it turns over,
followed by running water for several days.
Cxill congestion is a common disease of young fry, which are particularly
prone to it when in an overcrowded condition. It is highly infectious, and quickly
spreads through a whole tank of fish. In the case of young fish no satisfactory cure
has yet been discovered.
White Spot— This is a highly infectious disease, which may be recognised
by the fine, white specks which cover the body and fins. These spots contain
colonies of a ciliate infusorian known as Ichthyopthirius, sometimes familiarly referred
to as “ itch/’ They are microscopic and very variable in size, the largest I have
seen measuring -4 mm. The young grows to an adult in from two to five days,
when it drops to the bottom and forms a cyst. Spores break out in from one to
three days, and at once seek a fish to which to attach. The disease is susceptible
to a number of treatments, one of the most recent and most successful being the
addition of four drops of two per cent, mercurochrome to a gallon of water, renewing
each day. A cure is usually effected in from five days to a week, and is rendered


more certain if the water is maintained at a temperature of 85° F. to 90° F. Indeed,
this temperature maintained over a period of a week may effect a cure even without
the addition of mercurochrome.
Owing to the fact that the adults drop to the bottom when about to propagate
they may in this state be washed away by means of strongly running water, and
reinfestation thus prevented.
Fluke. —By this name a small worm known as Gyrodactylus is referred to.
It is usually parasitic on the gills, and fish infected by it frequently dash wildly
about the tank, bumping into the bottom and the glass sides, rushing to the surface
as if in search of air, then subsiding to the bottom, where they remain, panting, but
otherwise motionless. Treatment consists of placing the fish in very dilute formalin,
five drops to a quart of water; one drop a minute is then added until there are ten
drops to the quart. The fish are allowed to remain in this for ten minutes, or they
should be removed sooner if they show signs of exhaustion. The treatment is
repeated on the second and third days. Another satisfactory method of treatment
consists of one part of glacial acetic acid to 490 parts of water. The fish should
remain in this for two minutes (longer than this is dangerous).
Treatment of “ fluke ” is sometimes rendered difficult by the affected gills
being attacked by fungus. This usually proves fatal, though I have effected a cure
by placing the fish in salt water (one and a half ounces to the gallon) after the acetic
acid treatment, and running oxygen for several hours over the mouth of the fish.
Large amounts of fungus were quickly ejected through the gill openings, leading
to the complete recovery of the fish.
Gyrodactylus is of interest inasmuch as the adult bears living young, which
before birth contain the young of the third and fourth generations.
There are a number of other diseases of goldfish, some of which are incurable,
but fortunately they are much less common than those described above. One of these
is known as dropsy, an incurable disease of the liver, accompanied by diabetes, the
fish having a heavily-bloated body with distended scales. Goldfish may develop a
form of tuberculosis, caused by a tubercle, B. tubercle piscium, accompanied by loss
of appetite and an emaciated body, or at times they may be subject to air-bladder
trouble, leading to loss of equilibrium, bor these, also, no satisfactory cure has
yet been found.
Conclusion.
The reader, after a careful study of this pamphlet, may come to the conclusion
that the keeping of goldfish brings in its train endless worry and trouble. It may
and it may not. It certainly will if the few elementary principles herein enunciated
are radically departed from; but after all they are perfectly simple and straight-
forward, and if applied with ordinary intelligence, there is no reason why the fish
should not remain in perfect he? Ith for years.


Of course, trouble may be met with even in the best regulated aquarium.
The introduction of new fish may bring infectious diseases into a perfectly healthy
tank, and the installation of fresh plants may introduce parasites capable of under-
mining the health of the fish. But even these troubles can be avoided with care.
As a precautionary measure, before introducing new fish to an aquarium where
others are already established, it is a good plan to quarantine them by giving them
a salt bath (one ounce to the gallon, changed daily) for several days, followed by
fresh water from a dripping tap for a day or two. New plants should be immersed
for a short time in household ammonia diluted with fifty parts of water, and then
washed carefully under a tap.
With ordinary good fortune, the aquarium, once well established, will remain
a thing of beauty and a joy for many years.


SYDNEY:
ALFRED JAMES KENT, 1.5.0., GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1932.






