

THE
NATURAL CAPABILITIES
OF THE
COLONY OF VICTORIA,
CONSIDERED IN REFERENCE TO INDIGENOUS
OR INTRODUCED YEOETATION,
BAROU FEED. TOU MUELLER,
0 3133.
C.M.GL, M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.
“ Give to dissimilar yet fruitful lands
The grain, the tree or herb, that each demands.”
COWPEK.
HUllnmrm:
M‘CAKRON, BIRD & CO., PRINTERS, 37 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
1875.




THE NATURAL CAPABILITIES
OF THE
COLONY OF VICTORIA,
CONSIDERED IN REFERENCE TO INDIGENOUS OR INTRODUCED
VEGETATION,
BARON FEED. YON MUELLER, C.M.G., M.&Ph.D., F.R.S.
It is intended on this occasion to glance cursorily at sucli of our native
plants as are possessed of special utilitarian importance; and this eluci-
dation of the resources of this country, so far as its vegetation is
concerned, will be extended, by submitting to a general view also many
foreign plants, which for industrial purposes might be transferred to
Victorian soil with every advantage. Condensed within the narrow
limits, assigned to this essay, these remarks must necessarily be brief;
indeed, they cannot aim at more than but a slight passing survey. In
commencing to sketch thus the vegetation, which as original pertains to
our territory, we have before us but a light task, when we compare it
to an effort of enumerating those of our future vegetive resources, to
which for our enrichment any extra-tropic and very many sub-tropic
regions can contribute. Even the great double continent of America,
before the settlements there of the Caucasian race, enjoyed from the organic
creation but few primeval gifts in comparison to the treasures, which with a
lavishing preference were strewed over Europe and Asia. Till the
occupation of America by European nations all our cereals were foreign
to the western hemisphere, where however the maize existed. Most of
the delicious fruits of the countries of our northern homes did not occur
in any part of the American continent. The orange, fig, mango, mango-
stane and banana, alike with the sugar-cane, the spices, the tea- and
coffee-bush, had gradually to be carried across the Atlantic Ocean. The
olive and almond, the cocos- and sago-palms had as well to be brought to
the western hemisphere, as the sugar-beet, most of our culinary vege-
tables, medicinal plants, dye- and fodder-herbs, along with ordinary flax,
hemp and silk. Neither did the horse nor our select rural race of sheep


and oxen browse on American soil prior to the conquest. So also
Australia, though great in its pristine mineral wealth, salubrious in its
clime, fertile in much of its wide extent, rich in native timber, in
pastoral grasses and many other vast resources, free and open for occu-
pation everywhere, so Australia also is mainly indebted to the countries of
the northern part of the eastern hemisphere for the new and additional
riches, which enable it to rise to permanent greatness.
Our Sea-border, which first of all greets the new comer, and unfolds
the puzzling and curious forms of Australian vegetation before his view,
is not devoid of industrial interest. A splendid Acacia, of great tannic
value, with golden trusses of fragrant flowers, lives with a high and
dense Melaleuca in the drift-sand, while a myrtle-like Leptospermum of
tall stature, with half-snowy and half-rosy flowers, mainly binds the
sand. Gratitude has not even protected everywhere this latter plant
against intrusive axes; but its powerful effect for staying sand is well
recognised already in distant lands. Struggling, along with the
Melaleuca, against tempests and sand-waves, the Sword-Rush of the
genus Lepidosperma occupies wide spaces, and under intelligent care
can be made to yield, like the Sparta, one of the best of materials
for writing-paper, without the sand-walls being set free to endanger
adjoining pastures or agricultural lands. A species of Mesembry-
anthemum, while also subduing the sand with its far-running branches,
produces a fig-like, sweetish, soft fruit. The drooping Casuarina-tree
and a tall Myoporum, with interspersed Eucalypts on favourable spots,
form the main coast-timber. On the flat shores a saline vegetation, in
many respects not dissimilar to that of Europe, passes gradually into
that of the pasture-land. The Native Celery abounds, together with New
Zealand Spinage. Also these sand-tracts of the shores can be made far
more largely serviceable to the requirements of man. For instance,
whole forests of Mediterranean Coast-Firs and Pines of many other
countries might be raised there for a judicious utilisation of enormous
stretches of ground and ridges, which do not at present contribute to the
wealth of the colony.
In the Low Lands of the Southern and Middle Regions field-culture,
similar to that of Britain, is extensively carried on, especially in the
most fertile tracts, while on basaltic undulations, often widely treeless,
and in other open localities of the country, from flocks and herds a great
and almost universal prosperity has arisen to the occupants of the soil.
But here again only the nature of the original vegetation concerns us at
present, and the adaptability of clime and soil to foreign cultures must
become the theme of subsequent discussion. Among the timber several
species of Eucalyptus furnish us with the requisite hardwoods for build-
ing purposes, fuel and other similar wants; and among these trees the
Red Gum-Eucalypt, which lines extensively the water-courses, yields the
most valuable, indeed an almost’ imperishable wood. In the volumes of
former industrial exhibitions I have detailed the qualities and yields of
numerous products and educts of the Eucalypts, such as their timber,
oil, resin, tannic and dye principles, potash, tar, pitch, acids, varnishes,
together with wood-alcohol and vinegar. As in most parts of the
Australian continent, so also here, the Acacias predominate in the tree


vegetation next to the Eucalypts, and it would be unjust to the great
natural resources of the country were we to leave unnoticed our splendid
Blackwood-Acacih, so famed for its wood, highly adapted for the con-
struction of carriages and furniture, especially as the tree abounds in the
trap-formation and in the valleys of rivers. The bark of our two
leading Wattle-Acacias is amazingly rich in tannic acid, which circum-
stance, together with their rapidity of growth and contentedness with the
most meagre soil, renders them objects most worthy of methodic culture,
both here and abroad, in order that their bark may take a prominent and
permanent place in the great commerce of tanning materials. The Grass-
trees of the swampy or sandy heath regions furnish a fragrant resin,
resembling benzoe, acknowledged as exceedingly rich in picric acid for dye
purposes. The leaves of these Xanthorrhceas, as well as those of many of
our sedges and rushes, can be converted into paper-material. The most
frequent of all our Melaleucas occupies swamps and river-banks, even
onward to maritime saline soil. Industrially this tree is valuable for its
volatile oil, and to some extent also for furnishing here the best boughs
for garlands and wreaths on the occasions of extensive decorative require-
ments at public festivals. Eor this purpose alone the heath-leaved Mela-
leuca deserves transfer to other countries, without taking into account
the rare facility, with which this tall evergreen myrtaceous plant
with its intricate roots can be moved from spot to spot, even in an
upgrown state, for shelter or scenic effect. It may be raised with the
greatest ease from its minute seeds. Of the genus Casuarina two
arboreous species occur in our southern and middle regions, both not
without importance for shade and shelter purposes, for fuel, for various
artisan’s work and perhaps also for the acid of their foliage, which
resembles citric acid; besides they live in poor soil, spring easily from
scattered seeds like Wattle-Acacias, and are of comparative celerity of
growth.
The nutritive excellence of many of our perennial pasture-grasses has
long since been acknowledged; for the regions now under review we
might adduce species of the genera Anthistiria, Danthonia, Poa, Era-
grostis, Ehrharta, Agrostis and Panicum.
Several medicinal plants deserve attention, among them some kinds of
Mint. Among the pretty spring-flowers, which gaily decorate our
meadows, plants of the genera Geranium, Anguillaria, Burchardia,
Microseris, Caesia, Arthropodium, with a multitude of modest but lovely
terrestrial Orchids, yield tuberous roots, too small for our culinary
requirements, but for ages the main vegetable diet of the nomadic hordes
which, sad as it is to contemplate, have passed almost entirely away
already. A large and frequent Heleocharis furnishes however palatable
fair-sized tubers in our swamps, where the amylaceous roots of two
kinds of Typha may also be obtained, with such fruits near at hand as
the Native Baspberry for a wayfarer’s frugal camp. Many of the exceed-
ingly showy native plants, including our gorgeous Mistletoes, will long
continue the objects of a lucrative horticultural trade.
In the Forest Regions, which expand almost unbroken over the greatest
part of our southern and eastern mountain districts, our most manifold
resources in appliance to vegetable industries are latent. The Eucalypts


are varied, and on the richest spurs and in the deepest ravines some
species are of marvellous heights. One, the Eucalyptus amygdalina, in
its smooth-stemmed form (recorded as var. regnans) carries off the
palm for procerity over all other trees of the whole empire of plants,
including even the Californian Mammouth-tree, although it cannot
vie with that long-lived vegetable leviathan in its extraordinary, at
times, almost fabulous caliber of stem. Still more renowned is the Blue
Gum-Eucalyptus, a tree naturally restricted to Tasmania, to southern
and eastern Victoria, and to a very small portion of New South Wales,
adjoining the territory of our colony. So exhaustively has been written,
in several languages, on its enormous dimensions, on its readiness of
growth in the most varied soil, on the value of its timber, the uses of
its largely exported oils, its exercise of special hygienic properties, that
it seems superfluous to enter again anew on these or kindred subjects
concerning allied trees. Suffice it to remark, that the Blue Gum-Tree,
the various White Gum-Eucalypts, the Stringy bark- and Ironbark-
trees of our ranges, offer sources of wealth, through the appliance of
technology, to thousands of additional clever and hardy settlers, who
may seek a rural home of activity and prosperity in many, as yet, silent
and untraversed recesses of our mountains. The Wattles and Black-
wood-trees in the rich sedimentary soil and the shelter and humidity of
the ranges attain dimensions many times more vast, than in the change-
able and often dry atmosphere of the open country. Bemarkable here
is the Prostanthera-tree, not so much for any particular technic uses to
which it could be applied, but for the fact that it is among several thou-
sand plants of the Labiata;, scattered over the globe, the only one as yet
known, which attains the dimensions of a good-sized tree; while similarly,
among about 10,000 plants known of the still greater order of Composite,
we have in our Musk-tree and Bedfordia-tree two of the exceedingly
few arborescent representatives. Among the grasses, quite peculiar to
the forests of Victoria, a Fescue occurs of incomparably large size. The
magnificent evergreen Beech-tree of ours is confined to the coolest and
most irrigated parts of our southern mountains, where to a limited
extent it forms the main feature in the forests.
In the silvan tracts also, more copiously than elsewhere, exists the
Exocarpus-tree; and absolutely confined to the deepest and most springy
valleys with dense underwood is the Atherosperma, or our so-called
Sassafras-tree. Of five kinds of Fern-trees, now known from Victorian
ranges, two only are of wide distribution—both unusually tall; the more
slender of the two, an Alsophila, occupying the less densely timbered
slopes; while the stouter Dicksonia bears greater cold, recedes into
deeper valleys and seeks greater humidity; indeed like the Todea-fern
of unexampled stoutness, it delights on the brinks of rivulets, which pour
their cool, clear and pure water from never-ceasing springs into the
gullies. A trade in fern-trunks, started mainly by the writer, like that
in Eucalyptus-seed (and beyond Victoria in Cycas-stems), is on the
increase, and will give additional occupation to silvan inhabitants for a
great many years to come. In the most southern forest-parts of this
country an unpretensive Sarcochilus is the only and last outpost of the
gorgeous tribe of epiphytal Orchids.


In tlie South-Eastern Regions of our colony the vegetation assumes an
almost tropical grandeur. The shelter afforded by the mountain-chains
of Tasmania against the often prevailing south-western antarctic breezes,
the warm currents from the Pacific Ocean, which act almost like the
Gulf-stream does on the west coast of Britain, together with the protec-
tion, which by our Alpine ranges is offered against the dry desert winds
from the north-west, give to these happy south-eastern regions a mild
equality of clime, to which the influence of wide forest-regions still
further adds. Alone to this part of our territory Palm-trees progress, a
noble Livistona-palm rising here to a height of 80 feet and more. It is
here also where epiphytal Orchids of the genera Dendrobium and Sar-
cochilus, Lianas of tropical type, tall trees of Sapindacese, Anonacese,
Euphorbiacese and Tiliacete, together with a species of Fig and two kinds
of wild Grape-vines commence to appear, thence to stretch far into the sub-
and intra-tropical regions along the east coast. In the uniform humid
warm clime, with a temperature in the lowlands never sinking to
the freezing-point, and rarely exceeding 80° F., many plants can be
reared to advantage, for which in most other parts in Victoria we should
vainly seek for all the conditions necessary for their remunerative
growth. The Peru-bark trees, the Assam Tea, Yams, Bananas and
other plants of this class would likely prosper here. In these south-
eastern regions occur also several species of Eucalypts, with timber of
particular value, which do not advance further westward.
Our Alpine Regions —grand, but desolate—without which no streams
could traverse our deserts, and without which less mitigating influences
would be exercised on our often scorching summer-heat, —these snowy
zones of wildernesses are alike refreshing to the mind of the tourist as
well as naturalist; nor are they without significance to the squatter, who
can utilise their ever fresh verdure during the summer months, when a
second spring arises there, while the lowland becomes parched. Nature
has but sparingly endowed our Alps with plants of striking utilitarian
value so far as hitherto ascertained. A kind of Wintersbark is
furnished by a Drimys; a medicinal Gentian pushes forth its bluish bells
over the patches of verdant freshness. Sweet succulent grasses of great
size, on which, as well as on the odorous Aciphylla, pasture animals
browse with extraordinary relish, are generated notwithstanding several
months’ snowfall. They are referable to the genera Hierochloe, Poa,
Festuca and Danthonia, if smaller kinds existing in much variety are left
unregarded. Acacias, myrtaceous, synanthereous and rutaceous bushes
form mainly the thickets; dwarf Eucalypts, up to 5000 feet, constitute
diminutive forests, and epacrideous plants imitate in spongy bogs or
along mossy brooks the growth of the heaths' of other parts of the globe.
The Desert Region presents perhaps the most varied vegetation within
the boundaries of this colony, however little the appellation—involving
thoughts about cheerless wastes—may imply it. A multitudinous display
of flowering bushes, interspersed with many a humble but blooming
herb, ornaments at all seasons these somewhat forlorn regions. Clearings
of the scrubs give access to sheep-pasture, wherever water can be secured
by raising dams or sinking wells. But when, at perhaps no distant
period, the Italian system of irrigation will be applied also to our


lowlands from Alpine waters, and when the penetrating onward course
of industry of a closer population cannot any longer allow the waters of
the longest river of Australia, with several large tributaries, to flow
almost unutilized into the ocean, then also irrigation by local raisings of
water from the Murray-river will effect changes in our desert-tracts
hitherto undreamt of. Some of the most nutritious and wholesome of
Saltbushes for sheep-pasture, mainly ascribed to the genera Kochia and
Atriplex, originate solely in the desert-tracts. Another and tall Salt-
bush, referred to the genus Chenopodium, provides a palatable spinage
well worthy of cultivation abroad. One of the two Sandal-trees yields
the Quandong-Peach, with acidulous pulp and hazel-like kernels. A
Jasmine of delicious scent entwines the scrubs in these arid regions.
The Myall-Acacia, much sought for its scented wood, is interspersed
among the various dwarf Eucalypts, the latter constituting the main
portion of the thickets; yet even these are not without value, as some of
them are singularly rich in essential oil of great technic importance.
Sandarac-Cypresses rise to a considerable height, and together with the
grey Casuarina and the weeping Exocarpus impress a peculiar feature
on the sceneries. The Spinifex-Festuca, a pungent almost woody species,
passes gradually away before the herds and flocks. The nutritive
grasses, scattered over the desert sands or the limestone or clay lands,
are chiefly referable to the genera Andropogon, Pappophorum, Neur-
achne, Chi oris, Cynodon and Panicum. Among the many showy
plants, yet to be drawn into horticultural trade, the Eremophila-shrubs
stand prominent. Of the poisonous Gastrolobium-bushes, the bane of
much of the scrub-country of south-west Australia, also this part of our
territory is free. A few square miles of the desert in its pristine state
should be reserved by an enlightened Legislature, for enabling future
generations to realise an idea of the bloomy wild features of this part of
the country, as received from the hand of nature.
Let us next reflect, when turning from indigenous to introducible
plants, what other continents have done for us already, and what we
may yet with gratitude receive from their riches. Omitting all ordinary
culture-plants, which follow the footsteps of the civilising settler nearly
anywhere, we may cast cursorily a glance on the less generally known or
not yet introduced kinds of plants, which are destined to prosper on
Victorian soil; for by these means we may also aid to unfold the vast
extent of our prospective resources, in reference to products of vegetable
life. From the countries of our homes, or from any of the Northern or
Middle European Regions, we have perhaps not very much to add to our
already acquired cultural possessions, beyond raising masses of the
Baltic Deal Fir, the Larch, the Silver Fir and the Norway Spruce, in
adapted localities, particularly along mountain ranges, our whole colony
being naturally devoid of pine-wood of any kind, unless that of our
Sandarac-Cypresses. There is, however, nothing to hinder us from
establishing pine-forests for our future independent supplies, without
encroaching on superior agricultural areas. In a similar manner the
Oak, Beech, Hornbeam, Birch and indeed all other Middle European
trees may be transferred to our cooler mountains, while along the forest
brooks up to the alpine zone, many of the wild fruits of Middle and


North Europe might be naturalised. May I only instance the Bill- or Blee-
berry and Cranberry, the Hazel- and Currant-bushes, as particularly
eligible for the higher forest-regions and alpine moors, where fruits of
these kinds are absent, but would thrive as well as in their northern
homes. It need hardly be explained, that all the more important Euro-
pean medicinal plants, such as Valeriana, Aconit, Colchicum, Gentian,
Mint, Arnica, Squill &c., could be naturalised on spots, where their
therapeutic virtues would not become impaired. The principal grasses
and fodder-herbs of Britain have reached us; and if this is not the case
in reference to those of any other country, it is generally not because the
difficulties of introduction or spreading are greater, but because all
exotic plants, even those of eminent utility, can only very gradually be
appreciated by the knowledge and experience of a rural population, to
whom such plants are in most cases entirely new objects. A good ser-
vice could be rendered to this colony by disseminating the English Sea-
Lyme and Marram-grass along the drift-sands of our shores; for
although protected by a very varied vegetation, the for a time uncon-
trolled inroads into this natural cover have set the sand free to play in
many places here as elsewhere. Among the appreciable gifts, which
Middle European vegetation can still offer us, after what we gratefully
did receive already, are the best of Basket-Willows, especially the red and
purple Osier. The Yarrow-Milfoil, the Salad-Burnet, the Caraway and
many other meadow-herbs, which as admixture to grasses and clovers
enhance so much the permanent value of sheep-runs, have not yet met
with sufficient appreciation in our pastoral community, to whom how-
ever, with increasing alienation of Crown-lands, the necessity of giving
a greater nutritive and increased salutary power to their pastures for the
augmenting stock becomes more and more apparent. Our list even of
European table esculents is far from complete, and thus many an addi-
tional industry even in this respect can be made to flourish. South
Europe and indeed all the countries around the Mediterranean Sea,
with winters genial like ours, can from an ample store of vegetable
treasures contribute yet much to the wants of Victorian husbandry.
We possess the Vine, Fig, Olive, Almond, Sweet Chestnut, Walnut,
Date-palm, Carob-tree, Manna-Ash, Plane-tree, the Stone-Pine and sea-
coast Pines more or less extensively in several districts, but only very
sparingly so or not at all the Cork-Oak, Valonia-Oak, Pistacia, Mastic-
tree, Constantinople-Nut, Tragacanth-bushes, Prairie-Millet, Sumach,
Scotino, Scammony, the two kinds of Dye-Saffron, some of the Scorzo-
neras, the Senna, Doum-Palm, Styrax-bush, Argan-tree, Myrrh-tree and
various other especially medicinal and culinary plants, as well as many
of the best grasses and pasture-herbs, although their adaptability has
long since been tested by the writer. Also wanting yet is the broad-
stretching Sycamore-Fig as a shade-tree along our roads. The Truffles and
best edible Champignons, not merely for the taste of gourmands, but
also for adding without cultural care to the variety of relishable food for
general consumption, have still to find their way to us.
Southern Asia, anciently the cradle of the culture of most of the
leading alimentary plants, the paradisic country of the Spices, Bananas
and most luscious of all fruits, bestows on us a complex of treasures of


vegetable origin sucli as lias no parallel in the wide world elsewhere.
To us, in extra-tropic regions, only such of these grand gifts are accessible,
as have their natural haunts in the cooler forests or on the rises of
mountains. In viewing thus far these resources we again recognise in
the Fir-woods one of our principal prospective gains. The Lebanon-
Cedar and particularly its Himalayan variety, the Deodar-Cedar of mar-
vellous longevity, though largely introduced in the first instance by the
writer into Australia, has not yet been copiously transferred to our
forests, and Victorian statesmanship can raise for itself an imperishable
monument by covering our neglected ranges with this majestic tree,
while never allowing the search for its lasting wood to destroy the equili-
brium, which nature has wisely ordained should exist between timbered
and open country. From the Deodara-regions we can draw also into
permanent naturalisation the lofty Bhotan-Pine, the ISTepal-Nutpine, the
Webbian Dye-Spruce, the long-leaved Cheer-Pine and several other noble
trees of the Fir-tribe, exclusively harboured in the Himalayan ranges.
Pines again conduct us here to Oaks, mostly evergreen, and these
transgress in insular India beyond the equator, whereas only the
Sumatran Pine, so far as we are hitherto aware, occurs in the Sunda
Islands, where the firs are supplanted by Kauris and Nageias, equally
eligible for Victorian mountains. What New Guinea in its higher
regions may be able to offer us, remains as yet a mere object of surmise,
though Australian science is likely to carry early the torch of elucida-
tion to the as yet unascended snowy rises of that great island, which
especially for ornithology and entomology has revealed already so many
marvels in its lower regions also. That the Papuan mountains are
concealing Oaks we have learnt not long ago from Dr. Beccari; and the
occurrence of several species with some first-class timber may ration-
ally be anticipated, while for the transfer of all these Oaks of the
southern hemisphere to our woodlands, our close proximity to the Indian
islands, to which Papua also naturally belongs, offers special commercial
advantages. Several of the Himalayan Oaks are remarkable for their
large dimensions as well as for the excellence of their timber, and the
tests of the writer have proved them adapted to our clime, except to
that of the desert-tracts. Among other trees, deserving trials of
acclimation in our warmer forest-glades, are the large Ebony- and
Calamander-trees of Ceylon, where they ascend mostly to the middle
zone of the mountains up to 5000 feet. The best Caoutchouc-Figs of India
occur in the upper regions, and admit of being reared in far extra-tropic
parallels. The mighty Storax-tree can be associated with them. The
success of transferring hitherward the expansive brilliant-flowered Butea,
so inch in kino and so remarkable also as affording food for the lac-insect,
is open to doubt, but neither with this tree, nor with the Tamarind, the
Sappan, the Lingo-Pterocarpus, yielding its flame-red wood, nor the red
Sandal-wood, the Aloexylon, famed since scriptural times for its fragrant
aloe-wood, have as yet fair test-cultures been instituted, no facilities for
the purpose having hitherto been enjoyed. The hardiness of many
south-Asiatic Palms and Bamboos here is beyond doubt. The former
include, among the more eligible ones, extra-tropic species of Wallichia,
Ptychosperma, Areca, Livistona, Licuala, Chamserops, Plectocomia,


Phoenix, Bentinckia, Saguerus, Bhapis, Zalacca and Calamus. The
sago- and sugar-yielding Oaryota-Palm ascends the Himalayas to regions,
where the temperature sinks to 40° F. The wine-yielding Palmyra
advances to 31° north lat. The uses, to which Palms could be applied
among us, are so multifarious and generally so well understood, that it is
beyond the scope of this treatise to enumerate them. The Bamboos,
so well calculated to create rapidly tropic sceneries even in our southern
latitudes, are to us easiest accessible from India, where we meet copiously
those grand, graceful and elegant forms, which nature has denied to us
here as indigenousevery one of the existing Bamboos would likely
prove to bear the temperature of the sheltered parts of our lowlands.
At all events several Arundinarise are subjected in the Indian highlands
to snowstorms. Bathed in the steam of the jungles, the ordinary great
Bamboo is known to grow at the rate of a foot a day for a month oi
more ] one of the Tenasserim Bamboos and a Dendrocalamus from Pulo-
geum rise with mast-like canes to 150 feet. In Ceylon Arundinarias
ascend to an elevation of 8000 feet, and a tall Thamnocalamus reaches
10,000 feet in the Himalayas, as shown by General Munro in his
excellent monography. The largest Gigantochloa of Java attains to 100
feet, while one Dendrocalamus of Penang is still taller, and has a
circumference of two feet.
The hardier varieties of Sugar-cane are just able to endure our winter
temperature in sheltered forest regions, but the mountain Bice would
be more amenable to Victorian cultivation. Of the vast display of
South Asiatic fodder-grasses many of the perennial species can be turned
to pastoral account. The Sorghums, particularly the Sugar- and Treacle-
corn, should not be omitted on this occasion, as having their source in
South Asia. The Orange, which poets place foremost in the garden of
paradise, impresses its charming features already to the surroundings of
many a dwelling in this country. The Cotton-plants, both the so-called
Tree-Cotton and the ordinary herbaceous kind, are also of South Asiatic
origin, and can be cultivated in the warmer tracts of Victoria with the
same success as around the Mediterranean Sea. Fibres of great strength
but available also for delicate textile fabrics, similar to those from the
Chinese and Japanese Bamee or Bhea, are produced from Indian bushes
belonging to the genera Maoutia, Debregeasia, Pipturus and Ville-
brunia \ they are allied to the Boehmeria and in some instances hardier
than that plant, as locally tested by the writer. Other Indian fibre-
plants tractable here are the various kinds of Jute, Sunn, some Hibisci
and the Danchi.
Of spices or spice-like plants, perhaps only the Ginger admits here of
culture with a prospect of a remunerative return. Among condiment
plants we obtain from thence the Dill-like Sowa and the Ajowan, besides
others obtainable also from China. Costly scents are drawn from
Indian Boses and Jasmines, which flourish also under our sky, not to
speak of Patchouli, Basil, Lemon-grasses and others of less importance.
The Bamtil, Ben, Sesam and Castor-Oil are likely to become also with us
objects of productive cultural and manufactural care under increasing
facilities for obtaining machinery and labour. The floating Aeschy-
nomene might be naturalised in our never-freezing waters for the sake of


the light Solah-pith. A whole host of medicinal plants come from
South Asiatic particularly mountainous countries; for example the best
Rhubarb exported vid Turkey, the Emodi-Podophyllum, the Spikenard
already of ancient renown, the Chirita, which latter could be naturalised
in our extensive alpine meadows. Among dye-herbs, which ripen in our
summers, we count Indigo, Perilla the Himalayan Madder. Among
fruits we adduce from a wide series four kinds of Watcrnuts or Ling-
nuts, which form a staple food for some centres of population in Upper
India during several months of the year, where the industrious inhabi-
tants with thoughtful diligence know, how to win from once unproductive
sheets of water not only fish, hut also a long annual harvest of the
Trapa-nuts, without any bestowal of refertilisers. Further fruit-
cultivation might be carried on and is to some extent initiated with the
Indian Brambles, the arboreous Leschenaultian Cranberry, several
Eugenhe, the Nepal Jujub, the Carambola and Bilimbi; where the
greatest annual warmth here favours the culture of tropical plants, also
the hardier Musas may be reared; and even some of the varieties of the
delicious Pisang from insular India, of which one attains a length of
two feet, may possibly be brought to fructification, just as the Caven-
dishian Banana, the culture of which is carried far northward in China.
This culture is not so hopeless when we remember, that the ordinary tall
Banana perfects its fruits in Madeira and Florida. Lemons, Oranges
and Melon-like plants of all kinds find, as well may be imagined, a true
home throughout the whole lower regions of Victoria.
Among the East Asiatic plants, particularly those of Chinese and
Japanese origin, the Tea must engage our attention more prominently
than any other; and this plant conducts us from the utilitarian or
agrarian vegetation of India to that of the Chinese empire. As all our
Ferntree gullies (irrespective of many other silvan valleys) to the extent
of several hundred miles’ length could be utilised for Tea-culture, and as
the annual consumption in this colony is now already valued at about a
quarter of a million pounds sterling, and the import nearly at double
that amount, it may justly be anticipated, that in apt localities Tea-
culture will become accessory to the present farm-occupations on an
extensive scale, especially as from year to year more juvenile labour
becomes available. The whole question, involved in the profitable cul-
ture of Tea, has been discussed by the writer before the Farmers’ Club
of Ballarat on a recent occasion, and from the publication emanating
therefrom a further insight into this highly promising subject may be
gleaned. From the Botanic Gardens of Melbourne Chinese and Assam
Tea-plants have been extensively distributed, the former since more than
a dozen years. China and Japan provide us with various kinds of Bam-
boos, some of particular hardiness, one Phyllostachys for instance having
resisted even the winter-cold of Berlin, which is far more intense than
that of the corresponding latitude of North-England. The young
shoots of a Melocanna, and indeed those of several other Bamboos form a
pleasant and wholesome esculent as yet unknown on our tables. A
Dendrocalamus, reaching 100 feet in height, extends with several
species of Bambusa and Arundinaria to Japan, where the climate is
similar to ours, if not colder. Balms also inhabit the Chinese and


Japan empires in latitudes, which prove, that their transfer to us could
be effected, even if my many years’ test had not already given affirma-
tive results. Species of Saguerus, Rhapis, Cham ter ops and Livistona
extend to Japan, and in China, particularly in the southern provinces,
the display of Palms is still greater. The Date-Plums, Tallow-tree,
Ramee, Camphor-tree, the long-rooted Dioscorea-Yam, the Hovenia with
its sweet pulpy fruit, the Yarnish-tree, the prolific long-podded Chinese
Bean, have stood the test of acclimation in all the warmer localities of
our colony. The pine-like trees are still all much hardier; the Crypto-
meria, though not thriving in dry hot tracts of this country, would
doubtless rise to its normal great height in any sheltered valley, and
would likely grow there with the celerity of the Haleppo-Pine, as in the
Azores. The fan-leaved deciduous Ginkgo, renowned for the enormous
age which it attains, might also furnish embellishment and soft pine-
timber of particular excellence in any of our forest-tracts. The great
Nipon-Cypress with its wood of silky lustre, the gigantic Yew, the
almost alpine Yeitchian Spruce, the Jezo-Spruce, Fortune’s Spruce and
several other lofty species, the Japan Nut-Pine, the Cedar-Larch, the
beautiful Thuyopsis, the huge Umbrella-Pir, the Chinese and Japan
Larch and several other coniferous trees are all of great industrial
value. Six kinds of Walnuts occur in Japan, China and the adjoining
Russian provinces. Of the many Oaks I will only mention the Silk-
worm Oak as one of twenty-three Japanese species, other Chinese species
not counted. It may readily be foreseen, that these trees in future days
will occupy large tracts in Victorian ranges like elsewhere. The Litchi,
Longan and Rambutan are likely to ripen their fruit in favourable
ground of this country. A Rhamnus yields the green Lokao-dye. The
Soja-Bean, the large Conomon-Melon, a peculiar Cabbage and an
endemic Hazel come from China and Japan. Prom a Zizania-grass in
swamps the favourite vegetable Kausun is raised. The Tarragon, the
Alpine Kale, the famous Sambul-root and some kinds of Rhubarb are
brought from the more central regions of Asia. The Isabella and some
other American Grape-Vines, together with the Menzies-Pir, are among
the highly remarkable plants, which stretch across to Eastern Asia.
The wide expanse of Eastern North-America from its wide and
exuberant forests might yield many noble trees, to us of all the more
importance, as timber-trees of the North American stamp are naturally
unrepresented in any part of Australia. May I only instance, among
the numerous Goniferse, which impress such a grand feature on North
American landscapes, the tall Weymouth- and other principal Deal-Pines,
the flooring wood of which we shall need to import in such vast quantity
until they are raised on Victorian soil. Let us remember the Balsam-
Firs, the White, Red and Black Spruce, the Hemlock-Spruce, which in
the course of centuries assumes huge dimensions, further the best of all
Pitch-Pines, the gigantic Bald Cypress, the latter since the miocene
period extinct in Europe, and which with the Montezuma-Cypress and
the equally deciduous American Larch might occupy swampy localities,
at present utterly unutilised in our forests. Let us think of the tall
Thuya, also of the Swamp-Cedars and of the white Cedar-Cypress, which
in noble form might rise from forlorn and dismal morasses of ours, while


the Virginian Pencil-Cedar would thrive on barren soil of our wood-
lands. The mountains of the Mexican Territory would likewise supply
many kinds of Timber, particularly Cypresses and Firs, of which some
are amongst the grandest objects in the whole vegetable creation. We
can well foresee, that under enlightened rulers of this country years
hence vast stretches of our ranges will be crowned by forests of the Fir-
tribe.
Passing on to trees with broad umbrageous foliage, for the richness
of which North-America is so famed, I single out only for mention-
ing the Live-Oak and the Quebec-Oak, not merely as standing pre-
eminent in utility for supplying some of the best wood used in
ship-building, but also as representing a long series of both ever-
green and deciduous Oaks occurring in Northern America, and attain-
ing in the cooler mountains of Mexico their most extensive and
varied display. Ash-trees of remarkable flexibility, and also stately
and hardy Birches, would no less than the Oaks prosper in forests
of ours; and there—especially in high regions—the Sugar-Maple,
one of the most valuable of all the trees of the globe, might with
several of its congeners and with the Bed Oaks impart to our silvan
landscape that magnificent purple and golden hue, for which the
autumnal forest-aspects of North-America have ever been celebrated.
Several kinds of Walnut- and Hickory-trees can only be obtained from
this part of the world, among which the tree, which yields the delicious
Pecan-Nut, is to be coveted most for acquisition. Various fruit-bushes
of American nativity, such as the Cranberries, Huckle and Whortle-
berries, might be easily spread over our alpine country, where as yet a
few wild roaming herds are almost the only inhabitants, but into which,
apart of pastoral industry, lucrative cultures of timber and also of
alpine fruits ought to be carried. To our orchards might be added the
Chisasa and other plums, susceptible to horticultural amelioration. The
American Vines, almost secure against the attacks of the Erysibe and
Phylloxera, are to some extent already domiciled amongst us; —but the
prolific Dewberry, as well as various Baspberries, Blackberries and
peculiar species of Bibes have as yet found no place here, to add to our
table. North-America possesses the Apios and several other tuber-
plants; among medicinal herbs and bushes the Podophyllum, the Jalap-
climbers, the Cassine-holly and others, all available for introduction.
Native Basket-Willows, the tall Arundinaria-Bamboo, hardy Palms of
the genera Chamserops, Sabal and Chamsedora, nutritious grasses, such
as the Water-Zizania and the true Buffalo-grass of Kansas, together with
Sumachs of its own, are awaiting with numerous other utilitarian plants
of yonder great States a transfer also to other shores to the extent of
industrial dimensions.
Turning to the Western side of North-America the wanderer may well
be charmed again by the magnificence of the forests, which is unfolded
to his view. The most colossal of coniferous trees of the globe reign
here supreme with unsurpassed natural resources for the commerce in
timber. The Wellingtonian and the other great Sequoia are restricted
to the Californian territory, both reaching a height paralleled or exceeded
only in any part of the globe by one or a few Eucalyptus-trees of South-


East Australia. The Wellingtonia, aptly termed the Mammouth-tree,
the other Sequoia, —which for the purposes of technology is still more
important, yielding the Red Deal of California,—the Yellow Pitch-Pine,
the White Liho-Cedar, Sabine’s Nut-Pine and the Lambertian Sugar-
Pine, come all from California, and are all gigantic trees with wood of
various utility, the two latter bearing cones as large as those of the
Queensland Bunya-Bunya Araucaria, full of edible seeds. Pinus
insignis, though not rivalling with its above-mentioned companions in
size, has shown itself here as one of the most eligible, to create with
celerity coniferous tree-groups, in this instance particularly beautiful for
their pure saturated and shady green in the embellishment of Australian
sceneries, an object in first instance accomplished on a large scale by the
author of this treatise. Nevertheless also this pine comes in to supply
planks, boards and pitch. Some of the noblest of all pines in exist-
ence, and all adapted to the clime of large tracts of this colony, stretch
from California through British Columbia even to the cold latitudes of
the formerly Russian dominions in North-West America, with which
provinces the United States acquired some of the noblest forests of the
globe, destined probably to remain one of the few accessible and per-
manent places, from which masts and deals can be supplied extensively
for foreign commerce. Widely northward extend also the Mertensian
Pine or Western Hemlock-Spruce, the Menzies-Fir, the Nutka-Cypress,
the two grand Western Silver-Firs, the Yellow Thuya, and as the
grandest and most precious of all the incomparable Oregon-Pine, which
even beyond Vancouver’s Island forms vast woods, and with which, as
furnishing some of the best flooring timber in existence, such enormous
lumber-trade is carried on from Puget-Sound and other parts of the
American North-West coast. These trees, which at least at the ratio of
their removal should be replanted, are all of great, some of enormous
size, and all adapted for our hitherto nearly unutilised sub-alpine
regions. It would lead too far to point to many other of the important
and varied trees of these western regions of North-Am erica; they
possess Walnuts, Maples and various Oaks of their own, and they could
also provide additional fruits, especially of the Blackberry- and Goose-
berry-tribe. It would also carry us too far, to specify all the grasses
and many other fodder-plants or otherwise utilitarian plants, derivable
from Western North-America.
South-America, the great country of the Maize, Potato, Tobacco,
Cinchona, Cacao and Tapioca or Cassava, can contribute many treasures
from its rich store of native plants also to extra-tropic countries like
ours. In the western and cooler countries down to Patagonia two
famous cypress-like trees, the Sandarac- or Fitzroy-Alerze and the Libo-
Cedar-Alerze, both attaining enormous dimensions, invite prominently
our attention for the sake of their precious almost indestructible timber,
and must be coveted for prospective possessions on our alpine moors or
upper forest zone. More generally known and perhaps grander still
than the Alerzes is the Nut-Araucaria of Chili and Patagonia, admired
by all as a park-tree, esteemed by few deservedly as a timber-tree or as
one yielding in its nuts grateful human sustenance. The Lleuque and
Lahual, as important timber-trees of the Yew-tribe, should on this occa-


sion not be altogether passed. From the West also exclusively come
the richest Cinchonas, which have yielded to millions of sufferers for
more than two centuries the fever-combating bark; and these glorious
offerings of nature can find also here a safe and extensive home in all
those forest-regions, which are free of frost, as sufficiently proved by
experiments initiated and conducted for several years by myself. We
owe to these western regions also one of the hardiest of all Arrowroots
or Andira-Canna, the Cherimoyer, the Coca-shrub with its marvellously
stimulating leaves; among tuber-yielding plants the Ullucus or Melloca,
peculiar Dioscorea-Yams, Scorzonera-like roots, and the Artichoke-Sun-
flower, while the Hazel-Guevina constitutes one of the most handsome
of evergreen nut-trees, and the tall Coquito- or Honey-Palm rests
available, to introduce into our southern latitudes one of the most
magnificent members of a princely family of plants. Among berry-
fruits are notably those yielded by the pretty Ugni-Myrtle and several
andine Bleeberries; among the numerous but imperfectly known
fodder-grasses the silvery Andropogon and the Coiron. Of greater pre-
tensions, not for fodder but for the multifarious uses, to which the
Bamboos—the giants of grasses—can be applied, is the Quito-Chusquea,
which ascends to 15,000 feet elevation, indeed to regions where it is
beaten down in midwinter by the snow, while several other Chusqueas
reach southward to Chili. This brings us to the Bamboos and such
other plants of Central America as come from higher elevations, and are
therefore calculated to endure Victorian winters. We meet there with
Chusqueas up to 12,000 feet, with Bamboos of the genera Arthrostyli-
dium, Aulonemia and Amndinaria of graceful and elegant forms, like
most of this tribe of plants, while the Platonia-Bamboo of the high and
cool mountains of New Granada sends forth leaves attaining 12 feet in
length and a foot in width which, be it remembered, can be. converted
into paper material like all other Bamboo-leaves. The columnar West
Indian Arthrostylidium-Bamboo rises occasionally to 120 feet and more.
Grander still and more varied in form, but not so easily transferable and
of much less celerity of growth are the Palms, of which in the central
regions of America we can choose many a hardy species, not merely of
the humbler but even of the most majestic kinds. I allude to the
Wettinias, Syagrus, Geonemas and Iriarteas, one of the latter at eleva-
tions of 5000 feet in the Andes exceeding 100 feet in height. The many-
stemmed Palms of the genus Oenocarpus occur neither at the base, but
far up the Cordilleras. The most superb of the Ivory-Palms occurs also
at elevations of about 5000 feet, where its leaves attain sometimes the
amazing length of 30 feet. Various Palms of the genera Euterpe,
Kunthia, Diplothemium, Platenia, Copernicia, Chamsedora, Brahea and
Oreodoxa ascend to 8000 feet in Bolivia, New Granada and Mexico,
and an elevation of 11,000 feet is reached by the two Wax-Palms,
which with their wax-coated stems of occasionally 200 feet height and
leaves of 25 feet length present one of the grandest sights in the whole
vegetable creation, though these superb plants luxuriate in a compara-
tively cool zone. The Peach-Palm of the Amazon Elver delights also in
the warm more temperate regions there, where its clustered stems rise
to 90 feet. In Central America, Lilies, belonging to the genera


Agave, Yucca and Fourcroya, attain there also their most prodigious
heights; they have shown themselves hardy in our lowlands, and thus
offer us also here the tenacious Pita-fibre, even when merely scattered
along our sandy coast-lands. Fourcroya longseva, with stems up to 50
feet high, terminated by a flower panicle sometimes nearly as long, is of
rare ornamental grandeur. After viewing such glorious plants it seems
almost insignificant to turn to the comparatively modest Cottons, the
Arrowroots, the Pacchyrrhizus- and Dioscorea-Yams, the Indigo, the
Capsicums, the Granadillas, the Arracacha, the Chocho, the Ochro, the
Cactus-plants yielding Cochineal, the Prairie-grass, the tall Pice-grass
and an almost endless number of fodder Graminese, of which the
respective value is as yet little understood, though for our industrial
uses they may not prove entirely unimportant. The Bermuda Pencil-
Cedar, the Persea-Pear and Sapodilla-Plum however combine with utili-
tarian value also a showy appearance. The colossal Courbaril, with its
ponderous wood, sweet pulpy pods and copal-like exudations, is also here
at home.
The Eastern side of the South,-American Continent offers us from its
extra-tropic regions again a number of beautiful Palms of the genera
Trithrinax, Copernicia, Acrocomia, Cocos and Diplothemium, some of
which, extend to the temperate clime of Uruguay, all destined to grace
under fostering care the landscapes of other countries, before the ruthless
hand of man has for ever swept them away from the face of the globe.
The eastern Bamboos of South-America count some of the most
eonspicuous forms, among them Guaduas, stouter than any Indian
Bamboo, graceful species of Arundinaria and Merostachys and various
Chusqueas of extreme tallness, all sure to bear our clime. The Grana-
danillas are here particularly numerous, and the luscious aromatic
Guavas display great variety; many other hardy fruitbushes of the
Myrtle-tribe abound. The Achiras-Arrowroot comes from Mendoza,
the Ipecacuanha extends to the forest-mountains of southern Brazil, and
the Sweet Potato, various Yams, as well as the Earth-Nut have also here
their origin. The Brazilian Araucaria replaces in the east that of the
west-coast.
South-Africa, comparatively poor in industrial plants of its own, yet
contributes or can contribute from its wonderfully varied and ornamental
vegetation some gift for industrial wants. We obtain from thence many
medicinal Aloes, the Bucco-bush, the Fennel-Carrot, the Anis-Parsnip, an
Asparagus, the weeping Cape-Willow, the Natal Earth-Nut and Indigo,
several species of Pelargonium for scent-distillation, the Wax-Myricas,
various herbs and shrubs of therapeutic value, a peculiar Arundinaria-
Bamboo and Phoenix-Palm, as well as the Sofala Doum-Palm.
The latter conducts us to the Tropic Regions of Africa, and indeed to
Egypt, where several of these branched Palms exist, all providing edible
fruits. How far any of the almost endless products of intra-tropical
Africa can be rendered our own, remains yet largely to be ascertained.
Its Beeshas and other Bamboos and many of its Palms would doubtless
flourish in the hotter parts of Victoria. The plants from the wide colder
mountain-systems of Central Africa are still to a great extent undis-
closed to applied science, since even geographic enterprise has only


commenced to penetrate into the inner regions of the large African
territory, where probably the display of vegetable wonders will be found
proportionate to that of the marvels of the animal empire. The most
prolific of all Millet-grasses, for instance the Shamola, the Guinea-
grass and the Coapim, come from the tropical parts of Africa, and with-
stand our winter-cold. It is scarcely needful to add, that the almost
endless variety of Ericas, Mesembryanthemums, Aloes, Pelargoniums,
Ixias &c., which in the early part of this century formed the principal
pride of European conservatories, live and prosper in adequate localities
of the Victorian colony unprotectedly, and may be turned to account for
horticultural traffic.
The additions to our resources from the Islands scattered through the
Pacific Ocean, so far as plants are concerned, are likely ever to remain
scanty. The Norfolk-Island Pine and Cook’s Araucaria, pre-eminent for
their grand symmetry among pine-like trees, have both found their way
copiously to us. Not so, however, the different Kauri-Pines, which,
being far more susceptible to hot winds, can with advantage only be
located in our fem-tree gullies. The Dioscorea-Yams and the Taros of
Polynesia are all identical with Indian species, and from thence equally
easy to obtain for those of our regions, which are exempt from frost.
Among the Dioscoreas should specially be recorded the Kaawi-Yam, a
delicious esculent; the Uvi-Yam, which attains occasionally the length
of 8 feet, and the prodigious weight of 100 lbs.; the Tivoli-Yam with its
arm-thick roots, which is also a splendid vegetable.
New Zealand, this lofty remnant of a sunken continent, though no
further distant from Australia than England from the nearest part of
Russia, possesses yet only endemic trees, and many of these of high
value. Hence at so short a distance and under the advantage of great
climatic similarity, the naturalisation of some of its best timber-trees can
add to the riches of our own forests. The Kauri-Pine of great renown,
with branchless trunks upwards of a hundred feet in length, can be
raised here for masts and spars, the yield of the Dammar-resin adding to
the value of the Kauri. Lasting and easily workable is also the timber
of the Totara, Matai and Celery-Pine. The New Zealand Flax-Lily,
with its very tenacious leaves, flourishes even on sandy shores. To these
islands we are also indebted for the most southern of all Palms, the
Nika, which bears occasional snowstorms. It is New Zealand also,
which glories in the possession of the tallest of all Palm-Lilies or Cordy-
lines, remarkable for their celerity of growth and ready amenability to
culture, thus having afforded us the opportunity of imparting to many
centres of settlements already a surrounding of almost tropical aspect.
Whatever the sister colonies of Australia can offer to Victoria, to
extend or enhance its industrial culture, is easily brought within our
reach; and we have largely seized on this facility of translocation as far
as climatic resemblance did admit.
West-Australia presents for Victorian forests its Jarrah, Touart and
Karri-Eucalypts, and the tall gorgeous crimson-flowered Eucalyptus
ficifolia, a palm-like Zamia, a peculiar Dioscorea-Yam, a Sandal-tree and
a host of gay and particularly charming plants, from the introduction of
which into European conservatories almost fortunes might be realised.


Central Australia yields among many other things a splendid
Casuarina, also solely the princely Marie-Palm, which no sirocco will
subdue. Among the perennial grasses there many are nutritious, tall
and drought-resisting.
Queensland and New South Wales can furnish us their lied Cedar, so
similar to the Singapore-Cedar, and here providing a large share of our
furniture-wood. We have largely transferred to us already the Bunya-
Bunya and the Cuninghamian Araucaria along with the Norfolk-Island
Pine. The tall Queensland Kauri proves quicker of growth with us
than the New Zealand congener. The hardy Palms of Lord Howe’s
Island can be reared in all our lowlands, where our own lofty Fan-Palm
will succeed; and this applies also to the still taller Alexandra-Palm, to
the Albert-Palm (a species of Caryota) and some others of East
Australia. Our own native Eucalypts are among hardwoods of such
excellence and variety of application, that we hardly need add to the
species of this genus, unless to gain still other kinds of Ironbark-trees,
or the lemon-scented Eucalypt from South-Queensland, or the two
species with large trusses of flowers of fiery red from Carpentaria.
Many however are the grasses of nutritious quality, perennial growth
and resistance to drought, which might be gathered as additional to
those, naturally existing on our pastures. The two endemic Lemons of
the coast-forests of East-Australia and our desert species, together with
some other East-Australian fruits, are likely to admit of cultural
improvement.
This short and intentionally popular treatise has not been burdened
with many appellations of a strictly phytographic kind; but whoever
may desire to follow up the indications, conveyed in these writings, may
readily consult the volumes of the Acclimation Society, in the pages of
which the “ select plants, readily eligible for Victorian industrial
culture,” are treated specifically at some length. May we finally then
sum up, that—while great resources were granted to this country at the
creation-days—man’s intellect can still far more widely enhance these
endowments, than by the strides of industry,—however rapid already in
this young colony,—this has hitherto been accomplished. Hence, under
a salubrious sky and in happy geographic latitudes, we can add yet for
the furtherance of settlement and prosperity in our wide dominions from
all climes, —except the warmer zones of tropical countries, —by seizing
on an almost endless array of the glorious gifts, which a wise and benign
Providence has destined to be gathered by mankind for our earthly
wants and enjoyments, and it must long remain one of the noblest of
worldly aspirations to share in so pleasing and grateful a task.


MELBOURNE;
M'CARRON, BIRD AND CO., PRINTERS,
37 BLINDERS LANE WEST.
