

■•V
»
■
\/ .
The Late Flood in Melbourne.
Paper Read by Mr. W. W. Culcheth, sth August, 1891.
1. It is not my intention to describe the late flood in
much detail, but rather to make a few observations on
points that require special consideration if effective mea-
sures are to be adopted with the object of preventing at
the next great flood, whenever that may occur, such wide-
spread disaster as that lately experienced. A discussion
by the members of this Institute will help to lead public
opinion in a right direction, and prevent the carrying out of
works to benefit particular localities, but increasing the
risks at other parts of the river.
2. The works of improvement carried out along the
Lower Yarra during the past few years provide a much
freer escape for flood waters than previously existed in that
direction. This advantage has been partly neutralised by the
closing of the natural escape along the low ground through
South Melbourne and Albert Park. Doubtless, however, it
is largely owing to the improved channel from Prince’s
Bridge to Hobson’s Bay that the late flood did not rise so
high below the bridge as the flood of 1863, although the
water rose to a higher level further up the river. A lower
tide in the Bay during the late flood also helped to reduce
the flood level on this occasion. Again, since the flood of
1863 many obstructions to the free escape of flood water
have been placed across, and on the banks of, the river
some distance up. These tend to reduce the flood level
lower down, as will be explained further on. »
• a


3- From the great rush of water through the thirteen
bridges which now exist below Dight’s Falls, it would
appear that most (if not all) of them obstruct the flow of high
floods to a greater or lesser extent. There may be ample
waterway for ordinary floods, and financial considerations,
doubtless, did not warrant provision being made for
excessive floods. Probably, also, it was thought that the
improvements carried out lower down would prevent a
recurrence of such a high flood as that of 1863. There can
be no doubt, however, that the bridges, and the numerous
buildings erected on the low ground over which the water
flowed in former floods, raised the flood level higher up the
river on this occasion. To what extent this took place
could only be ascertained after a very careful investigation
based on connected levels of the flood marks, measurements
of the waterway at various points, and an examination of
the set of the stream where the principal obstructions
occur.
4. Before making further remarks on these points, will it
be well to refer to some of the previous floods, of which
there have been several. There would appear, however, to
have been only four great floods since Melbourne was
founded; and it is very singular that these occurred after
fairly regular intervals, namely —14 years 1 month, 14 years
3 months, and 13 years 4 months, respectively. The first
occurred about the 28th November, 1849; but very little is
ascertainable regarding this.
5. The second great flood lasted from 14th to 18th
December, 1863, the water rising from to 3 feet higher at
Prince’s Bridge than in 1849. This is not, however, a
measure of the relative magnitude of the two floods, as the
stone bridge which was recently removed had been erected
in the interval. At a house on the Darebin Creek, and near
the Yarra, the water is said to have risen 7 feet higher than
on the previous occasion. In 1863, traffic on the Hobson’s
Bay Railway was stopped for four days or more, owing to
damage by the flood,


t€*s
6. The third great flood commenced on the 16th March,
1878. The water level at Prince’s Bridge did not rise within
4i or 5 feet of the highest level attained in 1863. It must
not, however, be concluded that, because the water in 1878
did not rise so high at Prince’s Bridge as in 1849, the latter
must necessarily have been a greater flood. On the first
occasion, Melbourne being only a small place, there was,
doubtless, much less obstruction both above and below the
bridge than there was some 28 years later. During the flood
of 1878, the Yan Yean aqueduct was much damaged, and
the water supply of Melbourne cut off.
7. The fourth great flood was the one of this year. Water
rose at Melbourne and overflowed the river banks on
Sunday, 12th July, to an extent that was very unexpected
and alarming to the residents on low ground near the river.
The flood was at its height near Prince’s Bridge in the fore-
noon of the next day, and began to recede later in the day.
The highest level opposite the Custom House was,
apparently, some three feet lower than in 1863 ; but from
Richmond upwards the recent flood levels were above those
of that year, the difference at Bight’s Falls being several
feet. It is probable that the flood of July, 1891, was the
biggest yet experienced in Melbourne.
8. Regarding the effect of the improvements carried out
during the last few years, while the waterway of the new
Prince’s Bridge is much more than that of the old bridge
which existed in 1863, the overflow that formerly took place
across the from St. Kilda has been stopped by
a high embankment. TRe only escape for flood waters is
now under the bridge, thus materially counteracting the
advantage of the improved channel to the Bay.
9. Suggestions have been made since the late floods to
embank the river in places and widen it in others. The
effect of such alterations would affect the next flood in
different ways. The embankments alone, unless placed a


considerable distance back from the channel, would raise
the flood level higher up the river; and, if placed well back,
a large area of low. ground would still remain exposed to
floods. The widening of the channel alone, or any changes
facilitating the flow of the water, would tend to raise the
flood levels lower done.
10. Generally, in a flood, the water rises gradually until it
attains its greatest height, and then falls again like a tidal
wave. Indeed, a flood in a river due to heavy rainfall takes
the form of a long wave moving down the stream. In a
regular channel the motion would be uniform, the height of
the crest gradually diminishing in its progress down towards
the mouth. In a river there are many irregularities, which
cause the height and form of the wave to vary. A tributary
stream will raise and lengthen the wave; a contracted channel
will keep much of the water back and store it for a time up
stream, lengthening the wave, and reducing its height lower
down. When there are no artificial obstructions, a flood will
have at any point what may be here called its natural level,
and duration.
n. If an obstruction be placed at any point, the natural
flood level will be raised up stream and depressed down
stream, the duration of the flood being increased. If any
obstruction be removed, or increased facilities given to the
water flowing off, the natural flood level will be lowered
up stream and raised down stream, the duration of the flood
being reduced. Some distance both above and below the
point where any change is made the effect would be
inappreciable, the distance depending on the conditions of
the case. For instance, it was the improve-
ments made in the Lower Yarra would not be noticeable
above the Hawthorn Bridge.
12. Perhaps it may be as well to remark here that in
considering this matter it must be borne in mind that there
is a great difference between the effect of alterations on a
flood and the effect on the ordinary flow of a river. It


should also be borne in mind that the length of the stream
in a flood when the low banks are covered is generally Ijess
than at ordinary times, since the flood water often takes a
short cut across at a bend of the river. If this is prevented
by embankments, the flood level higher up must be raised
owing to the fall required for the extra length the water must
flow, besides the loss of head at the bends.
13. Mr. Gordon, one of our Past Presidents, has very
kindly given me several particulars regarding the flood of
1863. A longitudinal section, prepared in 1873 to show the
levels of the flood from Bight’s Falls down to Hobson’s
Bay, is very instructive, and gives information that supports
some of the foregoing remarks. It appears that the flood of
1863 had a fall of some 31 feet from above the Johnston-street
Bridge to the Customs House, a distance, by the ordinary
course of the river, of about nine miles. In the late flood
the fall was probably nearly 44 feet, or an average of about
five feet a mile.
14. Doubtless the fall has been so greatly increased partly
in consequence of the numerous obstructions erected in the
last 28 years (nearly), and partly by the larger volume of
water flowing down ; but the steep slope of five feet a mile
is, in a measure, due to natural obstructions. Mr. Gordon’s
section shows small bars across the river at the Johnston-
street Bridge, at the Hawthorn Bridge and about a mile
lower down, and at the South Yarra Railway Bridge. It
also shows a high bar a few chains above Prince’s Bridge.
The reef shown at the bridge and another lower down have
been removed.
15, Probably the bar above the bridge will in a great
measure account for the great fall of some 6 feet (it is said)
in the flood levels of this year from Prince’s Bridge to
Queen’s Bridge. Some part of this fall would be due to the
obstructions in course of removal between the two bridges.
The bar at South Yarra seemed, in 1863, to keep water


back for some two miles and a half, in which length of the
river channel there was a fall of about 4 feet onl}'. When
the levels of the late flood have been collected it will doubt-
less be found that a similar reduction of the slope took place
here; but the length of the stream was certainly less
because the water took a short cut across one bend at
least. If this section of the river had been embanked, and
the water forced round the bend, a greater fall than there
actually was would have been required to carry off the
flood. The height further up would then have been still
further raised.
16. With a view of preventing misunderstanding of the
remark above made—that most of the existing bridges
obstruct, to some extent, the flow of flood waters —it may
be explained that I do not imply that there was any want
of care in designing these works. Financial considerations
must weigh in such matters, and the cost of providing
waterway for very high floods would, in most cases, have
been excessive, if not prohibitory. With the adoption
of such a view, however, there is a risk of actions-at-law
being taken by property owners along the banks who
might be affected. In a case tried a few years ago it
was held that there had been negligence (in a legal sense),
inasmuch as provision had not been made for the highest
known flood, and although there was no question as to the
sufficiency of the waterway at other times, heavy damages
were awarded.
17. Commissions were appointed in 1864 and in 1872 to
make inquiries regarding the flood of 1863 and recommend
such improvements of the river as might be found desirable.
Some of the works recommended have been carried out;
but it is clear from the extensive damage which has been
occasioned by the recent flood that other works are required.
These are the more necessary as Melbourne is rapidly
extending, and the value of property is steadily increasing.
The next great flood may cause much more damage than the


recent one unless effective improvements are carried out in
the meantime.
18, Among the measures which suggest themselves are
clearing away the remaining bars across the river up to
Dight’s Falls, widening the channel where necessary, and,
perhaps, straightening it in places and embanking the low
parts where valuable property needs protection. But all
these works must be so designed that as little risk as
possible may be caused elsewhere. Each obstruction should
be compensated for in some way.
1-9. Increased waterway from the Queen’s Bridge for some
distance down stream would also appear to be desirable. If
it were sufficient at present, water would not have over-
flowed Flinders-street and portions of South Melbourne.
Increased facilities for letting flood waters flow away from
the upper parts of the river will increase the risk of flooding
these places. An enlarged channel in the lower Yarra,
however, by reducing the ordinary daily scour by tidal water,
would be more likely to silt up than at present.
20. Further measures might be taken to reduce the
volume of flood waters reaching Melbourne. Water could
be kept back for a time by several comparatively inex-
pensive works at various places some miles above Mel-
bourne, where flooding would do very little damage. It
would not be necessary to form a reservoir at of these
places, although if this could be done anywhere it would do
good. A roadway embankment, raised and strengthened,
with a small culvert, would answer in one case. Small
weirs thrown across gorges in the hills, where water could
spread out above, would also be useful. Other places might
be found where dams of dry stone could be erected at small
expense. Numerous expedients might be adopted to retard
the flow of flood waters as long as possible, and prevent
so great a rise in the neighbourhood of Melbourne as it
is now evident we are liable to.
A, H. Massing & Co„ General Printers, Melbourne,


