

Reprinted from The Scottish Geographical Magazine for June 1892.
THE NEW HEBRIDEANS.
BY THE REV. JAS. H. LAWRIE, OF ANEITYUM.
The strange diversity of languages spoken by the natives of the New
Hebrides Islands has led to the oft-repeated inquiry, How have these
been originated 1 Where has this people come from 1 Theories there
may bo in abundance, but with our present knowledge these questions
cannot be, easily, or satisfactorily, answered. The people are confessedly
children of Ham, so that their., .original home must be Africa, but
thousands of years seem to have elapsed since the first contingent
came wandering across the ocean and landed on the great island of
New Guinea, the head-quarters of the Papuan race, to which the bulk of
the New Hebrideans decidedly belong. They have crisp frizzy hair;
their skin is of a burnt coffee colour; their foreheads are fairly intelligent.
A race of men somewhat resembling the inhabitants of Western Polynesia
are found on the Andaman Islands in the Indian Ocean; they have curly
hair like the Papuans, and their features and habits generally imply a
common origin. When the great migrations took place, they may have
tarried midway between Africa and New Guinea. These natives have
been called Negritos, and certainly they are far removed in type from
the Hindus on the neighbouring continent.
On the smaller islands of Futuna, Aniwa, Fila, Mele, and a part of
Emai, there has evidently been an admixture of Malayan blood, the skin
of the majority of the natives on these few islands being a shade lighter
than that of their neighbours, and the language spoken somewhat akin to
the Samoan. This has evidently been a later immigration, and the new-
comers have not been numerous enough to efface the Papuan cast of
countenance or the crisp frizzy hair of the aborigines of these smaller
islands. This is an additional reason for believing that the Papuans of
western Polynesia have sprung from a common source, although they may
have come by different routes. In this connection, the way in which
the Tanna men cord their hair, a custom which may be observed in the
ancient sculptures of Persia, is noteworthy. The earliest pioneers of the
tribes may have been carried from their original home as slaves, and
through successive generations, repeated divisions, and intermingling with
other tribes on their way to the South Pacific Ocean, have adopted new
customs and altered some of their heathenish practices, until, as will be
seen from what follows regarding the differences in their languages,
idolatrous customs, style of dress, and weapons of war, the New Hebri-
deans may be looked upon rather as a number of peoples than as a united
whole, , '
Judging from the distinct differences in the heathen and idolatrous
customs of the natives on the thirty inhabited islands of the New
Hebrides group, we may be almost certain that the migrations did not
all take place at one time or from one quarter, but, like drift sea-weed on
the surface of the ocean, war parties, or refugees from war, or in some
cases strayed fishing parties, may from time to time have been carried in
Sr
<mHz ■T"'*
’Me


their log canoes by wind and current, until one by one the islands were
occupied by the progenitors of the present inhabitants.
As evidence that the islands were not all peopled at the same period,
it may be stated that while in the centre of the group some six thousand
natives, dwelling on Elate, Nguna, Tongon, and other smaller islands,
speak the same language in varying dialects, on all the islands to the
north and south of these distinctly different languages are spoken by the
other sixty thousand natives, and oven on some of the larger islands
the natives of one district are wholly unable to understand the language
spoken by their brethren at no great distance from their own home.
On the island of Tanua the missionaries have ascertained that three
languages are spoken among seven or eight thousand people, and on
Maiekula five languages are spoken among, as has been estimated, twelve
thousand people; on Santo, with a still larger population, the confusion
of tongues is proportionately aggravated. This confusion of tongues
may best he illustrated by a few examples of the names by which two
such common objects as the sun and moon are called :
English Swi. Moon.
Aneityumbse .... Nangosengii Inmohog.
Tannesb Mori Makua.
Eutunese ..... Tarn Tamramu.
Eiiomanoan .... Mpniinan Itais.
Epatbse Elo Atelag.
Ngunese Elo Telagi.
Epian Maregio Simberio.
Ambeimesb .... Yal 01.
Malekulesb .... Mar Nebur.
Maloesb Alo Vitu.
Santo, N.W Metanialo Wula.
Unlike the inhabitants of Eastern Polynesia, the New Hebrideans
have no great king ruling over an island or group of islands; the
dominion of each important chief is limited in extent, being usually
bounded by headlands jutting into the sea, and, petty jealousy and
enmity tending to keep up tribal warfare, the feeling of isolation is
intensified with all its evil consequences. It has often occurred in the
case of labourers, brought back from Queensland and landed at their own
island, hut not in the district from which they had been taken three
years before, that after the departure of the vessel they have been
attacked, their property taken from them, and occasionally they them-
selves killed, cooked, and eaten. In districts which have been evangelised
by missionary effort these horrid practices have ceased, but as a matter of
fact all the larger islands in the north end of the group, such as Ambrim,
Paama, Maiekula, Santo, etc., have yet to he evangelised, and in these
places savage cruelty still holds unbridled sway.
As an illustration, we may mention that over a large district on
Maiekula it is the custom to'knock out the two upper front teeth of girls
before marriage. When a girl reaches the age of, say, ten years, she is
taken and held flat on the ground by half a dozen old women, and a man
2
THE NEW HEBRIDEANS.


■ —probably a medicine man—with a piece of wood for a punch and a
stone for a mallet, knocks out the two front incisors. It may be to them
a mark of beauty, or, what is more likely, an -evidence of subjection to
the lords of creation ; in any case, the cruel custom is insisted on, and the
cries of the girl-wife are drowned by the louder cries of the women,
who have undergone the same operation when they were at her age.
The wound soon heals, a feast is made, and all rejoice at the fact that
another belle has been admitted into the womanhood of the tribe. The
value of a wife on that island is ten boar pigs with long tusks, and, as
they are polygamists, a man need not limit himself to one wife if he is
able to purchase more. The lot of married women there is miserable in
the extreme; they are downtrodden, and, instead of being helpmeets, are
virtually slaves. As far as we are aware, this practice of knocking out
the teeth does not prevail on any other island in the group. A system
of caste prevails among the northern islanders, which is unknown in the
south. Women in Malekula are not allowed to eat with the men, nor
are the men of one rank allowed to eat with those of another, nor to eat
food prepared at their fire or even at a fire kindled from theirs. There
are four of these grades, the highest of which is only reached when a
man has during a number of years contributed and slaughtered for the;
public feasts one hundred boar pigs with long curled tusks. The ivory
tusks are afterwards used by the men for bracelets and neck ornaments, i
On Epi and other islands two or three curled boar-tusks are attached to
a cord and tied round the neck, so that they stand out from the back of
the wearer’s neck like hat-pegs. In the island of Malo there are no
fewer than ten grades to be passed through in this caste system before a
man can attain to the coveted position of a chief of the highest rank; in
all this the killing of pigs plays an important part.
This absence of uniformity among inhabitants of different islands is
further seen in the ordinary dress of the people. The men, being pro-
fessed warriors, dispense with everything of a cumbersome nature, a
narrow band being considered sufficient. The fancy patterns on their
faces, made with red ochre, charcoal, and oil, with which they decorate
themselves for feasts, dances, and sing-sings, are very ingenious. In
time of mourning, instead of the traditional dust and ashes, they com-
monly use soot mixed with oil smeared over the face and breast, but on
Epi a coat of whitewash on the head, face, and body is the fashionable
mourning costume. The accusation was , once formulated by an anti-
missionor, that the missionaries wore killing off the natives with trousers
and prayers. It is certain that prayers do not kill, and as for clothing,
while, there are, certainly, natives who lack common sense in its use, there
can be no objection to the cloth loin-girdle and shirt which the Christian-
ised men usually wear.
On most of the islands the women exhibit considerable skill in the
manufacture of their native dress and kilts of matting. On Santo and
Malo the women, for the most part, are contented with the original fig or
other leaves, without any attempt at manufacture. On Malekula and
Epi a neatly-woven kilt of matting, is tied round the waist; it is made
from naiTow strips of dried Pandams leaves, and is worn from ten to
csf
\^Js
I Az -<-4 S
i, J A*-t^
>1 ‘>^H-I'S-
|
[?]
| <7-
3
THE NEW HEBRIDEANS.


twelve inches deep. On Amhrim the fashion changes to short fringe
grass skirts, of which eight or ten are tied round the waist one' above
another, the deepest being about twelve inches in length, and the rest
graduated upwards until the uppermost ornamented fringe is only two
inches deep. On Tongoa, Nguna, and Efate kilts of a somewhat different
fashion were formerly used; but long print garments are now Common on
these islands. Coming south to Eromanga, We find the improvement
in women’s dress very marked indeed.' On that island six or eight fringe
skirts are used reaching below the knee, while an outer'ornamented one
trails on the ground. On Tanna, 'Futuna, and Aniwa decent fringe
skirts are used, but shorter than those on Eromanga. On Futuna an
unmarried or childless female can be recognised by the dress being left
open at the sides, whereas in the case' of mothers it is closed all
round. On Aneityum, although every' woman and girl wears a largo
print garment, she would have the feeling rif being unclothed without the
native-made fringes, of which three or four are worn together. The
material these skirts are usually made from is Pandanus leaves chewed
and soaked in water to make them soft; by way of ornament several
banana leaves are frayed out and introduced here and there to 1 form
stripes on the dress. Thus it will be seen that, upon the whole, even
among the heathen natives, women are more modestly clothed than the
men. ‘ On some islands the hair of the bead receives a large share of
attention, and on others it is left to grow naturally, with an occasional
coating of lime to kill insect life and to keep the head clean.
On Santo the women shave the hair on both sides of the head, leaving-
a narrow strip in the middle standing up like a cook’s comb, and at the
northern end of Santo the chiefs are distinguished by a peculiar white
shell, about the size of a breakfast cup, which is fastened'to the hair in
front, and makes them very conspicuous.
On Malekula some of the men wear a rope band round the head,
which, being often smeared with black pigment and oil, does 1 not add 1 to
their beauty. Many of the women on that island have their hair matted
with oil and dirt in a most unseemly manner.
On Tongoa, in former years, a peculiar-looking shade for the eyes
used to be tied round the head, the brow and shade being smeared 1 with
turmeric. On Efate the men and women wear their hair very short, but
on Tanna, and to a limited extent on Futuna, the most peculiar fashion
of all is in vogue among the men; they work up their hair into small
cords, four or five hundred of these, wrought round with vegetable fibre,
hanging from twelve to fifteen inches doWn the hack. Such a head-dress
is the work of years. The same style was worn on Aniwa and Aneityum
before these islands became Christian. The natives are fond of decorat-
ing their hair with plumes of hawks’ and cocks’ feathers, and also neat
wooden combs somewhat resembling ordinary forks. Bamboo soratchers
are worn as every-day ornaments in the hair.
Huge masks, from 18 to 24 inches high, are worn at the heathen
ceremonies on Malekula and the neighbouring islands. Beads, whales’
teeth, and shell ornaments are hung in abundance round the ' neck.
Tortoise-shell earrings, round pieces of wood an inch hr diameter, and
1
[?]
GAryS-%^.^
<r I


other articles, are inserted in the ears. Some of the natives wear hand- J
some shell, bead armlets, on which they place great value. Vandyked j
and diamond patterns are neatly wrought on these with black and white 1
beads. Such ornaments are possessed only by leading men.
Beautiful white Ovulum shells are worn on the arms on some islands
as a mark of distinction, and a small variety of the same shell used to be
so much valued by the Eromaugan chiefs that a boat-load of sandal-wood
could-be purchased for a pair of. them. The circular opening of the
Turho ishell is ground down into a line armlet, and worn by the women
in the northern islands. The Tongoans possess handsome armlets made
of tortoise-shell, and the Futunese neatly carve similar ornaments from
coco-nut shells ground down from both ends to a breadth of about half
an inch. Tightly-fitting guards for the bow-string are worn on the
wrist by some of the northern islanders.
The musical instruments of the people are few in number, but Pan-
pipes are used, the primitive instrument from which the magnificent
organs of modern times have been evolved, as well as a bamboo flute, |
and.-a conch or trumpet shell. By beating on hollowed log drums from 1
4 to 10 1 feet in height, they cam produce sounds which to them are as I
much a- language as the bugler’s call is to a civilised army. A consider-
able degree of skill is exercised in the hollowing out of these log drums
through a narrow opening only three inches broad.
On Epi and some other islands a peculiar band is tied round each
leg, with a number of hollow dried nuts attached to it, which, , when the
dancing and singing are going on, add a jangling sound to the noise. j
The arts, as far as they are practised, exhibit great differences on the
various islands, no less than language, customs, and dress. Ever since
Quiros, the celebrated navigator, visited the island of Santo in the year
1606 the natives have made rude clay pottery which they use for
cooking purposes. Strange to say, to no other island has this art been
yextendeil—. On Tongoa^and~other islands, pudding plates, ham bowls,
V clnocT bailers, and yam knives are cut out of solid wood. The very,
ancient and wide-spread method of preparing bread by covering it with
heated wood ashes is known to the natives of the New Hebrides. They, too,
cook their food in earth-ovens. A hole is dug in the ground, in which,a,
large fire is kindled with a heap of stones piled on the top. When these
are thoroughly heated, they are removed with the aid of a long piece of
wood partly split up, which serves as a pair of tongs. The hole is then
lined with leaves, and the prepared food is piled in—taro, yam, puddings,
fish, fowl, pig, or whatever there maybe for supper. The. heap is now
covered over with leaves, the heated. stones are piled over the whole,
more leaves are put on, and the mound is banked up with the earth
which was originally dug out of the ground. In two and a half or three
hours the oven is opened, and the steaming hot food is found to he
thoroughly cooked and deliciously flavoured in its own, juices. The
natives take a full meal only at sunset, but at any odd time during the"
day they eat bananas, bread-fruit, or chestnuts, chew sugarcane, and
drink coco-nut water. Ingenious water-bottles are made out of coco-nut
shells from which the kernel has been extracted. Four or five of these
f2iJL^>-^
I
3 -sasltM
i <^ Lo
I ~
fiLdat&u?
S
j t^ZZL-/y
I Lo-iKnsA^,
1 ~1/ C<2-a£^c7
1
I
[?]


are fastened together with cord, and when filled with water are easily
carried on the shoulders suspended from either end of a stick. The
largest size of bamboo is also used on some islands for carrying water;
this strange bucket, from six to eight feet long, with an opening made
in the side at one end, is like an enormous flute. Neatly carved lengths
of bamboo are used for head-rests or pillows on some islands; on others
a curious pillow is constructed from a branch of a tree raised from the
ground on its own twigs loft at each corner. The nape of the neck is
hardened by exposure, and the natives do not seem to think this single-
bar pillow uncomfortable. Napamas, or native bark-cloth, was commonly
made on Aneityum and most of the other islands before the introduction
of calico. The inner bark of a tree was soaked in water and then beaten
with a notched stick, which left a pattern on it when dry. On Efato,
Nguna, Tongoa, Emai, and other islands, this cloth was dyed a brownish-
■yellow and fringed with bird’s feathers. On Eromanga a pattern was
painted by hand on the white ground with rod and black pigments ; these
patterns somewhat resembled clusters of leaves, The Eromangans carve
a similar pattern on the handle of their delicately made star-clubs, and
the same pattern was formerly tattooed on the cheeks of the Eromangan
'women, All the islanders know how to convert Pandanus leaves into
various articles of utility ; sleeping mats are woven out of this material;
Napavalcs or carpets are made from it, as well as sun-hats, fans, waist-
bands, and fringed skirts, and in some cases even thatching is secured to
the roofs of the huts with these tough leaves; but the most general use
to which the Pandanus leaves are applied is the manufacture of a kind of
bag or basket which, on the Christian islands, is used for carrying food
and also books. The Futunese are special adepts in the art of making
' these baskets and sleeping mats, and they usually have a quantity of
them on hand for sale or barter when vessels happen to call at that
island. What a wonderful field the New Hebrides group is for ethno-
logical study, witli its varieties of language, customs, dress, and arts,
numerous indeed for such a confined space! even in the weapons of
War there is no sameness. It is most noticeable that the styles of manu-
facture on the several islands are totally different; but how these dis-
tinctive patterns have originated it is difficult to surmise.
On the southern islands the spears are merely sharp-pointed hard
wood saplings from nine to twelve feet long, whereas on the northern
islands the spear-heads are often elaborately carved into barbs and
points, while in some oases human bones are inserted.
On several islands the bows are large and not unlike the huge bows
of Old England; on Am brim they have an elegantly upturned pointed
end, which can be used as a spear when the quiver is empty. The bow
of the Eromangans is noted for its neatness; it is the smallest in the
group, but the arrows from its string are none the less deadly. Many of
the hard-wood points on the ends of the reed arrows are covered with
barbs well carved in various patterns; on some; of the islands the arrows
are poisoned with vegetable matter mixed with blood. The different,
patterns of,the clubs on the several islands are noticeable by the most
careless observer. It may be mentioned that guns having been intro-
PuSJLovz,
(L^rtt
eioJizr
(3£uAr~ |
I
[?]
CL-f-Yy-TjSa


duced by the traders and labour agents from Queensland, Fiji, and
Noumea, these weapons have now become much more common than the
native club, spear, and bow.
The war-club of Aneityum is from four and a half to five feet long,
diamond-shaped at the striking end, and of very hard wood. There
were also fancifully-shaped clubs with projecting points like the neck and
beak of a heron—ceremonial maces carried at the heathen dances.
On' Tanna the club is long and very heavy, and the head is star-
shaped ; when a man is killed with one of these clubs a point is knocked
off the head in remembrance of the deed.
On the northern islands the clubs are shorter and the shapes are also
different ; on Efate and Nguna the common club is merely left thick at
the butt-end, while on others fanciful knobs are made, but on Tongoa
the shape takes the form of a double-bladed battle-axe skilfully fashioned
out of solid hard-wood. On Ambrim they sling the murderous weapon
from the shoulder by a wrought hempen band terminating in a tassel,
and on north Santo a kind of sceptre is used by the chiefs as a badge of
office. On Tanna a singular stone weapon like an office ruler was used
with deadly effect when thrown at a distance of twenty yards. On
Futuna a similar weapon was used, but instead of stone it was ground
out of coral rock. The stone axes of other days were of the world-wide
wedge pattern; shell adzes were also made, but the steel axes of civilisa-
tion are now in common use.
The dwellings of the natives are for the most part rude thatched
huts, with a doorway, on some islands at the end, on others at the side;
in shape they somewhat resemble a huge fishing-boat turned upside
down with one end sawn off. Many of the natives are now building
square houses, which are much more healthy and less confined than those
of the old shape; these also are covered with thatch. Many of the lead-
ing men have from time to time been induced to build limestone houses,
but they soon leave them, saying that such houses are too cold to live in.
They cling with great tenacity to their old style of hut, in which the
smoke of the wood-fires at night, finding no egress but by the door or, to
a certain extent, through the thatch, sends the mosquitos about their
business, and allows the inmates to sleep.
The canoes on the southern islands are usually small and rude in
construction ; they are hollowed out of a single log, with an outrigger
attached, and are intended to carry from two to six adults. On Futuna
they have an ingenious method of heightening the sides of the canoes by
building on extra pieces. They bore holes in the wood with a heated
iron and sew the slabs to the body of the canoe with sennit, plugging up
the holes afterwards with coco-nut fibre. On Malekula and other islands
in the north the natives build huge canoes for war or trading purposes,
capable of carrying from forty to fifty men, besides pigs and other
articles of barter. Excellent fishing-nets are fabricated on some islands
with twine or cord made by hand from the inner bark of a tree. The
primitive shell fish-hooks are no longer made, as steel hooks are now so
easily obtained. Fish-traps of a circular shape are made with fine split
cane closely plaited together.
I
I
Ij
je^Up
*
i \S^f>^JZ>
I "~h*-^cx^a~<-~iitL
I
[?]
I (^±£
V


In the manufacture of their idols and in their idolatrous customs the
natives throughout the group vary considerably, yet it is evident that
one religion is common to the ■whole group, namely, the worship of
ancestors.
To these spirits they appeal in time of war, or when sickness or
distress overtakes them, and propitiate them by gifts of food placed on
stones in sacred spots, or in baskets hung in sacred groves; even in drink-
ing the intoxicating hava the Aneityumese used to pour out a libation
to the kava god.
On all the islands the sorcerers are presumed to have the power of
producing an abundant supply of food,- of bringing rain and wind, and
also of causing or preventing sickness and death. These men are both
feared and hated, but can levy taxes on their dupes at will. The idols
or sacred stones on the southern islands are for the most part rude and
uncarved; they are of all sizes from a small pebble to a huge block many
tons in weight. One such huge stone may be seen in the Ohul valley on
the north side of Aneityum; it was used in connection with the worship
i of the sun, to which and the moon (supposed to be husband and wife)
great honours were paid ; it is one of the few stones on the island that
have figures engraved upon it. Those figures are intended to represent
the sun, moon, fishes, birds, turtles and flying foxes which are very
numerous there. The generation which has just passed away knew
nothing about the origin of these figures, but simply ascribed them to
the work of spirits. This remarkable stone is of ordinary basalt, and
measures some thirty-three feet in length, by thirteen feet high,-and its
position suggests that it was thrown from the crater of some great
volcano in a past age. 1
At Lilipa, near Savannah Harbour, Efate, there is a cave where, on
the sides of the rock, a number of curious figures have been carved,
which also are ascribed by the natives of that island to the work of
spirits, and are, therefore, doubtless of considerable antiquity. On
Arabrim, Epi, Malekula, and other northern islands the natives, have a
custom of erecting huge carved images, intended to represent their ances-
tral chiefs. These images are usually made out of the black trunk of a
tree-fern with the butt-end upwards, the handsomely-carved human face
being highly painted red and green, or black and white, just as fancy
dictates. On Malekula we have seen fifty of these idols on the out-
skirts of a public square, with eight or ten hollowed log drums set up in
the middle; also, at another end of the square, flat stone altars were
erected, over which the blood of pigs killed in sacrifice is shed.
It is. hard for the heathen to believe that any adult man can die from
natural causes, the supposition being always that he has been bewitched,
and this belief keeps up a feeling of hatred and continual desire for
revenge. Both northern and southern islanders are very careful to keep
all refuse of food until an opportunity occurs to burn, bury, or otherwise
dispose of it—extending this practice to the skin of bananas, chewings of
sugar-cane, and even cuttings of hair; for should an enemy find them,
and with certain incantations burn them, the owner would sicken and
die. When an important man on a heathen island dies, his friends


immediately seek to discover who has bewitched him, and another life is
often taken in revenge, whence tribal warfare arises. Low down as
the people are in the social scale, they yet believe in an after-life. It
was customary to strangle women on Aneityum on the death of their
husbands, so that having been their companions or servants here they might
act in the same capacity hereafter. A fire was always lighted on the
beach, in order that the spirit of the dead man might come back and
warm himself, implying that the place to which he had gone was desolate
and dreary. Umaatmas, or the abode of the dead, was believed to be in
the direction of the setting sun. Cooking and eating the bodies of the
enemies killed in warfare is still practised on islands where missionary
teaching has not yet taken effect. Christianity on the one hand—which,
besides making men good, teaches them to be industrious—and legitimate
commerce on the other, improve their social condition, and are the two
levers which will raise these sunken savage races out of barbarism.
The Aneityumese had a legend when the missionaries went there,
that the chief Natmas, or spirit, called Jnhujaming, was the discoverer,
not the creator, of the island. This great spirit was considered so sacred
and powerful that ordinary people would not pronounce the name (it is
said that in olden times an ordinary Hebrew would not pronounce the
sacred name Jehovah) —a privilege reserved for the priests or sacred men
who had communings with the spirits. Inhujaraing is said to have gone
a-fishing in the leaf of a tree, called Neseaing, which grows close to the sea
shore; the leaf is peculiar, being like the ball of a tablespoon, without a
midrib. When the shell-fish hook was let down, it got attached to some-
thing, and, on the great spirit fisher pulling with all his might, lo ! the
island of Aneityum appeared. The saddle-peak mountain (which is about
2800 feet above the sea-level) rose first, on which the spirit sat, and con-
tinued his fishing until the whole island, as it now is, was above water,
and at last men were formed, who became the forefathers of the present
race. We can conceive a foundation for this story in the experience of
Noah after the flood, when his ark rested on Mount Ararat, where there
is also a saddle-like peak, and the subsidence of the water revealed
the dry ground.
Another story of Inhujaraing recalls the fall of man, when the
sentence of death was passed upon the human family. This great
Natmas is said to have had a shell like that of a turtle, which abounds
in those seas. One day, when he was absent from home, his_ children
had the daring to pierce the shell and burn it, and for this wicked act
they were doomed to die. On Eromanga, where a similar system of
idolatrous worship existed, the natives had a legend which somewhat
resembled the Bible story of Jonah. They said that a man once fell
into the sea, where he was swallowed by a great fish, but the pieces of
wood in the man’s ears pricked the sides of the fish, and caused it to
vomit him up, alive, but very thin and weak.
The folk-lore or legendary stories of the New Hebrideans has not
yet been systematically collected. An effort in that direction is being
made by Hr. John Eraser, of Eandwick, New South Wales, who is
now in communication with the individual missionaries on the various


islands, seeking to obtain and preserve for publication any valuable
knowledge of this kind that they may possess. It needs a thorough
acquaintance with the language, patient inquiry, and years of study
to find out the bearings of many strange, heathenish, and idolatrous
customs which are practised by the natives throughout the group, and
to distinguish those which prevail on one island and not on another.
Many of the traditions and customs of the natives are now well
known, but it may be that a more systematic study of their legends will
lead to the discovery of a common source, from which the progenitors of
the peoples came who now inhabit these numerous islands.
