

THE CENTENARY SERVICE OF SONG,
(To Commemorate the (> r sf;ib[tsbm:nt of S unbajj Schools
in Gloucester, bn Robert ilaikcs, in 1780,
By BENJAMIN CLARKE,
General Editor Sunday School Union.
STATUE OF ROBERT RAIKES TO BE PLACED ON THE THAMES EMBANKMENT.
MUSIC ARRANGED BY W. E. ABEL.
PRINTED BY THE SUNDAY SCHOOL UNION, LONDON,
FOR THE
RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY, 17, SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE,
PRICE THREEPENCE.
"T j/
s'( V
$


THE ARGUMENT.
An instrumental piece leads up to the opening Hymn, which is
descriptive of the institution of Sunday Schools by Raikes. —Con-
siderations of our indebtedness to God’s love should call forth
gratitude, which is further likely to be excited by a review of His
mercy to us as a nation. Gratitude on behalf of the children. A
poetical retrospect. Children ever special objects of God’s care.—
Provisions in the Pentateuch for their training both in public and in
private —The call of Samuel —David’s desire for the children—The
coming of the Saviour as a child —His attitude towards children—
—The attitude of the Church towards them—Lambs, outcast
from the fold —Robert Raikes pities them, and gathers them into
Sunday Schools. Early ideas of the Sunday School—Development
and advancement —Collateral results —Congratulation should lead to
Consecration, the best celebration of the Centenary. Improvements
—The actual and the ideal - Tne final gathering of teachers and
scholars. —Chorus of Praise.


-r I F
it*
THE
CENTENARY SERVICE OF SONG, ||
Introduction to “ GOD OF OUR FATHERS.”
C /(• -I —j [ T j j 1
PIANO. I _ jm~ q Ej
p ~~
rrf | h~ ~r~ j|* up — ~p ~p~ *
rJj
IJ. J J- .f J:


4 A hundred years ago ! —how great a change
Our churches witness now with joy and praise !
Of Sabbath Schools how wide is now the range ;
How loud the songs which children now upraise.
What families are blest! what homes, made glad !
What multitudes with holiness are clad.


5 And who the generations saved can count.
For ever saved from sin, and death, and hell ?
Myriads of children stand on yonder mount.
The chorus of the heavenly hosts to swell:
“ Worth)' the Lamb, who once was slain,” they cry;
“ Worthy the'Lamb,.who did for Sinners die.”
6 God of our fathers, Thee we magnify
For what Thou didst a hundred years ago ;
We, parents, teachers, children, glorify
Thy name this festal day, and long to know
More of Thy love, more of Thy power and grace,
U ntil we rise to see Thy glorious face.
GRATITUDE IN A REVIEW OF GOD’S MERCIES.
■ As rich inheritors of the past we rneet to-night gratefully to celebrate
the origin of Sunday Schools, to which we are all so much indebted.
“How much owest thou my Lord?” is a question we do well con-
stantly to ask of our own hearts : and those who are in the habit of
recounting their mercies, and of tracing all their blessings to the “ Giver
of every good and perfect gift,” are amongst God’s happiest creatures.
Those who in the spirit of David are most ready to call upon their
souls, and all that is within them, to bless and praise His holy name, are
those who are always finding cause for thankfulness everywhere.
The poet Keble says of nature:
“There is a book who runs may read,
Which heavenly truth imparts ;
And all the lore its scholars need, —
Pure eyes and Christian hearts.
# ;jc
Thou, who hast given me eyes to see,
And love this sight so fair,
Give me a heart to find out Thee,
And read Thee everywhere.”
But there are many books which tell of God’s love, and it is our desire
that “ pure eyes and Christian hearts ” may now be directed to events
that have been recorded in His own Word, and in the history of our own
land, which cannot fail to awaken or to quicken thankfulness and joy.
In our service we wish to strike the key-note of gratitude, and, if our
hearts be rightly attuned, the words of our lips will be acceptable in
God’s sight, and our vocal sounds will go up to Him as a melodious
sacrifice.
Nothing is so likely to arouse gratitude as a review of God’s mercies ;
and, fitting as may be the private recital of individual blessings, it is
well occasional!)' to take a broader outlook and a wider review, and
burst out into song at the recollection of God’s dealings with us as a
nation.
The celebration of the hundredth year since Robert Raikes first estab-
lished Sunday Schools as a system in the city of Gloucester is just such
an occasion.


* Verses 7,8, 9, and 10 may be omitted, or all the verses may be sung and read alternately.
t If any difficulty is experienced in teaching the terminal of the ninth verse, the words may
be sung to the same music as the previous verses, or the verse may be omitted.


2 For Thy bountiful provision
For the wants of needy man,
For the ever-changing seasons
Ever since the world began;
For each year of crowning harvest;
Waving field and laden tree,
Hallelujah! Hallelujah !
Hallelujah, God, to Thee !
3 For Thy Fatherly protection,
Thrown around our favoured land,
For a century’s direction
By the over-ruling hand ;
For immunity from conquest
On the land and on the sea ;
Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
Hallelujah, God, to Thee !
4 For Thy marvellous atonement,
Reconciling God to man;
For a century’s fulfilment
Of Salvation’s wondrous plan ;
For each ransomed soul’s salvation,
For each triumph grace has won,
Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
Hallelujah, God the Son.
3 For the gift of inspiration,
“ Holy Spirit, Heavenly Dove,”
For each gracious invitation
Written in the Book of love ;
For a century of comfort
. Shared by millions now in Heaven,
Hallelujah f Hallelujah !
Holy Ghost, to Thee be given.
6 For a hundred years of triumph
In the name of God and right;
For a century of progress
Out of darkness into light;
For the spread of earthly knowledge,
For the wisdom from on high,
Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
Hallelujah, God, we cry !
7 For a truer, purer freedom
Than our fathers’ fathers saw ;
For our liberty of worship
U nrestrained by let or law;
For the freedom of the Spirit
Wherewith Christ makes all men free,
Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
Hallelujah, God, to Thee !
8 For the armies of the faithful
’Neath the gospel flag unfurled,
In Thy name who seek the conquest
Of the kingdoms of this world ;
For their still increasing ardour,
Centuries can never cool,
Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
God of Church and Sunday School.
9 For each word fulfilled of olden,
For each promise that remains,
For the hopes that aye embolden,
For the faith that sure sustains,
For the arm that wearies never,
For the never failing hand,
Upward, onward, Heavenward ever
Leading to the promised Land ;
xo Hallelujah ! God the Father
Thou who sent the Son to save;
Hallelujah ! God the Spirit;
Who the quickening unction gave ;
Hallelujah ! God the Saviour,
Thou who diedst and rose again,
Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
Hallelujah ! Amen.
THE CHILDREN.
Whilst we desire to linger fondly over 1780, and to recall God’s mer-
cies through the last hundred years, we wish to date back His love to a
far earlier period, and to trace it down through far more centuries than
one.
But it is for the children’s sake we desire to give thanks. They are the
joy of the home —the hope of the land. These young buds of promise
make spring-time everywhere ; these rainbows of hope throw their
beauteous arch across every sky.
We thank God for the children ; and now that we are met to celebrate
the beginning of an institution specially designed to bless children, our
hearts go out towards them ; and whilst we think of the steps that were
taken to benefit those of a past generation, it is with the hope that further
blessing may be conferred on those of the present.


|i ast or Son
Rev. H. Bonae, D.D.
A. L. A.
rail. | |
light. A - bove both star and sun Shall it be lost . . or won?
ami -«• 5 ** 1 I !
2 See that high heaven of splendour,
Sweet shining from above ;
Seat of eternal gladness,
And dwelling-place of love.
Above both star and sun,
Shall it be lost or won ?
3 See that celestial glory
Appearing from afar,
Beyond the arch of azure,
Beyond the evening star.
Above both star and sun,
Shall it be lost or won ?
And conquer in the strife.
Above both star and sun,
Shall it be lost or won ?
4 See that fair wreath unfading.
The promised Crown of life,
The prize for those who wrestle,
5 See that bright throne where sitteth
The Son of God on high,
Who fought for us our battle.
And won our victory.
Above both star and sun,
Shall it be lost or won ?
6 See that resplendent city,
The holy and the blest,
The King’s own royal dwelling,
The heritage of rest.
Above both star and sun,
Shall it be lost or won ?
A RETROSPECT.
A few months since prizes were offered in Kind Words for the best
poem on the Centenary. It was thought desirable to direct the attention
of the readers to this great movement, and it was hoped that some
young author might make some contribution to the literature of the
period. How far the latter hope has been realised may be judged be
the following poem by Miss Lottie Sutton, of Oakham, to whom was
awarded the First Prize -
Here may I stand and hear again, for vanished childhood’s sake.
The ever swelling, sinking, hum which childish voices make,
That read the songs of bard sublime, or thoughts of kingly sage,
While tiny fingers trace the words across the God-writ page.


“ And thou shaft teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt
talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by
the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.
“ And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall
be as frontlets between thine eyes.”—Deut. vi. i, 2,6, 7, 8.


* Passages enclosed [ ] may be omitted if desired.
[ * Not only were the statutes and ordinances to be taught the children
in private, but it was provided that the young should have a part in the
public reading of God’s law.
“ And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons
of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and unto all the
elders of Israel.
“And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
“When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God in the
place which He shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel in
their hearing.
“ Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may
learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of
this law ;
“ And that their children, which have not known anything, may hear,
and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as ye live in the land whither
ye go over Jordan to possess it.” —Deux. xxxi. 9-13.
This was shortly before the death of Moses. He expounded God’s
law ; he then burst forth into song at the remembrance of God’s mercy
(Deut. xxxii.), and at the end, as though he would emphasise his last
words, that they might never be forgotten, it is recorded :
“ And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which I
testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law.”—Deux, xxxii. 46.]
Nor were the words of Moses forgotten, for the Lord graciously
provided for the children after His servant departed. Thus, when
Israel passed over Jordan, the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying :
“ Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,
“'And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of
J ordan, out of the place where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones,
and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging
place, where ye shall lodge this night.
“Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of I srael, out of every tribe a man :
“ And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the Lord your
God into the midst of Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone
upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children
of Israel:
“ That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones ?
“Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the Lord ; when it passed over J ordan,
the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be for a
memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.”— Joshua iv. 2-7.
Shall not we, who have so much more of God’s revealed word, cherish
it with all our hearts. A hymn in its praise well becomes us.


lEontgomeru.
J. Stanley.
No. 210, “ Union Tune Book."
2 The Bible! the Bible! blest volume of truth,
How sweetly it smiles on the season of youth !
It bids us seek early the pearl of great price,
Ere the heart is enslaved in the bondage of vice.
3 The Bible! the Bible! we hail it with joy,
“ Its truths and its glories our tongues shall employ;
We’ll sing of its triumphs, well tell of its worth,
And send its glad tidings afar o’er the earth.
4 The Bible! the Bible! the valleys shall ring,
And hill-tops re-echo the notes that we sing;
Our banner, inscribed with its precepts and rules,
Shall long wave in triumph, the joy of our schools.
And in this spirit we desire to raise to-day memorial stones of God’s
mercies. We seek to celebrate the memory of Raikes ; not so much to
sound his praise, as to remind ourselves and our children of God’s mercy
to us in putting it into the heart of His servant to plant a seed, which has
now grown into a mighty tree, and whose leaves are for the healing of the
nations ; and if, by and bye, our children shall say to us “ what mean ye
by these services ? ” or, whilst looking at the statue of Robert Raikes,
shall enquire, “ What mean ye by this statue ? ” we will reply that these
are a memorial of God’s goodness to the children in the past, and a
pledge that we will still further seek His grace to do more for them in the
future.


PUBLIC READING OF THE LAW.
God not only gave his ancient people the law, but He made provision
for its being made known, in the hearing of the congregation, both grown
jj ) up people and children, and in a manner that should be impressive.
> Thus at the assembly of the children of mount Ebal and mount Gerizim.
f “ Ail Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on
f) this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which
bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger, as he that
was born among them ; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and
half of them over against mount Ebal.
“ And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cur-
sings according to all that is written in the book of the law.
“There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read
not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the little
ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.” — Joshua viii.
33-35-
Let us, following this antiphonal reading of the law, in like manner
praise God, from another portion of His Holy word.
gr. Crotch's Chant
ist Choir.
1. Praise ye the Lord | from the | heavens ;|| Praise | .. Him [ in the ] heights.
2. Praise ye Him, 1 all His | angels: II Praise | ye Him, | all His | hosts.
2nd Choir.
PSALM CXLVIII.
3. Praise ye Him, | sun and j moon: II Praise Him, \ all ye | stars of ] light.
4. Praise Him, ye | heaven of) heavens, 11 And ye waters that (be a- | bove
the | heavens.
ISt s.'Let them praise the | name-of the ] Lord: II For He commanded, | and
they 1 were ere- ) ated.
6. Pie hath also stablished them for [ ever and | ever: || He hath made
de- | cree which ] shall not ] pass.
2nd Choir.
d Choir.
7. Praise the Lord' | from the J earth, |] Ye | dragons, and | all j deeps
8. Fire, and hail ; j snow, and | vapours; 11 Stormy j wind ful- | filling His |
word:
Ist Choir.
9. Mountains, and | all | hills; II Fruitful 1 trees, and | all | cedars:


10. Beasts, and ] all | cattle; ]| Creeping j things, and j fly. . ing | fowl:
and Choir. ,—„ _
11. Kings of the Earth, and [ all j people; |] Princes, and all ] judg. .es[ of
the | Earth :
12. Both young men, and maidens; j old-men, and [ children : y Let them |
praise the | name-of the | Lord.
Full Choir.
13. For His name a- j lone is | excellent; 11 His glory is a- [ hove the | earth
and | heaven.
14. He also exaiteth the horn of His people, the praise of | all His | saints; 11
Even of the children of Israel, a | peo .. pie j near unto [ Him.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and | ev. . er j shall be; 11 World 1
with. . out 1 end. A- ) men.
That God has need of the service of children, He has graciously shown
in every age.
We are never tired of reading of the call of Samuel, not only for the
sake of the beauty of the story, but also because of its special encourage-
ment to those who are engaged in Sunday School work.
“ The word of the Lord was precious in those days,” and when it was
heard it came addressed usually to God’s chosen leaders and priests.
But here, in His own temple, at the still evening hour, it came, not to
Eli, who was at hand, but to a little child, who ministered to Him in some
humble service; and because his childish capacity was not able to receive
the heavenly message at first, it was repeated three times, until u The
Lord came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel.
Then Samuel answered, Speak ; for thy servant heareth.” 1 Sam. iii. 10.
With this assurance of God’s willingness to accept now the ministry of
children, however humble, we will toil on, doing our utmost to win the
young for Jesus, assured that He is always ready and waiting to receive
them.
In times past there have been good men like Eli, wdio were slow to
perceive that the Lord calls the children ; but let it be our duty anu
earnest effort to be able in all our classes to point to witnesses of the
truth that God is now calling children to His service.
In every age God has had some who have loved the young, not only for
what they were, but for what they were to be ; and who have realised that
the hope of any nation lies in its children. Hence David and others
were anxious that God’s decrees should be lodged in the hearts of the
young, that they might thus be best preserved for His glory and the
welfare of the world. This care is expressed in the seventy-eighth
Psalm.*
“ Give ear, O my people, to my law : incline your ears to the words of
my mouth,
* 'The reader and the choir may read these verses alternately.


“ That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of
He came as a child, that He might the better endear Himself to chil-
dren. He was Himself a boy that we might realise how thoroughly He
enters into the ways, the wants, the aspirations and the longings of
youth ; and He is waiting to enter into young hearts, that thus their
boyhood and girlhood with all their fresh impulses, activities, unsullied
affections, and bright and merry temperaments, may be sanctified to His
Ip r p r H
Up - lift your loud ho - san - nas To Je - sus, Lord and King:
jpi _i J | J -<sj- -jgLj
12


2 ’Tis good for boys and maidens
Sweet hymns to Christ to sing,
’Tis meet that children’s voices
Should praise the children’s King;
For Jesus is salvation,
And glory, grace, and rest;
To babe, and boy, and maiden,
The one Redeemer blest.
O maidens, live for J esus,
Who was a maiden’s son;
Be patient, pure, and gentle.
And perfect grace begun.
4 Soon in the golden city
The boys and girls shall play,
And through the dazzling mansions
Rejoice in endless day;
O Christ, prepare Thy children,
With that triumphant throng,
3 O boys, be strong in J esus,
To toil for Him is gain,
And Jesus wrought with Joseph,
With chisel, saw, and plane;
To pass the burnished portals,
And sing the eternal song.
That scene, “ when mothers of Salem their children brought to Jesus,”
must ever stand out as the Divine warrant for all who would train the
young for Him. He took advantage of even the occasion of the disciples’
opposition to emphasise His love for the young : and to the disciples’
want of appreciation of their Master’s nature and mission we owe the
gracious declaration, “ Suffer the children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.”
CHRIST AND THE LITTLE ONES.
“ The Master has come over Jordan,”
Said Hannah, the mother, one day;
‘ ‘ He is healing the people who throng Him,
With a touch of His finger, they say.
“ And now I shall carry the children—-
Little Rachel, and Samuel, and John —
I shall carry the baby, Esther,
For the Lord to look upon.”
The father looked at her kindly,
But he shook his head and smiled :
“ Now who but a doting mother
Would think of a thing so wild ?


“ If the children were tortured by demons,
Or dying of fever, ’twere well ;
Or had they the taint of a leper,
Like many in Israel.’’
“ Nay, do not hinder me, Nathan,
I feel such a burden of care,
If I carry it to the Master,
Perhaps I shall leave it there.
“ If He lay His hands on the children
My heart will be lighter, I know.
For a, blessing for ever and ever
Will follow them as they go.”
So over the hills of Judah,
Along by the vine-rows green,
With Esther asleep on her bosom,
And Rachel her brothers between;
’Mid the people who hung on His teaching,
Or waited His touch and His word—
Through the row of proud Pharisees listening,
She pressed to the feet of the Lord.
“ Now why shouldest thou hinder the Master,”
Said Peter, “ with children like these ?
Seest not how from morning to evening
He teacheth and healeth disease?”
The Christ said, “ Forbid not the children,
Permit them to come unto Me ! ”
And He took in His arms little Esther,
And Rachel He set on His knee.
And the heavy heart of the mother
Was lifted all earth-care above,
As He laid His hand on the brothers.
And blest them with tenderest love ;
As He said of the babes in His bosom,
“ Of such are the Kingdom of Heaven.”
And strength for all duty and trial
That hour to her spirit was given.
Jwlia Gill.
And Jesus is still as tender and loving to children. He still says,
u Suffer them to come unto Me.”


(Staffer the little Chilton.
Rev. Paxton Hood.
A. L. A.
z rV 1 r-r i* t~ r
j. f God, who hath made the daisies, An d ev-’ry love-ly thing, TI , /p^
\ He will accept our prais-es, And hearken while we sing, ) Gesays(tno we are
~L_ .j—fj - J|_j J j-^rj
sim - ple.Tho’ ig - no-rant we be), “Srtf-fer the lit-tie cM-dxen, And
-jg 1 -p 1 - : g* • -]£ -ft ft -p- J o
_ __[ o M I I | slowly.
rrff r r 1 1 1 . 1
I let them come to Me. ” “Suf-fcrthe lit-tie chil-dren, And let them come to Me. ” \ A
2 Though we are young and simple,
In praise we may be bold ;
The children in the temple.
He heard in days of old.
And if our hearts are humble,
He says to you and me,
‘ ‘ Suffer the little children,
And let them come to Me."
3 He sees the bird that wingeth
Its way o'er earth and sky ;
He hears the lark that singeth
Up in the heaven so high ;
But sees the heart’s low breathings,
And says (well pleased to see),
‘ ‘ Suffer the little children,
And let them come to Me."
4 Therefore we will come near Him,
And solemnly we’ll sing ;
No cause to shrink, or fear Him,
Well make our voices ring;
For in our temple speaking,
He says to you and me,
“ Suffer the little children,
And let them come to Me,"
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS.
This has always represented Christ’s attitude towards children. His
command has ever been “ Suffer them and forbid them not! ” but alas !
His voice has not been heard. The children have been kept back, the
church for centuries made no special provision for them; her meetings
and services were not adapted for them; her fold was not open to receive
them; her songs were not written for them; her prayers were unintelli-
gible to them. They were not encouraged to join its ranks as children;
her sacred inclosure was too solemn a place for the exercises of boyish
mirth and girlish playfulness: it seemed to frown down exuberance of
spirits as incompatible with grace, and to judge that buoyancy and
mirthfulness were of evil origin.


The children would joyfully sing.
2 And if in this temple of worship,
Where now we are met in His name,
The Lord should appear in His beauty,
Himself His own Gospel proclaim,'
What anthems of grateful devotion
Around Him would echo and ring.
Hosanna ! Hosanna ! Hosanna !


4 And when in the Temple of glory,
Where falls never shadow of night,
Where sorrow and sin never sadden,
But if this was the attitude of the Church towards the young of her own
followers, what had she done for the children altogether beyond her pale ?
We need not go back farther than 1780, and try to realise what was the
condition of Gloucester that moved the heart of Robert Raikes, to find
an answer to this question. We have only to read Gregory’s “ Life of
Raikes ” ; or, later still, the Centenary volume, “ The Day, the Book, and
the Teacher,” just written by Rev. E. Paxton Hood, to understand how
shamefully the Church had neglected her mission to the young.
The most gifted lady poet of this, or, perhaps, of any century,
Mrs. Browning, has written a noble plea for the outcasts of our day :
Can we smooth down the bright hair,
O my sisters, calm, unthrill’d in
Our heart’s pulses ? Can we bear
The sweet looks of our own children.


While these others, lean and small,
Scurf and mildew of the city,
Spot our streets, convict us all,
Till wc take them into pity.
O my sisters r not so much
Are we asked for, not a blossom
From our children’s nosegay, such
As we gave it from our bosom.
But a place in Ragged Schools,
Where the outcasts may to-morrow
Learn by gentle words and rules,
Just the uses of their sorrow.
O my sisters, children small,
Blue-eyed, wailing through our city,
Our own babes cry in them all,
Let us take them into pity.
Our own love for children will be increased when we consider how
tenderly Jesus loved them.
Jesus Wohzh the Chilton,
Rev. Frederick Langbridge.
A. L. A.


2 Jesus loves the children—
Brothers, far and wide
3 Jesus loves the children,
As He loved of old ;
Tell how holy Jesus
Still His kind hands bless them,
Still His arms enfold.
Lived for them and died.
Lead the lambs of J esus
May His mercy keep them,
Till their locks are white,
To His sheltering breast;
Ye, in blessing children,
Trustful little children
In His holy sight.
Shall yourselves be blest.
Quartet, ist verse, /,
1, p ; 3rd, by Full Ghoir.
ROBERT RAIKES.
But with what greater reason might the poet have urged this on Christians
a hundred years ago. Then in Gloucester, under the very walls of her
Cathedral, and within daily notice of the Dean, Chapter, and all her
clergy, played, and fought and gambled, the despised and forsaken and
outcast children of the city, without so much as a thought in the
minds of her ecclesiastics that they were children for whom Christ died ;
without so much as a suspicion that the Church was in any way
responsible for them, and, therefore, without so much as putting forth a
single effort to save them.
At length the heart of Robert Raikes was touched : he who had been
moved by the condition of the prisons and prisoners, and whose pen had
been active in this noble cause, turned his attention to the waifs and
strays of his native city. He soon interested others, and notably the
Rev. Thomas Stock, the clergyman of his own parish : and to the lasting
honour of this good man be it known, that he worked afterwards as a
willing and valued coadjutor of Raikes.
Children were then gathered into rooms on the Lord’s Day and taught
to read God’s Word. Friends came forward—for Raikes used the Glotc-
cester Journal, of which he was editor and proprietor, to help on the
cause —but not in sufficient numbers as voluntary workers, and so pay-
ments were made to the teachers of a shilling a week. The work soon
spread. Raikes by his journal and by his letters, and the earty helpers
by their personal influence, made the work known ; and in many places
it needed but the suggestion, and the quickening of earnest example to
cause the gathering in of the children on Sunday to hear and read God’s
word.
Love for the young has been always a characteristic of God’s people ;
and in that day there were many whose hearts were animated with a new
fervour, as they saw a way of leading them to Christ. This open door
gave them cause for loftier praise, as they sang the hymns and tunes
common to the period—such as :


Behold I sit
In willing bonds
Before Thy feet.
He feeds His flock,
He calls their names,
His bosom bears
The tender lambs.
Thine is the power


* Some of these extracts may be omitted, if desired.
In 1786, a work appeared, entitled “ A Comprehensive View of Sunday
Schools, for the use of the more indigent Inhabitants of Cities, Towns,
and Villages,” by Jonas Hanway. This shows that public attention was
being drawn to the Institution : -but it will be interesting to note how
narrow a view of the Sunday School was entertained by its founders and
early patrons. We quote from Mr. Hanway’s book : —*
[“ It is most proper to begin the school duty at a certain time with prayer. If it be
short it can be no impediment to the giving instruction in reading, and it certainly will
be a means of promoting the dignity and efficiency of the Sunday morning assemblage,
to usher it in with such a solemnity : but no scholar should be put on this duty till he
or she can read well, and has previously studied the prayer, so as to comprehend the
meaning of it. Till this can be done, the master or mistress, if they are wise, will per-
form such part of the duty, even to consult the clergyman as to the proper
emphasis and expression.”
“I conceive that no school in city, town, or village, should, on any consideration,
exceed the number of thirty : I rather wish to see them confined to twenty scholars,
that so much the more justice may be done them. The example of schools for the
higher classes of the people, where the computation is made on how much may be
gained by the greater number, can be no rule in this case. In our humble attempt, we
must attend to the humble instruments we have to work with. It may be also con-
sidered, that in very few places will there be any public room, where the children can
be assembled, and the apartments of the teacher will be generally small. In the
metropolis the smaller number is recommended, with a view to their being accommodated
at church ; in general the most fit number seems to be twenty.”]
“When they have learnt to read, to say their prayers and their catechism, they
may flourish more naturally under the roof of their parents; and therefore,
the sooner they are returned to them, to show an example to their brothers
and sisters, the better, provided such persons are sober persons ; otherwise, it may be
most prudent to invite the children to attend the school for the longer time every
Sunday, at least to accompany the scholars to church.”
‘ ‘ If persons of fortune and leisure had entered into the duties of parochial offices,
it is probable the institutions of Sunday Schools might not have been necessary ; but
taking things as they are, whether the remedy be found in one expedient or another,
it is something that stands in the place of a moral sense of liberty, as well as religion,
suited to our laws and constitution, and may prove a more excellent expedient than
coercive power, which cannot extend to the mind.”
With our cheap Bibles and with our present lessons it is somewhat
amusing to read of the fears which agitated our forefathers with regard
to the reading of the Scriptures. Mr. Hanway says :
* ‘ The greater part of our teachers in schools present children with the sacred
volume at so very tender an age that they cannot be supposed to understand, and,
consequently, relish it. The practice seems to be attended with many disagreeable,
and some pernicious, consequences ; for it is apt to create a disrelish, especially where
the task is large, and nothing considered but the quantity of reading, which of all
absurdities is the greatest. It is not only the sentiment, but the language, which must
render the Scriptures, in general, the least fit book for the first study of children,
except it be in short, detached lessons. By degrees some whole chapters may be pre-
sented to them, but those should be chosen with accurate discrimination. Nothing;
can be more impolitic than to render the Scriptures cheap, whether in the eyes of
children or adults.”


Some of the early teachers had very primitive notions of discipline ;
they evidently had not realised the duty of making the Sunday School
full of all manner of attractions, and free from all that would be likely to
be distasteful and repellant. From a minute book of a Sunday School in
Leicestershire, at the beginning of the century, we find that a log, weigh-
ing nearly seven pounds, was used for fastening round the ankles of
disorderly scholars, and that, to increase the punishment, the culprit was
sometimes required to stand on one leg, with the log as a pendant. Other
punishments consisted of holding heavy weights, weai'ing paper caps,
and labels announcing the offence for which punishment was meted out.
DEVELOPMENT OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
But we must hasten on. Having dwelt on the opening we have no
time to trace the course of Sunday Schools. A cause which enlisted the
sympathies of good men and women would necessarily be embraced by
new methods from time to time. In 1831 the celebration of the Jubilee
of Sunday Schools brought the work into greater prominence. There
are some living who remember taking some part in that memorable
event: and perhaps its recollections are even brighter than the medals
which they wore on that occasion. The influences of that celebration were
far reaching : it gave an impetus to the work of the Sunday School which
has been of inestimable advantage. The chief actors in those scenes
have been called to their reward, but their work remains. We will sing
the hymns written for the occasion by Mrs. Gilbert and James Mont-
gomery to the tunes which were then sung, and, as far as we can, in the
way they were then rendered ; and, as we sing, we will pray that the
music of our work and of our lives may remain when we are gone. We
will take Mrs. Gilbert’s hymn first, to the old tune Arabia.
[ The audience may be requested to unite in singing these two hymns. ]
Mrs. Gilbert. 30, “ Union*Tune Book.”
I—H r■ f H rr*
1. Theflow’rsof fif -ty summers gone, The leaves that then were green
. . j 1 -h 1 1 1 1 iii 1 ,


2 The busy sights have passed away,
The merry din has died ;
Millions of hearts, then young and gay,
The quiet grave doth hide !
3 But, like a living, precious seed,
Dropped on a fruitful clod,
A thought of mercy came, to lead
The poor man’s child to God.
4 Like a lone husbandman, forlorn,
The man of Gloucester went,
Bearing his seed of precious corn,
And God the blessing sent.
5 Now, watered long by faith and prayer,
From year to year it grows ;
Till heath, and hill, and desert bare
Have blossomed like the rose.
6 And thus in cheerful ranks arrayed,
Our tens of thousands meet;
Lord of the harvest, bless the blade,
And keep from tares the wheat.
We will now ask the Choir to
James Montgomery’s hymn to the
tune Lydia, the audience joining in the last two verses.
James Montgomery.
295, “ Union Tune Book.”
2 From little ones, to Jesus brought,
Hosanna now be heard ;
Let infants at the breast be taught
To lisp that lovely word.
4 Hosanna sound from hill to hill,
And spread from plain to plain ;
While louder, sweeter, clearer still,
Woods echo to the strain.
3 Hosanna—here in joyful bands
Maidens and youths proclaim ;
And hail with voices, hearts, and hands,
The Son of David’s name.
5 Hosanna—on the wings of light
O’er earth and ocean fly,
Till morn to eve, and noon to night,
And heaven to earth reply.


* When possible, this hymn should be sung by teachers only.
We need not stop to detail the successive steps made in the advance-
ment of Sunday Schools since that day. Those of us now teachers
who were once scholars will be able to give God thanks that He has put
it into the hearts of His servants to devote themselves to #he work, so
that now in the matter of educated teachers, of teachers who prepare their
lessons, of the supply of notes and lesson helps, of school material and of
school buildings, we may well say, “ what hath God wrought ? ” A
mere recital of the barest figures as to the number comprehended in the
Sunday School system should fill our hearts with grateful joy.
In England, in connection with our own Sunday School Union, there
are 13 Metropolitan Auxiliaries, 198 Local Unions, embracing 105,937
teachers, and 964,305 scholars. In connection with other institutions there
probably are as many as will raise the total number of teachers to
300,000 and the total number of scholars to 3,000,000. The Conti-
nental work of the Sunday School Union is still in its infancy, but there
are already many missionaries and agents employed in establishing and
consolidating Sunday Schools, whose far reaching influence on the young
in the vast countries of Europe it will be impossible adequately to est£
mate. Perhaps the greatest proof of the hold that the institution has
on Christendom is found in the establishment and success of the Inter-
national Lesson system. At the present time most of us here, with the
majority of the Sunday Schools in America, many on the Continent
of Europe, in our vast Colonial Empire, in Norway, Sweden, and
Denmark, and in mission stations all the world over, are engaged
Sabbath by Sabbath in studying and expounding the same portions
of God’s saving truth. Verily the International Lesson system has put
a girdle round the earth, which binds us all in glad and voluntary
bands to God’s word. We have entered this year on another seven
years’ course, in which all the main parts of the Bible will be traversed,
week by week, in preparation and Bible classes ; at week evening ser-
vices, attention will be directed to the lesson of the following Sabbath ;
some of the ablest Bible expositors of all denominations will be, either by
speech or pen, giving others the benefit of their labours; and yet, with all
the help that is provided for teachers, there never was so much earnest
Bible study as there is to-day. Happy they whose privilege it is to break
the Bread of Life unto others.


Not to angels hath been granted
The dear flock of God to keep ;
Not to them hath the chief Shepherd
Ever spoken “ Feed my sheep ; ”
Not to angels by the Master
“ Feed My lambs ” was ever said ;
Not by angels are they gathered,
Are they tended, are they fed.
3 Not to angels are committed
The green pastures of the flock ;
Not to them the quiet waters,
Nor the shadow of the rock.
Not to angel love belongeth
The sweet balm for sorrows deep ;
For the angels never sorrow,
And the angels never weep.
4
They are wise, and strong, and holy,
On their errands well they speed";
But they may not teach a pardon '
Which they do not, cannot need. K
They are careful, tender, loving,
As God’s ministering host;
But they cannot preach a gospel
Which is only for the lost. M
o
Not to angels, but to sinners,
Is the great commission given y
Now to point their fellow wanderers C
To the open gate of heaven. t
And to us, who once have wandered, g
It is given to show the road v '
To the fold of rest and safety, A
To the blessed home of God. (“
COLLATERAL RESULTS.
In celebrating the founding of the Sunday School institution, it is well
we should see what are some of its collateral results. The Rev. J.
Comper Gray,* reminds us that in the Evangelical Magazine for 1799 is
the following account of the cause that led to the founding of the Religious
Tract Society:—“Thousands who would have remained grossly illiterate
having, through the medium of Sunday Schools, been enabled to read, it
it is an object of growing importance widely to diffuse such publications
as are calculated to make that ability an unquestioned privilege.” When
See Sunday School Chronicle, August, 1879.


we think of the vast sphere of usefulness which that Society now occupies,
it is our duty gratefully to remember the causes that called it into existence.
We have all heard how the little Welsh Sunday scholars toilsome journey-
ing on the Sabbath to hear God’s word which she could not possess for
herself, led the Rev. Mr. Charles to go to London to see if something could
not be done for Wales, and how his efforts led to the establishment of the-
British and Foreign Bible Society. When we think of the untold benefits
which this society has diffused ; when we consider how much all our great
religious societies owe to the teaching of the Sunday School ; when we
try to realise how the pulpit of this and other lands and how the ranks:
of the missionaries have been recruited from the Sunday School; when;
we attempt to appreciate how much the Church is indebted to the Sunday
Schools for many of its most active members, and the nation at large for
its most orderly and law abiding- citizens, we are constrained to thank God
that the little one has become a thousand.
But our retrospect will fail if it ends only in congratulation, it must
lead on to consecration. We best honour the memories of those who have
begun a good work, by carrying it on in the spirit of self-devotion with
which they set it in motion, but to higher and wider issues that any they
ever conceived. It would be impossible to estimate to what extent every-
one here is indebted to the Sunday School; we should not only have to
try and trace it on our own training, but to comprehend how far it had
affected our pious ancestors. Standing here to-day the heirs of past
generations shall we not seek to realise our duty, and desire earnestly
to discharge it. We have seen what the Sunday School was in its initial
stage ; thank God we know what it is in its present improved position.
Let it be our prayer , our effort , our care , our life-work to make this
beneficent institution better for those who are now educated therein,
and for those who shall come hereafter.
§abiour, blesaeb §abiour
G. Turing.
J. P. Harding.
Not too fas.


After each verse.
5 Onward, ever onward,
Journeying o’er the road
Worn by saints before us,
Journeying on to God ;
Leaving all behind us,
May we hasten on,
Backward never looking
Till the prize is won.
6 Higher then, and higher,
Bear the ransomed soul,
Earthly toils forgotten,
Saviour, to its goal;
Where, in joys unthought of,
Saints with angels sing,
Never weary, raising
Praises to their King,
2 Nearer, ever nearer,
Christ, we draw to Thee,
Deep in adoration
Bending low the knee.
Thou, for our redemption,
Cam’st on earth to die ;
Thou, that we might follow,
Hast gone up on high.
3 Great, and ever greater.
Are Thy mercies here ;
True and everlasting
Are the glories there :
Where no pain or sorrow,
Toil or care is known ;
Where the angel legions
Circle round Thy throne.
4 Clearer still, and clearer
Dawns the light from heaven,
In our sadness bringing
News of sins forgiven ,
Life has lost its shadows,
Pure the light within ;
Thou hast shed Thy radiance
On a world of sin.
IMPROVEMENT.
There are two ways of improvement; one is to improve the actual, the
other is to elevate the ideal. Both methods are good, and should be tried
at the same time. As officers, teachers, or scholars we may do much by
making the best use of that which already exists, by the faithful discharge
of duties as they now lie to our hand ; but in doing so we shall constantly
be presenting to ourselves and to others a loftier and more excellent ideal.
We have taken a long retrospect this evening—back through the vista of a
hundred years ; may we not, in conclusion, take a forward look, and what
see we on the horizon I The Sunday School everywhere recognised as
the mission of the Church to the young, of which the pastor is, of neces-
sity, the head ; to which, equally of necessity, every Church member
stands-related, and for which he must bear his share of responsibility.
What will this involve ? A collective and an individual interest in the
welfare of the School, so that all will be anxious, by relieving their pastor,
if needs be, of other duties, and, by exercising self-denial, to help him to
have an oversight of the lambs, and devote some special time to prepare
those of his flock who must be his deputies on the Sabbath.


7,' I £»
! 1 U
I—4 1-
W hat will this involve ? A pressing into the school of the Churches’
ablest, best, most cultured, most experienced members.
What will this involve ? The attendance of the young people of the
Church of all social grades : for the Sunday School is not a charitable
institution merely for the children of poor or irreligious parents, but it
is th & Bible service of the Church in which the rich and poor should as
much meet together, (the Lord being maker of them all,) as in His sanc-
tuary. What will this involve ? The school will lose its elemental, its
juvenile, its temporary character, and it will become invested with a
permanent, a home-like, a life-long association, so that all classes will
enter it as infants, go up through its graded classes, and then settle in its
higher classes as Bible students, unless the work of the school demands
their teaching, or official help ; and these thus called will feel their work
to be as sacred a trust, and needing as careful and as prayerful prepara-
tion as that which the ministry of the pulpit involves. Already in the
north of England and in Wales large numbers of adults are found in
Bible classes, and there may be seen in many schools three generations
at the same time. Our motto then must be “ Forward.”
'rrrrir r r f i -»■
Who shall dream of shrink-ing, By our Cap-tain led ? Forward, through the de - sert,
j . p
28


2 Forward, when in childhood
Buds the infant mind ;
All through youth and manhood,
Not a thought behind;
Speed through realms of nature,
Climb the steps of grace;
Faint not, till in glory
Gleams our Father’s face.
Forward, all the life time,
Climb from height to height.
Till the head be hoary,
Till the eye be light.
4
Glories upon glories
Hath our God prepared,
By the souls that love Him
One day to be shared;
Eye hath not beheld them,
Ear hath never heard ;
Nor of these hath uttered
Thought or speech a word.
Forward, ever forward,
Clad in armour bright,
Till the veil be lifted,
Till our faith be sight.
3 Forward, flock of Jesus,
Salt of all the earth,
Far o’er yon horizon
Rise the city towers,
Where our God abideth,
That fair home is ours;
Flash the streets with jasper,
Shine the gates with gold;
Flows the gladdening river,
Shedding joys untold.
Thither, onward thither,
In the Spirit’s might;
Pilgrims to your country,
Forward into light.
Till each yearning purpose
Spring to glorious birth;
Sick, they ask for healing,
Blind, they grope for day.
Pour upon the nations
Wisdom’s loving ray:
Forward, out of error,
Leave behind the night;
Forward, through the darkness.
Forward into light.
If the Sunday School be elevated to its proper position, we shall
have pastors, office-bearers, the Church collectively and individually, all
interested in promoting its welfare, and all anxious to be found in some
way engaged for its advancement. Those of us who are already engaged rjK
may determine that this Centenary
year shall witness our more entire
cers, teachers, or scholars, and those
consecration, whether as pastors, officers.
es in it may feel that the work is so
to demand their willing service.
' mission to the young beyond her
who have not yet interested themselves
holy, so urgent, so comprehensive as
Then shall the Church realise
pale ; then shall she be yearningly anxious for those who are growing up n t
around her, without any thought of their Father in Heaven, without any
conception of His gracious purposes concerning them. There are mil-
lions of children still unsaved, for whom Christ died ; and it is His will ‘"‘f,
that not one of His little ones should perish. ' >T
Not content with having the children of the church, we must gather
these others into mission schools, and tell them of a Saviour’s love.
Then there are the children of the lands lying in heathen darkness, to
whom the knowledge of “The Light of the World” must be sent ; and
how are our missionary societies to be sustained, much less increased,
unless ia our Sunday Schools there be planted the seed which shall result
in missionary zeal and love, and personal consecration to the service.


Audren. © lltu i\xh . * Haydn.
"Church'S. S. Hymn Book. ' s°4’ Union Tune Book Supplement. ”
f f f | f’ 1 ' M I 4- ‘rt- 4
Hark, the swell-ing breez - es, Ris-ingTrom a - far, Bring the sounds of
£ g * ~p~ rj .j J J J -«t .c.
2 Go, thou mighty Gospel,
Conquering on thy way !
Night upon the mountains
Changes into day ;
1 dols bow before thee,
Heathen temples fall:
Soon the world shall own thee
Victor over all.
3 O Thou blessed Saviour,
Reigning now on high,
May Thy faithful soldiers
Find Thee ever nigh ;
Bid their glorious mission
Spread from sea to sea,
Till the whole creation
Worship only Thee.
Verily the strength of the Church and the hope of the world lie in the
Sunday School. Shall we not all seek, by personal devotion and by holier
consecration, to do all we can to
There may be other festivities
deepen and extend its influence.
and other centenaries : may we so live in
the conscientious use and enjoyment of our privileges, that we who have
received so much from others may hand on the sacred trust improved.
At any rate there will be one day a gathering grander than any before
held, a celebration more glorious than any before observed, when Jesus
the King shall come and call His own from every kingdom and clime.
Shall we all take part in that ? Teachers and scholars from every land,
and from all ages, will gather there. Raikes will meet some of those he
first taught in his Sunday School. Will our teachers meet us ? Will
they have the blessedness of saying, “Behold the children whom the Lord
hath given me.” ("Isa. viii. 18.) Then will be sung the song of the ages and
of eternity, “Worthy is the lamb that was slain to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.”
(Rev., v. 12.)
For that never-ending song in Heaven there will be needed a life-longpre-
parationhere; “and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty
and four thousand who were redeemed from the earth ” (Rev. xiv. 3).
May we all seek the help of God’s Holy Spirit that our hearts and lives
may be attuned to His service here, so shall we praise Him for ever and
for evermore ! Amen !
* The audience are requested to join in singing this hymn.


. . © |3rakc 1-c the Jorh.
UoUUy. In unison. * v —'
Chorus.
i~*i *!—g- S ■£- »v. Sr
r■* o i i i i
■f f 3 *- -p- ®'« -ij*- i i fi Ir 1 oil i i
O praise ve the Lord, let us mag-ni -fv His .name, O praise ye the
I I oil W- J I J ' PI I I ! I
. f 10 I S *S tS- • ■»*» "S -®-
“T rFr f L r r i r - f > !
Lord, let us mag -ni - fy His name ; O praise ye the Lord, let us
_A!il.ll J . J m I i
I I * I j, I I 1 — I I
mag- ni -fy His name, O praise ye the Lord, let us mag-ni -fy His name.
: 4- S hi- -f -d- *»- -*>- ! I J_ L ! J J
AzV to be sung by Childi'en's voices ifpossible ; Choral Accovtp .to be sung softly and in exact time.
Air. Andante.
111 I J I
0 ® « -s- - g -
loves to be re - mem-bered thus, And hon-ouredfor His grace
Ivy Voo LU U C AC “ i.llClll'L'Cl CLI tltlloj xxllG tv/i XXlo f
'f 'I ■
Praise the Lord, praise the Lord, mag-ni -fy His ho -ly name.


S \ 6u» o


H«Btc far % pome Circle.
The Juvenile Harmonist. Cloth Boards, 2 5.; half-bound, 2 s. 6d.
A Collection of 148 Times and Pieces for Children, Arranged for Two Trebles
and a Bass.
Select Music for the Young. Cloth boards, 2 s. Consists of
176 Tunes with Words, adapted for Social Gatherings.
Song Ministry. Parts I. and 11. Large 4to, beautifully Illustrated.
Price i.e. 4 d. each. Containing all the Songs of Mi - . Philip Phillips, as sung
by him at his Evenings of Sacred Song. Arranged for a Single Voice, with
Pianoforte Accompaniment. Parts I. and 11. bound together, cloth, price
2s. Bd. ; gilt extra, 5.?.
77ie Words to the Song Ministry may be had separate, with the Hymns used
at Mr. Phillips’s Song Sermons. 128 pages, paper cover, price 4 d.; cloth, 6d.
The Chimes. First and Second Series. Illustrated, is. each.
A Collection of Copyright and other pieces. Words and Music.
Music for the Little Ones. Cloth, 6d. A Collection of Choice
Pieces suitable for use in the Nursery, or among the Children at Home.
Ithisit for Sdjoal JftstMs, iatljirinfs,
mtir lateral to.
The American Sacred Songster. Edited by Philip Phillips.
Old Notation and Tonic Sol-fa. Limp Cloth, 2s. 6d. ; cloth boards, gilt edges,
A Selection of Music by the best American Composers.
The JYards of the above may be had in a separate form, in paper covers, price 2d.;
cloth, price yl. each.
Song Life. For Sunday Schools. By Philip Phillips. Limp
cloth, 2s. 6d. ; cloth boards, gilt 4s.
7'he Words to the “Song Life ” may be had separately, in paper covers, price 2d.
each; cloth, price 3 d. each.
The English Sacred Songster. Limp cloth, 2s. 6d.-, cloth boards,
gilt, 4s.
The Voice of Song. By Philip Phillips, Limp Cloth, 2 5.;
bevelled boards, gilt, 3.1. 6d.
Songs of Gladness. With Tunes, Original and Selected. In Old
Notation and Tonic Sol-fa. Limp cloth, 2s. ; cloth boards, 2 s. 6d.
The Words of the above may be had separately, as follows : —l6 mo, 2d. paper ; 3 I. limp ;
6 d. cloth, red edges; B d. gilt edges. I.arge Type, limp roan, is. 4 d.
Songs by the Way. A Hymnal for Young Christians and Inquirers,
with Tunes. lump cloth, la. 4 d. ; Words only, paper covers, is. 4 d. per doz.
The Sunday Scholars’ Tune Book. New Edition. Cloth. 25. ;
boards, red edges, 2s. 6 d. each.
The Words may he had i6mo, paper covers, 2d. ; limp cloth, 3 d. Royal, 32 m0, limp
cloth, 6d. ; B d. cloth hoards, red edges; is. paste grain morocco, marble edges.
The Singing Annual, For Sabbath Schools. By Philip Phillips.
Vols. 1,2, and 3. Limp cloth, B d. each.
The Sunday School Singer. A Course of Instruction in the
Tonic Sol-fa Method, for Sunday Schools. Edited by John Curwen. 6d.


aEIu- CcntcmuTi Celebration
WORKS PREPARED BY THE
SUNDAY SCHOOL UNION,
56, OLD BAILEY, LONDON.
THE SUNDAY SCHOOL CENTENARY, 1880. An Address
I to Scholars. By Ancient Simeon. With Engravings. Price One Penny, or
Sr. per 100.
STEPPING STONES; A Centenary Address to Teachers. By
Benjamin Clarice, Price One Penny, or Sr. per 100.
ROBERT RAIKES AND HIS SCHOLARS. By Mrs. H. B.
Pauli., Author of “Miss Herbert’s Keys,” “Breaking the Rules,” “Walter’s
Mistake,” &c. With Engravings. Price ir. 6d., cloth boards.
The day, the book, and the teacher, a
Centenary Memorial. By Edwin Paxton Hood, Minister of Cavendish Chapel,
Manchester. {ln the Press. )
THE CENTENARY SERVICE OF SONG. Compiled by
Benjamin Clarke. Music selected and arranged by W. E. Abel. Price
Threepence.
ROBERT RAIKES, the Man of Gloucester. A Musical
Memoir. Compiled for ihc Sunday School Centenary. By Rev. E. Paxton
Hood, Minister of Cavendish Chapel, Manchester. Music harmonized by CHARLES
11. Fogg. Price Fourtenck.
ROBERT RAIKES, Journalist and Philanthropist. A
History of the Origin of Sunday Schools. By Alfred Gregory. Svo, cloth
boards. Price j.r. 6</.
WORKS ON SCHOOL HISTORY.
First Fifty Years of the Sunday School. By W. H. Watson.
Svo, limp cloth, is. 4 d. ; 2s. cloth boards.
The Sunday School Union. By the late W. H. Watson. With
Portraits of the Pioneers in the Sunday School Cause. Cloth hoards, 2s. 6d. Sets
foith the History and Work of the Sunday School Union ; and contains A Memorial
Sketch of the Author, by \V. 11. Groser, B. Sc.
