

“The Hospitals Act of
1923”
As Amended by “ The Hospitals Act
Amendment Act of 1928 ”
Analysis and Examination of Financial
Scheme of Act, and of Alternative
Taxation Proposals Advanc'eax
By the Honourable' JAMES STOPFORD. M.L.A.,
HOME'SECRETARY.
ANTHONY JAMES GUMMING. Government Printer, Brisbane


“The Hospitals Act of 1923” as amended by “The
Hospitals Act Amendment Act of 1928.”
Foreword.
There has been, perhaps, no Act which has been so freely criticised
as “The Hospitals Act of 1923,” and surely no criticism which was less
justified or based more upon unsound reasoning and lack of knowledge
of fundamental principles. This criticism has, in the main, been directed
to what has been termed an iniquitous and a class tax, and various
proposals have been advanced by the Opposition in Parliament and by
outside organisations for finding the means to maintain and develop the
Hospital service as alternatives to the scheme of finance embodied in
“The Hospitals Act of 1923.”
It should not be thought that the Government embodied the scheme
in the Act without careful investigation and consideration, and
examination of the varying taxation proposals for the maintenance and
development of the Hospital shows, in some cases, a fantastic view of
the situation.
Both State control (nationalisation) and local control have been
advocated, the consideration of which is, as a rule, governed by the
subject or subjects of taxation adopted—as, for instance, if the subject of
taxation is a local one, .the control should be local, and likewise, if the
subject he a State one, the control should he State (nationalisation).
Having regard to the varying, and, in some cases, conflicting
proposals which have been made, I decided to publish this brief analysis
of the scheme of “The Hospitals Act of 1923,” as amended by “The
Hospitals Act Amendment Act of 1928,” and of the several alternative
taxation proposals advanced, with a view to enabling those interested
to form an intelligent opinion on the complicated hospital tax question.
JAMES STOPFORD,
Home Secretary.
Brisbane, 10th April, 1929.
. * —. 'Y


Analysis and Examination of Financial Scheme of
“The Hospitals Act of 1923” as amended by
“The Hospitals Act Amendment Act of 1928 ”
and of Alternative Taxation Proposals Advanced.
Scheme of “Hospitals Act of 1923“ and “Amending Act of 1928.’’
“The Hospitals Act of 1923” was passed to deal with the position
in Brisbane, but powers were taken to apply the Aet to other Hospitals
if their localities failed to carry on under the voluntary system, and
the Act now applies to the larger Hospitals serving the more populous
areas of the State, and several more requests for its application are now
under consideration.
Under the voluntary system there was no scheme nor any co-ordina-
tion for the provision of Hospital services in well-defined districts.
The new system had for its main objectives the following:—
(а) Development of Hospital services on a district basis, to
- enable such services to be planned, co-ordinated, and
controlled to prevent overlapping and multiplicity of
Hospitals in the district;
(б) Local control and responsibility, by local Hospital Boards
and by requiring local taxation to bear a share of the
cost of the Hospital services;
(c) .Stability of finance; and
( d ) Institution of proper financial methods—budgetting,
separation of capital and maintenance expenditures,
with power to borrow.
The new system therefore provided for the constitution of Hospital
Districts and the placing of all Hospital services in such districts under
the control of a Hospital Board, in which was vested the responsibility
of maintaining and developing the hospitals in its district. The financial
provisions required the budgetting of income and expenditure, and the
separation of capital and maintenance expenditure—the former being
provided by way of loan, properly conditioned as to the life of the work
or service. The latter is provided in the following manner:—At the
commencement of each year the Board has to estimate its maintenance
or annual expenditure, including the annual charges for interest and
redemption of capital expenditure. It has also to estimate its income
from sources of revenue other than Government contributions and local


authority contributions— I comprising chiefly patients’ payments, sundry
incomes, and Golden Casket grant, but does not include donations,
bequests, &c., which are now credited against the precept of the local
authority from whose area such donations, bequests, &c., are received.
The difference between the estimated income and expenditure is divided
between the Government and local authorities in the proportions of
60 per cent, and 40 per cent, respectively. If there is more than one
local authority component in the Hospital District, the share is
distributed amongst them according to their ratable values. Thus, the
tax (the precept has to be paid from the local fund) is an equal tax;
that is to say, if a tax were levied the rate of tax would be the same
throughout the district, and it means, further, that the tax is distributed
amongst the ratepayers in proportion to the value of land, which is a
true application of the well-known and established taxation principle of
“ability to pay.”
Misrepresentation of the Scheme.
In the wholesale condemnation of this scheme of maintenance and
development of the Hospital service, it has been in some cases misrepre-
sented and in others left to be implied that the local authorities have to
find 40 per cent, of the total cost of the Hospital service, whereas they
have only to find 40 per cent, of the deficit, which for the year 1927-28
was only 22 per cent, of the cost of the Hospital service (in all Hospital
Districts). This is less than the amount which had to bejound by the
locality (voluntary subscriptions and efforts) in the same year in respect
of Hospitals still under the voluntary system. Now that donations,
bequests, &c., are to be used in reducing the local authority’s precept,
the locality may now meet its share of the cost of the Hospital service
(which is a local service, just as roads, sewerage, sanitation, water supply,
fire protection, &e., are local services) by voluntary effort as before, and
to the extent that voluntary efforts fail, out of the local fund of the
local authorities, and had this provision been in operation in the year
1927-28 the proportion which had to be met by local taxation would have
been considerably lessened.
The locality’s share of the cost for 1927-28 (22 per cent.) was spread
over 180,857 ratepayers, a number greater than the total adult male
population in all Hospital Districts, whereas under the voluntary system
the number of persons who voluntarily taxed themselves was very
limited. As an illustration, it can be mentioned that the number of
voluntary taxpayers to the three institutions in existence in Maryborough
at the date of the constitution of the Maryborough Hospitals Board was
less than 500, whereas the local share of the cost for the year 1927-28 was
met by 6,626 ratepayers. Further, the proportion contributed by those
who voluntarily taxed themselves was a small proportion of the locality’s
share; the balance had to be raised by special efforts—costly methods of
raising money.


Taxation Proposals to take the Place of the Financial Scheme of “The
Hospitals Act of 1923,” as Amended by “The Hospitals Act
Amendment Act of 1928.”
Proposals made in Parliament —
(1) By Mr. A. E. Moore, Leader of the Country Progressive
Nationalist Party, Leader of the Opposition—
“A tax on income and wages without exemption.” (See
Hansard, 1928, pp. 1295, 1296, 1297.)
(2) By Mr. R. M. King, Deputy Leader of the Country Progressive
Nationalist Party and Deputy Leader of the Opposition—
“A hospital tax on all wages, salaries, and other incomes,
to be made payable in the case of wages and salaries by means
of special stamps, properly cancelled, or by other means suitably
arranged between the employer and the Department, and that
the tax on other incomes be collected through the existing income
tax channels.” (See Hansard, 1928, p. 1308.)
(3) By Mr. W. A. Russell, M.L.A., member of the Opposition—
“A tax on betting and entertainments.” (See Hansard,
1928, p. 1588.)
(4) By Mr. J. P. Fry, M.L.A., member of the Opposition—
“Nationalisation.” (See Hansard, 1928, p. 1334.)
Proposals made outside Parliament—
(s) By the Rockhampton Hospitals Tax Committee—
“A tax on income now exempt, with an exemption of £lOO
only, to be called the Hospital tax.” (Vide circular issued to
local authorities by the Committee on 20th January, 1928, and
submitted to me as Home Secretary, and which, according to
circular sent to me dated 4th February, 1929, has been altered
to—
“A tax on income, with an exemption of £100.”
(6) By the Graziers’ Association —
“A tax on income now exempt, with an exemption of
£lOO only.”
(7) By Local Authorities’ Conference held in August, 1928
(a) “That the Hospitals Act be amended and that a
hospital charge be made payable in the case of wages and
salaries by means of special stamps, properly cancelled, or by
other means suitably arranged between the employer and the
Department, and that the charge on other incomes be collected
through the existing income tax channels”; and
( b ) “That funds necessary for the upkeep of hospitals
be raised by a special levy on income that will embrace income
B


now exempt, with an exemption of £IOO only, and that such
levy be called the hospitals tax.”
(Vide Report of Proceedings of Local Authorities’
Conference of 1928.)
(8) By the Primary Producers’ Conference, held in 1928
‘ ‘ Nationalisation. ’ ’
Many other proposals have been submitted, which are so impractic-
able that no reference need be made to them.
Medley of Proposals.
The outstanding feature of this medley of proposals is the disclosure
of the absolute lack of coherency in those who oppose the scheme
now in operation. Mr. Moore, as Leader of the Opposition, moved
a reduction of £1 in the Hospitals Vote as a protest against the
“iniquitous hospitals tax,” and he proposed a tax on income and wages
without exemption. It is probable that he had in mind the same method
of collection as that proposed by Mr. R. M. King and the Local
Authorities’ Conference, which required a tax on income and wages
without exemption. But Mr. King also read the proposal of the Rock-
hampton Hospital Tax Committee, probably not realising that it differed
materially from the proposals of his leader and himself. During the
same debate Mr. J. P. Pry mentioned nationalisation. Then, when I
moved to introduce the Amending Bill, Mr. W. A. Russell, who is a big
pastoralist, moved to alter the short title of the Bill to enable his proposal
for a tax on betting and entertainments to be included, and in the
course of his speech said that he was not in favour of the 40 per cent,
being collected from incomes, nor did he think it fair to levy it on wages.
Yet Mr. Bavin, Premier of New South Wales, said that a tax on enter-
tainments for hospital purposes was impossible. He considered, no doubt,
that such a tax would be a tax on the poorer section of the community,
whose only entertainment is the picture show.
Nationalisation.
The meaning of the proposals for nationalisation is that a State
Department will be created to run the Hospital service, similar to any
other State Department.
The nationalisation of the Hospital service, as advocated by the
Labour movement at its inception, had its origin in a different set of
circumstances. In those days hospitals were what are termed “voluntary
hospitals”—that is, they were wholly dependent upon charitable contri-
butions in the first instance for their existence. Many humiliating
conditions were connected with the hospital system in those days. For
instance, a poor person desiring admittance had first to seek the
patronage of a contributor. If unable to pay anything for the service of
the Hospital he was labelled “pauper,” and the Hospital walls were


strewn with charity notices telling the sick they.were the recipients of
charity. It was these humiliating conditions which brought about the
insistent demand for nationalisation. And at that time there was
no local representative organisation as there is now under the adult
franchise. But these conditions are of the past, and now nationalisation
merely means, as has been -stated, control by a State Department. The
scheme of “The Hospitals Act of 1923” is one of local control.
Tax on Income # and Wages, without Exemption—Nationalisation.
The tax on income and wages without exemption or with an exemption
of £IOO would, in effect, mean the nationalisation of the Public Hospital
service, inasmuch as the Commissioner for Taxes would require to collect
the tax (for reasons which are stated in reference to Mr. King’s proposal),
as it is not likely that any Parliament would create local bodies to run the
Hospital service, which would be spending bodies without any responsi-
bility for taxing.
Free Hospital.
.It also means the free Hospital, as, if wages are taxed, the
wage-earner will demand and expect free treatment, as he gets under
his industrial contribution, and which he has been getting for the last
forty or more years where industrial contribution schemes have been
in operation; and if the wage-earner is entitled to free service
from the Public Hospital the salary-earner will demand the same. This
fact has been recognised in the only ease where a tax on income and
wages has been attempted and since abandoned, in which case it was
proposed to pay part of private hospital charges from this taxation.
Whole Cost of Hospital Service would have to be met by this Tax.
It is therefore apparent that the w’hole cost of the Public Hospital
service, which would also include the cost of the Ambulance service,
would have to be met by the proposed income and wages tax. This
total cost is now approximately £BOO,OOO per annum, and under the
new conditions would obviously become a sharply increasing cost.
Cost of collection of tax must be added.
To this cost would have to be added the cost of collection of the tax.
Incidence of the Tax.
In the consideration of any question, whether it be the form of control
or the imposition of' taxation—as a rule the two questions are inter-
related —the advantages and disadvantages of any particular scheme
have to be weighed. There are certain well-defined principles which
govern these matters, but the circumstances of a particular country may
require a deviation from a principle or principles which generally and
unfortunately create in the long run problems of greater magnitude.
Again, in some countries, and particularly in some of the States,
there is a tendency to centralise functions in central departments in the


capital cities, at the expense of the country. But in this State the policy
of the Government has been the opposite—to decentralise functions and
to build up a strong local responsibility. This policy has been followed
in the development of the Hospital service.
Discarding all the fantastic and utterly impracticable proposals,
including that of Mr. W. A. Russell to'tax entertainments, which Mr.
Bavin so utterly condemned, and the grotesquely unfair proposal of the
Rockhampton Hospital Tax Committee to tax salaries and wages from
£BSO down to £IOO, we are left with three proposals—the three which
have the greatest number of supporters: The proposals of Messrs. Moore
and King to tax on income and wages without exemption—Mr. King’s
proposal differs inasmuch that he proposes to collect the tax by special
stamps, properly cancelled, and through the existing income tax channels
—and the altered proposal of the Rockhampton Hospital Tax Committee
to tax on income with an exemption of £IOO.
Middle Classes and Wage-earners Vitally Affected by these Proposals.
The proposal of Messrs. Moore and King to tax on income without
exemption would affect the middle classes, and particularly the lower
middle classes, to a marked degree. It will be agreed that those income
tax payers paying tax on incomes from £1 to £SOO can be taken as fairly
representative of the middle classes. Last year these taxpayers paid
income tax on an aggregate taxable income of less than £4,000,000; their
aggregate gross income, however, was £17,000,000, approximately, and
upon this amount Messrs. Moore and King propose to levy the hospital
tax. Consider the effect of taxing on £17,000,000 where before only
£4,000,000 was taxed! An intolerable burden would be cast upon the
lower middle classes —on the small struggling producer and the unfor-
tunate wage-earner—and the wealthy man and large financial bodies
would escape untouched.
The third proposal is that of the Rockhampton Hospital Tax
Committee—to tax on income with an exemption of £IOO, which still has
the same disadvantages as Messrs. Moore’s and King’s proposals.
Mr. King’s Proposed Method —Collection Impracticable.
Then, again, Mr. King’s proposal includes the method of collection.
His first method —by special stamps, properly cancelled —is entirely
impracticable for the reason that Commonwealth employees could not
constitutionally be so taxed, and it is doubtful whether employees under
a Commonwealth award are not similarly excepted. The second method
in his proposal—through the existing income tax channels —would, in
the opinion of the Commissioner for Taxes, prove far too costly to be
practicable.


Enormous Increased Cost of Collection of Tax on Income and Wages
without Exemption or with an Exemption.
The Commissioner for Taxes has reported that the eost of collecting
income tax would, under those proposals, be “enormously increased.”
The Registrar-General estimated that at the 31st March last year
there were 287,000 males and 50,000 females earning more than £l2O
per annum. The figures of the last census give a proportion of 43-1 per
cent, of the population as breadwinners, and, assuming this proportion
to be still the same, the number of breadwinners last year would be
approximately 387,000. There are, however, no means by which the
number of persons could be computed who would have to pay a tax with
an exemption of £IOO only. The term “breadwinner” would include
all occupied persons of any age, and there would be many included in
the figure of 387,000 who would actually be exempt. Nor does either
estimate take unemployment into account. As the cost last year of
collecting income tax from 39,576 income tax payers was £41,689, the
statement of the Commissioner for Taxes that, with the reduced
exemption of £IOO, the cost of collection would be “enormously
increased” can readily be believed. As this “enormously increased”
cost of collection would, necessarily have to be added to the amount to be
levied, the whole would require a considerable tax upon that section of
the community least able to bear the strain.
No Cost of Collection under Present System.
Under the present system there is no added cost of collection.
Earnings from User of Hospital Service Would be Lost.
Again, under the present system the user of the Hospital service
is required to pay for the service to the extent that he can afford, and
the earnings from this source are steadily improving, and now approxi-
mate 20 per cent, of the cost of running the Public Hospital service,
excluding the Ambulance, which is a “free” institution. Earnings from
the user of the Hospital service approximated £125,000 last year, which
would be lost under a tax on income and wages.
Taxpayer Would be Saddled with Heavy Taxation with Nothing to
Show.
As the loss of the earnings would have to be made good by the
tax, and as the taxpayer would be saddled with the heavy increased
cost of collection, it will be seen that a large sum would have to be
collected directly by taxation, for which there Mould be nothing to show.
Modern Development of Hospital as a Service.
The old idea of restricting the use of the Public Hospital to persons
without means has now disappeared, and the modern Hospital is being


developed a.s a public service, to be available to all classes of the
community. It bas long been recognised by statesmanship that two
sections of the community have been provided for in times of sickness —
namely, the wealthy class, who can command the services of the best
private hospitals, and the poorer section, who are provided for by the
Public Hospital. There is, however, no provision for the middle classes,
and particularly the lower middle classes. These classes are to be
provided for by the Intermediate Hospitals, and the Government has
made this provision a definite feature of its hospital policy. In every
maternity hospital provision has been made for the intermediate class,
and in the new Women’s Hospital which the Government is to build and
give as a free gift to the citizens of Brisbane, the intermediate provision
will be a distinctive feature. There is every reason to think that, with
the full development of the intermediate principle, the Public Hospital
service can be made largely, if not altogether, self-supporting, and this
development will enormously assist the provision of the Public Hospital
service along modern and economic .lines with the smallest cost to the
taxpayer.
Development of the Public Hospital Service under the New Scheme.
“The Hospitals Act of 1923” did not come into operation until
1924, so that the scheme has not yet been in operation for a full five
years. Yet in that short time in the majority of the districts the Hos-
pital services have been co-ordinated and brought up to date. In the
Maryborough District the saving brought about by the co-ordination of
services is more than sufficient to meet the interest and redemption
charges of a loan expenditure of £39,100. The Toowoomba Board has
incurred loans amounting to £49,646, the expenditure of which has
modernised the institution (no further capital expenditure will now be
required for some years). In a few months the Brisbane Board will have
expended approximately £200,000, adding 280 beds to the institution, a
first-class laundry which is the envy of Southern Hospitals, a dental
hospital which has provided a dental service for the poorer section of
the community, a pathological department, the radio-therapeutic depart-
ment, and many other improvements and services. The late Governor,
Sir Matthew Nathan, felt called upon to twice draw public attention to
the deplorable Hospital service in the wealthy Goondiwindi District.
The local committee threw in the sponge after vain efforts to raise funds
to build a new Hospital. Now this district has a modern Hospital service
which is the envy of the countryside. The same story can be repeated,
more or less, with regard to all the Hospital Districts. The total capital
expenditure carried out and authorised for all Hospital Districts now
approximates half a million pounds, and all this has been done in the
short period of five years, and without inflicting any undue taxation
burden.
What State in Australia can Show this Result?
The rate for the year 1925-26, the first full financial year of the
Maryborough Hospital Board, required to produce the amount of the


local authority’s share was -851 d. in the £, while the rate for the year
1927-28 was -943 d.—that is to say, the local rate, notwithstanding the
large capital expenditure in additions and improvements during the
period, had only been influenced to the extent of one-tenth of a penny
in the £. The rate for 1924-25, the first full financial year of the
Toowoomba Hospital Board, was -232 d. in the £, while the rate for the
current year is -340 d is to say, notwithstanding the large capital
expenditure in additions and improvements during the period, the local
rate had only been influenced to the extent of one-tenth of a penny in the
£ (approximate). The rate for 1924-25, for the first full financial year
of the Brisbane and South Coast Hospitals Board, was -296 d. in the £,
while for the current year it is • 3089 d. in the £ —that is to say, notwith-
standing the large capital expenditure in additions and improvements
during the period, the local rate has only been influenced to the extent
of one-hundredth of a penny in the £.*
Royal Commission.
Mr. Moore has now apparently abandoned his proposal to tax income
and wages without exemption—a proposal which he made and has
advocated for years in Parliament and at Local Authority Conferences.
He has now no scheme, so he proposes to appoint a Commission to
thoroughly investigate the unsatisfactory position of hospitals, and make
recommendations as to their conduct and management, and also as to
the methods of financing them. The Royal Commission is to find for
him the means by which he will be able to remove the undue burden of
the man on the land, which, he says, the present method of financing
entails.
What is the undue burden on the land? As has previously been
stated, the local share of the cost of the hospitals for the year 1927-28
in all hospital districts (the new system is not in operation in the whole
State) was distributed amongst 180,000 ratepayers, and the average
amount of tax was 9s. per ratepayer in that year. The average amount
of tax varies in different districts, du,e to the fact that in some there is
a multiplicity of and overlapping in Hospital services. Mr. Moore’s
district, the Toowoomba Hospital District, is, however, one of the
fortunate ones, in that its Hospital services have been centralised and
co-ordinated, and fortunately for it, proposals for the establishment of
four additional hospitals in small centres came at a time when such
proposals could be successfully resisted. The Rosalie Shire Council, of
• Note.— Prior to the passing of “ The Hospitals Act Amendment Act of 1928,”
the local authority could pay its share of the cost out of the Local Fund or it could
levy a Hospital Rato. The power to levy a separate Hospital Rate was removed
by the Amending Act of 1928, as some local authorities were levying Rates far
in excess of requirements and charging other expenditures to the Hospital Rate
account—an immoral, illegal, and wholly indefensible action Some local
authorities did not levy Rates, as, for instance, Brisbane. The Rate stated above
is therefore the Rate which would have been required to raise the amount of the
Precept.


which Mi’. Moore is chairman, levied a hospital rate of one-eighth of a
penny in the division in which Mr. Moore resides. This rate was levied
on 609 properties, and produced an asssessment of £73, so that the average
assessment was 2s. 4d. per property. (Vide Mr. T. H. Ludgate’s report
to the Auditor-General on the books and accounts of the Rosalie Shire
Council for 1928.)
Mr. Moore is straining at gnats and yet will swallow a camel. A
Royal Commission could not find any new means of taxation.
The position in a nutshell is that Mr. Moore and his colleagues
have abandoned the proposals which they so persistently advocated
during the passage of the Hospitals Bill and on every occasion since,
and have now no hospital policy. The localities have been educated by a
mischievous propaganda to believe that they should not have any respon-
sibility in paying for their local hospitals. Mr. Moore will therefore
have to swallow the camel of nationalisation, and as he dare not levy a
direct hospital tax on income and wages, the cost of the nationalised
hospital will have to be borne by the present subjects of taxation.
A. J. CUmmi.no, Government Printer, Brisbane.
