

The Angels of Mons
By Rev. James Green, C.M.G.
Late Colonel-Chaplain in A.LF, and
ex-President of Methodist Church of New
; South Wales.




“THE ANGELS OF MONS”


"My dwelling had been situate beside
The myriads of a vast metropolis;
But now astonished I behold, and lo!
There were more spirits than men, more habitants
of the air than of the solid ground;
The firmament was quick with life. As when
The prophet’s servant looked from Dothan forth
On Syrian thronging multitudes, and saw,
His eyes being opened at Elisha’s prayer,
Chariots of fire, by fiery horses drawn,
The squadrons of the sky around the seer encamping.”
E. H. Bicksteth.
“Are not all angels spirits that serve Him—Whom He
sends out to render service for the benefit of those who,
before long, will inherit salvation.” —Hebrews 1: 14.
Dr. Weymouth’s translation.
“Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, both when we wake and when we sleep.”
Milton.
"Angels are men of a superior kind;
Angels are men in lighter habit clad,
High o’er celestial mountains wing’d in flight,
And men are angels loaded for an hour
Who wade the miry clay, and climb with pain,
And slippery step, the bottom of the steep.
Nor are our brothers thoughtless of their kin,
Yet absent, but not absent from their love.
Michael has fought our battles, Raphael sung
Our triumphs, Gabriel on our errands flown,
Sent by the Sovereign; and are these, 0 man!
Thy friends and warm allies, and thou (shame burn
Thy cheek to cinder!) rival to the brutes!—”
Young.


By Rev. James Green, C.M.G.
‘’And Elisha prayed and said “Lord open Thou his
eyes that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes
of the young man; and he saw: and behold the
mountain was full of horses and chariots round about
Elisha” (2 Kings 6:17),
I remember one day in South Africa I
was riding* with a squadron of N.S.W.
Bushmen. We had had a long dreary
march in hot weather and were bound
for a new camp. During the afternoon
when we were moving along wearily,
our eyes were cheered with the sight of
“THE ANGELS OF MONS.”


a beautiful camp in the far distance. We
saw the white bell tents rising from
green meadows and around the camp
there was the silver thread of a little
creek flowing. At once the men began
to whistle and sing and the horses in
unison moved on more briskly,—but we
never came to that camp. The camp for
the night was a very different affair.
We had seen a mirage.
The picture, probably, of some model
training camp hundreds of miles away,
thrown on the clouds and projected by
some trick of nature. When we hear
of the wonderful experiences of so
many of our soldiers in France, particu-
larly during the retreat from Mons, we
are sometimes tempted to ask, “Were
these wonderful sights mirages? We
cannot doubt the stories, because there
are so many of them,—told by both
officers and men. Told too, so often, by
men in hospital, who knew that they
were on their death-beds. Told to


chaplains, doctors, and nurses by hard-
headed men, who had never been given
to pondering on the weird and wonder-
ful.
The usual explanation given is that
these weird experiences were the re-
sult of the hysteria of war. No ex-
planation will appeal less to those who
have really seen much of active service.
Sentiment is discouraged, men are
severely practical and visitors to the
battle area w.ere always amazed at the
matter-of-fact way in which soldiers
go about their work under the most
dramatic conditions. The hysteria, the
alternating moods of despair and exal-
tation were not in France, they were
seen at home.
The nearer men get to the parting
ways of life and death the more passive
they become to all phenomena, the more
open to any experience. They cease
from mental speculation, they approach
a point, particularly in such a titanic


conflict as the great war, when the vast
material forces of the world were
wielded by science in colossal forms and
sounds, which almost ceased to be terri-
fying, except to the new-comer; they
approach a point I say, when there is
practically no margin between the
supernatural and the natural, and men
become almost incapable of surprise or
marvel.
Battle does not produce the atmos-
phere of illusion or delusion. When
men arc “up against reality” their
faculties are intensified. They know
with a new definiteness. They live with
a new simplicity.
I have known scores of premonitions
uttered in the coolest and most matter-
of-fact way and received by others in
the same spirit, but never undervalued!
It is not altogether fatalism, though
often miscalled that. It is a quiet recog-
nition of unescapeable facts as they ap-
pear to the eye and mind.


The stories of these soul experiences
which we may group together as “the
Angels of Mons” lead me to ask.
Are There not Mirages of the Soul?
Do not men sometimes see with the
psychic vision as well as the bodily
vision ?
The experience of life shows that
in times of crisis men are more con-
scious of the spiritual elements in life.
It was after they had returned to the
ordinary life of the homeland that the
wonder of their experiences grew upon
them. Talking to a group of soldiers
who had just arrived home on leave, one
of them said, “There are strange things
happening over there, sir.” “Yes, in-
deed,” said the others. “More than we
can understand or explain.” “One thing
is certain, sir,” one man said. “We are
not going to lose this war.” We gain
nothing by doubting these stories. It


is for us to explain them and perchance
learn of them.
First we notice that these experi-
ences came when men were “up against
it.” Man’s extremity was God’s op-
portunity. He appeared on the held
when human resources failed. Success
in war means having abundant re-
serves when and where they are most
needed. The human command could
not always arrange that and it was as
though the Higher Command sent
spiritual reinforcements to comfort
men. To strengthen by company —to
give the old word its real meaning,—
“co” together with “fort” to strengthen.
Let us briefly group and describe these
experiences.
1. Frequently in the Retreat from
Mons, there were amazing appearances
in the sky,—described as colossal figures
between the rear-guard and the enemy,
with a background of cloud. Appear-
ances reminding the men of the “pillar


of cloud by day and the pillar of fire
by night,” which led and guarded the
Israelite hosts. Frequently the men
spoke of the bright faces, not fully dis-
tinguishable, of those strange figures.
2. There were many stories both
from British and French sources of
strange warriors appearing in the midst
of the fight. Described by the English
as like St. George on his horse, by the
French as like St. Michael on a white
horse. We note that the men could only
describe the figures in the language des-
criptive of things with which they were
familiar.
3. There is a well authenticated story
of British Infantry marching on and on
during the night through deserted
towns and villages. Although they
knew that the “Bodies” were not far
behind them, they moved on calmly be-
cause they saw cavalry riding parallel
with them on the flank. They naturally
came to the conclusion that mounted


troops had been detailed to guard them.
There were no cavalry in that area.
4. Thousands of French soldiers spoke
and wrote of seeing the figure of Jeanne
D’Arc in the midst when they were en-
gaged in fighting rearguard actions.
Remembering that Joan of Arc was a
regular figure in statues in the
Churches, we can understand how the
French mind would readily identify the
soldier-saint “who heard voices,” and
saved her country in days gone by.
They had seen the statues beside many
an altar with sword drawn or French
flag unfurled, and her appearance to the
mind would put fresh courage into
many a soldier hard beset.
5. There are stories of British for-
lorn hopes, when the troops were retir-
ing and units in their turn had to hold
up the advancing pnemy until their
comrades reached a certain point. At
such times they were stirred to fight on
by the apparent arrival of reinforce


merits, who took up positions on the
flank.
New troops were arriving and were
in some cases being pushed up to cover
the retreat.
There are cases where the troops
identified were the units ordered to
those points, but which had actually not
arrived at the time the men saw them.
There are similar stories of guns being
fought to the last, firing almost point
blank into the advancing hordes and en-
couraged to stand by the sight of other
guns galloping into action in reinforce-
ment. And yet history records that these
guns did not actually arrive until long-
after.
6. There are the numerous stories of
The White Comrade.
These stories were numerous enough to
affect the public mind in England and
were never scoffed at by the men at the


front, where the phrase “The White
Comrade” was a constant synonym for
Christ.
In 1917 there was hung a remarkable
picture in the Royal Academy Exhibi-
tion, a picture with this title. It repres-
ented a ruined xhurch, roof destroyed,
broken columns, windows, whose
arches incomplete, showed the moon-
light streaming in and rendering visible
the rows of wounded soldiers lying on
straw in lines up the sides of the nave.
In the distance there was a partly ruined
altar surmounted by a broken rose-
window. Apparently walking alongside
the wounded was Christ, in a white robe
and with a look of tender sympathy.
The faces of the men bore a look of
happy resignation. The picture was a
parable —and more —it gathered up the
news of spiritual experiences in hun-
dreds of letters from men in France who
had been “up against it.” Soldiers who,
not eloquent nor very imaginative, have


often said to friends at home, when they
looked for recitals of battle experiences,
“I have been through hell,” but often too
they have had to tell of strange comfort
in moments of dire necessity, which
were experiences of “heaven.” In a
sermon preached by Rev. R. F. Horton,
referring to letters from men and this
incident, Dr. Horton said “He did not
know how far they must take it liter-
ally.” Now and again a wounded man in
the field is conscious of a comrade in
white coming with help and even de-
livering him. One of our men who had
heard of this story again and again, and
had put it down to hysterical excitement
had an experience. His division had ad-
vanced and was not adequately pro-
tected by the artillery. It was cut to
pieces and he himself fell. He tried to
hide in a hollow in the ground, and as
he lay helpless not daring to lift his head
under the hail of fire, he saw one in
white coming to him. For the moment


he thought it must be a stretcher-
bearer, but no, it could not be; the
bullets were flying all round. The white-
robed came near and bent over him. The
man lost consciousness for a moment
and when he came round he seemed to
be out of danger. The white-robed
still stood by him, and the man, looking
at his hand, said. ‘You are wounded in
your hand.’ There was a wound in the
palm. He answered, ‘Yes that is an old
wound that has opened again lately.’
The soldier says, that in spite of the
peril and his wounds he felt a joy he
had never experienced in his life be-
fore.” Stories of the “Le Camarade
Blanc” came also from the French.
They came from Soissons, Ypres, Nancy
and from the Argonne. The White
Comrade appeared where death was
busy on the stricken field. I do not
quote all authorities for lack of space,
but details are given in many publica-
tions, such as Harold Begbie’s “On the


side of the Angels,” “War and the
Weird,” etc.
I group them and relate them baldly
as typical of many and I ask you to con-
sider them.
Perhaps some will say: “If these
strange things really happened, the
Germans must have known something
of them.” They did. How do we ac-
count for the escape of British units in
the retreat when humanly speaking the
enemy had them in the hollow of their
hand? German prisoners in answer to
questions have said, “How could we
break through your lines when you had
those thousands of troops behind you?”
They often frankly doubted the
British account of the disposition and
number of the troops. On the occasion
of a German failure the explanation
officially given was “that they did go
forward, but found themselves abso-
lutely powerless to proceed with their


orders, and their horses turned sharply
round and fled like the wind.”
On occasions German troops were
mysteriously halted by fear simultane-
ously affecting each man.
The providence of God works mys-
teriously and there are cases like this.
A cavalry officer leading his troop
reached a road at right angles which
he was to follow, to his surprise, his
horse stopped and nothing would in-
duce the animal to advance. Turning he
discovered the same thing had happened
to the whole troop —the horses refused
to move, —finding it useless to waste
time, he followed a parallel road further
on. Afterwards they found a strong
German ambush awaited them along the
road from which they had been so
strangely turned by the conduct of their
horses.
When asked why the Germans had
turned back from Paris, the answer was
given by more than one prisoner. ‘‘Plow


could we advance when we heard of the
immense army ready to take us in the
flank?” I stood on a little hill in the
Bois Boulogne at Paris in 1916 and
Parisians standing there told me of the
day when they stood there with tearful
eyes and anxious hearts.
They could see in the distance the
huge clouds of dust raised by the Ger-
man armies advancing on Paris. There
was no army between the enemy and
Paris! There are all sorts of explana-
tions of the unexpected victory of the
Battle of the Marne, but none of them
eliminates the providential element, and
the generals, who had most to do with
the victory humanly speaking, are the
most ready to recognise the providential
element. We turn now to a class of
story which seems to show that in the
heat of battle the souls of those killed
in action reluctant to leave the combat
remain for some time at least interested
witnesses of the conflict. How often


before men have died have they said to
comrades, “Never mind, I’ll be there to
help you.” There is a story told of one
of the series of critical fights during
the Battle of Verdun. The Germans
launched attack after attack in the ex-
pectation of overwhelming the defence.
At one point there was a position of
great strategic value that those in com-
mand watched very anxiously. After
waves of the enemy had almost passed
over it, to the surprise of onlookers it
was still holding out. It was a key posi-
tion and during a lull" in the fighting
senior officers went over to congratulate
the brave defenders.
They found only one battle-scarred
defender. The dead bodies of his com-
rades lay across the parapets. “How
ever did you manage to hold out?” they
said. “I do not know, but it was like
this, my General,” replied the survivor.
“Again and again the Bodies came on
and we worked our machine guns until


they were hot. My comrades fell one
by one around me. Then another aval-
anche of the enemy began to move on-
ward and as they drew near I looked
round at my dead comrades and said to
myself, if they only could stand with
me, we would stop them. In a crisis
of the fight when the enemy were near
I looked round in desperation and cried
out to my comrades. “Stand up ye
dead!” and it seemed as though they
stood with me against the enemy and
the Bodies broke before our trench.”
Such are the stories that came from
the battle-front and people sitting in the
comfortable arm-chairs at home read-
ing them, put them down to the hysteria
of battle. Among much that is difficult
to explain I know that in battle there
is an intensification of the faculties and
afterwards a stupor —a battle stupor,
resulting from worn-out powers. I have
rolled sleeping men out of the way of
guns and ambulances after the battle


was over. Their bodies were quite
inert. It is clear to me that for many
soldiers in a certain condition of soul
and body, experience of war has brought
home the conviction that the visible
phenomena of this earth are not the
only bonds of reality.
Are these experiences objective or
subjective? Both —in different in-
stances.
The objective mind is governed by
the five senses. The spiritual appeals
to the objective mind not only through
reason, but where need is, presents
fresh evidence objectively to the indi-
vidual. But God’s providence gets be-
yond the objective mind and for its
beneficent purposes influences the sub-
jective mind.
The subjective is governed by in-
tuition, faith, suggestion, idealism. If
God controls the subjective mind, the
objective mind will act in unison. “Thou
wilt keep him in perfect peace whose


mind is stayed upon Thee, because he
trusteth in Thee” Waiving for the mo-
ment all these stories and experiences,
and regarding them as individual and
isolated facts, I ask those who would
eliminate the spiritual elements in war
to explain
The Great Miracle of the Victory.
The spring of 1918 was most disastrous
to us. The Germans broke through at
the Lys and the Somme. They occupied
territory which we had long held. They
reached a point from which they could
shell Paris. It was not considered hu-
manly possible to begin a successful
offensive against them until the spring
of 1919. It was not intended to make
the attempt. King George called the na-
tion to prayer and Marshall Foch began
the work of building up the reserve with
which he hoped ultimately to smash f he
enemy. But he got the idea that the
spring of 1918 might be God’s time and


on July 18th, 1918, was launched an at-
tack which began that series of victories
which surprised us as much as the
enemy. I understand that the Americans
sometimes claim that they won the war.
I have heard Australians make the same
claim. The British probably think they
had something to do with it. I venture
to believe that God gave us the victory.
He reinforced the spirits of the warriors,
gave discernment to the command,
rallied the moral strength of the allies.
What conclusions do we draw from
these incidents?
The Reality of the Spiritual.
Men never doubted it. Under the pres-
sure of battle, souls were often attuned
to spiritual things, and because of this,
men were often able to pierce the veil
and see things that were not normal.
The Talians have a proverb which says:
“When God shuts a door, He opens a
window.”


God who marks the fall of the
sparrow did not leave those who fell
without a ministry of comfort. There
were none “missing” to God. Christ
the White Comrade was with them “to
the end,” and the Holy Spirit, the Com-
forter, stood by them, in their tragic
passing. ,
“And there they rest, who fought with no surrender,
Lap’t round* with peace like water cool and bright,
Till God shall armour them again in splendour
To battle with the spirits of the night.”
By Prayer we live in the Spiritual.
Because we are immersed in material
things, obsessed by things which are of
lesser importance, we are blind to God’s
presence, deaf to His voice, and ignorant
of His purposes. When a man like the
Sadhu Sundar. Singh comes amongst us
it is like receiving a visitor from an-
other world.
“The world is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;
Little we see in Nature that is ours;
We have given our heart away, a sordid boon!”


God’s Providence Touches Life more
Nearly Than we Think.
The incident at Dothan is typical of
our life. Like the young man we see
around us all the earthly combatants
and we are dismayed.
The eye of faith discerned the spiritu-
al allies of life. Jacob at Mahanaim
learned that God’s hosts are always at
hand, and this world is “the place of the
two hosts” (Gen. 32: 1-2). Angel bands
are always passing by us, only our eyes
are holden so that we do not see them.
“The Angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear Him, and
delivereth them,” God does not inter-
vene unnecessarily. Hot-foot on the
road to Damascus Paul might well have
destroyed the infant church, but God
struck him down. It was necessary for
the church that the Apostles should
preach. When hands were laid on the
Apostles and they were put in the


common prison, then “the angel of the
Lord by night opened the prison doors
and brought them forth” (Acts 5:17-
19). Paul and Silas were thrust in
prison, but “the foundations of the
prison were shaken and all the doors
were opened and everyone’s hands were
loosed” (Acts 16: 25). When Herod cast
Peter in prison an angel delivered him
and led him forth past the first and past
the second ward, through the iron gate
out into the street —and forthwith the
angel departed from him” (Acts 12:
1-10).
When there is no eye to pity and no
arm stretched out to save, then God’s
eye pities and His arm brings salvation.
This is the law of Providence. In our
extremity God comes.
These manifestations are not for all.
Many are unable to apprehend.
When there came a voice from Hea-
ven acknowledging Jesus (John 12:29)


some of those who stood by heard the
voice, and said: “An angel spake unto
Him.” Others said that “it thundered.”
Many were coming and going on the
road to Emmaus; only two felt their
hearts burn within them at His voice,
and recognised the Risen Christ. If our
eyes were opened we should know that
God’s forces are marshalled on our be-
half. By prayer, Christian service,
and communion we give God an oppor-
tunity of enriching and reinforcing our
lives at every point.
With the knowledge of God’s pre-
sence come peace, joy, and power. We
are able to face the present with cour-
age and anticipate the future with
happy assurance.
“Nay, in all these things we are more
than conquerors through Him that
loved us.”
“Certainly there are many thousand events wherein
common eyes see nothing but nature which yet are
affected by the ministrations of angels.”
Bishop Hall.


Some have asked: “Is not this very-
like Spiritism?’’ It is the opposite.
Here we see God taking the initiative.
Man does not arrange the seance.
The stage is Life, and the scene is
man at the end of his resources. The
immanent God breaks through the veil
to succour and support His children, to
keep His promises, and to vindicate His
cause. The sharpening of the psychic
powers by crises may enable man to see
providence at work. He sees, however,
only what God is always doing.. When
the smoke of the battle vanishes, and
the thunder of the guns is stilled, God
still keeps watch and guard over His
own.
Fellowship is always possible, and
though we do not always see the means
by which God is working, we may be
sure that the sceptred hand of Christ
works on the other side of the veil for
us. The dramatic illustrations of God’s
power and love which sometimes come


are intended to strengthen us for the
ordinary tasks.
“Thrice blest is he to whom is given
The instinct that can tell
That God is on the field when He
is most invisible.”
