

1 «
. AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
SYDNEY SESSION. 1898.
THE OCEANIC FAMILY OF
LANGUAGES,
Rev. Dr. MACDONALD.
33665 (14)
itfxf
Bead before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science ,
January , 1898.




THE OCEANIC FAMILY OF LANGUAGES.
By the Bev. D. Macdonald, D.D.
(Read before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
Tuesday, llth January, 1898.)
PHONOLOGY, STRUCTURE, ORIGIN.
The Insular family of languages, or Oceanic, is spoken by thirty
or forty millions of the human race, inhabiting islands in the
Indian and Pacific Oceans and in the intermediate Malay Archi-
pelago and Peninsula. The numberless languages, or dialects, of
this family have all sprung from one inflected Oceanic mother-
tongue, now lost, or existing only in these, its analytic or broken-
down offspring. They have been divided into four groups, which
it is convenient to recognise ; —(1) The Tagalan, comprising the
Tagala, Bisaya, Formosa, Marianne, Malagasy, &c. ; (2) The
Malayan, comprising the Malay, Java, Battak, Uayak, Bugis,
*kc.; (3) The Polynesian, comprising the Samoan, Tongan,
Hawaiian, Maori, tkc. ; and (4) The Melanesian, comprising the
Fiji, Aneityum, Tanna, Eromanga, Efate, Malikula, Santo,
Solomon Islands, &c. Taking a general view of all, we find that
they have a common stock of numerals, pronouns, and other
words, of formative or word-building suffixes and prefixes, and of
grammatical or syntactical processes or sounds, which constitutes
them one family. In order to ascertain the origin of this family,
or its relationship to some other known family, as the Indo-
European or the Semitic, these all must be taken into account,
due regard being had to the principles of dialectic, phonetic, and
grammatical variation, such as obtains in languages in the
analytic stage, and due allowance being made for the length of
time, and the circumstances in which the analytic process has been
going on—in this case (say) four thousand years—in circumstances
33665 (14) —A


very highly favourable to diversification. If it can be shown that
the common stock of numerals, pronouns, and other fundamental
words, of formative suffixes and prefixes, and of grammatical
processes and words, which constitutes the Oceanic languages a
perfectly well-defined family, is Semitic, this will establish the
relationship of these languages to the Semitic languages, and
prove that the Oceanic mother-tongue was a sister-tongue to the
Arabic, Phenician, Hebrew, Syriac, Assyrian, Himyaritic, and
Ethiopic (with their modern dialects, as the Neo-Syriac, Mahri,
Amharic, and Tigre), sprung, like them, from the no longer
existing Semitic mother-tongue. The object of this paper is to
show as briefly as possible that this can be done.
In treating the phonology of our subject, it is necessary to
observe that the Semitic languages have certain gutturals peculiar
to them, and that some of these occur— e.g., in the numeral words—
for 1,4, 5,7, 10, and 1,000. The Semitic gutturals referred
to are alif represented in what follows by a or some other vowel
in italic, and when it has hemza, which indicates that it is to be
pronounced almost like h l (ain), by a‘ or other vowel with ‘; ha
by h • hha by h’; the rougher Arabic hha by h”; ain by h‘ ; the
rougher Arabic ghain by h“. As to their original pronunciation,*
a ’ was the lightest, softer than h which is represented by our h.
The guttural h’ is stronger than h, something like ch in Scotch
loch ; it had a softer and rougher sound, the latter being repre-
sented in Arabic by h”. The guttural h‘ is unpronounceable by
Europeans, and peculiar to the Semitic languages, akin to and
sometimes confounded with h”. It had a softer and a rougher
sound, the latter being represented in Arabic by h“, and described
as the sound of a g slightly rattled in the throat, and resembling
somewhat the Northumbrian r and the French r grasseye. To
these has to be added the Semitic r, which was sometimes pro-
nounced as a lingual, and sometimes as a guttural with a hoarse
guttural sound. For an account of these gutturals, and the
trills r, I, see Prof. M. Muller’s Lectures on the Science of
Language, ii, pp. 135-138. It has to be added that the tendency
of the Semitic languages is, in the course of their analytic
development, to confound these gutturals, and, finally, to soften
them all down to a\ or a mere spiritus lenis. Dr. Codrington,
speaking of the guttural trill, which he calls “ the Melanesian g,”
says :—“ It may be taken for r, or may be missed altogether.
It has been written g (hard), r, g ( ngg ), rg, h, rh, and k. That it
resembles ris shown by the spelling of visitors. . . . Bishop
Patteson was struck by its resemblance to the Arabic ghain
( i.e ., h“), and Professor M. Muller’s description of the Hebrew
* The symbols here used are not to be regarded as at all denoting the true pronounciation
as to that, in the ancient and modern Semitic dialects the grammars of the various dialect
must be consulted.


ain (i.e., h‘) as a vibration of the fissura laryngea, approaching
sometimes to a trill, nearly equivalent to a German g in tage,
closely suits it.” (The Melanesian Languages, pp. 204-206). In
Oceanic r is sometimes pronounced as a lingual, sometimes as a
guttural (Crawford, Malay Gram., p. 75 ; F. Muller, G.d.
Sprache, iii, ii, ii, p. 92ff); hence, as we shall see, we find it
not only interchanged with t, b, v, &c., but also with h, g, ( k ), or
spiritus lenis.
Interchanges with each other of dentals, sibilants, gutturals,
labials, or of dentals with sibilants are not to be wondered at. But
the more remarkable interchange in Oceanic between (1) dentals (or
sibilants) and labials, and vice versa , (2) between dentals (or sibi-
lants) and gutturals, and vice versa, and (3) between gutturals and
labials, and vice versa, are not so easily understood. In (Melan.
Lang., pp. 403-407) Rotuma folu 3, hak 4, hif 7, for the common
Oceanic tolu,bat,pitu (and generally in the Oceanic numerals every-
where, as we shall see) all these interchanges are exemplified (1) in
folu, hif, (2) in hak, and (3) in hak, hif. In Hawaiian, dental and
guttural are confounded, and k stands for both t and k. In Tangoan
Santo, dental and labial are confounded, as t and p, m and v.
(South Sea languages, p. i). The same confusion is found in
North East Malekula, where it is impossible sometimes to tell
whether the native speaker utters morn,th or v. In these cases
one letter might represent both th or v, letter t or p, m or n, as
Hawaiian k stands for kor t. In Efate kis very often pronounced
ng and tasr,orr as t. In some cases r and e are confused.
“It is a question whether the sound made in some localities is
really an aspirate which may be written h, or not rather to be
represented by f ... In the greater number of languages
which have both sibilants and aspirates, h and s are equivalent.”
(The Melanesian Languages, pp. 193, 216.) Now, these inter-
changes must have been going on from the earliest times, as we
find examples of them generally throughout the Oceanic dialects.
Thus, in Efatese dialects “who?” is fei, sei, and he (Tahitian vai);
and bea, ‘ first,’ in one dialect, is tiamia, which is certainly for
miamia or fiamia, Epi beamu, Samoan muamua. Efate finanga,
food, is in Duke of York winaga, Mota sinaga, Motlav hinag.
Star in Malay is bintang, in Javanese lintang and wintang, in
Malagasy kintana and vasiana, in Aneityum moijeuv, In Efatese
masoei and ngmahe. In Malay nipis, tipis, mipis, ‘ thin,’ there is
the interchange of n and t, and n and m ; while in tukul, pukul,
‘strike,’ kilat, kilap , ‘ lightning,’ is that of t and p. (Marsden,
Malay Gram., p. 113.) In Malagasy, when a formative suffix is
attached to words having the formative ending -ka, -na or -tra,
the k is changed to h or f the tr to t, r, or f and the n often to
m. (Parker, The Malagasy Language, p. 19.) The importance
of this to the explanation of certain universal facts in Oceanic


will appear below. The interchange of labial and guttural is seen
in Malay in gawa or bawa ‘to Carry,’ in Efatese bui and kui
1 back,’ majis and makus 1 knife,’ Malay piso, Malagasy dialect
kiso 1 knife.’ Dr. Codrington has remarked that in the letter-
changes which do occur in the Melanesian it is generally impossible
to find a law. (Work cited, p. 201.) Prof. M. Muller, after
comparing Sanscrit gharma, ‘ heat,’ with Greek thermos , Latin
formus, says he is strongly inclined to ascribe the phonetic
diversity which we observe between Sanscrit, Greek, and Latin
to a previous state of language, in which, as in the Polynesian
dialects, the two or three points of consonantal contact were not
yet felt as definitely separated from each other. . . . No
letter ever becomes. People pronounce letters, and they either
pronounce them properly or improperly. (Science of Language,
ii, p. 180-1).
THE NUMERALS (PHONOLOGY, STRUCTURE, ORIGIN).
In the Semitic languages the abstract or feminine of the
numerals 3-10 was formed, as in other nouns, by the formative
suffix t, or th (pronounced now by some Arabs to), which often
became either a guttural hor elided. This feminine form of these
numerals was used with masculine nouns, and has become in
Modern dialects almost the sole form used and of common gender,
and it is, therefore, the form to be expected, and which is found
in Oceanic. This ending is unmistakably seen in the numerals 4
and 5, with which we begin, only premising that the nouns of the
Oceanic languages and dialects of the four groups to which the
following words belong, here omitted for the sake of brevity and
clearness, may be found given in my paper in the Journal of the
Polynesian Society, last quarter of 1896, pp. 215-222.
Four.
Arabic, a’rhah‘at ; modern, arbaat ; modern Ethiopic dialects,
arut, übah ; Oceanic, ampat, mbit, evats, ebits, efatra, efutchi,
apat, hipat, rare, vas, vitu, vier, bate, vavu, fiak, opak, emin, poll,
fal, awang, kaar, tar, tas, tiak, thdte, thack, hak, hani, the t elided ;
fa, wha, a in all the others is represented by this final consonant.
Malagasy efatra is efara in hefarana, etc.
Seven.
Arabic, sabh l atu ; Assyrian, sibit; Mahri (Modern Himyaritic),
ibet; Oceanic, pitu, fito, fiz, fuz, fik, sik, tik, titu, tuju, fiet,
fiak, ambitu, wontit, awith. The final consonant in all is the
ending t.


Arabic, sittat ; Mahri, iteet (itit) ; Oceanic, enina, anam, anum ,
innem, toonen, (won), (kon), (fene), (hene), (hono), gurum ;
Malagasy, enina is enima in enimina, &c. In all, except those in
brackets, in which it is elided, the final consonant is the ending t.
Nine.
Arabic, tisldat ; (Modern, tisd); Mahri, iset; Sokotra, sa'ali) ;
Oceanic, siam, sivy, hiva, hhepi, iva, sievo, sieva, siyu, tihu, sin,
sanga, asera, salapan, sambilan, pitan. In salapan we have
labial for sibilant (as in fene, 6; ivontit, 7; puluh, 10 ; and
often), and sola —is the initial t reduplicated exactly, as is dala
(or bala) in Malay, dalapan (also salapan ), 8 ; Lagala dalava, 2.
Sambihan appears by transposition for saliban ( = salapan). In
all, the final consonant is the ending t.
Eight.
Arabic ,' thamaniyat ; Modern thmani ; Hebrew, shenwnet ;
(Sokotra, tamani); Oceanic, lapan, dalapan (and salapan), wan,
wal, panu, valu, varu ; the ending t elided in all.
Three.
Hebrew, shiloshah; Arabic, thalathat; Modern, thlata, or
thelata; Modern Syriac, telaa; Oceanic, telo, tain, tolu, rolu,
folu, silu, teni, kar, rei, seik, tiga. Seik and tig a are for thelata
by elision of the middle I and gor k for the final radical t. In
all, the ending t is elided.
Two.
Arabic, thinta (ni); Hebrew, shila; Himyaritic, thita (for
shinta, thinta); Oceanic, duwa, rua, or tua (that is, ruwa or
tuwa), roa, duka, riea, ruka, dia, rowah, ua, lua, nuwa, and first
syllable reduplicated, dalava, darua. The formation ending ta
in thinta, thita, is a double ending, consisting of the Semitic
feminine t and the Semitic dual ending a, and is exactly repre-
sented according to rule in Oceanic by the last syllable of rica,
ruwa (rua), dalava, duha.
Arabic, m. a‘h’ad, f. wah’idat; Syrian m. It ad, f. h’ada, h’a ;
Hebrew m. a’h’ad, f. d’/i’ath; Ethiopic, m. a’k udu, f. alh’ati,
Ligri, m. ade. In h’a, ah’ath, ah’ati the dis elided. Oceanic/
aida, aisa, ida, ita, isa, asa (and sa), iray, tas (and rais), rari,
tasi, taday. In the following the final consonant represents,
according to rule, the original ending t : — Iraika, isaka, saka, dik,
san, isara.


Five.
Arabic, ITamsat ; Modern, h”arnsa or h”amse ; Mahri, h”omo ;
(Sokotra, h”emah) ; Oceanic, hima, himah, ima, yivia, lima, rima,
tima, kima, sirna, rime, diviy. The ending t and radical s elided
in all as in Mahri.
Arabic h l asharat, Modern h l ashra, Ethiopic h c ashartu, Hebrew
h‘asarah, Oceanic ngahuru, gavula, ahum, ngabulu (sa) chbulu,
nngaviri , ngatil, abur, folo, puluh, buro, furu, novulu, napulo,
mapuru , (si) nafulu, (sa) ngpuvu, (sa) nghul. The peculiar
Semitic guttural h‘ is here represented in Oceanic by g (as some-
times in the Septuagint version of the Bible, 3d century 8.C,), by
ng (as now is pronounced among the Jews), and by the guttural
ch, as well as by n and m. In all, the ending tis elided.
Hundred.
Arabic mia‘t’, with nunation miatuv , Modern mayat, Ethiopic
mdet, Amharic mato (the t is the feminine ending t), Oceanic mari,
mara, bot, fok, puku, lutcho, ratu, rato, ngut, and, with nunation,
hutun, utin, natun. For similar changes of m, see below. In
all, the ending t is the final consonant.
Thousand.
Arabic a'lef, with nunation a'lefun, Hebrew a!lef, Assyrian
alapu, Mahri Ehkili of, Oceanic arivo, libu, livu, ribu, sobu,
rewu, ewu, afe, and with nunation, ribun, rebun, ruwun.
The following belong to the common stock of Oceanic words,
and the letter changes they exhibit are to be compared with those
we have seen in the numerals. Compare the changes of the
initial m in the four following words with those seen in the word
for “ hundred.”
Water.
Arabic, maa't, Modern and Ethiopic, mai; Oceanic, vai, fai,
wai, ai, be, pei, tei, rei ; Gilolo, wayr ; Malay, ayer. The last two
still retain the ancient feminine ending t as r,
Banana.
Arabic, ma’z’; Amharic muz ; Oceanic, muhu,‘ bus, butch, hutshi,
hotsy, dts or at, muku, loka.
The two following words are of grammatical importance, being
used as the analytic substitute for the ancient inflexion of gender
in nouns.


Man (vir ).
Arabic, mara ; with ruination mara l un ; Aramaic, mare, mar ;
Oceanic, mera, muera, mane, mani, mano, man, ngane dnui, dne,
(in tangane, taane) ; (I for m), langai, lacay, laki, lahy, and with
nunation, burani, muwani, lanan.
Woman.
Feminine of preceding word. Arabic, marat, mar-a ( t; Oceanic,
(see for the same changes of the ending f above under the numerals,
4, &c.) baluk, pur an, bran, ngaruni; and the middle r elided,
but, bite, matu, Jid, vek, bine, fine, buan, bien, wien, pain ; ending
t elided, farri, ngarui, urao; both r and t elided, mua, bai, bayi,
vy ; I for m, lewa, alewa, Huai, lai, Ho ; re-duplicated parampuan,
parawan, pilaven, mavek, faifid, fafine, mahine, babayi, bavy,
babin, &c.
These foregoing words—hundred, water, banana, man, woman—
beginning with m, show the m changed to I, r, n, <fcc. The
following word shows initial I changed to m, n, r.
Tongue.
Arabic, lisan ; Hebrew, lishon ; Matori, lesa ; Oceanic, lidah,
Utah, Ida, rero, lapi, lapu (of the p in Salapan, 9), leme, neme,
meme, mena.
The following words, down to that for “ ears,” have as their
initial letter one of the ox-iginal four peculiar Semitic gutturals
like the numerals 1,5, and 10, and showing the same phenomena
of change to r, I, t, k, n, ng, and m, and to a spiritus lines or
elision.
Father.
Arabic, a l bw' ; Hebrew, a’b, a’v ; Aramaic, aba\ Oceanic, rama,
ro.y, tama, rema, kama, ab.
Mother.
Arabic, u'm, and i‘mu (Malay ibu); Aramaic, ima ; Tigre, ena ;
Oceanic, reny, rena, tina, sina.
Time.
Arabic, a‘ny, a'n ; Oceanic, rani, rang, lang, nang, dan.
House.
Arabic, h”aimat h”aima; Oceanic, hurna, luma, suma, kom, uma,
ima, lorn, om.
Testicles.
Arabic, h”isy h”usyo ; Oceanic, rass, laso, rasi, dsi, luho.
Fire.
Syrian, h’ab to burn (fire); Arabic, re-duplicated, h’ubah’ibu,
fire; Oceanic, gabu, kabu, api, afiy, habu, rahi, lain, lap, yap,
sembi.


Rain.
Arabic, h“a’th\ with ruination, h ll a’thurs ; Oceanic, uth, auf
omo, komah, gefa, usa, bosi, medic, with nunation ujan, udan,
roana.
Yam.
Arabic, h u ayah', roots, wurzel ; Oceanic, yuhi, uwi, übi, uvy ;
Malekula, rum; Samoan, ufi. With this compare—
Bury (verb)
Arabic, h u aba ; Malekula, rum ; Samoan, ufi.
Tree, stick, wood.
Hebrew, Rets ; Arabic, h ( assa (stick); Ethiopic, pi. h ( etsu,
a’Retsu ; Oceanic, hazo, kasu, kayu, kau, yesi, kaan, lakai, la‘au.
Stone.
Hebrew, e'ben, or e’ven ; Ethiopic, e’ben, pi. a’e’ban ; Oceanic,
vet, fat, fatu, veru, batu, vato, kohatu, pohaku kapir, kabil.
Water (Spring.)
Arabic, h’anu; Hebrew, Ran (eye, fountain, spring); Oceanic,
rano, ran, honu, tanu, fame, ranu, lanu (lake). The plural of
this Semitic word signifies—
The Eyes.
Arabic, a l h‘yunat; Ethiopic, ah l gnt; Hebrew, Rayanoth, henoth
(fountain) ; Oceanic, (final t elided), tano, nana, tun (n to m)
Kama, rama, lumo (initial guttural elided), nata, nero, mata, meta
masu. This final t, the tof the Semitic feminine plural, is the
same t already seen as the feminine or abstract ending.
Teeth.
Arabic (Semitic broken plural, or “ pluralis fractus”), a l sunr
a‘sinnat, or a‘sinne ; Oceanic, kasinga, lesin, nifan, ngipin (final n
elided), ngidi, bati, ngisi, nisi (s to labial), nify, ribo, livo.
Hands (the two.)
Arabic, (dual) yadan, and a l dan; Oceanic, tanana (for tadana ),
tangan, parian, patay, peni,fahan, pan, march, vira, kanei, karah,
vara, aru, faru, uada.
Ear, the Ears.
Aramaic, ( a’dena ); Arabic, pi. a‘than\ or aHhanu ; Ocean
iadiny, talinga, taringa, riringa, tiknga, karinga, karin, falian,
boronga, boro, tananu.
The Semitic guttural r we have already seen elided, or changed
to k, h, as in laki, lahy. See word following.


Head.
Hebrew, rosh ; Arabic, raasu ; Oceanic, lori, loha, lova, hulu,
ru, alu, karu, paru.
Note the changes here of the s or sh to r, I , h, and a labial, as
n the following word.
Hair.
Arabic, shah l ru ; Oceanic, huru, hili, lulu , Jiri, vili, bulu , volo.
The following two words show the interchange of guttural and
labial—
Swine.
Arabic, k’abbah ‘; Oceanic, babi, puaka, wak.
Bow.
Arabic, k’asu ; Oceanic, hisu, husu , dsu, vus, pasi, pana, fana ,
vini.
Moon.
Ethiopic, wareh’, or varah’; Mahri, wurit , &c.; Oceanic, bulan ,
volana, bulak, bulet wurah, mohok, mokwa , bughan, vula.
Lightning.
Hebrew, barak ; Oceanic, bilak; Malay, kilat or kilap ; others
hilatra, bila, wila.
Liver.
Ethiopic, kabdi or kavde ; Amharic, hode (if arut, 1); Malagasy,
Malay, Samoan, Efate, ate or dty.
The following two words are examples showing little change—
Earth , ground , soil.
Arabic, tano ; Oceanic, tano, tang, tana.
A rabic, tas’; Oceanic, tasi, tahi, tai.
The foregoing words, except the last two, have been given, not
because of their identity of sound, but because of the striking
phonetic changes they exhibit. These changes could never be
accounted for till the manner in which the peculiar Semitic
gutturals are represented in Oceanic was investigated. The
obvious error into which one fell was to expect to find these
gutturals as they are in the most analytic modern Semitic dialects,
—that is, as a more breathing or spiritus linis so elided ; whereas
the facts show that in the Oceanic mother-tongue these gutturals
had the same strong and varying peculiar pronunciation as in the
other ancient Semitic tongues. This comes out clearly also in
the pronouns, as we shall now see.


THE INTERROGATION PRONOUN,
Who 1 Which ?
Arabic, a l yy ; Ethiopic, a’y ; Oceanic, ( i ) sei, (i ) za, ha, me, vai,
hai, wai, ai, hex, tei, oi, thei ; Efate, he, sei,fei.
Which ? What ?
Arabic, a ( yyuma, contracted a‘ma ; Modern, a’ma. This is the
preceding word joined with the Semitic interrogations ma
(Himyaritic ma, or ha, what X) ; Oceanic zooy and (ovy), sapa and
(apa), safa and (sd), naf, ava, aha, a, hava, sav, hav, thava, taha,
neva.
THE PERSONAL PRONOUNS.
Arabic, a l na ; Assyrian, a'naku (original form); Oceanic, hina,
hanu, kena, kinau (for kinaku), haku, aku (and daku ), aho (and
zaho), rehu, lau, laku.
Thou.
Arabic, m., a‘nta (and a‘nka, a ( ka, as in this pronoun in the
Semitic mother-tongue t and k were confused as they are often by
little children); Oceanic, ik, nik, hica, hanta, any, daka, and see
the first person plural inclusive below.
Arabic, m., a l ntum (Modern also a ( ntu ), and a l nkum, a‘kum ;
Amharic, m. and f., s. and ph, a’ntu ; Modern Syriac, m. and f.,
ah'ton; Oceanic, akam or akamu, kamu (used also for singular)
dakau, anykau, kanykau, hanao, &c. Owing to this practice of
using the plural for the singular (you for thou), the Semitic
demonstrative plural ala, these or those, was joined with this
personal pronoun, and also that of the third person, to denote
exclusively the plural, as hanare (hano, thou or you, 're these), so
in Amharic is used alant (ala these, anta thou.)
In the pronoun of the third person the ancient Oceanic plural
is used now for both singular and plural, and generally with this
plural demonstration to denote the plural exclusively.
They (and used for singular in Oceanic, and often in modern
Syriac).
Masculine, Arabic, hum ; Hebrew, hem; Assyrian, sun; Himya-
ritic, sum, hum; Aramiac, hinurn, i’num; Modern Syriac, m.
and f., ani. In the Semitic mother-tongue the initial letter of
this word was pronounced s and h, which finally became also i’;
and the final m, the plural ending as in the second person, and as
in masculine nouns, was in like manner interchanged with n.
This mor n was also apt to be, and sometimes was, elided. Thus


we have in Malay inya and iya (Samoan ia), and diya ; Tagala,
siya; Malagasy, zy (for zini, as the suffixed pronoun ni also
proves) ; Malekula hini. To denote the plural exclusively we
have by the means already explained Tagala, sila; Malagasy,
zare-o ; Malekula, hiniri.
It should be observed that as the m in akam, kamu, ye, is the
m of the Semitic plural ending, so the n of hini, inya, is the same
ending changed to n as it was from the earliest times in the
Semitic languages, both in the pronouns and masculine plural
nouns. The Oceanic mother tongue, therefore, had this plural as
well as the feminine plural ending seen above in the word mata,
the eyes. In modern Oceanic as in the nouns, so in the pronouns
of the second and third persons, the distinction of gender has
been dropped as in the same (plural) pronouns in modern Syriac.
Hebrew, a'nah'nu, the prononn'of the first person singular re-
duplicated—literally, I + I = we. This is the nearest extract
form of the word to that of the Semitic mother-tongue ; and
even in Hebrew we have for it the more contracted form a’nu.
In the Oceanic languages it is the first part of the first person
plural exclusive and inclusive, the second part being the pronoun
third plural in the exclusive, and that of the second singular in
the inclusive; thus Efate, kina-mi, or kini-mi, we + they = we
exclusive of thou, and kini-ta, or kin-ta, we + thou = we
inclusive of thou j Malay, ka-mi, ki-ta; Malagasy, zaha-y, and si-ka
(for zi-ka ). That zaha is for zahna, the suffixed pronoun na
in na-y proves, and zahna exactly corresponds letter for letter
to the modern Arabic a'h'na, we.
GRAMMAR OF THE PRONOUNS.
The abbreviated suffixed and prefixed pronouns belong to gram-
mar, and for the sake of brevity it may suffice to point out here,
as showing the grammatical correspondence, that suffixed to verbs
they express the nominative, as Ethiopic ku, Malay ku Malagasy
ho, I ; Ethiopic kemu, Malay kamu, you, suffixed to nouns they
express the genitive, as Ethiopic kemmu, Malay kamu, your, or of
you. This is really the Semitic “ construct state,” expressing the
genitive, seen not only in the suffixing of the pronoun to a noun,
but also in the placing of one noun immediately after another in
this genitive construction. It is exactly so in the Oceanic, both
with pronouns and nouns. In the Semitic languages very abbrev-
iated forms of the pronouns were used prefixed to the verb to
denote the nominative ; thus in all of them the pronoun of the first
person singular was shortened to a\ which in Efate is also a, not
however prefixed to, but before, the verb, though never used
except with the verb, and therefore called the verbal pronoun.


THE VERB.
The Semitic finite verb was in its origin a participle (verbal
adjective) or infinitive (verbal noun of action) with the abbrev-
iated pronouns prefixed or suffixed to denote persons and number.
From the finite verb participles and infinitives were again derived.
In accordance with this, these derived participles and infinitives,
with the separate pronouns, abbreviates, or not abbreviates, were
often used for the finite verb. This analytic substitute for the
finite verb tended to become more commonly used as the language
became more analytic, as for instance in Aramaic and modern
Syriac. Thus the Oceanic verb, as we now find it, has originated,
being generally a derived participle or infinitive. An example
will show clearly what is meant, or the relation between the modern
Oceanic and the ancient verb. The verb “to fear ” in Arabic
is tak’a, from which was divided the infinitive tak’iyat a fearing or
being feared, the Semitic infinitive having both an active and a
passive sense. The simplest form of this verb in Oceanic corres-
ponds, not to taka, but to takiyat, and is seen in Malay takut, Mala-
gasy tahotra. Tahotra is a noun, fearing or fear, and is made into
a verb by formative prefixes to be after considered—as matahotra,
to fear, Efate mataku, Samoan mata’u ; but in Malay takut is
noun, verb, and adjective, fear, fearing or afraid, and to be fear-
ing or afraid. Thus akutakut, I fear, or am afraid, is literally, I
(am) fearing, or I (am) being afraid.
The formative abstract and adjective endings.
The simple or shortest form of the Oceanic verb being takut or
the like, it became necessary to form it verbal nouns (infinitive)
and verbal adjectives (participles), as takiyat ( e.g ., had been) formed
from taka, or by suffixed formatives. In the Semitic languages
there were two abstract and two adjective endings. The adjective
endings were an, or ana, or na and i, and the abstract endings
were t (as in takiyat), and an, ana, or on, or na. All these forms
having n, originally formed adjectives, and these cause to form
abstract nouns also. They were also combined i and t forming
abstracts in it, t and n adjectives in ton {e.g. Hebrew from the verb
h’akal was derived h’akalut a being crooked, crookedness ; then the
adjective ICakalton, crooked), and tanga forming nouns and adjec-
tives in Amharic. In Oceanic these are used thus : Malay, takutan
a fearing, fear; Malagasy, atahorana verbal noun, atahorina verbal
adjective ; Samoan, mata‘utio. Here ia corresponds to Malagasy
ina, and as both ia and ina are used alike ; thus in Samoan we
may infer that the Polynesian verbal adjective ending ia is for ina,
by elision of the n. Compare for this elision the pronoun, Malay,
inya, or iya. This ia or ina does not occur in Malay or Efate; but
ina as an adjective ending is seen in Duke of York, rumaina—
housey or full of houses—from ruma, house ; and na or ana


occurs as an adjective ending in Efate, as rana branchy, branching,
from ra a branch ; and the Efate adjective ending a, as kod rooty,
from ako root, seems to be this na or ana by the elision of the
same n. If so, the Polynesian a differs from ia only in not having
the i —that is, ia or ina is a combination of the two endings i (the
Semitic adjective ending i, and this other Semitic adjective ending
na or ana). The Polynesian ais certainly an adjective ending, as
it forms adjectives from nouns—thus Samoan, eleetea dirty, from
eleelea dirt; and the Oceanic ina is no less certainly an adjective
ending as it does the same, Malagasy ozatra a muscle, ozatina
muscular, somatra beard, somorina.
Compare Samoan mala , a calamity, malaia unfortunate, bearded.
Thus the “ passive participles ” in Malagasy in ina, and in
Polynesian in ina, ia, and a are verbal adjectives formed from the
verb by these adjective endings.
Corresponding to the verbal noun takutan, atahorana, is Efate
matakudna or matakudn (for matakutan ) ; and in all cases, in
Samoan this verbal noun formative is anga (Hawaiian ana.) It
remains now to point out the changes the t, seen in takiyat, has
undergone in different words or with different combinations of
letters. As it is the same ending t seen above in the numerals, so
it has undergone the same changes as those we have ascertained
there. It commonly occurs in Malagasy tr (as in tahotra), k, n;
and as has already been mentioned as a commonplace of Mala-
gasy grammar, when ana, and ina are suffixed to it (as in atahorana,
atahorina), tr appears as t, r, or f; nasoror m ; and kashor f.
It appears also as s, and these variations of this ending t are
found generally in Oceanic, as the following comparative table will
show :
s£££ »“*• E, “«-
Verbal noun— tana tanga tan
Verbal adjective—tina tia
~ rana langa ran
~ rina lia
~ fana fanga pan
„ fina fia
~ nana nan
~ nina
„ mana maga man
~ mina mia
~ hana ‘anga ban
~ hina
~ sana sanga san
~ sina sia
„ ana anga an an, ana.
Thus, Malagasy, taratra; Samoan, tilo; Maori, tiro, to spy,
look at ; we have Malagasy, tarafana, tarqfina ; Maori, tirohanga ;
Samoan, tilojia. The change of this <to a labial is seen also in
Malay, lakat, or lakah; Malagasy, rehitra; Efate, liko, or likot,


to adore ; Malagasy, minona ( minomana, minomina); Samoan,
inu ( inumanga, inumia); Malay, minum (mimiman); Efate,
minu , or munu (munuan for munutan), to drink. To die, deatli,
dead: Malagasy, maty (hafatcsand); Malay, Efate, mati (mat i an);
Mangarura, mate ( materanga ). It is quite clear that matlan is
for matitan, and that mati corresponds, not to Arabic mata,
indeed, but to its infinitive matit, a dying or being dead. One or
two more examples must now suffice. Arabic, “asha, he lived,
infinitive, —“ aishat , a living or being alive ; Mota, esu ; Malagasy,
velona ( velomana, velomina); Malay, idup (idwpan); Java, urip ;
Samoan, ola ( olatanga, ola l angd); Tanna, murif; Efate, moli
(molian for molitan, like mate for matitan, and matakuan for-
matakutan, and munuan for munutan). Arabic, a'thdna, a’thina,
to hear, perceive, infinitive, a’thanat; Malagasy, reny (renesana,
renesina); Samoan, lotnjo (longoina for lonyolina); Malay, dangar
(dangaran); Efate, rongo (rongoan for rongotan). See the word
“ ears,” above, in which the initial guttural of this stem is
retained in Oceanic. It falls away in the verb, according to a
Semitic law, owing to the influence of the ending t, as does the
initial guttural of the word, Arabic, h‘alaka, to adhere; infinitive,
h'alctkat, lakat (and lakap), rehitra, Hkot , or likut (see above).
<- FORMS OF THE VERB. FORMATIVE PREFIXES.
These suffixes formed nouns (infinitives) and adjectives (parti-
ciples). The prefixes now to be considered formed verbs from
nouns, or derived verbs from verbs, usually called forms (or
“ conjugations ”). These were three :
1. a—Arabic, Ethiopia, Aramaic, originally sha, sa (ta, ii);
Hebrew, hi ; Himyaritic, sa and ha: Causative.
2. n , in, i —Arabic, Ethiopia, Assyrian, Hebrew : Reflexive,
reflexive-passive reciprocal.
3. ta, it, ith —Arabic, Assyrian, Hebrew, &c. : Reflexive.
These three were combined thus :
4. an — Ethiopia,* Amharic, Himyaritic, han (Halevy, p. 41);
also Amharic, asan (for san) : Causative-reflexive, or simply
causative, or transitive (1 and 2).
5. ata, ista (for sata), asta (for sata), satha, hatha, or hath,
Arabic x. : Causative-reflexive, simple causative, tfec. Tigre,
Amharic, Ethiopia, Himyaritic (1 and 3).
6. nith, inta, itta —Assyrian, Himyaritic : Reflexive-passive, or
reciprocal-reflexive (2 and 3).
* Dillmann, Or. Eth., §§ 73, 87. He remarks that this is in more frequent use in
Amharic, referring to I sen berg’s Amharic Grammar, pp. 54 (xxiv, should be xxiii), 56
(vii-x), 60 (vii, should be vii-x). Isenberg remarks, p. 56, that these verbs ix, x (an-, tan-)
are very numerous.


7. tan Ethiopia, Amharic : Reflexive-passive (3 and 4. See
note on 4).
To tlie.se infinitives and participles m was prefixed, and then
this participle or infinitive came to he used, sometimes for the
finite verb. Thus we have ma, Syriac (Maphel), causative for the
common a-, as in 1. Modern Syriac, almost the sole form of the
causative. (Stoddart’s Grammar, pp. 110-111.)
8. ethma —Syriac: Refiexive-passive (3 and 1).
9. ma, m\ prefix to infinitives of ground-form, and to passive
participles of ground-form and derived-forms. Thus in Mahri
the common passive participle is expressed through m’-, which
replaces many lost inner passives. (See Yon Maltzan on the
Mahri, in Z. D. M. G., vol xxvii).
With these compare the Oceanic :
1. Dayak, ma ; Macassar Bugis, pa ; Efate, ha, fa ; Malagasy,
a, ma ; Mota, va ; Lifu, Mare, a : Causative.
2. Dayak, in;* Tagala, i ; Malagasy, i, mi ; Efate, hi, ji; Fiji,
vei ; Samoan, fa: Reflexive passive, reciprocal.
3. Macassar, Dayak, Fiji, Efate, (fee., ta; Malay, Java, Fiji,
Efate, &c., ka ; Dayak, ha; Fiji, ra : Reflexive passive.
4. Malagasy, an, man; Malay, Tagala, Dayak, (fee., man;
Malay (Malagasy), san. The nis often changed for euphony to
ng, &c. ; see the grammars : Causative, transitive.
5. Malagasy, aha, maha ; Tagala, mag, maka ; Macassar, paka ;
Efate, haka, faka ; Fiji, vaka; Maori, whaka; Samoan, fa 1 a;
Malay, hdr : Causative-reflexive, causative, reflexive.
6. Malagasy, iha, miha : Reflexive.
7. Dyak, tan (Malay, Malagasy, tan) : Reflexive of 4. The n
changed for euphony as in 4.
8. Malagasy, tafa; Dayak, tapa; Efate, taba; Oba, tama;
Mota, tava : Reflexive, or passive, of 1.
9. Efate, ma, mi, m’; Malagasy, Tagala, ma ; Solomon Islands,
(fee., ma (The Melanesian Languages, Dr, Codrington, pp. 183-4) :
Passive.
To these must be added :
10. tar, Malay : Reflexive-passive of 5, formed from ( h)ar, as
tan from an, (m)an.
Other combinations in Oceanic of these three prefixes (there
are only three) need not here be noticed, as—
11. ifa (2 and 1), ifan (2 and 4), Malagasy; Reciprocal.
* This in is also “infixed” between the first and second radicals of the verb in Javanese,
Malagasy (The Malagasy Language, Parker), &c. In like manner ta (3) was infixed in
Himyaritic and Assyrian, and tan (3 and 2) in Assyrian. In Arabic this n was infixed, but
between the second and third radicals of quadriliterals.


In the light of the preceding phonological facts, the letter-
changes here are not only according to rule, but, in such constantly
used inflexional particles, very slight, as t to k, h, and to r, y ;
the elision of n ; and the change of mto h,f v, p. As to signifi-
cation, the consonance is even more remarkable, of 1 with 1, 2
with 2, 3 with 3, 4 with 4, 5 with 5, 6 with 6, 7 with 7, 8 with 8,
9 with 9. The conclusion is that they are identical; and let it
be observed that these prefixes, together with the before dealt
with suffixes an, ina, na, ana, ia, a, constitute virtually the whole
of the Oceanic living inflexional material, these external inflexions
having, according to the law of the analytical development of the
Semitic languages, increased in frequency of use so as to replace
the lost (as living) internal inflexions.
The object of this paper was stated as to show as briefly as
possible that the common stock of numerals, pronouns, and other
fundamental words of word building or formative prefixes and
suffixes, and of grammatical or syntactrial words and pronouns,
which constitutes the Oceanic languages one perfectly well-defined
family, is Semitic, thus establishing the relationship of the Oceanic
to the Semitic family of languages. I now submit that the
foregoing being substantially correct, allowing for any possible
errors of detail, this has been done, or at least it has been shown
conclusively that it can be done; for it has been shown that
the Oceanic mother-tongue had the peculiar phonology, the peculiar
triliteral numerals and other words with, of course, their peculiar
inflexion of internal vowel change, the peculiar nunation the
peculiar dual feminine ending, the peculiar plural masculine
ending, and singular feminine ending, the peculiar formative,
abstract, or infinitive endings and formative adjective endings,
the peculiar pronouns with their grammatical use with verbs and
nouns, and the peculiar formative or verb building prefixes of the
Semitic family of languages.
It remains to make a few concluding remarks on the foregoing.
As to the method, it will be admitted that the numerals,
pronouns, and other words, the word building or formative
particles, and the phonology, though set forth in a paper like this
necessarily in the briefest possible manner, yet even as thus set
forth, show sufficiently for the purpose in hand the individuality
of the Oceanic family of languages. Nor will it be disputed that
the method of taking account of all of these, as stated at the
outset, and not of a part only, is the right method ; for instance,
all the twelve numeral words given are certainly and purely
Oceanic. Therefore, it has to be shown, in order to establish the
relationship of the Oceanic to some known linguistic family,
that all of them belong to that family. This method, which has
been carried out in this paper, was not carried out by Max Muller,
A. H. Keane, and Bopp, in endeavouring to establish the


relationship of the Oceanic to the Siamese, Canobodian, and
Indo-European respectively; for instance, JVJuller and Kean
did not find a single Oceanic numeral word in Siamese and
Cambodian, and after the most careful investigation of these
twelve Oceanic numeral words, Bopp could find only six which
he deemed identical with the corresponding Indo-European
numeral words; of the personal pronouns, only those of the first
and second persons with the Indo-European of these persons ;
of the formative suffixes, only possibly and doubtfully one with
an Indo-European sufiix, and of the formative prefixes none
he deemed identical in Indo-European. Now, not to mention
other things, these formative prefixes are a well known distinctive
feature of the grammatical structure of the Oceanic family, and so
important that any method that not oidy does not account for all
of them as is done above, but not even for one of them, is plainly
inadequate; also, in the method of this paper no use of or reference
to “ roots ”is made. All the Oceanic words are formed words, and
as such are compared both as to phonisis and meaning with the
corresponding formed Semitic words, this being deemed the right
method. Not so with Bopp. For instance, the Oceanic word tasi,
the sea, is compared with the Arabic word too or tasu, the sea ;
but Bopp compares it with the Sanscrit root sie (or sik ), to moisten,
whence sikta, moisten, sieaka , cloud, in which, to say nothing
more, the meaning is not the same.
It is worthy of special notice that the Indo-European pronouns
of the first and second persons only five of the six numeral words
compared by Bopp with the Oceanic, namely, those for 2,3, 4,6,
and 7, are the Indo-European pronouns and numerals, usually
compared with the corresponding Semitic as remarkably alike,
while it is admitted that such resemblances, which may be
casual, do not establish the relationship of the Indo-European to
the Semitic family. In order to that, the grammatical structure
of the two families must be taken into account; and as to
grammatical structure, proof is not found either between the
Indo-European or the Semitic, or between the Oceanic and the
Indo-European, but is found, as has been pointed out, between
the Oceanic and the Semitic. Assuming that the facts sub-
stantially are as have been set forth in this paper, then it is
absolutely certain, not only that the Oceanic words and formative
particles dealt with are purely the words and particles of the
distinctively Semitic stock, but also that the characteristic
grammatical structure as a whole of the Oceanic is that which as
a whole is distinctively and exclusively characteristic of the
Semitic family of languages. I may here add that the peculiar
gutturals, or the guttural phonology, of the Semitic family of
languages is an important part of this whole—that is, of this
distinctive or exclusively characteristic grammatical structure;
33665 (14J —li


and that this part also is duly represented, as has been shown
above in the Oceanic. Because of this, special prominence has
been given to these gutturals, and because otherwise the numeral
words, pronouns, and other words in which they occur could not
have been properly dealt with; see the numerals 1,5, and 10,
and the pronouns, and the other words given, which have one of
these gutturals as their first letter. Thus we can see the reason
for, or have the key to the phonology of such forms of the first
syllable or letter in the word for 10, as we have in gavula,
chdbulu , ahum, etc. ; for 5, as in tima, rima, hima, kima, ima ,
etc. ; for 1, as in taday, tasi, tai, rari, tas or rais, ray , aida, aim,
asa, ida, isa, etc. ; for I, as in haku, laku, daku or aku, zaho or
aho, hanu, kinau, etc. ; for We, as in haua (-m), kina {-mi),
kin (-ta), ka (-mi), ki (da), zaha (-y), si ( La), etc. ; for Thou, as
in Idea, daka, or any, ik, itc. ; for You, as in dakau or auykau
or kanykan, sicamo, hicamo, akam, etc.; and for who, which, as in
he, sei,fei, me, vai, ba, hai, vai, wai, ai, hei, tei, fhei, za, itc.
Nothing has been said in this paper of the race varieties and
geographical distribution of the Oceanic speakers, as the linguistic
question must be considered on the principles of linguistic
science, independently of discussions on those points, important as
they are ; and the settlement of the linguistic problem will give
the greatest aid to the settlement of these, and must be settled
before the discussion as to these can attain to any certainty.
Sydney: William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—lB99.
■




