

r ' Az
flrikf
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF
THE PRESENT AGE IDENTICAL WITH
THOSE OF THE AGE IMMEDIATELY
BEFORE THE FLOOD:
A Sermon, preached in the Wickham Terrace
Presbyterian Church, Brisbane, Queensland, on
Sabbath, the 26th September, 1868.
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D.,
MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY, AND MEMBER
OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF NEW SOUTH WALES J
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE OF FRANCE,
OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY, AND OF THE
LITERARY INSTITUTE OF OLINDA, IN THE BRAZILS.
sP>uMxsjutr irg JSfctqxrssi
Any profits arising from the publication of this Discourse, will
be appropriated towards the extinction of the debt on
the Wickham Terrace Presbyterian Church.
SISPEHQE.


PREFACE.
The doctrine of the second coming of Christ is a doc-
trine of unquestionable revelation. It is held forth to
us as one of the grand principles of our holy religion in
the Old Testament, as well as in the New. “ I know that
my Redeemer liveth,” saith the patriarch Job, xix. 25,
“ I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God. Whom I shall see for myself \ and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another.” “Ye men of Galilee,”
said the two angels who stood by the disciples, as Jesus
was ascending into heaven from the Mount of Olives ,
“ Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven !
this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven.” Acts i. 2. And the prophet Zechariah adds,
“ Nnd his feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of
Olives.” “In my father’s house,” says our blessed Lord
himself, “In my father’s house are many mansions: if
it were not so 1 would have told you. Igo to prepare
a place for you. And if Tgo and prepare a place for
you, I will come again and receive you unto myself; that
where I am, there ye may be also.” John xiv, 2, 3. It
is impossible, after reading such passages of Scripture as
these, to doubt for a moment that the second coming of
Christ is a doctrine of unquestionable revelation.


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PRESENT
AGE IDENTICAL WITH THOSE OF THE AGE
IMMEDIATELY BEFORE THE FLOOD.
Matthew xxiv. 37. —“But as the days of Noe were, so shall
also thecoming of the Son of Man be.”
At the close of the 23rd chapter of this Gospel accor-
ding to Matthew, and in the commencement of the 24th
chapter, which we have just been reading, our blessed
Lord had been predicting the destruction of the Temple
at Jerusalem, and his own second coming at the end of
the world. Immediately thereafter, as we read in the
3rd verse, “ As he sat upon the Mount of Olives, the
disciples came unto him privately, saying ‘ Tell us when
shall these things be 1 and what shall be the sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the world.” Now, the rest
of this chapter is occupied exclusively with our blessed
Lord’s answers to these questions, and especially the
last, “ What shall be the sign of thy coming and of the
end of the world.” And after having given a whole
series of signs or indications of his own speedy appear-
ing to those who should then be upon the earth, he sums
up the case, as it were, in these words of our text, “ But
as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the
Son of Man be.”
The coming of the Son of Man, that is, the second
coming of Christ, will, therefore, be like the flood of
Noe—sudden and altogether unexpected by the great
majority of men. “ For, as in the days that were before
the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into
the ark, and knew not until the flood came and took
them all away ; so shall also the coming of the Son of
Man be.”
But there is evidently something more, my brethren,
in the words of our Saviour in the text than the mere
announcement of a coincidence between the flood of
Noe and his own second coming, in the suddenness and
unexpectedness of their occurrence. It is clear, beyond
all doubt, that our blessed Lord gives us to understand
that there will be a remarkable coincidence in the
general characteristics of the period immediately preced-
ing his own second coming, and that of the period imme-
diately preceding the flood, “ As the days of Noe were,
no shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.”


What then were the characteristics of the days of
Noe, or the period immediately preceding the flood, and
what coincidence is there, if there is any, between these
characteristics, and those of our own time 1 In other
words, what was the general condition of mankind in
the days of Noe, and what is their condition now 1 ?
I. I observe then, in the first place, that the days of
Noe, or the age immediately before the flood, was an age
of great intellectual, social, and material development.
“ God,” we are told in Scripture, “ made man upright,
but he hath sought out many inventionsand it is a.
remarkable fact, as is implied, indeed, in this passage of
Scripture, that all the inventions of the antediluvian
world, with which we are made acquainted in Holy
Scripture, had their origin exclusively in the family of
Cain, The age or generation immediately before the
flood was the seventh generation from Adam; and who,
I ask, are the remarkable personages, the representative
men, so to speak, of that period 1 Why, with the excep-
tion of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, and Noah
himself, we find them all in the family of Lantech, in
the direct line from Cain. For while Jabal, the son of
Lantech by his wife Adah, was the father of such as
dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle, that is, was
one of those shepherd princes, of whom we have so many
specimens in this country, with their flocks and herds
innumerable; his brother, Jubal, was the inventor of
both wind and stringed instruments of music, or “ the
father of all such as handle the harp and organ,” And
Tubal-cain, the third son of Lantech by his wife Zillah,
is described as an instructor of every artificer in brass
and iron.
Now, it may be safely inferred from the universal
experience of mankind, that in any country or age in
which not only are pastoral pursuits carried on on a
great scale, as among ourselves, but in which also there
are manufacturers of brass and iron, while the harp and
the organ are called in to minister to the luxuries of life
—it may be safely inferred that, in such a country or
age, there must have been great intellectual develop-
ment, great social and material advancement. And
when we bear in mind that in the days before the flood,
human life extended from one hundred to a thousand
years, we can easily conceive how men of intellectual
ability or of mechanical skill could have perfected them-
selves and their works in that long lapse of time. There


must, therefore, have been great cities on the earth in
the days of Noe, and great intellectual, social and
material development. For while there were indivi-
duals, like our own shepherd princes, who had large
possessions in sheep and cattle, and who roamed over
the extensive wilderness with their flocks and herds,
the great masses of the community were collected in
cities, in which the arts of civilization and refinement
had been carried to the highest pitch —in which all the
mechanical arts were cultivated successfully on the one
hand, and all the embellishments of luxury were supplied
on the other.
And surely the present is in like manner an age of
many inventions—of great intellectual and social ad-
vancement. Speaking in the spirit of prophecy of this
very period in the history of mankind, the prophet
Daniel says, “ Many shall run to and fro, and know-
ledge shall be increased,” that is the means and facilities
of communication will be increased in an extraordinary
degree, so as to enable multitudes to avail of
them, and knowledge of all kinds will be increased and
diffused in a corresponding degree. For example, within
my own recollection, during the last fifty years, all those
great improvements in the means of communication
that distinguish so remarkably the present age have been
successfully developed to the astonishment of mankind.
I recollect sailing, and spending accidentally a whole
night on board the first steam vessel that ever floated
in British waters. It was on Christmas day, in the
year 1812, when going home from the University of
Glasgow, where I was then a student of the second year,
to spend the holidays with my parents ; the steam vessel
being the “ Comet,” the first of the kind that was ever
built. The invention of gas-lighting followed in due
time thereafter; and I recollect gazing with intense
interest at a shop-window near the University in the
city of Glasgow, where the mysterious process was exhi-
bited on a small scale by an enterprising tradesman to
the admiration of the citizens. Railway travelling and
telegraphic communication, not to mention the instan-
taneous production'of light, succeeded at a later period;
changing, as you are well aware, these successive inven-
tions and improvements have unquestionably done, the
whole face of the civilized world. In short, increased
means of communication, so as almost to annihilate
space, numberless inventions in all departments ox


science and art, and the universal diffusion of knowledge
over the whole face of the civilized world, are one of the
remarkable characteristics of our age.
11. The second remarkable characteristic of the days
of Noe—of the age immediately before the flood—was
that it was an age of violence; man arming himself, in
numberless instances, with the weapons of destruction
against his fellow-man. We hear nothing in the first
instance of the family of Seth, in connection with the
inventions and refinements of the age. They were pro-
bably, like Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, a pastoral people,
retaining in their practice much of the simplicity and
much of the piety of their “ grey forefathers.” But they
are introduced upon the scene at length in ominous,
although mysterious language; for we read, in the sixth
chapter of the book of Genesis, at the first verse, that
“ it came to pass, when men began to multiply upon the
face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them,
that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that
they wei’e fair; and theytook them wives of all which they
chose.” That is, the family of Seth, in which alone
there was a remnant of the piety of earlier times, began
to intermingle, in the way of mixed marriages, with the
family of Cain, from which they had previously stood
distinct and apart; and the offspring of these unholy
alliances were those mighty men which were of old, men
of renown, under whom the earth became corrupt and
filled with violence. In whatsoever manner this vio-
lence was exhibited—whether in the way of heartless
oppression, of cruelty, or open warfare—we cannot tell;
but the fact is evident that in the days of Noe the earth
was filled with violence; and when we reflect that, as 1
have already observed, the term of human life was then
from one hundred to nine hundred years and upwards,
the degree to which this violence must have been
extended and perpetuated is quite inconceivable. It was
doubtless in consequence of the violence that was thus
prevalent in the antediluvian world, and the enormous
evils that resulted from it, in the case of tyrants and
oppressors living so many hundred years, that God was
pleased, after the flood of Noah, gradually to shorten the
duration of human life to its present term of threescore
years and ten. For, strange as it may sound, death is an
institution as strongly characterized by divine benefi-
cence as life itself. Only imagine the state to which
multitudes of men would be reduced under some heart-
less tyrant living five or six hundred years.


And is not this, my brethren, pre-eminently an age of
violence, as compared with the ages that have preceded
it for centuries past 1 About a quarter of a century ago,
it was a favourite maxim of the irreligious and infidel
spirit of the age that war had been well-nigh banished
from the creation of God, and that the reign of universal
peace was about to ensue. I recollect about that period,
when crossing the Barrack Square in Sydney, meeting
an eminent member of our Colonial Legislature, long
since deceased, who belonged to the Society of Friends,
and who held the fond idea, so prevalent at that period,
that the age of war had passed away, never to return.
Turning to some soldiers who were exercising in sight,
he asked me with an air of contemptuousness when I
thought all such foolery would cease 1 I had been study-
ing the record of Scripture prophecy at the time, and I
answered him accordingly, that I believed there would
yet, and that shortly, be a much greater amount of wars
and fightings upon the earth, than the world had eve?
yet seen, ere the reign of peace which he anticipated so
fondly should be inaugurated. And has not the event
fully justified this anticipation 1 Since the period I have
mentioned, we have had, in addition to the wars on the
continent of Europe, originating in the Revolutionary
period of 1848, the Crimean war, the Indian war, the
Italian war, the Danish war, the American civil war
a case of brother armed against brother —and the recent
war in Germany. And what is the state of things on
the earth at this moment 1 Why, wars and rumours ot
war are the subject of universal speculation among all
classes of men in regard to the dark and mysterious
future. Europe seems to be resting on a volcano, ready
to burst forth on all sides ; for at no former period since
the days of Noah was there ever a fourth part of the
number of armed men—about seven millions in all—as
have been beheld during the last few years, standing in
array against each other, both in Europe and in America.
And the implements and engines of destruction, with
which these men are armed, as it were, from the bottom-
less pit, are incomparably more formidable than had ever
been directed before by man against his fellow-man.
There are giants in our days, if we regard the atrocious
machinery of destruction with which they are arrayed,
just as there were in the days of Noah, when t>hose ante-
diluvian men of renown filled the earth with violence.
Besides, there has been developed in our time, and in


direct opposition to the spirit and practice of the Gospel,
a war-spirit, so to speak, a perfect mania for military-
operations of all kinds, or in other words, for deeds of
violence between nation and nation, as if the chief end
of man had been to fight with his fellow-man. Volun-
teer armaments and movements, national defence asso-
ciations, rifle corps, and naval brigades, are everywhere
the order of the day, throughout the civilized world;
and without characterizing this war-spirit and its devel-
opements in any way, but merely looking at the fact of
its existence and prevalence, what does this mustering
together of such immense armaments, and the formid-
able means of destruction with which they are arrayed,
suggest 1 Why, they lead us irresistibly to the conclu-
sion that they are the fit prelude, appointed in the
providence of God, of that time of trouble of which the
prophet Daniel speaks in this mysterious language, as
the characteristic of the last time, “ there shall be a time
of trouble such as never was since there was a nation
until that same time.” For if we are warranted in
basing our anticipations of the future on our experience
of the past, as well as on the sure word of prophecy
going before, we are irresistibly led to the conclusion
that the time is at hand when the Lord shall arise and
shake terribly the earth —when He shall shake all
nations, and the Desire of all nations shall come.
111. The third and last of the characteristics of the
age immediately before the flood, was a wide-spread and
remarkable outburst of irreligion and infidelity, unpre-
cedented in the previous history of mankind, and accom-
panied with the prevalence of enormous wickedness of
every kind and degree. For “God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that
every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had
made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.”
Gen. vi., 5-6. And again, “And God looked upon the
earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth,” verse 13.
During a visit which I paid to the United States of
America in the year 1840, I became acquainted with
one of the remarkable historical characters of that
country in the person of the late venerable Colonel
Trumbull, who had been aide-de-camp to the famous
General Washington, during the war of American Inde-
pendence, and who was then upwards of eighty years of


age. On the re-establishment of peace, Colonel Trumbull
had devoted himself to historical painting, for which he
possessed super-eminent talents, combined with exqui-
site taste. One of his admirable pictures, which I saw,
was that of a family group of antediluvians endeavouring
to escape from the-rising waters of the deluge, by ascend-
ing a steep mountain, on the highest crag of which was
seated the patriarch of the group, who seemed as if he
had seen at least five hundred years, while his numerous
posterity, consisting apparently of three or four gene-
rations, were struggling up after him. The sun was
dimly visible through the thunder-cloud and the falling
rain, while the lightning was flashing fearfully athwart
the firmament. Meanwhile the aged patriarch, with a
scowl of malignant defiance on his countenance, was
holding up his right hand in a threatening attitude to
heaven, as if reproaching the Almighty for the destruc-
tion of his race. Now, although this was only an
imaginary scene, I have no doubt that it was realized
in ten thousand instances while the waters of Noe were
rising to submerge an ungodly world.
Now, to return again to the age we live in, there has
never, since the days of the apostles, been such an irrup-
tion of heaven-defying infidelity, throughout the pro-
fessed Christian world, as there is at this moment, both
on the continent of Europe and in our father-land. The
inspiration of Holy Scripture is now formally denied
and ridiculed by a large proportion of the intellectual
classes of society; the miracles both of the Old and of
the New Testaments are regarded as the myths and
fables of a semi-barbarous and credulous antiquity. ; the
divinity of Christ and His resurrection from the dead
are treated as the exploded doctrines of an ill-instructed
age, and man himself is represented as a mere material
organization in no way superior, either in his origin or
his destiny, to those of the beasts that perish. In one
word, it would seem as if the state of things were
rapidly approaching which the Redeemer himself pre-
dicts and characterises as one of the features of the last
times, “ When the Son of Man cometh, shall he find
faith on the earth V’ And the state of alarm now pre-
vailing on the continent of Europe—“ men’s hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things
which are coming on the earth”—may be inferred from
the remarkable fact that the Rev. Edouard Pressense,an
eminent Presbyterian minister in Paris, having pub-


lished a very able reply to an infidel publication called
“ The Life of Jesus,” which has had amazing popularity
in France, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Paris
actually called on the Presbyterian minister to thank
him personally for the service he had thus rendered to
their common Christianity.
In the second epistle to Timothy, chapter iii. 1-5,
there is a remarkable description of the religious char-
acter of the period immediately preceding the second
coming of Christ: “ This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphem-
ers,'•disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without
natural affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incon-
tinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lov-
ers of God ; having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof : from such turn away.” I fear greatly,
my brethren, that this witness is not only true, but a
graphic description, moreover, of the morality and
religion of the very days we live in. That remarkable
man, the late Rev. Edward Irving, who, with all his
eccentricities and lapses, was a thoroughly and emi-
nently Christian man, and who honoured me with his
friendship while he lived, was strongly of opinion that
this dark future, which the apostle has drawn in such
vivid colours, is exactly the picture of our time—the
picture especially of the religious world.
It is the general opinion of the ablest interpreters of
Scripture prophecy, that the seven apostolic epistles,
addressed to the seven churches of Asia Minor, and
contained in the second and third chapters of the book
of Revelation, not only indicate the actual state of these
churches in the days of the apostle, but present a series
of views of the state of the Christian Church from the
time of the apostles to the consummation of all things.
And it is also the opinion of these interpreters of
Scripture that the age we live in is the one symbolized
by the last of the seven apostolic churches, viz., that of
Laodicea. What then are the things which “ the Amen,
the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation
of God,” charges the apostle to write to the angel of the
church of Laodicea? (Rev. iii. 15-18.) They are these, “ I
know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. I
would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out


of my mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and
knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable and
poor and blind and naked : I counsel thee to buy of me
gold tried in the fire that thou mayest be rich; and
white raiment tlut thou mayest be clothed, and that
the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint
thine eyes with eye salve, that thou mayest see.” And
when one thinks of the despicable shifts which the so-
called religious world are ever and anon resorting to in
our day to raise money for alleged religious purposes,
what can be concluded but that this description applies
especially to us 1 The systematic boasting so general in
what is called the religious world, “We are rich and
increased in goods and have need of nothing,” contrasted
with the evident and undeniable spiritual poverty that
reigns around, is sufficient to convince the most incredu-
lous that this photograph of our age was drawn from
the very life by the Spirit of God. And what is the
intimation which the great Head of the Church makes to
us in the close of his epistle to the church of Laodicea 1
Why, it is simply this startling announcement of the
speedy appearing ofthe Son of Man, (verse 20) “ Behold,
I stand at the door and knock.”
To conclude, or rather to review the ground over
which we have passed—we have seen that it is matter
of unquestionable revelation, that the Lord Jesus, who,
after his resurrection from the dead, ascended up into
heaven from the Mount of Olives, will in like manner
come again, as he was seen going into heaven : and
his feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives.
We have also seen that his coming the second time will
be sudden and unexpected, like the flood of Noah, and
while all the usual movements and operations of human
society are in progress as at present —men eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, the states-
man directing the affairs of nations in the Government
offices and the halls of legislation, the merchant buying
and selling in the market place, the mariner pursuing
his voyage over the deep sea, and the husbandman
guiding his team in the field. We have also seen that
the period at which this great consummation shall be
realized, will be a time of great intellectual development
and great mechanical improvement, a time in which the
means of communication will be increased beyond all
previous experience, and knowledge of every kind will


be diffused beyond all precedent in the history of man-
kind. In short, it will be precisely such a time as the
present. We have also seen that this great event will
take place in a time of great political changes and
national convulsions, of wars and rumours of wars;
when, instead of beating their swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks, men will every-
where as at present be learning the art of war, and
perfecting themselves and their engines and implements
in the science of destruction. And finally we have seen
that the coming of the Son of Man will be preceded by
an extraordinary outburst of irreligion and infidelity, of
which we now behold the remarkable indications.
And what does our blessed Saviour inform its will be
the state of the professed Christian Church at the time of
his own second coming 1 Why, in the chapter immediately
following the one from which our text is taken, he
proceeds as follows : “ Then" or at that particular time
in the history of the Church and of the world, “ shall the
kingdom of heaven,” or the professed Christian Church,
“ be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps”
or assumed their Christian profession, “ and went forth
to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise,
and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their
lamps, but took no oil with them.” But mark what
follows in the fifth verse, “ While the bridegroom tar-
ried, they all,” the wise as well as the foolish, “ slum-
bered and slept.” And surely, my brethren, we could
not possibly have a more accurate and graphic descrip-
tion of the professed Church of Christ at this moment
than these most remarkable words contain. The wise
virgins are slumbering and asleep as well as the foolish:
and the cry that will ere long be heard “at midnight,”
“Behold the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him,”
will awaken and surprise them both alike. Seeing then
that these things are so, and that at just such a time as
the present will the sign .of the Son of Man be seen
in the firmament, and “ all kindreds of the earth shall
wail because of Him,” what manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, look-
ing for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God !
Amen.
A. CLEG HORN, MACHINE PRINTER, QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
