

UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES
No. 7.
THE DOMINIONS and THE WAR
BY
PROFESSOR T. H. LABY.
THE WAR and PUBLIC HEALTH
BY
Dr. J. H. L CUMPSTON.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
Propy Ltd.,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE.


BOUND VOLUME
OF
UNIVERSITY
WAR LECTURES
Now Ready
Consisting of all the Lectures
Published in this Series.
Paper Covers,, 2s. 6d. '
Cloth Gilt, 3«. 6d.


THE DOMINIONS AND
THE WAR
Lecture delivered in the Masonic Hall, Melbourne ,
on October 6th, 1915 , by
PROFESSOR T. H. LABY.
THE participation of the British Dominions in the
defence of the Empire is of recent growth, which
was necessarily the case, since in the early days some of
the Dominions were too fully occupied with the work of
colonisation to give attention to remote external dangers.
The Colonial Conference of 1887 was the first occasion
on which any of the Dominions recognised the need, or their
obligation to share in Imperial Defence.
It was not until Germany made a bid for the supremacy
of the sea that any steps were taken by us to organise the
resources of the whole Empire for defence. We had
scarcely made any progress with that organisation when
war broke out.
The Liberal Government, believing that the Anglo-
German rivalry was due to misunderstanding, to bad
feeling created by a section of the press of both countries,
and other similar causes, reduced in the period of 1906 to
1908 the naval expenditure by £13,000,000. Germany
responded with an increase in her expenditure of
£5,000,000. Although the intentions of Germany were
thereby established in the eyes of those open to conviction,
our naval supremacy had been seriously weakened. This,
the Foreign Secretary and the First Lord of the Admiralty
clearly stated in the House of Commons in 1909.
The Dominions saw the heart of the Empire
threatened: both Australia and New Zealand made offers


of warships, and an Imperial Defence Conference was
summoned in London.
In a review of the situation by the Imperial
authorities, printed in the report of the Defence Confer-
ence, it is stated “the necessity for an early consideration
of . . . Imperial military policy is increased by the fact
that, in proportion as danger threatens the heart of the
Empire, and compels the mother country to concentrate
her naval and military forces, the immediate responsibility
foij the safety of the outlying parts of the Empire must
tend to be delegated to her daughter nations, whose
possession of alternative lines of communication might
enable them to send prompt and efficient aid to some
threatened point or to reinforce or relieve the regular forces
of the Mother Country.”
The proceedings of the conference show only too
plainly that the Dominions were not prepared to offer to
take their full share of the burden of . defence. The in-
adequate character of the basis of co-operation arrived at
in 1909 is now only too evident. England, throughout the
negotiations, adhered strictly to her traditional policy of
never asking the Dominions for assistance. This is illus-
trated by one clause of the report which runs:—
“ (8) It is not suggested that any one of the Dominions
“should be asked to undertake a definite obligation. What-
ever is done must be done spontaneously, and with due
“regard to the circumstances in which each of them is
“situated.”
Fortunately, some of the Dominions did undertake a
definite obligation, and later, in 1909, Australia and New
Zealand established a system of compulsory military train-
ing. By 1912 Australia had completed the first unit of the
Royal Australian Navy at a cost of £3,500,000. Under
Admiral Henderson’s comprehensive scheme the fleet would
include in twenty-two years eight Dreadnought cruisers
and ten protected cruisers, with torpedo-boat destroyers
and submarines. The scheme also provided for docks and
harbours.
New Zealand presented a Dreadnought cruiser to the
Imperial Government, and was beginning a local navy when
war broke out. That Dominion undertook about a year


before war broke out to organise an expeditionary force
of 8,000 men for foreign service. It is now at the Dar-
danelles.
The Union of South Africa has also passed measures
providing for local defence. All men are obliged to undergo
military training if not in an active citizen’s force, then
in a rifle association.
The Canadian people had still under consideration
when war broke out proposals for contributing ships to
the British Navy. Canadian Home Defence was in the
hands of the militia, which numbered about 70,000, the
permanent force being about 3,500.
Canada has clearly relied on protection of the Munro
Doctrine, which we now know is inadequately backed by
force.
It is of interest to compare the sacrifices which differ-
ent parts of the Empire have made.
The extent to which the men of the United Kingdom
have enlisted may be seen from the following statement,
made by Col. Foster, R.E., of Sydney University, writing
from London in January. He says:—“The effort made by
Great Britain in this war is perhaps hardly realised. Her
Expeditionary Force of 160,000 was mobilised in a week
or so, and part of it was in France by August 12th—the
whole a week later. All the reserve men of the regular
army corps came up without absentees. The sailors and
marines of the navy have been increased, and probably
number now over 200,000. The Territorial army of
250,000 was mobilised in a few days, and in a week had been
recruited up to its establishment of 315,000. Shortly after-
wards, some of its fourteen divisions were despatched to
India, Gibraltar, Malta and Egypt, thus setting free the
regular army garrisons of those places. Large numbers of
Territorial troops were also sent to France, and more are
ready to follow. All Territorial units abroad have been
replaced in the Home force by others, while those at the
front have, in addition, a reserve battalion at Home. The
whole Territorial army has thus been more than duplicated.
In addition, a volunteer association has provided nearly a
million of men, with the idea that these older men unfit for
active service, will release younger men for the front.


“As regards the new army, or what is known as the
Kitchener army, men were called for between the ages of
19 and 33. The first half million was raised in September,
the second early in November, and the second million is
now well under way. There are now, including the Territor-
ials, two million men under arms in England, besides those
actually in the navy and army abroad. In raising these
enormous numbers of troops so quietly by voluntary
enrolment, Great Britain has done what has never been
attempted before, and what no other nation could ever have
performed. A Canadian, in the ‘Economist/
wondered why England, withiin sound of the guns, did so
little compared to Canada at a (distance! At present Canada
has sent 35,000, with more to follow, say 50,000 in all. She
has a sixth of the population of Great Britain, so on her
scale our armies should be 300,;000 strong, whereas we have
over 200,000 at the front, more in the navy, and 2,000,000
under arms at Home. Similarly, the three Australian
contingents, making up 35,000 men, would justify England,
with ten times the population, providing 350,000 men. In
reality, the people of the Mother country have in all nearer
two and a half millions serving their country, all except
300,000 Territorials serving, or going to serve abroad.”
Since Colonel Foster wrote in January, some of the
numbers mentioned have been increased. No figures have
been published recently as to the total number of men that
the United Kingdom has under arms. From the numbers
stated by Colonel Foster, and the fact that recruits are being
obtained for the third million of the new armies raised by
Lord Kitchener, the following numbers will be less, if any-
thing, than the correct ones.
Regular Army - 245,000
Army Reserve • 138,000
Territorials • 315,000
Reserve Territorials, etc 400,000
New Army raised by Lord Kitchener .. .. 2,000,000
Navy .. •. • • 250,000
Total men under arms (say) 3,300,000


MEN UNDER ARMS.
„ . , Number of Men of Population
Population. Date. under Arms , which was
under arms
United Kingdom 46,000,000 3,300,000 7‘2
Canada 7,800,000 July 140,000 1*8
Australia 4,900,000 Aug. 140,000 2 8
M V , SAug. 31,000(?) 27 (?)
New Zealand j 1,160,000 | Apri j 24,000 21
The following table compares the men under arms
contributed by different parts of the Empire.
Authorities: Canada—Toronto London —
Times; Australia—Defence Department; New Zealand
figures for April —New Zealand Prime Minister.
We may safely assume that Britain has on a popula-
tion basis at least twice as many men under arms as Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, and three times as many as
Canada. . .
EXPENDITURE ON WAR.
What the war is costing Great Britain was made
known by the Chancellor of the Exchequer on 4th May. To
the end of the financial year the war expenditure had been
£307,000,000, the amount for the first four months being
£177,000,000.
The Exchequer is suffering not only from direct
expenditure on the war, but from the commercial embar-
rassment which present conditions have brought about.
Britain’s imports far exceed her exports, and the large
credits she has given other nations will put a strain upon
her finance.


The Chancellor of the Exchequer stated a few
days ago (29th September) that by the end of the year the
debt of the United Kingdom would be £2,200,000,000.
Since the debt at the beginning of the war was £700,000,000,
we can conclude that the cost of the war till December, 1915,
or for seventeen months of war will be over £1,500,000,000.
The daily cost is rapidly increasing. Three years of war at
the same rate would cost nearly £3,000,000,000, and the
interest of the National Debt, at 4 per cent., would alone
amount to £148,000,000 which is about three-quarters of the
British revenue before the war. In December, the cost of
the war to the United Kingdom will have amounted to about
£3B per head. I understand that up to the end of June the
Commonwealth had spent nearly £15,000,000 on the war,
and the estimated expenditure for the following year is
£46,000,000, or the total expenditure till December will be
£38,000,000, or about £8 per head. During the first few
months of the war, New Zealand had spent about the same
per head as Australia, Canada somewhat less. Thus, of
the cost of the war the Dominions have taken a much
lighter burden than England.
In one direction alone, the sacrifices of Australia and
New Zealand have been almost as great as those of
England. The casualties amongst the Australian and New
Zealand troops, considering the short time they have been
engaged, have been exceptionally heavy, proving the
bravery with which they have fought.
THE DUTY OF THE DOMINIONS.
Germany began the war by repudiating her treaty
obligations to Belgium, and she has continued it with an
utter disregard of the usages of civilized mankind and of
internationl law. The organised outrages in Belgium, the
sack of Louvain, the destruction of Rheims Cathedral, the
raid on Scarborough, and the sinking of the Lusitania show
that Germany has become a criminal nation. If the
relations of nations are not to be utterly debased, and a
premium put on immorality and unscrupulousness in
international affairs, then it is necessary that the conclusion
of this war should be a lasting lesson to criminal nations.


The task of inflicting this punishment has become the task
of all civilized people.
Last May a national Government was formed in the
United Kingdom in order that the British people might
throw their whole strength into the contest, and sink all
internal party divisions.
The French were the first to bring all their forces to
bear against Germany. The last of the French reserves
were in the fighting line or in training so long ago as last
May, and for that reason recently we have taken a larger
and fairer portion of the Western front.
When the London “Times” published, on May 18th, the
statement in a letter from a Major Richardson that “the
last of the French reserves are out,” the British Government
prosecuted the “Times” for publishing information that
might be useful to the enemy. A full report of the trial is
to be found in the “Times” of June 7th. Major Delme-
Radcliffe, of the staff of the War Office, was called by the
prosecution, and in his cross-examination he admitted that
a law was passed in France on April 3rd, 1914, authorizing
the French Government to call up the class of 1917; that is,
boys of 17 years of age; the law further provided for men
already rejected, in some cases on the ground of physical
fitness being re-examined. He admitted further that “the
boys are training,” as a general statement was correct. It
came out in the evidence that the “Cologne Gazette” and
the “Frankfurter Zeitung” had discussed these French mea-
sures on April 4th, so the “Times” disclosed nothing to the
enemy. The Government failed in their prosecution.
The case shows that information which would enable
the public to gauge the gravity of the situation is censored
by the Imperial Government. Whatever may be the
merits, or demerits, in England of such censorship, there
can be no doubt that it is a policy utterly unsuited to the
Dominions where the Governments have never been fully
responsible for defence, nor are they in possession of the
full facts. The policy of censoring information known
to the enemy, but of a grave character, is a policy which
removes from both the Governments and the people of the
Dominions the responsibility of adjusting their efforts to
the situation.


According to the evidence which Major Dillon, of the
War Office, gave before a Prize Court on 2 August, Ger-
many has 750,000 men in training. The military correspon-
dent of the “Times” believes she has in addition some mil-
lions of men in reserve.
Germany is forcing the men in the territories she has
conquered to manufacture for her munitions of war, and so
is able to release more of her own men for the firing line.
Thus Germany makes her conquests a source of strength.
Bulgaria has now joined the Central Powers, from
whom she is separated by only 34 miles. Our troops at
the Dardanelles will have shortly to face Germans and
Bulgars in addition to Turks, who will all be fighting
near their bases, while we are thousands of miles from ours.
It may be well to recall the facts relating to this.
Austria delivered her ultimatum to Servia on July 23rd.
From July 26th to the 29th there was only one question
before Europe—how could Russia and Austria be brought
to an agreement. Germany professed then, and since, the
desire to avoid a breach between Russia and Austria.
Nevertheless, the British Ambassador at Berlin, Sir E.
Goschen, reported on July 29th that “I was asked
“to call upon the Chancellor to-night. His Excel-
lency had just returned from Potsdam. . . . .
“He said .... a European conflagration might,
“he feared, become inevitable. ... He then pro-
ceeded to make the following strong bid for Bri-
tish neutrality. . . . Provided that the neutrality
“of Great Britain were certain, every assurance would be
“given to the British Government that the Imperial Govem-
“ment aimed at no territorial acquisitions at the expense
“of France should they prove victorious in any war that
“might ensue. I questioned His Excellency about the
“French colonies, and he said that he was unable to give a
“similar undertaking in that respect.” (British White
Paper Despatch, No. 85.)
Thus, four days before Germany declared war on
Russia, she made a declaration which showed she intended
to take the French colonies. No doubt if she won now she
would take not only the French but British colonies. The
penalty of defeat for Britain would be no doubt a heavy


indemnity and the occupation of her colonies by Germany.
Britain would lose much, but she would remain a
Sovereign State, while we would lose everything which
as a people we care for, and we would be treated with the
barbarity that Germany has shown to Poles, Beiges and
Alsatians.
The Dominions, then, stand to lose more than Britain
by the victory of Germany.
So long as Britain retains the supremacy of the sea,
and can resist invasion, the Dominions are not in danger
of German occupation. But if the Allies fail to expel
Germany from Belgium, Germany’s resources would be
increased, and an attack on England rendered easier, our
security and supremacy at sea would be more seriously
threatened than they have ever been before. How ever
much we may dislike the idea, we must recognise that the
future of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, just
as other parts of the world, is being decided in the present
war. These considerations are mentioned, not because it
is believed that fear of defeat will drive the Dominions to
greater exertions, but to show that their interests are
directly and vitally effected.
The ability of Democratic Governments to maintain
themselves against aggression is on trial. The French,
after initial failures, have shown themselves a united
people, prepared to make any sacrifice for the cause they
are fighting, with the utmost confidence in their leaders.
The central Powers could not have a more formidable
opponent than France. Her best friends must be surprised
by her strength.
The United Kingdom may not have done all that some
would have wished. Strikes and drunkenness decreased her
output of munitions, and caused a serious shortage of high
explosives. Nevertheless, the people of Britain have
responded excellently to the calls for men. Before the war
Britain was a weak military power. At Mens, she had not
many more men than Australia and New Zealand now have
at the Dardanelles. In some thirteen months Britain has
raised, trained, officered and equipped over two million
men, nearly ten times the number of her regular army.
All this has been done by voluntary enlistment, which is


without precedent in history. At the same time she has
maintained her supremacy at sea, and helped to finance her
allies and supply them with munitons of war. Such exer-
tions were due to her allies. History has only too fre-
quently shown that the only durable basis of alliance is for
all the partners to do their utmost. If Britain is under
an obligation to France and Russia to leave nothing undone,
are not the Dominons under an even more binding obliga-
tion to do their utmost to help Britain ? Can an Empire
continue to exist in which the privileges of membership are
equally shared by the different parts, while the burden of
war falls fully on one part, the rest being at liberty to bear
only so much of the burden as they choose? We have seen
that 7.2 per cent, of the population of the United Kingdom
are under arms, 2.7 per cent, of New Zealanders, and 2.8
per cent, of Australians. Why should Britain have to bear
so much more of the burden than Australia or New
Zealand? Why should not Canada contribute as liberally
as Australia and New Zealand ?
It is true that the British Government controls the
foreign policy of the Empire, and determines the issue of
peace and war, but at the same time she has for long been
alone responsible for the defence of the Empire as a whole.
Such an allocation of power and responsibility is undemo-
cratic, but it can be altered whenever the Dominions
demand a share in both these privileges and obligations.
As has been pointed out, the Dominions are at least as
vitally interested in the defeat of Germany as Britain is.
Upon what principle then can we continue to take such a
small share in the war?
If it is granted that we enjoy all the privileges of
membership of the Empire, then there seems to be no
ground upon which we can claim to be excused from render-
ing greater services in the war than we have so far ren-
dered. There may be considerations—such as for example
our distance from the theatre of hostilities—which in a less
terrible war might be sound reasons for not sending so
many troops as parts of the Empire nearer the theatre.
In the present war, failure to throw the whole of our weight
into the contest at the earliest possible moment has many
dangers, it increases the chances of the enemy gaining a


decisive success before we put forth our utmost strength,
it exposes our own soldiers who are already at the front
to dangers they would not incur if better supported, it
prolongs the war, and thereby increases the severity of the
economic effects which will follow it.
A long war is still before us—some of the Balkan
States are just entering the war. It is only by Britain
putting in the field every available man that France and
England will possess the numerical superiority which will
enable them to continue on the offensive, and overcome the
defences which we know the Germans have prepared in
Belgium and elsewhere.
In these circumstances, what is the duty of the
Dominions? Up to the present no Dominion has taken
more than a fraction of its just burden of the war.
We are far from doing the utmost which our strength
allows, as much as we would do if part of our own territory
were invaded.
From whatever point of view the question is con-
sidered, the Dominions are under an obligation to put forth
their utmost effort. At first we entered into the war in the
spirit of giving the Mother Country help in a quarrel in
which our interests were not directly effected. Is that the
right spirit? It has been said that Australia is not directly
and vitally interested in the war, as we are not directly
affected by the victory or defeat of Germany. But that is
clearly incorrect, for we know that Germany, while the
peace of Europe was in the balance, was prepared to
undertake, if she defeated France, not to occupy any part
of France proper, but she was not prepared to give a
similar undertaking with regard to the French colonies.
Although our supremacy at sea is essential to the con-
tinued existence of the British Commonwealth, at the same
it is a source of weakness. Our effective blockade of Ger-
many has made her self-reliant and self-contained; it has
developed the wonderful powers of the German scientists
and manufacturers of increasing the range and efficiency of
their industries. We have used our freedom to trade with
America and other neutral countries until we are in
danger of bleeding ourselves to death by huge purchases
abroad at inflated prices paid for out of capital.


War inevitably tends to pull down the standard of
living of all classes. The improved conditions, which the
working classes have so dearly won will gradually disappear
as the war goes on, and the return of peace is delayed.
There is only one way open to us to meet these evils, and
that is for the Dominions to throw the whole of their
strength into the conflict at the earliest possible moment.


THE WAR AND PUBLIC
HEALTH.
Lecture delivered at the Masonic Hall , Melbourne ,
on October 6th , 1915 , by
Dr J. H. L . CUMPSTON.
The subject of this lecture is cjfearly a very compre-
hensive one. It implies some kind of correlation
between the concerted activity of a community towards the
preservation of its common health on the one hand, and
a unanimous national impulse towards the destruction of
another community. This constant antagonism of ideas,
preservation and destruction, makes it difficult to mould
this subject into a complete unit, and renders it necessary to
regard each portion of the title as a separate stirrup, by
either of which one may mount into the saddle, and on
each of which, during the ride, the pressure is alternately
made.
Public Health and War cannot be said to have much in
common.
War is the attempt by one body of men to destroy or
disable an opposing body of men. Such an attempt is
rarely or never completely successful, for men and women
are not so easily entirely destroyed. But the means by
which this attempt is made are worth a little consideration.
What are these means ? Both on land and on sea the
essential arm is an explosive—solid or liquid, as may be—
a complex chemical substance discovered after prolonged
mental effort, manufactured at great cost and with the
expenditure of great human effort—to what end? To
disintegrate in a flash into elementary gases which diffuse
invisibly and are lost, the labour of Earth's natural


forces for centuries, the toil of man’s mind and body for
years, painfully built up, in order to suddenly disperse into
primary elements and be lost economically for all time.
And in this process, what a mass and a variety of destruc-
tion is wrought—guns, rifles, shells, torpedoes, aeroplanes,
motor-cars, all constructed with fine scientific accuracy, re-
presenting many years of careful, precise, and laborious
experiment, used for a few short days, hours, or minutes,
and then blown to fragments, smashed to splinters, or
abandoned to the weather. Thousands of men dig and
dig with a ferocity that is undreamed of in civil life and
expend a sufficient number of foot pounds of energy to com-
plete a huge undertaking in civil engineering-Kmly to have
it blown away in a moment by a mine or in an hour by
bombardment. Men work for a year and a nation spends
a million pounds to build a ship of war—this floating monu-
ment to a vast mass of energy is sent to the bottom of the
sea in a matter of seconds.
So much for the material. Of the human waste one
does not care to think. We do not know the amount of
disablement and the loss of potential energy even to our
own nation; we are only just now beginning to realize it.
War is destruction and dissipation of both matter and
energy. We are assured at the University that neither
matter nor energy can be lost. This is academic. We
know very well that a very considerable amount of both
matter and energy are lost to this generation, and we are
much more intimately concerned with what happens to
this generation than we are with posterity. A sharp con-
trast to the picture of destruction just outlined is offered
by that special branch of practical science which is known
as Public Health. This is a study of all factors which
may prejudice the health of the community, and of the
methods by which such factors may be removed. This
science, like all others, has exhibited a rapid evolution. It
began merely in the collection of a few scattered facts con-
cerning the pollution of water by human excreta and a
vague association of ideas between malaria and marshes.
It has rapidly extended until it now concerns itself with
the possible effect upon human health of every factor in
the human environment. The purity of air, soil, and


water in everyday life; the purity of food under all condi-
tions, the most hygienic conditions of education in schools;
the proper regulation of the particular environment in cer-
tain trades and occupations, hours of labour, and all such
things, have been and are being carefully studied, to say
nothing of the very extensive study of infectious diseases,
or of the part played by animals and insects in the diffusion
of disease.
In short, the study of public health has, as its province,
the whole environment of man on a large scale and in detail,
and its effect upon his life and health. Moreover, the new
science of Eugenics, which is closely allied, is concerning
itself with the individual himself, and while the hygienist
is striving to improve the environment, the eugenist is seek-
ing indications of the correct method of improving the
human stock.
Together, these must result in a vast improvement in
health, and therefore in potential national energy, and must
effect the saving of many lives.
But while war can produce 25,000 Australian casualties
and 5,000 deaths in six months, it is very doubtful whether
the present methods of interpreting known facts of hygiene
can produce a like saving in as many years.
So much for the contrast between the two phenomena
under consideration, and this contrast has been depicted
with some deliberation in order to emphasize the construc-
tive application of the knowledge the last twelve months
has brought us.
While these two national pursuits have little in common,
yet when they come into juxtaposition there is naturally an
influence by each on the other, and it may be of some
advantage to pass from generalities to the consideration
of these mutual influences in sufficient detail to obtain a
general idea of the situation.
What effect has the war had upon the Public Health
or, per contra, what effect has Public Health had upon the
war? The latter question is obviously an abstract pro-
position, and would be more conveniently stated, “What
effect has the application of practical knowledge of sanita-
tion and hygiene had upon the war?”
It is possible to answer this question, and, happily, to


answer it in a way which is entirely satisfactory. In the
first place there is the remote influence. Britain has
shown to all nations the way to obtain sanitary conditions
in daily life. Britain began the study of sanitation, and
has been in advance of other nations both in its search
for this kind of knowledge and in its application of that
knowledge. It is not unreasonable to say that the steady
improvement of the sanitary conditions of Britain has
played its part in the production of the physical fitness of
Britain’s standing and volunteer armies. The constant
inculcation of clean habits and general clean living must
moreover surely have played some part in the production of
that clean-mindedness which, we pride ourselves, is a char-
acteristic of Britain’s armies.
But it is in the actual details of the present campaign
that the benefits of this close study of public health con-
ditions have been apparent. It has been possible to bring
together a vast army of one, two, or three million men,
and maintain them under conditions of exceptional aggre-
gation, and in an environment quite unfamiliar to them,
without any special occurrence of epidemic disease.
Typhoid fever, diarrhoea and enteritis, dysentery and
cholera have been in the past inevitable associates with such
conditions of military aggregation, but these have been
unknown as epidemics in the military camps of the last
year in England. Cases have occurred certainly, but the
scourges of the past running uncontrolled throughout the
camps—these now belong to the past. These intestinal
diseases are the index of sanitation, and their absence is
sufficient indication of the triumph of applied knowledge.
In this one direction alone public health has played its part
in maintaining the number of effectives. What is true of
Britain is true also of the fighting zone. There the atten-
tion to sanitation is unceasing, and the conditions are made
as perfect as possible consistent with military require-
ments. Travelling laboratories are constantly at work
checking the work in the field, investigating sources of
water supply, possible carriers of infectious diseases, and
assisting in all the ways in which bacteriological knowledge
has been found to be useful.
When one reflects upon the numerous geographical


spheres of military operations, and considers what has been
done to prevent disease, and considers how little disease
has actually occurred, then one is led to a realization of how
completely the science of public health has justified itself
throughout a supreme test. It would have been interesting
to have been able to record the results obtained, but the
difficulty is that there have been no results other than the
purely negative. All that can be done is to record a cata-
logue of various spheres of operations where typhoid and
cholera have not appeared.
As a contrast to this the conditions in other countries
and at other times may be recorded. Austria
and Turkey both have experienced, and doubtless are still
experiencing, more or less widespread outbreaks of cholera.
Servia has passed through a murderous epidemic of typhus
with an indefinite number of deaths (one estimate places
the deaths at 80,000 as a minimum). But these are coun-
tries where public health as a science has received very little
attention.
What is true of the value of public health in preventing
infectious diseases is true in other directions. The system
of control of the purity of the food supplies has resulted in
a supply to the armies of food of a high standard of purity
and quality.
Disinfection and bathing stations have been equipped,
and in many other directions the knowledge possessed is a
result of the study of public health which has placed the
British fighting forces in a more satisfactory position than
they have been in any previous war.
But these effects of public health, while important
enough, are not more than a side-issue in the war, and sink
into insignificance beside the matter of the supply of
munitions. So long as war lasts destruction will maintain
its ascendancy over conservation, and the initiative will
never pass to the side of conservation. The two are
obviously incompatible.
Before leaving this phase of the effects of public health
on the war, however, there is one point upon which atten-
tion may be focussed with advantage. The difference in
the amount of knowledge possessed in 1900 and in 1914 is
not nearly so great as the difference in practice at the time


of the South African War and that in operation during the
present war. The work of the Royal Army Medical Corps
has vastly improved during those fourteen years, but it has
improved not so much by reason of increased knowledge as
by greatly improved practice due to keen and vigorous
organization.
Let us turn now to the consideration of the effects of
war on the public health. Throughout history war and
pestilence have been invariably and inevitably associated
—bosom- companions stalking through the afflicted coun-
tries bent on evil. This partnership of destruction has
been dissolved in all civilized countries. Nations have
been able to improve their knowledge and rationalize their
practice sufficiently to prevent the ravages of epidemic
disease. It may not be too much to hope that nations may
become educated to a point at which war itself may become
impossible.
The civilized races have not suffered from epidemic
diseases during this war, but that such are still possible in
the absence of modern sanitation is evidenced by the ex-
perience of Austria, Turkey, and Servia just referred to,
and in an equally striking way by the experiences of the
Balkan States in the late Balkan war.
Cases. Deaths.
Serbia .. .. ...... 11,000 ... 3,000
Bulgaria .. .... .. 11,000 .. 4,000
Roumania . .... .. 6,000 .. 3,000
The danger is, however, not yet over. The troops are
operating in various centres of disease. Our own Aus-
tralian forces are fighting in Turkey, which has an evil
reputation as being an endemic centre of plague, cholera,
small-pox, and typhus, without referring to a number of
oriental diseases of a more or less infective type.
The movements of large bodies of troops consequent
upon the cessation of hostilities, together with the confusion
which is almost inevitable at that time, offer a very distinct
menace to all countries. Without doubt the resources of
the larger nations are sufficient to prevent any great spread,
but still the danger of the introduction of disease is a real


one. The contingent returning from China after the
Boxer riots introduced small-pox into Sydney—the troops
returning from South Africa introduced bilharzia—a
disease hitherto unknown here, and which, fortunately, has
failed to spread to any extent.
In spite of all vigilance, it will not be surprising if
some epidemic disease is introduced by our returning sol-
diers, when they commence to return in large numbers at
the end of the war. One of the deplorable results of this
European war is the check it gives to a very beneficial
movement amongst the nations. For thirty years the
various civilized races had been attempting to find a basis
for harmonious co-operation in the direction of inter-
national uniformity in health administration, and the 1912
Conference marked almost the completion of this work, as
all the important nations agreed to a common working
basis in questions of international hygiene. Much of the
progress made will now be lost and this search for a basis
of uniform action will have to commence all over again.
The war has had no appreciable effect upon the food
supplies of the nations with whom we are associated. War
may, however, under certain conditions, produce serious
shortage of foodstuffs of one or other kind, with a concomi-
tant effect upon the general health. There seems to be
some indication of such a result in a minor degree in Ger-
many, as the German medical journals report dietetic dis-
turbances as a result of the substitution of other varieties
of starch for wheaten starch. In matters of detail affect-
ing the health of the community on a large scale, the prin-
cipal directions in which the effects can be immediately
observed are the infectious diseases and the food supplies.
There are, however, other directions, probably more
important, in which the public health is influenced.
The loss of an appreciable proportion of young, healthy
and enterprising males would appear to be likely to very
seriously affect the standard of health and physique of sub-
sequent generations. At first sight this would seem to be
inevitable, but it is not at all clear that it is actually so. It
is one of those subjects upon which there is not as yet
sufficient evidence to justify a reasoned opinion. It is
just possible that the reverse may be the actual truth and


that the general average of the national human stock is
raised. The evidence is, however, not available, and
judgment must be suspended for probably at least a gen-
eration until the effect of the present war is seen in various
countries.
One very definite result of the present war has been
the concerted action taken by France and Russia to control
the consumption of alcohol. There can be no diversity
of opinion as to the economic and moral value of such a
step, but there is much food for reflection in the facility
with which a violent revolutionary reform may be intro-
duced when the nation is moved by a common and pro-
found emotion.
This stirring of a nation’s soul under a common dan-
ger is one of the most wonderful effects of the war, and is,
I firmly believe, destined to be one of the most profound
and far-reaching effects of the war upon the public health,
and this in two directions.
The common health is but the aggregate or the average,
whichever you will, of the healths of the individuals which
make up the community. The health of the individual is
very materially affected by his mental condition, and one
is, I think, justified in believing that the common danger,
the call to the community for concerted action and for the
exercise of their most intelligent assistance, must result in
a sensible improvement in the mental tone, and therefore
necessarily in the general health of the community.
The experience of the French nation has been referred
to by many writers during the past few months as an in-
stance of a profound mental conversion amounting almost
to a religious reformation. A nation which passes through
such an experience cannot fail to benefit by improved physi-
cal tone.
Moreover, the men who have been serving with the
colours, who have constantly lived with wounds and death,
will assuredly return to their homes with a sterner vision,
with a more critical consideration of their daily life, and
we may regard it as certain that these men are not going to
accept the froth and bubble as being the whole of life, what-
ever may have contented them in the past. They will look
to those who control their movements, who make the laws


they have to obey, to deal with them as grown men who
have found themselves.
It may be earnestly hoped that from this war are com-
ing back to Australia a body of men who have discovered
what things can be accomplished by resolute men,
actuated by a common impulse, and determined
to achieve any objective which represents an ad-
vance on their previous position. There are many
questions which Australia has to settle, and will
have to settle, and not the least amongst these is the pon-
servation of the public health. Other wars may come, and
men will be needed. Men will certainly be needed both
to replace those who have sacrificed their lives or been per-
manently disabled, and to help us to pay in full our debt to
these men. The commercial development of the country
will require men, and apart from all these special con-
siderations, we are yet far from having attained that pin-
nacle of perfection when we can claim to be doing all that
we can for the health of the nation.
It seems to me that one of the most important effects of
this war is going to be that our men are coming back to
us impressed very seriously with the importance of being
in earnest, and that this is going to have a very marked
effect upon the development of the nation, of which the
most important phase is the conservation of public health.
One other result of the war has been the demonstration
of the ability of a nation, as a nation, to rouse itself to a
realization of a pressing common need, to rapidly organ-
ize itself as a whole, and to actually accomplish, by a con-
certed effort, things which would previously have seemed to
be fantastic. The Germans have been doing it for years
very systematically, the French did it in a very remarkable
way, and even that wonderful complex of contradictory
phases— the British nation—has found itself and, by con-
centrated effort and systematic application, has accom-
plished extraordinary results. Even in Australia the
amount of highly successful work which has been accom-
plished is striking and highly satisfactory evidence of what
can be done by concentrated effort. Here I should like
to digress for a moment to record my admiration of the
work which has been successfully done in Australia since


the war began. The organization necessary to the training,
equipment, and transport of the 100,000 men to Egypt has
involved an immense amount of self-sacrificing work, and
has been conducted with a degree of success which there is
reason to fear has been overshadowed by the criticism of
the things which did go wrong, and has consequently not
been sufficiently recognized.
All of this truly marvellous achievement has been found
to be possible in several nations, and it has been found to
be not only possible, but easily practicable by concentrated
effort to organize the whole intelligence and energy of a
nation for a common purpose.
It would be well for us to consider seriously whether
if this national co-ordination can be attained with the sole
object of the destruction of life, the disorganization of
matter, and the dissipation of energy, it is not equally our
duty to give as much attention to the possibility of success-
ful organization for the conservation of human energy
and the preservation of human life.
There is a proverbial reproach to the effect that panic
is the parent of sanitation. History provides much
evidence in support of this. The Health Departments in
Western Australia and Queensland owed their origin in
their present form to the occurrence of plague in 1900, as
did the Health Departments of Tasmania and New South
Wales to the occurrence of small-pox in 1903 and 1884
respectively. While the Health Departments in every
State are now doing progressive work, yet every health
official knows how difficult it is to push reforms through the
tortuous channels which all progressive movements have
to follow under the conditions of public administration as
they exist to-day. If a Health Act requires amendment,
being perhaps as much as 25 years out of date, it is re-
garded as being of minor importance, and is entirely subor-
dinated to political conditions of really less moment. It is
surely not too much to hope that the day will come when
any legislative measure submitted by the official public
health advisers of the Government will be given precedence
over all other measures, and its passage facilitated in every
way until after full discussion and necessary amendment,
it becomes law as early as is convenient.


A study of the annual statistics of Australia reveal an
unduly high infantile mortality. This is a matter
which one might legitimately think would demand the
earnest attention of Governments. It would surely be a
wise national policy to institute, without any delay, a close
enquiry into the reasons for such unnecessary mortality.
Is it due to hereditary infections, to improper feeding, to
ignorant nursing ? Whatever be the cause, it might well
be investigated, and any steps necessary to reduce it be at
once put into operation. Is better administration of our
pure food legislation required ? Is control of the standard
of nursing needed? If so, then let us by all means see that
these things are at once done. Such would, under this
improved national spirit which I hope and believe we are
going to have, and which we certainly ought to have, be the
attitude of those responsible.
There has just been concluded an analysis of the medi-
cal certificates issued in respect of all claimants for Invalid
Pensions, under the Commonwealth Pensions Act. This
analysis reveals that 11 per cent, of the total certificates
gave the cause of invalidity as phthisis. With respect to
persons under 40 years of age, 24 per cent, of the certifi-
cates stated that cause of invalidity to be some form of
tuberculosis. Congenital imbecility accounted for 14 per
cent, of the total cases under 40 years of age, and if the
combined group of affections of the nervous system, in-
cluding hemiplegia, degenerations of the spinal cord, in-
sanity, and epilepsy be considered, these account for 19
per cent, of the total persons under 40 years of age.
One-fifth of the cases under 40 are thus seen to be due
to definite breakdown of the nervous system. This clearly
should not be. The causes of such breakdowns are not
entirely clear, and it is not sufficient to say that such per-
sons inherit unstable nervous organizations. An endea-
vour to ascertain the reasons for such instability has made
known that part, possibly a great part, of this instability is
the direct result of either inherited or acquired syphilis,
and the matter must be left at that until further infor-
mation is available. But it would appear to be incontest-
able that the interests of the community call urgently for
such further information.


These diseases —tuberculosis, syphilis and gonorrhoea—
therefore play a very important part in the production of
the total human permanent incapacity in the Common-
wealth, and are imposing upon the community a quite
serious financial burden. This at once provokes the ques-
tion, Is there no way of reducing this burden of suffer-
ing and misery, and cannot some means of attaining a
preservation of this amount of human health and a con-
servation of this amount of human energy be discovered ?
These three diseases are productive of so much ecomonic
loss to the community that they merit very serious atten-
tion on this ground alone. The human suffering is, in
itself, enough to justify action, and both considerations
together should be sufficient to force the nation to decide
whether it will continue to trifle with these questions or
whether it will set itself vigorously to ascertain some basic
facts upon which remedial measures may be built up.
Tuberculosis has, during the past five years, killed in Aus-
tralia, about 18,000 persons, and has been responsible for
reducing a total of 3,300 persons to such a condition that
they are permanently incapable of earning their own liveli-
hood. Of syphilis and gonorrhoea we have no such accur-
ate information. The reasons for this are obvious. But
we have at least this fact—that of all invalid pensions paid
16 per cent, were paid on account of degeneration of the
spinal cord, insanity, epilepsy, congenital imbecility, con-
genital malformations, and syphilis—a group in which
syphilis, either inherited or acquired, plays some part.
We have also statements made by responsible authorities
well known to us in Australia to the effect that syphilis is
very much more widely spread in the community than is
generally realized. In an investigation which was very
carefully and scientifically controlled, it was ascertained
that during a period of twelve months (June, 1910, to May,
1911) 1,900 cases of syphilis were verified as existing
within the metropolitan area of Melbourne.
There may have been more than this—it is probable that
there were, but it would not be wise, nor do I propose to
endeavour to startle you with any emphatic statements as
to the distribution of this disease.


No one can, however, doubt that here is a subject for
careful dispassionate investigation, and for such disciplin-
ary control as shall be indicated as necessary by the results
of such investigation.
So with all other infectious diseases. We do not know
many of the factors assisting in their spread—our system
of notification and control is in itself so defective that we
cannot even say we know accurately how many cases
do occur, and certainly we are far short of any complete
and rapidly effective system of control, especially in the
outlying districts.
Our public health system has not yet begun to concern
itself seriously with diseases other than those which are
regarded as transmissible. Rheumatism, degeneration of
the blood-vessels, cancer, and a number of others produce
a large amount of ill-health, and a considerable number of
deaths. These could very profitably be scientifically in-
vestigated, and any necessary legislation based on the
results obtained.
While this search for causes was proceeding, the ques-
tions of successful treatment could be taken up. We
can find no reason to be proud of the haphazard hospital
system which has grown up in Australia. That our hos-
pitals should be dependent, even though it be only partly
dependent, upon promiscuous charitable contributions,
given half-unwillingly, upon a special social gala-day, is not
gratifying, and is even humiliating.
It should be possible to devise a system which should be
dominated throughout by the idea that these hospital
patients are the human capital of the nation, and that hospi-
tals are national instruments for the safeguarding of this
capital.
I have but vaguely sketched an outline, with the inten-
tion of focussing your attention upon the idea of a co-
ordinated scheme for the preservation of the national
health, a scheme in which there will be careful scientific
investigation of all phenomena, in which the investigation
in the field will go hand in hand with investigation in the
laboratory, and which will be productive of sound and accur-
ate data upon which administrative practice will be based.
Such a scheme would involve an administrative machinery


sufficiently developed to ensure successful practical appli-
cation of any increased knowledge and would necessarily
create in the minds of the Governments a feeling of such
complete confidence in their advisers that any necessary
legislation would be rapidly brought into effect.
There is no place in such a paper as this for any discus-
sion of the form which such a scheme should take —nothing
more than the presentation of a vague astral body is appro-
priate.
If, however, the nation realizes fully the capacity for
national organization, which this war has revealed, if it
applies that capacity to the production of a sound national
policy of public health, with all available resources properly
co-ordinated, and if the nation realizes that it can, and
should, regard the care of its own health as one of its first
duties, then this war will have produced a considerable
amount of material good to this nation.


How the War Affects Australia.
NOW READY, AT ALL BOOKSELLERS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Articles the War.
*
(Reprinted from the Melbourne Herald)
ENTITLED
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR
Among the articles in the book are “Why Germany Made War,”
“ World-Power or Downfall ? 5 5 “Our Dangers and Duties/ 5 “The
Worker and Germany/ 5 “Our Stake in the War/ 5 “Facts to be
Faced/ 5 ‘ ‘ Australia 5 s Deadly Danger/ 5 “The Agony of Belgium/ 5
“Self and the State/ 5 “Women and the War/ 5 “ The Case for
France/ 5 “An American View of Germany/ 5 “The War and
Socialism/ 5 “ Ourselves and the Empire/ 5 “Naturalisation and
Treason/ 5 “ Australia and Sea Power/ 5 etc., etc.
ORDER NOW from your Bookseller or from
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO
PROPY. LTD.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.


SPECIAL EDITION
PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA.
THE GREAT WAR NOVEL.
Author of “Oyer the Pass,” “ The Vagabond,” Etc.
“War as he knows ills what the author seeks to paint; war as
it is, not as it was or ought to be .... . The portions in which he
tells of the fighting between the two armies are read with realism.
Mr Palmer’s theme is a big one, and his descriptions of modern
warfare in its various phases are vivid.”—New York Times.
11 A picture of war as it is fought to-day in the nth degree of its
modern organisation and methods. ...... It is not necessary to
recommend this book ; it is sure to be read widely, and more widely
as discussion of it spreads.”—New York Tribune.
A Graphic Answer to the Question—
What would
if two great nations
should go to war ?
By FREDERICK PALMER.
War Correspondent,
Cloth, 3s. 6dL
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. Propy. Ltd.
AND ADD BOOKSBDDERS.
B. R. Gowan & Co., Printers, 492 Collins Street, Melbourne.
