



WELDON’S SHILLING LIBkmRY.
THE
WRECK of the PRINCESS ALICE
SALOON STEAMER.
COMPLETE
NARRATIVE OF
THE FEARFUL DISASTER
BY WHICH NEARLY 700 LIVES
WERE SACRIFICED, AND A PERMANENT
RECORD OF THE NOBLE ACTS OF HEROISM
AND DEVOTION SHEWN IN RESCUING SURVIVORS
AND RECOVERING THE DEAD. A LIST OF THE
NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF THE PASSENGERS LOST.
**♦ The entire Profits arising from the Sale of
this Book will be forwarded to the Mansion
House Fund for the Relief of the Survivors.
LONDON;
WELDON & CO., 9, SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND, W.C


G-LENFIELD
STARCH
Has for many Years been Exclusively used in the
Royal Lanndry.
“ The lest Starch I ever used.”— The Queen’s Laundress.
“Admittedly far and away the lest Starch ) ~ m, w ~
attainable ” c 1116 World.
/
Particularly adapted for clear ) " Englishwoman’s
starching muslins j Domestic Magazine.”
Mill
FO
Wood Iron
MANSIONS
sPUBLIC BUILDING!
Steel
it
THE.
eriod
OF
Price-Lists
Patentees
FREE
AN
OR
Manufacturers
On Application


/ COMPLETE \
/ NARRATIVE \
/ OF THE FEAR-X
/ FUL DISASTER \
/ BY WHICH NEARLY \
/ 700 LIVES WERE \
/ SACRIFICED. \
/ AND A \
/ PERMANENT RECORD OP THE \
/ NOBLE ACTS OF HEROISM \
/ AND DEVOTION SHEWN IN \
/ RESCUING THE SURVIVORS AND \
/ RECOVERING THE DEAD \
/ TOGETHER WITH \
/ A LIST OF THE NAMES AND ADDRESSES \
/ OF THE PASSENGERS LOST \
Edited by Edwin Guest.
Ifoniron:
THE
Wxtt\ rrf frinxm
(SALOON STEAMER).
WELDON and '
9, SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND.
*»* The entire Profits arising from the Sale of this Book will be forwarded to
the Mansion House Fund for the Relief of the Survivors.


PEE FACE.
IT was the duty of the compiler of this narrative
to witness most of the sad scenes which followed
the terrible collision on the Eiver Thames, olf Wool-
wich, on the evening of September 3rd, 1878, between
the steam collier vessel, " Bywell Castle," and the
saloon-steamer, " Princess Alice," with between 800
and 900 passengers on board. Through the dismay
with which his mind was filled at the appalling sight
of hundreds and hundreds of unrecognisable corpses
laid side by side in the open sheds of Woolwich Dock-
yard, two impulses struggled to the front, the first, the
result of his admiration of the many acts of devotion
and self-denial to which he was daily a witness, and the
second springing from his sympathy with those chari-
table persons who so promptly opened their purses to
relieve, as far as money could do so, the fearful burden
of misery that followed in the wake of the catastrophe.
To gratify the first impulse, he would have desired a
pen of steel and a page of adamant in order perma-
nently to record the good deeds of gentle and simple,
of soldier, waterman, policeman, and labourer, as well
as of the clergy, professional gentlemen, and, in short, of


all who had any kind of authority, whether of a military,
a civil, or a social character. To gratify the second
impulse, he would have desired a far deeper purse than
it is his lot to possess. To gratify both, he determined
to propose the plan of the present narrative, and, thanks
to a generous publisher, the suggestion will be realised
if the compiler's work meets with the sympathy and
support of the public. To the very excellent accounts
furnished to the London daily papers, by their special
correspondents, the editor is greatly indebted, and in
many instances their descriptions have been so much
more vivid than any he himself has written, that he has
peferred them to his own. In the belief that many
will sympathise with his twofold wish, and that it
may thereby be gratified, this little book is dedicated to
the generous British Public, by its
Humblest Servant,
The Educe.
IV
PIiEFACE.


INTRODUCTION.
SEPTEMBER, 1878, will probably be for ever
remembered in the history of great disasters as
“black September,” just as a certain day in 1866,
which witnessed the commencement of a disastrous
financial panic, will be known to history as “black
Eriday.” On the Ist September of the year named,
the country was startled by the news of a railway
collision at Sittingbourne that occurred on the previous
evening, and in which five persons were killed and a
large number injured. On the 3rd occurred the over-
whelming disaster on the Thames, narrated in the
following pages, where the number of persons lost will
possibly never be precisely ascertained, but as 610
dead bodies were rescued during the ten days following
the accident, the most moderate estimates place the
total loss at not less than 700 souls. In not a few
cases entire families, numbering seven, eight, and in
one instance sixteen persons, were swept away at a
stroke, without leaving a single survivor.
The catastrophe of the loss of the “ Princess Alice ”
was still the all-absorbing topic of conversation, and
the horrors of the recovery and identification of the
bodies were being fully realised, when news of another
disaster, almost as great in extent, and if possible more
terrible and sudden in form, arrived from the valleys of


South Wales. In the extensive coal mines of Abercarne,
in Monmouthshire, upwards of 300 miners were at
work, when a sudden explosion occurred, and in an
instant 259 poor men were hurried into eternity. The
recent loss of the “ Eurydice,” with all hands except
two ; of the iron turret ship “ Captain,” in 1870, with
every soul on board; and many a previous shipping
disaster, sink almost into insignificance before the late
tremendous calamities. The only event of the kind
with which the loss of the “Princess Alice” can be
compared in extent, is the wreck of the “Royal
George,” in 1782, when, as Cowper wails—
“ Brave Kempenfelt went down
With twice four hundred men.”
These terrible calamities were followed before the close
of the month by one of the most terrific storms that
have ever lashed the coasts of our island. The blackest
year in our previous history as regards disasters to
shipping was 1854, when 1401 lives were lost in four
great wrecks. The transport “ Lady Nugent ” dis-
appeared in the Indian Ocean with all her crew of 400.
But little less disastrous was the fate of the “ Arctic ”
on the banks of Newfoundland, when the loss was 323
persons. Three others vessels started on voyages and
were never afterwards heard of, one of them, the “ City
of Glasgow,” having a crew of 480.
This heavy total had already been passed before the
autumnal equinox of 1878, by the losses in three wrecks,
of the “Eurydice,” the “Princess Alice,” and the
German ironclad “ Grosser Kurfurst.”


THE WRECK OF THE PRINCESS
ALICE.
Ok a lovely evening in the beginning of September,
1878, a saloon steamer, with its human freight of about
.900 souls, was tranquilly making the best of her way
up the Thames towards London, as she had done
hundreds of times before, on her return from a pleasure
trip to the holiday resorts on the Kentish shore—
Sheerness, G-ravesend, and Kosherville—which are
visited in the fine days of summer by many thousands of
busy Londoners. The vessel was the " Princess Alice,"
a favourite excursion steamer, belonging to the London
Steamboat Company, and her commander, Captain
Grrinstead, one of the most careful, cautious, and ex-
perienced captains in the Company's extensive fleet
After an unusually wet August, September came in
with beautiful weather, and advantage was taken of the
respite from rain by many family and friendly parties
to enjoy what was regarded by most as their last
summer trip, for the season had been so wretched as
regards weather, that but little hope could be enter-
tained that the fine interval would be of long duration.
Tip to sunset on that fatal Tuesday everything had
prospered, and the trip appeared to have been thoroughly
enjoyed by all. Confident in the care of an attentive
and skilful captain who had been observed always at
his elevated post on the bridge, and, in the absolute


security with which the excursions of the Steamboat
Company had for many years been conducted, the
passengers gave themselves up to the enjoyments of the
hour —singing, laughing, joking, dancing, or listening to
the music of the hired band, each happy after his own
fashion, not one, probably, suspecting the horrible fate
so near to the vast majority of them. In many groups
mothers, accompanied perhaps by grown-up daughters,
and children of the second generation, in others, thrifty
couples were taking together a rare and well-earned
holiday. In several instances young couples, newly
married, were on their wedding trip, or returning home
at the end of their honeymoon. One group of fifty
women, mostly of mature age, who formed a Bible class,
had been “ spending a happy day ” under the care of an
intelligent and Christian lady, the teacher of the class.
Here an invalid who had been down to Sheerness in
search of life-supporting oxygen, or the ozone, not too
abundant in a crowded city; there, among the lightest-
hearted and most good-humoured, a publican with his
wife and children, and perhaps a barmaid or a nurse,
out for a blow on the river; and right forward, as high
as he could perch himself, a young man from a distant
county, seeing the river for the first time, possibly,
and admiring the outward-bound vessels sailing down
on the ebbing tide. Such was the scene on board the
“ Princess Alice,” at half-past seven in the evening of
Tuesday, September 3rd, 1878, as, almost within sight
of Woolwich, she came round Margaretness Point,
under the rising harvest moon.
A slight alarm had been felt by the more timid
passengers at the near approach of a lumbering screw
collier, hasting straight down the Beach more suo, but


the music and the dancing did not cease, for in such a
beautiful night on our own river, with so skilful a
captain, calm and watchful at his post, and so handsome
and large a vessel, what danger could there be ?
Suddenly the great hull of another screw steamer of
colossal proportions comes into near view, and the
watchful master gives the warning " mind your helm,"
with the necessary orders to preserve the thousand
precious lives entrusted to his charge. Still the monster
ship draws nearer, her huge bow pointing straight at
the pleasure steamer, which seems to grow smaller by
contrast as the screw approaches. Now some alarm is
felt, and the captain, determined at all hazards to avoid
a collision, calls " Ease her," " Stop her," and after-
wards, " Turn her astern," but still that awful bow,
with the directness of an arrow, points at the doomed
saloon boat. " Hi, hi, hi, where are you coming to ? "
from the now alarmed captain, elicits no audible reply
from the huge vessel, which still continues to advance
and never swerves. The captain's cry of " Hi, hi, hi," is
now taken up in a swelling chorus by the alarmed
passengers, but still no voice replies, and the vessel
stands so high above the " Princess Alice," that no
living being can be seen upon her. Silently as death,
and straight as a bullet from a gun, the sharp prow of
the screw steamer, rushes at and rams amidships the
heavily-freighted passenger boat, biting into her like a
" knife in a cheese." The shock is not great, but the
bite has been so deep that the captain knows that all is
over, and after a vain effort to calm the terrified
passengers, he directs them to save themselves, but
makes no move to save his own life. Erom a scene of
pleasure and contentment the crowded steamer is by


this one fatal blow, converted into an abode of horrors,
women and children rending the air with their agonised
screams and shrieks.
“ The big iron steamer, that towered aloft like some
huge monster,” says the Daily News “ drew back
from the blow she had struck, and as she did so the
water rushed in, and the “ Princess Alice ” began not
only perceptibly but rapidly to settle into the deep
channel of the river. The tide was ebbing fast in about
twenty-four feet of water. Imagination can more
readily picture than pen describe the awful con-
sternation on board the doomed saloon boat. Little or
nothing w r as available in the way of help. Some
hundreds of people, rendered frantic by terror, were
struggling towards a single rope. No earthly power
could help them. Within five minutes after the first
shock and thrill of the collision the “ Princess Alice ”
sank into deep water, leaving her freight of seven
hundred souls screaming, shrieking, and struggling in
the dark cold waters of the Thames driving rapidly
down towards the sea.”
With but five minutes warning, nay less than that
time, the groups were scattered, the family ties severed,
and the merry voices hushed in death.
An eye-witness thus describes the moment of
contact:—
“ People were shouting, ‘ Stop, stop ! ’ The ‘ Bywell
Castle ’ crushed into our ship near the starboard
paddle-box. I then heard our poor captain say, ‘ Good
God Almighty! what is to be done?’ Our vessel
appeared to separate, and commenced to go
down. The sight here on board was awful. Women
with babies in their arms, and fathers rushing


frantically about with little children. The lady I had
been sitting near called out, ‘ Oh, pray, dear sir, give
help to the children ; ’ and another female exclaimed,
‘ I will give any sum to anyone who will save my
girl.’ ”
Existence, till then enjoyable and bright, was turned
in a moment into the blackness and bitterness of death.
An awful gap was made in thousands of families, while
in others a merciful Providence had left the family
undivided, every individual being involved in the same
terrible fate. "What had become of one of the happiest
groups in those few minutes will be seen by the following
notice sent, a few days after the accident, to the
coroner: —“ Mr. Bird, of the ‘ Granby Arms,’ Granby
Street, Hampstead Eoad, has lost Ann Wool, his only
daughter, aged 42, also her five children, as follows :
Birdie, aged 14 years; Lillie, 13; Minnie, 11; Mabel,
5; and Kate, 15 months, who were accompanied by
Annie Gristwood, the barmaid, and Charlotte Turner,
the nursemaid, both of whom had been many years in
his employ, and who were both drowned.”
Here is another sad family picture:—■
“Mr. Alfred Alesbury, of Jewin Crescent, City, left
London on Saturday afternoon, for the purpose of
joining his wife and family, who, with their servant, had
been spending a six-weeks’ holiday at Southend, and
intended returning home on Tuesday. The children
were four in number, three girls and one boy, their
ages varying from seven months to ten years, the boy
being about two years old. Mr. Alesbury’s mother,
with her husband, likewise went to Southend on Tuesday,
for the purpose of joining her son’s party and returning
with them at night. Instead of a joyous household


reassembling around the family hearth, desolation
reigns.”
A clergyman of Plumstead, the Rev. Mr. Eowley,
having reached almost the threshold of his home, found
himself suddenly bereaved of his son and daughter, aged
respectively twelve and fourteen. The girl had de-
scended to the saloon cabin, as the evening air was
chilly, and, just as the steamer was about to enter
Woolwich Reach, Mr. Eowley sent the boy to call his
sister, as they were “ near home.” While he was on
his errand the collision came, and Mr. Eowley says that
two minutes could not have elapsed before the “Princess
Alice ” sank, for he had no time to seek his children. He
himself clung to a rope hanging to the other vessel, and
was nearly exhausted when he found himself seized and
dragged into a boat.
One fine little boy of five, on recovering after his
rescue, wept continuously, calling out, “ Go and bring
me mammy and my baby brother,” adding a circum-
stance which showed of what the little fellow’s mind
was most full after the desire to find his parent, “ It is
my birthday to-day.”
The following letter from a boy rescued gives a ter-
rible picture of a family broken up at one fell swoop :
“ I, John A. Everist, aged ten years, wish to state I am
well and with my aunt. I was picked up by a boatman,
and was taken to the Yacht Tavern, Erith, where I was
fetched by my aunt. My brother George, aged eight
years is saved, and is with an aunt at Stratford. But
where is my poor father, Mr. Robert Everist, of 3, Croy-
don Road, Barking Road, and my poor mother, Mrs.
R. Everist, my eldest brother, Robert, aged twelve years,
and Willie, aged four years, and baby Alice, aged two


years ? lam thankful lam saved, and for the kindness
I received at the Yacht Tavern, Erith.— John A. Eveeist,
49, Eort Head.”
Who can describe the disappointment of poor
Inspector King, of the Thames Police, who had with
him his wife, two children, father, mother, and brother,
the latter being an old Waterloo pensioner with a
wooden leg. He was a good swimmer, and on finding
himself in the water, caught hold of a woman whom he
thought was his wife, swam ashore with her, and then
discovered for the first time that she was a stranger.
All the members of his family were drowned.
A nearly parallel case was disclosed at the inquest.
John Eoom, of Spring-hill, Birmingham, identified the
body of his wife, Elizabeth Eoom, aged 44, who went for
a trip to Sheerness with her son. The little boy, who was
an excellent swimmer, was saved; he also saved another
woman, who, at the time, he thought was his mother.
Mr. 'William Catlin, General Superintendent of the
Cowcross Mission,writes : —“Among the passengers on
board the i Princess Alice ’we had 50 poor mothers, mem-
bers of a Bible class connected with our mission at West
Smithfield, who were returning from Gravesend accom-
panied by Miss Law, the Lady Superintendent. As
far as I could ascertain at Woolwich, only one of
our number is saved.”
The finding of two bodies many days afterwards locked
in an inseparable embrace forms the sad sequel of the
following notice given two days after the accident:—
Maeeied and Deowned in One Day. —Amongst
those who are supposed to have perished are a young
lady and gentleman, named Eastwood. They were
married in London on Tuesday morning.


THE STRUGGLE WITH THE
WATERS.
In a tragedy so terrible, embracing hundreds and
hundreds]of precious human lives, there were necessarily
occurring in that small space and in those few minutes
hundreds of separate incidents as tragic and dramatic as
anything ever conceived by the epic writers of ancient or
modern story. One unfortunate man who lost his
wife and children on the steamer, went mad, and after
wandering about the streets of "Woolwich in a state of
excitement was taken charge of by the officials. One
of the rescued women learning in her weak and
exhausted state that her husband and child were among
the dead, simply faded out of life. A father dreading
the loss of his whole family, and hastening from
Walthamstow to the Essex shore in search of what he
feared to find, had the undescribable surprise and
pleasure of finding his little son chasing a butterfly
over the common, quite unconscious of the terrible
ordeal that he had passed through, and in perfect
ignorance of the means by which he had been saved.
The joy of the bereaved man at this happy meeting was
speedily tempered by his grief at finding that he had
lost for ever his wife and two daughters. The tale is
told of an infant of a few months floating peacefully


down the stream supported perhaps by the water-proof
clothing which, like another “ ark of bulrushes,’ ’ would
preserve this modern “ infant Moses ” until picked up,
if not by the tender hands of a royal serving maid, by
the equally gentle, though hard, rough, and un-
accustomed hands of a noble, if humble, Woolwich
waterman, and consigned to the care, both gentle and
loving, of a tender-hearted Woolwich mother.
The most exquisite joy, the most unbounded sorrow ;
the noblest acts of heroism, the blackest acts of selfish-
ness ; the strong helping the weak, the weak being
battled down and crushed ; the fiercest fighting against
any and every obstacle, human or lifeless, by unreason-
ing men and women, their souls wholly possessed by a
single passion “ the desire of life ”; hundreds of living
people rolled like coals down a shoot, huddled together,
a twisting, writhing, shrieking mass, until the cruel
waters close over the horrible gulf and leave the load
still twisting, writhing, battling and fighting, though
now silent. Such was the scene a moment after this ter-
rible collision. Soon for some the fight is over, and the
horrible black waters have succeeded in choking out the
life, sending the soul to the bar of G-od and the body
down like a stone to the muddy bed of the treacherous
Thames. For others one more chance is left, and as
they spring to the surface again they shriek in anguished
broken accents. “My child, my child; save my child,”
cries the despairing mother. “Lord Jesus save me,”
is the last prayer of one who is thus suddenly ending a
godly life. “ Ten pounds, twenty pounds, a hundred
pounds, for a helping hand,” springs to the lips
of some worldly man who well knows the power of
money. A very small band of persons, calm through


all, secure in their knowledge of the art of swimming,
are making their way warily through the now less nume-
rous victims on the surface, towards a boat or the shore ;
a larger number have convulsively clutched whatever
came within reach, sometimes only again to sink; others
have grasped the overhanging chains and ropes of the
great steamer that has wrought this terrible deed,
climbing with all the energy of hope renewed ; while a
few, at the very moment of salvation, sink from ex-
haustion and their chance is gone for ever. Some, net
able to swim, have had the presence of mind to turn
over on their backs and allow themselves to be carried
within reach of a merciful hand stretched out from boat
or surf. A few, oh! horror of horrors ! grasp with a
superhuman effort the gunwale of a boat already dan-
gerously full, only to be beaten off by the boatmen, who
their own hearts bursting with grief, bruise with their
oars those despairing hands until they release their
hold, and the victim sinks to the common fate or renews
the struggle, according to the strength of his body or
greatness of the courage that animates his soul. To all
these fearful incidents there are numerous witnesses,
but the last and most terrible shall here be given in the
words of one of the chief actors in the tragedy. Among
the coasters in the river by which many lives were
saved, was the “ Elizabeth,” of Gloole, J. S. Burnitt,
master, which was standing by when the vessels struck.
Burnitt says, “ I immediately launched a boat and
rowed to the scene, but was nearly swamped by the
crowds who, shrieking and drowning, made a last
struggle for life, and it was necessary to quench their
hopes by knocking them off the sides with the oars.
Eleven were dragged in, and a speedy retreat was made.”


NARRATIVES OF SURVIVORS.
The earliest information brought to Woolwich of the
terrible accident was received with incredulity, and it
was not till the arrival of first one and then another
boat bearing the dripping survivors, that credence was
attached to the awful tale. Their stories were then
eagerly listened to, and a shiver of horror went through
the town, and for a short time a sort of paralysis weighed
upon all. Then a feverish desire to assist in the rescue
seized all the male population, while the women from
the highest to the humblest were possessed with the
hope of being able to shelter and succour the half dead
survivors. The first persons rescued were landed on
the Essex shore.
A crowd of witnesses testify to the kindness of the
bargemen and watermen on the river, and of one and
all at South Woolwich as soon as the calamity
became known there. Mr. Eussell, who swam ashore
and landed at Woolwich, speaks in high terms of a man
named O’Brien, who, after saving several lives, quietly
and modestly withdrew from the scene. Enssell is of
opinion that neither Captain Grinstead nor Captain
Harrison should be blamed, but he attributes the col-
lision to the practice of hugging the shore, by which the


force of the ebb tide is sought to be avoided by an
ascending vessel. He says, in fact, the saloon boat
going round Barking Creek, cutting it perhaps too fine,
was just in the act of shooting across stream to get into
the middle of the current when the crash came by which
so many lost their lives. This survivor adds that it was
a general remark on board the boat that she was too
crowded, the majority of the passengers being women
and children. He will never forget the sudden change
of the scene from pleasure to sorrow, for just before the
calamity took place the band on board the boat struck
up a lively air, and the people seemed at the height of
their enjoyment.
Mr. Pittivant, of Stoke Newington, was saved, with
others, by John Bennett, mate of a brigantine, in the
most gallant manner after an exhausting struggle, and
landed on the Kentish shore.
Mr. Pittivant thus describes the shock of the col-
lision : —“ There was a kind of vibration, and I could
feel the vessels had come together. The tables down
below rocked to and fro as if they had been ‘ electrified.’
The glasses tumbled about, and the ornaments came
down. The ladies set up screaming, and somebody tried
to pacify them by saying that probably the machinery
had become deranged. But we all made our way
upstairs. I tried to look over the head of the ship, but
in a couple of minutes I saw she was sinking. As the
bow dipped the stern part of the vessel became a kind
of inclined plane, and I was thrown down. Somehow I
scrambled up —how I cannot tell, and then I saw the
water running into the engine-room and the steam
coming up from the hatchways. Seeing what was the
matter, I made a dive into the water, and on coming up


to the surface swam to the side of the screw steamer,
and got hold of a rope to which three girls and a young
man were already clinging. The girls were crying out,
'Lord Jesus, save us! ' As we looked up the side of
the ship, we saw someone, as we thought, about to let
go the ropes, and we cried out to them not to do it. It
was a terrible moment for us, but we tried to encourage
the girls to bear up, and presently a little boat came
and picked us up, and also a little child. I cannot say
who the latter belonged to or whether it was drowned.
I think that man there (Mr. Pittivant was relating his
story in presence of the bodies lying at the Town Hall)
was alive with us in the boat. I put a drop of brandy I
had with me to his lips and tried to restore him. "We
were knocking about for two hours in that little boat,
the man in charge of it being unable to find a spot at
which to land, and the tide preventing us making head-
way. Ultimately, however, we got ashore. I desire
most emphatically to record my gratitude to the man in
charge of that boat, and I took care to get his name —
John Bennett, the mate of a brigantine. I gave him a
little reward myself, but he deserves a great deal more.
Singular to say, I lost my hat, but preserved my
umbrella. After getting to the pier I found out a com-
fortable pub., the landlord of which furnished me with
a dry suit of clothes, and so I was enabled to get back
to London last night. I should add that a friend named
Hughes accompanied me down to Woolwich, and we
went back by the boat just for a blow on the river. I
made sure he was lost, and wanted a policeman to go
back with me to town to break the news to his wife,
but the officer said he could not leave. I then went to
the station, where, to my joy and astonishment, I saw


Mr. Hughes, who had been taken care of by another
survivor. We had a regular hug over it. It was a
greeting, and no mistake, but made very melancholy by
the fact that the young man who had seen after him had
lost his brother.”
The following statement by Mr. H. Drew, of Old
Change, furnishes one of numerous instances of lives
being saved by bargemen lying off Woolwich :
“ I was seated about two or three seats abaft the paddle-
box when I saw a large screw bearing straight down upon
us. When I first saw her she was about 300 yards off.
Our captain gave orders to stop our engines, and I
believe they were stopped at the time we were struck,
but the ship seemed to come down upon us without
altering her course, and struck us on the side of the
paddle-box, cutting us nearly in halves. In three or
four minutes the vessel went down. My wife and three
children were on board, but I don’t know what became
of them. I suppose they were drowned, (Here the
poor fellow burst into tears.) I laid hold of a piece of
wood, which I pushed before me, and it kept me up.
I was afraid every moment that some of the poor
people would snatch it from me, for I was surrounded
by hundreds —men, women, and children struggling for
life, and shrieking in their agony. It was a sight which
I shall never forget if I live for a hundred years. I
looked for my wife and children, but could see nothing
of them, and I was very nearly done myself when two
good fellows, who I found belonged to the barge
‘ Charity,’ caught hold of me, saying, ‘ All right, old
fellow,’ and dragged me into their boat.”
Two brothers of the name of Wiele, respectively aged
twenty-one and twenty, give a somewhat romantic


account of their meeting in the water. The younger
brother, Claude H. Wiele, says, “ I was standing on
the lower part of the after gangway at the time of the
accident, having left my brother somewhere on the top
of the saloon deck. We had come up slowly against
tide from Gravesend, which we left at six o’clock.
The captain was in his usual place on the deck. All
the crew were sober, and everything appeared to be in
good order. The ‘ Princess Alice ’ was fully loaded,
and the fore part especially was crowded. I estimated
the number on board at 700 —quite that number; the
saloons and cabins were full. I did not witness the
-collision, nor did I see the ship which struck us until
I was in the water. Our vessel seemed to be almost
cut in two, and in a few minutes she seemed to double
up in the middle and sink in deep water. The people
rolled down the decks towards the opening. It was so
steep that they could not stand. I did not wait for her
to sink, and after giving a peculiar whistle which my
brother might recognise, I jumped into the water.
Presently I found my brother swimming about; we are
both good swimmers, and we made for the screw steamer.
The water was full of people, especially about the hull
of the screw, and we had great difficulty in avoiding
them. A woman clutched me, but I got away, and
I saw her go down like a stone. The ‘ Princess Alice ’
sank as I leaped off, and I was one of the last left on
board, working my way to the stern before I jumped.
I took off my boots, coat, and waistcoat, and reached
here in my trousers and shirt only.”
The eider brother, Herbert A. Wiele, confirms the
statement of the younger man : —“ I was on the saloon
deck, aft, but looking ahead. I heard a shouting, when


I saw the huge red hull of a steamer coming upon us,
towering high above our saloon. She struck us amid-
ships on the right hand side, and then we seemed to
lie still for a minute. I ran down the companion
ladder and got to the extreme after part of the boat,
and took off my boots ready to dive. The passengers
were frantic, and I tried to pacify some of them, for I
did not think she would sink, and I think the people
got a little quieter, but in three or four minutes our
vessel parted in the middle, and she seemed to double
up. The part where I was rose so high in the air that
I was almost afraid to dive. I shut my eyes and
plunged in, taking a long dive to get clear of the
people in the water. I had seen them sliding down the
decks before I leaped. Our vessel seemed near the
north shore just before the accident, and we were not
steaming at all, for the captain had stopped to avoid
another vessel which had just shaved us, and before
she could go ahead this other one came upon us. The
captain and officers shouted, ' Where are you coming
to?' and she drove into our side. When I came up
after diving, the ' Princess Alice ' was not to be seen ;
but I wiped the water out of my eyes and saw my
brother. We swam together to the screw ship and got
hold of a rope which someone threw over to us. The
screw had stopped, and did what it could to save life ;
but it did not lower any boats. I saw four or five men
on board, but they said they had no boats. The money-
taker of the 4 Princess Alice ' climbed up the chain of
the funnel when the accident took place, and got on
board the screw as she came flashing in, and I also saw
one of the stewards catch hold of the anchor chain, I
believe these two afterwards came ashore. My brother


and I got faint clinging to the rope, and let go. We
swam about till we got bold of a boat, and dragged on
there for awhile until at last the man in charge of the
boat took us in. We were taken on shore at Barking
Creek, and lodged at the Crooked Billet. We were
in the water about 20 minutes.
Philip Hilson, 46, Wandsworth Eoad, who went
down by the “ Duke of Cambridge,” with his wife and
three relatives, gives the following narrative, which,
though expressed in familiar language, is extremely
graphic:—“ When we went on board, our party took
their seats on the saloon-deck, and we joined another
party of five persons. We had been singing on the
way up, and enjoying ourselves very rationally and
comfortably. Just as we neared the bend of the river
opposite Beckton I noticed a large ship coming towards
us. I did not think that she was going to run into us.
I said to my wife, ‘Polly, look at this big vessel coming
round; see her red lights burning.’ I said to her,
‘ Come, Polly, give us another song.’ She had been
singing, and her voice was a sweet one. She replied,
‘ I have sung enough, I think; but give me a little
rest.’ She, however, struck up a favourite song of
hers, ‘ Come, buy my pretty flowers,' and just as she
had finished and our party had applauded her, a cry
rose in the bows that a ship was upon us. I jumped
up then, and I saw a ship between 50 and 60 yards
distant. I saw immediately that nothing could prevent
a collision, so I told her to put her arms over my
shoulder and to hold on tight. She said to me, ‘Philip,
if we are to go, let us go together.’ The steamer then
crashed into us, and I got my right hand smashed. We
fell on the deck, and seeing a rope hanging from the ship


I twisted it round my arm and hand. By this time I could
feel the ship going out from below us. I swung by the
rope in front of the bows of the ‘ Bywell Castle,’ my
wife still hanging around my neck. I was swinging
clear of the water, and slipped to the end of the rope in
hope of touching the water, but I was unable to do so.
My wife never said a word all the time I was hanging
by the rope. I tried to pull myself up, and I got my
foot against the side of the ship and walked up hand
over hand. When I had got my right knee on the
gunwale I put one hand behind me to support my poor
wife, and to give some relief to myself, as I was almost
being choked. I said, £ Thank heaven, Polly, we have
got to the top.’ She then eased herself by releasing
hold of my neck. She said, “ Oh, Philip, I cannot hold
on any longer,” and she then dropped back into the water.
After I had somewhat recovered, I got hold of the rope
and slid down again to the end of it in the hope of
seeing my poor wife, but she had disappeared. I cried
for help, and I was pulled on board by some members
of the crew.”
It is to be feared that many of the unidentified dead
are the bodies of visitors to London whose friends have
no immediate opportunity of ascertaining their where-
abouts. The narrative of Mr. John Lesley, of Laister
Dyke, Yorkshire, well illustrates this phase of the
catastrophe. In Mr. Lesley’s letter we have a perfect
vindication of the master of the “Bywell Castle” from
the charge of inhumanity at first made against him. He
says :—“ Being in London for a few days’ holiday, I
went to Gravesend by the ‘ Princess Alice ’ on Tuesday
Sept. 3, and returned by the same steamer at half-past
six in the evening. The boat was well filled, but not


over-loaded. The captain and crew were, I believe,
perfectly sober. The band played lively airs, singing
and dancing were going on, and everything went plea-
santly enough until Woolwich was sighted, when the
*By well Castle ' was observed bearing down upon
us, about 800 yards distant. I was sitting on the
starboard side rail on the upper deck forward, and
from this position neither vessel appeared to alter its
course in the least as they approached each other. Just
before the collision occurred there was a good deal of
shouting among the passengers, who could now perceive
their perilous situation. When the crash came the
screw struck us just in front of the starboard paddle-
box, and feeling certain that the vessel must sink, my
first impulse was to throw off my coat and stand ready
to spring into the water. However, looking up at the
bow of the vessel that had done the mischief, I saw a
loop of cable hanging over, and in the hope of reaching
it I tried to make my way to the paddle-boxes. The
scene on the deck was now one of the greatest con-
fusion, the passengers rushing hither and thither frantic
with terror. One woman caught hold of me, and ex-
claimed, ' G-ood heavens, what shall Ido ? Save me !'
I told her I could not help her, and, releasing myself
with great difficulty from her grasp, I rushed to the
paddle-boxes just in time to spring up and catch the
cable and climb by its aid on to the deck of the' Bywell
Castle.' The first thing I put my foot upon was a coil
of rope, and I threw the end of it over the side, and
afterwards another part of the same rope. While doing
this I saw the fore part of the doomed ship go down,
and a fearful cry arose from the struggling mass of
human beings in the water. The sight was terrible


and one that I shall never forget. The stern end of the
boat soon followed, and then there was another frightful
scene, heartrending in the extreme. I rushed to the
ship’s boats and assisted in launching four, and getting
into the last one myself with two of the crew, we pulled
round to the bows of the ‘ By well Castle ’-to search for
survivors ; but we were called to from the deck to keep
from under, as they were going to drop the anchor,
which was done immediately afterwards, and the ship
swung round off Beckton. I believe that the crew of the
‘ Bywell Castle ’ promptly rendered all the assistance
in their power, and that the boats were got out as
quickly as possible, considering the small number of
hands, of whom I did not see more than six or eight.
The boats were each covered up in canvas, and tied
down all round, which increased the difficulty of launch-
ing them. I owe the preservation of my life entirely
to my being alone and on the upper deck. I did not
see anyone else rescued by the ‘ Bywell Castle ’ while
I was on board.”
The first persons rescued alive appear to have owed
their safety greatly to the devotion of the inhabitants
of the villages of Beckton and Creek’s Mouth, on the
Essex shore. The chief engineer of the City of London
Gas Works, at Beckton, Mr. Trueby, forwarded to their
homes 23 persons who had been brought on this shore,
and many other survivors remained for several days
under his immediate care, or under the care of persons
residing on the works of the Gas Company.
One survivor thus graphically describes the moment
of collision: —“ Eirst of all there was a sort of hum,
then there was a big shout and a crash, and then there
were shrieks which made your flesh creep; and these


shrieks, at first intermittent, blended and swelled into
one prolonged cry for help, as two dark masses sepa-
rated in the haze which floated over the river.”
Mr. Haynes, solicitor, of Bow Road, Poplar, a
gentleman, whose powers of observation and descrip-
tion are beyond the common order, thus narrates his
rescue by Mr. Trueby ; —“ On going down the river in
the morning the ‘ Princess Alice,’ when opposite North
"Woolwich, narrowly escaped a serious collision with a
barge; the incidents in connection with the affair were
so serious as to create a great feeling of uneasiness for
a time amongst the passengers. This event happened
close by where, later in the day, the final collision
occurred. On the return journey there were about 800
souls on board, counting the great number of children
with the adults. The fore part ©f the vessel was well
filled, so also was the saloon deck; but not so much the
aft part, where I was located. After quitting Graves-
end, and when nearly abreast of the beacon light at
Grays, our ship nearly collided with a large brig, and a
serious accident was only averted by our captain
reversing the engines. This incident caused no small
amount of consternation among the passengers. After
righting ourselves all went well till we arrived opposite
North Woolwich. We had just passed the Powder
Magazine on our left and the Beckton Gras Works on
our right. We were pretty nearly in mid-stream. It
was rather dark and hazy at the time. Suddenly there
was a bustle aboard, and our signal whistle blew
tremendously. The wheels of our boat were reversed
and speed slackened. Being at the hind part of our
boat I went to see what was the matter, when cries were
raised of 4 She is upon us.’ Within a second afterwards


the big ship crushed into the ' Princess Alice' on the
starboard side and split us right in half. It is too har-
rowing to describe in detail the scenes which followed.
In a minute or so I could see distinctly the fore part of
our vessel sink. As it sank the poor people were shot
out as if down a shaft into the water below. Meantime
our part of the vessel followed quickly the example of
the fore part and gradually went down. I held on to
the hindmost part, above the rudder, as did a few others,
and we were the last to leave the ship. Before this the
cries of the women and children were piteous beyond
description. One of the crew rushed up to the stern
just before the vessel sank and tried to undo the ropes
connecting one of the davits on the port side ; but he
could not get the ropes unfastened, and said, 'Who's
got a knife; have you got one, sir ? ' I replied that I
had, and handed it to him, when he cut the rope, and
after shouting out,' below !' let the boat down into the
water without a single occupant, although by proper
management people could have been got into it. After
being let down it must have drifted away with the tide.
When I found myself struggling in the water I seized
hold of a lady next to me, who was drowning, and sup-
ported her in the water. A s well as I was able I ' trod'
the water, and was thus better able to keep both of us
afloat. Nevertheless, I went under several times, for
there was a great surge on, caused in great part by the
screw of the big ship near us. After a while a little
boat hove in sight, manned by Mr. Trueby (and an
assistant), the manager of the Beckton Gas Works, who
I have truly and sincerely to thank for the great kind-
ness shown to me. I saw the boat, and called out
'Help, help,' and Mr. Trueby put out an oar, which I


seized, and closed up to the side. Mr, Trueby took the
lady in, and I followed. At this moment cries of dis-
tress were heard a little way off and a lady and gentle-
man were seen to be violently struggling in the water.
The boat put off to their rescue, and Mr. Trueby suc-
ceeded in saving them. The gentleman was Mr. Whar-
ton, private secretary to Sir Sydney Waterlow. The
ship which cut into us did not go on, but remained
stationary, for we rowed right round her to try and
ascertain her name ; but owing to the darkness of the
night we were unable to find it out. Having been
landed at the Gras Works every kindness was shown to
us by Mr. Trueby, his wife, and servants. Fires were
lighted—we were then more dead than alive—and the
ladies were supplied by Mrs. Trueby with changes of
clothing. Every procurable nourishment was provided.
My watch, which kept correct time, stopped at
7.46 p.m.”
A lady who had kept herself afloat for some time by
clinging to a piece of wood, pays the following tribute
to the gallantry of the Essex villagers, residing at
Creek’s Mouth. The Mr. Allen referred to is the man-
ager of the Barking Gruano Factory, who, with nearly
all the adult population of the village, spent the
whole night in and on the water in their noble task,
with a success which, it is to be hoped, will secure for
them some further recognition than that of their own
approving consciences, although it is due to these noble
men to record the conviction of the writer, that
motives of humanity alone, without thought or hope of
reward, dictated their self-sacrifice.
“ I was becoming quite exhausted when I heard a.
man say, ‘ Keep up, missus, I will save you.’ And I


saw a boat by my side (containing three other rescued
ones). I was then dragged in. The boatman who
rescued us called loudly to those in the vessel to let
down a rope or ladder, which call seemed to be un-
heeded, so the boatman bore us to land, and took us to
the cottage of Mr. Allen, a person connected with the
guano factory at Barking, whose kindness to all the
sufferers (including myself) is well worthy of mention,
and should be well rewarded. Everything that could
be done to make all the sufferers comfortable was done.
A fire was lighted in every room, and beds and blankets,
brandy, and food were given, as far as they could do so.
They would not receive any gratuity. I left their
house quite recovered, and able to proceed to my
home. At the time of the collision, the screams
of those struggling for life were heartrending, but
seemed all at once to die away, and there was silence.
It was truly an awful sight, and one never to be
forgotten.”
The curate in charge of Creek’s Mouth, who
modestly hides himself under the initials TI. D. C.,
fully describes the terrible occurrence. About 100
school children .were enjoying their “ treat day ”
with tea and cake, bon bans and fireworks, under the
direction of the curate and Mrs. Blomfield, wife of
the Yen. Archdeacon Blomfield, Yicar of Barking.
“ A little before eight,” says the curate, “as the
children were getting ready for kiss-in-the-ring, some
one came and quietly told the superintendent of the
games that a collision had occurred on the river. The
report of the collision was like that of a big gun—the
screams and shrieks of the poor victims were heard
plainly for some five minutes by those outside the


school-room. Those who were on the river wall, about
50 yards from the school, distinctly saw arms wildly
flung up as the moon lighted up the waves, rippling
over those who never more should see home. The
treat evidently must come to an untimely end. The
children were speedily dismissed with sweets and
urged to go home. Hardly was this over before poor
fellows were brought into the school-room, led by men
on either side of them. Soon the school-room, which
half an hour before had been bright with joyful faces
of little children, was being turned into a hospital
ward. One fine gallant fellow, much injured behind
the ear, was laid in one corner. Before a hastily
lighted fire sat two females—one a young woman, the
other a girl. At another end of the room was a man
dripping with wet, frantically lamenting over wife
and children gone for ever. In a side passage was a
young man, being hastily rigged out in dry garments
who saved himself by hanging to the rigging. Others
there were able to get about, but their hearts too full
to express much. And as a contrast to all this in the
class-room behind was an elegant supper, laid out with
fruits, &c., for the teachers and friends. These, how-
ever, were devoted to the wants of the poor sufferers
and by ten o'clock the pretty school-room looked like a
hospital. Creek's Mouth is a settlement of about 40
cottages, with perhaps 300 people. The men are en-
gaged in the hard work of Messrs. Lawes' Chemical
Manure Factory; but to see the way those rough-
looking men set to work to save the drowning people
did one's heart good, and I myself saw horny-handed
men with hearts soft as women's gently bearing poor
shipwrecked men and women in their arms, and bending


oyer them, bathing their wounds, soothing their mental
agonies as they best knew how. All that night did
some of these good fellows and gentle women watch at
the rude bedside of the sufferers, though their own
work began again at six in the morning. Shirts,
trousers, waistcoats were produced from what must be
a scanty store, considering that all who live in the
place are labouring people. Nothing was withheld that
could in anyway serve the poor sufferers. Best rooms,
best beds were vacated, that the injured might have
some little comfort. Among the cottages were distri-
buted, perhaps, 18 or 20 survivors. In the plumbers’
shed in the factory lay nearly 30 dead. One poor
fellow saved had been lying on the paddle-box which
was struck by the collier, and knew nothing till he
found himself lying on a board in the river, with his
feet hanging in the water. Creek’s Mouth is two miles
from Barking Town over the marshes, which are almost
impassable in winter, and six miles from Bainham,
down the river. There is no road nor even a recognised
footway leading to it, but, fortunately, the weather
being fine, the marshes were tolerably dry, and friends
and searchers were able to make their way across.
The authorities of Messrs. Lawes’ Factory rendered
every assistance, sent out every boat, and have been
very attentive in helping in the identification of bodies.
The people and children of Creek’s Mouth —that ultima
Thule —will for many a long day remember their great
day Tuesday, September 3, and their self-denying kind-
ness and sympathy is worthy of everlasting remem
brance.”
The venerable vicar, though not present on the night
of the accident, was, with his wife, most active in his


ministrations among the poor sufferers on the following
day.
The captain of another barge, Charles Handley of
the “ Chance,” belonging to Messrs. Fuller, states :
“ About a quarter to eight I was with my barge at
Beckton, when I heard dreadful screaming, the blowing
of whistles, and cries for help, and on looking down
the river I saw that a collision had occurred. There was
a regular tearing crash. Instantly I took my boat and
my mate, William Robinson, and rowed to the spot.
Ours was about the first boat there. I never shall
forget the sight I saw. The whole river seemed alive
with heads and hair. It looked like a river full of
cocoanuts. Some people were holding on to forms,
others to chairs and pieces of wood. A stout
gentleman came close to me, and I grabbed at him at
once, but he was so heavy that he nearly pulled us
over. He was like a madman and would not be quiet-
I ordered him to sit down in the boat, but he would
not, and my mate and I had to push him down. Then
another gentleman cried out, ‘ Twenty pounds to save
my life.’ The promise of money did not influence me
but I seized hold of him, but he was so heavy. We
lugged and tugged away, and at last we got him in;
and whilst we were doing this four little boys floated
by us, and their beseeching looks were something
dreadful. We saved them, thank Grod. Then a young
lady, whom I at once recognised as Miss Towse, the
daughter of the superintendent of the Steamboat
Company, came close by, and she seemed to know me.
I seized her, and drew her in too. Our boat was now
pretty full, and we found we could not take in any more;
and as we turned we saw the bodies of two women


but of course we did not know they were quite dead.
My mate and I were nearly paralysed with the efforts
we had made, but we did not like to see the bodies
go by us. We got them in with great difficulty, as
their dresses held so much water. There were nice
gold watches and chains on the bodies, but they were
so heavy. The young lady was holding on to the
form, and was turning over and over when I caught
her! Oh, how I wished I had a bigger boat as I
could have saved so many ! When we got the bodies
in I placed my ear to their mouths, but I could not
hear them breathe, and it seemed that all was over.
Still, as I have before said, we did not like to pitch
them over again. When we got to the pier the
boat was full of water, and it was with difficulty we
saved her from sinking. So loud were the screams
and cries for help that we could not hear ourselves
speak. The rush of steam and fire, too, was something
terrible, and I could not see the funnel of the ‘ Princess
Alice.’”
Mr. Dicey’s celebrated twin ship “ Castalia,” which
happened to be lying in the river near the scene of the
accident, sent off boats to assist in rescuing the drowning
creatures. One of those saved by this means, Mr.
Wharton, thus relates the terrible story: —About
half-past seven o’clock the “ Princess Alice ” neared the
Powder Magazine which lies moored off the Kentish
shore. Soon after passing it several of the passengers
observed that they had abated their ordinary speed,
and, whilst wondering what could be the cause for so
doing, he saw a large vessel ahead. At the first glance
it was difficult to say if she was moving or standing
still, but a very few seconds sufficed to make it clear to


everybody on deck that she was noiselessly but rapidly
coining down upon the " Princess Alice," and great
excitement ensued. Captain G-rinstead called out
loudly, " "Where are you coming to P " which hail he
repeated two or three times. The " Princess Alice "
had stopped, and seemed, in fact, to wait two or three
minutes for the collision. Prom where he was standing,
Mr. Wharton saw the point of contact quite plainly.
He says the prow of the " By well Castle " seemed to
career along the fore starboard bulwarks of the " Princess
Alice," and then bury itself like a knife in her frame,
just in front of the starboard paddle-box. The shock
threw a great number of people down, and almost
immediately the fore part began to fill, the portion
nearest the engine going first. In two minutes from
the collision —Mr. Wharton says it certainly could
not have been more—the fore part had disappeared,
carrying an immense number of people with it. The
stern portion had by this time commenced sinking,
and, like the fore part, it settled down amidships first.
The bulk of the passengers were on this portion, and it
was terrible to see them one after the other, unable to
keep their feet, slide —like coals down a shoot, as Mr.
Wharton graphically puts it—into the water. Mr.
Wharton had placed his right arm round his com-
panion, and with his left held by an iron upright for
supporting the awning. Just before this he had seen
an army officer with a bench in his hands and his family
standing round him holding on to the sides of the
steamer. The water was quite up to his waist before
he felt the steamer give a lurch under the feet of him-
self and friend, and leave them struggling in the water,
They were drawn down some distance, but on coming to


the surface Mr. Wharton, with his arm still round his
companion, turned on his back and floated down stream
with the tide. Casting his eyes upwards he distinctly
saw the red light of the “ By well Castle,” and called
out for help. A piece of wood about a yard long
coming close to him, he managed with an effort to
seize it with his left hand, and luckily got his arm
right round it. By its aid he was much assisted in
keeping the heads of himself and companion above
water. After drifting for some two or three minntes
longer a boat belonging to the “ Castalia,” manned by
White of the “ Castalia’s ” crew, and Gardiner, the
watchman at the Gas Works Pier, came up, and they
were lifted in, the young lady being then in an uncon-
scious state. They were conveyed ashore to the house
of Mr. Trewby, the manager of the Beckton Gas
Works, and treated with a kindness and consideration
beyond all praise.
A waterman named Peter Brown rescued the mate of
the “ Princess Alice ” and six others. The rescued
mate took an oar with Brown, but both were so exhausted
that they were three hours in reaching Woolwich. Many
of the survivors express opinions as to who is to blame
and though we recommend our readers to suspend their
judgment till the result of a series of very careful en-
quiries shall fix the blame on the right shoulders, we
shall not be doing any injustice by recording here one
or two of those opinions which have already been made
public through the daily press. Mr. Peed, 57, Oxford
Street, London, says :—“ I was on the upper fore deck
of the ‘ Princess Alice,’ and, noting our slow progress,
I stood on a seat to ascertain the cause. I then saw
the huge steamer advancing directly on us, and, as far


as I could judge, she made not the slightest deviation
from her course, but came straight into the centre of
the ‘ Princess Alice.’ In the water I caught hold of
a plank, which enabled me to support myself and my
wife, and when a rope was thrown over the iron vessel
we managed to secure a hold, and, with the help of the
plank, five of us hung on till taken into a boat. Of the
five, one was a woman whose child had gone down, and
her screams were truly frightful. She appeared to me
to be dying when taken out of the boat. Considering
the great distance we could be seen from the iron steamer,
and the terrible shouts of hundreds of people which would
beheard long before the collision, I cannot avoid the con-
clusion that the captain or pilot in charge of the collier
is morally answerable for the dire calamity.”
One passenger, on the other hand, blames the captain
of the saloon steamer, and in opposition to the testimony
of almost every other survivor who speaks to the point,
he goes so far as to assert that Captain Grinstead was
not on the bridge when the danger of a collision first
revealed itself. His statement is, however, neutralised
by the admission that the funnel, which was between
himself and the bridge, might have hid the captain from
his view. This passenger, a Mr. King, states that when
the collision took place nearly all the passengers rushed
aft of the funnel, which made it evident that she was
quickly going down. A cry was thereupon raised to
keep over to the forward part of her. Upon that cry
being raised, however, there was another rush in the
other direction, and Mrs. King, of whom he was taking
care—having at the same time his child in his arms, was
knocked down. The steamer then gave a lurch over
upon her side, and his wife fell overboard and was


drowned. When the steamer went down he kept the
child as well as he could above water, and made towards
the shore with the aid of the wreckage. In the end,
however, he was obliged to let the little one go in order
to save himself, as he was unable to keep it up any
longer.
Mr. King further says:—“ That when the two vessels
were about fifty yards apartthe people on board the saloon
boat commenced shouting, but no notice was taken by
the officers of the ship and no attempt was made to
reverse the engines.” The state of the engines when
recovered from the river disproves this, but we will
continue Mr. King’s extraordinary statement: “ There
was quite time enough for the captain to have reversed
his engines between the commencement of the shouting
and the actual collision. It was his firm opinion that
the captain of the saloon steamer was, in a great measure
to blame for the accident, because he could have easily
averted the calamity had he been at his place on the
bridge when the shouts were first raised. The ‘ noses ’
of the two boats were then fifty feet clear of each other.
He was satisfied the captain was not on the bridge, be-
cause he looked particularly to see where he was, and
could not see him. The funnel, which was between
himself and the bridge, however, might possibly have
screened the captain from his view.”
The master of the “ Bonetta,” Mr. Abraham Dennis,
who did glorious service as a rescuer, strongly insists
that the captain of the wrecked saloon steamer acted
with perfect judgment. He says : —“ lam master and
owner of the barge ‘Bonetta,’ and reside at Newing-
ton, next-Sittingbourne. On the evening of Tuesday,
September 3, I was sitting on the after part of my main


hatchway, when I saw a steamboat coming up Tripcock's
Point. She rounded the Point, hugging the south
shore as closely as possible. I then heard a shout twice,
' Where are you coming to ?' I then heard the steam-
boat's whistle twice, and a shout from the screw, 4 Port,
port.' I had not seen the screw previously, but on
looking round I saw her bearing down on the steam-
boat. I did not then know that the screw was the
4 Bywell Castle,' but I found out that was her name
afterwards. The collision took place a moment after I
heard the shout from the screw, 4 Port, port.' I called
out to my mate, James Hodgman, 4 For G-od's sake
come up here and save life.' I then jumped into my
boat, followed by my mate, and we pulled away with all
speed to the spot where the collision occurred. The
4 Princess Alice' disappeared almost immediately ; I
was close under her stern when she went down, and
those I picked up jumped out of her. I saved eight
lives. Would to God I could have saved the lot! I
hardly know how to describe the scene to you. It was
too dreadful. I can compare the 4 Princess Alice' to
nothing else than a cloud. One moment she was there,
and the next moment clean gone. I can compare the
people to nothing else than a flock of sheep in the
water. The river seemed full of drowning people. I
went right in the midst of them, but from their frantic
exertions to save themselves I hardly thought I should
get out again alive. The shrieks and shouts of the
people were piteous to hear, and would quite have un-
nerved me but for my desire to rescue some of
the poor creatures. The people were calling out all
round, 4 Save me, save me, for God's sake save me.' I
rendered all the assistance I could. My boat is a small


one, only 12ft. long, and I hung more on her than she
was able to carry. She was very nearly level with the
water, and I dared not attempt to row ashore. Another
boat took two persons from me. I do not know their
names, but I have the names of the other eight or nine
persons I picked up. I then pulled to the first craft I
came to, which proved to be the Eliza Bellard. I had
to put my passengers out there to get the water from
my boat. I then took them in again, and rowed them
to Beckton Gras works, where I put them safe on shore,
and saw them safe into conveyances. How we came
out of it safe I don’t know. It is my firm opinion that
if the 1 By well Castle ’ had not ported her helm she would
have cleared the 1 Princess Alice / and ifthelatter had not
been there she must have gone ashore . It was a quarter
or 10 minutes to 8. It was just dark, but moonlight—
the moon was just showing itself. The 1 Princess
Alice ’ was keeping her course in a proper direction , and
had no other chance of going clear hy porting her helm.
She had no chance of avoiding a collision than hy keeping
the course she was going in. If the £ By well Castle ’ had
not ported her helm she must have gone clear. There was
nothing else in her way to the northward for three-
quarters of a mile .”
The tragedy was nearly ended when there appeared
the “ Duke of Teck,” a steamer belonging to the
London Steam Boat Company, which followed the
“ Princess Alice ”at a short interval. Though it arrived
on the scene of the accident too late to assist the
majority of the unfortunate passengers in the crisis of
their battle against a dreadful death, this vessel saved
several, and was of great service in succouring the
rescued, and in most cases exhausted passengers. Mr.


G. Webb, Green Street, Paddington, who returned to
London on board the “ Duke of Teck,” to avoid the
crowd on the “ Princess Alice,” says :
“As the ‘Duke of Teck’ followed very shortly
after the “ Princess Alice,” we were able by the aid of
a glass to distinguish her plainly all the way up the
river, and therefore saw the whole of the dreadful
occurrence.”
As regards the actual collision, the “ Duke of Teck ”
would hardly be able to make out clearly the details of
the terrible event, for it was not only on the very edge
of the night that it took place, but there was an obstacle
in the intervening headland called Tripcock Trees Point.
The “ Duke of Teck,” however, did all that remained
possible when it had arrived on the scene, and a large
number of eye witnesses will join Mr. Webb in saying
that great praise is due to the captain and crew of
the “ Duke of Teck,” as the vessel was kept by the
wreck for more than an hour, every possible means
being used to give assistance, and she did not leave
until all hope of saving more lives was gone.


THE NEWS OF THE COLLISION.
ALTHOUGH, as we have seen, the accident occurred
before eight o'clock on Tuesday evening, September 3rd,
it was not till the information was given in the papers
of Wednesday morning that London became aware of
the awful tragedy. A rumour had been circulated
that a collision had occurred, with the loss of 600
lives, but no one could be found to credit a story so
improbable. "When at length the citizens realised the
magnitude of the disaster, a thrill of indignation,
mingled with an almost despairing and helpless feel-
ing of grief, throbbed through all the great heart
of London. "Whoever had friends whose non-appear-
ance at home during the night led them to fear the
worst, thronged to Woolwich by the early trains,
some even leaving as early as 2'30 in the morning by
a hop pickers' train, which happened to be going
from London Bridge. The Times and Daily News
published second editions, giving later particulars, with
a list of passengers saved, that had been furnished by
the Steamboat Company. Every scrap of information
was eagerly devoured, in the hope that later accounts
would show the earlier reports to have exaggerated the
magnitude of the disaster; but the later accounts only
confirmed the worst anticipations, and then London


gave itself up to a profound feeling of sorrow. The
Sittingbourne railway accident, which had occurred
three days before, was forgotten in this greater cala-
mity, and the mind was cast back to the loss of the
“ Eurydice ” to find a recent parallel.
“ Despite its vastness and the multitudinous nature
of its interests,” says the Morning Advertiser , “ expe-
rience shows that there are occasions when the metro-
polis is capable of evincing a degree of pity and concern
for perishing and suffering humanity as true and deep
as any manifestation of public feeling in a provincial
town or country village. The present instance affords
a notable proof that London is neither so imperial nor
so cosmopolitan as to lack commiseration for the victims
of a catastrophe at its own doors. The sor 600
persons who went down in the saloon steamer on
Tuesday night belonged for the most part to the ranks
of the upper working class ; but while this may make
the disaster appeal more directly to the masses who
subsist on the wages of industry, it detracts nothing
from the deep feeling of concern which affects society
at large in respect to this fearful catastrophe. The
message of sympathy from the Queen indicates the fact
that the disaster is recognised as national, and affects
the hearts of all. The sensation produced is the more
marked owing to the unexpected nature of the visi-
tation. Before the occurrence of this extraordinary
disaster, probably very few persons ever thought it
possible that a collision in the Thames, almost within
the limits of the metropolis, could be accompanied by
such a tremendous sacrifice of life. The country has
often been shocked at the stories of vessels cast away
on the perilous coasts which flank our north-eastern


ports. But the Thames has neither rocks nor billows,
and the perils of the lee shore are unknown on its
tranquil water. Hence the fact of a vessel being
wrecked and hundreds of lives lost within hail of "Wool-
wich has startled the inhabitants of London almost as
much as if the loss of life had accrued from an earth-
quake. We have heard, and that truly, of' sorrow on
the sea.' But at this hour there is grief on the banks
of the Thames as widespread and terrible as if another
* Eurydice' —or even two as fully thronged as she was —
had sunk beneath the waters. The river has proved
for the time even more greedy than the sea, and has
swallowed up, not only gallant men carrying their
lives in their hands, but home-abiding citizens, with
their wives, their daughters, and their little ones."


THE WORK OF RESCUE.
On both banks of the river the conduct of every class
of the inhabitants was beyond all praise, and, in fact,
the only part of the whole sad occurrence which is at all
pleasant to contemplate is the kindness with which the
survivors have been treated by private persons. At the
Plumstead Union 100 extra beds were promptly made
up, and the unfortunately much smaller number of sur-
vivors actually taken in were treated with the greatest
skill and attention.
Doctors, police, parish officials, and others rendered
aid, and the whole population of Woolwich seemed con-
gregated in the streets about the water side all through
the night eager to hear a scrap of news or gain a shade
of comfort over the addition of one more to the list of
saved. At North Woolwich G-ardens, where the usual
gay scene was in progress, the news fell like a black
pall. Mr. Holland at once stopped the music and
dancing, and the grounds were very rapidly cleared. A
Lodge of Freemasons at the Henley Arms at once
adjourned, and the most intense feeling of sorrow, sym-
pathy, and excitement prevailed on all sides.
At Beckton and at Barking Creek on the north shore,
where the ebb tide had carried the persons earliest
rescued, the same anxiety to save life and render help
actuated the whole of the inhabitants, as testified by


narratives of survivors, and by the letter of the curate
of Creek’s Mouth (page 30), and the same active
sympathy and self-denial in presence of the calamity
was evinced by the people of Rainham and Erith.
All through the night the work of rescuing the dead
and succouring the living went on, the officials of the
Steamboat Company, the parochial authorities, and the
police working together with a singleness of purpose,
and a vigour which it is as much a pleasure as a duty
for us here to record. The solicitor of the Steamboat
Company, Mr. Edwin Hughes, and Mr. Towse, the
general superintendent, immediately organised parties
of rescue, and the master and crew of the “Heron”
steamer were told off to perform the dreadful task of
collecting the bodies from the small boats that were out
on the search. Soon the lifeless forms and the all but
lifeless and half naked persons rescued began to arrive,
one of the most useful and active workers being Mr.
"Warren Hawkes, landlord of the “Steam Packet Inn,”
near Woolwich Pier, who had already, as he came up
soon after the accident in the “ Duke of Teck,” helped
to save several lives, in conjunction with Mr. Plaisted
and others of the passengers. Those who still lived were
about midnight taken in cabs to the infirmary by Messrs.
Eisk, Waters and Bishop, and for the same purpose
the officials at the Plumstead Workhouse made prompt
preparation to render help to the living and to give
shelter to the dead, and here on the day following the
disaster, commenced that sad pilgrimage of persons
with mournful, anxious faces, vainly hoping to find the
friends whom they miss, which was destined to con-
tinue without intermission for very many days.
The Rev. Mr, Balchin, chaplain, Dr. Rice, Miss Wil-


kinson, the matron, and all the officials, received the
unhappy wanderers with proper kindness, as well as
taking care of the patients left under their charge.
One gentleman, Mr. W. H. Vachel, of Surbiton,
requested to be taken to the house of his friend
Dr. Lacy, Burrage Road, where he lingered a few days,
and then died from the effects of the immersion.
The following were some of the medical gentlemen
who freely gave their professional services : —Drs.
Pullar, Mitchell, Coleman, Howard, Sharpe, Lett, and
P. Smith, Burrage-road. Prom soon after the accident
throughout the whole night the Rev. S. Thackrah, M.A.,
of Oreenwich-park College, gave kindly aid and conso-
lation to the surviving sufferers. Police duties, neces-
sarily of a very onerous and responsible character, were
discharged under the direction of Chief-Inspector
Lucas of the R Division; Superintendent Hindes,
Woolwich; Superintendent Alston, Thames Police;
Inspectors Ford, Meering, Clark, and Phillips, and an
efficient body of sub-inspectors, sergeants, and constables.
The dead were conveyed to the Town Hall at
Woolwich and to the Board Room of the offices of the
Steam Boat Company. The following description of
the scenes at the Town Hall and at the Board Room
is from, perhaps, the most vigorous of the many ex-
cellent reports published: —
“ The most unimaginative of mankind could not have
looked upon a single corpse placed upon the straw with
which the floor was covered, without acknowledging
that the spectacle before him was a hideous reality of
death in its most repulsive form. Placid and peaceful
in expression the faces of the dead were almost aglow
with a sickening ruddy colour indicative of death from


asphyxia, and approaching decomposition. The ex-
tremities, the hands and other parts of the body exposed,
were pale and colourless as wax, and the contrast
between the coppery hue of the swollen features and
the pallid ashen tint of the limbs was painful to the
beholder. There were twenty-eight men and four
women, of whom, at three o’clock in the afternoon, only
six had been identified. All were lying peacefully and
calmly on the floor, but in every case the hands clenched,
raised and distorted, too plainly indicated the violent
death they had suffered. One had the left hand below
his hips, but the fist tightly clenched, while the right
was raised a foot high, as if trying to grasp something
at the moment of death. An unfortunate woman, aged
about fifty, presented a sickening spectacle. The face
swollen, the blood slowly oozing from the clammy
nostrils, the hands upraised as if imploring assistance,
all were horribly suggestive of the unnatural death
which had overtaken the poor creature.
“ Leaving the Town Hall, with its crowd still surging
about the doors, noisy and clamorous as before, I with
difficulty regain the fly awaiting me, and drive to the
office of the steamboat company at the pier gate. Here
are nineteen bodies, ten in the room itself, and nine out
on the verandah looking upon the river from which they
have so lately been taken. It is indeed a piteous sight.
Here, too,themostagonising sight I witnessed took place,
the recognition of a baby a few months old by its mother
—a spectacle I never witnessed before, and certainly never
wish to see again. Of the nineteen bodies here, fifteen
have been identified. In the rather small space of the
board room lie ten corpses ; over eight of them is stretched
the friendly covering of a white blanket, denoting the


fact that they have been identified. They are in striking
contrast to those in the Town Hall. They lie so
naturally and seem in their attitude so little distorted,
their faces, too, being less muddy than those I before
saw, that they appear, notwithstanding the unmistakable
signs of violent death, much less repulsive in aspect
than any I have yet come across. Stepping out on to the
verandah I for once fall back, feeling for the moment
more than overcome. Before me lies a girl of tender
years, neatly dressed, evidently for the pleasure excur-
sion, which was no doubt so happily anticipated and so
joyously looked forward to, and by her side are ranged four
little babies, tiny morsels of humanity, with wax-like
features, wan in death, and the inane and sickening
smile of the dead permanently fixed upon their features.
A pitiful, pitiful sight, as they lie by the side of the
hapless young maiden, their faces upturned to the blue,
sunny sky their glazed eyes shall never again behold.
Almost overcome, I turn half round, and a sight scarcely
less affecting meets my eye. There lies a fine hale old
man, one of the stewards of the steamer ' Princess Alice,'
a man known by all the "Woolwich people, and every-
where respected. A faithful servant of the company
who engaged him. He died at his post, a brave old
fellow. He seems so peaceful and still, his face so little
altered, his features so little distorted, that one can
searcely realise the fact that he is really and truly dead.
Close by him is a young woman of about two or three
and twenty, ' bravely' apparelled, as if for a holiday,
her dress bedraggled, her features swollen, and her
complexion horrid. The blood, too, begins slowly to
trickle from the nostrils, and, sickened, I am forced to
turn aside. Standing a little back I watch the entry of
those coming to ' seek their dead."' d


HELP FROM THE MILITARY AND
POLICE.
The desirability of collecting the whole of the bodies
in one place to facilitate identification was at once
recognised, and Captain Barrington, E.E., offered for
the purpose one of the large sheds at the Woolwich
Dockyard, capable of holding 200 bodies. So far as the
Essex shore was concerned, the bodies could not
legally be removed until after they had been viewed
by the coroner, Mr. Lewis, and an Essex jury, and
there was necessarily some hours’ delay in collecting
the other bodies from the different localities.
Meanwhile, all day on Wednesday hundreds of tear-
stained searchers for missing friends were compelled to
travel from place to place. The earliest of these
melancholy parties arrived before daylight at the
Arsenal Station. It was a party of sixteen, including
four ladies, and their search is thus described by one of
them:—
“ We were taken by the station inspector to the pier,
where commenced the work which is not yet finished,
that of finding three persons who are most dear to us.
Then to the Town Hall, and then to the police office,
where the inspector telegraphed home for us; by the
early boat to North Woolwich, across to Beckton, and
thence to Barking, afterwards in a waterman’s boat to


Erith. At all these places the same sad result. Many
corpses, hut not those we sought. We owe many
thanks to Mr. Lord, a draper in Woolwich, and also to
a clergyman, who will, I hope, know us from this, and
accept the grateful thanks which we missed the chance
of giving him this early morning. Our search is not
yet over. No better father or mother sat on that boat
than those we mourn.”
The correspondent of the Standard writes from
Barking ;
“Although every facility is given at Woolwich by
the officials to glean tidings of the persons missing, as
time creeps on no doubt the anxiety of the unhappy
friends and relatives increases. Many who have
been here in the hope of gaining some news of their
lost relatives have been woefully disappointed, and
one after another, in the most mournful tones
have been heard to exclaim — { I have been to
Woolwich, I have been to Erith, now I come here !
oh, where shall I go to next? I fear I shall never
see them more.’ ”
Perhaps one of the saddest cases was that of a poor
young girl named Palmer, who had lost father, mother,
two sisters, and a brother, and who had been left at
home to mind the house. She had not even money to
pay her fare to Woolwich to identify her lost relatives,
and Mr. Towse, the superintendent, gave her passes to
and fro.
The well-timed offer of the military authorities came
very apropos , and by the morning of the sth Septem-
ber, most of the bodies found on the Kentish shore
had been removed and decently laid out in Slip No. 2,
one of the large open sheds at Woolwich Dockyard.


The soldiers of several corps volunteered their services
as carriers in the most generous manner, those of the
Army Service Corps and the Army Hospital Corps, who
are accustomed to duties of this nature, being especially
useful, and bringing their own ambulances and bearers.
Had the accident occurred at almost any other point on
the river, or had the military, both officers and men,
shown a less generous spirit, the terrible task of iden-
tification would have been infinitely more difficult, if
not in most cases impossible; and it is difficult to see
how the parochial authorities of Woolwich, excellent
men of business though they have proved themselves to
be, could have got through the enormous difficulties
involved in the rescue, identification, and decent inter-
ment of hundreds upon hundreds of corpses already
in an advanced state of decomposition before being
recovered.
Even with all the special resources of the Dockyard
and the garrison, the physical powers of both officers
and soldiers were taxed to the uttermost. Night and
day for more than a week the necessary but repulsive
work proceeded, many gentlemen never being able to
take more than a few minutes’ rest for many days.
The police authorities who co-operated most cordially
with the military, also proved themselves equally
energetic and equally humane. Indeed, the most im-
portant and disagreeable part of the task of identifica-
tion fell upon them, and their labours have been thus
recognised by the Times correspondent:—
“ Captain Baynes, district superintendent, one of
the four principal officers of the Metropolitan Police
Eorce, gave his personal attention during yesterday
to the arrangements connected with the disposal and


identification of the bodies in the Dockyard. Mr.
Hindes, superintendent of the "Woolwich Dockyard
division, who has also Deptford and Woolwich Arsenal
in his charge, was also present on the spot. There
were four inspectors, 20 superintendents, 230 con-
stables from foreign divisions, employed in addition to
the regular force on duty at the Dockyard. The small
force of river police were overburdened with their
double task of recovering wreck and the bodies, and
keeping order among a mob of boats. A sergeant of
police has been employed all day and during a great
part of the night in sending telegrams to different
parts of the country. The behaviour and industry of
the greater number of the police is beyond all praise.”
The following excellent method was adopted in the
work of preparing the bodies for identification.
The description of the bodies was recorded in a book,
with a distinguishing number; the clothes, property, or
other objects that could afford a clue to identity, being
put together and marked with the same number ; and
the body was then washed and removed to the shed, No.
2, till identified. At a later stage, when it was no
longer safe to keep the bodies on view for identification,
photographs were taken of them before being enclosed
in the coffins. When a body had been identified it was
at once removed to the iron shed, in another part of
the yard, where only identified bodies were placed.
These arrangements were carried out under the direc-
tions of Chief Inspector Lucas and Inspectors Phillips
and Dawkins, who had a hard task to perform in the
reception and examination of all bodies brought in.
The carrying was cheerfully done in the first instance
by soldiers from the Artillery, and the Eifle Brigade


following the Army Service and Ambulance men and
labourers from the Dockyard, but subsequently dock
labourers were engaged from London to do this labo-
rious work; but their services, besides being much more
expensive, were less efficient and satisfactory than the
volunteered services of the military. Mr. Lever, the
yard foreman, had the superintendence of the squads of
bearers.


SCENE AT THE DOCKYARD.
Most heart-rending were the scenes constantly occur-
ring in the unidentified shed where, besides the horrible
odour of so many decomposing bodies, hardly kept
under by tons of disinfectants, there was the shriek
every now and again of an agonised parent, a sister or
brother, or a heart-breaking burst of sobbing and wail-
ing as the form sought for came to be recognised among
the long rows of ghastly corpses. The correspondent
of the Morning Advertiser writes thus of the sad sight
in the Slip No. 2:—“ Three men stood there together
•who had in the last twenty-five years, seen death in
almost every shape that is conceiveable —in battle, in
murder, in sudden death from colliery calamities, in
pest epidemics—who during the last fifteen months had
ridden over bodies scattered on battle-fields, both in
Europe and Asia, and they said to one another, as they
looked at the rows of women and children laid out on
the mess-table tops, that this sight was the sorest
of all.”
Long after it might have been thought impossible
that any distinct feature could be traced in the distended
and distorted mass representing the face, the sudden
cry of anguish opposite some shapeless form, told that
it had been recognised by some subtle instinct of an


affectionate father or mother. One poor old lady, with
hair of snow, and features which told of long years of
trial, had recognised her daughter by the clothing upon
one of the corpses in a frightful state of decomposition.
The features were too dreadfully changed to be
exposed, and a cloth covered them. A natural wish
was preferred with awful energy by the poor mother
for a last look which it was impossible to comply with;
but the tenderness, the tact, and the pious words with
which the request was refused by the sergeant of
police on duty, were like balm to the lacerated heart of
the mother, for, with a sudden impulse of gratitude,
she seized the policeman’s hand and kissed it, and was
then carried swooning from the scene.
The contamination of the water of the Thames by the
sewage of London, which here falls into the stream on
both sides, by the refuse of gas works and chemical
factories, had, probably, much to do with the rapid
decomposition of the bodies. In consequence of the
danger to the health of the community it was found
absolutely necessary to inter many of the bodies before
they could be claimed by their friends.


THE BURYING OF THE UNKNOWN.
ABOUT 120 bodies bad tbus to be interred unrecognised.
This duty fell on the officers of the Local Board of
Health, and they proved themselves equal to the occa-
sion. The following gentlemen gave their personal
attention to the arrangements for many weary hours to
the decent and proper removal of the bodies to be
interred by the parish:—Mr. Taylor, churchwarden ;
Mr. Thomas, surveyor, the sanitary officer; and Messrs.
Edwards, Lockyer, and Yaylor. Coffins were provided
by these gentlemen, and Commissary-Greneral Young
told off a number of men of the Army Service Corps
with the necessary horses and waggons for their
removal to the cemetery at Wickham. A portion of
the ground had been set apart for these poor unknown
remains, and a most impressive funeral service was per-
formed by the Hon. and Bev. Adelbert Anson, rector
of "Woolwich, assisted by his curate the Bev. Mr. Love.
Care was taken to indicate the resting-place of each by
the same number and letter which had been attached
to the bundle of clothes and personal ornaments taken
from the body, so that in case of subsequent identifi-
cation, the friends might be able to find the graves of
those they had each lost.


Although buried as unknown, gentle hands performed
the last sad offices as tenderly as relatives.
"When the coffins had been lowered to their places,
and before the first spadesful of earth had been thrown
upon them by strangers, a member of Mr. Anson’s
congregation, Miss Broughton, of New Cross, went to
every grave, one by one, and cast into it sweet smelling
flowers, heartsease, fuchsias, and geraniums.
Every house in Woolwich appeared to have put on
the outward signs of mourning for the dead : the shop-
keepers by partially closing their places of business,
and the private residents by closely drawing the blinds
at every window. Erom the day following the accident
flags waved half-mast high from the public buildings
and churches, whilst the bells of St. Mary’s tolled each
day at intervals, and rang forth a funeral knell as the
mournful cortege passed through the town. The clergy
and ministers of the different denominations were also
unremitting in their attention to the families of the
bereaved.


THE INQUESTS.
Of course an inquest was promptly organized by the
Coroner for the western part of the county, Mr. J. C.
Carttar, and a jury being empannelled, of which Mr.
Harrington was appointed foreman, the business of
identification was commenced on the day following the
accident. The bodies were so numerous that for nearly
a fortnight the pannel was exclusively occupied with the
formalities of identification, and the inquiry into the
causes and circumstances of the collision was still
unfinished when the present volume was published.
In noting the innumerable good deeds performed by
the "Woolwich people, it would be unjust to withhold
from the jury a recognition of the patient self-denial
with which they have for an extended period been
willing to sacrifice their time for the due and fair inves-
tigation of the mass of evidence brought before them.
Like all the incidents connected with the disaster,
those coming before the coroner were of the most har-
rowing description. Here a highly-placed official of
the Steam Boat Company, Mr. Towse, the superinten-
dent, relates, with a masterful effort to speak col-
lectedly, how he has lost wife and almost every member
of his large family in the dreadful catastrophe. After
him a father, with heart-rending sobs, gasps forth


brokenly the story of tbe loss of wife and all his loved
little ones. A youth, named Elliott, comes direct from
school to seek the bodies of both his parents, and the
poor lad has not a penny in his pockets, though his
father is known to be a wealthy man. On the very
first day of the inquiry the terrible fact comes out that
amongst the passengers, fifty pious old women, forming
a Bible class, went down with their teacher in the
wreck, and of the whole fifty but one was saved.
But even to this dark picture there were occasional
glimpses of brightness as some survivor gave evidence
of the devotion of the waterman or the river-side
inhabitants, and with grateful acknowledgment attri-
bute their salvation to their courage and humanity.
One of the most beautiful incidents is that where a
lady bears testimony to the heroic conduct of poor
Captain Grinstead in his last moments. Binding
herself near the Captain while strugglng in the water,
she recognised him, and appealed to him for help. The
noble master of the lost boat directed her in safety to a
plank, by which she was enabled to sustain herself till
assistance arrived, but fearing, doubtless, to deprive
another of its support, the Captain refused to avail him-
self of it, and was drowned.


THE RELIEF OF THE SUFFERERS.
The tidings of the calamity had no sooner flashed
through the land than the tide of sympathy at once
set in, and the ready purse of the wealthy was imme-
diately opened. The key-note which always has found
a ready response in English hearts, was struck by Mr.
J. Orrell Lever, ex-M.P. for Q-alway, and founder of
the Steam Boat Company, who forwarded the subjoined
subscriptions to the Lord Mayor, with a request that he
would convene a Public Meeting to organise a relief
fund for the bereaved families :—Captain Pelly, E.N.,
(Chairman of the Steam Boat Company) £100; J.
Orrell Lever, £IOO (first subscription); B. Barrow
Esq., £100; Murray Aston, Esq., £SO; John Mann,
Esq. (Secretary Steam Boat Company), £lO 10s.;
C. E. M‘Kenna, Esq., £lO 10s.; B. Nicholson, Esq.,
£lO 10s.; Edmund Walker, Esq., £lO 10s.; A. P.,
£lO 10s.; Messrs. Stephenson, Clarke, & Co., £52 10s.
Speedily following the opening of the subscription
lists came a letter of sympathy from Her Majesty the
Queen, enclosing 100 guineas, and another containing
50 guineas from the Prince and Princess of Wales.
Then subscriptions began to pour in—slowly at first;
but later, as people began to comprehend the awful
nature of the accident, at the rate of £2,000 per


day, until at the time of writing a sum of nearly
£40,000 has been collected. Letters full of the
kindest, heartiest sympathy, and offers of rea help
have arrived from all sorts and conditions of men.
A kind hearted clergyman writing from Amwell
Vicarage, "Ware, states, “ That he will be happy to give
rent-free for life, his lodge (which is now unoccupied),
to any poor widow whose husband has been lost in this
most dreadful and appalling accident.”
Mr. William Williams, the secretary of the National
Eefuges for Homeless and Destitute children, has
offered, at once, to take in 100 orphan boys and some
girls into their homes and training ships ; Miss Shar-
man of the Orphans’ Home, South Street, Southwark,
offers to give a home to seven of the orphans —this, as
a thank offering, for the safe return of seven of the
orphan children under her care, from Sheerness to
London in the “ Princess Alice,” the evening before the
accident.
The Industrial Home for Boys, Copenhagen Street,
offer to take in several lads ; the National Working
Boy’s Home in Beckham proposes to take ten boys from
the age of seven; the Boy’s Industrial Home, Forest
Hill, similarly offers to receive two boys ; and similar
offers were promptly sent from Dr. Barnardo and other
directors of charitable institutions.
Miss Cayley, of St. Leonard’s, Mrs. Horsfall, of
Liverpool, Mrs. Hope, of Birkenhead, and Mrs. Ladds,
of Tunbridge Wells, were among the earliest to offer
the shelter of their own comfortable homes to the poor
waifs and strays left destitute by the calamity; but
their example has been since followed by so many other
charitable ladies that merely to name them would


unduly overburden our pages. The members of the
theatrical profession, never behind when a deed of
charity is to be done, offered their talents to the good
cause, Miss Virginia Blackwood, at Astley’s, and Mr.
Holland, at the Surrey, leading the way. But prompt
as these have been, they have been forestalled in the
generous contest by the theatrical company of the
Comedie Francaise, in Paris, whose generous sentiments
were conveyed within a day or two of the arrival of the
news in Paris, in the following letter, in which a cheque
for £SO was enclosed: —
“My Lord, —A disaster has fallen upon a portion of
the population of London. A subscription list has been
opened through your lordship in aid of the necessitous
families who have been made the victims of the cata-
strophe. The Societaires of the Comedie Frangaise,
preserving an appreciative recollection of the good help
which was rendered to them in 1871, hasten to bring
their tribute to this subscription. I am directed by
them to remit their offering directly into your lordship’s
hands. I beg you, therefore, in their name to
receive the annexed subscription.—l am, my lord, your
most obedient servant,
Emile Peeein, Administrator.
The names of MM. Coquelin, Fibrey, Launay, and
several other actors follow.
The following letter from an Indian Mussulman, who
sent one of the earliest subscriptions, is of itself a
sermon not less eloquent than that of any Christian
preacher : —“ I cannot adequately express to you the
intense sorrow I feel at the wreck of the ‘ Princess
Alice.’ Although lam a Mahometan, I feel as much


for Christians as for the people of my own religion,
because, as Shakespeare says, ‘ One touch of nature
makes the whole world kin.’ No human comfort will
alleviate the sufferings of those who are the victims of
the wreck, and all we can and must do is to diminish as far
as lies in our power the physical and worldly pains of
those whose beloved ones have now gone to God, May
God bless the deceased, the dying, and the survivors
from the wreck,”
The military, both officers and men, and the police
force, not resting satisfied with the great personal
sacrifices they have made, have of their scanty pay
given most generously. The Eifle Brigade stationed at
Woolwich nearly 1,000 strong commanded by
H.E.H. the Duke of Connaught, have agreed to
contribute one shilling each to the Princess Alice Local
Belief Pund. The officers of the Eoyal Artillery mess
at Woolwich have subscribed £SO. Major-General Sir
Charles L. D’Aguilar, K. 0.8., commanding at
Woolwich, ’was one of the first to take steps for
organizing a local fund to aid the sufferers. Major
Schreiber, Ist Brigade, Eoyal Artillery, sends ten
guineas ]as a first instalment of a day’s pay of the
officers and men of his (D) Battery ; and Mr, Wrench
Towse, Superintendent of the London Steamboat
Company, who, in the midst of his own bereavement
does not forget the others bereaved, sends ten guineas.
Indeed, generous as the British public has on many
previous occasions proved itself, no stronger wave of
pity or sympathy has ever moved it to greater
generosity. Churches and chapels are, of course, not
behind, but the workshop and the public-house are
proving [equally open-handed and open-hearted. A


•subscription fund has been started by a committee of
the Incorporated Society of Licensed Victuallers, at the
“Morning Advertiser ” office, 127 Elect Street, and
many hundreds of pounds have been added to the
■“ Mansion House Belief Fund ” from this source.
The Australian team of cricketers, before quitting
the old country, sent £IOO to the relief fund, and a
three days’ cricket match between North and South
at the Oval, given by the Surrey Club made a solid
addition to the fund.
The following important donations besides a very
large number of donations of smaller amount have been
already received: —Twenty-five guineas each by Messrs.
Turquand, Youngs and Co., Messrs. Marshall and Snel-
grove ; £25 each by Messrs. Cassell, Peter and Galpin,
the Bight Hon. Sir John B. Byles, C. C. Gooch, Esq.,
Alfred Bevan, Esq., owner of steam launch “Emily,”
Messrs. Crocker, Sons and Co., His Grace the Duke of
Leeds, the Hon. Sir C. Murray, K.C.8., Messrs. Ham-
mond and Co,, Leonard Marshall, Esq., Loftus Leigh
Pemberton, Esq., General Lord Bokeby, Edward E.
Hankey, Esq., the Earl of Ilchester, Messrs. Druce,
Sons, and Jackson, Messrs. Truman, Hanbury and Co.,
W. P. Jackson, Esq., Charles Harris, Esq., and Mrs.
Harris, Thomas Greg, Esq.; twenty guineas each by
Messrs. Fuller, Banbury and Co., H. T. Coghlan, Esq.,
Julian Senior, Esq., W. L. Nicholson, Esq., the Mer-
chant Taylors’ Company, Messrs. Edwin Fox and Bous-
field, Messrs. B. Twining and Co., J. Bayley-White, Esq.,
Messrs. Beyroux, Phillips and Golding, Messrs. Friih-
ling and Goschen, Messrs. Beadel Brothers ; £2O each
by M. Balderson, Esq., Joshua Dixon, Esq., James
Adams, Esq., Miss E. M. Green, Miss Jane Peckover,


Messrs. Schacht, Son and Co., the Misses Jacomb, W.
H. Stratton, Esq., W. Spragen, Esq., John Walters.
Esq.
There are also many important sums forwarded
anonymously. It is a remarkable proof of the pro-
found feeling of sympathy excited by the catastrophe
that nearly £7OO was deposited by passing citizens in
less than a week in the box placed outside the Mansion
House. A box for penny subscriptions placed at the
northern end of London Bridge by Messrs. Taylor,
produced in five days a sum of £7O.
The distribution of funds in small amounts to relieve
temporary distress has been entrusted to the able hands
of the Eev. A, Styleman Herring, Yicar of St. Paul’s,
Clerkenwell, whose experience in the administration of
the funds collected for the relief of the sufferers by the
“ Northseet,” the “ Cospatrick,” and other disasters,
eminently fit him for the task.


THE CAUSE OF THE COLLISION.
In discussing the cause of the collision we would
expressly warn our readers of the injustice of arriving
at a conclusion as to the blame attachable to the indi-
viduals in this terrible catastrophe. The question
is under the consideration of an impartial and com-
petent tribunal, and when the judgment of the court
is pronounced it will then be soon enough to apportion
the blame. There is a natural tendency on the occur-
rence of an accident or calamity to blame somebody,
and as soon as some person is punished the public feels
satisfied, and forthwith forgets the matter. In the
present case, besides the awful weight of the guilt, if
guilt there be, there are special reasons for refraining
from a premature decision. The Steamboat Company,
on the one side, is distinguished for the carefulness of
its management generally, and the choice of a com-
mander for the "Princess Alice" in particular; and,
on the other hand, Messrs. Hall Brothers, the owners
of the "Bywell Castle," are known as the most philan-
thropic and generous friends of the sailor in the north
of England ; and for greater safety they had a river
pilot as well as a North Sea pilot on board, though they
would have been technically justified in proceeding to


this part of the river without either. It does not neces-
sarily follow that the commander of either vessel was to
blame; indeed, one of our greatest nautical authorities,
Captain Colomb, E.N., is distinctly of opinion that “ the
destruction of all these lives is the fault of no single
individual.” He is of opinion that “it has arisen
directly from our English method of legislation.”
We shall give some extracts from Captain Colomb’s
letter to the Times as an example of careful ex-
pression of opinion as well as for the valuable
remarks and just reflections contained in the letter.
Captain Colomb clearly states the conditions precedent
to a collision.
“ Eor ships approaching each other there is a
position of absolute safety, and of extreme danger.
When ships approach on parallel and opposite courses,
or paths, they are in absolute safety unless the distance
between these paths is less than the breadth of one of
the ships. If ships under this latter condition come
into collision, it is not a severe one, side rubs against
side, and the damage done is slight. Again, as the
breadth of ships seldom exceeds 50ft., the danger of
such collisions is confined to a belt of water of that
width, and is, consequently, very remote.
“ When ships, on the other hand, approach each
other on paths which cross, each is steering for a single
point ahead of each, which I name the collision point.
When the two paths so cross at right angles, we have
the condition of extreme danger. There will be a
collision at the collision point, unless either ship
contrives to drag her whole length across the path of the
other before that other can reach her. If neither ship
succeeds in doing this, the ensuing collision is one of


the severest possible character. The solid stem of one
ship cuts into the side of the other, fairly presented to
it, and inevitable destruction is the result. A ship
which is 50ft. broad, will be 300 ft. to 400 ft. long, so
that if we put the risk on parallel courses as 1, the risk
for the same ships when their courses cross at right
angles will be from 6 to 8.
“ The obvious rule deducible is a common-sense rule
of safety, namely, encourage all movements towards
parallel courses, and discourage all movements tending
to increase the crossing angle; or in language which
was supplied to me by one of our most celebrated
commanders in the Mercantile Marine ‘ Never make
for the bow of an approaching ship, and always make
for the stern.’ Put into yet another paraphrase, it may
be said that ‘ there is always six or eight times as much
risk in turning one way as in turning the other way
when a collision is apprehended.’”
This scientific sailor further states as a fact that at
least two collisions occur after dark for one in daylight,
and what is very remarkable is that most collisions occur
during clear weather. At night the seaman is entirely
dependent on lights for his guidance ; and an astounding
statement is made in this connection by Captain Colomb
that, though this system of lights has been established
30 years, nine-tenths of the seamen do not understand
the signals they convey.
fC Steamships are fitted with a green light, which
throws its rays to the left of the keel. Any observer in
a ship, looking to the right of his own keel, and seeing
the green light of another ship, ought to know —and
generally does know —that the paths of the two are at
least parallel and safe. So with a red light to the left


of his keel. But when the same observer sees a red
light to the right of his keel, all he knows is that there
is a collision point ahead. In such a case, according to
our rule, any turning to the right would be towards
parallel courses and safety, and any turning to the left
would be towards right angles and extreme danger. So
soon as this dangerous light was brought to the left of
the keel by a turn to the right, absolute safety would be
reached; so long as it remained to the right of the keel
there was danger which increased every moment by the
converging of the two paths. There is probably six
times as much risk in turning to the left as in turning
to the right.
“ Take now the converse case—of an observer in one
steamer looking to the left of his keel, and seeing there
the green light of another steamer. Here there is again
a collision point ahead, and the risk is increasing every
moment. In such a case absolute law steps in, and says
that, although it may be true that a very small turn
to the left will put both ships on to parallel courses
and safety, yet it must not be made. The people in the
approaching ship may be asleep, or worse, yet still no
movement towards parallel courses must be made until
the danger becomes unbearable.
“ What are the conditions under which these two
steamers, one seeing a red light to the right, and the
other seeing a green light to the left, are placed P They
have between them an excellent system of signals, which
if obeyed, after their plain meaning and intention, ought
to be sufficient. But law and authoritative gloss have
stepped in, and have said of the red light, ‘lt is no par-
ticular signal, it means you are to do whatever you think
best;’ and of the green light, ‘lt is a signal forbidding


you to take the shortest way of diminishing the risk
which it, and it alone, exposes.’
“ What the red and green lights really denote, and
ought to he held to command, are clearly as follows:
A green light to the right denotes a safety which can
only he made a danger hy a turn to the right. A green
light to the left denotes a danger which will he made worse
by a turn to the right. Therefore a green light is always
a signal not to turn to the right. A red light to the left
is a signal of safety which can only he made a danger
hy a turn to the left. A red light to the right is a signal
of danger which will he made worse hy a turn to the left.
Hence a red light is always a signal not to turn to the
left.”
Captain Colomh lays the blame of this and nearly
al] similar collisions rather on the system than on
individuals. His letter thus concludes : —“The
regulations for preventing collisions at sea have come
to form a confused patch-work; laying in places
immense stress on matters of no moment, and leaving
such vital questions as I have stated either untouched
or confused. Seamen who make mistakes leading to
disasters only follow out the teaching, or the absence of
teaching, which has been furnished them, and cannot
logically he blamed for it,
“But if I could attract a firm attention to this
matter it would he seen that no such thing as a real
inquiry into the causes of collision at sea has ever been
held. The law and teaching itself has never been put
on its trial. This inquiry about to be held will not in
the least help us, as its intention will he to apportion
blame to individuals, assuming that the law and
teaching is right. What we want is an enquiry where


no individuals will be on their trial; where the facts of
large numbers of collisions are set out in order, and
where the actual movements of things are ascertained
by clear experiment. Then anew law and new teaching
may arise, distinctly warning seamen of the relative
safety and danger of different movements. Until this is
done we must expect a constant flow of such accidents
as we have now to deplore.”
"We will now commence the history of the case,
commencing with the attacking vessel, it being under-
stood that we do not use the term as indicating
culpability, but simply as a convenient way of
distinguishing it from the vessel attacked, without
being compelled to use, with tiresome frequency, the
titles of the two ships.
Immediately after the unfortunate collision, the
captain of the “ Bywell Castle ” made a statement
which has since been amplified in his sworn deposition
before the Receiver of Wrecks, under the provisions
of the 448 th section of the Merchant Shipping Act
His first statement is here appended:—
“ Immediately I saw the collision inevitable I
stopped the engines, and ran forward myself. Binding
that the people on the forecastle were saving life by
throwing ropes overboard and hauling people up over
the bows, I came aft again, and got together the chief
engineer, the cook, the donkeyman, and the steward and
sang out to get out the starboard aft boat, which was
soon done. By this time we were joined by some of the
passengers, who had been saved, and I called loudly
upon them to help, and assist in putting out boats.
After getting out the starboard aft boat, we put out the
port aft boat, and then the port lifeboat. After this I


kept doing all I could, and had at the same time to keep
the ship, which was rapidly drifting down. The first
two boats were immediately surrounded, and very
nearly swamped by the people, who floated round like
bees, making the water almost black with their heads t
and hats, and clothes. The lifeboat, the last boat
launched, was, however, unable to save many lives,
most of the people having by this time sunk exhausted.
The three boats would hold seventy persons, but I
should say they did not save more than forty. They
rowed immediately ashore, and afterwards returned to
the ship, but by this time all was still, and there was
nothing to show how many hundred death struggles
had taken place there just before. Those who had
been saved by hauling over the bows and by ropes
thrown from the ship were afterwards taken off by the
' Duke of Teck,' which came alongside about an hour
afterwards, so that when the ship put up for the night
off Barking, about a mile below the wreck, where she
had drifted, we had none of the survivors on board.
After casting anchor, I determined to abandon the
voyage and return to London next morning, to make
my report and await the official enquiry. About
eleven p.m., Mr. Chapman, the North Sea pilot,
suggested taking one of the boats on shore, and seeing
if we could render any assistance. He went near
Beckton, and found twenty-two bodies lying in a
factory, covered with bags. Finding he could do no
good, he afterwards returned to the ship. The 'By well
Castle' was quite uninjured. The 'Princess Alice *
must have been as thin as an eggshell, for she broke
right up when touched. The collision was undoubtedly
caused by the ' Princess Alice' starboarding her helm


when she ought to have continued her course on the
port helm. If she had continued her port helm she
would have gone clear.”
The next statement of importance on this side is that
of Christopher Dix, the pilot of the “ Bywell Castle,”
who held a certificate of a class instituted by the Trinity
House, in 1873, for pilots who were before unexamined
and uncertificated. Ships bound on a coasting voyage
of the nature of that on which the “By well Castle” started
are not subjected to compulsory pilotage. They were
formerly guided by a class of men called “ hovellers,”
who were neither licensed nor supervised by any autho-,
rity. In 1873 the Trinity House examined 120 of these
men, and gave them licences, which only authorise them
to steer ships exempted from compulsory pilotage, and
only to conduct them as far as Gravesend. As the ship
was not under compulsory pilotage, the master and
owners are not relieved of liability; but it may be
a point in their favour that they engaged a licensed
pilot when no rule of law obliged them to have a pilot.
Dix was licensed in 1875, and is described as a steady
man; but his licence, we learn on the authority of The
Times, has been once suspended for six months, for
taking a ship lower down than Gravesend, i.e., outside
his district, on which occasion he ran her ashore on the
Groodwin Sands.
Dix states as follows :
“ On Tuesday, the 3rd day of September, at 7.30 p.m.,
the tide at the time being first quarter ebb, the weather
fine and hazy, and the wind in the south-west, blowing
a light breeze with smooth water, the £ Bywell Castle ’
arrived in G-alleon’s Beach, the regulation lights burning
brightly at the time. He was on the upper bridge in


charge of the vessel, and the master, E. Harrison, was
also on the bridge. The second mate was assisting with
two A.B. seamen at the wheel, and an A.B. seaman,
John Hardy, was on the topgallant forecastle, keeping
the look-out. The vessel was going at half-speed
from the time of leaving the docks, the engines being
occasionally slowed to avoid craft in the river, and was
steering mid-channel, the course being N.E. i E.
After entering the Beach he observed the red and mast-
head lights of a steamer, which proved to be the passenger
steamer 4 Princess Alice,' the lights being seen over
Tripcock's Point, about three-quarters of a mile distant.
Deponent kept his course, carefully watching the
coming steamer ' Princess Alice,' and after she rounded
the point, her red and white lights were two points on
the port bow, and nearly half a mile distant. Deponent
ordered his helm, which up to this moment had been
steady, to be slightly ported, which caused the vessel to
steer slightly towards the south shore. When the
vessels approached within about a quarter of a mile of
each other, he ordered the engines to be stopped and
sounded his whistle. The ' Princess Alice ' was still
showing her red and white lights, inclining slightly to-
wards the north shore, and the 'By well Castle ' slightly
inclining towards the south shore. The latter had still
way on, and when the' Princess Alice' came to about
300 to 400 yards' distance she showed her red and
green lights quite two points on the port bow. De-
ponent ordered his helm hard aport and put the engines
full speed astern. Loud shouts were heard from the
' Princess Alice,' and she was hailed to port her helm.
Suddenly the ' Princess Alice's' red light disappeared,
and the green only was visible. He then saw a


collision to be inevitable, the ‘ Bywell Castle’s ’ stem
striking the ‘ Princess Alice * on the starboard side,
close to the paddle-box. The ‘Princess Alice’ in-
stantly began to fill, and in about four minutes sank.
Three of the ‘ Bywell Castle’s ’ boats were lowered as
speedily as possible, all lifebuoys thrown overboard,
and also all ropes and articles that could assist in
saving life. The vessel drifted slowly with the tide,
picking up all the passengers that could possibly be
saved by the ropes, chains, &c., and at B*ls p.m„
anchored in Barking Beach. He considers that; the
cause of the casualty was the ‘ Princess Alice ’ im-
properly starboarding her helm, and that it might have
been avoided by the ‘ Princess Alice ’ keeping her
course on the port helm.”
Two able-bodied seamen on the collier also have been
examined.
¥m. Chaeles Haynes, the helmsman, says :
“At about 7.80 p.m. he heard the look-out man ask
the pilot if he saw a red light, and the reply ‘ All right ’
was m ade, and orders were given ‘ Port a little,’ which
was done. In about three minutes deponent observed
the red and masthead lights of the coming vessel, which
proved to be the ‘ Princess Alice,’ which appeared to be
about a third of a mile distant. When she approached
within about a quarter of a mile she suddenly shut in her
red light and the green light became visible. The master
or pilot gave the order ‘ Hard a-port,’ which was instantly
done, and the engines were stopped and reversed full
speed astern,but almost immediately a collision occurred.
The ‘ Bywell Castle’s’ stem struck the ‘ Princess Alice *
on the fore part of the starboard sponson. The ‘ Princess
Alice ’ immediately began to fill, the two vessels drifting


with the tide, and in five minutes the ‘ Princess Alice ’
sank stern first.
After deposing to the means used for saving life, he
adds that: —“ In my opinion the cause of the casualty
was the £ Princess Alice ’ improperly starboarding her
helm, and it might have been avoided if she had kept
on her port helm.”
John Haedy, the second A.B. seaman, and the man
alluded to by Haynes, says precisely the same in effect,
and concludes:—“ In my opinion the cause of the
casualty was the ‘ Princess Alice ’ showing her green
light and starboarding her helm, which caused her to
come athwart the ‘ Bywell Castle’s ’ stem, the ‘By well
Castle ’ being on port helm.”
So far we have given the collier’s view of the affair,
and we now give the statement of several of the crew
of the ill-fated saloon boat who were saved, and at this
point it may be as well to state for the assistance of
our readers, that steamers carry their red light on the
“port” side, and their green light on the “starboard,”
The “ port ” side is the left hand side of a vessel looking
forward toward her bows, and “starboard” the right
hand side ; but it is perhaps hardest to make a lands-
man understand that to “port” a vessel’s “helm”
does not mean to send her to “ port ” but to “ star-
board,” thus porting the helm will cause the vessel to
travel or “ pay off ” to the right, and starboarding her
helm cause her to travel to the left. Two vessels
coming in opposite directions, one “ porting helm ” and
the other “ starboarding,” must therefore almost in-
evitably come into collision.
The narrative of the first mate of the ill-fated ship,
Geoege Thomas Long, is a very graphic one. He says :


"We started from Rosherville at 6.15 and all went well
nntil, on running up G-alleon's Reach, while standing on
the fore saloon, the captain being on the bridge, and a
man and a boy on the look-out, I observed a large black
steamer coming down the river. It was then just half-
past seven, and the weather was fine and calm, and the
moon shining beautifully over the water. Our vessel
was just above the Powder Magazine, and I reckon her
head was pointing in to the Arsenal light. On rounding
Tripcock Point the vessel's helm had been starboarded
to pass a screw steamer bound down the river, and we
still remained so, and at that moment we saw the vessel
which proved to be the ' Bywell Castle.' Our engines
were immediately stopped. The other vessel appeared
to be coming down upon us stem on, and looming in
the evening haze like a great black phantom, gave
us a foreboding of the unhappy disaster. She was then
about 150 yards distant, and each vessel was of course
rapidly nearing the other. The whistle was at once
sounded, and loud shouts raised by the man at the
look-out and others on deck to the ' Bywell Castle,'
but it was then, I fear, too late. Seeing that the
collision was inevitable, I ran to the lifeboat, but before
I reached it the ' Bywell Castle ' had twice crashed
into us. She struck our vessel with her stem on the
fore sponson, cutting clean through into the engine-
room. Por a moment we were locked together, and
then we heard the water rushing in below, and a minute
later she sank. I soon rose to the surface, and striking
out for the shore, was picked up by a waterman. We
rescued our second mate and some passengers. The
helm of the vessel was still at starboard when we struck,
and the engines stopped." He adds " that he considers


the accident due to the ‘ By well Castle ’ £ porting her
helm ’ after she had ‘ starboarded.’ ”
The account of Ralph Wilkins ok, the second mate, is
“ That just before the collision the regulation lights were
burning brightly and the master was on the bridge. Three
of the vessel’s crew were on the fore saloon keeping the
look out, and two of the crew were at the wheel. He
was on the starboard side of the after sponson coiling
the ropes for landing at North Woolwich Pier. The
vessel was on the starboard helm and steering about
mid stream, and the engines going ‘ easy.’ Deponent
was in the act of coiling the throw line when, glancing
over the bulwark, he observed the ‘ By well Castle ’ steam
ship approaching stem on. Seeing that a collision was
inevitable he rushed to the top saloon, and instantly
the £ By well Castle ’ struck the £ Princess Alice ’ stem on
with great violence, nearly cutting her in halves. De-
ponent was knocked down by the force of the concus-
sion and went to the port boat, but before the boat
could be fairly launched she capsized, and in about five
minutes the £ Princess Alice ’ sank head first. De-
ponent had previously struck out and swum towards a
piece of the wheel-box, being subsequently picked up
by a skiff and landed at Beckton G-as Works in safety; ”
and he gives it as his opinion ££ that the casualty must
have been caused by incautious navigation on the part
of the £ Bywell Castle,’ adding that i: the master of the
£ Princess Alice,’ who is missing, was an extremely
cautious mariner, and was most careful in navigating
his vessel.”
Then we have the evidence on oath of Heney Youno
an A.B. seaman of the saloon steamer, and he says ;
“ The master was on the bridge. The first mate was on


the fore part of the saloon. Tvro A.B seamen were
at the wheel, and he was keeping the look-out with
three other members of the crew, and was stationed in
the fore port sponson. After rounding Tripcock Point
he observed the green light of a steamer, which proved
to be the ‘ Bywell Castle,’ about a mile distant. The
‘ Princess Alice ’ was at this time about mid channel,
inclining slightly towards the south shore, and on the
starboard helm. The master sounded the whistle,
they eased and then stopped the engines, but the
‘ By well Castle ’ came on, still showing her green light.
Deponent and all hands forward hailed the ‘Bywell
Castle,’ ‘ Where are you coming to ? ’ but she kept
on, and with her stem struck the ‘ Princess Alice ’ on
the fore sponson, above the paddle-box, cutting almost
into the engine-room.” This man climbed up the
“Bywell Castle’s” chains and reached her deck in
safety, and helped to throw ropes over the bows,
and assisted in rescuing four lives, and he says
“ he did not see the ‘ Bywell Castle’s ’ red light until he
got on her forecastle, and then noticed that she
was standing in to the south shore, and in his opinion
the casualty was caused by the ‘By well Castle ’
suddenly porting her helm, and it might have been
avoided if the ‘ Bywell Castle ’ had kept her starboard
helm.”
J. Band, the foremost hand (lookout) on board the
“ Princess Alice ” says :
“We were in the top of Halfway Reach. We saw a
screw coming down. We blew our whistle, aud the
screw starboarded her helm. We did the same. Then
he ported his helm, and came into us on our starboard
side. We were about 300 yards below the screw when


our captain gave the orders for the engines to be
stopped and turned astern. The screw came right into
us and sunk our ship. I jumped off our box and caught
the screw’s chains, and got on board her.”
J. Evers, one of the men at the wheel, describes the
collision as follows
“The captain gave me orders to starboard helm.
We were then coming round the Point, very close
indeed to it. The captain said to me, ‘ Mind your helm
on account of the down tide.’ I said to him, ‘ There is
a screw coming down, starboarding his helm.’ Then he
ported, and I said, ‘ He will be into us,’ and the captain
said, ‘ Hold on your helm,’ and then the screw struck
us on the starboard side fore sponson, and we sank. I
asked the captain to come with me, but he would not
leave the ship. I then jumped for the chains on the
screw’s bow, but was pulled down by other people on
to the boat’s rail. I then went forward and saw my
brother in a boat, when he wanted me to go with him,
but I told him to look out for himself and I would do
the same. I then jumped overboard and swam to the
screw, and called out to the people on board for help.
A rope was thrown to me by H. Young, one of our own
people, who had managed to get on the screw before
me. As soon as I got on the deck I heard the order
given for her to go astern, when I bid them stop, as he
was cutting the people up, when he said, “Was he to
let his ship go ashore, then ? ” I said, ‘ Yes.’ ”
Both these men speak loudly in praise of their dead
master, and attribute the accident to the “ Bywell
Castle” “porting” suddenly after she had had her
“ starboard helm ” as when first seen.


OUTSIDE EVIDENCE.
Having now given the more important statements of
the hands on both vessels, we proceed to give the testi-
mony of persons not connected with either vessel; testi-
mony which is the more valuable because disinterested.
The account of the captain of the “Bonetta,” already
given on page 38 ante , is altogether in favour of the
lost ship, and his deposition subsequently before the
Receiver of "Wrecks fully confirms his previous state-
ment. The deposition says “In my opinion the cause
of the casualty was the ‘ By well Castle ’ porting helm as
she approached the ‘ Princess Alice,’ and it might have
been avoided if the ‘ Bywell Castle ’ had kept her course
straight down stream a little south of mid stream.”
Another bargeman named Handley, in the employ
of Messrs. Fuller, as captain of the barge “Chance,”
expressed the following opinion : —“ I believe that both
steamers were going at full speed ; still I cannot prove
it. I only judge from the crash. It was a long-sound-
ing crash, as if the steamer had not done going through
her. I heard one say that the boilers had burst, but I
think it was not so. If they had burst there would
have been even more noise, and more wood floating
about. The river appeared, when we got there, to be
covered with ladies’ hair. The ladies floated, whilst the


gentlemen who could not swim sank at once. The
steamer ‘ Bywell Castle ’ must have been in fault,
because if they had gone round the slack of the tide the
accident could not have happened. The ‘ Princess
Alice ’ was about ‘ halfwater ’ off, or in the middle of
the stream. The steamer ought to have bore away, so
as to have given the ‘ Princess Alice,’ who was coming
up on the slack, room to pass.”
J. S. Btjebtitt, master of the “ Elizabeth,” of Goole,
states on oath that while at anchor he observed the
“ Bywell Castle ” steamship, coming down the river
steering a straight course about mid channel at about
seven to eight knots. He also observed the “ Princess
Alice,” steamer, coming up the river on the south
shore. As the “ Princess Alice ” passed the Powder
Magazine she easied and then stopped. Heard a steam
whistle, and as the vessels approached each other heard
a shout from the “ Princess Alice,” “ Where are you
coming to ? ” At this moment the vessels were about
150 yards distant from each other. The “Bywell
Castle” appeared to be on her port helm .the red and
white lights of the “Bywell Castle,” and the green and
white lights of the “ Princess Alice ” being visible to
deponent. In a few seconds saw the stem of the
“ Bywell Castle ” strike the “ Princess Alice ” near the
starboard paddle-box, and in about four minutes the
“ Princess Alice” filled and sank. In his opinion the
cause ot the casualty was the “ By well Castle ” keeping
on the port helm when a collision became imminent,
and it might have been avoided by the “ Bywell Castle ”
keeping a straight course down river, and passing the
“ Princess Alice ”on the starboard side. The “ Bywell
Castle ” appeared to adhere too rigidly to the port helm.


THE TWO STEAMERS.
The “Princess Alice” was a paddle-steamer belonging
to the London Steamboat Company (Limited), of Ben-
nett’s-hill, Doctors’-commons, London. Her official
number was 52,614. She was built of iron, and was of
158 tons net tonnage, and 251 gross tonnage. Her
length was 219 ft. 4 in.; her breadth, 20 ft. 2 in.; her
depth 8 ft. 4 in. Her engines were by Caird & Co.,
of Greenock. They were of 140 horse-power. The
vessel was built by Messrs. Caird, of Greenock, in
1865, as “ The Bute,” for the Wemyss Bay traffic, but
subsequently she passed into the possession of the
London Steamboat Company when that undertaking, of
which the chairman is Captain Pelly, E.N., and the
principal promoter was Mr, John Orrell Lever,
absorbed the minor firms engaged in the river passenger
traffic.
The “By well Castle ” is an iron screw steamer,
having the official number 63,546. She is known by
the signal letters J.K.P.W. Her registered tonnage is
892 tons net, 1,376 tons gross, and 1,168 tons under
the deck. Her length is 254 ft. 3 in.; her breadth,
32 ft. 1 in.; her depth, 19 ft. 6 in. She has compound
inverted engines, with two cylinders, diameter 27 in.,
and length of stroke 51-33 in. They are of 120 horse-


power, and by Palmer’s Company, Newcastle. She was
built by Palmer, Newcastle, in the year 1870. Her
owners are Hall Brothers, of Newcastle.
It will thus be seen that the collier was five times as
heavy as the steamer, and when we consider that she
was light in ballast, with her helm and screw not in a
condition to perfectly control the ship, the terrible nature
of the collision becomes the more explainable. The
pace at which she was going, the course she took, and
the manner in which she was handled will form the
subject of the judicial enquiry ; but the scope and
intention of this work does not require the subject
to be dealt with. In order not to prejudice the
owners of either vessel it will be most fair as well as
useful simply to bring together and focus the most valu-
able of the views already expressed by nautical men and
others in the columns of the daily press since the occu
rence of the accident, commenting only where necessary
—to set right an error, correct a wrong impression, or
complete a partial statement. A correspondent of the
Times thus puts the question of the numbers that a boat
like the “ Princess Alice ” ought to carry.
“ The public should clearly understand that the
‘ Princess Alice,’ formerly the ‘ Bute,’ built in 1865
was a little steamer of only 251 tons gross measure-
ment, 219 3-10ths feet in length, only 20 2-10ths feet
breadth, and only 8 4-10ths feet depth —such an one in
point of size as may be observed daily loading for or
discharging from the small Continental ports at wharves
near London-bridge. It is necessary to be very explicit
on these points, because to the inexperienced these
* saloon’ steamers appear large boats. This little boat
obtained first a Board of Trade certificate allowing her


to carry 336 passengers in winter, and 486 in summer
for c extended river service.’ Afterwards she obtained
a certificate for passengers ‘ for river service
in smooth water only or on lakes.’ I will
dilate upon the fact of her length being 26
times her depth, further than to observe that this
source of weakness rendered her fit for river purposes
only, but I will ask any man of common sense if the
weight and height of a huge fore and aft saloon, con-
taining in and upon it 600 passengers is likely to add
to the stability of this long, shallow, and very narrow
vessel, especially when we remember the fact that such
weight is all placed over the water-line, and that the
leverage exercised by the passengers rushing to either
side is thus immensely increased. Imagine Blondin
on a rope with a sack of coals on his head! Yet the
case is parallel. Because this little vessel has had
built up from her deck a towering and, I say, burden-
some saloon, she is forsooth licensed to carry 899 pas-
sengers. I unhesitatingly say that the understructur©
should have been twice or thrice the tonnage or
buoyancy, and especially the beam should have been
30ft. instead of 20ft. I will conclude by urging upon
the public to call upon the Board of Trade to revise
their rules as to passenger certificates ; to compel all
passenger steamships to be so fitted with watertight
compartments as to be practically unsinkable; and
especially to see that no sailing or steam ship, whether
carrying passengers, cargo, or ballast, be allowed to
proceed to sea without such a number of unsinkable
lifeboats on board as will readily save all hands.”
[No comment of ours is necessary to strengthen the
valuable suggestions made by this correspondent.]


The Times adds its own opinion that “No steamer of
such a build, with so few appliances or means for
saving life, should ever be allowed to carry a multitude
of helpless people on the river, especially after dusk
This also is a practical suggestion, but the Steam-
boat Company will naturally answer that no river
steamer ought to be required to be strong enough
to repel the assault of a battering-ram, and they
already point significantly to the fact that since the
company was formed they have carried 200 millions of
people, not counting private excursionists, without an
accident. But the pitcher may go too often to the well
—and this accident is a sad enough illustration of the
adage—and the eyes of the powers that be must be
opened to the construction of such vessels, their carrying
power, the means of saving life, the rule of the road in
rivers as well as at sea, and to the reckless driving
of the masters of certain classes of vessels, which is a
well-recognized fact, and can no longer be glossed over
or escape inquiry.
The Times further suggests that vessels going down
light in ballast, like the “Bywell Castle,” should be
towed by a tug. The suggestion merits, and will
doubtless meet with, general assent, and at any rate,
an experience of many years on the river impels us
cordially to approve the recommendation. This journal
says: —“ The ‘ Princess Alice,’after rounding theTripcock
Trees Point, was probably caught by the ebbing tide
and sheared out into the river with her head towards
the northern bank. Many of the river steamers under
these circumstances cross over at once to the northern
bank. Those on the ‘Bywell Castle,’ coming down,
may have imagined that the ‘ Princess Alice ’ was, in


fact, about so to cross over, and may therefore have
determined to pass on her south side. The course they
held would have enabled them so to do. But the
‘ Princess Alice,’ instead of crossing, continued under
her starboad helm to round the point, so that she would
have gone on the southern side if her ill-starred voyage
had lasted long enough. When those on the 4 By well
Castle’ ascertained that the ‘Princess Alice’ was
taking this course they might, perhaps, by great skill
and vigilance have yet averted the collision if their
vessel had been well under command. But it is stated
that she was too high in the water for the screw or
rudder to have much purchase or control over her
movements. She was unable to stop quickly, even
although her engines were reversed. The speed of the
tide was added to her momentum. If she was moving
through the water at four knots an hour, the tide
running down would carry her over the ground at
three knots more, so that her total speed over the
ground would be seven knots. With some such
velocity she with her strongest part —her stem —struck
the “ Princess Alice ” in her most vulnerable parts,
and the most dreadful results followed. The question
arises whether it was right to let the ££ By well Castle ”
go down the stream in a state in which she had so little
command over herself. Ought she not, if so lightly
ballasted, to have been towed down by a tug ?
The Globe says :• —Perhaps the strange steamer bore
down upon her so quickly and in such a straight line
that he could not get out of her way in time to prevent
the collision. It is said that the great length of the
saloon boats, coupled with their shallowness and flat
bottoms, render them somewhat slow in answering the


helm. [This is so: the captains have been selected
with special regard to their fitness, because these vessels
require such careful handling; and it may well be on
this account that the experience of Captain G-rinstead
led him to stop his boat rather than trust to “port
helm.” — Editor.] Their steam power is also less for
their size than that of ordinary river steamers. It may
therefore prove that the captain tried to keep clear of
the big outward bound vessel, which suddenly came
looming out of the darkress right in his course, but
failed to do so in time to avoid the collision. The
strange steamer was probably going down the Thames
at a high rate of speed, as the tide was with her; and as
soon as Woolwich is passed it is usually considered safe
to put on full power. It is freely alleged by down-
river experts that too many steam colliers are in the
habit of proceeding as if the waterway belonged to
them exclusively, and as if the responsibility rests with
smaller craft to get out of their road. We do not
know what weight should be attached to this suspicion,
but the belief certainly exists, and we trust it will
receive due attention when the enquiry into this awful
calamity takes place. The fact that the ‘ Princess
Alice ’ was struck on one side goes some little way to
prove tl at she was trying to keep clear of the approach-
ing steamer at the moment of contact. And it is very
certain that the captain of a weakly constructed vessel
rarely runs the risk of collision with stronger ships.”
[The compiler of this section, from a very long experi-
ence of the caution of Captain Grinstead, may, without
the slightest desire to prejudge the official enquiry, say
that the dead captain was the very last man who would
have run the risk referred to, and his memory is vindi-


dicated by Commander Cameron and the Commodore
of the Eoyal Canoe Yacht Club, who both acknowledge
the skill evinced by him in handling his vessel.]
The Morning Advertiser says : —“ The moonlight,
which we are told was all that could be wished, is
perhaps more to be really blamed for the disaster than
the darkness. Shadows and objects under the beams of
the moon give a very false idea of position and of
distance, and on the whole there seems to be a good
deal to be said in favour of those in charge of both
vessels. So many hairbreadth escapes take place between
the Pool and the Mouse Light every day, that less
attention is given to keeping well away than to keeping
the shortest course and trusting to the luck which
proved worthy of confidence in the forenoon, but failed
dismally at night, as it always will sooner or later fail.
Prom the Daily Telegraph we extract the following:
—“ The £ Princess Alice ’ is found to have been struck
on the starboard side. Her captain was accordingly in
his own water at the time of the collision. The portion
of the hull which bears out this fact was the chief point
of observation among the numerous nautical authorities
who visited the wreck, and the much-disputed point is
now set at rest.”


THE PERILS OF THAMES
NAVIGATION.
The OHy Press is severe on steam colliers. This
organ of the City does not consider Captain Grrinstead
necessarily censurable even if he altered his course after
porting helm, as alleged by the captain of the “ Bywell
Castle.” He might perhaps have been able to calculate
that a collision was inevitable if he kept his helm to
port, and, knowing the carelessness and erratic manner
in which steam colliers are usually steered, he might
have thought that his only chance of escape was by
putting his vessel about.
A hope is then expressed that after so frightful a
calamity has taken place, more “ stringent regulations
will be made to enforce the ‘ rule of the road ’ in the
navigation of the river. At present it is conducted in
the most reckless and dangerous manner. Every captain
is left to do pretty much what is right in his own eyes,
and the wonder is that the loss of human life is not
greater than it actually is. The river pilots are almost
free from control, and their greatest anxiety is to get
to their destination quickly in order to get a return
job. The great variety of craft on the river renders
it difficult to lay down a hard and fast rule with
regard to the course vessels should keep, and the


licence thus allowed becomes an element of the
greatest danger. Without referring in the slightest
degree to the ‘By well Castle,’ it is perfectly well
known that the most carelessly navigated vessels are
steam collier ships. They are a terror, not only on
the river, but all along the coast; their enormous size,
weight, and strength affording practical immunity to
themselves.”
On this point a member of the Sailing Committee of
the Junior Thames Yacht Club is equally severe: —
“ The appalling accident to the ‘ Princess Alice ’ will
cause no surprise to those who frequent the Lower
Thames, but it will rouse the attention of the public to
the reckless manner in which the navigation of the
river is conducted by the river pilots, who appear to be
a body of men subject to no control, for the suspension
of a certificate for neglect or carelessness is a thing
unknown. Masters of sailing vessels and yachtsmen
are bewildered by the extraordinary and reckless man-
ner of navigating steamers. The navigation being con-
ducted, apparently, without reference to any rule of
the road at sea or river bylaw, the result is that there
are few days in the year when the green flag of the
Thames Conservancy moy not be seen floating over the
wreck of some craft which has been sunk by collision.
The week before last my own yacht, when beating
through the Hope, was nearly cut down by a screw
steamer at full speed attempting to cross her bows ; a
collision was only avoided by shaking the yacht up into
the wind’s eye, and then she only passed clear so that
a boat hook could touch her side. Had she kept her
course she would have been sunk. A yacht last week,
sailing up Sea Eeach in broad daylight, witnessed the


collision by wbicb the Widgeon lies sunk off the Blyth
Sand. It is to be hoped that the Government will not
only order a full investigation into the causes of this
collision, but also into the manner of conducting the
general navigation of the river.
Hundreds of yachtsmen say precisely the same thing
while they always speak in high terms of the way in
which passenger vessels are handled.
An important correspondence respecting collisions in
the Thames has been elicited by the accident, between
Admiral Ommanney, one of the Conservators of the
Thames, and several writers, especially one who signs
himself “ Marine Insurance.” The latter gathers from
Lloyd’s List that over 70 collisions, some serious and
others very slight, occurred in the Thames between
October Ist, 1877, and March 31st, 1878, or about
three per week, and he challenges the Admiral to pro-
duce the records of the Conservancy Office to disprove
the statement. “ Marine Insurance ” continues thus
confidently: —“ My reference to Lloyd’s List has neces-
sarily been somewhat hurried, but I think that the
more complete records preserved at the Conservancy
Office will show that I have rather understated than
overstated the figures, and there may be many trifling
collisions which do not find their way into that journal
at all.
“ The traffic in the Thames is, of course, very great,
and I dare say that the gallant Admiral will be able to
show to a nicety that there is not one collision in pro-
portion to ever so many thousands of tons that pass up
and down the river ; but then that is not the point.
The question is, rather, can nothing be done to make
these collisions still less frequent ? ”


The reluctance of Conservators to admit the figures
of “Marinelnsurance” is the best possible evidence of
the necessity for an inquiry into the causes of the
numerous collisions which take place on the river, and
the means of diminishing their frequency.
Owing to the frequent fogs on the river, and the
smoke from factories on its banks, another able corres-
pondent, “Flag Officer,” considers the rule of the road
as applied on the open sea almost useless on the Thames.
The attempt to avoid a collision on one side probably
involves one on the other; it would]be very difficult,
indeed, to devise any rules which would sensibly lessen
risk upon the river without greatly interfering with
public interests, and still more difficult to get such
rules enforced. It is notorious] that sailing vessels or
lighters rarely attempt to avoid a collision, hut leave the
onus entirely on steamers. The danger to life in such
cases it is true, is not great; the crews are few in
number, and if the sailing vessel is sunk, her masts and
rigging afford shelter; in the case of the lighter or barge,
the conventional two quietly transfer themselves to the
deck of their assailant. Little is, therefore, heard of
this kind of collision. The steamer invariably has to
pay, whether she is in the right or the wrong, and this
is so certain that an action is never contested.”
The danger to life is greater from these slight accidents
than “ Flag Officer/’ suggests, because, in trying to
avoid them, a much more serious accident is frequently
encountered. It is quite open to consider that in the
case of the “Princess Alice” a slight collision, imminent
a few minutes before the great accident, materially
contributed to produce the more disastrous event.
Another correspondent would punish the captain of


each of the steamers in case of a collision. This
correspondent thus concludes :—“ If captains could be
made criminally responsible for collisions, they would
not leave port with an unmanageable crew, they would
procure a sufficient number of hands to remain on board
until those for the long voyage have become sober and
until the pilot leaves.”
To conclude this part of the business, a letter from
J. A., who evidently understands 1 the work, shall be
given in its entirety: —“ The late terrible catastrophe
has turned universal attention to the dangers incurred
when navigating the river. All appear to agree that
the ocean-going steamers chiefly cause the risk. I do
not wish to say a word that might point blame at the
unfortunate pilot who had charge of the ‘ Bywell
Castle ’ when she ran down the ‘ Princess Alice.’ He
may be quite blameless. In hopes, however, of calling
attention to an evil easily remedied, I beg leave to state
from experience the general position on board an ocean-
going steamer when starting on its journey down the
Thames, A steamer when leaving the docks for the
stream is always a scene of disorder. Lately-arrived
cargo strews the deck, hatches are open, ropes are un-
rove, and the whole ship presents an appearance like a
midshipman’s chest —‘ everything on top and nothing at
hand.’
“ The pilot comes on board. The captain places him
in charge and descends to his cabin to spend the few
hours at his disposal in arranging his shelves and putting
away his numerous belongings, which a few hours
before sailing had been brought on board from his
home on shore. The first officer, in the saloon, is
engaged signing manifests, surrounded by clerks of


shippers, whose purpose is to leave the ship at Gravesend
or some other convenient place. The second officer
and the watch are endeavouring on deck, or in the hold
to make order out of chaos. A quartermaster and the
third officer (if there is one) go to the wheel, and
another sailor takes the look-out forward, the pilot
being at his post on the bridge.
“ This is the general arrangement; but it is not a
satisfactory one, because the sailors so employed —that
is, at the wheel and on the look-out —are seldom suited
for the posts.
“ First, then, the helmsman. He may be quite
competent to steer the steamer on the ocean, but the
intricacies of river steering, added to his weariness from
perhaps, working hard all the previous night, or from
passing it in a jovial manner on shore, together with
his ignorance of the land signals of the pilot, and his
non-acquaintance with the pilot’s voice, render him
but badly fitted for his work. The man on the look-
out, unacquainted with the twists and bends of the
river, and with his mind intent on the friends who
have just parted from him, and in altogether an
unsettled state, cannot be safely trusted in such a
post. The result of all this is that the pilot has all
to do, and, besides, cannot depend on his orders and
signals being carried out by the helmsman with
alacrity.
"If I am right in my conjecture —that our pilots
are competent men but fail through want of proper
support —surely a remedy is easy. The Thames pilot
should be divided into four classes —say first, second,
and third class, and apprentices. The order of
promotion from one class to the other would be a


matter of arrangement; but no steamer of over 1,000
tons burden should be allowed to go up or down the
river without one of each class on board —the pilot of
the first class in charge on the bridge, he of the second
class at the wheel, he of the third in the bow, and the
apprentice learning his trade in one place or the other
as his chief appointed. I do not know how pilots are
now ruled, but I am convinced that the danger
of the river will not diminish until pilots are made,
not only nominally, but really responsible for the
steamers under their charge, and this can only be when
the carrying out of their orders falls on men
accustomed to them, and to their specific duties."


THE EULE OF THE EOAD.
THIS is a subject about which tlie general world knows
but little, save through reading the proceedings at the
Admiralty Court and the New Wreck Commissioners'
Court; but the differing statements of the men on board
the " Bywell Castle " and those saved from the " Princess
Alice, have so drawn public attention to the matter that
the Board of Trade themselves have at length awoke to
the necessity of reconsidering, and perhaps remodelling,
rules which have grown obsolete and useless. It is
perhaps not generally known that, although the Courts
take due cognizance of the differing circumstances
affecting each collision, they are practically bound by
one rule both for the open sea and in the dense mazes of
our Pool. It need not be pointed out how absurd is a
hard and fast rule which governs so different a state of
circumstances; it is only surprising that commerce and
pleasure have been so satisfactorily carried on all these
years as they have been; and we may probably extract
this amount of good out of the lamentable amount of
evil, that the whole subject is likely soon to be opened up
and discussed, as on the 9th September, a few days after
this catastrophe, Lord Sandon, the new President of the
Board of Trade, addressed the following letter to the


Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, through whose
instrumentality it has become known throughout the
length and breadth of the land: —■
“ Board of Trade, Sept. 9.
“ My dear Lord Mayor, —On considering the circum-
stances which have attended the late terrible disaster on
the Thames, I have come to the conclusion that it is
desirable at once to appoint an official committee of
gentlemen specially conversant with the matter in
question to take into consideration the rules now in
force with respect to the navigation of the river, and
to report to us whether any and, if any, what fresh
regulations are necessary with a view to prevent col-
lisions and for regulating the traffic. I should propose
to appoint upon the committee one member from the
Thames Conservancy Board, one from the Trinity-house,
one from the Admiralty, and one from the Steam Ship
Owners’ Association of London, as well as three gentlemen
from the Board of Trade. I enclose to your Lordship here-
with a more detailed statement of the points to which I
intend to direct the special attention of the committee.
My immediate object in now writing to your Lordship
is to request you, as the official head of the Thames
Conservancy Board, to be so good as to bring the
subject before the Board, and to invite them to nomi-
nate one of their members of large experience and
knowledge of these subjects to assist Her Majesty’s
G-overnment by serving on the proposed committee
respecting, this important question. It is hardly
necessary that I should mention that the committee will
not assemble before the conclusion of the Board of
Trade inquiry into the causes of this lamentable
accident. I should, however, be obliged to your Lord-


ship if you would kindly let me know as soon as possible
the name of the gentleman nominated by the Thames
Conservancy Board, as I am anxious to appoint the
committee without delay.
“ I remain, my dear Lord Mayor, very
“ faithfully yours, Sakdoit.
“The Eight Hon. the Lord Mayor.”
The enclosure was as follows :
“ Order of reference to committee.—The rule of the
road; the lights to be carried; the use of signals ; the
speed of steamships ; the necessity or otherwise for
alteration in the regulations concerning the number of
passengers carried by steamships in such waters, and as
to appliances to be provided for saving life in cases of
emergency, and the hours during which passengers
should be carried in river steamers; and generally to
report whether and in what manner further provision
can be made for better securing the safety of human
life upon the river, stating with whom the responsibility
now rests for making and carrying into effect the regu-
lations for that object, and whether any alteration is
desirable in the distribution of the work among the
authorities or officers now charged with it.”
This is entirely apart from the official enquiry into the
loss of the “ Princess Alice,” and we sincerely trust it may
be productive of good results. The body responsible for
the present rule of the road on the river is the Thames
Conservancy Board. They, as the harbour authority,
have adopted the rules for preventing collisions at sea
framed by the Board of Trade, and observed by the
principal maritime nations of the world. It has lately
been proposed to re-enact the old provision, which
directed ships going up to keep to one side of the river.


and ships going down to take the other. A greal deal
of evidence was taken on this point by the Conservators
of the Thames and the Trinity Board. The large majority
of the Trinity pilots were against the proposal, because
to forbid vessels from " cheating the tide " and making
straight across reaches from point to point, and to
compel them to keep instead to the banks, would
lengthen the voyage down the river by five miles.
Although five miles additional steaming for each vessel
means a considerable total addition to the cost of navi-
gation in the port of London, this consideration of
course would not deserve any weight if it were certain
that the proposal would prevent collisions. But it was
stated that during the time when the simpler rule pre-
vailed the proportionate number of collisions in the
Thames was much greater than the average now. The
navigation of the tideway of the Thames, says the
Times , will never be work for. other than skilled
navigators so long as London maintains her high com-
mercial position; nor can it be reduced to great
simplicity even for them. The short-distance steam-
boats cross from one side of the river to the other, and
they could not, without great inconvenience, be confined
to one bcnk. But the present rule of the road is clearly
susceptible of improvement even with regard to steering
and sailing at sea. It has been proposed by a highly-
qualified committee appointed by the Admiralty, the
Board of Trade, and the Trinity House to consider the
regulations for preventing collisions at sea, to re-enact
the rule which prevailed before 1862 for steamships
navigating narrow channels —namely, that each ship
shall keep to the starboard side of mid-channel —a very
useful regulation. The committee also recommend the


addition of words in tlie regulations to show that the
English term “port helm” is equivalent to altering
the course of the ship to starboard, and vice versa.
The English sailor’s language on this point is so mis-
leading that it cannot be briefly explained even by
persons familiar with the point without the risk of
confusion of language. The custom in some cases is
that when the officer of the watch calls out “ Port,”
it means that the ship’s head is to go to port, but it
generally means that the “ helm ” is to be ported and
the ship is to go to starboard. If the terrible disaster
which we have chronicled puts an end to the recurrence
of confusion and disaster from this source alone, some
little advantage may be derived from the very greatness
of the calamity.
A pilot writing to the Standard says :—“ Having had
forty years’ experience on the Thames, will you kindly
allow me to make a suggestion which, I think, will tend
to render collisions on the Thames (which are now of
frequent occurrence and often attended with loss of
life) very rare. I would earnestly impress upon the
Board of Trade the great necessity for a stringent rule
compelling all vessels proceeding up and down the
river to keep their own side, or, to speak more plainly,
for vessels proceeding up the river always to keep to the
left or port side of those coming down, and vice versa.
It is not to be supposed that I mean vessels shall crawl
along shore in shallow water, which is a very dangerous
practice (no vessel steering well when near the ground),
but that they shall always keep in deep water and a
true tide. This rule would let the pilot know which
way to steer his ship, let the night be ever so dark, and
would prevent collisions, which are now inevitable.”


USEFUL SUGGESTIONS.
A shoal of suggestions more or less useful have ap-
peared in the columns of the London journals, the
majority of which may safely be left unconsidered. A
few of them may be usefully referred to here.
A Liverpool shipowner recently exhibited an inven-
tion for saving life from shipwreck which might be
adopted by the owners of boats carrying a large
number of passengers. The invention consists in
making the upper part, or roof, of the saloon move-
able, so as to be instantly detached and converted into
a raft in the moment of peril. This detachable roof
appears to be a commonly adopted expedient on the
passenger steamers of the American rivers.
A means of making known to approaching ships the
course each is intending to steer, would be undoubtedly
of great utility.
An invention was some time ago exhibited at Lloyd’s,
which one of the most experienced marine authorities
of the room declared to be simplicity itself. The in-
vention consists of port and starboard masthead signals,
attached by lines to the rudder, and moving, therefore,
simultaneously with it.
An American shipmaster, Mr. W. P. Hurley, con-
tends that steamers should have a passing signal, and
be obliged to use it on approaching, and should make
known on which side they wish to pass —if to starboard,
by blowing two sharp blasts of steam-whistle ; but if to


port, one blast. If at nigbt, and approaching a bend
or turn in the river, to give the danger signal by
blowing three sharp blasts; and should a steamer be
approaching to answer by repeating, after which to give
the passing signal, indicating on which side she intends
to pass —if to starboard, two blasts ;if to port, one.
Mr. John Humphrey, the coroner, on receiving from
his jury at Poplar, a suggestion that passenger boats
should carry moveable seats, said he would forward the
recommendation to the Board of Trade authorities,
and to Mr. Rothery, the Wreck Commissioner. He
remarked that he had built a steam vessel for his own
use, and always arranged that the cushions and seats
should be moveable, made of horsehair, and inflated,
so that in the event of an accident they would float,
and enable those aboard the vessel to keep above
water—the cushions, in fact, acting as life-buoys.
The Engineer demands that passenger vessels shall be
built in at least three compartments, in such a way that,
if one is destroyed by collision, sufficient bouyancy and
stability will remain to keep the damaged vessel afloat.
A good idea, among others, is the adoption of a spon-
son running all round the vessel, made of cork or other
soft material, and projecting, like a continuous buffer or
fender, so as to lessen the impact in the event of a colli-
sion, and such material should preferably be of rubber.
A disaster of such magnitude will undoubtedly be
followed by some beneficial changes. The letter of
Lord Sandon, in the chapter on the “ Rule of the
Road,” shows the large views of the Board of Trade in
opening the inquiry; but the only immediate gain to
the community appears to be the prominence given to
the necessity of learning to swim.


AN ABSOLUTE NECESSITY.
How do we estimate a man who can neither read nor
write ? "What should we say of a man who could neither
take a hand at cards, play billiards, chess, croquet,
tennis, cricket, or football, not to mention the art of
fencing, or the other so-called "noble art?" He would
rightly be called a " muff," and his life would, in civilised
society, be a burden to him till he became enlightened.
But is a man less a muff who, on the occurrence of an
accident on smooth water, allows himself to drown like
a kitten ? Self-helpfulness is supposed to be a charac-
teristic of Englishmen; but can we fairly claim the
credit of being self-helpful when within 200 yards of
land, and a far less distance from barges and boats,
scores upon scores of strong men are reduced in water
to the level of helpless babes the moment they lose
their feet. With our aquatic tastes a man unable to
swim ought to be regarded as a shiftless mortal whose
education had been disgracefully neglected, and
he would be so regarded, but for the unfortunate fact
that nineteen-twentieths of his fellows are like him-
self. On this subject we have received the following
communication from Mr. Rarnsden, Hon. Sec. of the
Swimming Association of Great Britain:


Goswell Hall, Goswell Eoad,
September l7tb.
Heae Sib, —It has been computed that of the four
millions of inhabitants of the metropolis not five per
cent, can swim, and the terrible loss of life consequent
upon the foundering of the “ Princess Alice ” in the
late catastrophe upon the Thames, proves the accuracy
of the computation.
It is lamentable that, with the means of acquiring
proficiency, within the reach of all, —nay at their very
doors—so few can preserve their own lives, or that of
those dear to them, in case of accidental immersion in
water. That this need not be, and that people are
miserably neglecting the means at their disposal, may
be gathered from the fact that there are at the present
time, in London alone, over forty organisations having
for their object the promotion of a more general know-
ledge of the art of natation. There is scarcely a bath
that is not the practice water of one or more clubs,
the members of which are only too glad to welcome to
their ranks the non-swimmer. With the majority of
them the subscription of membership is but nominal—
rarely exceeding 2s. 6d. per quarter, the payment of
which, in addition to securing to the member the ad-
vantages of teaching by competent instructors and
practice with advanced and proficient swimmers, admits
him to the use of the bath at a price so greatly reduced
that the gain will nearly cover the amount paid for
membership. Surely, with so many clubs spread over
the metropolis, no one need be ignorant of an art which
costs him next to nothing to acquire; and I shall at all
times be pleased to furnish prospectuses containing
full particulars of the club nearest the residence of


the applicant, upon receipt of stamped directed en-
velope.
I may add that clubs are forming all over the United
Kingdom under the fostering care of the Association ;
even Jersey being enrolled under our banner, so that
those who like myself have steadily and persistently
advocated this necessary art for the last twenty years
are surely, though but very slowly, seeing the realisation
of their fondest wishes.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
W. W. Eamsdek,
Hon. Sec.
Swimming Association of Great Britain.
Land and Water calls attention to the invention of
“ Swimming Plates,” by Mr. H. R. W. Dunlop, C.8.,
late of the Indian Civil Service. “ These plates, which
are ovals of wood, are said to give remarkable
float power, diving power, endurance, and speed to
swimmers, to supply over twelve ounces of buoy-
ancy, and so allow of motionless rest on the sur-
face, without the constrained breathing of ordinary
floating; and, in short, to render swimming easier >
pleasanter, and more effective, making powerful swimmers
of weak ones, and changing what is often an exhausting
labour into an agreeable recreation.”
If the acquisition of an art so necessary, so easily
learnt, and for which so many facilities are offered in
London, is not encouraged by this terrible river-side
story, it is time for Englishmen to renounce their
pretensions to be a common sense, practical, self-helpful
race, and submit to be judged in history as an indolent
and self-indulgent one,* incapable of understanding


the logic of event?. To say nothing of its value in
moments of peril, the art of swimming introduces a
new means of enjoyment, of which no man who has
once realised it would willingly be deprived. In a
country like ours it ought to be a compulsory subject
in the school curriculum, and to be ignorant of it should
be considered almost a crime. After " spelling bees "
and " rinking," why should not " swimming " become
the "rage"—the "craze "if you will. Why should it
not become the fashion for a whole household, parents
and children, all decorously clad, to bathe in common,
the father taking the boys, and the mother the girls
in hand, how it would add to the delight of the out of
town jaunt; by this means, and such as this, by joining
existing clubs, and by making the teaching of swimming
imperative in board schools, the nation would in time
be as familiar with the art as the negroes, whose little
woolly heads may at any time be seen bobbing about
in the water of the Bonny river, and we should
never again present the pitiably helpless spectacle
to the world of seven hundred persons drowning
in smooth water like untaught dogs, within sight of
home and friends.
LEARNING TO SWIM.
Practical philanthropists have been enunciating this
necessary principle for very many years, and yet how
slow is the real advance that has been made let this
catastrophe answer. Had but 100 men and boys been
acquainted with this useful art, calm and self-possessed
in the supreme moment of agony (like the brothers
Wiele), each could have directed two or three others, at
least, to any spare plank or floating objec 4 ", while if the


women, too, had been taught—and we see no reason
why it is less necessary for them than for the sterner
half of humanity —at the most we should only have had
to chronicle the death of a few as contrasted with a tale
of fully 700. That we are a maritime race and love
the water is proved by the astounding numbers who
daily go out on the river. The London Steamboat
Company alone have carried twenty millions of people
per year for ten jears, not to mention the numerous
other companies; and it seems an anomaly that out of
the 800 or 900 souls on this ill-starred vessel, a mere
handful only should have saved themselves by swimming.
On this head a number of letters have reached the Press
since the calamity, and amongst others the well-known
Captain Webb says: —“ When that great and bitter cry
arose that rang the death knell of over 600 lives, among
that vast throng a few only remained calm and kept
their presence of mind, knowing that, unlike the ma-
jority, they had something more than a plank between
them and eternity, and these few were swimmers. A
simple easy movement of the limbs enabled me lately to
swim from Woolwich to Gravesend and back; and yet,
because so few take the trouble to learn this movement,
they perish within a couple of hundred yards from shore.
It may be too much to expect middle-aged persons to
learn, but surely parents, with boys and girls under
their care, should feel that, with the facilities that now
exist for learning to swim, if at any future time their
children should perish in a similar disaster, they them-
selves are in a measure responsible for their deaths.”
Mr. Cumber, of the North London Swimming Club,
asks: —“ How many on board that ill-fated steamer
would have given all they possessed had they but


known the art of swimming! This shocking calamity
should act as a warning to those who have neglected
the art of swimming, and stimulate them to acquire that
knowledge at once, for who can tell but that we our-
selves may some day be placed in a similar position to
those on board that ill-fated steamer the ‘ Princess
Alice.’ ”
A father writes to the Echo :—“ I would venture to
suggest that some means should be provided by which
ladies could bathe at a less expensive rate than at
present. At Brighton, for the male portion of the com-
munity, there are certain places where at certain hours
they can bathe without any charge. The females, how-
ever, have no privilege of this kind whatever; and this
I believe to a great degree is why they cannot swim.
Cannot something be done to remedy this evil p Por
might we not reasonably suppose that if girls could
swim at the ages our boys do, many of the poor
creatures who perished in the appalling catastrophe
which happened to the ‘ Princess Alice ’ might have
been alive still ?”
The following little incident speaks so forcibly that
it well deserves a place in these pages : —Mr. George
Hayes, of Lillington-street, Pimlico, writes to mention
the circumstances in which three young people became
survivors from the wreck. Mr. Thorpe, aged 17, his
brother, aged 9, and his sister, aged 18, resident in the
Old Kent-road, were in the boat at the time of the
disaster. The two brothers, having learnt swimming,
kept themselves afloat till picked up by a boat, while
their sister, who had also been taught, courageously
swam to the opposite bank. Mr. Hayes hence urges
the importance of swimming to girls as well as youths,


and says that British mothers ought to overcome the
general prejudice among them against their daughters
learning to swim. A greater instance of the presence
of mind engendered by the knowledge of this useful
art could not well be found.
This is undoubtedly one of the things which our
Government should take up and insist upon. There are
now numerous clubs where youths and men may.learn,
but it is the children we should reach. Many a useless
subject is now being taught in our Board Schools, and a
splendid opportunity arises to put the suggestions of
many writers into practice. A gentleman writing from
Eastcheap says : —“ Our School Boards might most use-
fully help to teach a- large portion of our population
how to take care of themselves in the water. If there
were attached to each group of schools baths for both
sexes, in which lessons and practice in swimming came
in the routine of instruction, it would not fail to be
popular with the children. Before long the knowledge
of swimming and the consequent confidence in the
water would be widely spread. The most economically
minded ratepayer could not oppose the cost of putting
up suitable baths, which need never be very great and
which might be lessened by opening them out of school
hours to others on a small payment.”
Mr. Eerr, certificated teacher, St. John’s School
Hammersmith, also says : —“ At the present time, when
the Government are taking so very much care of the
minds of our rising generation, it is but fair that they
should also take some thought for the children’s bodies,
and the physical exercise of swimming is one well fitted
to improve their health. It will, of course, always be
found that in any given accident like that of the


* Princess Alice,’ many must be lost, owing to their
being below at the time, or to their being very young,
or getting injured ; but I am certain that the loss
might be very easily made much less if attention were
paid to the matter. I would say then, provide boats,
lifebuoys, air cushions, moveable seats, anything you
like in that direction ; but above all let us try and pro-
vide individuals with the means of doing without such
aids when they are not forthcoming. In my school, out
of 170 boys, two can swim imperfectly, and the rest not
at all; while of three pupil teachers, two have just
learnt to swim. Next year I hope to remedy this by
trying to have some of them taught in the swimming
baths (very inadequate ones) near here.”
This point ought to be insisted on until it becomes
the law of the land, and then, and not till then, will the
saving of life in deep water become the rule, instead of
as now, the exception.
We have been favoured with the following by the Secre-
tary of the Boyal National Life Boat Institution (Richard
Lewis, JEsg., of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law) .
INSTRUCTIONS TOR SAYING- DROWNING
PERSONS BY SWIMMING TO THEIR
RELIEE.
Ist. When you approach a person drowning in the
water, assure him, with a loud and firm voice, that he is
safe.
2nd. Before jumping in to save him, divest yourself
as far and as quickly as possible, of all clothes; tear
them off if necessary, but if there is not time, loose, at
all events, the foot of your drawers if they are tied,


as, if you do not do so, they fill with water and drag
you.
3rd. On swimming to a person in the sea, if he he
struggling, do not seize him, but keep off for a few
seconds till he gets quiet, for it is sheer madness to
take hold of a man when he is struggling in the water
and if you do, you run a great risk.
4th. Then get close to him and take fast hold of the
hair of his head, turn him as quickly as possible on his
back, give him a sudden pull and this will cause him to
float, then throw yourself on your back also and swim
for the shore, both hands having hold of his hair, you
on your back and he also on his, and, of course, his
back to your stomach. In this way you will get sooner
and safer ashore than by any other means, and you can
easily thus swim with two or three persons; the writer
has even, as an experiment, done it with four, and gone
with them forty or fifty yards in the sea. One great
advantage of this method is that it enables you to keep
your head up, and also to hold the person’s head up
you are trying to save. It is of primary importance
that you take fast hold of the hair, and throw both the
person and yourself on your backs. After many ex-
periments it is usually found preferable to all other
methods. You can, in this manner, float nearly as long as
you please, or until a boat or other help can be obtained.
sth. It is believed there is no such thing as a death-
grasp, at least it is very unusual to witness it. As soon
as a drowning man begins to get feeble and lose his
recollection, he gradually slackens his hold until he
quits it altogether. No apprehension need therefore
be felt on that head when attempting to rescue a
drowning person.


6th. After a person has sunk to the bottom, if the
water be smooth, the exact position where the body
lies may be known by the air -bubbles, which will occa-
sionally rise to the surface, allowance being of course
made for the motion of the water, if in a tide-way or
stream, which will have carried the bubbles out of a
perpendicular course in rising to the surface. A body
may be often regained from the bottom before too late
for recovery, by diving for it in the direction indicated
by these bubbles.
7th. On rescuing a person by diving to the bottom,
the hair of the head should be seized by one hand only,
and the other used in conjunction with the feet, in
raising yourself and the drowning person to the surface.
Bth. If in the sea, it may sometimes be a great error
to try to get to land. If there be a strong “ outsetting ”
tide, and you are swimming either by yourself, or
having hold of a person who cannot swim, then get on
to your back and float till help comes. Many a man
exhausts himself by stemming the billows for the shore
on a back-going tide, and sinks in the effort, when, if
he had floated, a boat or other aid might have been
obtained.
9th. These instructions apply alike to all circum-
stances whether as regards the sea or smooth
water.
DIRECTIONS FOR RESTORING- THE
APPARENTLY DROWNED.
THE leading principles of the following Directions for
the Restoration of the apparently Dead from Drowning,
are founded on those of the late DB. MARSHALL


HALL, combined with those of Dr. H. E. SILVESTEE,
and are the result of extensive inquiries which were
made by the Institution in 1863-4 amongst Medical
Men, Medical Bodies, and Coroners throughout the
United Kingdom. These Directions have been exten-
sively circulated by the Institution throughout the
United Kingdom and in the Colonies. They are also
in use in Her Majesty’s Eleet, in the Coastguard Ser-
vice, and at all the Stations of the British army at
home and abroad.
I.
Send immediately for medical assistance, blankets,
and dry clotting, but proceed to treat the Patient
instantly on the spot, in the open air, with the face
downward, whether on shore or afloat; exposing the
face, neck, and chest to the wind, except in severe
weather, and removing all tight clothing from the neck
and chest, especially the braces.
The points to be aimed at are —first and immediately
the Eestoration op Breathing- ; and secondly, after
breathing is restored, the Promotion op Warmth
and Circulation.
The efforts to restore Breathing must be commenced
immediately and energetically, and persevered in for one
or two hours or until a medical man has pronounced
that life is extinct. Efforts to promote Warmth and
Circulation, beyond removing the wet clothes and
drying the skin, must not be made until the first
appearance of natural breathing. Eor if circulation of
the blood be induced before breathing has recommenced,
the restoration to life will be endangered.


11.
TO EESTOEE BEEATHIXG.
To Clear the Throat —
Place the patient on the floor or ground with the
face downwards, and one of the arms under the forehead,
in which position all fluids will more readily escape by
the mouth, and the tongue itself will fall forward,
leaving the entrance into the windpipe free. Assist
this operation by wiping and cleansing the mouth.
If satisfactory breathing commences, use the treatment
described below to promote Warmth. If there be only
slight breathing —or no breathing—or if the breathing
fail, then—
To excite Breathing —
Turn the patient well and instantly on the side, sup-
porting the head, and—
1. —Inspiration.
Excite the nostrils with snuff", hartshorn, and smelling
salts, or tickle the throat with a feather, etc., if they are


at hand. Hub the chest and face warm, and dash cold
water, or cold and hot water alternately, on them.
If there be no success, lose not a moment, but
instantly —
To imitate Breathing —
Replace the patient on the face, raising and support-
ing the chest well on a folded coat or other article of
dress.
Turn the body very gently on the side and a little
beyond, and then briskly on the face, back again ■
repeating these measures cautiously, efficiently, and
perseveringly about fifteen times in the minute, or
once every four or five seconds, occasionally varying
the side.
\_By placing the patient on the chest, the weight of the
iody forces the air out; when turned on the side, this
pressure is removed, and air enters the chest.~\
2. —Exfibation.
The foregoing two Illustrations show the position of the Body during the employment
of Dr. Marshall Ball's Method of Inducing Respiration.


On each occasion that the body is replaced on the
face, make uniform but efficient pressure with brisk
movement, on the back between and below the shoulder-
blades or bones on each side, removing the pressure
immediately before turning the body on the side.
During the whole of the operations let one person
attend solely to the movements of the head, and of the
arm placed under it.
[_The first measure increases the 'Expiration —the second
commences Inspiration .]
The result is Respiration or Natural Breathing ; —
and, if not too late, life.
Whilst the above operations are being proceeded
with, dry the hands and feet; and as soon as dry
clothing or blankets can be procured, strip the body
and cover, or gradually reclothe it, but taking care not
to interfere with the efforts to restore breathing.
111.
Should these efforts not prove successful in the
course of from two to five minutes, proceed to imitate
breathing by Du. Silvestee’s method, as follows :
Place the patient on the back on a flat surface, in-
clined a little upwards from the feet; raise and support
the head and shoulders on a small firm cushion or
folded article of dress placed under the shoulder-blades.
Draw forward the patient’s tongue, and keep it pro-
jecting beyond the lips ; an elastic band over the
tongue and under the chin will answer this purpose,
or a piece of string or tape may be tied round them, or
by raising the lower jaw, the teeth may be made to
retain the tongue in that position.


To imitate the Movements of JBreathing,
Standing at the patient’s head, grasp the arms just
above the
1. —Inspiration.
elbows and draw tbe arms gently and steadily upwards
above the head, and keep them stretched upwards for
about two seconds. {By this means air is drawn into
the lungs?) Then turn down the patient’s arms and press
them gently and firmly for about two seconds against
the sides of the chest. ( By this means air is pressed out
of the lungs?)
Repeat these measures alternately, deliberately, and
perseveringly about fifteen times in a minute,
until a spontaneous effort to respire is perceived
immediately upon which cease to imitate the move-
ments of breathing, and proceed to Induce Cmcu-
LATION AND ‘WaBMTH.


2. — EXPIRATION
The foregoing two Illustrations show the position of the Body during the employment
of Dr. Silvester's Method of Inducing Respiration.
TREATMENT AETEE NATURAL BREATHINGr
HAS BEEN RESTORED.
To promote Warmth and Circulation.
Commence rubbing tbe limbs upwards, with firm
grasping pressure and energy, using handkerchiefs,
flannels, &c.: \hy this measure the blood is propelled
along the veins towards the heart. ]
The friction must be continued under the blanket or
over the dry clothing.
Promote the warmth of the body by the application
of hot flannels, bottles, or bladders of hot water, heated
bricks, &c., to the pit of the stomach, the arm-pits,
between the thighs, and to the soles of the feet.
If the patient has been carried to a house after respi-
ration has been restored, be careful to let the air play
freely about the room.


On the restoration of life, a teaspoonful of warm
water should be given; and then, if the power of
swallowing has returned, small quantities of wine, warm
brandy and water, or coffee, should be administered.
The patient should be kept in bed, and a disposition to
sleep encouraged.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
The above treatment should be persevered in for some
hours, as it is an erroneous opinion that persons are
irrecoverable because life does not soon make its ap-
pearance, persons having been restored after means
have been persevered in for many hours.
APPEARANCES WHICH GENERALLY
ACCOMPANY DEATH.
Breathing and the heart’s action cease entirely ; the
eyelids are generally half-closed; the pupils dilated;
the jaws clenched ; the fingers semi-contracted; the
tongue approaches to the under edges of the lips, and
these, as well as the nostrils, are covered with a frothy
mucus. Coldness and pallor.of surface increase.
CAUTIONS.
Prevent unnecessary crowding of persons round the
body, especially if in an apartment.
Avoid rough usage, and do not allow the body to
remain on the back unless the tongue is secured.
Under no circumstances hold the body up by the feet.
On no account place the body in a warm bath, unless
under medical direction, and even then it should only
be employed as a momentary excitant.


LIST OF THE DEAD AND MISSING.
The following list divided into districts, shows that of the total
number of persons lost, nearly one half belonged to the South
London District, if we include Woolwich and Plumstead.
A portion of those marked missing were identified by clothing
or relics after being buried as unknown.
SOUTH LONDON.
IDENTIFIED.
Aldridge, Ann, 16, New-street, Kennington.
Aldridge, Eliza, 32, of 14, Thornton-street, Brixton-road.
Anckorn, John, 49, zinc-plate worker, and Ellen Elizabeth, 47,
his wife, 222, Waterloo-road, Southwark.
Andrews, Frances, 31, of 51, Langton-road, Camberwell.
Andrews, William Daniel, 27, of 10, Harvey-rd., Camberwell-gn.
Aylen, Frank, 39, Daniel’s-road, Nunhead.
Bailey, John, 25, of 62, and George, 25, of 77, Portland-street,
Walworth.
Baker, Ben. Frederick, and Mrs., 82, Boys on-road, Camberwell.
Basten, Frederick William, and Mary Ann, St. George’s-road,
Camberwell.
Bridger, William, 40, of 4, Borrodale-road, Wandsworth.
Bottrill, Wm. E. and Thomas, 44, South-street, Camberwell.
Butcher, Henry Thomas, 27, sub-manager of the Civil Service
Association, Gordon-road, Beckham.
Brady, Lucy, 5, Stormin’s-road, Lavender-hill.
Butt, Clement, 23, Rochester-square, London-road.
Calton, Harriet, 20, of 32, East-street, Walworth.
Carter, Frederick and Sarah, 27, Bird-street, Kennington.


Chabot, Josephine, 40, and two sons, Earnest Alfred, and Harold
Percy, of The Avenue, Croydon.
Childs, William Thomas, 27, of 4, Victoria-ph, Carlton-rd. Peckham.
Chittlehnry, Geo., 92, South Lambeth-road.
Clymick, John, 19, Allan-street, Lambeth.
Crawford, E. Jane, mother, brother, and two children, Besson-st.,
Hew Cross.
Dormer, Henry Erederick, 99, Besson-street, Hew Cross.
Dormer, Emma, 60, of 67, Camden-street, Hew Cross.
Drake, Mary Jane Cutler, 20, of 769, Old Kent-road.
Durrant, Ethel, 276, Brixton-road, grandchild of Mrs. Wickens.
Edridge, George, 29, clerk, 103, Hew Kent-road.
Elliott, William, and Mary Ann, 17, Eerndale-road, Brixton.
Ericker, Flora, 3, an orphan, of Battersea.
Forsdyke, Edmund and wife, and Sydney and Eliza, son and
daughter, 69, Walworth-road.
Frost, Bobert, 48, of 4, Thomas-street, Gibson-street, Lambeth;
and Jane Amelia, 46, his wife.
Furneaux, Mary Drew, 60, and Emily, 21, of 55, Penton-place>
Kennington.
Freeman, Mr., of the “Princess Alice,’’ fore-cabin steward, Weston-
street, St. Thomas-street, Borough.
Grimsay, Ellen, 2, Portland-road, South Horwood.
Green, Sarah Hannah, 33, Commercial-road.
Greenfield, Eebecca, 32, Thorburn-square, Bermondsey, stewardess
on board “ Princess Alice,” and her infant daughter.
Greenwood, Sarah Ann, Osprey-street, Eotherhithe.
Greenwood, Joseph and George, 2, Windermere-villas, Putney.
Gissing, Harry G., 6, Beresford-street, Hew Cross.
Gyde, Mrs., 28, and Clara Louisa, 18 months, her infant, of 324,
Albany-road.
Haggar, Hannah Elizabeth, 20, High-street, Putney.
Hallett, Maria, Ivy-cottage, South Lambeth-road.
Hand, Dinah, and infant, Thomas H. Hand, 20, Grange-road,
Bermondsey.
Harris, Walter, steward’s assistant, East Greenwich.
Hawkins, Henry, 63, Trafalgar-road, East Greenwich.
Head, Alfred, 2, Yictoria-place, St. George’s-road, Camberwell
Head, Mrs. Alice, 32, South-street, Camberwell.
Hilson, Mary Ann, 46, Wandsworth-road.


Howard, G-eorge, 3, Wright’s-place, Holland-sfc., Blackfriars-road.
Hollis, Mary, 6, Page’s-walk, Grange-road, Bermondsey.
Hollingsworth, Elizabeth, Maud, and George, 47, St. James’s-road,
Brixton.
Hoskins, Frances M. 8., and Henry T. 8., Swindon-cottage,
Lewisham.
Hughes, Henry, 14, Pear-street, Waterloo-road, cabin boy on
“ Princess Alice.”
Hunt, Edith, 24, Crawshaw-road, Brixton.
Hurwood, Rose Marie, 5, Manor-street, Walworth.
Hutley, Eliza, Ferndale-road, Bedford-rd., Clapham.
Ivory, James, 60, gasfitter, and Mary Ann, 55, his wife, 69, Havil-
street, Camberwell.
Jardine, Charles, 48, of 63, Manor-road, Hew Cross.
Jones, William James, Martha Margaret, and Florence Elizabeth,
47, St. James’s-road, Brixton.
Jones, Eliz. Florence, Manor-street, Clapham.
Eempe, Mr., dentist, Herwent-grove, Grove-vale, East Dulwich.
Eing, Mrs., Mr. Francis, and Edward, 6 months, 20, Wooton-st.,
Corn wall-road, Lambeth.
Larchin, Arnold and Harriet, Tunbridge-villas, Lewi sham-road.
Lambert, W. J., Lucy Catherine, and Eate, 8, Manley-terrace,
Eennington-park.
Leaver, Ben., 18, Ruth Elizabeth, 14, and Albert, 15, of 20, High-
street, Lambeth.
Lewis, Caroline, 4, Bowler-street, Walworth.
Lamer, Samuel, 21, of Odell-street, Albany-road, Camberwell.
Lynn, Amelia, 126, Broadwall, Lambeth.
Lee, Amy, Merrick-road, Clapham-road.
Martin, Frederick, Hightingale-lane, Clapham.
Marks, John, Ebenezer, Frank, and Esther Bridget, St. Alban’s-
street, Eennington-road.
May, Fanny, 42, of 18, Union-street, Lambeth-walk.
Mansfield, Alice, 35, and Jane, 22, of Bermondsey.
M’Geary, Joseph, 54, of 17, Pascall-street, Wandsworth-roid.
Morrison, Emily, 24, and Evelyn, 15, of 88, Boyson-rd., Walworth
Muncey, Anna, and Blanche, Tramway Terminus, 9, Blackfriars-rd.
Hares, Charlotte Sophia, 12, Claude-villas, East Dulwich, daughter-
in-law of Captain Sir G. Hares, R.H.
Orr, Alfred, 139, Stamford-street, Blackfriars.


Page, Thomas Frederick, Emily Margaret, and Frederick, 30,
Chesterfield-grove, Dulwich.
Palmer, David William, 22, of Commercial-road, Lambeth.
Pickerell, George, Jane, and Anne, Church-street, Blackfriars.
Pearson, Susan, 22, of 71, Rosemary-road, Peckham.
Potter, Emma, 42, of 9, Rodney-road, Walworth.
Randall, Mary Rebecca, 136, Drummond-road, Bermondsey.
Ralph, Mary Ann, Sarah, and Kate, 7, China-walk, Lambeth.
Sabine, Alfred Wm., 30, steward on the “ Princess Alice,” and
wife and four children, South-street, Camberwell.
Sedgwick, Joseph George, 43, carpenter, 202, Lambeth-road.
Slocombe, William, 74, and Ann, his wife, 215, East-st., Walworth.
Smith, Maria, Kate, and Lilian, Evelina-road, Peckham.
Spencer, Arthur, 15, of 78, Hercules-buildings, Lambeth.
Shand, Jane Frances, 11, of 35, Great Dover-street.
Sims, Martha, 60, of 126, Broad wall, Lambeth.
Standish, Susannah, and John Charles, 82, East-street, Walworth.
Steele, Hannah, Sophia, Grace, 12, and Louisa, 27, of 15, Harlej-
ford-road, Kennington.
Swan, James Hutchison, Mary Elizabeth, and Anne, 214, West-
moreland-grove, Camberwell.
Stahr, Victor Emmanuel, 22, of 18, Derrick-street, Rotherhithe.
Summers, Annie Elizabeth, 29, Florence Ann, 5, and Sydney
Walter, 13 months, 7, Mornington-road, New Cress.
Taylor, John, a drover at Deptford Cattle Market.
Wallis, Alice, Anne, and Jane, 121, Villa-street, Camberwell.
Ward, Louisa Sophia, 16, dressmaker, 16, Clapham-road.
Wark, John Ebenezer, William Frederick, and their mother, 38,
St. Alban’s-street, Kennington.
White, Sarah, 5, Vowler-street, Walworth.
White, Mrs., wife of Henry White, 11, Torrens-road, Brixton-hill.
White, Aaron Henry, 50, and Sarah, 45, his wife, 24, Kennington-
park-road.
Weightman, Emily, 14, nursemaid, 96, New Weston-street,
Bermondsey.
Whiten, George and Mary, Marshall-street, Southwark.
Wickens, Henry and Rebecca, Rutland-cottage, South Norwood.
MISSING-.
Bandy, Maria, 40, of 9, Manley-terrace, Kennington-park.
Greenfield, Mr., 32, Thorburn-square, S.E.


Hagger, Mr., and daughter, Wandsworth-road, Yauxhall.
Hallett, Mr., Ivy-cottage, Singley-lane, South Lambeth-road.
Hollingshead, Mr. and Mrs., and two children, Angell-rd., Brixton.
Hunt, Mr. and Mrs., and one daughter, 24, Crawshaw-rd., Brixton.
Jones, Mr., and Mrs. Jones and two children, Angell-rd., Brixton.
Jones, Mr. and Mrs,, and daughter Alice, 6, of Manor-st., Clapham.
Jenkins, Mr. James, 28, of Mount-gardens, Westminster-bridge-rd.
Marson, Miss, 56, of 14, Fentiman-road, Clapham.
Pearson, Mrs., 71, Eosemary-road, Peckham.
Eussell, Herbert Cecil, 18, of 60, Stockwell-park-road.
Eeuter, Elizabeth Grace, 411, Battersea-park-road.
Stubbings, William, 41, and Stubbings, Anne, 39, of Castle-road,
Brixton-hill.
Welby, William, 18, of 2, Lucas-street, Deptford, New-town.
GREENWICH, WOOLWICH, PLUMSTEAD, &c.
IDENTIFIED.
Barker, Mary Brockley, nursemaid to Mr. Towse.
Best, Mary Ann, 125, High-street, Woolwich.
Bing, Ann, 109, Lower Thames-street, Charlton.
Boncey, Frederick, of the firm of Boncey and Watt, steamboat
caterers, chief steward, Greenwich.
Burton, James, 38, farrier sergeant, Eoyal Artillery, Maria, 36,
James, 9, and two other children.
Catlin, Ann Maria, Ada, 3 years, and Thomas, 3 months, Beres-
ford-street, South Woolwich.
Collis, Theresa, 27, and Nellie, 12 months, of 3, St. John’s-place,
Barnfield-road, Plumstead.
Constable, Caroline, 44, of 27, St. James’s-place, Plumstead.
Coombes, Mary Ann, 67, of 6, Blissett-street, Greenwich.
Crofts, Amelia, 187, High-street, Woolwich.
Curtis, Charles Henry, 33, of 125, Ann-street, Plumstead.
Dunkley, Valentine, 47, shoemaker, Plumstead.
Ferguson, Jane, 73, Crescent-road, Plumstead.
Grinstead, William, captain of the “ Princess Alice,” Woolwich.
Grin stead, John J., son of Captain Grinstead.
Halliday, George, ticket collector.
Harrison, John, signalman, Greenwich station.
Hawkes, Eugenie, “ Anchor and Hope,” Elver Bank, Charlton.


Hawkins, Henry, 63, Trafalgar-road, East Greenwich.
Hock, Mr., “Hope and Anchor,” Woolwich.
Holliday, John, 17, Albion-road, Woolwich.
Hooper, Mrs. Eliza, 63, mother of Mrs. Towse.
Jobling, Mrs. Ralph, 22, and son Thomas, of 6, Lower Harden-
street, Woolwich.
King, William, parcels’ porter, South Eastern Railway, Elizabeth,
Edward, and Alfred, 19, of Woodland-terrace, East Greenwich.
Rowley, Annie Clark, 14, daughter, and Walter W., 12, son of the
Rev. W. T. Rowley, of 7, Ebenezer-terrace, Plumstead.
Sans, Nelly Louisa, 111, Albert-road, North Woolwich.
Searle, Mary Ann, 24, of Plumstead.
Smith, Hannah, 66, Chilton-street, Deptford.
Stahr, Yictor, Blackheatb.
Summers, Grace, 73, Crescent-place, Plumstead.
Turner, Emily, 18, of 1, Pioneer Beerhouse, Woolwich.
Towse, Mrs. Emily, 32, Edgar Stuart. 13, Winifred, 10, and Bar-
nard, 14 months. Towse, Frederick W. 8., son of Mr. Towse.
Mrs. Towse was the wife of the Superintendent of the London
Steamboat Company.
Wearing, Helen Jane, 28, sister of Mrs. Towse.
Warmy, Ellen, cousin of Mrs. Towse.
Ward, Louisa Sophia, 16, dressmaker, 16, Clapham-road.
Watson, Frederick Joseph, 19, of 11, New-road, Woolwich.
Westhall, James, 1, John-street, Woolwich.
Whomes, Frederick, organist, 34, Parsons-hill, Woolwich.
MISSING!.
Collis, Willie, age one year and six months, of 3, John’s-place,
Barnfield-road, Plumstead. ’
King, Mrs, Fanny, and infant son, of Hardens-manor-way, New
Charlton.
Saury, Mr., 40, of Bexley Heath, and one son.
Smith, Maria, 25 ; a child 12 months old.
Yanderbilt, Mrs., ot High-street, Woolwich.
EAST LONDON.
IDENTIFIED.
Alesbury, Alfred William and Eliza Jane, 58, Elizabeth, 21,
Jessie, 9, Louisa, 5, Jabez, 2, Edith, 5 months, 1, Yalentine-
road, South Hackney.


Green, Jane, 17, servant to the Alesbury family.
Allan, George and Catherine, Ebenezer Place, Bromley.
Aslat, Mr. W, A., Inspector of East India Docks.
Aslat, Edmund, East India Docks.
Beadle, Frances, 19, Mariner-street, Bromley.
Belcher, Henry and Harriet, 113, Brook-street, Ratcliff.
Bilton, James Read, Margaret, Mary, and Beatrice.
Bishop, William, 15, Mary-street, Old Ford, Bow.
Blackburn, Jessie and Louise, Walthamstow.
Bledger, Thomas, 41, of Stratford.
Bridges, Jane, 11, Valentine-road, Wells-street, South Hackney,
Burman, Philip, Charlotte, and three children, 24, Arson-street,
Commercial-road, E.
Butler, Alfred James, 28, oil and colourman, and Lydia Butler, of
Stepney.
Butler, Joseph, 48, and Elizabeth, of 101, Victoria Dock-road,
Silvertown.
Clifton, Henry F., 4, Cable-street, Whitechapel.
Cole, Charles, 2, Ann-street, Pollard-row, Bethnal-green.
Conway, Mr. F. and Mrs. A., 404, Bethnal-green-road.
Crocker, Lewis Mead, Emily Jane, and Matilda, 106, Leonard-
street, Bromley.
Crouch, Frank, Flora, Frederick, and Florence, 120, St. George’s
street, East.
Davis, Thomas and wife, and four children, 293, Burdett-road-
Limehouse.
Everest, Robert, and wife and two children, John and Willie, 13,
Croydon-road, Barking-road, Canning-town.
Finnett, Sophy and Florence, mother and daughter, “ Queen
Victoria ” public-house, Leonard-street, Bromley.
Fisher, W. A., corn chandler, Crisp-street, Poplar.
Freeman, Sarah, 30, of St. Leonard’s-street, Bromley, and brother
and two children.
Hallett, George, 32, of 24, St. Leonard’s-street, Bromley-by-Bow.
Hammond, Alice, Frederick Villa, Barking-road.
Harden, Mrs., 74, of Cambridge-heath, Hackney.
Harris, Sarah, 44, Sarah Alice, 17, Jane, 15, and Kate, 7, of 19,
Rhodeswell-road, Stepney.
Hewlett, Bessie, 25, and Walter, of 75, Teviott-street, Bromley-
by-Bow.


Huddle, George, Eliza, Ernest, and Henry, 75, Dalston-lane,
Hackney.
Huddle, George Michael, 28, Salishury-street, Victoria Park.
Johnson, William Edward, 38, mining agent, and Amelia John-
son, 29, his wife, of 81, Cassland-grove, South Hackney.
Kidston, Mrs. Filmer, Duke-street, Bishopsgate.
King, Busina Bebecca, 18, Theydon-rd., Grove-rd., Victoria Park.
Lewis, Alfred and Mary Ann, 33, Upper Aberfeldy-street, Poplar.
Magiff, William, 103, Victoria Dock-road.
Meeks, Catherine, 38, Victoria Park-road.
M’Geary, Caroline, Lyall-road, Victoria Park.
Mulhern, James, Margaret, and Catherine, Clyde Wharf-cottages,
Victoria Docks.
Newman, Elizabeth, 40, widow, 8, Market-street, Poplar.
Northey, John, St. Ann’s Schools, Limehouse.
Perou, Disney, 51, “ Bising Sun,” Sidney-street, Mile End.
Penney, Katharine, Tufnell Park College.
Piddell, George, and Annie, of Market-street, Poplar.
Piper, Flora, 154, Columbia-square, Hackney.
Backley, Harriet, 24, of Cambridge-heath, Hackney.
B)berts, Mrs., and Emma Isabella, 2, of 53, Auckland-road, Bow.
Bichardson, Mr. J., 3, Elmorah-road, Downham-road, and Her-
bert William, 11, his son.
Bichmond, George Charles, 12, Andrew-street, Bromley.
Biddell, Edward, 18, and Arthur, 12, of 118, Victoria Park-road.
Savage, Thomas, 22, Usher-road, Bow.
Scurr, Michael, Parnam-street, Salmon’s-lane, Limehouse.
Sinclair, Jane Ivory and Mary Jane, 138, Jubilee-street, Mile End.
Skelton, George, 3, Victoria-terrace, Cubitt Town.
Skillington, William, 66, Brook-street, Batelilf.
Sutton, William Thomas, 56, draper, 96, Charles-street, Stepney.
Velcher, Henry, and two children, 113, Brook-atreet, Batcliff.
Watson, Ann Elizabeth, and Emily Mary, 18, Northampton-street >
Cambridge-street, Mile End.
Wyatt. Frederick W., and Susan, 10, Appleby-road, Lansdown-
road, Dalston.
MISSING-.
Allan, Mrs., Ebenezer-place, Cross-street, Poplar.
Billing, Mrs., and child, West Ham,


Crouch, Mr., 120, St. George’s-street, East.
Grinstead, Mrs. Jane, Copenbagan-place, Litnehouse.
Hallett, Mrs., St. Leonard’s-street, Bromley-by-Bow
Ja-kson, Hannah Poplin, Commercial-road.
King, Jane Elizabeth, 40, of 10, Shrogden-road, Victoria-park.
Macgilf, Taos., 6, Denmark-terrace, West Ham.
Mitchel, , Cannon-street, Limehouse.
Newman, Charles, 8, Market-street, Poplar.
Potter, Mr. William, 33, of 12, Suffolk-street, North-street, Poplar.
Sutton, Mrs., Charles-street, Stepney.
Skelton, Mrs., Brook-street, Eatcliff.
Taylor, Eliza, Wellesley-street, Stepney.
NOETH LONDON.
IDENTIFIED.
Arnstead, John, 21, of 42, Queensbury-street, Islington.
Ball, Emma, 58, of 18, Brighton-street, King’s Cross.
Bardens, Elizabeth Mary, 63, of 12, Waterloo-ter., IJpper-st., N.
Bangs, Jane, 3, Fox-lane, Kingsland.
Baker, William, 13, Grove-terrace, Highgate.
Baker, Emma Jane, of 22, Lavender-grove, Dalston,
Briscoe, Cornelius, Jane, 23, and Sarah, 5, of 35, Holly-street,
Dalston.
Brodrib, Eliza Sarah, 52, John Edward, 18, private in the 11th
Hussars, and two children, of 74, Hornsey-road.
Bull, Emma, 18, Brighton-street, King’s Cross.
Burns, Hugh, 63, Peckwater-street, Kentish Town.
Campbell, Emma, 52, Spencer-road, South Hornsey.
Campbell, W., of 72, Eichmond-road, Dalston.
Cattermole, Julia, 73, St. Paul’s-road, Camden-road,
Chapman, Elizabeth Mary, 103, Barnsbury-road, N.
Cobham, Craven Proctor, Elizabeth, and Mildred, 84, of New
North-ro.id, N.
Cochren, H. J., 10, Gaisford-street, Kentish Town.
Copping, Maria Grace, 18, of 61, Dalston-lane.
Dillon, Charles Eowe, and Sarah, 5, Bartholomew-villas, Kentish
Town.
Donald, Hannah, 52, Spencer-road, South Hornsey (by her
clothing).


Drew, Mary Ann, Miriam Rath, and Elizabeth, The Hale, Tot-
tenham. The mother was saved, but died subsequently of: grief.
Ellis, Joseph and Mary, 19, Delhi-street, Oopenhagon-street.
Emmett, James 0,, 13, Albion-street, King’s Cross.
Earnum, Ada Florence, Georgetown, Demerara, and Queen’s
College, Tufnell Park.
Finney, Gertrude, Queen’s College, Tufnell Park.
Flatman, Phyllis Sarah, 3, Woodhury-vale, Stoke Newington.
Fricker, Sarah, 191, St. John-street, Clerkenwell.
Garrard, George, 44, Ernest-street, Hampstead-road.
Ginn, R. Wm, 103, Barnsbury-road, Islington.
Golding, Charlotte, Caledonian-road.
Gristwood, Annie, barmaid at the “Granby Arms,” Granby -
street, Hampstead-road.
Gurr, Harriet, 40, of 45, Robert-street, Hampstead-road.
Hambury, Ella, 20, and Harrison, William, 24, of 81, ivlddmay-
road, Holloway.
Hennessy, Rosa, Queen’s College, Tufnell Park.
Hill, Thomas William, 2, Grove-terrace, Hampstead.
Hollings, Mary Ann, 43, Poole’s-park, Holloway.
Hughes, George, 40, Fortis-green, Finchley.
Hunt, Mrs., Sarah Jane Mills, Edgar, Ethel, and Eliza Annie,
St. Mark’s-villas, King-land.
Ingram, George, Stoke Newington.
Ledamun, Mary Ann, James, and Leonard, 37, Shaftesbury-street,
Hoxton.
Lowry, Samuel, 2, Highway-place, Highbury.
Mayman, Eliza, 15, Hampstead-road.
Moore, Edward T., his wife, and two children, of the “ Alfred,”
Roman-road, Barnsbury.
Muddock, Henry Grigson, Harry, and Rosa M., 120, Sussex-road,
Upper Holloway.
Notman, John, 50, and Kate Notman, 21, father and daughter,
47, Arlington-street, Islington.
Nunn, Hannah, 103, Barnsbury-road.
Oakley, George and Charlotte, 23, Philip-street, Kingsland-road.
Phillips, Emily, 37, of 2, Holly-terrace, Highgate.
Pitt, W. L. and S., 2, Priory-villas, Park, Tottenham.
Bolt, Kezia Amelia, and Sarah Elizabeth, 8, De Boauvoir-road,
Kingslaud,


Rouse, Alfred James, Kate Mary Ann, and Sarah 8., 115, New
North-road, Islington.
Scholz, Maria, Queen’s College, Tufnell-park.
Stubbins, W. George, and Annie Elizabeth, 16, Hanover-street,
Kentish Town.
Teesdale, Mrs., Miss, and Charles George, 24, of 20, Windsor-
street, Essex-road, Islington.
Thompson, Kate Jane, of Queen’s College, TufneH-park.
Warburton, Rosa Ellen, 23, of Wellington-road, Kentish Town.
Ward, Louisa, 98, Grafton-road, Kentish Town.
Watson, Alfred E.,and Albert, 57, Halliford-street, N.
Watts, Besa Jane, William, and George, 105, Mildmay-road.
Wayman, Harriet, 26, Drusilla, 16, Elizabeth, 14, and Alfred
William, 18 months, 29, Sutton-street, Islington,
Wheatley, Augusta, 3, Fox-lane, Kingsland.
White, Fanny, 15, and Mary Eva, 13, from Queen’s College,
Tufnell-park; daughters of Augustus White, of Shanghai.
White, Thomas, 254, St. Paul’s-road, Highbury.
Wool, Annie, 42, Annie Bird, 14, Lydia Mary, 13, Minnie Sarah,
11, Emily Rose, 5, and Kate Winifred, 16 months, wife and
children of Edmund Wool, of the “ Granby Arms/’ Hampstead-rd.
Worsfold, Charles and Charlotte Phoebe, 2, Downhill-villas, Phihp-
lane, Tottenham. Eight children left.
MISSING,
Briscoe, Benjamin, 18 months, 35, Holly-street, Dalston.
Emmett, Mary Jane, 36, of 13, King’s Cross.
Hughes, 25, Forbes-street, Finchley; husband identified. Seyen
children left.
Turner, Charlotte, servant to Mrs. Wool.
WEST AND NORTH WEST LONDON.
IDENTIFIED.
Barnes, Norman 8., 4, Providence-court, Grosvenor-square.
Bishop, Walter, 8, Elvaston-place, South Kensington.
Bishop, Mary, 1, Q-lendower-place, South Kensinaton.
Bishopp, Mmnette, 26, of 16, Churton-street, W.
Besley, Eliza Ann, 13, Craven-road, Bayswater.
Bridgeman, William, 35, and Lucy, 25, of Fitzroy-rd., Eegent’s-pk,
Brown, Mrs., North Hall, Mortimer-road, St. John’s-wood,


Channel, H. Charles, Artillery Arms, Rochester-row, Westminster.
Childs, Alice Jane, 6, and Greorge Ernest, 3, of 14, Sovereign-mews,
Edgware-road.
Codling, William A., 4, Margaret-terrace, Hammersmith.
Coalman, James, of 10, Lawn-terrace, North End, Fulham.
Hayes, Mrs , Cheyne-walk, Chelsea.
Henderson, Louisa Alice, 23, and Harry F., 26, of 186, Q-oldhawk-
road, Shepherd’s-bush.
Hill, Q-eorge, and Mrs., 2, G-resse-streer, Rathbone-pl., Oxford-st.
Hollingworth, F. H., 9, South Eaton-place.
Howard, Gleorge Henry, 1, Great Smith-street, Wastin'nster.
Lamborne, Thomas Adolphus, 47, Shouldham-st., Bryanston-sq.
Leverton, Mary Ann, 40, Louisa Whittington, 13, and Susan K.,
9, Glebe-street, Turnham-green, Hammersmith.
Lee, Eliza, Kilburn Baths.
Legg, Edith Elizabeth, 8, Palace-garden-mews, Kensington.
L’ttle, William, Industrial School, North-street, Edgware-road.
Little, Egmontina, 14, of 186, Qoldhawk-road, Shepherd’s Bush.
Loder, Maria, 12, Robert-street, Chelsea.
Milsom, Florence, one of a party of eight, Hammersmith.
Marsh, Susan and Eustace G-eorge, 69, Brook-gr., Hammersmith.
Marsh'll, Annie, 6, Poden-street, Hanover-square.
May, Harry, 5, Harley-street, Cavendish-square.
May, Michael, Ellen Matilda, and Minnie, 27, Harley-mews.
Mekins, Robert, Rochester-row, Westminster,
Murphy, Harriet and Caroline, London-street, Fitzroy-square.
Ridout, Emily, 7, Gnfton-street, Fitzroy-square.
Ryail, T. Chapman, 3, High-row, Kensington.
Rjalls, Thomas C.. Silver-street, Netting Hill.
Russell, Martha, 25, of 47, Great Andrew’s-st., St. Martin’s-lane.
Silvester, Lucy and Rosa, 7, Radcliffe-stables, Hollywood-road,
South Kensington.
Small, Alice Mary, 31, Newland-street, Eaton-square.
Smith, Edwin and Prudence, of 29, Paddington-green.
Smith, Prances, and child, 84, G-loucester-road, Regent’s-park.
Somerville, Elizabeth, 25, cook at Inverness-terrace, Bayswater.
Teesdale, Joseph Wteland, an infant, and Elizabeth, 7, Bridge-
street, Westminster.
Tidy, Mrs. Sarah A., Russell-road, Kensington,


Usherwood, Mary Ann and Harriet, 8, Rathbone-place, Oxford-st.
Wakeham, Fanny, 2, Caxton-terrace, Shepherd’s Bush.
Weaver, Jane, 8, Upper Rathbone-place, Oxford-street.
White, Ann, 14, Eaton-square.
Wilkins, Robert and Maria Martha, 11, St. Margaret’s-terrace,
Rochester-row, Westminster.
Wilson, Betsey, 43, of Upperford-road, Westbourne-park.
Wilson, John, 43, dairyman, Westbourne-park.
Wood, Robert, 63, of 20, G-olden-road, Harrow-road.
MISSING-.
Aekroyd, Frank, 29, of 12, Upper Berkeley-street, Portman-square.
Beaver, Mrs., 64, of 8, Upper Rithborne-place, Oxford-street.
Cocks, Mrs., 50, of 60, Welbeck-street, Cavendish-square.
Clynch, John, 45, of 11, Alien-street, Westminster.
Dawes, Susan, 55, of 22, Drummond-street, Euston-square.
Flatman, Philip, 29, Bedford-row.
Ingram, Eliza, with the Milsom family, Hammersmith.
Little, Mr. William, Kathbone-street, Canning-town.
Milsom, Mr. and Mrs., and two children, Hammersmith.
Sims, Winifred, Oxford-street.
Smith, Mr. A. J., Claverton-street, Pimlico.
Wilson, Edward, Samuel, and Florence, 100, Hammersmith-road,
West Kensington.
CENTEA.L LONDON.
IDENTIFIED.
Aldridge, Will’am, 38, Clothfair, Smithfield.
Aldridge, Ann, aged 65, 6, New-street.
Ball, Mary, 26, of 6, New-street, Clothfair.
Bencher, William, 43, clerk to stockbroker in Throgmorton-street
Boddington, Elizabeth 26, Cowcrofs-street.
Bolam, Mary Ann, 9, Wuitacross-dley, Cowcross.
Bird, Elizabeth, 104, Huntley-street, Tottenham-court-road.
Bryant, Susan, 73, Bath-mad, Clerkenwell.
Denham. Christopher John, 21, Charterhouse-street, E.C.
Dybl ■, Caro ine Ade ! aide, landlady qf the “ Bose and C-own,’
Dorset-rtreet, Fleet- treet.


Fricker, Sarah, 197, Sfc. John-street, Clerkenwell.
Frith, Mrs., 2, Cottage-lane, Citj-road.
Fuller, Thomas Mdls, “ Adam and Eve ” public-house, Jewin-
street, and one child.
George, Mary Ann, 38, of 4, New-street, Clothfair.
Gulliver, Mrs. and Matilda, 6, Whitehor-e-alley, Smithfield.
Haist, William, Eliza, Eleanor, and Matilda, Alhion-place, St.
John’s-lane, E.C.
Harris, Elizabeth, Whitehorse-alley, Smithfield.
Hayes, Mrs. Pettr’s-lane, Smithfield.
Harrison, Arthur Major, 20, and his brother, 12, South-street,
Finshury-square.
Holmes, Sarah Ann, la, Baker’s-road, Farringdon- street.
Hunt, Frederick George, Bell-yard, Gracechurch-street.
Jones, Thomas, 1, Greenharbour-court, Goswell-street.
Jenkins, James, 37, Windmill-street, Tottenham-court-road.
King, Mary, 42, Hatton-wall, Hatton-garden.
Kitt, John and Rachael, 5, St. John’s-lane, Clerkenwell.
Law, Jane, the London Joint Stock Bank, Charterhouse.
Mouflet, Louis, Alexandre, L.Y., Metropolitan Meat Market, with
his wife Nancy and children, Alexandre and Annie.
Neale, Mary Ann, 4, Robert-pl., Bowling-green-lane, Clerkenwell.
Quick, Lucy Maud, 15, Sutton-street, Goswell-road.
Rich, Eliza, 191, St. John-street, Clerkenwell.
Roberts, George, 16, Lizard-street, Bartholomew-sq., Old-street.
Ropkins, Elizabeth, 72, of 12, Pine-street, Clerkenwell.
Senior, Alice, 7, Compton-street, Clerkenwell.
Sewell, Elizabeth, 27, Yerulam-street, Gray’s Inn-road.
Smith, Christina, 12, Benjamin-street, Cow Cross.
Stoneman, Emma, 56, Corporation-buildings, Farringdon-street.
Thurgood, Richard, 54, Graj’s Inn-lane.
Thurgood, Mr., Mrs. Eliza, and Eliza Rebecca, 2, and sister,
Compton-street, Goswell-road.
Yivash, Emma, 5, Hosier-lane, Smithfield.
Wakley, Maria, 55, Model-buildings, Holborn.
Waddilove, Zillah, 12, Peartree-court, Farringdon-road.
Warren, Harriet, 61, Calthorpe-street, Gray’s Inn-road.
Webb, George Jarvis, 10, of 104, Aidersgate-street.
Willemot, Ellen, 40, “Rose and Crown,” Dorset-st., Fleet-st,


MISSING.
Hogwood, Edward, 74, of 11, Henry-street, Old-street, St. Luke’s.
Smith, Caroline, 62, of 12, Benjamin-street, Cow-cross.
SUBURBAN AND PROVINCIAL.
IDENTIFIED.
Bell, W. E., Walter, and Harold, Beverley House, Barnet;
Bonsey, Arthur, The Pottery, Chertsey.
Bools, Elizabeth, 6, North-street, Sheerness.
Creed, William Thomas, 3, New-road, Gravesend.
Cully, Jane, Whitgift-street, Croydon.
Dewell, Sarah, Surbiton.
Harrison, Arthur, York.
Hosken, James, Emma, and Jessie, Aldridge-house, Balham.
Huddart, James Henry, Hampton.
Ledger, Thos. B. and Mary 8., 2, Claughton-villa, Chobham.
Marshall, Lawrence, 69, Wells-st., Loyall’s-bdgs., Birmingham.
Martin, Mrs., 40, of Northend, Huntingdon.
Welch, Eichard, Tunbridge.
MISSING-.
Bowles, Mrs. Elizabeth, 6, North-street, Miletown, Sheerness.
Leech, Mrs., and three children, Hoddesden, Hertfordshire.
Boom, Elizabeth, 44, of 98, Odd Fellows’ Hall, and Spring-hill,
Birmingham.


Mme. MARIE BAYARD’S
UNIVERSAL PAPER PATTERNS.
6cL, 9d., and Is. each.
( Postage \d.)
These Patterns, all Life-Size, are enclosed in an envelope, with the
illustration of each pattern and description printed outside, and are
acknowledged by thousands of ladies throughout the Kingdom, Ind.a, and
the Colonies, to he
The Cheapest and most Useful Patterns in the World,
Being modelled by experienced Parisian Artistes, from special designs,
COMBINING
Elegance with Economy in Dress .
All Madame Bayard’s Patterns are guaranteed correct.
Children’s Undergarments (under 12 years) ... .. 6d. each.
Or made-up untrimmed , 3d. extra.
Children’s Dresses, Mantles, Jackets, Ulsters,
Waterproofs, &c. .. ~
Or made-up tmtrimmed, -id. extra.
Ladies’ Underclothing of the Newest Shapes -- 9d. „
> Or made-up untrimmed , id. extra.
Ladies’ Costumes, Skirts, Bodices, Folonaise,
Ulsters, Mantles, Waterproofs, Mantelets Is. „
Or made-up untrimmed, 3d. extra.
Any of the above may be had trimmed as worn at an additional cost to
uutiimmed patterns of from 4d. to 6d. each.
Orders Sent by Beturn of Post. Agents Wanted.
Mmi:. MARIE BAYARD,
9, SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND,
London, W.C.
(Office of “ The Journal of Costumes ,” Is. monthly.)
DAVIES’S
Effervescing-
ALKALINE
SULPHUROUS
CHALYBEATE
«ac
eo
Portable
CO
Substitutes
CO
For the Alkaline, Sulphurous, and Chalybeate Spas in an Effervescing Tasteless
form, containing all their iVLedicinal Virtues, without the disadvantage ot
taking an excess of water.
Highly recommended by the British Medical Journal, Lancet, Medical Times, and
the Profession,
The ALKALINE is invaluable for Bilious Constitutions, Stomach and Liver Com-
-15 K \TISj where there is want of colour in the Blood, attended with General Debility
and Constipation. ■
Order of Chemists, In bottles , Is. Od. and 2 s. o d. Sample bottle free for 12 stamps.
Prepared only by DAVIES, Pharmaceutist, TENBY.


THE WANT OF A CENTURY SUPPLIED.
AJET BLACK MARKING FLUID
FOR MARKING LINEIiCOTTOIk
NO PREPARATION OR HEATING REQUIRED
AFTER BEING WRITTEN *
All Articles Marked with MATHER’S NIGRINE, will stand
Boiling in the following Solutions, whereas Marking Inks made
with Silver will not, viz.
Solution Cyanide of Potassium.
Caustic Potash.
Solution Caustic Sofia.
r , Chloride of Lime or Bleaching
Powder.
Ist.
2nd.
3rd.
4th.
sth
7th.
8 th.
9th.
The following advantages are gained by using Mather's Nigrine:
-Mo WARM IROM or HEATING required.
-Mo PREPARATIOM, MIXING, or WASTE.
-Mo fear of SCORCHING or BURNING the cloth,
-Can be used with a STEEL or QUILL PEN, BLOCKS or
STENCIL PLATE, for Monograms.
The Bottles contain DOUBLE the Quantity of ordinary
Marking Inks.
6th Bee mes, when washed, a JET BLACK, which gets
DARKER with repeated washing and age.
Cannot he removed by ANY CHEMICAL MEANS.
Will not injure the most delicate Fabric.
Plows readily from the Pen.
EXTRACT PROM THE LANCET, January 6th, 1878.
Niorine, a Jet Beack Marking Fluid.—We can commend this as a very good and con*
venient Marking Ink. We have submitted linen marked with it to some of the most powerful of
chemical agents, including acids, alkalies, and chlorine and cyanide of potassium, and have found
that it was very much easier to destroy the linen than the marking upon it. In fact, the writing
could not be effaced by any of the agents we employed.
EXTRACT FROM THE SANITARY RECORD, February 22nd, 1878,
We believe that Mather's Mi chunk is the very best of all Marking Inks. It t not often that
we meet with an article which is in every respect what the manufacturer states it to be, but
having in this case exhausted all our resources in endeavouring to prove the facts we have stated,
we must acknowledge Mather’s Nigrine as the blackest, most lasting, and satisfactory ink of
which we are cognisant.
Ladies will find an interesting and an agreeable occupation in using MATHER’S NIGRINE
for Etching Fern Leaves, Rustic Scenery, Views, &c., on cloth, whkrh may be used for dessert
doyieys, antimacassars, toilet mats, and sundry other ornamental and useful work, as from the
uner lines remaining distinct after repeated washing, very satisfactory results may be obtained
from this fluia, which is not the case with any other Marking Ink.
SOLD IN BOTTLES, at 6d.. Is., 2s. 6d., and ss. each,
BY ALL CHEMISTS AND STATION EES.
Samples sent Post Free on receipt of Thirteen
Stamps.
Manufactured hy W. MATHER, Pharmaceutical Chemist. Manufac-
tory-Dyer Street , Hulme , Manchester. Wholesale Warehouses — Far-
nngdon Road, London; 84, Corporation Street, Manchester.




