

THE
LATEST PRESBYTERY SCANDAL.
A STATEMENT
BY
The Rev. JOHN STORIE, A. M.,
Minister of St. Andrew's and Colonial Chaplain.
Reprinted from the “Launceston Examiner.”




THE
LATEST PRESBYTERY SCANDAL
A STATEMENT
BY
The Rev. JOHN STORIE, A.M.,
Minister of St. Andrew's/ and Colonial Chaplain.
Reprinted from the La u nceston Examiner.




THE PRESBYTERY CASE
To the Editor of the Examiner.
Sir, —I complain at being dragged into this
public collision. I had believed that in putting
into the hands of the Presbytery the documents
in my possession, I put it in the power of Mr
Budge to clear up, if he could, his own character
and antecedents : and that I put it in the power
of the Presbytery to clear up, if they could, the
mystery that hung round his conduct, and the
serious culpability that seemed to attach to their
own. doing this I believed that I had fully
discharged the duty which I owed to Mr Budge,
to them, and to myself. But, instead of con-
fining themselves to the question understood to be
before them, they—combining with Mr Budge-
have seen fit to diverge into a vehement attack
on me—misstating, repressing, falsifying, even
fabricating facts and documents $ and they now
compel me in defence of my own integrity and
my own honor to speak out in a way from which
I shrink, and which is inevitably jto issue in a
grievous scandal to religion and to public morals.
These documents will speak their own tale with-
out much comment of mine.
I. Minute of Budge’s Admission.—The
first document I submit isthe following minute:
John’s, Hobart Town, 10th September,
1875. Presbytery met, etc. Present—The
Revs. J. Black, A. Michie, and J. Scott. The
Clerk reported that the Home Mission Com-
mittee met on the 7th instant to consider an
application from the Rev. Henry Budge
to be received into the Presbyterian Church of
Tasmania; and that it had been cordially agreed
to receive Mr Budge on the understanding that
in the meanwhile, and prior to his induction
the Rev. Dr. Knox, of Elmira, N.Y., U.S.,
America, be communicated with; and that to
facilitate matters, and prevent unnecessary
delay, arrangements should be made to receive
his reply by telegram. Mr Michie moved that
the report be received ; but that as Mr Budge
had brought a certificate from Maumee up to
the date of his leaving America; and as he
satisfactorily accounted for the time that had
elapsed since then; and as they had documen-
tary evidence _of his having discharged the
duties of his ministry in the Australian colonies
for the last nine months : and as the plan which
the Home. Mission suggested involved an expen-
diture which the funds at their disposal would
not bear ; it should be dispensed with, and that
the Presbytery should be left at liberty to pro-
ceed with the settlement of Mr Budge, if they
see fit, on his receiving a call. The Clerk (Rev.
J. Scott) stated that inasmuch as the Moderator
(Rev. R. S. Duff), who was absent, was anxious
that Mr Budge should be received simpliciter,
he would withdraw his opposition, and this the
more readily after the frank manner in which
Mr Budge had met the proposals of the Home
Mission Committee. Mr Michie’s motion
having been duly seconded (by Mr Scott)
‘was agreed to.’” The facts, then, are
these: that Dr. Knox, of Elmira, is from the
first and is now Mr Budge’s sole referee ; that
Messrs. Black, Michie, Scott, and Duff are
from the first his four sponsors, responsible for
him then and now; that they decided in de-
liberate violation of the usage, law, and safety
of the Church to admit a person who comes
here to this distant colony not duly accredited
to a cure of.souls and a seat in a Church Court
where he might in utter ignorance of our laws
proceed to censure, to suspend, to excommuni-
cate myself and the office-bearers and members
of my Church ; and that they make me, as a
member of Presbytery, responsible for the
education, character, and standing of this
unknown man.
11. Official Letter from Maumee.—They
affirm in that minute that Mr Budge brought
“a certificate from Maumee up to the date of
his leaving America.” This is not the fact.
They have had in their hands an official letter
from the Clerk of that Presbytery. From this
letter I give these extracts :—“ In the year 1872
and a part of 1873 Mr Budge supplied the


Church of Brian, Ohio, in the Presbytery of
Maumee; I know there was a rumor
current that he was strongly suspected of com-
plicity in the death of his wife ; he
was acquitted of the crime, but the circum-
stances were such that the cloud of suspicion
hovered over him and followed him wherever he
went. Mr Budge’s relations with the Church at
Brian were unhappy and resulted in his leaving
that Church and seeking a field of labor else-
where. He asked for a letter of dismission
from our Presbytery to the Presbytery of Cin-
cinnati, 0., which was granted, and the letter
sent. This letter was never presented to that
Presbytery, for some reason; and we never
heard of the whereabouts of Mr Budge until a
letter of enquiry came from Connersville,
where he had succeeded in securing a charge,
followed by the usual results, division and dis-
sention in the church. In the meantime charges
were preferred by a member of session
of the Church of Brian against
Mr Budge.” These charges have been
printed by this Presbytery, but in their opinion
deliberate falsehood and language and conduct
damaging to religion, and creating discord in
the Church, are charges of no “serious charac-
ter.” The Clerk continues :—“ The above
charges were filed, and the whereabouts of Mr
Budge being unknown, it was impossible for the
Clerk to give the accused notice of the fact.
. . . Mr Budge held our letter of dismission
and had gone to parts unknown
During his brief sojourn in Connersville, Ind.,
after leaving Brian, you can judge of the results,
of his ministry by the following extract of a let-
ter which I will give. It is a letter directed to
the elders of the Church of Brian by a member
of the Church of Connersville, Ind. He says :
“ His course here has been such that he has
succeeded in disorganising the Church, so that
quite a number of the members and with them
two of the elders have ceased to attend the
Church, rather choosing that course than have
an open quarrel in the Church. If Mr B. had
remained in this country it was the deter-
mination of the Session of Brian to have fol-
lowed up the charge which they had made, to
prevent him from bringing ruin upon other
Churches where he might be received. But he
had gone so far and seemed to be so anxious to
get beyond the evil rumors that followed him
everywhere, that it was thought best to give
him a chance to recover his character. We are
sorry if evil has come upon you through an
inadvertence.” It is not, then, true, as this
Presbytery have chosen to affirm, that Budge
came to these colonies from Maumee ; not true
that he has a regular dismissal and credentials
from Maumee; but the real facts are that, pro-
fessing an intention to proceed to Cincinnati,
and receiving a letter to that Presbytery, he did
not deliver that letter but immediately left the
country and went to England—a fugitive from
discipline ; that the Presbytery of Maumee had
in consequence no knowledge of his “ where-
abouts” for more than 12 months; that they
then heard of him by enquiry and complaint
from Connersville, and, when prepared to take
action against him, learned again that he was off
to Australia; that he has in reality imposed on
this Presbytery a missing, a misleading, a can-
celled document; and the remaining fact is that
all this was actually known to the members of
this Presbytery when they decided to present
their late report to the members of our Church
in Tasmania.
3. First Letters eeom America. —I proceed
now to give some extracts from the first letter I
received on this distressing affair. It is from
the Eev. J. Wilson of Beverly, N.J., and was
transmitted through the Rev. Dr. Dulles, Secre-
tary of the Presbyterian Board of Publication,
Philadelphia. He says “Mr Budge was” (at
Beverly) “for a short time . . . during a
portion of the years ” (he writes 1872-3 ; it
ought to be 1862-3.) ... lam somewhat
familiar with the scandal which arose in conse-
quence of the circulation through the town of
the pamphlet containing an account of his trial
and acquittal of the murder of his wife. The
sentiment of the community, as far as I can re-
member, seemed to be equally divided. The
Church and congregation divided into two fac-
tions. The consequence of all this nearly resulted
inthedisbandmentof our Church; requiring years
to heal the gaping wound and to bridge over the
almost fatal chasm. He came to Beverly recom-
mended by the late Rev. Dr. Brainerd, at that
time pastor of the Old Pine-street Church. Dr.
Brainerd knew of the cloud which overshadowed
him, but said nothing about it; which was after-
wards considered unkind and unfair by the
Church, which was nearly shipwrecked because
of him. I would not, God knows, throw a straw
in the way of one of God’s messengers know-
ingly ; but as this fearful pall seems to hang
over him wherever he goes, his usefulness in the
ministry must of necessity be destroyed, and not
only himself and individual Churches suffer m
consequence, but the direct calling of the minis-
try suffer likewise. Some of his best friends, I
am told, advised him, when he left Beverly, to
give up the ministry.” The Rev. Dr. Scheak of
Philadelphia, writing about eight weeks later,
says : —“ As the case now presents itself, I think
our brethren in Tasmania need to exercise great
caution until they have more positive knowledge
about Mr Budge’s history. ” Both these letters
and that of Dr. Dulles were in the hands of this
Presbytery when they decided to present and pub-
lish their report.
IY. The Blue Book.—l have next to sub-
mit certain extracts from evidence taken in the
Supreme Court of the U. States. It is contained
in a printed 8 vo. of 531 pages, issued as a
printed STATE DOCUMENT ; its authentication
being in these terms : —“ State of New York,


No. 209, in Assembly, March 13th, 1862. Trans-
actions of the State Medical Society. Hon.
Henry J. Raynard, Speaker of Assembly. Sir,
—We have the honor to transmit to you the
transactions of the Medical Society of the State
of New York for the year 1862. — Very respect-
fully, your obedient servants, Thomas Steen,
Sylvestee D. Nihaed, Howaed Townsend,
Committee of Publication.” This volume has
been sent through the Rev. Dr. Dulles and Mr
J. Wilson. Dr. Dulles writes with it saying—
“We mail to your address a volume containing
a presentation of the facts elicited in the suit of
the Rev. Mr Budge against the Hon. Caleb
Lyons for libel.” Mr Wilson says—“l have
received a volume of medical testimony, in
which the whole case is reviewed. There is
contained also the sworn testimony of many
who knew Mr Budge. ” From some 30 pages of
sworn evidence in this volume I am now com-
pelled, in self-vindication, to make the following
brief extracts :
_ 1. Sworn evidence of Henry Budge:—Mar-
ried in Plymouth, Devonshire, England. I was
engaged in clothing and dry goods business.
She was an assistant in the same store for her
brother-in-law; her father sailmaker in dock-
yard at Davenport. I was 19 when married;
she was 26 ; continued in same business about a
year. Married in 1846. I had given and was
then giving my attention to preparing for the
ministry; I then went to London, and she
came in about two weeks ; I completed prepara-
tions for the Ministry ; spent a year in London ;
got credentials there, and was accredited to the
Canada Conference. I went to Canada to
Ottawa. Next went to Prescott; took family :
were there one year; she attended me the
afternoon on a visit to an aged couple ; had
religious service; they had a niece ; I had not
seen her before ; my wife asked if I had seen
the woman before ; I said no; she thought I
took too much interest in her. While at Rut-
land my niece visited me to spend a few weeks;
I proposed to wife to call with niece on some
families to make it more pleasant for niece ;
took her and returned about 5 p.m.; Mrs Budge
asked usif we had a finetime; shejdoubledupher
fist and said, “You shall never come tome
again—never will I have a child by you.” Went
to Camden and stayed two years ; towards
close of second year, she asked one day if I
was exchanging gloves with young lady in choir.
I said no, and she refused to receive visits of
young lady or family ; went to Lyons
Falls ; returned again in a week ; she made a
bed in a closet on floor, and she went into
other room and slept with children; did not
lodge together after that. Brought her to
Lyons Falls; about two weeks before death
insanity developed itself to my conviction. .
In August she was extremely religious and her
manner peculiar in worship and talk in prayer
.... She said her Heavenly Father was
going to take her, and wanted me to pray,
but not for other women. . . . Last night
(the night on the morning after which she
was found dead) when I returned from Turin,
about dark, she again questioned me closely as
to where I had been through the day, and
what doing. About half-past nine went up-
stairs to my bed and did not see her after that;
this morning (the morning of the inquest) by
half-past 5 o’clock, in company with my two
little boys, came down stairs, lighted the fire in
this room and in the kitchen, then proceeded
to my study ; while there I heard my little girl
cry out very loud; I came down stairs to enquire
the cause ; she says, “ Oh ! pa, ma is deadl
asked her how she knew; she satisfied me; I
said, “call Mr Shepard!” Mr Shepard and
Eli came in, and I asked them to go and look,
and they said it was so; my little girl came
to me at the barn last night and stated that “ma
had given Emma Gould a letter to somebody,
and I told her that ma was going to make
trouble, and told her to keep that letter for
you.” When at Mr Gould’s, I asked if I might
be allowed that letter, and Emma delivered it
to me. I found it was addressed to her sister in
England. I have never intercepted a letter to
her friends before. My reason for doing it now
was because of threats that if people would’nt
believe her here, she would expose me where
people would believe her. She had taken some
verses, with music attached, from my desk,
which I had received from a niece in Canada.
She insisted that it was from some of my lady
friends. The verses were not enclosed,
but the fact was stated therein that she had got
them. Other comments about my going to
Constableville and other places out of my im-
mediate parish, all tending to misrepresent me
and the truth. I threw the letter in the fire ;
she stated also in the letter, “ Such is my
misery here, where I have no friends, that I
sympathise with pieces I read in the papers of
persons who commit suicide.” She did not
know anything that the letter had been burned ;
she did not ask about it. I heard no noise dur-
ing the night. I never knew her take any in-
strument indicating that she designed to commit
suicide.”
Adam Deitz, postmaster of Greig, Lewis
County—“Mr Budge was at my office in the
morning of October, 1859; had a talk with him
about his wife ; he said he had a good deal of
trouble with his wife ; she was of a jealous
disposition.” Mr Lyons “ offer to show that
Budge went to tbe witness’s office and withdrew
a letter mailed by his wife, Mrs Budge ; and
also to show that he told the witness that he had
frequently intercepted letters ; Budge’s counsel
concedes this, that the witness withdrew
letters.”
Catherine S. Dwight lived in Adams, Jefferson
County, in 1857 and 1858 ; lived in. Belville ;
Budge was pastor of our Church.; my husband


was an elder of it; Budge left for England about
10th July; after he returned from England he
boarded at our house; he left, saying he was
going to Lyons Falls ; before he went to Canada
with wife had a talk with him ; he said “ he
was having a great deal of trouble with his
wife ; they commenced three weeks after mar-
riage ; she was very jealous of him ; she annoyed
him in various ways ; he felt as though he could
not endure it any longer ; he thought he must
avoid it by a divorce or in some other way ; he
said she had been the means of removal from
places where he had been ; he thought he would
take her to her parents in England, he could
live with her no longer.” I told him I always sup-
posed they lived happily ; considered her a very
superior woman ; prayed him to be reconciled,
and told him instances in which I thought she
was more considerate of him than other women ;
I told him she had told me that when she was
sick she had stand and flat iron brought and she
ironed collars for him, as he was particular, and
girl could not suit him; that was when she
was unable to be about house ; I was at her
house and she wanted me to prepare something
nice for dinner; she did not care for herself or
children, but wanted something nice for him;
I did it, and she seemed to enjoy it; I begged
him to look the matter over, and be reasonable
to her, and live happy ; he said he thought he never
could ; he tried to live pleasantly with her, but
could not. After he returned from England he
told me of an affair that happened in his study ;
he said she had been troubling him in his study;
he became enraged, and put his hand on her
shoulders to push her down stairs, but thought
of consequences and desisted; he spoke of his
trouble frequently; he said that after he re-
turned from England he was often tempted to do
something desperate ; he said in case she should
return from England he would be tempted to go
to Sandwich Islands or somewhere where he
would never be heard of; he told me he received
a letter from England saying his wife was very
sick, and another might bring announcement of
her death ; he felt sad to live with a companion
in such a way, but if he should hear of her
death he could not mourn for her; heard him
speak of a divorce twice; he never intimated
she was not chaste.”
To the like effect is the evidence of D. Altar
Dwight—“ln 1857, knew Budge in Belville;
was an officer of his church while he was there ;
knew Mrs Budge had to work very hard to take
care of her family; had a great deal to do ; had
a young child, six children in all; part of the
time without a girl; my father was a physician.
In May, 1858, had a talk with Budge ; he said
he lived very unhappily with his family; he
felt he could not endure it much longer; he
must be separated from her by some means.
Myself and wife remonstrated against such a
course. I told him her people would not en-
dure such a state of things; he said he had
often prayedhe might notbe left to do some awful
thing ; he frequently said he would go to
Sandwich Islands or somewhere where his family
could never hear of him.”
Helen Shepard says—“ I did the dining work
for the first three weeks after she (Mrs B.) came
to Lyons Falls : I don’t remember of Budge and
his wife speaking together but twice, once when
he introduced me to Mrs B. and the other
when she spoke to him about the fire ; he talked
to me about his wife ; she had locked him out
of doors ; he said she had treated him so that
he had lost all affection for her —the ties were
broken. He said if it was not for the
children he would not endure it. ‘ There is my
Henry, young as he is, would almost weep tears
of blood over me, and say, pa, why don’t you
send her away ? ’ ”
James Sponastein says— “ Budge came to my
house in August, 1859. He says —I wish to
say something to your woman about something
she has said about me ; I heard that she said I
was running about where I had no business,
and representing me as a bad man; she told
him she knew nothing about his business : had
heard nothing about him. He said he was at
Lyons’s ; that he and Mrs L.were at room, and
she looked out and saw a female in the yard ;
he looked and said it was Mrs Budge, I will
have to go. He said he had not lived with her
as companion or husband, and never should
again ; that he had moved and moved, but
should never move again for her ; he would try
one thing more. When he got through I said
to Mr 8., ‘look here my dear fellow, we can’t
always tell men when they come into our neigh-
borhood ; we sometimes get deceived by
preachers;’ told him of several clergymen
who had done wrong ; he asked me what did
they do with; Andy and I replied that his friends
cleared him.”
Hannah Spongstein gives evidence to the like
effect.
Emma M. Gould —“Lived in Greig when
Mrs Budge died, quarter of a mile from
Budge ; was well acquainted with Mrs Budge ;
called frequently during summer and fall ; was
at Budge’s morning of day before she died ;
Mrs Budge gave me a letter to give to our hired
man to carry to post office, directed to Mrs
Lonsdale, Plymouth, England; her daughter
Priscilla was present; the same evening Budge
called at our house about 6 p.m.; Budge asked
me if Mrs B. had given me a letter; I said she
had; he asked me if I had sent it; he said he
was glad, and he wished to be allowed the
letter ; I got it and gave it to him, and a quar
ter of a dollar she gave me to pay postage; he
said, “it is hard to take a letter my wife had
written, but I am obliged to do so.” He said
a short time since he had received some verses
from his niece in Canada, with music attached ;
that he left them on the table in his study ;
Mrs B. found them, and said he received them


from his lady friends; he told her he had not; s
she could not believe him ; he thought that the
verses were undoubtedly in the letter, and that
she would use them with her own composition
in order to misrepresent him ; lie said, “ my
troubles have been as they are now for eleven ]
years, and were it not for my children I
would not endure it for six hours ” ; he took :
letter, held it until I saw Mrs Budge was '
coming, then he slipped it into his pocket; I
said, “ Mr Budge, it is a lady passing the win- :
dow ” ; as she passed the second window I saw
it was Mrs Budge, and he said, I warrant it
is ” ; I then said, “ Mr Budge, what shall I say
to Mrs Budge in regard to the letter ?” He said
I had better say that I had sent it; then, as I
arose to open the door, he said, ‘ You need not
say by whom ” ; I opened door; Mrs B. came
in ; she responded good evening ; she. said, I
did not know Budge was in”; he said, “Yes,
I came to see Mr Gould about a man to thrash
for mo , she asked me if our hired man had
gone to post office, Falls? I said he had;, she
asked me if I had sent her letter, and I said I
had ; she said, “ I thank you;. I am very glad
you sent it; it is a very long time since I heard
from my sister; it is such a task to get a letter
from her sister or relations ” ; I can’t say which.
When I said the letter had gone, mother said,
“Yes, Mrs Budge, it’s gone” : nothing unusual
in her appearance, except when she first came in
she appeared excited; more composed and
cheerful when she found the letter was gone.
She said in the summer, “ I have been accused
of a falsehood, but my heavenly Father knows I
could not tell a lie; I am a stranger; I have no
mother or sister to soothe me when sick ; but I
am not a stranger to my Father in heaven.”
Jesse T. Gould—“l was at home on the
evening Budge came there; he then asked my
daughter for letter; she said. Mrs Budge had
given her a letter, and he said if not mailed he
should like to get it; he said it was hard to
intercept a wife’s letters, but he was obliged
to do it; he had endured these troubles for
the last 11 years, and if it were, not for
his children he would not endure it six hours ;
told girl to get letter, and give him; she got
letter and piece of money, and handed to. him ;
daughter said Mrsß. was passing; he said, “ I
warrant it is;” daughter says, “What shall I
g&y X have done with the letter ? and he said,
“ tell her you have sent it.” Mrs Budge came
in and said, “ I did not expect to see Budge
here this evening;” after Mrs B. sat down she
turned to Emma and asked if letter had been
sent; and Emma said yes; wife said ‘‘Yes,
it is gone ;” Mrs Budge said she was glad, it was
so much trouble for her to get a letter to her
friend. She said she was troubled a good deal
with her head feeling so bad ; wife said she had
headache ; Mrs Budge said it was not headache
—that she could endure ; she spoke of Budge s
being gone so much y Budge started for home,
saying nothing to Mrs Budge. Went to Budge s
Wednesday and Thursday evening of the same
week ; Budge in dining-room ; asked him how
his wife was; he answered me ; I said it was a
hard case for a person to be in that condition ;
he said he did not consider her crazy ; she
would take one mistaken idea, and look at it till
she became distracted ; he said her last sickness
was caused by his being out rather later than
usual, and shp said she would not sleep that
night, and he should not.
Mary Ann M‘Mullen—“Knew Mrs Budge ; I
lived there when she died ; went there to live
the Tuesday before her death; left there Sunday
evening after death; I slept up stairs ; I went
to my room from dining-room ; I slept alone;
the girls slept in dining-room bedroom; the
boys slept up stairs over dining-room ; they went
up from kitchen , I went to bed Saturday night
about 8 ; I left Budge and Mrs Budge, Priscilla,
and Henry up ; the next morning Budge called
me; he was in dining-room when he called;
when I first came down I made the tea for her,
as she had directed me on Thursday or Friday ;
this was the first time I made it ; it was carried
into her room by Priscilla ; when I made the tea
Budge was in his room up stairs ; can t tell
when he went up; when Priscilla went |in she
came out screaming, and Budge came down and
asked me what was the matter, and she said her
mother had cut her throat —all in the kitchen ;
then Budge told me to go over to Shepard’s and
tell him to come over ; Budge was in kitchen
from the time he came down till I went out
Shepard came with me —Mrs Budge went to
Gould and Shepard’s that night before she
died ; brought back some patterns for children’s
clothes ; she cut out some factory cloth by pat-
tern, and I took back pattern ; Mrs Budge very
cheerful; went and got me a book to read ; she
showed me about pictures, and told me about
the stories ; nothing unusual in her appearance
after she came back ; I heard talk between Mrs
Budge and children before she went to Gould s ;
Priscilla and Henry were talking about a letter
that her mother had written and given Emma
Gould; and Mrs Budge came from dining
room and. asked what it was all about y she said
it was a poor thing she could not send a letter
to her sister without it being stopped. Cross
examined —"When Priscilla came from ohep-
ard’s she spoke to her about telling her father
s about letter ; the fire was lighted when I came
; down (half -past five on a December morning);
; Priscilla. Budge, and self were the only ones
l up, when she came out of room (where Mrs
, Budge was found dead).”
3 Joshua Shepard, of Greig, Lewis County—
v “Knew Mrs Budge ; lived at a distance of 15or
116 rods from her house; first knew Budge in
1 July, 1859 ; on Sunday morning, 11th Dec., was
e called to plaintiff’s by his hired girl about 6 a.m.,
s not yet daylight; went immediately into room
i with son, whose name is Eli; found Budge and


family there (dining room); he pointed to light,
and asked me to take it and go into other room;
pointed to parlor; this was all Budge said; son
and I went into parlor bedroom with light; was
burning when I took it ; found Mrs Budge in
bed with her throat cut; I told son to go after
neighbors ; I returned to dining room, and said
to Budge, “ she is dead,” and I think he said,
“is it so?” He then asked me if ‘I saw any
instrument she killed herself with ?’ I said ' I
did not look for any’—he said ‘probably a
razor ’ —his little girl said she would go and see;
she went to the pantry and took down a box,
and said, ‘ pa, there is but one here. ’ He said,
‘ there ought to be two.’ He asked me to go
back and see ‘ what instrument she killed her-
self with.’ I said I would rather wait till
neighbors came ; Adam Shell came in first where
Budge and I were. I told him Budge wanted
me to go and see what she killed herself with ;
and we went and found a razor under her right
arm, half way between elbow and wrist; there
was a tumbler with something in it on stand ;
candlestick with candle in it; Mrs Budge was at
my house sometimes once a week, and sometimes
once in two weeks; she was at my house the
night before she died; she left about 8 p.m. ; she
appeared as usual; conversed freely as usual;
she was considerable of a talker. The funeral
was attended on Tuesday; Budge at my
house Tuesday evening ; he said he had to re-
move from one place to another on account of
his wife; he had to shift on account
of her. We had lived at Bellville,
Canada, Camden, and Smithfield. Before
Higby came in, he took up his little child and
said, ‘Now, if he had the means, he could go
andj educate his children to his mind.’
Cross-examined The hired girl came to
my house and said Mrs Budge had cut her
throat, and Budge had told her to come in;
found Budge and family in room, huddled to-
gether, all crying loud ; he motioned to parlor;
nothing said; when I came from bedroom
found Budge as I left him: Budge and I did not
meet after; he and I were friendly.”
Delia Shepard—“l remember inquest day she
died; I was present some of the time; I was
examined; I went home and found Budge at
father’s; when I entered sitting-room he said,
‘Delia, what are they doing over there ? —are
tney trying so get anything against me ?’ I said,
‘Yes, they spoke of quarrel at breakfast table
He said, ‘Just as I expected.’ After this occa-
sion Mr Budge said she was up till 10 o’clock the
night of her death.”
I do not propose to track this affair through
all its ghastly details. All that I am called to
do and that I now undertake to do is to set forth
so much ot the sworn evidence as may be needed
to expose to public censure the {monstrous folly
and the monstrous guilt of those who have
dared to blind their own eyes; deliberately to
deceive a congregation and a community whose
purity they were bound to shield ; and to attack
and calumniate me. The immediate facts seem
to have been briefly these : —The dead woman
was hastily buried, after a mere formal inquest
on the Sunday forenoon, but no post mortem.
as a case of suicide. Prevailing and uneasy sus-
picions led to the disinterring of the body; a
second inquest was held and a post mortem then
made ; the verdict of the jury was murder ; and
Budge was committed for the action of the
Grand Jury. In the month of September the
Grand Jury of Lewis County found a true bill,
and indicted the Bev. Henry Budge for
the murder of his wife, Mrs Priscilla Budge.
The prisoner was subsequently released by Judge
Morgan, of Syracuse, on bail of ten thousand
dollars. The trial for murder went on for two
days, and then, the presiding judge stating his
opinion that the medical evidence was in some
parts conflicting, and that “it would be unsafe
to convict,” the case was withdrawn by the pro-
secuting counsel, and was not submitted to the
jury. I proceed now with some farther portions
of this evidence :
The Post Moetem.— Conducted by Dr.
Swinbourne, of Albany, Professor Porter, and
several of the local surgeons, revealed these
facts : —“ An extensive cut was found on the
neck, having the following position : on the
right side 3| inches below the lobe of ear; on
the left side about 3J inches below lobe of ear; 4J
inches below centre of chin, on medium curved line
severing cricoid cartilage, oesophagus, arteries,
veins, pneumo - gastric nerves, and all J the
muscles of the anterior part of the neck. Cir-
cumference of neck above or at the wound
twelve inches ; curved length of cut 53, inches.
Depth of cut in a direct line 2 inches, back to
the vertebrae, cutting through the periosteum
and into the osseous matter of the fifth vertebra,
and also shaving off a lateral portion of the
transverse process of this vertebra. Skin on
the right side cut down J to | inch lower than
tissue. Tissue on left side cut deeper than skin
by about |to § inch. Tonyue. —There was
distinct ecchymosis on each side at points oppo-
site the molar teeth. On the left side this
covered a surface of one inch in length and J
inch in a lateral direction. On the right side
1\ inches in length, extending through the mass
of the tongue. Bight lung congested and
engorged with blood and apoplectic. Brain ex-
amined ; no appearance of any disease. All the
other examined and found healthy and free from
congestion.”
Fokther Evidence. —Thomas Bogers “ was
coroner when first inquest held; got to house
between 9 and 10 day of inquest; went into
bedroom alone; a tumbler, candlestick, and
piece of candle on table; head on left hand
pillow; chin more than usually elevated ; blood
had settled inside of wound; two or three stains
of blood across the nose, as if the finger drawn
across; a little blood above and below wound


and on neck below chin; a few spatters of blood
about as large as head of a pin, six or eight;
the neck appeared as if blood had been rubbed
with something ; discovered blood in back hair
on right hand side ; the streak of blood on right
side of neck three inches wide, on left two
inches; when I first went in the clothes lay
over the left elbow ; sheet covered over smooth
across the bed, except across the breast; it ap-
peared to be tucked under; a strip (of bloody
sheet ?) ten inches long and four or five wide,
which I pulled out and put back as it was before,
one inch visible before I pulled it out ; a stain
of blood on right hand sleeve, five or six inches
long; the upper part of stain slight and not
all connected, in streaks ; the lower part was con-
nected, thicker blood and deeper stain; the sleeve
had been slipped up; some blood on ball of
thumb, and inside of fingers, and across ball of
fingers; stain on fingers lighter towards ends;
a little blood on neck of night gown and wrapper,
en each side; night-gown down in front, as far
as top of breast, bloody ; right pillow had blood
on top and lower corner; marks on top as if
touched with fingers ; the spot on lower corner
of right pillow eight or nine inches from neck ;
no spatters on pillow; the blood on sheet across
the breast was dry and cracked open when un-
folded : clothes at foot of bed tucked in strong;
I pulled them out; no blood on walls, &c. ;
none on floor; looked under bed.”
(The bedroom was 8 feet by 10 and about 8 feet
high.)
Joshua Shepard—“ There was a stand near
head of bed; there was a tumbler with some-
thing in it; candlestick with candle in it; saw
a finger mark of blood on cheek and nose ; no
blood on dress in front; her dress at neck stood
open some two or three inches below cut; blood
extended only an inch or two on left side ; no
spatters of blood on clothes, head board,or wall;
no blood on left hand ; some blood on right hand
inside, from middle joint to ends of fingers;
blood on right arm of nightgown down by wrist,
larger than a doller considerably; no other blood
on sleeve but that; the bed clothes were folded
down ; lay smooth ; saw blood on right hand
pillow on top; appeared to be done with bloody
hand; it was nearest the head; it was as if
some one had hold of it and let go; there were
two or three marks on upper sheet near breast;
there was a streak of blood two inches wide
across breast, running towards right arm; her
head appeared settled down on pillow; no
blood under bed; the bedclothes smooth and
natural; no disorder about them; the blood
mark on face was as of the finger drawn
across the face; small streaks; appeared like
two or three finger marks all made at one time ;
the streak of blood across breast was in folds of
sheet; the tucking at side not removed further
than was necessary to enable her to get in; bed
clothes tucked in all round the bed.”
Jesse T. Gould —“Went into the parlor bed-
room about 7 a.m.; ber chin was rather
elevated, left hand on breast; clothes over elbow
and left arm ; razor lay four inches from wrist
joint: streak of blood on sheet about a foot
below fold; it was two or three inches wide and
a foot long; bed clothes all right; no blood
under bed ; no spatters of blood ; a little streak
of blood on face as of finger marks ; a little on
nose and cheek ; a little blood on the inside of
right hand and fingers; noticed no blood on
her person or night dress; a little streak
of blood on lower edge of right sleeve
three or four inches long; three inches from
chin to the cut; partly below Adam’s apple ; it
turned up; no blood on neck below wound;
near upper end of right hand pillow there were
marks of blood; ruffled up some; blood run
under the body ; fingers bent; hand lay on the
back ; if blood on outside of sleeve would have
seen it.”
Jas. Springstein—“Reached Budge s house at
7 a.m. ; went into room a number of times ; was
there when the body was removed ; head on
left hand pillow; left hand on breast, right
thrown back ; the left lay on sheet; I think
right thrown toward wall; razor under wrist ;
saw some blood on inside of right hand, on ends
of fingers ; razor open ; saw no blood on it; saw
some marks of blood on face ; they looked like
finger marks; they were on nose and right
cheek; no more blood except round the wound;
some spots of blood on right hand pillow;
looked like finger marks ; upper edge three or
four mark 3; I looked under bed and saw no
blood; did not appear very bloody about her.”
Isaac Shell—“ Saw no blood on wrist; saw some
spots of blood on right sleeve of night-gown ; no
blood on her person except on her throat; no
other blood on her clothes ; none on bedstead ;
a little blood on sheet which crossed her breast,
where it was folded; a blood stain on one of her
cheeks as if touched with end of finger; very
little blood on razor; could not say it ran on
razor; it appeared to run towards edge and
dry there.” _ . „ .
Laura E. Seger (wife of hon. Francis Seger)—
“Was at Budge’s day of inquest; noticed no dis-
turbance of bed clothes; I assisted in removing
night clothes ; the bed clothing lay smoothly on
the bed turned over on the top, as we usually
make a bed; there was no blood upon
her chest; none on her neck below the
wound;, no blood upon the left hand sleeve of the
night-dress or upon the arm; there was blood
upon the right hand and the inside of every
finger—just a trace of blood on every finger; no
blood upon the outside of the right hand ; no
blood on the right-hand sleeve ; none upon the
wrist; washed the right hand with a white
cloth; the cloth was stained some with blood—not
a great deal; no blood on the right arm from
elbow downwards; there was very little blood
on the right hand—a slight trace across the
fingers on the inside of the right hand, not so


wide as a finger, wider on some fingers than
others ; there was but one line across, but was
not continued between the fingers ; there was
no blood on the outside of the right hand ; I
made the examination for the purpose of cleans-
ing it ; the blood ran down the neck, back of
the shoulder, none on the front part of the
shoulder ; no blood on the neck below the wound
in front ", a space two or three inches from the
neck on the pillow, where the head lay, was
covered with blood.”
Opinions of Medical Authorities. —In this
Blue Book are given opinions on the case as
detailed in the preceding evidence by four of
the highest known authorities in medical juris-
prudence. From each of these I adduce a few
sentences :
Professor Alfred S. Taylor, Guy s Hospital,
London—“ From these documents it appears to
me, Ist, that the wound on the throat must
have been inflicted while the deceased was lying
on her back—i.e., in the recumbent posture. 2nd,
Taking the depth, extent, and direction of this
wound m the neck, it was not such a wound as
a nerson could inflict on himself or herself while
lying on the back in a recumbent posture. I
am decidedly of opinion that there would not
have been the power to shave off the left trans-
vers process of the fifth cervical vertebra or
penetrate the osseous structure. 3rd. On the
hypothesis of suicide, a wound of this extent
and depth must have been inflicted with
tremendous force and with great rapidity.
There must have been a sudden and
copious loss of blood from the divided
vessels of the two sides of the neck. No
muscular power would, in my judgment, have
remained to enable the deceased to have placed
lier arm in this position after the infliction of
such a wound in the recumbent position; and
there is no conceivable accident by which it
could have assumed this _ posture, unless the
body had been interfered with before it was seen
by the medical attendant. The weapon, in the
view of suicide, should have been in the grasp of
the hand, considering the enormous muscular
power used; if not in the grasp, the part by
which the weapon was held should have been
close to the palm. Had the right hand inflicted
such a wound as is described, the back of the
hand, as well as probably a part of the palmer
surface, would have been covered with blood.
The spot of blood 12 or 14 inches in length, etc.,
on the bedclothes, and the spots on the pillow,
have no communication with the main source of
hemorrhage. There is no conceivable theory by
which the deceased could have produced them,
or that they could have resulted from any act
on her part on the supposition of suicide.
Taking the attitude of the body, the nature of
the wound, the medical circumstances in
reference to the position of the stains of blood
and the weapon, I am of opinion that this
wound was not inflicted by deceased herself,
but that it must have been inflicted by some
other person.”
2. Professor Geoghegan,'Dublin University.—
“I quite coincide as to the extreme improba-
bility of suicide, and this for a variety of rea-
sons. I cannot conceive, in the first place, that
had the division of the great vessels been the re-
sult of suicide, the neighboring objects, as the
head of the bed and walls, bed clothes (i.e.
pillows), ar.d doubtless the deceased’s face and
upper part of the neck, could have escaped
being copiously sprinkled with blood.
Secondly, that the lungs should have been
ensanguined) or nearly so, instead of form-
ing characters, which lead to the legitimate
inference that they were congested at the
time of death. The condition of the razor
blade unstained in a great part of its breadth
by blood, seems strongly also to militate against
self-murder. I should have further expected that
in case of suicide, followed by rapid death, and
where the extent and character of the injury
would indicate a most determined effort, the
weapon would have been grasped in the hand as
it most usually is. Again, suicide by cutting the
throat in the recumbent position is most un-
usual ; nor have I ever seen or read of a case of
suicide where a portion of the bone was sliced
off. Lastly the injuries of the tongue are very
onnont"fton.Ytf.
3. Charles A. Lee, M.D., formerly Professor
of Medical Jurisprudence, New York—“ There
is not a shadow of doubt in my mind that the
incision was inflicted after death ; and there is as
little doubt that death resulted from suffocation.
The depth and extent of the wound argue a
determination of purpose and strength of wrist
possessed by very few suicides, especially fe-
males ; and I do not believe it possible that such
an incision could have been inflicted by the
deceased. All the facts point irresistibly to the
agency of another hand.”
4. Dr. S. D. Gross, Professor of Surgery,
Philadelphia —“After a careful examination of
the testimony submitted to me, I have come
unhesitatingly to the conclusion that she was
destroyed, not by her own hands, but by those
of another person. Ist. It is impossible for any
person to cut the large vessels of the neck with-
out being inundated with blood. If Mrs Budge
had been alive at the moment her neck was cut
the blood of the caotdid arteries would have
spurted about in every direction, soiling not only
the bed and body clothes, but also the floor, and
probably even the wall and ceiling. I assume
that this circumstance alone is amply sufficient
to establish the fact that she had ceased to
breathe when her throat was cut. 2nd. If Mrs
Budge had herself inflicted the wound, her
hand, face, and chest would necessarily have been
covered with blood. 3rd. From the fact that the
woman was comparatively thin and feele, I infer
that she could not (even if we suppose she pos-
I sessedmost extraordinary will and determination)


have wielded the razor with which the wound
is said to have been inflicted in such a manner
and with such force as to shave off the left
transverse process of the fifth cervical vertebra,
or to divide all the structures in front of the
neck, even down to the scalenus muscle. 4th. :
Erom the position of the razor and from the
almost entire absence of blood upon it, to say
nothing of the peculiar shape of the wound, I
cannot suppose it was the weapon used to kill
Mrs Budge. The above facts and considerations
establish most irrefragably, in my judgment,
the conclusion that Mrs Budge’s neck was not
cut until she had ceased to breathe, and conse-
quently that she was not her own murderer.
How she was killed I will not pretend to
affirm, but the probability suggests itself to my
mind that the act was effected by manual stran-
gulation, and that her throat alas cut imme-
diately after.
Evidence as to extent of Fame and Be-
lief. —The Presbytery had in their hands a
letter from J, Wilson, Esq., an elder in that
church at Beverly to which this Henry Budge
acted as supply in the years 1862-3. He says
“ I find upon enquiry among those who were his
staunchest friends while here in this section that
there is but one universal opinion prevailing
now as to the character of the man. I indivi-
dually cannot see how any other than the one
conclusion can be reached by any unprejudiced
person, after reading the testimony as given at
the trial. I firmly believe and with Dr. John
Swinburne, of Albany, believe as he says : —‘ I
know of no one in our profession or out of it
who now doubts that Mrs Budge was murdered,
and all concluded and still conclude that if mur-
dered, it was done, I will not add, because
I shudder to add, the rest of this
sentence. The Presbytery had in their hands
a second letter from Professor MTlwaine of the
same city (Beverly) sent to this colony through
the hands of Principal M‘Cosh and by him
authenticated, in which he says:—“ The docu-
ments had not reached Hobart Town when
the letter to you was written; but
when received will be quite sufficient
to prove the guilt of Mr Budge.” The Presbytery
had also in their hands two letters from the
Bev. Dr. Manley, Clerk of the Synod of New
York, and residing at Camden, in the near
neighborhood of this tragedy. These letters
were transmitted to this colony by Principal
McCosh, and by him authenticated. In these
Dr. Manley says: —“ The community here was
widely stirred as to the matter, and sharply
divided in opinion ; and there are still some if
not many persons who gravely doubt his
innocence of the crime charged, as to the melan-
choly matter which 18 years ago stirred three
counties, and might so easily be caused some-
what to stir them again.” I ought here to add
that there was also the evidence in their hands
that the Bev. H. Budge, some months after the
murder case was taken out of the hands of the
jury, brought an action for damages against the
Hon. Caleb Lyons for ‘ ‘ causing a libel to be printed
in Albany,” charging that “ Priscilla Budge was,
on the night of the 10th December, 1859, wilfully
murdered by the plaintiff 5 and also charging
Budge with other gross offences,” namely, as the
judge puts it, “of criminal intercourse with
other women.” This case lasted three weeks.
The judge, in charging the jury, said to them :
“ The fact that the defendant at the time of
the publication had reason from the facts and
circumstances existing at or before the publi-
cation, to believe the plaintiff was guilty of the
acts charged, he would not thereby be relieved
from liability for the damages which legitimately
and naturally resulted from the. publication ;
but it would relieve him from any liability which
the existence of actual malice would justify and
require the jury to give. The bad character of
the plaintiff is legitimate evidence in mitigation
of damages. The action being for injury to
character, defects of character would properly
and legitimately reduce damages. If the jury
find the publication proven, and that there is no
justification, and that the defendant was actu-
ated by express malice, they will give such
measure of damage as will fully compensate
the plaintiff for the injury done his character,
and such further damages as will punish the
defendant for the infliction of the injury. If
the justification (in the charge of murder) is
proved, then the plaintiff is entitled to like
damages for the injury sustained by reason of
the other charges against him in the libel, ” that is,
“ other gross offences.” The damages were laid
in this case at 20,000 dollars; the jury gave
100 dollars, or about £2O.
My Letters to Messrs Budge, Webster,
AND Wardrop.— While in the act of receiving
such documents as these, I deemed it my duty
to write to Mr Budge as follows“ The
Manse, Hobart Town, December 19th, 1877.
Rev. Sir, —You will no doubt remember that at
my first interview with you at Launceston, you
stated to me that you had a church in Philadel-
phia ; that it was in that city you had much
peisonal and domestic trial; that you were
there mobbed during the mad heats of the civil
war, and there lost your wife ; that, m broken
health, you first left your Church there for six
months, and then, by the advice of an influen-
tial minister, finally, to seek restored health by
a lengthened period of entire release from pulpit
duties. In all this there may have been some
want of clearness on your part or some miscon-
ception on mine ; and I now feel bound m strict
honor to inform you that I have, within the last
two or three months, letters from Philadelphia
that cause me some uneasiness. I have one
letter from the Rev. Dr. W. E. Schenk, a resi-
dent of 25 years in Philadelphia, who assures
me that no Rev. Henry Budge has been settled
within his knowledge in any Church of rnua-


delphia during that period. A second letter I
have from my old friend Dr. Wm. Blackwood,
who has been a Presbyterian minister in that
city for the last 27 years. He is certain that no
Henry Budge ever held a church in that city ;
not a person of that name appears to have been
at Buchanan, Mich., in 1871; stated supply at
Brian, in the Presbytery of Maumee in 1872-3 ;
at Connersville in 1874 ; and in 1875 in transitu
and in Australia. I have also a letter from the
Rev, Dr. Dulles, of Philadelphia, enclosing_ a
second from Beverly, N.J., in which I am in-
formed that a person of the same name —Henry
Budge—who had been indicted and tried for the
murder of his wife, did for some brief period
act as supply for the Presbyterian Church in
that town, but was not inducted nor settled
there, and left under a dark cloud and after
shattering the congregation. As I find,
however, that you have lately informed the
community of Launceston that your church
was in New York —a congregation of some im-
portance, numbering 1200, with 512 communi-
cants —it seems to me possible that all the facts
may be connected with the career of some other
person of the same name ; and I feel that it is
my duty, in these painful circumstances, to in-
vite information from yourself on these follow-
ing points :—lst. Where, when, and by what
Presbytery were you ordained? 2nd. Where
and when did yonr wife die ? 3rd. What was
the name of the important Presbyterian Church
of which you were minister in New York ? 4th.
Where and what was the last clerical appoint-
ment you held before leaving the United
States? sth. Were you connected in anyway
with the Presbyterian Church at Beverly, New
Jersey; and if so, in what year? It is possible
that a few explanations may put all things
straight. I am, Rev. Sir, yours dutifully, John
Stobie.” Before sending I read that letter to
one of the oldest and the most judicious min-
isters in this city, and his remark was—“ If he
be a right man he will thank you for itbut
to that letter I have had no reply whatever.
By the advice of the same minister I wrote
Mr Webster, of Launceston, on the 6th Feb.,
1878, as follows:—“You have been, I pre-
sume, made acquainted with the fact that I
wrote the Rev. Mr Budge on the 19th of De-
cember last, informing him of the contents of
letters I have had from the Rev. Doctors
Schenk, Blackwood, and Dulles, of Philadel-
phia, and Mr Wilson, of Beverly, N. J., and in-
viting any explanation that he might wish to
offer me. That letter having not even been
acknowledged by Mr Budge, I don’t consider
that any further communication from me is due
to him. But to you as the oldest manager
of our Church in Launceston, and zealous for
its spiritual interests and respectability, I must
now communicate the fact that I have by the
last mail received letters from the Rev. Dr.
Knox, of Elmira, Mr Wilson, of Beverly, and
Dr. John Swinburne, of Albany, N.Y., in re-
ference to certain very distressing occurrences
in the career of Mr Budge. I have also received
by the last Californian mail a printed volume
of the “ Transactions of the Medical Society
of the State of New York for 1862, “containing
a report extending to about 80 pages of the evi-
dence, both medical and otherwise, of the
alleged suicide of the late Mrs Budge. This
volume contains an engraving of the body of
Mrs Budge as said to have been found lying in
bed with the throat cut, and several other
engravings, suggesting how this may have been
done, impossibly by herself, possibly by
another. The report and the post mortem is as
follows. 1 cannot at present allow these
documents to leave my hands, but I have to
request that you will acquaint the other managers
of the Church with the facts I have stated in
this letter, and inform them that by you and
them these documents may be at any time seen
for perusal at my house. As interested in and
representing the congregation you have the first
right of access to the knowledge of all these
most distressing and necessarily most damaging
facts. It seems to be impossible that Mr Budge
can continue to minister in any of our Churches
with either edification or propriety.” Again on
the 6th of February I wrote to Mr Webster—
on his declining apparently to inspect the rest,
but urging to have Dr. Knox’s letter alone: —“I
scarcely feel at liberty to permit these docu-
ments to leave my possession at present, but it
is surely right for me to say that if the man-
agers of the Church at Launceston are not will-
ing to become acquainted with the facts or evi-
dence contained in these documents—as in my
opinion they were entitled to be the first to be—
I cannot be responsible for what may follow.”
Deeming that, though the managers refused to
inspect these documents, the facts—now
notoriously clamant in Launceston through Mr
Budge’s own act —must of necessity be in some
way investigated, I wrote the following letter to
the Rev. J. R. Wardrop : —“The Manse, Ho-
bart Town, March 20th, 1878. Rev. Sir, —I
have received from the United States various
documents, and among the rest an official
volume issued under the authority of the House
of Assembly, N. York, containing facts and
evidence bearing on the murder of Mrs Priscilla
Budge, wife of a Rev. Henry Budge,then minis-
ter of a church at Lyons Falls ; the verdict on
the inquest; the finding of the Grand Jury; the
arraignment of Mr Budge for murder; and
report of the other most painful proceedings in
connection with this appalling case ; If you
consider it your duty to become acquainted with
the contents of these documents, I am prepared
to make any reasonable arrangement for your
perusal of them, or even to send them through
to Campbell Town, on receiving a written pro-
mise that they shall be returned to me within
four days, safe and uninjured. Be good enough


to reply at once, and to confine your reply
strictly to the business in hand.” I received im-
mediately a note from Mr W. refusing to re-
ceive them or to peruse them; and a second
from the Rev. J. Scott convening, in Mr Ward-
rop’s name, a special meeting of Presbytery, at
which “ Mr W. was to move a vote of censure
on the Rev. J. Storie for unpresbyterial conduct
in reading and showing documents with a view
to prejudice people’s minds against a minister of
tbe Preseyterian Church.” All this needs no
remark from me. I acted in the case of Mr
Budge and towards him as I should expect any
honorable man to act towards me.
Knox and Swinburne. —I come now to Dr.
Knox. To him I wrote as the confidential
friend and sole referee of Mr Budge, putting
categoric questions. One was, “ Had Mr Budge
been ordained to any recognised charge in the
Presbyterian Church ?” To this his first reply
was indirect and misleading—" He has held a
regular relation to congregations in the Presby-
terian Church.” When the question is pressed
in my second letter, he tells—“l do not think
he was ever settled as pastor of a Presbyterian
Church“l do not find any record even of his
having been a regular pastor.” Again, as Mr
Budge had distinctly said to myself and others
that the Church he had just left was in Phila-
delphia, and that there his wife became insane
and died, I enquired—“Had Mr B. at any time
a fixed charge in that city?” This question
Dr. Knox left unanswered. I enquired again—
“ Was there anything distressing in the illness
and death of his wife ” To this Dr. Knox re-
plied—“ His wife committed suicide.” I knew
from evidence in my hands that this was not
the fact. As to the trial or trials in which Mr
B. was involved, I understood Dr. Knox to tell
me “ there is no printed report.” I had thirty
pages of printed evidence in my hand. As to the
last place Mr B. left in the United States, Dr.
Knox told me—“ I had a letter from the elders
in Connersville after he left the county,
speaking kindly and confidingly of him.” The
Clerk of the Presbytery of Maumee writes to
us—“ His course has been such at Connersville
that he has succeeded in disorganising the
Church, so that quite a number of the members,
and with them two of the elders, have ceased to
attend the Church, rather phoosing that
course than have an open quarrel in
the Church.” I considered, and I still
consider, that first letter of Dr. Knox’s to
have been disingenuous, and worse than disin-
genuous. Of his name and his position I know
nothing whatever. This Committee venture so
far as to testify of him that “he is well-known
to be a minister of exalted character and of
high standing in the United States.” I ask
is it the fact that any single member of
that committee does in reality know any-
thing of this Dr. Knox whatever ?—any-
thing, except through Mr Budge ? Is he known
by repute or even by name to Mr J. Gibson, or
Mr J. Maclanachan, or Mr J. T. Robertson, or
Mr A. Webster, or to any one of them ? If not,
I ask how they dare, as honorable men, to speak
either of him or of Dr Swinburne in the terms
they have ? They affirm again “ that Dr Knox’s
second letter to Mr Storie is also highly favor-
able to Mr Budge.” Why not print that letter
in their report ? He concludes it with the bated
words—“ I fear Mr Budge is at times impulsive
and injudicious, but I can but trust that he is an
inoncent man ! ”
Of Dr John Swinburne, I only know that he
is now and has been for more than twenty years
a physician of standing and character in nhe city
of Albany, N. Y. ; that Dr Gross, then Profes-
sor of Surgery in the Medical School of Phila-
delphia, writes to him, “ I am, dear doctor,
very truly and respectfully your friend and
obedient servant; ” that the late Dr Charles
Lee, Professor of Medical Jurisprudence, N.Y.,
writes to him, “ I have nowhere read a more
interesting case, or one which has been more
ably or logically elucidated, where the reasoning
is so thoroughly based on science and established
principles of anatomy, physiology, and patho-
logy ; ” that the State Medical Society of New
York have printed his paper of upwards of 80
pages in their Transactions for 1862; and that
his name has been sent here with the utmost
respect by several of the gentlemen whose
documents are at present in our hands: and this
is the man with whose character the members
of this Presbytery have ventured so to deal as
to induce the editor of the Hobart Town Mer-
cury absolutely to denounce him through these
colonies as “ a perjured scoundrel! ”
Testimonials from MacDonald and Ham-
ilton. —As to Mr Hamilton’s testimonial, I can
only go this far now —that what he says as to
Budge’s “ preaching on board ship ” on his
voyage to these colonies from England (received
from Budge’s own information) is now in respect
to its true facts sufficiently known and notorious
in Launceston, and from independent testimony.
In respect to the Rev. Dr. MacDonald, I am
not at present at liberty to say more than, just
these two things—First, that I have means of
proving that the use of his official designation,
“Convener of Home Mission,” is entirely un-
authorised ; and second, that he is now in pos-
session of later knowledge as to facts which
make it impossible that he can adhere to that
testimonial at this day.
V. Presbytery Records. —In the month of
November, 1875, Mr Budge was admitted, forthe
first time in his long career, to the pastorate of a
Presbyterian Church, and to a place of rule in a
Church Court, by the act of these men who now
sustain him and impeach me. In the month of
October, 1876 he was elected, for the first time
in his long career, Moderator of a Presbytery;
and as Moderator he acted as the organ and
instrument of those who now defend him, in the


endeavor to disfranchise my Church of St.
Andrew’s from its rights in Presbytery. In the
year 1877 he, as their Moderator, placed himself
at the head of a movement to deprive the mem-
bers of the Church of Scotland of properties to
the amount of nearly £40,000 ; and intending to
substantiate their plea on oath that this Church
and Presbytery were not and never had been in
connection with the Church of Scotland nor
subject to its laws, he attached his name to a
document professing to be the minute of a Pres-
bytery meeting held at Campbell Town, and
dated the 15th October, 1873. This minute,
imposed as evidence on the Supreme Court, is
signed “ Henry Budge, Moderator,’’and is dated
20 months before he first set foot in this colony.
How can the persons who dared to combine with
him in that fabrication of evidence, dare to
combine in acting against him now ?
All these painful incidents in the life of this
Mr Budge, extending their baneful and damaging
influence over the last 18 years were—if made
known to the Presbytery—concealed from the
congregation at the time of his settlement at
Launceston, concealed from me, and concealed
from the colony. He was introduced into this
city for special religious services as an evangelist
and revivalist. He was raised by these gentle-
men to the position of highest eminence in our
body, and encouraged to stand at the annual
levee at the Governor’s right hand as the Mode-
rator and representative of the Church of Scot-
land ; and, now that the facts can be no longer
hid, instead of fair investigation or fair rebuke,
these persons combine with him to repress and
falsify the documents that have reached the
colony, and to maintain him in the position of a
minister of God—a persecuted and maligned
man ! I am conscious of no unkindly feeling
towards Mr Budge, and as to his guilt or inno-
cence of the crime once charged, I intend to
express no judgment. But lam conscious of a
self-respect that recoils from longer connection
with those who, instead of carefully guarding
the purity, have dragged down to infamy the
name of a Church I have been taught to
honor; and I must so act now and in the future
to preserve my character and my congregation
from being compromised in the wrong.
John Storie,
Minister of St. Andrew’s.
dk. Macdonald’s lettbes.
P.S. —I am now at liberty to extract the
following sentences from a letter of the Rev.
Dr. Macdonald to me, dated 22nd September,
1877“ As to Budge, you must not in any way
commit me in the matter, as I am convener of
the Home Mission Committee which is also the
reception committee. In fact, however, he was
not received by us, as he had not the necessary
documents. I made enquiry about him at home
(during the Pan-Presbyterian Council) and
there can be no doubt that he was accused, as
you say, though I do not know that he was
formally tried. It was told to me as a very
grave case. Your correspondent in Philadelphia
could perhaps lay his hand on a newspaper
report or the pamphlet.” In his letter just
received, of date 14th June, 1878, Dr. Mac-
donald says to me—“ I suppose I must let myself
be dragged into this Budge affair after all! My
letter to Mr Duff, quoted in the Presbytery’s
report (13th July, 1875) was not written by the
convener of the Home Mission Committee of the
Victorian Church, but by Dr. Macdonald,
writing unofficially, though of course there was
nothing in the note which the convener as such
might not have said. After my name and letter
have been used on one side, I will not prevent
you from using or quoting my letters on the
other. As to the extract which you give from
my note to you (23rd September, 1877) I have
now to say that I have again looked over the
records of the Home Mission Committee in Mr
Budge’s case, to make sure of the facts, and I
find that the reception of Mr Budge stopped at
his delaying or refusing to give the names of
referees in America as toj his 'character and
standing.”
The Manse, Hobart Town,
June26tb, 1878.






