

THE
PINECREST
CHRONICLE
• OATLANDS
• PARATTAH
• MX. SEYMOUR
J. S. WEEDING




THE
PINECREST
CHRONICLE
J. S. WEEDING
Printed by the Derwent Printery, 24 Burnett Street, Mew Norfolk, Tasmania.


DEDICATED to the MEMORY
of my dearly loved wife
ALMA ELIZABETH


How this book came to be written is perhaps best
explained by a question addressed to the author
“Before the story of the Weeding family and their
residence at Pinecrest has been lost to posterity, do
something about it, without delay."
A philosopher once said “Pioneers only receive
credit from their grandchildren.” While in a sense this
may be true, it is also a well-known fact when writing
family history one must rely heavily upon other people
for their help in imparting knowledge and the task of
compiling the Weeding - Pinecrest story is no exception.
Sincere thanks to all who have rendered assistance,
howei’er small.
J. S. Weeding
Pinecrest
Ml Seymour
20-2-1979


The long period of residence in Tasmania by the Weeding family dates
back to September 26, 1823, when the sailing ship “Mariner" berthed at
Hobart Town with a cargo of passengers and live-stock.
Lloyds London Register describes the Mariner "Sailing ship, sheathed
with copper over boards. Built Whitay, 1807, 449 tons, 2 decks, 17 feet
draught when loaded, surveyed at London and in good repair."
Among the passengers to disembark at Hobart Town was John Weeding,
accompanied by his two young sons.'Thomas and John. His wife having
died during the long voyage from Surrey, England, where they embarked
seven months previous.
Lonely and bereaved by the loss of his beloved wife he sadly gazed around
the busy scene wondering however he could begin a new life in this land of
his adoption.
He was also saddened by the fact of not possessing sufficient money to
obtain a land grant which at this period of time was readily available to new
settlers with means. 434,160 acres having been granted during this year (1823)
to new arrivals in the colony, the largest alienation of land in a single year in
the entire history of Tasmania.
His brother, James whom he accompanied from England, obtained a
land grant at Macquarie Springs in the midlands and kindly invited John
and his young sons to make their place of abode with him and his family.
He was appointed a Constable on February 1,1824, at a salary of £25 per
year and was stationed at Macquarie Springs until the settlement was
abandoned and Oatlands founded. In 1833, John Weeding was once more
united in wedlock and two years later (1835) his wife, Phobe Ann, gave birth
to a son which they named Charles Robert.
After residing in the midlands for fifteen years, John Weeding, on receipt
of his portion of the family wealth bequeathed by his Uncle, Thomas
Weeding of London, translated with his wife and family to Hunting Ground
in the Green Ponds municipality. Here he founded the historic “Sunnyside”
estate.
He finally retired to live at Proctors Road (now Dynnyrne) where he
remained until his death in 1873. It is of great family interest to note the
Proctors Road estate remained in possession of John Weeding’s descendants
for 94 years. The old homestead finally having been destroyed by the
disastrous fires which swept southern Tasmania in February 1967. In
addition to the homestead, the fire also destroyed many valuable historic
family documents which can never be replaced.
The following obituary notice was published by the “Mercury"
newspaper on February 8, 1873.
"Our obituary today records the demise of Mr John Weeding of Proctors
Road at the age of 84 years. Mr Weeding was one of our earliest settlers. He
arrived in this colony by the ship “Mariner" in 1823. During the wholeof the
50 years Mr Weeding has lived in Tasmania he has mainly been engaged in
farming. He has been suffering more or less for the last four years, but died
very suddenly, for he was only confined to his bed for one day. He leaves a
widow and seven children.”
His son, Charles, remained in the employment of Thomas Weeding (his
cousin) who then owned the Sunnyside holding. In 1857, young Charles
began a romance with a Scottish lass named Charlotte Tolland who had


settled in the colony after having migrated from Dunfermline, Scotland, per
sailing ship “Coromandel” in 1852.
The following extract taken from the original reference recalls her first
place of employment
This is to certify that the bearer, Charlotte Tolland, who has this day left
my sendee, has diligently and faithfully served us for the last 14 months,
having arrived in the colony a free immigrant by the ship Coromandel, from
which I hired her.
I have also much pleasure in adding that she is a young woman of the best
disposition and exemplary in her conduct.”
Signed Thomas Young
No 10 Liverpool Street
Hobart Town
September 23, 1854
PITT’N'CRIEFF ST., DUNFERMLINE. SCOTLAND
Modern street scene where once stood the home of the Tolland family.
Thrifty and hard working, Charlotte Tolland saved enough money to pay
the passage from Scotland for her brother, Daniel, who wished to settle in the
new colony.
On May 27, 1854, she received a letter to say he had married Janet
Fotheringham (a girl well-known to her) and in the same letter requested
financial assistance to enable him to bring his bride with him. With her help
Daniel and his wife arrived in 1858. They were followed later by another
brother George.
Charlotte Tolland and Charles Weeding did not have many
opportunities to visit each other during their two year courtship but


corresponded frequently; each letter describing graphically their love and
faithfulness for each other.
On October 20, 1859, the young couple were united in wedlock.
Charlotte prior to her marriage had been a faithful adherent of the
Roman Catholic faith while Charles Robert had been baptized by a Priest of
the Church of England.
They had for reasons unknown reached a compromise after wedlock and
both them and their family, even the present generation, became devoted
Presbyterians.
After a brief honeymoon, the couple made their home at “Sunnyside”,
Hunting Ground, where they remained for three years.
On June 25, 1861, their first child was born, Isabella Mary, but sadly she
failed to survive the rigors of early childhood, only living two years May
30, 1863.
At the time of the death of her daughter, Charlotte gave birth to their first
son, Charles, and during the same year, 1863, they left Hunting Ground and
obtained 99 acres of virgin land at Long Marsh, Whitefoord, in the Oatlands
district.
This parcel of land was portion of 953 acres owned by a relative, James
Weeding, of Weedington, Oatlands.
It would harly be possible to describe the privations and hardships
Charles Robert and Charlotte Weeding (later destined to become my


grandfather and grandmother) encountered during their pioneering days at
Long Marsh.
With little else than their bare hands they erected a humble home and
cleared enough virgin land to grow small quantities of produce in order to
support their ever increasing family.
Roads were almost non-existent, neighbours were few and far between yet
in spite of every adversity they somehow managed to provide at least the bare
necessities of life for their young family. Their main income was obtained
from the few family cows they possessed. Firstly the cows were milked by
hand and the milk poured into large dishes. This was left, mostly overnight,
until the cream formed on the surface. This was skimmed off and later
churned, by hand, into butter which was later sold for 4 pence per pound.
Grandfather often walked to Oatlands carrying the butter which he sold
in order to obtain provisions to meet the daily needs of his young bairns.
- Education was perhaps the most difficult obstacle which faced settlers
during those times. A school at Whitefoord did not become a reality until
1887, thus the only centre available was Mt Seymour which had been
established in 1863.
The arduous task of walking the five miles most of which was only a bush
track was undertaken by the young Weeding children, without complaint.
On arrival home from school their boots were removed in order to make them
wear as long as possible. Often their evening meal consisted of potatoes and
butter only.
Clothing was not over plentiful and on at least one occasion grandmother
cut up her window curtains to make dresses for her daughters. Warm
blankets were few and far between, one cold frosty winter’s night when
grandmother went to tuck the boys in bed, she heard one exclaim, "turn over,
I'm cold:" his brother soon replied, "you’re not cold, you can still talk.”
Whatever the faults and failings of grandfather and grandmother may
have been, it can always be truthfully said they never once failed to impart to
their family their knowledge of Christian living, which in later years proved
their teaching was not in vain.
Grandmother olten spoke of the last Christmas they spent at Long Marsh.
Although only the youngest children were at home, the festive season
approached finding the family without a morsel of food. On Christmas eve
the elder boys arrived home Robert brought a ham, Sydney half a lamb,
Charles vegetables and George fruit. Later she was happy to relate "The
most extravagant Christmas they every enjoyed.”
After residing at Long Marsh for twenty-six years, grandfather decided to
purchase a small undeveloped property at Mt Seymour on which the only
building was a two-roomed hut overgrown with ivy.
People bearing the name of O'Shea had leased the land and lived here for
a period of time.
The story of the purchase grant is taken from the original deeds "ln
consideration of the sum of seventy-seven pounds, six shillings and eight
pence, all that piece of land containing fifty-eight acres in the Parish of
Whitefoord in the County of Monmouth in the colony of Tasmania together
with the appurtenances excepting all mines of gold and silver and reserving
always the right of making roads and bridges, cutting, quarrying and
conveying all timber, stone, gravel and soil respectively, to the use of Charles
Robert Weeding, his heirs and assigns.” Dated June 21, 1889.


In order to secure the property Grandfather paid a deposit of twenty-seven
pounds, six shillings and eight pence.
He somehow managed to obtain a mortgage for fifty pounds, to cover
baclance. This mortgage was repaid by my father (Sydney) on October 18,
1922.
The first major task undertaken by the Weeding family was the erection of
a substantial residence.
Uncle Charles, now a young man, twenty-six years of age and possessing
a natural knowledge for woodwork, undertook the role of architect and
carpenter for the project.
All timber used in construction was obtained from gum trees standing
nearby, by the age old method of pit sawing. For roofing, split shingles or
two feet sixes, as they were named, were used throughout.
This meant all water, both for drinking and other domestic use had to be
carried or carted from springs some distance away. All nails used in
construction were made by hand as was all the joinery. Uncle George, just
learning the art of stonemasonery, undertook the mammoth task of
quarrying, dressing and erecting sandstone foundations also two double and
one single chimney and fireplaces.
Uncle Albert, although never enjoying the best of health, also assisted his
brothers.
The original plan for the dwelling to comprise two stories was never fully
completed; the reason is not known.
Local tradition has claimed before the upstairs portion of the dwelling
was finished, Uncle Charles and his lady love parted company, consequently
he left home and went bush.
The heavy work of clearing the virgin land and producing crops was
entrusted to my father (Sydney), sometimes helped by Uncle Robert.
By 1892 the Weeding family had taken up residence in their new place of
abode and named the holding “Pinecrest”.
Pinecrest and members of Weeding clan. (1895)


Before the turn of the century the family home became well-known and
loved for the hospitality and welcome extended to all, both friend and
stranger. Flowers were planted and grew in profusion, flowering clematis
almost covered the wall facing east, and beds of many other varieties thrived
on every side.
A large vegetable garden supplied not only the family’s kitchen but also
the wants of visitors.
Pincrecrst also provided a place of board and lodging for school teachers
stationed at Mt Seymour.
Grandfather devoted his time to gardening and working to build a
Presbyterian Church at Mt Seymour. His dreams were fulfilled in 1902,
when the present church was dedicated for worship.
Mt Seymour Presbyterian Church and congregation. (1910)
To carry out his duties as Elder, Grandfather’s only transport was
walking. The folk always said they would rather attend divine worship on
Sunday than have “Old Weeding’’ visit them on Monday to inquire “why
they were not at Church yesterday.’’
He founded and taught Sunday School for decades in addition to
organising what was then known as “Tea Meetings” which were held in the
State School on November 9th each year in aid of Church funds.
Grandfather did not at any lime give his blessing to dances. Said “girls
should dance with girls, hoys with boys.”
One amusing incident relating to Pinecrest is recalled in later years
“Two of the Luck girls (nieces of Grandfather and Grandmother) had
walked to a dance at Baden after arranging to sleep at Pinecrest. They arrived
home from the dance much later than they expected only to find
Cirandmother approaching, candle in hand: they sprang into bed fully


attired, boots and all, just in time. Returning to her own room she reported to
Grandfather ‘girls in bed, sleeping peacefully'.”
Uncle George, anxious to exploit his limited knowledge in his newly
acquired art of nurseryman, planted pinetrees at random. Fifty years later
most had to be felled in order to preserve the fertility of the surrounding soil.
Outbuildings were non existent for some years after the pioneers arrived.
A blacksmith shop was constructed by Uncles Albert and George; here they
manufactured many farm necessities. Uncle George once built up a working
model of a steam engine, using only scrap metal. The building of a stable and
barn was the work of Arthur Sainsbury, a neighbour.
Stable built by Arthur Sainsbury.


Grandfather kept a diary in which he recorded the happenings of each
day. One week, after having spent several days walking and doing Church
business, he recorded “Fifth day. very tired, resting.”
When unexpected visitors called at “ Pinecrest" and Grandfather
happened to be inside, he would hurry to his bedroom and get dressed up,
then he would appear at the front door, “ Very surprised to see you, didn't
know you was here.”
He always loved gardening and his greatest delight was to experiment
with any new variety of seed. One season the old gentleman obtained some
small black seed from the mainland and not knowing the first thing about
their growth scattered them everywhere. The result: Mt Seymour became the
first place where carrot-weed outgrew almost any type of cultivated crop.
On one occasion “Pinecrest” received a visitation from a group of local
visitors. After they had enjoyed the usual hospitality metered out by
Grandmother, it looked as though they would outstay their welcome but
Grandmother thought otherwise and said, “You’ve had a nice little stay, a
nice cup of tea, it’s time for my daily nap, so I bid you all good-day .’’They got
the message immediately.
The custom on farms during the early years was to have a steer or heifer
shut in a small paddock and fed on chaff and potatoes until fat enough to kill,
the process taking about six weeks. As soon as the “ Pinecrest” winter meat
was shut up Grandmother would enquire every morning: “When are you
going to kill the beastie Dar?” No answer was ever forthcoming.
Mr and Mrs C. R. Weeding
On their Golden Wedding 20th October, 1909.
We know ’tis only noble to be good
And all men honour those in whom they see,
The noble manhood, noble womanhood,
Which is the crown of frail humanity.
And yet, the Master calls none good but One!
Yet, surely 'tis not wrong for us to say
“Good friends, good father, mother, daughter, son!” -
Out of this maze there is a simple way.
'Tis human goodness, not Divine, we mean,
And that is but a likeness, here below,
We reach no higher, when the Throne is seen,
And not till then, shall we true goodness know.
What, then, is human goodness? humble friend.
In love divine, kind thoughts, kind deeds for all,
And doing justice, not because we must.
But gladly, ever prompt at duty’s call.
’Tis thus we greet you on your Wedding Day,
“Good friends, good father, mother, daughter, son!”
Your light has shone for fifty years, and may
It shine forever when your Crown is won!


You live again in sons and daughters,
These are tokens of your worth! With thankful heart
Each child reveres you, and will never cease
To love you, nor from your good way depart.
We know, ’tis only noble to be good!
And all men honour you, in whom they see,
The noble manhood, noble womanhood,
Which is the crown of frail humanity.
Compiled and presented by Professor H. B. Ritz
Pinecrest in background, dairy and cowshed in foreground.
Grandfather died at Pinecrest on July 21, 1917 aged 82 years, having
predeceased Grandmother who died on October 26, 1921.
The “Mercury” correspondent at Mt Seymour writes: “An old and
respected resident, in the person of Mr C. R. Weeding, passed away on
Saturday morning at his residence, after a short illness.
The deceased was a pioneer, and resident of the district for sixty years. He
was of a quiet and genial disposition; he endeared himself to all. He took a
keen interest in all church matters, and it may be said the Presbyterian
Church at Mt Seymour is a standing monument to his memory. He was an
ardent supporter and elder of the church, and also founded the Sunday
School, and held the position of superintendent till his death.
Much sympathy is expressed for the aged widow and family. The
interment took place at the Presbyterian cemetery, Oatlands, the cortege
being followed by a large number of friends. The deceased sons were the chief
mourners.


The Rev. Mr Judd officiated, and delivered a short address at an
impressive service in the local church, referring to the Stirling qualities of the
deceased.”
The family of Grandfather and Grandmother
Isabella Mary 1861-1863
Charles 1863-1939
Fanny 1865-1922
George 1867-1936
Robert 1869-1957
Albert 1871-1928
Daniel 1873-1897
Agnes 1875-1969
Sydnev 1878-1945
Leslie 1881-1966
FAMILY NOTES
ISABELLA MARY
As previously stated died when only two years of age.
DANIEL
Very little is known about Daniel and it is possible he was never blessed
with good health as he only lived to the age of twenty-four years. His grave in
the Uniting Church cemetery, Oatlands, is marked by an upright sandstone
slab, painstakingly hand carved by his brother, George.
ALBERT
Another member of the family prevented by ill health from attaining a
ripe old age. Albert during his short life was a talented musician, poet and
singer. Played a leading role in the work for the Church.
During the summer of 1895 three of the Weeding boys, Robert, Albert and
Daniel were employed by Alex Wilson of “The Braes” Woodbury, to assist
with the annual harvest.
The following is an extract from a letter written by Albert to his sister
Fanny prior to her marriage to William Luck.
Dear Fan,
I promised when I went away.
That I would write to you some day,
And tell you how we are getting on,
A-binding up the ripening corn.
Well first of all I’m glad to say,
That we all get five bob a day,
We rise in the morning at five o’clock,
At seven p.m. we off do knock.
We have drunk so much thro’ the heat of the weather,
That we have nearly all turned up our toes together,
And I was taken in the same way,
Mrs Wilson was in bed for three or four days,
Through the heat of the weather the old man says


She had to send for her mother to come and stay,
And Bob was bad for a night and a day,
But never the less we are well again,
And busy carting in the grain,
We only have the carting to do,
We’ll up in about a week or two,
How is Mum is she allright,
Or does she sit up and weese all night,
How do you get on yourself,
I hear you are not stuck on the shelf,
Dan said when he heard so many visitors come,
That he wouldn’t like to have been at home.
Well dear Fan, I’ll now conclude,
I have told you all that’s any good,
When I come home the news I’ll bring you,
I am yours truly, your own brother
Dingo (Albert)
LESLIE
The youngest son, spent his early years at Pinecrest where he became well-
known for his work as a photographer. In 1905 he went to Sydney, New
South Wales where he remained. On February 20, 1907 he married Georgina
Wheeler, daughter of Henry Wheeler, Inspector of Schools at Perth, W.A.
Family four sons and four daughters.
Uncle Charles and Uncle Leslie,
Asters in foreground, photo-
graphed near Uncle Charles'
humble residence, Pinecrest.


FANNY
Spent early years of her life at Long Marsh. Educated at Mt Seymour State
School. On February 28,1893 married William Luck and resided at “Ceres”,
Mt Seymour. Family of four daughters and four sons.
ROBERT
Spent early years of his life in the district and later worked at Scottsdale,
West Coast Mines and New Zealand. On return from latter he purchased
propety at Mt Seymour which he named “Wattle Park” where he carried on
farming until he retired to reside at Woodbury in 1945.
A stalwart of the Presbyterian Church and Elder for thirty-five years
speaks volumes for his character. In 1913 he married Miss Isoline Wilson,
elder daughter of Thomas Wilson “Dunmoor”, Mt Seymour. The
“Mercury” report of the wedding
WEEDING WILSON 13-8-1913
The marriage of Robert, second son of Mr and Mrs C. R. Weeding of
Pinecrest, with Isoline, eldest daughter of Mr Thomas Wilson of Dunmoor,
was celebrated in the Presbyterian Church, at Mt Seymour by the Rev. J. O.
Dick.
The interior of the church was decorated with foliage and silver horse
shoes with initials the well-known bridal bell hung over the wedding
group.
The bride was beautiful in a dress made Empire style of fine cream
cashmere, elaborately trimmed with silk lace and ribbon etc, gloves, shoes of
same colour, long lace veil and orange blossom, and bouquet of white
flowers with long ribbon streamers.
The bridesmaids were Miss Myrtle Wilson in white muslin, silk girdle,
white shoes etc, and miss Olive Luck, also in white silk muslin etc.
Neither wore hats, but pale blue ribbons in hair and gold bar brooches,
the bridegroom’s presents.
The bride was given away by her father, Mr T. Wilson and her brother Mr
R. Wilson acted as best man.
Mrs George Wilson played the nuptial hymn and the Wedding March as
the bridal party left the church.
They were driven to Dunmore by Mr Wilson and Mr J. Wilson of
Ponsonby, the usual shower of confetti and good wishes being sent after
them.
Before the Rev. Mr Dick, and Miss Dick left for Oatlands, the Rev
gentleman conveyed the good wishes of all present to Mr and Mrs Robert
Weeding, and hoped that the lucky omen the sudden shining out of the
sun on bride immediately after the ceremony would continue to them
through a long and happy life.
The bridegroom replied very heartily for himself and bride.
Mr and Mrs C.R. Weeding, and Mr and Mrs H. Bailey, also added a few
words of congratulation and appreciation of the bride’s helpfulness, and the
pleasure in the knowledge that their home would still be in the vicinity where


for several generations many of those assisting on this auspicious occasion
had lived.
In the evening a dance was given by Mr Wilson to the young people
around in honour of the event, and a most successful party, enlivened by the
bright music, and cheered by the substantial hospitality of Dunmore,
enjoyed themselves till the small hours.
Mr and Mrs Robert Weeding have taken up residence at their new home,
'Wattle-Park' Mt Seymour, surrounded by good wishes of relatives and
friends.
GEORGE
Renowned stonemason and nurseryman of yesteryear.
Many examples of his art as a stonemason may still be viewed throughout
the district. His prices, by modern standards, were almost impossible; double
chimney and fireplace costing ten pounds to quarry and erect, single five
pounds, monument carved by hand, ten pounds.
The foundation and steps of the Uniting Churc h at Mt Seymour was
quarried, dressed and erected by him as a donation to the building.
The community sheep dip near the summit of Bulloc k hill was cut out of
solid stone by himself and William Hyland.
He established a nursery at Eldon (then Kennedy Creek) where he
cultivated many species of native shrubs and trees. They found a ready
market throughout Tasmania, other states erf Australia, England and
America.
He once supplied an order for flowering native shrubs to be grown in the
grounds of Buckingham Palace. He was a familiar figure as he travelled
around delivering orders, per push bike, followed by his faithful dog Tiger -
Tipperary.
Returning home, before descending the steep hill to his nursery he often
tied a large gum bough to back of bike to save wear of brakes.
He was always a welcome guest at Pinecrest for the family gathering on
Christmas Day, bringing with him cherries and strawberries, a real treat at
that period of the year. Also he did not forget a bag of boiled sweets for a
scramble.
A man dedicated to the principles of Christian living, he held the respect
of young and old alike. An elderly resident once exclaimed: “When talking to
George Weeding, you should remove your hat.’’ When asked why he said:
“he always reminds me of our Saviour.”


Residence and nursery established by
George Weeding at Eldon.
CHARLES
Eldest son of the family of Charlotte and Charles Robert Weeding. Early
in life he established himself as a carpenter and although only self taught,
constructed many substantial buildings in thedistrict. Most times timber was
obtained from nearby trees per pit saw, adze and axe. On one occasion he was
demonstrating how a new hand saw he acquired, would bend without
damage, but soon found the strain too much; the saw broke in half. Uncle
Charles rather surprised, exclaimed, “never saw it do that before boy."
He was a first-class cook and won many prizes at the, then popular, Baden
Show.
Was also a leading exhibitor of flowers and vegetables. His many prizes
included the Yates medal for most prizes won at a single show, he was also
recognised as a classy shot with a twelve guage gun and won many swinging
bottle matches which were conducted regularly at Woodbanks and other
places.
An elderly neighbour often told the sad story about Uncle Charles leaving
Pinecrest to reside at Tiger Hill near Stonehenge some ten miles away
“Saddened by a broken romance he left home with a swag on his back
leading a cow and his black dog trotting along behind. He travelled across
country via Devils Gully, Ponsonby Vale and Stories properties.”
At Tiger Hill he resided for some thirty years, living in a one room hut.
During the summer he would sleep in the loft to escape the plague of fleas
which appeared during the hot weather. Most of the winter months were
taken up trapping rabbits and snaring game for their pelts.
Being a keen naturalist he devoted any spare time to the growing of
flowers of which his specialty was Asters.


Uncle Charles was always welcome at the Pinecrest Christmas family
gathering. He walked from Tiger Hill on Christmas morning laden with
bottles of home brewed ginger beer which he carried in a sack bag through
which a stick was threaded to place on his shoulder. When returning at night
he always replaced the carrying stick in the bush where he found it.
He was also the unselfish donor of a large roast of beef which was eaten on
Christmas day by the Weeding clan who had gathered to celebrate the Holy
birth.
A very strong walker, on many of his visitations would leave Pinecrest on
dark nights with only a candle lantern to guide him over the long bush track
to Tiger Hill.
On one occasion he and my father walked from Pinecrest to Hobart in the
one day. Their mission was to deliver soup to Uncle Daniel who was sick in
hospital.
During 1932 he returned to live at Pinecrest where he built a one-room
hut in which to enjoy the autumn years of his life.
Here his days were fully occupied growing gladiolus and turnip seed in
addition to obtaining rabbits for their skins.
Uncle Charles’ hut. (1970)


AGNES
Youngest daughter of Charlotte and Charles Robert Weeding was
perhaps the best remembered member of the family, not only by her
longivity, but to a far greater extent her loyalty to God, Church and fellow
man.
From girlhood through life she was almost an institution and proved
time and time again the truth of the ancient proverb No-one in the world is
useless who brightens the burden of it for someone else.
“Pinecrest” washer home; even after her marriage in 1912 when she left to
reside at “Springfield”, Parattah, she never forgot the home of her youth.
How many times Aunt Agnes and my mother covered the kitchen at
“Pinecrest” with wallpaper has been forgotten. The number of loaves of
bread and mouth-watering cakes baked in the large wood-fired brick oven
will never be known by the present generation. Their knowledge in the use of
this age old method of cooking alas has been lost forever.
Gone too, are the skills required for the making of soap, candles and
brushes to clean fireplaces; also numerous other household items so
necessary to the pioneer womenfolk, were the work of their hands.
One year Aunt Agnes, as was the custom, baked the usual number of
Christmas cakes and packed them away.
To carry out an old Scottish tradition of cutting a cake and opening a
bottle of ginger beer, on Christmas Eve, had to be abandoned; someone had
stolen all the cakes. Although the culprit was known, no action was taken.
She often told the story of wash day at “Pinecrest”. A fire was made up
near the spring and the water heated in tins thus saving the laborious task of
carting water required for cleansing her six brothers work clothes.
For washing their trousers she decided to charge six pence per pair, which
Uncle Robert refused to pay, but after one attempt at washing his own, gladly
paid up in advance, claiming her price to be very reasonable.
Her wedding in 1912 was the social event of the year.
As the wedding ceremony proceeded, the officiating clergyman, asked
Uncle Charles, whose duty it was to represent Grandfather and give the bride
away “Who give’st this woman away”, instead of a casual nod, piped up in
a loud, clear voice “Me, Mr Dick".
Details of the wedding were published in the “Mercury” newspaper
EADIE WEEDING
On July 3, at 2.30 p.m. the marriage of Mr John Eadie of Springfield,
Parattah took place with Miss Agnes Weeding, youngest daughter of Mr and
Mrs C. R. Weeding of Pinecrest, Mt Seymour. Rev J. O. Dick was the
officiating minister. Mrs Hallam of Hillcrest, Moonah, acted as organist.
The church was prettily decorated, a conspicuous feature being a large
floral bell made by Miss Ailsa Brewer, and the nuptial ceremony was
performed beneath it. The initials of bride and bridegroom, made of white
and silver flowers by Miss Jessie Weeding, were suspended from the pulpit.


The bridesmaids was Miss Ailsa Brewer (cousin of the bride), and Mr Arthur
Eadie (nephew of bridegroom) acted as best man. Mr C. R. Weeding j nr gave
away the bride.
After the marriage the bridal party escorted by many relatives and friends
adjourned to Pinecrcst to a reception held by Mrs C. R. Weeding. Here the
usual congratulations were accompanied by wedding tea and an eloquent
address from Mr Dick to the bridal pair and assembled friends. Mrs H. Bailey
responded suitably for the bride, being sure that the pleasant relations
between Ml Seymour and Parattah would still be continued. Mrs C. R.
Weeding thanked the Rev Mr Dirk for his kind expressions towards herself
and family, and also the many friends who had assisted on the occasion.
The cutting of the bridal cake concluded this part of the day's festivities,
guests from a distance leaving for their homes to meet at Baden in the evening
at a reception and dance given by Mr John Eadie in the hall there, which was
crowded with guests. Many of the dresses were very pretty.
Mr and Mrs John Eadie drove away for home early in the evening amid a
storm (tropical) of rice, go<xl wishes, and the noi-to-be-forgotten old shoes.
The description of bridal dresses is appended, upwards of 200 presents
having been received by the bride.
DRESSES
Bride's dress, cream serge coat and skirt, white silk blouse, spray orange
blossom and sprig of Scotch heather from Mr W Johnston, Hobart: steel grey
hat trimmed with white plumes, pale pink rosebuds and cord: gold bangle,
presented by the residents of Baden; Bridesmaid's dress, cream Sicilian
trimmed with silk insertion, pale pink sash, brown hat. trimmed with pale
pink flowers and cherries: gold crescent brooch, present from the
bridegroom. Brides bouquet, while chyrsanihemums, daisies, and ferns,
cream streamers.
' Bridesmaid's bouquet, white daisies, ferns, jjale pink streamers made by
Miss A. Brewer. Bride's mother, black dress, with handsome cream lace fischu
and head dress.
Bride's travelling dress, pale blue cashmere, long dark coal, blue hat,
trimmed with navy blue ribbon and cherries: set furs (gift of the bridegroom).
The ‘‘Wedding March” was played by Mrs T. F. Hallam of Hillcrest,
Moonah.
After her decease in 1969, a memorial service was held in the church she
once loved so well, at Mt Seymour. During this service the address was given
by her nephew, who outlined the Stirling qualities of his aunt and the
example of Christian living she set for all to follow.
His address could be best described as the life story of Aunt Agnes.
Sermon preached by Rev L. S. Luck, at the Memorial Service for Aunt
Agnes at Mt Seymour Presbyterian Church, October 5, 1969.
“May I first express my sincere appreciation to your minister. Rev
Drooger, for asking me to take part in this Memorial Service, and


allowing me the privilege of worshipping in this lovely little
church filled with such fond memories of my family.
It was here we first learned to call ii[>on God and to praise His
Holy Name, through the example and teaching of His ministers
and other God-fearing Christians among whom was my
grandfather, Charles Robert Weeding.
This gracious gentleman, whose father John and brother James
had tome out from Surrey. England, in 1823, brought about by the
influence of their uncle, Thomas, an officer of the East India
Company, who had visited Van Diemen's I.and some years earlier
and taken such a liking to the place that he determined to send his
two nephews to settle there as sot in as they were old enough.
James settled in the Oatlands district and named his grant
■'ll ’eedington". John in later years settled at Hunting Ground in
the Kempton district. It was from here that my grandfather set out to
carve a farm for himself out of the virgin country of Eastern
Marshes, near Whilefoord, anti it was here that he settled with his
young wife, who was formerly. Miss Charlotte Tolland.
To them was born seven sons and three daughters of which Agnes
was the youngest. Of course, these were the days before school buses
pampered our children, pic king them up almost at their doors.
The Weeding children were expected to walk from their home at
Tong Marsh to the school at Ml Seymour, little Agnes with them.
She has often told me that during the winter months they would
seldom see their home in daylight during school days.
After years farming in this district, grandfather and his family
moved to Mt Seymour and established "Pinecresr.il was here I first
remembered him and the most vivid recollection was seeing him
walk up the road from “Pinecrest" to the c hurc h. hands behind his
back under his coat-tails and beard flowing in the bree/.e. He was
coming to conduc t Sunday Schcxtl and seeing him was the signal
lor us c hildren to cease our playing round the church and wail in
awesome silence for Sunday School to commence.
One of the features of the session was to tell grandfather the good
deeds that we had clone during the week and to win his approval.
Many and vatied and imaginative were these good deeds, each
pupil Hying to give a bellei answer than the other.
One blight scholar proudly exclaimed, "I stopped twit stingy
hensties from fighting." lint the c towering ac hievement which no-
one c oiild heller wits the proud boast that. "I opened the gate for the
King!" The King being the- affectionate name given to Mr William
Wilson of "Hillside”.
"Pinecrest" was always open house and Sunday was a gala day
when the whole family with their offspring, including the Minister
who had taken the morning service in the church, would assemble
round the huge kitchen table for dinner and a time of happy
Christian fellowship was enjoyed.


This was the home and environment in which Agnes Weeding
grew up, and endeared herself to all by her unselfish living and
helpful service.
It may well be said of her as the early church said of Dorcas,
“This woman was full of good works and acts of charity."
Whether it be someone who was sick, or needed a friend, or to
assist with the activities of the district, or j ust go to, and be consoled,
she was the one. My own family regarded her a good angel or
perhaps I should say, a guardian angel, for we were a pretty harum-
scarum lot. She was a confider, consoler, and very often maid of all
works.
On one occasion one of the members of the Luck family was laid
low with a childish complaint and feeling very miserable was heard
to say that she would be better if only she had "A untie's little Sowl".
Auntie’s little Sowl being an ornamental hen which belonged to
our aunt. Of course she was looking for the love and sympathy
which was always so willingly offered by this good lady.
In due course, Agnes Weeding married John Fadie and settled
down at "Springfield" Parattah. This did not diminish her
activities but rather increased them. Sunday School teacher for over
sixty years, organist at both Presbyterian and Anglican churches,
active member of the Red Cross, for which she was deservedly
honoured. Organiser, adviser, home-maker and mother, all of
which she did with a willingness and a unique sense of humour
which she preserved right till the end of her life.
Perhaps chief among her many qualities was her friendliness for
young and old alike. She was respected by all. whether it be the
Governor of the Stale. Parliamentarians, dignitaries of the Church
or little under-privileged children, with whom she was delighted to
share the joy and thrill of a monster Christmas stocking which she
won a c ouple of years ago. I know who received the greatest joy and
satisfaction.
We read in the Book of Proverbs about virtues of a good woman
and it is said that, "Her lamp does not go out by night." Of Agnes
F.adie it could be said that, "her door was never shut."
Few people have ever seen it so. It typified the warmth and
sincerity of her friendship and it could be said of her that she saw
some gocxl in everyone and developed a sense of trust in all God's
creatures.
How then, c an we sum up the effect of her life and example upon
us. Can we say she hits left us all a legacy. She has left me a legacy. It
is neither property nor coin, no material thing or stuff, not
something which she could not take with her. If this legacy was
material and you shared it. I would have loss: but your sharing of
this legacy will not diminish my share, for this is spiritual.
First, she has increased the value of goodness. By her life she has
given us a little deeper and somewhat finer conception of the value
of goodness. This is part of her legacy. The only eternal value is that
of goodness in one form or another.


Secondly, she enriched our memories. When our acquaintances
and friends and loved ones leave us we lay aside all the faults and
failings which they may seem to have had, and it is good to do this.
None of us are jx-rfect. We all have our human frailties. But often,
after we have put these aside there seems to he little left to treasure in
our memories. Not so with Agnes Eadie. She was a most gracious
soul. Her countenance was a revelation of her sweet spirit. We hold
in memory both the countenance and her inner life, and they are a
good legacy.
Then, she has given us a dealer idea of "the better country".
Travelling friends bring distant countries near. So it is as friends
and loved ones deixirt to that "hellercountry", they bring it a little
doser! They stimulate our hope of finally reaching it ourselves.
This is it good legacy.
She has also left us a deejx-r assurance of the Christian Cospel.
Because she was a Christian I have it firmer grasp on my Christian
faith. Because she has lived and died we have greater hope of the
resurrection: for one who lives for goodness can never die.
Because she put her trust in our Lord. Jesus Christ, our own trust
is strengthened. This is a great legacy which I hope you share, that
Agnes Eadie hits left us; and we can rejoice in the usefulness and
example of her long and active life, the influence of which will
reamin with us indefinitely.
"She is alive in many lovely ways.
In every soothing sound, her voice you'll hear.
li'herever beauty is, you'll see her face.
Go where you will, you'll find her spirit near.
For in your heart she found her resting place."
How better can I conclude than by telling you a story. One which
I am sure would have beenappreciated by my dear Aunt.
A little child went home from Sunday School and her
mother asked her "What did you learn today?" And
the little girl said: "IVe have been learning about a
man who used to go for walks with God; and, mother,
one day they went for an extra long walk, and they
walked on and on until God said to Enoch, for that
was the man's name, ‘Enoch, you are a long way
from home, you had better come in and stay.' And so
he did." Encxh had become so familiar with Cod that
he just went in and stayed.
Can we say the same texlay about the one whom we are
honouring. She became so familiar with God that she has just gone
to stay with her Friend.
It is with this confidence that we give thanks to God for the life
and example of I lis devoted servant, Agnes Eadie. I Icr contribution
to the life of the church and community stands as a permanent
memorial of her faithfulness and we are grateful for her life of
inspiration and love”.


SYDNEY
Son of Charlotte and Charles Robert Weeding, who can honestly be
claimed to be the real founder and builder-up of “Pmecrest”. For almost fifty
years, Sydney (my father) toiled and worked the soil to provide for the family;
firstly his ageing mother and father and later on his own family. If any man
ever missed hiscalling in life it was certainly my father; unselfish, kind, calm
and composed in all circumstances, his life portrayed the meaning of
Rudyard Kipling’s famous poem
If you can dream and not make dreams your master,
If you can think and not make thoughts your aim,
If you can meet with triumph and disaster and treat those two
impostors just the same,
Yours is the world and everything that’s in it,
And what is more you’ll be a man, my son.
A man never known to lose his temper or complain as he whistled and
sang his way through life, it is very doubtful if anyone ever heard him swear
or find fault in his fellow man.
Even his animals loved him, which they proved after his death. "Don” his
old sheep dog refused food for many days and his faithful horse “Scotty”,
who had never jumped a fence in his life, jumped several fences and paid
homage to his master by trying to enter the house.
At Baden Show held in 1909, he fell in love with Mary Hart, his boyhood
girlfriend. Before their marriage in 1913 he had built a cottage on land
separated from “Pinecrest” property by the Creighton road. This he
appropriately named “Coramandel”, to perpetuate the name of the sailing
ship on which his mother migrated from Scotland many years previous.
The wedding of Mary Hart and Sydney Weeding was another of the great
social events in the life of the village of Mt Seymour.
Bride and bridegroom surrounded by guests after their
Wedding Breakfast at "Pinecrest”.


They were married, surrounded by friends, in the local Presbyterian
Church, followed by their wedding breakfast at “Pinecrest”. In the evening
“Coramandel” was the venue for the young folk, dancing until the wee small
hours of the morning.
Uncle Charles provided liquid refreshments for the gala occasion; ten
gallons of honey-mead. This was stored in the blacksmith shop, and while
grandfather and Uncle William Luck, who did not believe in dancing or
drinking, were seated one each side of a roaring log fire; complained “the
devil’s at work on Ml Seymour tonight,” did not realise the truth in their
quotation. As Douglas Luck, then a young man, later explained, the devil
worked overtime that night. The honey-mead manufactured by Uncle
Charles proved a very potent brew when drunk by the local boys who became
intoxicated.
Now happily married, mother and father resided in their cottage,
“Coramandel”, until the death of grandfather in 1917, when they translated
to live at “Pinecrest” in order to care for grandmother whom I can just
remember.
As young chidren she tried in vain to teach us the meaning of the Gospel
story but we were more interested in pinching her peppermint lollies of
which she seemed to have a never ending supply.
By the time of Grandmother’s death in 1921, our family was considered
quite large and with the approach of the depression years we became very
poor indeed.
When one of the younger members of the family was born some kind soul
suggested to father, the family was getting out of hand; to which he replied
‘'Each one is worth £lO,OOO and what’s more we’ll have another one next year,
won’t we mum.” Mother was not quite so sure.
The Weeding Tribe. (1920)


“Coramandel” cottage was sold to Arthur Weeding for £lOO, and removed
to his property “Pinebanks”, two miles away. The removal proved quite an
engineering feat; under the watchful eye of Raymond Wiggins who sawed
the building in half for transportation per horses and wagon. The chimneys
were taken down stone by stone, each one numbered and re-erected at
“Pinebanks
During the latter years of the 1920’s and the 1930’5, father had to versify
from farming in order to provide for his family. Trapping rabbits in the
winter months and stripping wattle bark in the summer gave little relief from
the financial burden involved in raising a family during the depression years.
One season after working hard stripping fourteen tons of wattle bark
and pressing it for sale, he was advised the market had collapsed and he was
forced to burn it.
Mother milked six cows to try and supplement their meagre income and
father undertook the work of collecting cream for the Baden Butter Factory.
This work meant long hours of toil; often after picking up cream from
various parts of the scattered district he would have to transport per horse and
spring-dray the finished product, butter, some five miles to the Stonor
railway station.
The year, 1935, necessitated the erection of a new “Coramandel”, when
the wedding of Alma Elizabeth Wighton and myself was celebrated at
Glenorchy before taking up residence in the new dwelling.
By 1940, the shingles covering the roof of “Pinecrest” had perished and
rotted to the extent of removal to be replaced with galvanised iron. The cost
was greatly aided by money bequeathed to father by Uncle George.
With the outbreak of World War 11, mother and father were proud parents
of two sons, Daniel and Charles when they enlisted with the A.I.F. for active
service in the Middle East and New Guinea.
They were equally proud of daughter Grace, when she signed for the role
of nursing sister with the A.A.M.W.S.
Without doubt, the greatest pleasure mother and father enjoyed during
the autumn of their lives was to receive and read letters addressed to them
from their scattered family.
Father also derived much enjoyment from his pipe of tobacco. A moderate
smoker, he loved to sit by the fire after the evening meal, and puff away until
he fell asleep.
Christmas Day has always been a gala day at “Pinecrest” with the family
gathering to celebrate the Holy birth. For many years, Aunt Agnes always
walked from Parattah to assist mother decorate the kitchen with a new
covering of wallpaper, in preparation for the great day. Cakes were baked and
some of us children were sent to Grandmother Hart’s place at Whitefoord for
new potatoes, green peas and a goose.
Christmas presents were unknown, but for us the festive season could
never come quick enough; ham, beef, spring lamb, new vegetables, plum
pudding and ginger beer often proved more than our digestive organs could
handle and the result, very sick.


A modern Christmas Day group.
FAMILY of MARY and SYDNEY WEEDING
pictured after attending the wedding
of our son and their nephew.
Centre: Bride, Roslyn and bridegroom, Ken.
Best Man, Malcolm.
Left to right: Grace, John, Ina, Margaret,
Charles, Marie and Daniel.


The year 1945, was one that brought much sadness to our family.
Father and mother were both called home by the God whom they served
so well.
“Pinecrest” was bequeathed to brother Charles and myself but
unfortunately did not contain sufficient acreage to support two families.
Also Charles had married and settled in Melbourne, so with much assistance
from my wife, Alma, we began a long struggle to update and restore
“Pinecrest” to its former glory.
The house was in a bad state of repair, and with the assistance of our
neighbour, Reg Wilson, we restored the primative dwelling to the best of our
ability. We sold “Coromandel” to Alma’s mother and father and with the
proceeds of the sale were able to cope with the cost of the restoration.
Alma and her waterlily pond at "Pinecrest”.
“Coromandel” in background.
Nearly all the property required fencing with wire to replace the old
deadwood fences that served their purpose for many decades.
We grew potatoes, swedes and green peas in addition to our small herd of
■Jersey cows we milked and sold cream. In order to boost our income to
support our three children, I was obliged to return to my former seasonable
occupation in the shearing industry.
Alma worked unceasingly to restore the large neglected garden
established by my grandfather so many years before.


As the years went by and our family left home we sold our cows and
replaced them with sheep which did not require the time consuming work of
milking cows.
Grandaughter Gillian holding our faithful sheepdog, Fred.
In the early months of 1978 we decided to dispose of portion of the
property and retire from hard work but sadly to relate before the sale of the
land was completed, Alma was called Home to rest. Her passing and the
illness with which I became stricken left no alternative but sell balance of
“Pinecrest”, the home loved and treasured with happy memories by five
generations of the Weeding clan.
