

THE REIGN OF BACCHUS
T\Tl ¥ TV TIT)
II Ti A I I Pi H
iUJlli/iJll
If you think of taking out a Life Policy in the
A.M P. Society, I herewith invite you to
call on or write to
J. B. YOUDALE, Agent, 134 Pitt Street.
BY
THOS. WALKER M.P.
INSURE IN THE A.M.P, SOCIETY.
J. B YOUDALE, Agent, 134 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
APPOINTMENTS MADE DAY OR NIGHT, CITY OR SUBURBS.
Write or Call if you think of Insuring.
W. H. PALING & CO., Limited.
ESTABLISHED 1853.
PIANOS, ORGANS, MUSIC,
AND ALL MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.
Sole Agents—Steinway, Feurich, Ecke, Uebel, Gors and Kallmann,
and for the Victor and Belling Pianos, Estey Organs.
Boosey’s Band Instruments, &c., &c.
GREAT VARIETY. LOW PRICES. EASY TERMS.
338 GEORGE STREET.




THE
REIGN OF BACCHUS
BY
THOMAS WALKER.
FIRST SERIES.
:
Websdale, Shuosmith and Co., Printers,
117 Clarence Street
1892.




THE REIGN OF BACCHUS.
I.
I am to speak to-night on the reign of the most potent
of evil that has ever held dominion over human
lives. I shall be obliged to make quotations from works
on mythology to illustrate my text, but I beg of you to
bear with me, for I want to put Bacchus before you in his
drue light or, more correctly, darkness. To do this I shall
have to take your minds back a few thousand years, and we
shall have to linger a little in lands classically rich and
mythologically luxuriant.
Bacchus in the nineteenth century means simply the
distiller’s and the brewer’s poison, but to the poetical Greek
and the imaginative Roman in “the brave days of old”
Bacchus was a personality, a veritable god, though I would
rather say devil, and quote Shakespeare for proof—“ O
thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be
known by, let us call thee Devil! ” In the land of Hellas
in classic times he had his followers, his symbols, his
temples—his ceremonies, mysteries, and festivals. He had
a sacred pedigree, and though his lineage implied the
dishonour of his mother, he was none the less revered and
worshipped for that. Some, indeed, at least in the days of
Euripides, doubted his divinity, but it was scarcely safe to
openly avow the doubt. As old Cadmus is reported to
have said of him—
Even if, as thou declar’st, he is no god,
Call thou him god. It were a splendid falsehood
If Semele be thought t’ have borne a god.
’Twere honour unto us and to our race.
He was so popular that he had more titles than any other
•deity. It is impossible to say where his worship first


originated —what country first set the wine-god on his.
travels. Greece, Rome, Egypt, India, and, in fact, every
large or small division of the Orient had a Bacchus of its
own. No wonder, then, he was called “ god of the many
names.” In the Orphic hymns alone we meet with over
forty. Some go so far as to say that he was Noah, and
quote Indian mythology for colouring to the supposition.
Because Noah planted a vineyard and drank of the grape-
juice, had three sons (Shem, Ham and Japhet) who saw
Noah intoxicated, he is compared to Satyavarman, who
likewise had three sons, Shema, Chama and Yapeti.
Satyavarman also was discovered by these sons in a
terrible state of drunkenness, ergo , Noah and Satyavarman
are one and the same. Now comparative mythologists have-
identified this Indian myth, related in the East Indian
Pur ana, with Adonis of the Phoenicians, who is the same
as Osiris with the Egyptians, Dionysus or Bakchos in
Athens, and our Bacchus of the Romans. Now I hope you
understand it. If you do you are lucky, for I don’t, and
consequently I am going to drop the Noachian family out
of my lecture. I find Bacchus has so many Greek,.
Egyptian, Indian, and Roman origins that it is unnecessary
to make him out a Jew.
Bacchus, or Bakchos, is from the Greek, and means in its.
verb form “to revel.” But in Athens he was perhaps
better known as Dionysus, though his names Bromius,
Lyaeos and Dithyrambus were almost as familiar. Greece-
was considered his fatherland, Thebes his birthplace Zeus
his father, and Semele his mother. Zeus, of course, is
■ identical with the Roman Jupiter, and was the chief god of
the Grecians. Semele was the daughter of Cadmus or
Kadmos, the founder of the ancient city of Thebes, and he,
too, was reported to have descended from a god, being,
according to mythology, the grandson of Poseidon, or
Neptune, who was, as everybody knows, the brother of
Zeus or Jupiter. Thus, for those times, Bacchus has a
very respectable genealogy.
The morals of the primative worshippers and originators
of myths were not over fastidious, and even Great Zeus,


"the chief of divinities, is accredited with numerous liaisons.
He was the sire of quite a family of gods and demi-gods,
•and he frequently made Here (his wife and . sister)
desperately jealous in consequence of his amours with the
daughters of men ” She was so jealous of Semele that
she determined to punish her rival with death, and for that
purpose, with the cunning of feminine divinities, she dis-
guised herself and paid a visit to Semele. She won the
confidence of Semele, and when talking of love matters she
proposed that her rival should ask Zeus “to visit her for
■once in all the plenitude of his majesty as god of thunder.”
Don’t forget that Bacchus had the devastating thunder-
god for father. Zeus seems to have been as weak in love
affairs as the general run of Romeos, and before knowing
what Semele would ask swore “ by the black waters of the
Styx” to grant her any request. When he learned what
'her request was he was greatly angered, but no power could
absolve, even him, from his oath. So one fine day, or rather,
I should fancy, one stormy day, he revealed himself before
Semele amid the crashes of thunder and the playings of
forked lightnings. Of course this killed his earthly lover,
but, even as she died, she gave birth to Bacchus. What
could be expected of a god born under such circumstances
but an everlasting life-destroying thunderstorm as long as
he should reign !
Zeus preserved, some say restored, the life of the infant.
Mythology states that the infant was saved from the
mother’s fate by cool ivy which Zeus made to grow up
suddenly around him, and then—
Him the Theban queen of yore,
‘Mid Jove’s fast flashing lightnings bore :
Sprung from her womb the untimely child,
While smitten with the thunder blast
The sad mother breathed her last.
Instant him Saturnian Jove
Received wdth all a mother’s love ;
In his secret thigh immured,
There with golden clasps secured
Safe from Here’s jealous sight.


So runs mythology, and so writes Euripides. Zeus carried!
him about in one of his legs for a time, as many a Bacchic
devotee does to this day. Thus Here was prevented from
doing him an injury, but I should think it made Zeus
rather uncomfortable when he sat down. Owing to this
reputed preservation of Bacchus he was called Dithy-
rambus, the “ twice-born,’’ and under that name was
frequently invoked. Thus the Mtenads in “ The Baccha-
nals’' sing of him—
“ Come, my Dithyrambus, come,
Enter thou the masculine womb ! ”
Lo ! to Thebes I thus proclaim,
“ Twice born ! ” thus thy mystic name.
Well, we can imagine Jove wouldn’t keep the little boy
long in his thigh. Hermes, the messenger of the gods, was-
secretly dispatched to take him to a place called Nysa (from
which place it is probable his name Dio-nysus, or “ god of
Nysa,” is derived), where dwelt the woodnymphs and
“ the frantic satyrs.” The father of the satyrs, Silenus,
Zeus made his offspring’s foster-father. The kind of
“ bringing-up” he had we may well imagine. “ The life of
the satyrs was spent in woods and on hills, in a constant
round of amusements of all kinds - hunting, dancing, music,
drinking , gathering and pressing the grapes, or in the
company of the god, whirling in wild dances with the
Maenads.” Thus we see him—
Bromius, that his revel rout
To the mountaius leads about ;
To the mountains leads along,
Where awaits the female throng.
From the distaff, from the loom,
Raging with the god they come.
* * *
On the mountains wild ’tis sweet,
When faint with rapid dance our feet,
Our limbs on earth all careless thrown
With the sacred fawn skins strewn,
To quaff the goat’s delicious blood,
A strange, a rich, a savage food.


And rather unwholesome, 1 should think.
Then oft again the revel goes
O’er Phrygian, Lydian mountain brows;
Evoe ! Evoe ! leads the road,
Bacchus self [now mark his name] the maddening god !
Virgil, in his sixth eclogue, pictures old Silenus as a con-
firmed and perpetual toper, always drinking, if not drunk,
and sharing his potations with the boy-god Bacchus. There
is an old Greek legend of the days of this god's boyhood
which is worth reading : - “ When Bacchus was a boy he
journeyed through Hellas to go to Naxia, and as the way
was very long he grew tired, and sat down upon a stone to
rest. As he sat there, with his eyes upon the ground, he
saw a little plant spring up between his feet, and was so
much pleased with it that he determined to take it with
him and plant it in Naxia. He took it up and carried it
away with him ; but, as the sun was very hot, he feared it
might wither before he reached his destination. He found
a bird’s skeleton, into which he thrust it, and went on.
But in his hand the plant sprouted so fast that it started
out of the bones above and below. This gave him fresh
fear of its withering, and he cast about for a remedy. He
found a lion’s bone, which was thicker than the bird’s
skeleton, and he stuck the skeleton, with the plant in it,
into the hone of the lion. Ere long, however, the plant
grew out of the lion’s bone likewise. Then he found the
bone of an ass, larger still than that of the lion. So he put
the bone of the lion, containing the bird’s skeleton and the
plant, into the ass’s bone, and thus made his way to Naxia.
When about to set the plant, he found that the roots had
entwined themselves around the bird’s skeleton, and the
lion’s bone and the ass’s bone; and, as he could not take it
out without damaging the roots, he planted it as it was,
and it came up speedily, and bore, to his great joy, the
most delicious grapes, from which he made the first wine,
and gave it to men to drink. But, behold a miracle.
When men drank of it, they first sang like birds; next
after drinking a little more, they became vigorous and
gallant, like lions ; but, when they drank more still, they
began to behave like asses.”


But though this legend is about as true as hundreds of
others, and, as Dr. Eddy says, “ contains some suggestive
thoughts,” it is not half so poetic as the description of the
origin of wine by Euripides :
And one her rod plunged deep in the earth, and there
The god sent up a fountain of bright wine.
Now Silenus, the foster-father of Bacchus, was “ a sort of
paternal guardian of the light-headed troops of satyrs,” and
he is described as a “ short, round-bellied, hairy old man,
with a bald head.” If we want him more in keeping
with the character of the male nurse of the god of
drunkenness, though the description just given is surely
typical enough, we have it in one account of his parentage
where Pan is his father, a nymph his mother, and he
himself is adorned with a tail and has the ears of a £>oat —
a sort of a composition of Old Nick, a beast and a man.
To make the association more complete he had a donkey
that is said to have been a valiant and intelligent beast,
for on one occasion in the war with the giants it brayed so
loudly that it put the giants to flight in fear and consterna-
tion. He was often represented “ with a drinking-cup or
wine-skin in his hand, or intoxicated and supported by two
satyrs.” Nevertheless he was fond of music, and is the
reputed inventor of such music as was produced by the
syrinx (Pan’s pipe) and the double flute which was used in
the worship of Rhea and Dionysus. Wine, nymphs and
song—these are the so-called poetic side of the origin of
intemperance.
As Bacchus arrived at manhood mythology and legend
describe him as a great traveller “ through all known
countries, even unto the most remote parts of India,
instructing the people as he proceeded how to tend the
vine.” Like all other heathen deities he was a miracle
worker. He turned the Tyrrhenian pirates into dolphins,
and substituted wine for water. Because Lycurgus, the
King of Thrace, resisted him, he drove him mad, and so
the demented king killed his own son under the delusion
that he was a vine plant, and then in dispair committed
suicide. Ambrosia he changed into a vine, and at Orcho


menus, because the three daughters of Minyus would not
join the rest of the women in their midnight orgies, he
transformed them into birds. His stock miracle was, of
course, madness. His aunts, his mother s sisters, disbe-
lieved his heavenly origin (and no wonder). “ bo, he says,
So from their homes Ive goaded them in frenzy ; _
Their wits all crazed, they wander o’er the mountains ;
And I have forced them wear my wild attire.
There’s not a woman of old Cadmus’ race
But I have maddened from her quiet home.
The reign of Bacchus endureth still! And how many,
oh ! how many of the fair among women hath he not in the
memory and sight of us all maddened from their quiet
homes ?
Nothing can be more lamentable than the spectacle of a
woman—the jewel of love, the guardian of virtue, the queen
of hone, the flower of life, the solace of mankind frenzied,
fallen, mad with drink. And yet the principal worshippers
of Dionysus
In the dim glens
Of wild Cittneron
are said to have been women. They were called Thyades
and Msenades—“ names which denote madness and folly.
O ye young maidens, and you, O saintly matrons, beware
of the demon, for in every dreg of his pleasure-cups lurks
diabolical frenzy, and on you, above all others, mythology
and experience alike declare, once you indulge, this frenzy
falls.
One more illustration of his maddening power : “ Icarius,
instead of keeping secret the use of wine, spread it among
the herdsman and labourers, who, becoming intoxicated
with wine, slew him and threw him into a well or buried
him under a tree, where his daughter Erigone found his
grave, and in her despair hanged herself on the tree.
The school of Praxiteles have delighted in immortal
marble to reproduce the exploits of Dionysus and those
associated with him. He was represented under a great
variety of forms. There are two ancient and prominent
figures of him. “The one called the ‘lndian Bakchos


represents him as a man of years, with worthy aspect, a
long beard, a diadem on his brow, and a long drapery
sweeping to his feet. In the other figure he is represented
as a beautiful youth, with an almost feminine appearance,,
beardless, his hair falling in long tresses, and adorned with
a wreath of ivy or vine tendrils, sometimes wearing the
skin of a stag over his shoulders, or with small horns on
his brow, and often in a car drawn by panthers or lions, or
riding on one of these beasts. At other times he appears-
as a child, and that sometimes when he is being handed
over by Hermes to the care of Silenus and the Nymphs of
Nysa.” In ancient paintings he is depicted with “ a red
face” and “ a bloated body,” with a guard of “ a drunken
band of satyrs, demons and nymphs that preside over the
wine presses.” Again : “On his journey to India he rides
on a camel, and on other occasions he is attended by
panthers, His staff is a thyrsus —a rod with a pine cone at
the top. In his hand is often a drinking cup.” But under
every aspect he is associated with loose women, drunken
men, lewdness, wild beasts, folly, shame, and intemperance.
His devotees had the striking attribute of delirium
tremens — snakes—as their symbol. “A golden image of a
serpent was placed in the lap of the newly initiated, the
satyrs were represented with serpents coiled around their
heads, and the serpent was consecrated to Bacchus. In
these ceremonies wine was indispensable, and the wor-
shippers were drunken, and the infamous character of these
orgies are the lasting obloquy of the peoples who tolerated
them.” The women worshippers, the Mtenads, are thus,
described by Euripides :
I saw three bands, three choirs of women: One
Antonoe led, thy mother let the second,
Agave—and the third Ino. And all
Quietly slept, their languid limbs stretched out—
Some resting on the ash trees’ stem their tresses ;
Some with their heads upon the oak leaves thrown
Careless, but not immodest; as thou say’st,
That drunken with the goblet and shrill fife
In the dusk woods they prowl for lawless love.
Thy mother as she heard the horned steers


Deep lowing, stood up ’mid the Bacchanals
And shouted loud to wake them from their rest.
They from their lids shaking the freshening sleep,
Rose upright, wonderous in their decent guise,
The young, the old, the maiden yet unwed.
And first they loosed their locks over their shoulders,
Their fawn skins fastened, wheresoe’er the clasps
Had lost their hold, and all the dappled furs
With serpents hound, that lolled out their lithe tongues.
After they had been severely fighting with some intruders
on their orgies, where the “ women drave men,” they
Washed off the blood, and from their cheeks the drops
The serpents licked, and made them bright and clean.
Of these peculiar women and their serpent symbols
Plutarch in his life of Alexander gives a graphic paragraph.
“ They tell us,” he says, “ that the women of this country
were of old extremely fond of the ceremonies of Orpheus
and the orgies of Bacchus, and that they were called
Clodones and Mimallones , because in many things they
imitated the Edonian and Thracian women about Mount
Hsemus; from whom the Greek word threscuein seems to-
be derived, which signifies the exercise of extravagant and
superstitious observances. Olympias being remarkably
ambitious of these inspirations, and desirous of giving the
enthusiastic solemnities a more strange and horrid appear-
ance. introduced a number of large tame serpents, which,
often creeping out of the ivy and the mystic fans, and
entwining about the thyrsuses and garlands of the women,
struck the spectators with terror.” This story is given to-
explain the legend that “ a serpent was seen lying by
Olympias (the mother of Alexander) as she slept, and that
the serpent was a god in disguise.
“ That old serpent called the devil!” Wine “ stingeth
like an adder” Here, indeed, are the snakes and belly-
crawling things of the delirious inebriate. He or she is
like the horned god Bacchus with “living snakes his brows-
around.”
Whence still the wanded Maenads bear
Their serpent prey wreathed in their floating hair.


I have quoted these passages from Euripides because, as
a matter of fact, “ The Bacchse” is “ the only surviving
Greek tragedy connected with the worship and mystic
history of Dionysus—Bacchus.” He has had many wor-
shippers and many panegerists among the poets, from
Alexis to from Homer to Yirgil, from the
dawn of letters to Avon’s immortal bard : but Euripides
has put him on the stage, and the play was performed at
least two thousand three hundred years ago, the date of the
death of its author. I am, therefore, to-night quoting
from a tragedy which so long ago elicited the applause
of the people of Athens, and who have been “ sleeping
with their fathers” through many centuries of time.
I quote from Dean Milman’s translation, because it
is admittedly the best. The play itself is also admittedly
the best production of the prolific genius of the Grecian
dramatist.
In my humble opinion the play is a grand moral lesson,
depicting by personification the terrible effects of Drink as
they were known in civilisation’s childhood. Bacchus is
Drink. Change the words and read Wine wherever we
find the god’s name, and we have a key which unlocks
allegory and reveals the madness ar.d disaster that are the
slaves of intoxication. Let us look into the tragedy and
see how, to this old Greek, drunkenness operated, though I
must again apologise for wearying you with quotations.
Of course I shall have to abreviate the tale, but consistent
with brevity I shall give the poetical rythm of the
dramatist.
Jove’s son, Dionysus, makes his appearance at Thebes
after leaving
The golden Lydian shores,
The Prygian and the Persian sun-seared plains,
And Bactria’s walls; the Medes’ wild wintry land,
and
Araby the Blest; and all
Of Asia, that along the salt-sea coast
Lifts up her high-towered cities,
determined to subdue Thebes to his worship, and to punish
his aunts for decreeing him “ no son of Jove.” He declares,


If this Theban city, in her ire,
With arms shall seek to drive from off the mountains
My Bacchanal rout, at my wild Maenads head
I’ll meet, and mingle in the awful war.
Agave, the daughter of old Cadmus, and sister of Semele
the mother of Bacchus, with Ino and Antonoe, two othei
sisters, the three aunts of Bacchus, had become leaders ot
Bacchanal bands, as I have already quoted. Agave had a
son named Pentheus, and just at the time the play opens
old Cadmus has handed over the kmgdorn to him. Pen-
theus is enraged with his mother and the Theban women
who had become Msenads.
’Tis said a stranger hath appeared among us,
A wizard, sorcerer, from the land of Lydia,
Beautious with golden locks and purple cheeks,
Eves moist with Aphrodite’s melting hre.
And day and night he is with the throng, to gui e
Young maidens in the soft inebriate rites.
But old Cadmus and the prophet Tiresias, though they are
both pretty well fit for the grave, are for admitting the
worship of Bacchus to Thebes—drink has got hold of them.
You have seen tipsy old men. Have you never noticed
how they think they can dance 1 How they fancy they
are young 1 Brink acted in the same way on Cadmus and
Tiresias. Old Cadmus says :
Where shall we lead the dance, plant the light foot,
And shake the hoary locks ? Tiresias, thou
The aged lead the aged : wdse art thou,
Nor will I weary night and day the earth
Beating with my lithe thyrsus. Oh, how sweetly
Will we forget we are old.
Tib. Thou’rt as myself —
I too grow young ; I too essay the dance.
The giddy old fools are going to the dance when Pentheus
meets them. He is struck with astonishment
But 10, new wonders ! See I not Tiresias,
The prophet, in the dappled fawn skin c ad .
My mother’s father, too (a sight for laughter
Tossing his hair ? My sire, I blush for thee,
Beholding thine old age thus fatuous grown.


They reprove him, call him “ impious” for his sneers, and
old Tiresias’ attempts to argue with him ; and one would
fancy him almost a modern doctor or secretary to some
society for the drink traffic, when he says that Bacchus
Found out the grape’s rich juice, and taught us mortals
That which beguiles the miserable of mankind
Of sorrow, when they quaff the vine’s rich stream.
Sleep, too, and drowsy oblivion of care
He gives, all healing medicine of our woes.
Such a deity ought not to be banished, He was too
agreeable. And
A prophet is our god, for Bacchanalism
And madness are alike prophetical.
And when the god comes down in all his power,
He makes the mad to rave of things to come.
He compares him to Ares, who scatters enemies “ with
panic fear,” and conclusively says
From Dionysus springs this frenzy too.
'Then the old prophet offers advise :
In the land receive the god.
Four wine, and join the dance, and crown thy brows.
******
I, therefore, and old Cadmus, whom thou mock'st.
Will crown our heads with ivy, dance along
An hoary pair—for dance perforce we must.
But Pentheus would have none of it. He vows vengeance
on the stranger—
That womanly man, who with this new disease
Afflicts our matrons,
-and orders his attendants to go to the city and
Seize him and bring him hither straight in chains,
That he may sutler stoning—that dread death
In the meantime the hoary pair, leaning on each other,
bobble to the dance.
What may in modern drama be called the next act opens
with the information, brought to Pentheus by a messenger,
that they had arrested Bacchus and his crew. He had
■offered no resistance,


But all the Bacchanals whom thou had’st seized
And bound in chains within the public prison,
All now have disappeared, released they are leaping
In their wild orgies, hymning the god Bacchus.
Spontaneous fell the chains from off their feet—
The bolts drew back untouched by mortal hand.
Then, very naturally, Pentheus resolves to make this
Bacchus suffer still more, and catechises him severely.
Not taking him for the god in person he asks :
And hither com’st thou first with this new god ?
Dio. —There’s no Barbarian but adores these rites.
Pen.—Being much less wise than we Hellenians.
Dio.—ln this more wise.
Pen.—Performest thou these rites by night or day ?
Dio.—Most part by night —night hath more solemn awe.
Pen.—A crafty, rotten plot to catch our women.
Pentheus threatens to barber him of his hair, and to bind
his body “in strong iron chains,” but Dionysus replies
coolly, “ My god himself shall loose them when he will.”
Exasperated beyond endurance Pentheus at length ex
•claims:—
Away go bind him in our royal stable,
That he may sit in midnight gloom profound :
There lead thy dance !
Euripides doubtless thought a stable the best of possible
places for drink, but is not a stable too good for it ?
This son of Jove, as you have expected, escaped. He
tells the story to his Mienads, who were waiting for him,
and sneering at Pentheus, he says—
He thought me in his chains ;
He touched me not, nor reached me ; his idle thoughts were vain !
In the stable stood a heifer, where he thought he had me bound :
Round the beasts knees his cords and cloven hoofs he wound.
He calls fire from the heavens to consume the royal palace.
From roof to base that palace in smouldering ruin lies.
From which I argue it is not safe to put a drunken man
even into a stable.
“ I am outraged—mocked ! ” Pentheus exclaims, and in
the midst of his anger Dionysus approaches him, and to the
two appears a messenger, who relates the doings of the
Bacchanals.


One ye might see a young and vigorous heifer
Hold, lowing in her grasp, like prize of war,
And some were tearing asunder the younger calves
And ye might see the ribs or cloven hoofs
Hurled wildly up and down, and mangled skins
Were hanging from the ash-boughs dropping blood.
The wanton bulls, proud of their tossing horns
Of yore, fell stumbling, staggering to the ground,
Dragged down by the strong hands of thousand maidens.
And swifter were the entrails torn away
Than drop the lids over your royal eyeballs.
Strange exploits truly for women ! But you must remem-
ber they were inspired by the drink-god, and under his
inspiration what will not even women do ?
Pentheus is at his wits end for a remedy. He bids his
courtiers
Go to the Electrian gates
And summon all that bear the shield, and all
The cavalry upon their prancing steeds,
And those that couch the lance, and of the bow
Twang the sharp string. Against these Bacchanals
We will go war.
Then Dionysus tries to reason with him. “ Rather do
sacrifice,” he says, “ than in thy wrath kick ’gainst the
pricks.” He offers his services to subdue the women
without force of arms, and rouses the young king’s
curiosity by asking—
Ha ! would’st thou see them seated on the mountains ?
And for that sight Pentheus replies he would give “ a
thousand weight of gold.”
Pentheus is willing to go, but Dionysus imposes the
condition that he must first dress himself up as a woman.
Pex. —What dress ? A woman’s ? lam ashamed to wear it.
Dio. —Art thou not eager to behold the Maenads ?
Pen.— And what dress say’st thou I must wrap around me ?
Dio.—l’ll smooth thine hair down lightly on thy brow.
Pen. —What is the second portion of my dress ?
Dio. —Robes to thy feet, a bonnet on thine head.
Pen. —Wilt thou array me then in more than this ?
Dio.—A thyrsus in thy hand, a dappled fawn-skin.
Pen.—l cannot clothe me in a woman’s dress.


But under the influence of drink (Bacchus) he does. As
Bacchus says : —-
Bereave him first of sense ;
Yet be his frenzy slight. In his right mind
He never had put on a woman’s dress ;
But now thus shaken in his mind he’ll wear it.
A laughing-stock I’ll make him to all Thebes,
Led in a woman’s dress through the wide city !
The indignant Pentheus is losing his virtue and becoming
ridiculous ! By degrees he gets more than “ two sheets in
the wind.” He commences to squint, and gets into that
species of “ drunk” called “ blind.”
Ha ! now indeed two suns I seem to see,
A double Thebes, two seven-gated cities.
Thou, as a bud, seem’st to go before me,
And horns have grown upon thine head. Art thou
A beast indeed ? Thou seem’st a very bull.
and Dionysus replies —
The god is with us !
How simply and naturally is this process of inebriation
related by the poet ! How much nicer it sounds to say
“ The god is with us,” than the common, vulgar way of
saying “You’re drunk!” And how subtly the dramatist
depicts the self-conceit that grows with the emptying
glass. The dignified king has now become so vainglorious
that he asks—
Could I not now bear up upon my shoulders
Cithseron’s crag, with all thy Bacchanals ?
And of course Dionysus answers him as only a drunken
man will be answered—by flattery.
Thou could’st if ’twere thy will. In thy right mind ,
Erewhile thou wast not, now thou art as thou should’st be.
Then comes the hour for vengeance to Bacchus. Pentheus
is now fully prepared to be a victim to the drink-frenzied
Msenads. Led on to their dancing grounds in a semi-
insensate state by the potent god of potations ; to where
“ There was a rock -walled glen, watered by a streamlet,
and shadowed o’er with pines.” Pentheus resolves upon
seeing the women from the top of an ash-tree, which
Bacchus bent like a bow and “ dragged to the low earth.”


And slowly rose it upright to its height,
Bearing my master seated on its ridge.
There was he seen, rather than saw the Mrenads.
******
Then from the heavens a voice, as it should seem
Dionysus, shouted loud, “ Behold ! I bring,
0 maidens, him you and me, our iites,
Our orgies laughed to scorn ; now take your vengeance.”
It was the vengeance of mad women I would like to read
you the whole description of it, but I must limit myself to
selections.
Agave spake, <c Come all and stand around
And grasp the tree, ye Maenads ; soon we will seize
The beast that rides thereon.”
And at her bidding
A thousand hands
Were on the ash, and tore it from the earth.
He was in their power. Never was the degrading, sex-
annihilating, love-destroying, maddening, and murderous
power of drink more forcibly pourtrayed than in the
description I am reading now :
His mother first began the sacrifice,
And fell on him. His bonnet from his hair
He threw, that she might know and so not slay him.
The sad Agave. And he said, her cheek
Fondling, “ I am thy child, thine own, my mother !
Fentheus, whom in Echion’s house you bare.
Have mercy on me, mother. For his sins,
Whatever be his sins, kill not thy son.
She, foaming in the mouth , her rolling eyeballs
Whirling around, in her unreasoning reason,
By Bacchus all possessed, knew, heeded not.
She caught him in her arms, seized his right hand,
And, with her feet set on his shrinking side,
Tore out the shoulder —not with her own strength !
The god made easy that too cruel deed.
And Ino laboured on the other side,
Rending the flesh. Antonoe, all the rest,
Pressed fiercely on, and there was one wild din
He groaning deep, while he had breath to groan,
They shouting triumph. And one bore an arm,
One a still sandalled foot ; and both his sides
Lay open, rent. Each in her bloody hand
Tossed wildly to and fro lost Pentheus’ limbs.
The trunk lay far aloof, ’neath the rough rocks


Part, part amid the forest’s thick strewn leaves,
Not easy to be found. The wretched head,
Which the mad mother, seizing in her hands,
Had on a thyrsus fixed, she bore a’oft
All o’er Cithseron, as a mountain lion’s,
Leading her sisters in their Maenad dance.
Horrible as these details are, as revolting to that purest
and mightiest bond of human nature—a mother’s love for
her son—as they appear, they have their counterpart in
the world we live in. Bacchus can make even a mother
do all this. Drink has oftentimes plucked out the maternal
heart and planted a she-devil’s in its place.
Poor Agave ! “Mad with the god,” her hands were not
the white hands of woman, but the red hands of murder,
and yet she proudly nursed the delusion that she had merited
glory. She knew not what she had done. It was not her
son, but to her delirious ecstacy, a lion’s cub she had slain,
and she exclaimed, “ Mine, mine the glorious lot” to have
struck him first She comes to the high-towered Theban city
to seek applause, the reward of bravery, the distinction of a
mighty huntress. Alas, there comes the awakening—the
return to sobriety. She asks, with the head of her son in
her hands :
“ Where is mine aged sire 1 Let him draw near !
And where is my son Pentheus ? Let him mount
On the broad stairs that rise before our house ;
And on the triglyph nail this lion’s head
That I have brought him from our splendid chase.
Old Cadmus is heart broken at the deed, and with paternal
pity and pathetic delicacy he draws her back to her
senses.
Cad. —And whose the head thou holdest in thy hands?
Agave—A lion’s ; thus my fellow hunters said.
Cad. —Look at it straight: to look on’t is no toil.
Agave— What see I ? Ha ! what’s this within my hands ?
Cad. —Look on’t again, again ; thou wilt know too well.
Agave—l see the direst woe that eye may see.
Cad. —The semblance of a lion b ars it now ?
Agave — No; wretch, wretch that I am, ’tis Pentheus’ head !
The aged and venerable founder of the seven-gated city
revealed all to this unhappy devotee of Bacchus, and then
she poured forth a lamentation so eloquent, so plaintive, and


so purely womanly that in the “ Christus Patiens,” which
is ascribed to Gregory of Nazianzen, a Christian writer of
the fourth century, the lines “ were transferred to the
Virgin Mary’s lament over her son, and this use of the
passage led to its omission from all texts of Euripides that
have come down to us ” Dean Milman, however, had the
courage “ to make restitution to the Heathen,” and I will
read you the whole passage :
Father, thou see’st how all is changed with me ;
I am no more the Meenad dancing blithe ;
I am but the feeble, fond and desolate mother.
I.know, I see—ah, knowledge best unknown !
Sight best unseen ! I see, I know my son,
Mine only son ! —alas ! no more my son.
O beauteous limbs, that in my womb I bare !
0 head, that on my lap wast wont to sleep !
0 lips, that from my bosom’s swelling fount
Drained the delicious and soft-oozing milk !
0 hands, whose first use was to fondle me !
0 feet, that were so light to run to me !
O gracious form, that men wondering beheld !
0 haughty brow, before which Thebes bowed down 1
0 majesty ! 0 strength ! By mine own hands
By mine own murderous, sacrilegious hands
Torn, rent asunder, scattered, cast abroad !
O thou hard god ! Was there no other way
To visit us ? Oh, if the son must die,
Must it be by the hand of his own mother ?
If the impious mother must atone her sin,
Must it be but by murdering her own son ?
What an awakening from the <( Bacchic Frenzy ! ” How
many wretched men and women have perished on the
scaffold in the hangman’s hands after such an awakening 1
To complete her inebriate descended miseries her father,
that old Cadmus who had been so willing a follower of
“ the hard god,” was doomed to become a fierce dragon ;
her mother, Harmonia, was compelled to “ take a brutish
form, and sink into a serpent ,” whilst she herself is
rendered abject indeed. The concluding words of the
tragedy are hers, spoken in deep contrition and gloomy
forboding:—


So lead me forth—my sisters now to meet;
Sad fallen exiles.
Let me go, let me go,
Where cursed Cithseron ne’er may see me more,
Nor I the cursed Cithseron see again—
Where there’s no memory of the thyrsus dance.”
I close up Euripides, and I hope my reading of it has not
been wasted time. I recommend the reading of the entire
tragedy to all who are studiously inclined, for not only is it
a literary treat, but it is pregnant with weighty lessons and
mystic lore.
You may say that this tragedy is only a work of poetic
fancy —ancient imagination let loose. But I assure you
the main features were as absolutely believed, and the
main character as certainly worshipped as those of any
other cult history immortalises or our own times behold.
Bacchus was the centre figure of a religion, celebrated with
numerous and imposing rites. Every December in the
neighbouring districts to Athens the rustics held high
holiday in bis honour. “In January a festival called
Lenaea was held in his honour in the town, at which one
of the principal features was a nocturnal and orgiastic
procession of women. Then followed, in February, the
Anthesteria, the first day of which was called ‘ cask-
opening day,’ and the second ‘ pouring day.’ Lastly came
the great festival of the year, the Great Dionysia, which
was held in the town of Athens, and lasted from the ninth
to the fifteenth of March (some say February), the religious
part of the ceremony consisting of a procession, in which an
ancient wooden image of the god was carried through the
streets from one sanctuary to another, accompanied by
excited songs. The theatre of, Dionysus was daily the
scene of splendid dramatic performances, and the whole
town was astir and gay.”
It was doubtless in the theatre of Dionysus that the
tragedy of “ The Bacchanals” was first performed, for, in
addition to being the god of Wine, Bacchus was also the
god of the Theati’e.
The specific worship of Bacchus survived even into the
Christian epoch. Some authorities even go so far as to


identify the Christian Agapce with the Eleusinian mysteries,
so named from the City of Eleusis, in Attica, on the Eleu-
sinian Bay. These mysteries were often termed love-feasts,
and if we may believe Livy, the Roman historian, they
were of an outrageous description. Livy says :—“ The
employment decreed to both the Consuls was to make
enquiries regarding clandestine meetings. A Greek of
mean condition, a low operator in sacrifices, a soothsayer
and a teacher of secret mysteries, first appeared in Etruria.
These mysterious rites at first were imparted only to a few,
but afterwards communicated to a great number of both
men and women To the religious ceremonies of these
were added the pleasures of wine and feasting, in order to
allure a great number of proselytes. When wine, lasci-
vious discourse, night, and the mingling of the sexes had
extinguished every sentiment of modesty, then 'debauchery
of every kind began to be practised, as every person found
at hand that kind of enjoyment most congenial to his
predominating passion.”
Even murder and infanticide, as we might expect, were
perpetrated in these Bacchic mysteries. Gibbon, quoting
from Justin Martyr, observes that it was asserted “that a
new-born infant, entirely covered over with flour, was
presented, like some mystic symbol of initiation, to the
knife of the proselyte, who unknowingly inflicted many a
secret and mortal wound on the innocent victim of his
error ; that as soon as the cruel deed was perpetrated, the
sectaries drank up the blood, greedily tore asunder the
quivering members, and pledged themselves to eternal
secresy by a mutual consciousness of guilt. It was as
confidently affirmed, that this inhuman sacrifice was
succeeded by a suitable entertainment, in which intem-
perance served as a provocative to brutal lust; till, at the
appointed moment, the lights were suddenly extinguished,
shame was banished, nature was forgotten,” &c.
So deeply planted were these mysteries in the lives of
the Roman citizens, that even in the latter half of the
fourth century the Emperor Valentinian gave them the
stamp of his imperial authority. He “ admitted the peti


tion of Prsetextatus, pro-consul of Acliaia, who represented
that the life of the Greeks would become dreary and
comfortless if they were deprived of the blessing of the
Eleusinian mysteries.”
And to still further establish the certainty of the vital
energy of these “ mysteries,” I will quote from an author
whose authority none will dispute. I hold in my hand
“ Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical History,” and in Part 11., Chap,
iv., Sec. 5, I read :—“ Among the Greeks and the people
of the East, nothing was held more sacred than what were
called the mysteries. This circumstance led the Christians,
in order to impart dignity to their religion, to say that they
also had similar mysteries, or certain holy rites concealed
from the vulgar.” The Christian Adrian was initiated
into the Eleusinian mysteries at Athens, and to him is
attributed their introduction among the Latins and their
subsequent extension among the Christians of the West.
Mosheim adds : “ They gradually introduced also the rites
which were designated by those terms.”
Indeed, the customs arising out of Bacchic worship in
Greece were honoured and adopted by the proudest and
most exalted in the land. Not the vulgar alone, but
powerful potentates indulged in Dionysiae revelries, and
Emperors and Kings participated in the orgies. That able
and exemplary biographer, Plutarch, in his “ Life of
Alexander,” says : —“ After he had given his army some
time to refresh themselves, he marched in Carmania for
seven days in a kind of Bacchanalian procession. His
chariot, which was very magnificent, was drawn by eight
horses. Upon it was placed a lofty platform, where he
and his principal friends revelled day and night. This
carriage was followed by many others —some covered with
rich tapestry and purple hangings, and others shaded with
branches of trees fresh gathered and flourishing. In these
were the rest of the king’s friends and generals, crowned
with flowers and exhilirated with wine. In this whole
company there was not to be seen a buckler, a helmet, or
spear; but instead of them, cups, flagons, and goblets.
These the soldiers dipped in huge vessels of wine and drank


to each other, some as they marched along, and others
seated at tables, which were placed at proper distances
on the way. The whole country resounded with flutes,
clarionets, and songs, and with the dances and riotous
frolics of the women. This disorderly and dissolute march
was closed with a very immodest figure and with all the
licentious ribaldry of the Bacchanals, as if Bacchus himself
had been present to carry on the debauch.” 0 temporal
0 mores !
But I am likely to overstrain your patience with these
references—so many centuries old —and, moreover, the
time limit of my lecture is exhausted. What you have
heard to-night you will kindly consider as introductory to
future lectures, for I intend to give Bacchus no quarter,
whether lie flourishes in the shadowy glens of Attica or
still rules in the back-blocks of Australia; whether he
causes the theatre of Athens in the great Dionysia to
resound with the plaudits of Athenians, or he demoralises
our people in the gin-palaces of Sydney. He is the same
maddening god, the same relentless fiend, the same author
of vice, villiany, and vulgarity; of shame, sorrow, and sin ;
of meanness, misery, and misforture in every age, in every
clime, in every habitation. He is a King 'whose crown is
the serpent, whose sceptre is the executioner’s weapon,
whose robes are the polluted and infectious coverings of
the dead, whose throne is the criminal’s scaffold, whose
reign is a deluging tornado of degradation, disease, and
death ; whose palace is the asylum, the penitentiary and
the gaol; whose taxes are human virtues and human lives;
and whose subjects are the wretched, the sorrowing, the
blighted, the outlawed, the forsaken, the hopeless, the
living dead, and all those who have pledged their servitude
to him in a cup of poison.


II.
I have been told during the week that my last lecture
was somewhat unjust to the worshippers in the Eleusinia.
These mysteries, the Bacchantie apologists would impress
upon me, were not confined to Saturnalian debauches.
Well, I have never pretended that they were. There was
certainly an occult side to the worship of ancient Bacchus,
and though our reliable information upon the nature of the
mysteries, especially the greater mysteries, is extremely
scanty and obscure, the fact mentioned by Strabo that the
Eleusinian temple could furnish accommodation for twenty
or thirty thousand people points to ■ something besides
licentiousness and intemperance as the mainstay of the
popular devotion. Mrs. Blake, in her “ Realities of Free-
masonry,” suggestively attributes the honour to the
Bacchanals of being primitive Masons, and prototypes of
our guilds and trades-unions. “ It has been suggested,”
she says, “ that the name Soubise is a corruption of Saba-
zius, a name by which Bacchus was known in Thrace It
is certain that the priests of Bacchus early founded com-
panies of architects and masons to erect theatres for the
performance of dramas in honour of their god Dionysus or
Bacchus. These builders acquired the name of Dionysian
workmen, and eventually became numerous, and spread
from Greece into remote lands. Such companies would
certainly have practised the mysteries of Bacchus, and
would possibly have preserved the name of Sabazius; and
it is not difficult to understand that a corruption of the
name, held sacred by building-fraternities in Pagan times,
may have descended to similar societies in the middle
ages.”
As an instance of analagous development (if, indeed,
there be no actual connection) of very remote countries,
let me trouble you with a reference to the ancient customs


and manners of the Scandinavians, those valiant
men whose blood still flows in our veins. Mallet, in his
“ Northern Antiquities,” writes :—“ The common liquors at
these carousals were either beer, mead, or wine, when they
could get it. These they drank out of earthen or wooden
pitchers, or else out of the horns of wild bulls, with which
their forests abounded. The principal person at the table
took the cup first, and rising up, saluted by name either
him who sat next to him or him who was nearest in rank ;
then he drank it off, and causing it to be filled up again to
the brim, presented it to the man whom he had saluted.
Hence came the custom of drinking to the health of the
guests ; but I know not whether that of drinking to the
honour of the gods was generally practised among all the
Teutonic people or only among the Scandinavians. Snorri
Sturlason says, 1 that in the solemn festivals, such as
usually followed the sacrifices, they emptied what was
called the cup of Odin, to obtain victory and a glorious
reign ; then the cups of Njord and of Frey, for a plentiful
season ; after which several used to take off another to
Bragi, the god of Eloquence and Poetry,’ The Scandi-
navians were so much addicted to this custom, that the
first missionaries, unable to abolish it, were forced, instead
of these false deities, to substitute the true God, Jesus
Christ, and the saints, to whose honour they devoutly
drank for many ages. In the Pagan times they also
drank to the heroes, and to such of their friends as had
fallen bravely in battle. Lastly it was at these feasts, for
the most part, that those associations were formed and
confirmed which the old chronicles so often mention.
There was scarcely a valiant man who was not a member
of one or more of these societies. . . . Fraternities of
this sort still subsisted after the Christian religion was
received in. the north, but by degrees the object was
changed. When the harbouring projects of enmity and
revenge were forbidden at them, these meetings had no
other object or support but drunkenness and intemperance.”
I have quoted this chiefly for the purpose oi introducing
the explanatory and instructive note to which the attention


of the readers of the “ antiquities” is directed “Were
it not foreign to our subject,” the note runs, “ a chapter
might be written to show the influence which Guilds had
in working out the municipal franchises of the middle ages.
We cannot, however, refrain from remarking, that before
the introduction of Christianity the Scandinavians used to
meet in select parties for the purpose of feasting and
drinking—used, in fact, to have regular drinking bouts
at which he who drank the deepest, or emptied the largest
horn at a single draught, was regarded as the hero of the
festival They were too fond of guzzling their ale and
mead to abandon this custom when they became Christians,
but as drinking gave rise to quarrels, which generally ended
in bloodshed, these private meetings were, through the
influence of the clergy, gradually changed into public
confraternities or Guilds , the members of which, or Guild-
brethren as they were called, pledged themselves to keep
the peace and to check intemperance. The Guilds estab-
lished by the Norwegian King Olaf, the Quiet, in the
latter half of the eleventh century, appear to have been of
this discription—convivial clubs, in fact, whose members
were pledged to keep good order and behave like gentlemen,
And as such a club or guild was placed under the patronage
of a saint, some worthy bishop or other high dignitary of
the Church could preside at the social board and empty his
CU p—for cups were in this century substituted for drinking
horns—in honour of the sainted patron without in any way
infringing the decorum of his sacred office. In the latter
half of the twelfth century we find these convivial guilds
had become powerful and influential corporate bodies, and
that the guild brethren were pledged to afford eich other
mutual aid and protection.
“It would lead us too far to follow the changes which
gradually took place in these protective guilds until they
became trades-guilds or companies Neither will it be
necessary for us to inform the guild brethren of the City of
London that their worshipful companies are the lineal
descendants of the old Scandinavian drinking bouts, for they
seldom fail to show the public that this is a fact which they
are perfectly aware of.”


Now I think that is justice enough to Bacchus and tfm
Bacchanals ! Of course it is altogether beyond the scope of
these lectures to enter into a discussion upon comparative
mythology and to relate all the myths of Osiris, Sabazia,
Kottytia, Zagrseus, Liber, and I scarcely know how many
others which have been declared the names given in different
countries for the same god—Bacchus. But that I may not
be accused of bigoted partiality I will endorse the statement
of Gustafson, when he says : “ The Eleusinians worshipped
Bacchus as the son of Ceres (in Greece, Derneter , the same
as Isis in Egypt), and that their worship chiefly consisted
of contemplations, and demonstrations of the unity of God
and the immortality of the soul.” And I will admit with
Alden that “the story of the stolen Proserpina is itself an
afterthought, a fable invented to explain the mysteries.
Ihe Eleusinia are older than Eleusis—older than Dt meter,
even the Demeter of Thrace—certainly as old as Isis, who
was to Egypt what Demeter was to Greece—the Great
Mother of a thousand names, who also had her repeatedly
endless sorrow for the loss of Osiris. .... And what
do we read on the tablet of Isis ?— 1 lam all that has been,
all that is, all that is to be ; and the veil which is over my
face no mortal hand has ever l’aised.’ Not to Demeter not
even to Isis do the Eleusinia primarily point, but to the
human heart,— 1 1 am the First and the Last—Mother of
gods and men. As deep as my mystery, so deep is my
sorrow. For lo ! all generations are mine. But the fairest
fruit of my holy garden was plucked by my mortal
children, since which Apollo among men and Artemis among
women have raged with their fearful arrows. My fairest
children, whom I have brought forth and nourished in the
light, have been stolen by the children of darkness.’ . .
As I candidly and willingly avow there was a good side to
the human nature that worshipped even such a god as
Bacchus, and I think I have sufficiently shown that both
the evil and the good have largely percolated through the
customs and ceremonies of the early Christian communities,
and I boldly assert, to the disgrace of us all, the evil has
survived to our own times.


We can do nothing even now of a social character with-
out an appeal to Bacchus. We cannot eelebrate the
simplest holiday without the aid of the barrel and the
decanter. We have had quite a crop of State banquets in
our colonies within the last few years, and Jubilee and
Federation, Exhibitions and Soudanese glorifications have
made “ respectable ” these aristocratic drinking-bouts ; and
grandiloquent speeches have arisen from the gasseous
ebulition of champagne to the clashing and tinkling
accompaniment of bell-shaped glasses, empty bottles, and
“ popping ” corks.
What constitutes a “ banquet ? ” Plenty to eat ? No.
Plenty of wholesome drinks ? No. What then? An un-
limited supply of the raw material of drunkenness.
I)o not think, then, that Bacchanal drinking bouts were
confined to the Scandinavians and Dionysian devotees.
They are part of the customs of every nation. They form
a portion of the religious ceremonies of every people Our
Aryan ancestors in the Indian groves and temples sang
thousands of years ago : ‘ Indra verily is the chief drinker
of the Soma, among gods and men, the drinker of the
effused libation,” and again, “ Indra and Vishnu, agreeable
of aspect, drink of this sweet Soma, fill with it your bellies;
may the inebriating beverage reach you.” “ Indra drink
this effused libation till thy belly is full.” “ Quickly, priest,
pour forth the Soma, for Indra is thirsty; verily he has
harnessed his vigorous steeds, the slayer of Uritra has
arrived. Pour out, priests, the Soma libations to Indra, in
his chariot ” They even prayed to Soma, a prayer which I
quote from Max Muller : “ Where wishes and desires are,
where the bowl of the bright Soma is, where there is food
and rt-joicing, there make me immortal.”
Soma, of course, was the drink for gods and aristocrats,
the “ Burgundy” of Brahmins; but Sura was the drink of
the people. This Sura (literally, wine) was more intoxi-
cating than Soma, and one of the hymns of the Veddas
says, “ It is our condition that is the cause of our sinning;
it is intoxication” from Sura. But Samuelson says,
“ Palastva, an ancient sage, enumerates no less than


twelve different kinds of liquor besides Soma; and the
preparation of those drinks from the grape, from honey,
sugar, dates, the palm, pepper, rice, cocoanut, <kc., has been
described with considerable minuteness.” At this time the
common drink in India is “ arrack, distilled from rice,
although the very lowest and besotted drink a fiery com-
pound called Pariah arrack, the distilled juice of the
palm and the thorn apple, a powerful narcotic.” On this
and other stuff the descendants of the sages, “ all classes of
India,” in fact, have an annual drunk “ under the guise of
religion.” “ The carnival,” says Rousselet, “ lasts several
days, during which the most licentious debauchery and
disorder reign throughout every class of society. It is the
regular Saturnalia of India. Persons of the greatest
respectability, without regard to rank or age, are not
ashamed to take part in the orgies which mark this season
of the year.” “ Troops of men and women, wreathed with
flowers, and drunk with bang, crowd the streets, carrying
sacks full of a bright red vegetable powder. With this
they assail the passers-by, covering them with clouds of
dust, which soon dye their clothes a startling colour.”
Egypt has been reputed the birthplace of wine, as
Hellanicus, the historian, says, “ The vine was first
discovered in Plinthina, a city of Egypt, ; on which account
Dion, the Academic philosopher, calls the Egyptians fond
of wine and fond of drinking.” The ancient Monuments
attest the far-back antiquity of Egyptian vine culture, and
it is to Egypt also that the first brewing of beer is ascribed.
“ Tradition,” says Richardson, “ active again in giving
celestial origin to strong drinks, has assigned the introduc-
tion of the art of making this product first to Osiris, the
divinity of Egypt, and afterwards to the goddess Ceres.
The fluid thus produced became, in Saxon language, known
as beer, bere, from barley, or perhaps from the Hebrew,
bar, corn. Tacitus calls it zythum. The Egyptians, it is
said, made it first for the common folk that they too might
receive the gift of Osiris.” Gustafson informs us : “ The
Egyptians, whose country was famous for its corn, are
regarded as the earliest brewers, and it is claimed that they


knew how to extract the juice of barley nearly two
thousand years before Christ ; but when they learned to
ferment it does not appear. They very early used what
they called grain wine at their libations (the religious
ceremony of pouring wine either upon the ground or on a
sacrifice—living or dead—in honour of a diety). Hero-
dotus tells us that beer or wine drawn from barley was the
liquor principally used, and he describes the clergy as
feasting upon the sacrifices and quaffing the sacred wine.”
It was in Egypt that in the midst of the banquet, when
wine was working wondrously, a skeleton crowned in a
funeral wreath was carried and shown to each of the
guests that they might still drink and be merry whilst
there was yet time, for to that shape of death must all
come at last. They did not reflect how much the flowing
bowl hastened the fatal end.
Sir J. G. Wilkinson, in “A popular account of the
ancient Egyptians” has preserved to us some of the frescoes
and illustrations of the customs of these early denizens of the
Valley of the Nile, in some of which servants are carrying
their insensible masters home from a drinking frolic, while
the female attendants on their wives and daughters are
represented as supporting them as they sit at the feast,
unable without such help to prevent themselves from
falling on those sated beside or behind them, and often so
sick in their debauch as to be unable to conduct themselves
with decency.”
Need I to trace the drink-customs of the Assyrians,
Babylonians, Medes and Persians? Need I paint the
character of that prince of voluptuaries, Sardanapalus,
whose motto was : “ Eat, drink, play, and know that thou
art mortal ; drain present delights, there is no voluptuous-
ness after death V’ Perhaps I had better not leave these
worshippers of Ormuz and Ahriman, the followers of
Zorvaster, those drinkers of Homa (probably the same as
Soma), out of my lecture altogether, for if you do not like
to remember what 1 have to say, I can assure you that
one of the easiest things in the world is—to forget that
which is instructive. Listen to the song of Hafiz :


That poignant liquor which the zealot calls the mother of sins is
pleasanter and sweeter to me than the kisses of a maiden.
The only friends who are free from care are a goblet of wine and
a book of odes
The tulip is acquainted with the faithlessness of the world ; for
from the time it blows till it dies, it holds the cup in its hands.
Give me wine ! wine that shall subdue the strongest ; that I may
for a time forget the cares and troubles of the world.
The roses have come, nor can anything afford so much pleasure as
a goblet of wine.
The enjoyments of life are vain ; bring wine for the trappings of
the world are perishable.
Athenaeus states that one of the Dariuses had his chief
desire that on his tomb there should be eugraved the fact
that “he could drink a very great quantity of wine without
being drunken.” Nor is that desire so very extraordinary
when we find Cyrus basing his claim to the kingdom on the
quality of being able to drink more wine than his brother
Artaxerxes “ without being inebriated or his passions dis-
agreeably excited.” Herodotus tells us that when Cyrus
made war upon the Massagetoe, of Central Asia, he made
a pretence of flight, but left his camp flowing in wine, and
so conquered his enemies, for after they had become
drunken Cyrus attacked them and gained a great victory
He was not the only general who has butchered his
enemies by such a device. In later times Tacitus relates
how the Roman general Germanicus beat the Marsians
because of the intoxication of these people. “ The scouts
brought intelligence that the approaching night was a
festival, to be celebrated by the barbarians (Germans) with
joy and revelry. . . , The barbarians were sunk in
sleep and wine, some stretched on the beds, others at full
length under the tables ; all in full security, without a
guard, without posts, and without a sentinel on duty No
appearance of war was seen; nor could that be called a
peace, which was only the effect of savage riot, the languor
of a debauch. Germanicus, to spread the slaughter as
wide as possible, divided his men into four battalions.
The country, fifty miles round, was laid waste with fire
and sword; no compassion for sex or age; no distinction
of places, holy or profane—nothing was sacred. Dreadful


as the slaughter was, it did not cost a drop of Roman
blood.”
This was a case of the Romans winning by the drunken-
ness of their foes, and it is not the only case; but the same
author gives us a graphic account of Roman intoxication
also. “ The whole city,” he says, “ seemed to be inflamed
with frantic rage, and at the same time intoxicated with
drunken pleasures. . . . Thrice had Rome seen
enraged armies under her walls, but the unnatural security
and inhuman indifference that now prevailed were beyond
all example.”
And yet, is it not strange that people should be proud
of their drinking habits ? Do we not think it absurd of
Cyrus and Darius to boast of their capacity for indulgence 1
They are not at all peculiar. In Persia at this very time
a man never thinks he has acted with true hospitality
until “ he has made his guests so drunk that they cannot
find their way out of the room. The more they reel and
stagger about the less reason has he to regret the expense
of the feast.” In the times of the Roman historian and
naturalist Pliny, men, and women too, drank for wagers.
Pliny tells us that they took hemlock before drinking so
that they might terrify themselves by the fear of death
into drinking the wine as an antidote. Some made them-
selves vomit so that they might make a fresh start. Others
went and had a hot bath, and were carried out half dead
Caius Piso was a sort of champion, his fame resting on the
reputation of being able to stay “ for two days and nights
drinking without intermission, or even stirring from the
table.” Tiberius knighted Torquatus with this title:
Tricongius - the three gallon knight, because he could
drink three gallons without taking breath ! Another
Roman was called Tergilla, because he could manage two
in the same way. It was said that the Emperor Maximin
could drink six gallons and not be drunk ! According to
Athenaeus, when the Romans were bent on a real ‘jolly
time” they made their slaves get drunk “that they may be
at no advantage over their masters, and at last, host, guest,
men, women and slaves, mingle in the wildest riot and
confusion.


1 need not inform you that they were as bad in Athens
as in Rome. And to think the women, too, should have
bequeathed their names through the storms of centuries
for no other reason than that of their inebriety ! It is
pitiful. Whoever would have heard of, cared about, or
wished to know Eopyra, but for the mention of her by
Alexis 1 Even now I cannot tell you whether she was
Miss or Mrs., maid or married, mother or minx. All I can
learn is that Alexis speaks of her as
Zopyra, that wine-cask.
Phaltecus mentions another woman drunkard :
Cleo bestow’d this splendid gift on Bacchus,
The tunic, fringed with gold and saffron hues,
Which long she wore herself ; so great she was
At feasts and revelry : there was no man
Who could at all contend with her in drinking.”
One would imagine these women fit companions for Odin,
the Scandinavian Bacchus “ Odin ” says Har, in Grimms-
mal, “ gives the meat that is set before him to two wolves,
called Geri and Ereki, for he himself stands in no need of
food. Wine is for him both meat and drink.”
They should, indeed, with many others equally unfor-
tunate, have been of the old Norse family with access to
Valhalla in extremis. “For the she-goat, named Heidrun,
stands above Valhalla, and feeds on the leaves of a very
famous tree called Lserath, and from her teats flows mead
(beer) in such great abundance that every day a stoop,
large enough to hold more than would suffice for all the
heroes, is filled with it.”
Truly these people of the North gave the soft and olived
skinned Southerners a start in their drinking bouts.
Samuelson quotes Hans Sachs for “an account of a
druhken tournament which he had witnessed, where
twelve ‘ beer heroes’ succeeded in drinking from ‘ pots
and cans’ a tun of beer in six hours ! ”
Now do not run away with the idea that I am wandering
in a dream-land, among folk-lore and foreign folk. I say
Bacchus has put the seal of his reign on “ Merrie England ’


as much as on any of the countries I have mentioned.
Shakespeare gives England the palm for drinking :
I ago— Some wine, ho !
And let me the canakin clink, clink ;
And let me the canakin clink :
A soldier’s a man ;
A life’s but a span ;
Why then let a soldier drink.
Some wine, boys. (Wine brought in.)
CassiO —’Fore heaven, an excellent song.
lago—l learned it in England, where, indeed, they are most
potent in potting. Your Dane, your German, and your swag-
bellied Hollander,—Drink, oh !—are nothing to your English.
Cassio —Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking ?
lago— Why he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk ;
he sweats not to overthrow your Almain ; he give 9 your Hollander a
vomit ere the next pottle can be filled !
Cassio— To the health of our general !
Mon. —l am for it, lieutenant, and I will do you justice.
lago— o sweet England,!
This view of “sweet England” was certainly shared by
Thomas Young, who published a work in 1617 entitled
England's Bane , or the Description oj Drunkennesses and
who says :
“ There are in London drinking schools : so that
drunkennesse is professed with us as a liberall arte and
science. ... I have seen a company amongst the very
woods and forests drinking for a muggle. Sixe determined
to trie their strengthe who could drinke most glasses for
the muggle. The first drinks a glasse of a pint, the second
two, the next three, and so every one multiplieth till the
last taketh sixe. Then the first beginneth againe and
taketh seven, and in this manner they drinke thrice a-piece
round, every man taking a glasse more than his fellow, so
that he that dranke least, which was the first, dranke one
and twenty pints, and the sixth man thirty-six.”
Certainly my quotation scarcely gives us a shadow of a
hint as to what the decoction was of which the bibulous
Englishman could swallow four gallons and a half, but the
author appears to leave the point I moot, purposely ambigu-
ous, as much as to say, all drinks come alike to a thirsty
Cockney.


The Russ drinks quass ; Dutch, Lubeck beer,
And that is strong and mighty ;
The Briton, he metheglin quaffs,
The Irish aqua vitce.
The French affects the Orleans grape,
The Spaniard tastes his sherry ;
The English none of these can ’scape,
But he with all makes merry.
In my last lecture I read to you a passage from Plutarch
of the Bacchantic march of the Great Alexander and his
army. Even that has its parallels in English history.
Dr. Eddy says, “ Drunken feasting seems to have charac-
terised both ecclesiastical and secular occasions. An
instance of the former is found in the account that when
the Archbishop of Canterbury was enthroned, a fish
banquet was given, at which the following drink provision
was made : 1 Six tuns of red wine, four of claret wine, one
of choice white wine, one of white wine for the kitchen,
one butt of Malmsey, one pipe of wine of Osey, two tierces
of Rhenish wine, four tuns of London ale, six of Kentish
ale, and twenty of English beer.’ A striking instance of
the latter is found in the fact of the general statement of
Harrison, that Queen Elizabeth’s visits to her nobility were
a great oppression to them by reason of the cost of her
luxurious entertainment; and by the special instance cited
by Hume, of her visit to the Earl of Leicester, whereat,
‘ among other particulars, we are told that three hundred
and sixty-five hogsheads of beer were drunk.’”
The quotation from the book I have just closed refers to
the “ virtuous” Queen Bess, our English Cleopatra. Then
what must the English Alexanders have been in their
entertainments ? Listen to what R. Y. French says :
“ The pageant, or royal entertainment, on the accession
of Richard 11. is described by the chronicler Walsingham.
The city was most richly adorned, and the conduits ran
with wine for three hours. In the upper end of the Cheap
was erected a castle with four towers, on the two sides of
which ran forth wine abundantly. In the tower were
placed four beautiful girls dressed in white, who on the
King’s approach, blew in his face leaves of gold, and filling


cups of gold with wine at the sprouts of the castle,
presented them to the King and his nobles.”
Here was not only Bacchus, but his Maenads ; not only
Alexander, but the “ Bacchanalian procession.” However,
let us continue. “ The citizens had signified their joy in
much the same way before, when Edward I. returned from
the Holy Land. Maitland, in his London , seems to have
regarded with wonder the fact that the very conduits in
the streets through which the cavalcade passed ran with
wine; but it happened before, and happened very often
afterwards. Mr. Moorehead fell into the same error, and
exclaims—‘ To this extravagance there are few parallels,
except that of Polemkin, when Be gave a magnificent feast
to the Empress Catherine at his palace in the Taurida,
when the conservatory fountains were filled with cham-
pagne and claret, and served to the company by means of
silver pumps applied to those reservoirs.’ ” Again he
says—“ Henry IV. came to the throne in 1399. A
pageant of the kind already mentioned was held. Frois-
sart notices that there were seven fountains in Cheapside,
and other streets he passed through, which perpetually ran
with white and red wines.”
“One of the most magnificent pageants fon * record
welcomed Anne Boleyn to the City of London in 1533.
At Gracechurch Corner was erected the Mount Parnasus,
with the fountain of Helicon. It was formed of white
marble. Four streams rose an ell high and met in a cup
above the fountain, which ran copiously till night with
Rhenish wine. At the great Conduit in Cheap a fountain
fan continuously, at one end white wine, at the other claret,
all the afternoon.”
Very few of our Sovereigns in England have been
abstemious patterns of sobriety. King Edmund the Elder
died through a drunken spree ; King Edward was stabbed
whilst drinking a cup of claret given him by Elfrida, his
step-mother; King Ethelred, when drunk and by means
of the drunkenness of others, was the instigator and
abettor of murder and massacre; Hardicanute, who spent
days and nights feasting and carousing, fell dead when


drinking at a wedding ; D’Aubigne says King John died
of drunkenness and fright ; Edward the Fourth died in
1483 “under a violent fever aggravated by excess ;” “the
early life of Henry V. was a course of dissipation ; ” Henry
VIII. was scarcely ever sober ; his chief friend, Wolsey,
was put in the stock for being drunk at a fair ; James I.
was an habitual drunkard, and would have got “ six
months without ihe option” if he had fallen into the hands
of a Redfern policeman. ■ Charles 11., “ the Merry
Monarch,” was known to his courtiers as “ the old goat
Macaulay says, “ Indeed there was no excess which was not
encouraged by the ostentatious profligacy of the King,”
and great suspicion surrounded his death. James 11. “was
almost, if not altogether, as great a libertine as his brother.”
William 111 after the death of Mary took to Holland gin.
Of the husband of Queen Anne, Charles 11. said, “ I have
tried Prince George drunk, and I have tried him sober, but
drunk or sober there is nothing in him and Macaulay
declares, “ All places where he could have his three courses
and his three bottles were alike to Prince George of Den-
mark, the husband of Queen Anne.” Davidson states
“ George 11. literally kept a seraglio, with the Oriental
accessories of two negro eunuchs, Mustapha and Mahomet.”
George the Fourth was so drunk on his wedding day that
his brother could scarcely keep him on his feet whilst the
ceremony was being performed, and he “ fairly astonished
his Grace of Canterbury by from his knees before
the ceremony was half over.” I could say much more, for
I could give a whole course of lectures—and may do so—
on the subject of drunken and immoral monarchs, but I
have lifted the royal curtain sufficiently for one night, and
I will leave the Royal Princess who drank the whole of the
sacramental wine from her goblet, and seemed to sigh for
more, and the Duke of Clarence who is reported to have
been drowned whilst a prisoner in the Tower in a butt of
Malmsey wine, and the generally majestic mischiefs of
miserable monarchs and corrupt courts to treatment at
another time.


Do not imagine for one moment, however, that drinking
was the especial vice and lnxurions prerogative of royalty
and regal and courtly associations. Men who have been in
no sense of the word courtiers have been dwarfed, cor-
rupted and ruined by “ the maddening god.” Byron and
Burns, Parnell and Pope, Cowley and Coleridge ; Theodore
Hook, Addison and Lamb; Dryden, Hartley and Steele
all men of powerful intellect and lofty parts, either caused
or hastened their deaths, embittered their lives, lowered
the flights of their genius, curtailed their mighty labours
and planted thorns for their own feet, poisoned the
fountains of their own happiness and plucked the feathers
from the wings of respectful friendship by their prostration
at the shrine of Bacchus. Even the great Pitt was repre-
sented in his time “ under the character of Bacchus, and
his friend Dundas under that of Silenus, in a caricature
entitled The Wine Diety , or the Triumph oj Bacchus and
Silenus.” Mrs. Matthews gives a description of him when
her husband, Mr. Matthews, the commedian, was admitted
into his presence. “My husband’s eye glanced from face
to face, in fear that he was too late to behold the only one
he came to see, and having hastily scanned each counte-
nance, his quick eye being familiar with Gilray’s and other
likenesses of the Prime Minister, could not fail to recog-
nise, though in a haze, in the sharp features of the long,
slim personage seated at the top of the table, the political
guiding-star of Britain, the great son of the great Chatham,
the dignified statesman, the observed of all observers—
undisturbed by the entrance of the new guest —gravely,
and even thoughtfully, employed in collecting the wine-
glasses within his reach and piling them one upon another,
as high as they could balance, and then with the fragments
of the dessert pelting them down in pieces (the crash and
suppressed mirth heard by my husband at his entre being-
occasioned by the destruction of the first batch), and not till
all the glasses upon the table were, in auctioneer’s phrase,
showed up did the mighty perpetrator think of desisting.”
When he was the “ model Minister ” he broke down in the
House because of a debauch the previous night at Lord


Buckingham’s. Fox more than once took his seat in the
House of Commons absolutely intoxicated, and Walpole says,
“Fox’s abilities areamazing at so very early a period, especially
under the circumstances of such a dissolute life. He was just
arrived from Newmarket, had sat up drinking all night, and
had not been in bed.” Walpole himself was a devotee. When
he was a young man his father used to say to him, “ Come,
Robert, you shall drink twice while I drink once; for I
will not permit the son in his sober senses to be witness to
the intoxication of his father.” Sheridan, the author of
“ School for Scandal,” and one of the most brilliant wits,
racy and instructive orators, and accomplished authors of
his day, was a tavern frequenter and was frequently
inebriated. “We left Madame de Stael’s together,” says
an author in the Dublin University Magazine , “ and
supped at a tavern in Oovent Garden, where we remained
until four o’clock in the morning. It was in the middle
of June, and Sheridan walked home to his residence,with
his long swmrd clattering on the pavement, and his cocked
hat rather awry on his head, followed by a large mob of
admirers, and pelted with cabbage stumps and the offal of
the street.” When he was staying with Lord Holland he
told Moore that he always took a book and a bottle of wine
to bed with him, and of course he did not swallow the
book, and generally the only thing he opened was the
bottle. r He took spirits with his morning tea or coffee,
and on his way from Holland House to town invariably
stopped at the old roadside inn, the Adam and Eve, where
he ran up a long bill, which Lord Holland was left the
privilege of paying.”
Intellectual greatness was no shield against the Diony-
sian weapons, as you observe. Lawmakers have proverbi-
ally broken nearly, if not quite, all the laws against drink.
I ask you to refrain from smiling, for despite of appear-
ances, the Parliament of New South Wales is as sober as
any similar body in the world, and perhaps more so.
According to Knight, the historian, a Parliament which
met at Edinburgh in 1661 “has been honored with the
name of the ‘drunken Parliament.’” Of the English


Parliament in 1666 Evelyn writes :—“ Among other things
Sir R. Ford did make me understand low the House of
Commons is a beast not to be understood, it being impos-
sible to know beforehand the success almost of any small
plain thing. . . . He did tell me, and so did Sir W.
Batten, how Sir Allen Brodericke and Sir Allen Apsly
did come drunk the other day into the House, and did
both speak for half an hour together, and could not be
either laughed, or pulled, or bid to sit down and hold their
peace.” And so late as May, 1834, Lord Jeffrey, in a
letter to Lord Cockburn, says—“ I had a jolly dinner with
the Scotch members on Tuesday, about thirty-two present,
two Tories, (Jumming Bruce and Pitfour. Apologies in
very kind terms from Sir William Rae, and about a dozen
of our friends. They stayed till one o’clock, and were not
all sober.” And to show that they are not altogether sober
legislators over in America, even, I will make another
quotation from a splendid little work called “ Republican
Superstitions”—“ We were temporarily successful in voting
in Committee to stop dealing out strong drink to the sailors
and marines in our navy, though this, too, was ultimately
defeated ; but, in the first flush of our delusive triumph, a
member sitting near me, who had voted to stop the grog
ration, said to a friend who, I believe, had voted the same
way, ‘ Gid, that was a glorious vote we have just taken.’
‘ Yes, glorious,’ was the ready response, ‘ Gid,’ resumed
the elated reformer, ‘ let us go and take a drink on the
strength of it.’ ‘ Agreed,’ was the willing echo ; and they
went.”
That fundamental essence of mankind called “ human
nature” seems to possess the same characteristics in king
and peasant, poet and toiler, statesman and subject. All
are pregnable to the assaults of Drink ; all may be victims
to its ravages. One may smile when reading Smollet’s
“ Histoi-y of England,” when he states—“ Such a shameful
degree of profligacy prevailed,” in the eighteenth century,
“ that the retailers of this poisonous compound set up
Painted boards in public, inviting people to be drunk for
the small expense of one penny; assuring them they


might be dead drunk for twopence, and have straw for
nothing. They accordingly provided cellars and places
strewed with straw, to which they conveyed those
wretches who were overwhelmed with intoxication.” But
there is no occasion for merriment in such pitiful facts.
They are not so old as to be historical fossils, lifeless
remnants of extinct customs, buried for ever in the barbaric
strata of experience. They have their living descendants
in our daily lives, they accost us in our public thorough-
fares, they arrest us at our street corners. They are so
real, so vital and so present with us that we cannot afford
to laugh at them.
Laugli ! Why in this young land there should be a
baptism of tears. Sleeping under the soft south breezes
laden with the brine of the ocean rest the remains of
Henry Kendall. What tenderness, what sweet poesie,
what gentle dreams, what happy imagination, what
musical pathos, what love of wood-sprites and fairies, and
what whisperings from mountain and sea, from fern dells
and waratah forests are buried in his grave at Waverley ?
O Bacchus ! thy robes are red with his life’s blood ! And
who would not shed tears of pity for Adam Lindsay
Gordon ? How his lyre sounded the minor strains of
human existence, as though his singing were the sighing
of dispairing souls, standing with sunken heads, saying
with sweetest sorrow, beware ! beware! The sound of
clattering hoofs, the prancing of neighing steeds, the
clamour of victory when “ we beat the favourite” died
away on Brighton beach when Bacchus murdered this
child of the muses, What eloquence is hushed in
Deneihey ! The voice that had a key to every heart, that
offered counsel in a nation’s need, that directed the hopes
and passions of the multitude as the horseman governs his
chariots fell into everlasting silence under the blighting
shadow of a Bacchic temple.
I have stood recently by the grave of a man I knew in
life who was a thinker, a teacher, a reformer. His friends
have erected a modest monument to his memory over his
early grave. No one can measure what we have lost by


bis death. How well I remember the time when I stood
on the same platform with him, but his great gifts are now
like jewels lost in the ocean, or like the music to memory
when the harp strings are broken. The destroying curse
of drink pronounced his doom, and he was taken to the
silent city, misjudged, when the tree of his work had not
yet blossomed, whilst he had but pronounced the prelude
to his speech, ere he had seen the first streaks of the dawn
of a day of thankfulness to him.
Do you mock me for giving these lectures ? Do you
sneer at the work lam trying to do ? I have tasted of the
poison, I have had the fetters upon me, I have writhed in
the agonising thraldom of the serpent-king. I know what
these men felt and suffered. I have walked in the shadows
with Clarke, with Greenwood, and with Garrett. O that I
might partake of the grandeur and greatness of their living
souls ! But with such feeble powers as I may claim I tell
you I hear the warning from these fresh-filled graves, and.
I repeat that warning unto you. From the tomb of the
memories in mv own breast I warn you against that palsy
to effort, that paralysis to good, that sepulchre of hope, of
love, of life, which are intoxication’s gifts. I tell you the
tyrant is as powerful as ever, and the living are as feeble
in his hands to-day as were our departed brothers during
the battles they fought. Their deaths did not exhaust the
viper’s poison. The fangs of the serpent are yet full of
venom, and I bid you beware lest it enters your blood. I
s ay there lurks for the unwary of this audience in every
liquor saloon, in every drinking house, a protean monster
w ith all the weapons of disaster and destruction, all the
wiles and machinations of enchantment, all the destroying
agencies and potencies of evil in his grasp. We may shut
OUr eyes and refuse to see him—but he is there, We may
Play and trifle with him, but he will kill us in the end.
We may even call him our friend, but hell contains no
more bitter, no more terrible a foe.


III.
I am convinced of one thing since I commenced these
lectures—the magnitude and terrible danger of the alcoholic
evils; the insidious, malefic and universal powers of Bacchus
are not fully comprehended even by the most enlightened
in our midst. Society, whilst maligning the drunkard, and
whilst finding no language too severe, no contempt too
keen, no punishment too harsh for drunkenness, takes the
initiative step, and gives sanction, encouragement, and
opportunity for every succeeding stage of the Bacchanals’
downward course. No great or solemn event of our lives
escapes the Bacchic ordeal. So simple an episode as
' christening—whether we be called Jack or Nebuchadnezzar,
Polly, Susan, or Bridget—means a resort to the decanter,
and possibly to intoxication. When we are mai-ried we
must furnish the “ best ” of liquors for our friends, and on
such an occasion we have every excuse for the guests who
“ won’t go home till morning; ” and, if the occasion be
more solemn, and we have to watch by the bed whereon is
sleeping in the everlasting rest some dear one who loved us
fondly in life, the bottle must be passed round. When we
deliver the “earth to earth, the ashes to ashes, and the
dust to dust,” we must follow the fashion and imbibe the
poison. Aye, that is the calamity. We must follow the
fashion ! We must drink when we are not thirsty, swallow
what we do not wish, and gulph down a burning fluid just
to be in the common ! Be it so small a matter as the buy-
ing or selling of an ox or an ass, we must do it agreeably
to the palate, and patronise the landlord of the nearest
public-house When we make a new acquaintance we must
register the event in whisky; when we meet an unexpected
friend we must give the welcome in brandy; when we do
not know what to say to a stranger we say, with familiar
vulgarity, “ Come and have a wine ! ”


At morning we must have a “pick-me-up,” after breakfast
a “ refresher,” just before lunch an “ appetiser,” at lunch a
“ bottle,” before dinner a “ stimulant,” at dinner our wines
ad libitum, and before going to bed we must have a
“night-cap,” which—of all places in the world for a “night-
cap —we put in our stomachs.
When we are “ out on business ” or parading our busy
streets, the first person we meet, if we are at all acquainted
with him, asks us, or we ask him, to “ come and have a
glass 1” After he has paid for the contents of the glass,
just by way of avoiding being thought mean and to be in
the fashion, we tell the landlord to “ fill ’em again—mine’s
the same, please.” And if half-a-dozen others have come
into the “ bar,” and we recognise them, we “ shout ” for the
half-a-dozen as well, and by the time the glasses are once
more empty the half-a-dozen insist on returning the compli-
ment, and we empty them six times more; and then, if we
are sober enough, we start the round afresh.
Should we be invited to “ spend the evening ” at the
house of some friend, to patronise an evening party or any
“ social ” gathering, we must expect to be coaxed and pressed
into drinking. Anything on a grand scale—such as dinners,
balls, and banquets—must of necessity be plentifully pro-
vided with the nectar neither fit for devils nor men.
Would men act so stupidly if they comprehended the
dangers and possible consequences of these supposed
convivialities, these pretended hospitalities ? Would they
trifle and coquet with the devil if they knew the
length of his pitch-fork ? Would they help to sharpen
the teeth of the monster if they knew the strength of its
jaws? Yet this is what “society” does. I have often
heard an apology offered, when I have been making a
casual visit, for there being a lack of “something in the
house,” as though the only “something” people are ashamed
to be without is “ fire-water ”in some shape or other. If
you are travelling, and the weather is hot, you will be
invited to take a “drop of cool beer” to cool you; if the
weather is cold, you are told to take a whisky to warm
you ;if the weather is “ dry,” you must take a wet; and if


it is raining, you are offered brandy “ to keep the wet out.”
If you are taken ill in any way, from toothache to cholera,
the dram is the universal remedy; if a young lady becomes
exhausted at a party, and falls gently back into a magnetic
lover’s arms, the dainty flask is in instant requisition. If
you are weak, you must drink stout, if you are strong, you
must still drink stout “to keep your strength up.” If you
are dull and sleepy, you must take “a reviver;” and if
you cannot go to sleep, you must “take another glass ”to
induce somnolence ” If you are lean, you are ordered
beer; and if you are fat, you are prescribed spirits. If
you have had a fortune left you, you are expected to get
“jolly;” and if you are “down in the dumps,” you get
drunk. Be what you will, do what you will, “society”
offers you drink. There is an excuse for every occasion,
and there is occasion for every excuse—society likes it.
“Yes,” says Count Leon Tolstoi, “the common orders
are savages; but without fail on one day every January
the newspapers publish the following notice : — 1 The banquet
of old pupils of the Imperial University of Moscow will
take place on the 12th January, the anniversary of its
foundation, at five o’clock in the afternoon, in such-and-such
a restaurant Tickets may be procured, at a cost of six
roubles, at such-and-such a place.’ But this is not the
only banquet. There are many others besides—at Mos-
cow, St. Petersburg, at almost every town in the provinces
—for the 12th J anuary is the anniversary of the founda-
tion of our oldest University; it is the celebration of
progress and of civilisation in Russia. The flower of
intellect meet together on that solemn occasion. One
would think that men situated at the two extremes
of civilisation, like the semi-savage moujiks and the most
highly-educated men in Russia—the moujiks, who feast St.
Peter and St. Paul, and educated men, who celebrate a
feast of intellect—would conduct themselves in a manner
altogether different from one another. It nevertheless
happens that the feast of the most educated men, in its
exterior form, is distinguished in nothing from that of the
uncultured moujiks. The moujiks do not concern them


selves as to the signification of the feast of St. Peter
or St. Paul; for them it is simply a pretext for inordinate
eating and drinking. Cultured men take advantage in
the same way of the anniversary of St. Tatiana to eat
and to drink without otherwise enquiring as to the motive
which has brought them together. The moujiks eat soup
and calves’ feet jelly; the cultured classes eat homards,
filets, cheese, &c. The moujiks drink brandy and beer,
and the educated men all kinds of liqueurs, fine champagne,
dry and sweet wines, tart or sugared, white or black, &c.
The cost to each moujik varies from twenty kopecks to a
rouble; that of the cultured man from six to twenty roubles.
The moujiks protest their good feeling for their neigh-
bours and sing popular songs. The cultured men speak of
their attachment for alma mater , and with their clammy
mouths chant Latin inanities. The moujiks roll in the
gutter, and the cultured men on velvet divans. As for the
moujiks, their wives and sons fetch them home, while the
cultured men are conducted home by straight-faced and
jeering lacqueys.”
What is true of Russia in this respect is true of England
and true of Australia. High and low, the rich and poor
alike seize every opportunity and pretext for indulgence.
The pretext may be a holiday, but as holidays are far
apart every other event, from washing days to birthdays,
ls an excuse for an extra allowance. Jeremy Collier hit
the nail on the head when he satirically translated an in-
vitation to a dinner thus :—“ Sir, —If you please to do me
the favour to dine with me, I shall do my best to drink
you out of your limbs and senses, to make you say a
hundred silly things, and play the fool to purpose if ever
you did it in your life. And before we part you shall be
well prepared to tumble off your horse, to disoblige your
coach, and make your family sick at the sight of you.
And all this for an opportunity of showing with how much
friendship and respect, I am,
Your humble servant.


One would imagine that the chariot of society required
its axles saturated with wine in order to make it move
along, if we are to judge by the prevalence and antiquity
of our drinking customs. Viewed from the standpoint of
rational, sober sense, these customs are simply ridiculous.
This is how a native of India looked upon an European
entertainment given at Delhi in May, 1833 :—“ The gentle-
men of exalted dignity had a great feast last night, to
which all the military chiefs and lieutenants were invited.
There was a little, hog on the table before Mr. , who
cut it in small pieces, and sent some to each of the party ;
even the women ate of it. In their language a pig is called
ham. Having stuffed themselves with the unclean food,
and many sorts of flesh, taking plenty of wine, they made
for some time a great noise, which doubtless arose from
drunkenness. They all stood up, two or four times, crying
hip ! hip ! and roared before they drank more wine. After
dinner, they danced in their licentious manner, pulling
about each others wives.” I say the Indian only took a
commonsense view of the entertainment.
Let us look at some of these drinking customs for a few
minutes. You are at an entertainment, public or private,
and a flushed-faced personage rises to his feet and says,
“Gentlemen, fill your glasses. I am about to propose a
toast." What on earth does he mean 1 Oh, you reply,
they are going to drink a toast. Well, isn't toast rather
a funny thing to drink ? How did such an expression
originate 1 “ The origin of the word toast is much dis-
puted,” says French, “ and no better account of it is
forthcoming than that the word was taken from the toast
which was put into the tankard, and which still floats in
the loving cup. Hence the person named was the toast or
savour of the wine, that which gives the draught piquancy.”
As Wyther says :
Well he will drinke, yet but a draught at most,
That must be spiced with a nut browne tost.
Just imagine a gentleman at Chicago getting up and
saying, “ Gentlemen, the next toast is ‘ Success to our
Improved Pork and Sausage Factory.’” What a fine
piquancy that would be in our wine !


“ The way in which anything or anybody that one drank
a health to came to be called a toast has baffled derivation
hunters of all degrees, and we are no wiser to-day than we
were in 1709, when Isaac Bickerstaffe, in the twenty-fourth
number of the newly-established Tatler , attempted to settle
the matter by saying how, at Bath, in the times of Charles
11., a celebrated beauty happened to be in the Cross-Bath,
and out of the crowd of her admirers who were in the room
one of them took from her bath a cup of the water in
which the lady was standing, and drank her health to the
company. Another of her admirers who was present, being
intoxicated, instead of pledging or drinking in response to
the sentiment, announced his intention of jumping into the
water and carrying off the bather, swearing that though
he liked not the liquor, yet he would have the toast. He
was opposed in his resolution; yet this whim gave foundation
to the present honour which is due to the lady we mention
in our liquor, who has ever since been called a toast. It is
far more likely that, as Ellis observes, the use of the word
on this occasion was a consequence of its previous employ-
ment for a like purpose, and not the cause of its being
adopted. It is probable that toast came to be used in the
sense it is stated to have been by the bath gallant,
gradually, at first meaning a mere material relish or
improvement to a glass of liquor, and afterwards getting
to be applied to the 1 sentimental relish,’ or, as Sheridan
truly calls it, ‘ the excuse for the glass.’ Toasted bread
formed a favourite addition to English drinks so early as
the sixteenth century, and in the cups of sack and punch
hrown toasts frequently floated at the top.”
Brand, who is generally admitted to be critical and exact,
says of this story in his “ Popular Antiquities ” (Bohn’s
Edition, vol. ii., p. 340): —“Though unable to controvert
this account, lamby no means satisfied with it. The wit
here is likelier to have been a consequence than the cause of
this singular use of the word, and puts me in mind of the
well-known reply of a Mr. Brown, who, on having it
obesrved to him that he had given a certain young lady a
long while for a toast, answered— ‘ Yes; but I have not
heen able to toast her hrovm yet.’ ”


In the “New Help to Discourse, 1864,” is the following
anagram :
“A toast is like a sot—or, what is most
Comparative, a sot is like a toast—
For when their substances in liquor sink,
Both properly are said to be in drink.”
Whatever be the origin of the word, it is still used for
an excuse for drinking, and as such, of course, is as old as
Bacchus. The drinking of “ healths ” was an old Roman
custom ; and I think I showed you in my last lecture
that it was a prevalent Scandinavian custom long before
the time of Christianity. You have all heard of the story
told by Nennius and Geoffrey of Monmouth, how Hengist,
the Saxon chieftain, the first Anglo-Saxon king, won the
province of Kent from Vortigern, the British king.
Hengist gave a feast, and ordered his daughter to give the
king as much ale as he could take. As soon as the feast
was over, the Saxon beauty left her chamber, “ bearing a
golden cup full of wine, with which she approached the
king, and, making a low courtesy, said to him : ‘ Lauerd
King wacht heil ! ’ The king, at the sight of the lady’s
face, was on a sudden both surprised and inflamed with her
beauty, and, calling to his interpreter, asked him what she
said, and what answer he should make her. ‘ She called
you “ Lord King,” ’ said the interpreter, ‘ and offered to
drink your health; your answer to her must be, “ Drinc
heil!”’ Vortigern accordingly answered, ‘Drinc heil!’
and bade her drink; after which he took the cup from her
hand, kissed her, and drank himself.” And thus, after
becoming intoxicated, Vortigern fell in love with her,
married her, and prepared the way to Saxon Royalty by
the gift to Hengist of the province of Kent in exchange for
the hand of the fair Rowena—shall I say, the first Royal
barmaid ?
It is from this doubtful episode in English history that
the custom of Wassail drinking is said to have arisen. “It
appears,” says Brand, “from Thomas de la Moore’s ‘Life
of Edward 11.,’ that Was-haile and Drinc-hail were the
usual ancient phrases of quaffing among the English, and


synonymous with the ‘Come, here’s to you,’ and ‘l’ll pledge
you,’ of the present day.”
“ This is ther custom and her gest
When thei are at the ale or fest.
Ilk man that lovis qware him think
Salle say Wosseille, and to him drink
He that bidis salle say, Wassaile,
The tother salle say again DrinJchaille.
That says Wosseille drink is of the cop,
Kiss and his felaw he gives it up.”
I have not the time, and I do not think you have the
inclination to listen, or I could give you quotations of a
number of tales and songs of the Wassel, Christmas, and
New Year’s Eve drinking customs still in vogue in our
Merry England, or certainly only very recently extinct
among the old gentry. I will only give you one instance
of the curious old customs of Wassailing in Herefordshire :
“ At the approach of the evening on the vigil of the Twelfth
Day, the farmers, with their friends and servants, meet
together, and about 6 o’clock walk out to a field where
wheat is growing. In the highest part of the ground,
twelve small fires and one large one are lighted up The
attendants, headed by the master of the family, pledge the
company in old cider, which circulates Jreely on these
occasions. A circle is formed round the large fire, when a
general shout and hallooing takes place, which you hear
answered from all the adjacent villages and fields. Some-
times fifty or sixty of these fires may be all seen at once.
This being finished, the company return home, where the
good housewife and her maids are preparing a good supper.
A large cake is always provided, with a hole in the middle.
After supper, the company all attend the bailiff (or head of
the oxen) to the wain-house, where the following particulars
ai 'c observed—The master, at the head of his friends, fills
the cup (generally of strong ale), and stands opposite the
first or finest of the oxen He then pledges him in a
curious toast; the company follow his example with all the
other oxen, and addressing each by his name. This being
finished, the large cake is produced and, with much cere-
mony, p u t on the horn of the first ox, through the hole


above mentioned. The ox is then tickled to make him toss
his head. If he throw the cake behind, it is then the
mistress’s perquisite; if before (in what is termed the
boosey), the bailiff himself claims the prize. The company
then return to the house, the doors of which they find
locked, nor will they be opened till some joyous songs are
sung. On their gaining admittance, a scene of mirth and
jollity ensues, which lasts the greatest part of the night.”
This seems to indicate, to me at least, a connection
between the wassailing custom in Herefordshire in 1791
(and later) and the worship of Bacchus among the ancients.
The wine, the cake, the oxen (and the ivy which was often
associated with these customs) were all Dionysian charac-
teristics. The Bull Apis was sacred to Bacchus in Egypt,
and Bacchus himself was often depicted with horns, notably
in Phrygia under his name Zagraeus, and one of his symbols
is a pair of horns. Moreover, we often see an image of
the god on public-house signs with unmistakable horns.
“ Awake ! ” says a curious writer in the time of Charles
11., “ Awake ? thou noblest drunkard, Bacchus, thou must
likewise stand to me (if, at least, thou canst for reeling),
teach me how to take the German’s Op sijn frize, the
Danish Rowsa, the Switzer’s Stoop of Rhenish, the Italian
Parmasant, the Englishman’s health and frolicks. Hide
not a drop of thy moist mystery from me, thou plumpest
swill-bowl.”
As to the custom of “ pledging,” in his “History of Great
Britain, ’ Dr. Henry states : —“lf an Englishman presumed
to drink in the presence of a Dane without his express
permission, it was esteemed so great a mark of disrespect
that nothing but his instant death could expiate. Nay,
the English were so intimidated that they would not
adventure to drink even when they were invited, until
the Danes had pledged their honour for their safety, which
introduced the custom of pledging each other in drinking”
Wise says:—“The custom of pledging healths, still pre-
served among Englishmen, is said to be owing to the
Saxon’s mutual regard for each other’s safety, and as a


caution against the treacherous inhospitality of the Danes
when they came to live in peace with the natives.”
Strutt attributes the origin of the custom to the death
of King Edward, who was treacherously stabbed whilst
drinking, through the treachery of Elfrida, his step-mother,
and of which I made mention in my last lecture. He has
an interesting passage which I will quote. “The old
manner of pledging each other when they drank was thus :
The person who was going to drink asked one of the
company who sat next him whether he would pledge him,
on which he, answering that he would, held up his knife or
sword to guard him whilst he drank ; for while a man is
drinking he necessarily is in an unguarded posture, exposed
to the treacherous stroke of some hidden or secret
enemy.”
Many strange habits have surrounded this custom, and
the multiplicity of volumes in which- they are mentioned
or described renders it difficult for me to make appropriate
selections for a popular audience. In Beaumont and
Fletcher’s time it was the habit of young gallants to draw
their own blood from their arms “in order to drink the
healths of their mistresses, or to write their names in their
own blood.”
I stab’d mine arm to drink her health
The more fool 1, the more fool I,
says am old song. In some instances the cups were measured
in suitable proportions with pins or nails, and the drinker
rained the draught down to the pin level, and the custom
Was called inn-drinking. The peg-tankards held two quarts,
a nd inside there was a row of eight pegs, so that between
pins there was half-a-pint, which Archbishop Dunstan had
limited as the allowance of drinkers, forbidding them to
take more, with as little utility as our Sunday trading
|aws, for pin-drinking became a sport and an art, and the
ankard was repeatedly replenished. Another custom was
. le ‘breaking of glasses.” “We never were glass-breakers
in this house,” says Mr. Oldbuck in the Antiquary. “At
m rejoicing in Edinburgh for the Restoration, at the Lord
•ovosts return, he was at every bonfire complimented


with the breaking of glasses.” Besides mixing blood with
their wine, some mixed liquid rubbish with it; and there
is an account of two young men at Oxford University
testing the strength of their relative amours in this way.
One mixed a tablespoonful of soot with his wine, and the
other, to prove that his love was stronger, emptied a phial
of ink in his glass, and drank it, exclaiming, “Io triumphe
and Miss Molly ! ” Some ladled the wines in a lady’s shoe ;
others went down on their knees to drink. There was the
custom, too, of Supernaculum. “To drink supernaculum”
says Brand, “ was an ancient custom not only in England,
but also in several other parts of Europe, of emptying the
cup or glass, and then pouring the drop or two that
remained at the bottom upon the person’s nail that drank
it, to show that he was no flincher.” Then there was the
drinking over the right thumb.
“ Then Phillip began her health,
And turn’d a beer-glass on his thumb ;
But Jenkin was reckon’d for drinking
The best in Christendom.”
But equally absurd with these is a description of health-
drinking in “Boss’ Yacht Voyage to Norway”:—“After
dinner the host tilled two glasses of wine— one for himself
and one for me—and, sliding close up to my chair, placed
himself arm-in-arm with me. I could not understand his
meaning, and watched with no little anxiety the next act
of familiarity he would commit. My eyes glanced round the
table, but the gravity of every man’s face was catechetical
gravity in the extreme. Without unlocking his arm from
mine, the Norwegian raised his glass in the air, and
motioned with his hand for me to do the same. I did so.
He then drank off the wine, and bade me drink in like
manner. I did that likewise. I had thus followed my
friend’s injunctions, and had scarcely, with a smile, replaced
on the table the glass I had drained when I received a box
on the ear. Starting from my chair at this unprovoked
assault, 1 was about to break the decanter over the
Norwegian’s head, when a great gent seized hold of my
right hand, and begged me to be pacified, for that it was


merely the usage of the country in pledging to the health
of a friend, lie said my host would be highly gratified by
my retaliation. ‘We have been simply, then, drinking
each others healths ?’ I asked. I No more, sir,’ my mediator
replied. Ashamed of my hasty and most unmannerly con-
duct, I gave the amicable cuff, and all was merriment
again.”
Notwithstanding all this absurd pledging, I ask you to
take the pledge to-night for ever and for ever.
What accentuates the evil of a myriad drinking customs
is that they have been intimately associated with sacred
ceremonies and religious practices. At marriages, as I
have already intimated, drink was an essential. The ale
for the occasion was called bride-ale, because the bride sold
the ale on her wedding day, the cost of it having been
defrayed by her friends and relatives. It was called also
bride-stake, bride wain, and bride-bush. The bush was a
general sign for an ancient public-house, and reminds us
once more very forcibly of the thirsi of Bacchus and the
jvy-bushes of the Bacchanals. Remember also the glass-
ing at Jewish weddings, an ancient simi'ar custom in
the Greek Church, and the proverb, “ Good wine needs no
bush.” When Phillip was married to Queen Mary in the
Winchester Cathedral, 1554, “the trumpetts sounded, and
cy both returned, hand-in-hand, to their traverses in the
c l Ulre , and there remayned until mase was done; at which
j'yme wyne and sopes were hallowed, and delivered to them
ooth.” Bear in mind this drinking took place in the
c narch, or, at all events, in the porch, and bowls or cups
' Vere kept in the churches for the purpose. The cup had
0 be blessed by the priest, the Sarum Missal giving the
w ords to be used by him :
P r oferatu iSSam ’ panis 6t vinum ’ vel dliud bonum potabile, in vasculo
. n illusion is here made to the bread-sops as well as the
ine which the cup was to profer. But it was after the
ding that the bulk of the drinking was done. In a
CQ 0r 5 bating from 1543, the author says:—“When they
home from the church, then beginneth excesse of


eatyng and drynking, and as much is waisted in one daye
as were sufficient for the two newe-maried folkes halfe a
year to lyve upon.”
Let me give you a list of ales : Bid-ale, bride-ale, church-
ale, clerk-ale, Easter-ale, give-ale, help-ale, lamb-ale. leet-
ale, midsummer-ale, scot-ale, tithe-ale, weddyn-ale, Whit-
sun-ale, This list, which, of course, is not an exhaustive
one, clearly shows the strange admixture of religion and
drink, and proves the reality of the reign of Bacchus even
in Christian customs. As to the word “ ale,” Douce says
that from its use in composition with the words I have just
recited it means nothing more than a feast or merry
making. . . . At all these feasts ale appears to have
been the predominant liquor, and it is exceedingly probable
that from this circumstance the metonymy arose.”
Even the Honey moon of the newly-married takes us
back to paganism. The moon is everywhere a favourite
with lovers (on account of its mellow and subdued light, I
suppose), and it is often appealed to as a charm by the
poets and superstitious lovers, as Brand abundantly attests.
But H oney-moon scarcely signifies, as many suppose, a
sweet, honey-like prelude to marriage responsibilities, but
arose out of the pagan custom of drinking honey-ale or
mead, which, according to Henderson, it was customary to
indulge in after a wedding for a period of thirty days—the
space of a moon, a primitive method of reckoning time. I
wonder if they got sober on the thirty-first day ?
Ale is said to be identical with Yule, and to this day
"i ule means the festival at Christmas, or the time of the
sun’s return, at the winter solstice, to the North. This Yule
feast, we are informed, “everywhere prevailed in ancient
times, to celebrate a feast at the winter solstice,” and this
ale feast “ was the greatest solemnity of the year.”
“ One of the principal feasts,” says an author in 1784,
“ amon g t* ie Northern nations was the Juul, after-
wards called Yule, about the shortest day, which as Mr.
Mallet observes, bore a great resemblance to the Roman
Saturnalia. Recollecting that “ale” and Yule are iden-
tical, and that Yule is “the old name for Christmas,” Jet


iis open Mallet’s “Northern Antiquities” at page 110,
where I read, “ Sacrifices, feasting, nocturnal assemblies ,
and all the demonstrations of a most dissolute joy, were
then authorised by the general usage.” No wonder he
compares the feast to the Saturnalia of the Romans, for it
lias all the ingredients of a Bacchic festival, even to the
Christmas bush.
Brand gives it on the authority of Blount that York-
shiremen and others in the North of England used to cry
Ule , Ule, after the sermon or service on Christmas Day,
even whilst they were still in the church. They would
seem to carry the thyrsus itself in Yorkshire, for in
“ Leland’s Itinerary,” 1769, there is given the Yule
Proclamation :—“ 0 yes !We command of our liege lord’s
behalf the King of England (that God save and keepe),
that the peace of the King be well keeped and maynteyned
within the citty and suburbs, by night and by day, &c.
Also,that no common woman walke in the streets without
a grey hood on her head, and a white wand in her
hand, &c. . . . Also, that all manner of whores and
thieves, dice players, carders, and all other unthrifty folke,
he welcome to the towne, whether they come late or early,
att the reverence of the high feast of Youle, till the twelve
days be passed.” This would, indeed, have made a
®ete assemblage for the chorus in “ The Bacchanals” of
Euripides.
The Whitsun “ales” were of like character, and Brand
preserves some very curious bills contracted at these jovial
e stivities. He quotes the following :—“ There were _no
rates for the poor in my grandfather’s days; but for
Edugston St Michael (no small parish; the church-ale of
Whitsuntide did the business. In every parish is (or was)
church-house, to which belonged spits, crocks, &c., utensils
0r dressing provision. Here the housekeepers met and
were merry, and gave their charity. The young people
Were there too, and had dancing, bowling, shooting at
ai, ’ .^ c -> the ancients sitting gravely by and looking on.
things were civil and without scandal, The Church-Ale


is doubtless derived from the Ayourat,, or Love-feasts;
mentioned in the New Testament.”
I have already quoted from Livy a description of these
Love-feasts, but to connect the Agapae more directly with
Bacchus, I will read you an extract from a note to Owen
Powell Meredith’s “ Prophet of Nazareth.” On page 222 he
says : —“ The apostolic Agapse are traceable to the same
pagan source. The Eleusinian and Bacchanalian Feasts were
great renown, not only among the Greeks, but even as late
as the fourth century of the Christian era ; also among the
subjects of the Roman Empire, although, as late as this,
among the latter, only tolerated by Yalentinian the First.”
Mosheim tells us that in the first century the Christians
had “ oblations of bread and wine and other things ” after
their service. He says “ the distributors of the sacred
supper were the deacons; ” and these suppers, he avers,
were denominated agapce. He also states that in the fifth
century “ these feasts gave to many persons occasions for
sin.” Dr. French, Rector of Llanmartin and Rural Dean,
after telling us that Easter-ales and Whitsun-ales are simply
species of the Church-ale, says : —“ The idea is, without any
doubt, taken from the Agapce, or Love-feasts, so famous in
the early Church. Many of the features of these feasts
were revived in the wakes of the middle ages.” I shall
speak of these a little later on ; but just here let me observe
that my authorities certainly point to the conclusion that
Bacchus has apparently had as many ecclesiastical devotees
in England as he had in the olden times in Athens.
Stubbs, in his Anatornie Abuses (1585), appears to have
arrived at this conclusion. He says, on page 95 : —“ In
certain towns where dronkm Bacchus beares swaie against
Christmas and Easter, Whitsondaie or some other tyme,
the churchwardens of every parishe, with the consent of the
whole parishe, provide half a score or twentie quarters of
maulte, whereof some they buy of the churche stocke, and
some is given them of the parishioners themselves, every
one conferring somewhat, according to his abilitie; which
maulte, being made into very strong ale or bere, is sette to
sale, either in the churche or some other place assigned to


that purpose. Then when this is set abroche, well is he
that can gete the soonest to it, and spend the most at it.
In this kinde of practice they continue sixe weekes, a
quarter of a yeare, yea, lialfe a yeare together. That
money, they say, is to repaire their churches and chappels
with, to buy bookes for service, cuppes for the celebration
of the sacrament, surplesses for Sir John, and such other
necessaries, and they maintaine other extraordinarie charges
in their parishes besides.”
These Church-ales were often indulged in on the Sabbath
day, and William Kethe, in 1570, says they called that
holy day “their revelyng day, which day is spent in bull-
beatings, beare-beatings, bowlings, dicyng, cardyng, daun-
synges, drunkenness, and whoredom, in so much as men
could not keepe their servauntes from lyinge out of theyre
owne houses the same Sabbath day at night.”
The amount of money made by these Church-ales may be
judged from the churchwardens’ account in Kingston-upon-
Thames in 1526, wdiere the entry is made of £7 155., or
not much short of one hundred pounds at the present value
of money.
As to “ wakes,” they are certainly as old as the oldest
records of Egypt or China. They are undoubtedly of
anti-Christian origin, and have simply been adopted and
adapted by Christians. “As in the times of Paganism
annual festivals were celebrated,” says Brand, in opening
his second volume, “in honour and memory of their gods,
goddesses, and heroes, when the people resorted together at
their temples and tombs .... so it hath been an ancient
custom among the Christians of this island to keep a
feast every year, upon a certain week or day, in remem-
brance of the finishing of the building of their parish
church, and of the first solemn dedicating of it to their
service of God, and committing it to the protection of some
guardian saint or angel.”
I am going to quote Dr. French again, and I beg you to
notice the Bacchannal adjuncts or accessories to wakes :
“ Much confusion,” he says, “ has been displayed by various
writers in treating of the origin and rationale of these


observances. Sir H. Spelman saw in them such occasions
of gross intemperance that he derives the word ( wake’ from
a Saxon word meaning drunkenness. But the derivation
is to be found in the fact that wake and watch are the
same words. The feast obtained its name from the night
spent in watching—waking . JVIr. Bownie rightly remarks
that at the conversion of the Saxons by Augustine, the
heathen Paganalia were continued among the converts , with
certain regulations, by order of Gregory the Great. This
Pope enjoined that on the day oj dedication , or the birth-
day of holy martyrs, whose relics are there placed, the
people should make to themselves booths of the boughs of
trees , round about those very churches which had been the
temples of idols, and should observe a religious feast; that
beasts be no longer sacrificed to the devil, but for eating,
and for God’s glory.”
Here, then, is admittedly an heathen excuse for drinking
among Christians. As Speght says in his Glossary to
Chaucer : “It was the manner in times past, upon festi-
val evens, called vigilise, for parishioners to meet in their
church-houses or church-yards, and there to have a
drinking-fit for the time.” And Bishop Hall says of these
drinking-fits : —“ What should I speak of our merry wakes,
and May games, and Christmas triumphs, which you have
once seen here, and may see still in those under the
Roman dition : in all which, put together, you may well
say no Greek can be merrier than they.”
King Charles 1., following in the footsteps of his father,
whilst enjoining decorum at wakes, authorised their con-
tinuance :
We do ratify and publish this our blessed father’s decree, the
rather because of late, in some counties of our kingdom, we find
that under. pretence of taking away abuses there hath been a
general forbidding, not only of ordinary meetings, but of the feasts
ot the dedications of the churches, commonly called Wakes. Now
his Majesty’s express will and pleasure is that these feasts, with
others, shall be observed.
But a council held in London in 1342 found it necessary
to prevent the holding of these wakes over the dead owing
to the drunkenness thereat. In 1367 the Archbishop of


York “complains that in vigils men come together in the
churches and at Junerals, as if to pray ; and then, turning
to a reprobate sense, they indulge in games and vanities,
and even worse, by which they greatly offend God and the
saints, whom they pretend to venerate ; and they make the
house of mourning at funerals a house of laughter and
excess, to the great ruin of their souls.”
At funerals! Yes, at funerals; for even that solemn
event was, and still is, an excuse for drinking. M. Misson
in his “ Observations ” tells us :—“ Butler, the keeper of the
Crown and Sceptre tavern in St. Martins-lane, told me
that there was a tun of red port drunk at his wife’s burial,
besides white wine. No men ever go to women’s burials,
nor women to men's, so that there were none but women at
the drinking of Butler’s wine.”
Again, reversing his order, Misson says : —“ Before they
set out, and after they return, it is usual to present the
guests with something to drink, either red or white wine,
boiled with sugar and cinnamon, or some other such
liquor.” In the “ Statistical Account of Scotland” there
are some very curious particulars on funerals. At a
funeral at Cainsie we are told :—“ The entertainment con-
sisted of the following parts: first, there was a drink of
ale, then a dram, then a piece of short bread, then another
dram of some other species of liquor, then a piece of
currant bread, and a third dram either of spirits or wine,
which was followed by loaves and cheese, pipes and
tobacco,” and we are told that sometimes this was re-
peated. Mons. Jorevin, a French traveller in England at
the beginning of the reign of Charles 11., is struck with
the fact that whilst the minister was officiating “ there
stood upon the coffin a large pot of wine, out of which
every one drank to the health of the deceased.” It was
considered a disgrace not to have these indulgences, and
the deceased when alive made provision in their wills, like
the Chinaman whose corpse was so recently sent to China
trom Sydney, for “ a drinking for their souls.” “ Margaret
Atkinson, widow, by her will, October 18, 1541, orders that
tLp n wt Sunday after her burial there be provided two


dozen of bread, a kilderkin of ale, two gammons of bacon,
three shoulders of mutton, and two couple of rabbits,
desiring all the parish, as well rich as poor, to take part
thereof; and a table to be set in the midst of the church,
with everything necessary thereto.”
The Scotch get particularly happy at funerals, just as
the Irish do at wakes. “At a late interment in Ross-shire,
the mourners engaged in a general row. . . . The
funeral and festal preparations are inseparably blended in
the mind of the Highlander.” At Cantyre, on the occasion
of a funeral, “ the mourners were so intoxicated that they
jostled each other in their way to the grave.” In another
account of a Scotch funeral I read :—“ Scores of men must
be invited, and every man served with four or live glasses
of strong whisky and some food before they moved. Horse-
loads of bread and cheese, dressed fowls, beef, and whisky
went along with them to the burying-ground. The funeral
procession marched in good humour, preceded by a piper, to
the place of interment. When the corpse was laid in the
grave, a papistical cross was drawn with a spade upon the
breast of the coffin, to render the deceased blessed. When
the grave was secured, they sat down in some convenient
place in the open air, but not unfrequently in the church,
when the minister happened to be so generous as to grant
his permission The feasting then commenced. The rulers
of the feast were always most pressing in their liberality.
A number of uninvited persons were sure to make their
appearance; they were served sepai’ately. Bread and beef
were tossed in the air, that they might alight among boys,
to produce scuffling among them, to the no small amusement
of the assembly and to the great honour of the deceased.
As the drinking advanced , they became wildly obstreperous
and tumultuous, so that the clamour might be heard at a
great distance. When the day was far spent, and the
excessive drinking of ardent spirits had produced general
intoxication, fighting and bloodshed ensued. . . . At a
gentleman’s funeral, five or six ankers of whisky would
perhaps be consumed. Most of the ministers would counten-
ance this barbarous custom with their presence, and none of


them ever made any vigorous effort to suppress and abolish
it.”
Now, do not misunderstand me. Do not run away with
the idea that, because I have emphasised the concluding
words of this quotation, I have sought a personal insult to
the Scotch ministers. Neither would I have you imagine
that, because I have traced so many of our drinking customs
to Pagan times, and shown their connection with Dionysian
ceremonies, I am anxious to covertly attack the clergy.
This is certainly not the place to do that; and I am pleased
to say that in all times many of the clergy have resolutely
attacked, and often with success, these lamentable abuses. I
have simply sought to be historically accurate, and to show
you how wide-spread and deeply-rooted in our lives and cus-
toms the reign of Bacchus is, and how he has held his sway
over all classes alike. The fact is, the clergy, like all other
mortals, have been the products of their age; they have
been men, and have succumbed to the weaknesses of men.
It is a proof that Drink is no respector of persons when it
enters the churches and inebriates the priest. After all I
have said to-night, can we wonder that I should have yet
to quote this from Dr. Grindrod’s “ Bacchus’ :
“A.D. 1693 (14 Charles I.) —For Mr. Thompson, that
preached the forenoon and afternoon, jor a quarte of sacke,
xiiiid.”
“ A.D. 1650 (Commonwealth) — For sixe quarts of sacke
to the ministere, when we had not a ministere, 95.”
“ A D. 1666 (6 Charles 11.) —For one quart of sacke be-
stowed on Mr. Jillet when he preached, 2s. 4d.”
“A.D 1691 (4 William and Mary)—For a pint of brandy,
when Mr. George Bell preached here, Is. 4d. When the
Dean of Durham preached here, spent in a treat with him,
3s. 6d For a stranger that preached, a dozen of ale, Is.”
Let me, also, give the other side : —“ln the year 1220,
Richard de Marisco, Bishop of Durham, decreed: ‘We
forbid announcements of scot-ales to be made by any priest
or any one else in the church.’ ”
“In 1223, Richard, Bishop of Sarum, orders, ‘ that no
announcement of scot-ales be made by laymen in the church,


and neither in the churches nor ou»t of the churches by
priests or by clergymen.’ ”
“ In 1237, Alexander Stavenby, Bishop of Coventry, ‘ for-
bids, under penalty, any priest to go to tavern, or to keep a
tavern or scot-ale.’ ”
“In 1240, Walter of Cantilupe, Bishop of Worcester,
decreed : ‘We forbid the clergy to take part in those drink-
ing parties called scot-ales, or to keep taverns .’ ”
“In 1255, Walter de Kirkham, Bishop of Durham, wrote :
‘ We adjure all priests, by Him who lives for ever, and all
the ministers of the Church, especially those in holy orders,
that they be not drunkards, nor keep taverns , lest they die
an eternal death; moreover, we forbid scot-ales and games
in sacred places.’ ”
These orders, I am obliged to confess, were necessary.
It was the drunken licentiousness of the priests that gave
Luther such a power in Europe. The same cause enabled
Henry VIII. to plunder the monastries and religious
orders in England with impunity. “ Those were days of
open vice,” says Beard, in his “ Hibbert Lectures,” “of
brazen-fronted license, when crime went straight to results
of which it was not ashamed, and foul corruption poisoned
the life-blood of society.” It was because of this low ebb
of moral sentiment that the preaching of Wickliffe in the
fourteenth century was so powerful and caused that
reformer to so strongly attack the clergy. He protested
“ that they haunt taverns out of measure, and stir up
laymen to drunkenness, idleness, and cursed swearing,
chiding and fighting. . . . And sometimes they have
neither eye, nor tongue, nor hand, nor foot to help them-
selves for drunkenness. By this example the ignorant
people suppose that drunkenness is no sin ; but he that
wasteth most of poor men’s goods at taverns, making him-
self and others most drunken, is most praised for noble-
ness, courtesy, freeness and worthiness.”
Even in the eighteenth century, according to Lecky,
many of the clergy were dissolute characters. In his
“England in the Eighteenth Century” he writes: —“A
multitude of clergymen, usually prisoners for debt, and


almost always men of notoriously infamous lives, made it
their business to celebrate clandestine marriages in or near
the Fleet. They performed the ceremony without license
or question, sometimes without even knowing the names of
the persons they united, in public-houses, brothels, or
garrets. . . . Almost every tavern or brandy shop in
the neighbourhood had a Fleet parson in its pay. Notices
were placed in the windows, and agents went out in every
direction to solicit passers-by. Young and inexperienced
heirs, fresh from college, or even from school, were thus
continually entrapped. A. passing frolic, the excitement of
drink, an almost momentary passion, the deception or
intimidation of a few unprinc'pled confederates, were often
sufficient to drive or inveigle them into sudden marriages,
which blasted all the prospects of their lives In some
cases, when men slept off a drunken tit, they heard to their
astonishment that during its continuance they had gone
through the ceremony. ... It was proved before
Parliament that on one occasion there had been 2954
Fleet marriages in four months, and it appeared from the
memorandum books of Fleet parsons, that one of them
made £57 in marriage fees in a single month ; that another
bad married 173 couples in a single day.”
I have given you many pictures to-night, and may I not
modestly affirm that they demonstrate the observations I
made at the commencement of my lecture 1 And remem-
ber my difficulty has been, not to find material, but to
exclude a hundred illustrations of my text. lam far from
satisfied with the little I have been able to compress in an
hour’s time. There is so much I have not been able to
say, that what I have said appears to me like a bare
skeleton, wanting the rounding flesh and healthy covering
°f a living thing. But I have said enough to assure you,
I am certain, that Bacchus has left no age, no country, no
class, no community of mankind, untouched. He curses
the child before it is born, he feeds it in its mother’s milk,
be pollutes it when it is named. He walks with the boy
manhood, holding alluring or revolting images ever
before his eyes. He twines his serpent coils around the


wedding hearts and spews his poison in the marriage bup:
He tightens his grip as life advances, until at length he
holds his revel court over the open grave. If we enter the
palace, he awaits us at the table; if we go to the cottage,
he meets us at the door. In the quiet home and in the
crowded sanctuary alike, he claims to be king. His yoke
is on the brightest and the best of the sons of men, and his
curse has blighted the fairest of the daughters of women.
The bright eye, the tuneful voice, the gentle mien, the
proudly step, and the noble form he hath withered like a
blasted weed, till the hope and glory of yesterday is, to-day,
a worthless shape of shame and degradation. What we
have loved, he has lost for us; what we have trusted, he
has betrayed ; what we have hoped to be, he has made
impossible. He has given to the sun rays of blackness, to
the night the glare of Inferno ; to wakefulness, delirium ;
to sleep, the horrors. There is nothing too sweet, too dear,
too pure for his wretched talons to tear, for his venomed
fangs to macerate. He will follow some of you to-night as
you go home; he will dog you about to-morrow ; he will
pursue you to your graves if you do not arm yourselves
with a stubborn resolution to resist the fiend. Fight him,
I tell you ! Strike at his dragon-head! Rescue his
perishing victims. Pluck from his clutches those babes,
those children, those women, those men Haste, for he is
maddened ! Speed, for his victims are dying ! Arouse
your strength, for his shadow is on you. Hark ! to the
cries of those he has driven mad ! Hear the groans of
those in his agonising tortures ! Hark to the cries, the
screaming, the shrieking, and the sobbing of those he has
struck with disease, despair and death. Up, then, no
matter what creed you lisp, for here we must be brothers.
The common enemy is trampling us down ; with a common
effort we must crush him beneath our feet.


IV.
In the last three lectures we have been considering the
antiquity, universality, and potency of the drink incubus
from the surface side—what I may call the photographic,
bird’s-eye view of the question. We have seen the figure
working, and have been horrified or filled with shame and
humiliation at its grotesque, abominable, ridiculous, and
malignant antics. But I want to take the figure to pieces
and to examine its mechanism. Is this a veritable god,
Bacchus, that works such mischief and misery through the
lapse of centuries, and leaves scattered on the tracks of
Time the pitiable ruins of so many peoples, so many lives,
and so many characters ? Is it a personality with will to
injure, or is it a thing with which we have the will to injure
ourselves? Let us strip off the skin woven in the looms of
poetry—the covering of myth and legend—and see what
there is left. Only a liquid poison ! Now, ye Bacchse, trot
out this god of yours ! Let us have him before our eyes !
Ach ! he is only a glass of whisky.
“ Nothing to be afraid of, then,” some of you say. On
the contrary, more to be feared than prussic acid, for it is
a more dangerous poison. It may not kill immediately,
though it can even do that, but it poisons in such a way
that it holds the living in a state of agony and wretchedness
so direful that it were often better for them to be dead.
Ask any drunkard you know if he has ever prayed for,
longed for, death, and not one in a hundred will give you
a negative answer. Thousands have drowned themselves,
hanged themselves, cut and stabbed themselves, to escape
the life that this poison has induced. It not only poisons
the tissues of men, but their morals, their characters, and
their every source of rational happiness. It makes exist-
erice a burden, the present a disaster, the future a chaos of


However in the world did mankind first come to taste
it ? Who was that wretched mortal who was the first to
establish a brewery 1 What madman was he who was the
first to set up in the wine business ? Whoever was it who
first took upon himself the odious responsibility of giving
to the world the first draught, of distilling the first potation,
of ardent spirits ?
Happily for their memory, history is silent on these
points. It is because of this silence that Bacchus, under
his manifold names, has had his mythic invention. These
questions were asked thousands of years ago, and the easiest
answer was to say “ Bacchus,” and have done with any
further explanation. But Bacchus is, to us moderns, what
Father Christmas and Santa Claus are to our intelligent
infants—an explanation to be smiled at. The question is,
what do we know about the invention of drink ? I reply a
multitude of guesses; and that is all. That drink is of
hoary antiquity, though not venerably archaic, I think I
have amply demonstrated; but when, how, and why it was
discovered or invented are conundrums without an answer.
Perhaps, as some have suggested, if we had access to all
the learning of the ancients we might gain some interesting
information on the history of alcoholic manufactures in the
land of the Pharaohs, or elsewhere; but, unfortunately,
only a fragment of the literature of primitive civilisations
have survived the vandalism of man and the wreckages of
time. Under the dominion of the Ptolemies, Alexandria
has been denominated the intellectual metropolis of the
world; and, considering the astonishing activity and the
übiquitous versatility of the intellect of the Greeks, it is
not surprising that, when they obtained the sovereignty of
Egypt, they should have implanted their mental ardour
in a soil so wonderfully rich in literature, poetry, and
philosophy. “The Alexandrian Museum,” says Draper, in
his “Intellectual Development of Europe,” “soon assumed
the character of a university. In it those great libraries
were collected—the pride and boast of antiquity. Demetrius
Phalareus was instructed to collect all the writings of the
world. So powerfully were the exertions of himself and


his successors enforced by the government that two immense
libraries were procured. They contained 700,000 volumes.”
Surely we might reasonably expect to find some work or
other of this immense number treating historically and
practically upon the theme of my lectures. Unfortunately
they have disappeared. The Egyptian works on “Alchemy”
were ordered to be destroyed by the Roman Emperor
Diocletian, lest they might instruct the Egyptians how to
make gold, and thereby procure Egyptian independence
from Roman rule. Three centuries later, or nearly one
thousand years after Ptolemy Philadelphus began the
Alexandrian collection, when the worshippers of Mahomet
became conquerors, Amrow, the lieutenant of the Khalif
Omar, wrote to the Khalif requesting a gift of some of the
remnants of the great library for John Philoponus, or the
labour-lover. The Khalif replied : —“ If the books agree
with the Koran, the Word of God, they are useless, and
need not be preserved; if they disagree with it, they are
pernicious. Let them be destroyed.” So they were de-
stroyed—“distributed among the baths of Alexandria;
a nd it is said that six months were barely sufficient to
consume them.” Absurd bigotry is responsible for a lot of
ruthless literary destruction. “The Crusaders burnt the
library of Tripoli, fancifully said to have consisted of three
nfillion volumes. The first apartment entered being found
contain nothing but the Koran, all the other books were
supposed to be the works of the Arabian impostor, and
were consequently committed to the flames
Cardinal Ximenes delivered to the flames, in the squares
Granada, eighty thousand Arabic manuscripts, many of
them translations of classical authors.” From these in-
stances we may gain a faint idea of the irreparable loss,
a part from “ reasonable wear and tear,” mankind has
suffered from the stupidity of men ; and it is, therefore,
scarcely surprising that we should lack any definite treatise
u P°n alcoholic preparations among the ancients.
Dr. Magnus Huss asserts : —“The art of distillation was
cst discovered in Arabia, but as regards arrack at least,
Chinese and Indians seem'to have been their teachers.”


The author of the “ Conflict between Science and Religion,”
page 116, says the Saracens “ originated chemistry ; they
discovered some of its most important re-agents—sulphuric
acid, nitric acid, alcohol .” “ The first experiments in dis-
tilling wine,” says Eddy, “ are said to have been made in
the eleventh century of the Christian era, by an Arabian
chemist, named Albucasis. He called it ‘ The Spirit of
Wine,’ and for a long time its use was confined to the
laboratory of the chemist.” “ AJbucasis,” writes Lacey,
“an Arabian chemist of the eleventh century, commonly
receives the credit of opening the then fast-shut door, and
of first placing wine in the alembic. . . . Not until,
perhaps, some six hundred years later still—in the seven-
teenth century—was the new name conferred—alcohol.
There is a debate as to the name’s origin, but the balance
appears to incline to a derivation that is historically fitting.
The word is said to be taken from the Arabic, a’l-ka-hol, & a
subtle essence or powder, with the cosmetic properties of
which Eastern beauties were intimately acquainted.” Dr.
Richardson states “ The discovery of distillation of wine
has been attributed to Albucasis, or Casa, an Arabian
chemist and physician of the eleventh century. The evi-
dence on this point is not very convincing. It is true that
the refined body called spirit of wine began to be known
in alchemical and Arabian schools about or soon after the
time of Casa, and from that circumstance, rather than from
direct evidence derived from his works, the discovery has
probably been imputed to him,”
I feel compelled by the weight of evidence to share the
doubts of the careful and cautious Dr. Richardson. In
Gustafson’s very able work, from which I have cited so
often in this course of lectures, there are numerous cases
given of the practice of the art of distillation long prior to
the time of Albucasis. “ There is ample reason,” he says,
“ for supposing that spirit distillation was practically
known in Arabia long before the time generally accepted
as the earliest. There seems little doubt that Geber
(Abou-Moussah Diafar-el-Soli) knew the process of dis-
tillation. According to Leo Africanus, Geber lived in the


seventh century, according to others in the eighth. Di.
J. Friend, in his “History of Physic ” saysAs to
distillation, M. le Clerc fixes the epoch of it in the tim
Avincenna” (who died about 1036) “ who, as he supposed,
first applied this sort of knowledge in the way of medicine
The honour of the invention ought rather to be
restored to Rhazes ” This celebrated Moorish physician is
dated 850—923. I quote from Gustafson : ‘ Hoef ® r ’
his great work, ‘ History of Chemistry, says positively
that Rhazes knew how to distil spirit from gram, bu
some reason his discovery did not become a matter of
general knowledge.”
But long anterior to these dates it is more than probable
that the ancients were able to distil spirits. Dr. aei
says: “ Santschu, a spirit distilled from various grams
in China, but especially from rice, has been a common
drink in China and Japan for several Hundred years. In
a footnote to “ The Foundation of Death _ I read : 1
Asiatic Journal of 1840 cites an old Hindu manuscript,
according to which a distilled liquor resembling brandy,
called Kea-sum, was known in India from most ancient
times.” In “ The She-king, or Book of Ancient Poetry
of the Chinese, we have a description of the people of i ia,
under King-leuz, B.C. 1496-1325, wherein we find :
In the tenth [month] they reap the rice,
And make the spirits for the spring,
For the benefit of the bushy eyebrows.
Du Halde states:-“In China, a country which has pre-
served its civil polity for so many thousand years, the art
of distillation was known far beyond the date of any ot its
authentic records. . . . The search after this elixir
vitce originated, it appears, among the deciples o ie
Philosopher Lao-Kiun, who flourished six hundred years
before Christ . . . They betook themselves to chemis-
try, and after the labour of ages in a vain endeavour to
prevent the dissolution of our species, and alter the
destruction of three of their emperors, who fell victims to
the immortalizing draught , they, like the alchemists o


Europe, ended their researches under the pretence of dis-
coveries which were never made.”
This allusion to elixir vitcv, the immortalising draught,
sought for by the philosophers of China so far back
course of Time, is demonstrative of the fundamental unity
and likeness of mental processes in all ages and among all
peoples. The philosophers of Europe from time imme-
morial have been searching for the philosopher's stone
that something which was to transmute every metal to
gold and to reveal the secret of immortality. The ever-
lasting tire in the crucible has smoked and tanned the
faces of hundreds who have spent their allotted space of
life vainly endeavouring to unveil the goddess Isis, to solve
the riddle of the Sphinx, to lift the curtain that conceals
the secret of existence. “ When we consider that the
alchemists—whose philosophy, founded by Hermes Trisme-
gistus, was based on Aristotle’s doctrine of four elementary
substances of the universe, air, water, fire, and earth had
been constantly labouring for hundreds of years, by means
of various combinations, to extract from these elements the
universal essence of life, is it wonderful that on obtaining
this mysterious spirituous fluid, comprising ingredients of
all these elements, yet baffling their efforts at analysis,
they should at once cry out that at last was found the
philosopher's stone, the fifth element, the quintessence, the
elixir of life ? ” The elixir of Life ! They had discovered
only the liquid of Death.
This elixir vitce was our alcohol, and though we may
admit that the word “alcohol” is comparatively of modern
application, the i n-toxicat\ng, literally poisoning, quality of
inebriating beverages is, as I have indicated, so old that
the attempt to discover its antiquity and primal origination
is as futile as it is useless to hunt for the name of the first
man with bow legs, or the first maiden who flirted with
her eyes. “In the word alcohol,” says A. Gustafson, “ the
Arabic article al is prefixed, as in the word alchemy, to
denote the superlative degree of the cohol, or in Arabic,
kohl; in Chaldaic, cohal; in Hebrew, kaal; which means
fine, that is, exceedingly fine and subtle. This word was


used in Arabia as the name of an almost ethereally line
powder, with which the Eastern dames were wont to tinge
their eyebrows and eyelashes; hence, because this fluid
was found in Arabia, and was among fluids as line and
volatile as this cosmetic among powders, Europeans gave
to it the same name.” This Arabian origin of alcohol is
sceptically considered by French, who says : —“ Alcohol is
the Hebrew kaal (Chaldaic cohal), with the same prefix,
and signifies something highly subtilised, pure spirit. The
Arabians owed much to other countries ; they were rather
restorers and improvers than inventors. They formed the
link which unites ancient a'd modern literature ; but their
superstitious reverence for antiquity checked originality of
ideas and freedom of thought. In respect of the discovery
in question, it is certain that the invention preceeded the
days of the Saracens. Pliny very nearly describes the
process. Thus, he details the mode of obtaining an arti-
ficial quicksilver by distillation; and in another book
(XV.), he speaks of the vapour arising from boiling pitch
being collected on fleeces of wool spread over pots, and
aftewards extracted from them by expression. Galen, the
famous medical writer of the second century, speaks of
distillation per descendum ; while Zosimus, a writer of the
fifth century, has given figures of a distilling apparatus
which Borrichius has copied in his ‘ Hermetis et JEgyp-
tiorum Chemicorum Sapientia.’ ” In support of his view
the author quotes a passage from a French work, “ Me-
langes,” by Edouard Fournier—“ Le mot en effet parait
etre de l’ancienne Chalde'e, on il signifiait ‘ bruler.’ En
trouve-t-on des rudiments chez les peuples d’bu nous vint
d’abord cet £ esprit’ des liqueurs fermentees ? On a cru
longtemps que c’etaient les Arabes, mais nous pensons,
a vec Mongez et Pauw, que ce sont les Tartares qui en
auraient appris la fabrication par les Chaldeens. Certaines
liqueurs importees de Perse en Egypte semblent avoir cte
a lcooliques”—of which I will venture to give you a trans-
lation:—The word in effect appears to be from the ancient
Chaldean, where it meant “to burn.” Do we not find
traces (rudiments) of it among those people from whence


first came that “ spirit” of the fermented liquors? It has
long been believed that the Arabians were the first to use
it, but we think with Mongez and Pauw that they were
the tartars who had acquired the art of making it from the
Chaldeans. Certain liquors imported into Egypt from
Persia seem to have been alcoholic.
If you open your French dictionary you will find that a
brandy distillery is called a Brulerie —a burne rie 1 The
word “brandy” also comes from brennen, to burn ; brant
wein, brandy. And without any teaching, save thetasting,
the North American Indians unanimously christened the
same thing fire water !
The poison is one and the same whenever and however
procured. It is a mistake to imagine that there is an
essential difference in the poison of beer, burgundy and
brandy. The same poison is the basis of all —alcohol. The
only difference is its intensity—the degree of its concentra-
tion or dilution. Dr. James Miller, in his “Alcohol: its
Place ond Power,” thus puts the fact: —“A man is apt to
draw a broad distinction—greatly in his own favour—
between himself drinking beer and another drinking brandy
as a daily habit; but the truth is that both are drinking the
same thing, only in different guise and dilution; chemically
and practically there is much the same difference as there
is between one who drinks spirits ‘ neat,’ and another who
drinks his allowance of the same thing well ‘ watered.’
The one drinks alcohol slightly diluted—brandy; the other
drinks alcohol much diluted, and somewhat modified by
flavour—beer; but both are drinking alcohol.” Again he
says : —“ Beer, no doubt, is less hurtful than brandy—wine
less dangerous than whisky; but chiefly because they
contain less alcohol ”
Thus you will see that the question of the invention of
the art of distilling (since it is the same alcohol, fermented
or distilled) does not settle if it could be settled histori-
cally, the question as to when mankind first became
acquainted with the use of alcohol, and I don’t think Noah
himself could settle that point. Fermented alcoholic
beverages preceded distilled liquors, but for what period


of time it is impossible to say. But though I would like
to satisfy the curious with day and date, I must remind
such among my audience that the question with me is not
so much When ? as What ?
What is this alcohol—fermented or distilled 1 I might
be satisfied with the definition of John Ellis, M.D., who
says, in his very readable and interesting work, “.The
Wine Question in the Light of the New Dispensation” :
“Alcohol, we repeat—and at this day it cannot be repeated
too often—is the ‘ prince of poisons ; ’ more to be feared
and shunned than the poison which causes diphtheria and
typhoid diseases. . . . There is no other poison on
earth which, when voluntarily taken, so perverts, diseases,
pollutes, and degrades a man, both physically and spiritually,
as alcohol.” But, as I said at the beginning, I want you to
see not only the figure, but its joints and mechanism ; and
I must crave your indulgence if my lecture becomes a little
“ dry,” hoping that, even if it do so, it, nevertheless, will
help to kill that terrible alcoholic thirst which it is the
object of these lectures to annihilate.
Less than a century and a half ago alcohol would have
been defined by a chemist as “ the element of water com-
bined with the element of fire, to which elementary fire he
would give the name of phlogiston, a name derived from a
Greek word signifying to burn or inflame.” This was the
opinion of the celebrated chemist, George Ernest Stahl.
It was the North American Indian’s fire- water. The able
German professor believed in the Aristotelian notion that
only four elements composed the universe. That notion
was exploded by Lavoisier, that wonderfully industrious
a nd intrepid French experimentalist and chemist. True
Butherford, Priestley, and Scheele, by detecting the exis-
tence of nitrogen and oxygen, and therefore adding to the
list of so called elements, had given a deathblow to the
phlogistic theory of Stahl, but to Lavoisier belongs the
credit, not only of bringing the list up to seventeen —now
there is a list of at least sixty-seven—but of generalising
the results of his investigation with such a rational founda-
tion as to completely overthrow the primitive chemical


conception and to establish the modern science of chemistry.
He established the identity of an element in the mineral
and animal kingdom. From the time of Boyle up to his
day, an animal or vegetable element was not supposed to
exist in the minerals j the inorganic and the organic were
supposed to be separate and distinct from each other.
Lavoisier exposed the fallacy of this view, and demon-
strated that any given element was the same element
whether in the mineral or animal kingdom, Oxygen was
the same thing in air, in water, in a plant, and in man
himself. By taking a given amount of oxygen and adding
with it, under certain conditions, twice as much hydrogen
you get water. By separating the component parts of
water you get one portion of oxygen and two of hydrogen.
In like manner by separating the elements of plants you
get the same oxygen combined with hydrogen and other
elements, and the same oxygen you can procure by pulling
elemental man to pieces. It is the same oxygen com-
bined in different proportions with the same and dif-
ferent elements in every instance. This view fully grasped
and extended leads to the logical conclusion that matter is
eternal and infinite, that nothing in the universe is lost in
any change we witness, that we cannot destroy matter, nor
can we create it. Lavoisier was engaged in making experi-
ments which pointed to this conclusion during the turmoil
and horror of the French Revolution. He was seized in
the midst of his labours and dragged before the relentless
Danton “ Lavoisier begged for only fourteen days more
in which to complete his experiments that the results might
be saved to mankind,” when Danton “ brutally exclaimed
that F ranee wanted neither scholars nor chemists, and
hurried him to the guillotine.”
Analysed by chemical means, then, what are the
elementary parts of alcohol 1 Science answers, as nearly as
possible, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. These are the
three elements which, when combined or associated together
in certain and definite proportions will constitute alcohol.
-These self-same elements conbined in different proportions
will produce different things. I want you to bear that


carefully in your minds. Alcohol has three elements—
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen for its composition. But
sugar has the very same three. What then is it that makes
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, sugar in one instance, and
alcohol in another 1 Can the publicans tell us 1 The bulk
of them cannot, I am certain. The difference is iu the
relative proportions in the combination of these elements
produced by organic life, Thus the grape sugar conists of
Carbon, 6 parts; hydrogen, 12 parts; Oxygen, 6 parts ;
or, C 6 H l2 0 6
Or to make the matter more intelligible the formula for
grape sugar is C 6 H l2 0 6 the number underneath the
letter denoting the number of atomic parts, thus :
Carbon... ... ... 6 atoms
Hydrogen ... ... 12 atoms
Oxygen .. ... ... 6 atoms
Total ... ... 24 atoms
To give you, not an accurate conception of the idea, but
one that will serve my purpose, let us suppose grape sugar
to be a two shilling piece, in which, of course, there are
twenty-four pennies—the pennies, for the sake of the illus-
tration, being atoms. We will call the carbon an old
sixpence, the hydrogen a shilling piece, and the oxygen a
jubilee sixpence. These, though differing in particular,
a re of the total value of a two shilling piece, and, so to
speak, may be blended into one.
Now the formula for ethylic alcohol, the c< mmon alcohol
°f intoxicating beverages, is: C. 2 H 6 O; that is to say 2
atoms of carbon, 6 of hydrogen, and 1 of oxygen.
It will be seen, therefore, that grape sugar has in it all
the elements of alcohol, only the atoms are combined in
larger proportions. If we can find a means, then, of taking
away the excess of the atoms from grape sugar we shall
have the number left which constitute in combination
R thylic alcohol. There is a means of doing this. There is
a little cellular plant commonly called yeast —I will tell you
more about it a little later on—which may be supposed to


say to the atoms of the sugar—Divide ! And in their
division new combinations arise. “ Under the influence of
yeast,” says Dr. Hargreaves, in his “ Alcohol and Science,”
the sugar splits up into carbon dioxide carbonic acid —
and alcohol; thus :
Sugar, Alcohol. Carbonic Dioxide.
C 6 H 12 0 6 - 2C 2 H 6 + 2C 0 2
I want every one of you to understand this. Sugar may
be said to have been divided into four parts, two of which
are alcohol and two carbonic acid gas. There are two
given quantities of each. Let me metaphorically put them
back.
Alcohol ... ... Carbon 2, Hydrogen 6, Oxygen 1
Carbonic Acid Gas... Carbon 1, Hydrogen 0, Oxygen 2
How repeat these figures to get the two quantities —
Alcohol . . ... Carbon 2, Hydrogen 6, Oxygen 1
Carbonic Acid Gas... Carbon 1, Hydrogen 0, Oxygen 2
and we get the total—
Grape Sugar ... Carbon 6, Hydrogen 12, Oxygen 6
The article on Alcohol in the “ Encyclopaedia Britannica”
gives this table as the relative proportions of the component
parts of alcohol :
Carbon ... 52-67 per cent.
Hydrogen ... 12-90 ~
Oxygen ... 34-43 ~
100-000
This formula is obtained by dividing these numbers by the
atomic weights of the elements. Hydrogen is the standard
atomic weight, and therefore stands at 1. Carbon has
twelve times this weight, and therefore stands at 12, whilst
oxygen is heavier still and stands at 16.
Perhaps you may be able to follow the explanation given
i)i Attfield’s “Chemistry: General, Medical and Pharma-
ceutical” better than any I could give. The figures are
slight!* different from those I have just quoted, but they


are practically the same. I will quote the whole paragraph
on page 504 under the heading :
“ Empirical Formulae Composition of Alcohol. —Alcohol.,
by quantitative analysis is found to contain the elements
carbon, hydrogen, andoxygen in the following propor-
tions :
Composition op Alcohol.
Carbon .. 52 174 or-h 12 = 4-348 or 2
Hydrogen... ... 13-043 or-f- 1 = 13-043 or 6
Oxygen ... .. 34"783 or-5-16 = 2-1/4 or 1
From the centesimal numbers a formula is obtained in the
usual way. Thus, on dividing these figures by the atomic
weights of the respective elements (0= 12, H=l, 0
and reducing the products to the simplest whole numbers,
alcohol will be found to contain two atomic weights of
carbon to every six of hydrogen and to every oneoi oxygen,
and its possible or empirical formula} to be C 2 H n 0.”
Remember these three component parts of ethylic alcohol
are three essentially different substances. Remember they
only form this alcohol when united in the definite propor-
tions I have mentioned. In themselves, and in other
proportions, their properties may vary so much that we
May think them absolutely possessed of nothing in common.
Who would imagine, without analysing them or otherwise
testing them, for instance, that alcohol, starch and sugar
are made up of these three identical elements ; and yet
such is the fact. Let us see :
Alcohol. Starch. Grape Sugar.
Carbon .. 2 Carbon .. 6 Carbon... 6
Hydrogen 6 Hydrogen 10 Hydrogen 12
Oxygen... 1 Oxygen... 5 Oxygen 6
Total 9 Total 21 Total 24
Let me again quote from Dr. Hargreaves to show you
Mfat these substances are :


“ Carbon is commonly known as charcoal, but is mixed
with several earthy substances and is solid. In diamonds
carbon is in absolute purity. Carbon is endowed with a
considerable range of affinity, forming, as already seen,
two gases by its union with oxygen.
“ Hydrogen has special affinity for oxygen, uniting with
it to form water. Upon the exercise of this affinity the
decay of all substances depends , and many of the most
nutritive processes of plants originate in the attempt to
gratify this affinity. In a gaseous state hydrogen is the
lightest body known [therefore taken as the standard
atomic weight] and very combustible. It is never found
in nature in an isolated state ; water is its most common
combination.
“ Oxygen is a gaseous element, and composes about one-
fifth of the atmosphere and one-third of the crust of the
earth. It has a powerful attraction for other elements,
combining with them with such force as to produce com-
bustion. It is superior in the extensive range of its
affinities to all other elements, affecting the union and
disunion of a great number of compounds.”
Now these are the three principals who enter into
partnership, by way of illustration, to form a variety of
businesses. They are unlike in disposition, birth and
temperament, but they agree to be partners under certain
well defined conditions. They have their articles of agree-
mentt, and according to the amount of capital each one
puts into it, the business may be called the starch, the
spirit, or the sugar business, bearing in mind, of course,
that their capital is their own substance, and it is the same
substance in each business. It is very curious, but never-
theless true, that not one of these principals can be
detected individually, so to speak, by our senses. “Nor
can the senses of sight,” says Attfield, in the work I have
already quoted, “ touch and taste, or other common means
of examination, detect in their concealment the three
elements of which sugar is composed.” The same may be
said of starch and alcohol. Two of these elements I have
already said form water in the proportion of two of hydro-


gen to one of oxygen, but, says Attfield, “ none of the
common properties of water indicate that it is composed of
two elements, both gases but differing much from each
other.” The results vary then according to the way the
atoms unite, attract and attach each other, marry, as it
were, and set up house for themselves.
In thus personifying these elements and endowing them
with selecting will and choice I am not original by any
means. More than 2000 years ago “ Empedocles,” says
Professor Tyndall in his much criticised, but nevertheless
famous, Belfast address to the British Association in 1874,
“ a man of more fiery and poetic nature [than Democritus],
introduced the notion of love and hate among the atoms to
account for their combination and separation. Noticing
this gap in the doctrine of Democritus, he struck in with
the penetrating thought, linked, however, with some wild
speculation, that it lay in the very nature of these com-
binations which were suited to their ends (in other words,
in harmony with their environment) to maintain them-
selves, while unfit combinations, having no proper habitat,
must rapidly disappear.” The way Tyndall puts it is
scarcely fair to Empedocles, but it justifies me in my
personification of the atoms “ Empedocles,” writes Pro-
fessor Lange in his “History of Materialism,” “of Agri-
gentum cannot be described as a Materialist, because with
him force and matter are still fundamentally separated.
He was probably the first Greek who divided matter into
the four elements, which, by means of Aristotle, secured so
°ug a tenure of life, that even in the science of to day we
'instantly come upon their traces. Besides these elements,
Empedocles supposed there were two ultimate forces—Love
an d Hate— which, in the formation and dissolution of the
performed the functions of attraction and repulsion.
Had Empedocles made these forces properties of the ele-
ments, we might quietly rank him as a Materialist ; for not
did the picturesque language of his poems draw its
‘lustrations from the Jeelings of the human heart, but he
Se t the whole Olympos and the lower world in motion in
P''der to give life to his conceptions, and to find occupation


for the imagination as well as the reason, But his forces
are independent of matter.”
For my part I think that Empedocles was wrong in
separating the two, but controversy on this point would
lead one into a discussion on the atomic theory, and is
outside the track of my present lectures. Personally, I
like the idea that all atoms are alive , that they love or hate
each other, and that according to the intensity of their
love or hatred will they pair, separate, or be indifferent to
each other. Moreover, lam of opinion that this notion is
becoming more scientific and acceptable every day. The
investigations of Pasteur, Fliigge, Cagniard de Latour,
Schwann, Kolliker, Hansen, Rees, Wiesner, Brefeld and
many other able investigators, certainly tend to establish
this view.
I will read you a paragraph illustrative of my meaning
from the work of Dr. Cooke on “ Fungi: Their Nature,
Influence, and Uses.” “ There is another equally impor-
tant, but more complicated, subject to which we must
allude in this connection This is the probability of
minute fungi being developed without the intervention of
germs, from certain solutions. The observations of M.
Trecul, in a paper laid before the French Academy, have
thus been summarised : —l. Yeast cells may be formed in
the must of beer without sptires being previously sown.
2. Cells of the same form as those of yeast, but with
different contents, arise spontaneously in simple solution
of sugar, or to which a little tartrate of ammonia has been
added, and these cells are capable of producing fermenta-
tion in certain liquids under favourable conditions 3. The
cells thus formed produce Penicillium like the cells of
yeast. 4. On the other hand, the spores of Penicillium
are capable of being transformed into yeast. The inter-
pretation of this is, that the mould Penicillium may be
produced from a sugar solution by ‘ spontaneous genera-
tion’ and without spore or germ of any kind, The theory
is, that a molecular mass which is developed in certain
solutions or infusions, may, under the influence of different
circumstances, produce either animalcules or fungi. ‘ln


all these cases, no kind of animalcule or fungus is ever seen
to originate from pre-existing cells or larger bodies, but
always from molecules.’ The molecules are said to form
small masses, which soon melt together to constitute a
globular body, from which a process juts out on one side.
These are the so-called Torulce , which give off buds, which
are soon transformed into jointed tubes of various diame-
ters, terminating in rows of sporules, Penicillium, or
capsules containing numerous globular seeds.”
But whether or not the yeast cells originate in a sugar
solution, without the aid of a yeast parentage, it is certain
that without the aid of this living fungus we should not
have the brewers and the distillers obnoxious trades. To
brew we must ferment, and fermentation is produced by
these tiny living things. They feed, they grow, they
multiply, and in doing so they break up the composition
of sugar and prepare our alcohol. In the words of Turpin,
“ Fermentation as effect, and vegetation as cause, are two
things inseparable in an act of decomposition of sugar.”
Referring to the words I have just cited, Dr. G. S.
Woodhead, in his “ Bacteria and their Products,” says :
“ This theory is that living organisms build up structures
a nd develop energy from the materials in which they live,
ar *d break up by their vital activity, either directly or
through a soluble ferment, the sugar in which they grow.
to this theory albuminoid material is considered to be
necessary for the process of fermentation or decomposition
only
in so far as it is required for the nutrition of the
nncro-organism, it being denied that nitrogenous elements
P* a y any such part, as that ascribed to them by Liebig, of
Producing the molecular motion, which brings about the
s plitting up of the sugar, by undergoing a spontaneous
ecomposition. Albuminoid material, in fact, is merely an
a cconipaniment of the process of fermentation—a necessary
° ne > no doubt, but not in any way playing the part of
Ca sual factor.”
You have already concluded that alcohol is a product
prising from the “ splitting up,” the decomposition, the
dotting, in fact, of sugar, “The brewer,” says Lacey, “or


the brewer’s man, looks upon the thick creamy froth that
rises to the surface of his vat without realising that he is
in the presence of exhuberant, though death-nourished,
vegetation. Yet this is the fact.” On page 35 he says:—
“ Strong drink depends for all its attraction on a spirit
which has escaped from one of nature’s charnel houses.
Rotted sugar is the origin of ethylic alcohol.” Again :
“ Without the disintegration of the sugar in the first
instance there could be no intoxicating wine or beer
in the sequel.” “As far as known,” says Gustafson,
“ alcohol can never be obtained from any living organism,
substance, or chemic compounds containing life—death
and decay being necessary pre-conditions for its natural
production.”
But that which we call “ death” and decay” is, in the
view I have taken to-night, only another manifestation of
life. Putrefaction, decay, rottenness, are the condition of
a thing which has ceased to feed, and is itself now being
fed upon by an invading army of bacteria. Ido not know
that I could urge this in any more forcible language than
that of M. Pasteur himself, He says :—“I have been
inclined for a long time to consider fermentations, properly
so-called, as chemical phenomena, co relative with physio-
logical actions of a peculiar nature. Not only have I
shown that their ferments are not dead , albuminoid
matter, but actually living organisms ; I have also excited
the fermentation of sugar, lactic acid, tartaric acid, glyce-
rine, and, in more general terms, of all fermentable matters
in media exclusively mineral, an incontestable proof that
the decomposition of fermentable matter is correlative with
the life of the ferment, that it is one of its essential
aliments; for instance, under the conditions to which I
refer, it is impossible, that in the constitution of the
ferments which arise, there can be a single atom of carbon
which is not taken from the fermentable matter.
“ That which distinguishes the chemical phenomena of
fermentations from a number of others, and particularly
from the functions of ordinary life, is the fact of the


decomposition of a weight of fermentable matter much
greater than that of the weight of ferment in action.
“ I have long suspected that this peculiar character may
be allied to that of nutrition without contact of free
oxygen. Ferments must be living organisms, but of a
peculiar nature, in this sense, that they have the property
of exercising all the functions of their life, not excepting
their multiplication, without necessarily employing the
oxygen of the atmospheric air.
“ Let us call to mind those curious infusoria which cause
butyric or tartaric fermentation, or certain kinds of putre-
faction, and which are not only able to live and multiply
without contact with oxygen, but which perish and cease
to excite fermentation if we dissolve this gas in the medium
in which they feed. That is not all. By careful experi-
ments, made with the yeast of beer, I have shown that if
the life of this ferment were carried on partially by the
influence of free oxygen gas, this little cellular plant lost,
m proportion to the intensity of this influence, a part of
its fermenting character, that is to say, that the weight of
yeast, which is produced under these conditions during the
decomposition oj sugar, increases progressively, and ap-
proaches the weight of decomposed sugar, in exact proportion
as % ts life goes on in the presence of increasing quantities of
free oxygen gas.
“ Guided by all these facts I have been gradually led to
took upon fermentation as a necessary consequence of the
Manifestation of life, when that life takes place without the
direct combustion due to free oxygen.”
Schiitzenberger, in his work On Fermentation, says
that Leuwenhock “ observed that yeast is a mass of organic
globules, susceptible of reproducing themselves by means
°t buds, or seminules, which appeared to belong to the
e getable kingdom, and not to be simply organic or chemi-
Ca l matter, as had been supposed. He concluded that it is
lery probably by some effect of their vegetation that the
gmbules of yeast disengaged carbon dioxide from the
Sa ccharine liquid, and convert it into spirituous liquor.”


The discoveries of Cagniard de Latour, Schwann and
Kiitzing, and confirmed by Quevenne, Turpin and Mitzer-
lich, “ led, without any possible contradiction, to the
following conclusions respecting the nature of yeast. This
body was considered to be a mass of organised and living
cells, composed, like vegetable or animal cells, of an
envelope and granular contents.”
It is exceedingly interesting to read the life history of
these infinitesimal organisms which originate and sustain a
ferment; but I must now be as brief as possible. There
are many kinds of these fungi, varying in shape, motion,
growth and conditions of existence and reproduction. The
kind producing the alcoholic ferment of beer is called
Saccharomyces cerevisice. They are thus described by
Schiitzenberger, On Fermentation , page 46:—“The
cells are round or oval, from 1(^0 to 10 9 00 of a millimetre
(from -00031 to -00035 inch) in their greatest diameter.
They are formed of a thin and elastic membrane of colour-
less cellulose, and of a protoplasm, also colourless, some-
times homogeneous, sometimes composed of small granula-
tions. We find in the protoplasm one or two vacuoles, of
various sizes, containing celular juice. The cells are either
separate or united two by two. When these cells are
deposited in a fermentable liquid, we soon see at one, and
more rarely at two points of their surface, vesicular pro-
minences arise, the interior of which is filled at the expense
of the protoplasm of the mother-cell ; these prominences
enlarge, and at last, having attained the size of the original
cell, they lessen in diameter at the base. They usually
originate at the widest side, but more rarely at the
extremeties. As soon as the formation of this kind of
neck takes place, the new cells separate with considerable
rapidity from the mother-cell, in which the protoplasm,
given up to the young cell, is replaced by one or two
vacuoles. If the conditions are favourable, the same cell
is able to produce several generations of cells; but by
degrees it lo=es all its protoplasm, which at last unites in
granules swimming in the midst of superabundant cellular
juice. The cells then cease to reproduce, and even to live ;


the membrane is ruptured, and the granular contents are
diffused in the liquid.”
Then there are the Saccharomyces elipso'ideus, the
Sacchciromyces Pastorianus, the Saccharomyces conglome-
ratus, the Saccharomyces lieesii, the Saccharomyces myco-
dermia and varieties of these and yet others, all of which
have special features, but are instrumental in transmuting
sugar into alcohol. Truly these bacteria are all the more
wonderful to me in that they play such a tragic and
destructive part in the economy of nature; and yet their
very existence was not until recently even suspected!
“ The microscope,” says Lacey, “ fights the battle of total
abstinence.”
Ido not want you to conclude that alcohol and carbonic
acid gas are the only products of sugar under fermentation.
In the process there are produced what are termed “ bye-
products, glycerine, succinic acid, and a number of other
substances, the amount and nature of these bye-products
varying, first with the yeast, and second with the con*
ditions under which it is allowed to grow. The character
and aroma of beer and wine indeed depend essentially on
the formation of such bye-products —compound rnthers.
It is, of course, possible, nay, even probable, that what
bacteriologically may be termed impurities, may effect the
same result, and that special aroma and flavour may
depend upon the presence of small quantities of other
organisms than the special yeast used.”
There appears to be no end to the processses of these
nunute living things. They attack everything in some
form or other of their infinite variety of existence. They
w dl not even allow the alcohol to remain stable, but change
ev en it to acetic acid, aldehydes and other compounds.
■They are everlastingly devouring, and if they have nothing
e lse to feed upon they consume each other. Even these
minute creatures have their parasites. The microscope
reveals a frightful world of slaughter and cannabalism.
Indeed, it seems to prove to me that there is no such a thing
Death, but only an eternal round of changing Life.


The very atoms themselves attract and repel—they love
or hate their neighbours, as I have fancied to-night. In
their attracting they absorb, devour, consume each other ;
and it is in these processes, added to their hating qualities
—the repelling, resisting, excreting—that Life consists.
Love retains, constructs, organises. Hite undoes every-
thing. In chemistry we call this love the affinities of a
substance; hate, the lack of them. Compounds whose
parts love much are called “ stablethose whose parts
seek the slightest excuse for a divorce are called “ un-
stable.”
If I have not been too discursive in my desire to avoid as
much as possible the use of more concise, but, to a popular
audience, unrememberable techniehological terminology you
will be prepared for my conclusion. Alcohol is the excre-
tion of certain kinds of Bacteria ! Do not loathe the dung-
fly for feeding on manure, for yon brother of yours dragged
along by two Redfern policemen has brought this upon him
by drinking the liquid manure of prolific micro-organisms !
Do not laugh. I have scientific authority for what lam
saying. Listen. I open Woodhead ? s “ Bacteria” on page
124, and this is what he says “As to the exact nature
of the process, there is much difference of opinion, some
authorities holding that it is necessary for the whole of the
sugar which is altered by the living cell of beer-yeast to
penetrate or pass, by a process of endosmosis, through the
membraneous envelope of the cell and become an integral
part of the cell protoplasm, and that, unlpss this takes
place, the resolution of sugar into alcohol, glycerine,
carbonic acid gas. succinic acid, <fcc., cannot take place.
It is necessary, in fact, that the whole of the sugar should
be, as it were, digested by the yeast-cells, and combined in
great part into protoplasm before it can be converted into
the various substances above mentioned, which are, on this
assumption, merely the excretory products of the vegetable
cells feeding on a definite kind of nutrient material.”
I can corroborate this bv the work of Schiitzenberger
On Fermentation. On page 148, in summarising the
conclusions of M. Bechamp, he says : “ Together with


these phenomena of nutrition, and side by side with them,
other inverse reactions, those of disassimilation [the hating
process] take place, by which the tissues are changed into
excrementitious products, unsuited to the life of the cell,
and these are eliminated [excreted]. The production of
carbon dioxide and of alcohol are the consequences of this
process.”
Here I will leave the subject for to-night. Now that
you are aware that alcohol is the ejected liquor of bacteria
which feed on rotting sugar, you cannot be “ very particu-
lar” if you still smack your lips at it. If you do you are
not much better than those Russians who drink their own
urine. Do you doubt this revolting fact 1 Then, though
the subject is disgusting, to show to what loathesome
filthiness alcoholic indulgence will lead human nature, let
me conclude my present lecture by a quotation from the
“ History of Inebriating Liquors,” by Samuel Morewood : —-
“The most extraordinajy effect of the aminata is the
change it makes in the urine, by impregnating it with an
intoxicating quality, which continues to operate for a con-
siderable time. A man moderately intoxicated to-day will
by the next morning have slept himself sober; but, as is
the custom, by drinking a cup of his own urine he will
become more powerfully intoxicated than he was the day
preceding. It is therefore not uncommon for confirmed
drunkards to preserve their urine as a precious liquor, lest
a scarcity in the fungi should occur. This inebriating
property of the urine is capable of being imparted to others,
t°r every one who partakes of it has his urine similarly
a ffected. Thus with a very few aminatse, a party of
drunkards may keep up their debauch for a week. Dr.
Langsdorff states that by means of the second person
faking the urine of the first, the third that of the second,
fbe intoxication may be propagated through five indi-
viduals. The relation of Strahienberg, that the rich lay
U P great stores of the aminatm, and that the poor, who
Ca nnot buy it, watch their banquets with wooden bowls, in
or der to procure the liquor after the second process, is fully
confirmed by the statement of Langsdorff.”


Horrible ! But horrible also are the drunken habits of
all. Let us touch no more of the foul thing.. I ask each
one, who has not already done so, to come forward and
take the pledge this very night, that he may never again
pollute his lips with the poison.


Y.
In my last lecture I dwelt largely on the composition of
the alcohol which is the common alcohol of our inebriating
beverages—ethylic alcohol. But there are more than one
kind of alcohol, and even many varieties samples, if you
like—of any particularly classified spirit. Chemists speak
of the alcoholic “ group,” and describe to us the specific
kinds constituting the group, detailing their differences
and fundamental agreement. The name of the alcohol is
given to it from the composition of the “Radical. To
put it in the words of Dr. Richardson, the radicals vary
in respect to the equivalents of the elements of which they
are composed, and to distinguish them they have different
names. Essentially each radical, though it is composed of
more than one element, acts as if it were one, and is called
a base, because it is the root or origin upon which other
structures rest. Thus, in the present case, the radicals, as
they vary in amount of carbon and hydrogen which they
contain, produce, in each case of their combination with
water, an alcohol possessing a different property or different
properties from the other alcohols.” In I able V. of t e
Appendix to Dr. Richardson’s “ Cantor Lectures,” there is
a list of alcohols which I will quote, showing also their
elementary composition :—
Methylic or Protylic (wood spirit) ... C H 3 HO
Ethylic or Deutylic (common alcohol) ... C 2 H 5 HO
Propylic or Trilylic n 3 HO
Butylic or Tetrylic ••• y*
Amylic or Pentylic (potato spirit, fusel oil) C, H n HU
Heptylic HO
Octylie ... - °« H '- HO


I need not quote the whole of the list he gives up to
melylic, as my quotation is sufficient for my purpose.
You will have observed they all consist of the three ele-
ments, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, and they differ in
this : some contain larger proportions of carbon and hydro-
gen than others. The point to be observed is they increase
their proportions after a definite manner. If you add one
atomic weight or volume of carbon you must add two of
hydrogen all through the series. Starting carbon at 2, you
will run the figures thus : 3,4, 5,6, 7, &c., and the names
of the alcohols indicate these numbers 5 as some of you will
have noticed. But starting the hydrogen at 5 (and I start
for the sake of convenience with the number in the radical
ethyl) your progression will be 5,7, 9, 11, 13, &c. With
every addition comes a change in the properties. The
alcohol is of a different character, heavier, less volatile, less
soluble, and so forth.
You have observed the difference, of course, between the
radical and the alcohol. For instance, the formula for
radical “ethyl” is C 2 H 5. and for ethylic alcohol C 2 H 6 0.
The leason why in the alcohol we have 6, one more than in
the radical, and that we have oxygen added, is that this
radical has united with water, H 2 O, and has taken the
place of one of the equivalents of hydrogen in the water.
Thus the symbol for alcohol may be thus expressed :
(C 2 H 5) HO or C 2 H c 0.
The vapour density, the specific gravity, and the boiling
point of these alcohols differ according to some underlying
principle. As the carbon and hydrogen increase, they
become heavier, they have a greater density, and it requires
greater heat to make them boil. Thus ethylic alcohol boils
at 172° F., or 40 degrees lower than the boiling point of
water. The lightest alcohol, methylic, boils at 140°, or
72° below water, whilst the boiling point of amylic alcohol
is 270° or 58° above water.
Advantage is taken of the low boiling point of ethylic
alcohol in the process of distillation. “ The vapour coming
off from alcohol,” says Dr. Kate Mitchel in The Drink
Question, ‘ when the latter is boiled at a temperature of


172° Fahr., is received into a vessel called a still (which is
surrounded by cold water or ice), on the sides of which it
condenses in drops. There is generally some portion of
water contained in the first distillation of alcohol, and in
order to obtain what is called the spirit of wine the liquid
is again, submitted to the same process, and still more water
is evaporated. The rectification oj spirit, or rectified spirits
of wine , is still a further process by which more water is
evaporated off, but even then a certain percentage is left,
about 10 to 20 per cent.” “In commerce,” I now quote
from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, “ the strongest spirit
is known as spirit of wine, and contains about 90 per cent,
of alcohol. The remaining 10 per cent, of water must be
removed by some chemical agent that will combine with
water and retain it at the boiling point of the spirit, and be
without any specific action on the alcohol. Ihe dehyd-
rating substances in general use are certain anhydrous
salts, such as carbonate of potash, acetate of potash, or
sulphate of copper. These rapidly absorb water at low
temperature, and part with it at a red heat; so that they
may be used over and over again. The most efficient dehyd-
rating agent is caustic lime or caustic baryta. Lime is
generally used in making the absolute alcohol of commerce.
If we allow the water to remain in the alcohol and expose
it to the atmosphere, this diluted alcohol will undergo a
chemical change and produce vinegar. It is first changed
into what is termed aldehyde— al, meaning in Arabic the
definite article- de, the dis, or un, hydrogenised. All
alcohols in dilution will produce this change in presence of
the atmosphere, under suitable conditions. What is the
change? The word al-de-hyde expresses it. A quantity of
hydrogen has, to use the simile of my last lecture, obtained
a divorce, a separation, from the alcoholic body, and has
sought an alliance elsewhere. It has entered into partner-
ship and drawn to its chemical embrace oxygen. You will
remember wdiat I quoted from Dr. Hargreaves in my last
lecture, “ Hydrogen has special affinity (love as I have
expressed it) for oxygen, uniting with it to form water. ’
Keep the oxygen in the air from paying Miss Hydrogen a


visit and all will cohere peacably in the alcoholic house-
hold, but when Mr. Oxygen prowls around she will elope
with him or bring him into the now broken up family,
which passes under another name. Two atoms of the
hydrogen have become oxydised by means of which water
(W 2 0)» has been formed in this process. In the formation
of aldehyde then two atoms have deserted and so we find
the formulm thus expressed :
Alcohol. Aldehyde.
c 2 H 6 o c 2 h 4 0
Acetic acid, or vinegar is a further extension of this
chemical affinity. Two atoms of oxygen come into the
combination. The Misses Hydrogen draw the extra atom
of oxygen from the air and he enters into their domestic
union. We can now understand the difference in the three
formulae :
Alcohol. Aldehyde. Vinegar, Acetic Acid.
C 2 H 6 O C 2 H 4 O C 2 H 4 0 2
To put this in more exact language, I will give it in the
words of Dr. Hargreaves:—“Ethylic alcohol, when oxydised,
yields a variety of compounds according to the character of
the oxydation. The result may be the oxydation of two
atoms of hydrogen, by which water is only produced, which
will leave a fluid with the water having the composition of
C 2 H 4 0, called aldehyde; or, the oxydation carried further,
and an equivalent of oxygen added, the resulting compound
will be C 2 H 4 0 2 acetic acid. If the oxydation be intense
(if the chemical affinities be allowed to display themselves
strongly), as the burning of alcohol in a lamp, the carbon,
which in preceding examples was not touched, is now
directly oxydised with the hydrogen, and the result will be
the formation of dioxide of carbon, carbonic acid C o.> and
water H 2 0.”
I have been dealing with the common alcohol in these
illustrations; but, as I have informed you, all alcohols can
be subjected to the same process. As Gustafson observes :
—“ All acids substitute an O for H 2, thus :


Methylic ... CH 4 0
Ethjlic C 2 H 6 O
Propylic ... Q, H 8 0
Butylic... ... C 4 H lO O
Amylic ... ... C 5 H l2 O
Caproylic ... C 6 H l4 O
Formic... ... C II 2 0 2
Acetic ... ... C 2 H 4 0 2
Propionic ... C 3 H u 0 2
Butyric ... C 4 H 8 0 2
Valeric ... C 5 H lO 0 2
Caproic ... C 6 H l2 0 2
Hargreaves speaks, in the quotation I just now gave
you, of intense oxydation —that oxydation which brings
the affinity of carbon for oxygen into activity. This is the
common source of combustion —burning. By this means
we can often test the quality or the kind of alcohol we are
asked to swallow. You have doubtless noticed that the
lesser the proportion of carbon in the composition of the
alcohols, the liglbter they are. Methylic, which has only
one atom of carbon, is therefore the lightest of the series.
As we run through ethylic, propylic, butylic, amylic, Ac.,
with their 2,3, 4, and 5 atoms of carbon, the weight
increases. This fact is important, because, as Dr. Richard-
son observes, “ the lighter the alcohol . . . the less
injurious its action.”
Again, quoting from Dr. Richardson “ Avery simple
experiment suffices to show the increase of carbon in these
series. If I take a piece of cotton wool, place it in a glass
cup, pour upon it a little methylic alcohol in which alcohol
there is the smallest amount of carbon, set fire to it, and
hold a white plate over the flame, the plate remains white,
because the air that reaches the flame is sufficient to con-
sume all the carbon. If I do the same experiment with
ethylic alcohol, although the carbon is a little greater, yet
the result remains the same. If I move two steps higher,
viz., to butylic alcohol, in which there are four equivalents
of carbon, the combustion is not quite complete, and there-
fore a shade or stain of carbon is left on the plate ; and
if, going one step further in the series, I use amylic alcohol,
then the combustion is rendered so imperfect that a thick
layer of carbon, derived from the alcohol in the destruction
of it by the burning, is left upon the white surface.”


A little further on he says:—“This simple mode of
testing eommon alcohol will serve roughly to detect extreme
adulteration of it with the heavier alcohol—fusel oil. . .
I his heavier alcohol is used in adulteration, and, as you
will learn when you hear of its effects, it is a dangerous
adulterant. I was dining a few months ago with some
fiiends, one of whom produced a small flask of precious
liquor he had had presented to him, and which was said to
be an unusually choice hollands. On examining it, I felt
suie it was a gin treated with fusel oil, and on burning a
little of it this suspicion was confirmed by a deposit of
carbon upon a white dish. [ warned my friends forthwith
of the danger of drinking this heavy, though certainly
pleasant, spirit, and the majority took the warning. Two,
less prudent, indulged, to suffer for the next two or three
succeeding days to an extent that convinced them there
was no mistake in the scientific and friendly admonition
they had received.”
He also cites an instance of a well-known physician who
regularly drank methylic alcohol in preference to common
alcohol because it was lighter. “He was accustomed to
make it into toddy, with water and sugar, and considered
that while it was as pleasant to take as ordinary spirituous
drinks, it was less injurious than they are.” Dr. Richardson
continues, “ I have myself, of late years, when compelled
to allow the administration of alcohol, sometimes recom-
mended this methylic lighter spirit, and I am satisfied
with better results than if the heavier or ethylic
spirit had been employed. I have ventured also to
suggest that in many instances other physicians might
follow the same practice with advantage; for methylic
alcohol is much more rapid in its action, and much
less prolonged in its effects than is common alcohol,
so that it produces its effects promptly, and what is of most
importance, it demands the least possible ultimate expendi-
ture of animal force for its elimination from the body.
This latter fact, I repeat, is of great moment, for, in the
end, all these alcoholic fluids are depressants .”


It does not follow, in the adulteration of common alcohol
with heavier ones, that the manufacturer has consciously
mixed them—though this is often the case, as brewers are
well aware. In wine, for instance, in the very process of
fermentation several kinds of alcohol are procured during
the process. Dr Kate Mitchell gives us a simple and
interesting experiment which illustrates this fact. In the
chapter on the History and Chemistry of Alcohol in the
same work I quoted from a little time ago, I read, “ Grape-
sugar or some saccharine substance is dissolved in about
eight parts its weight of water, and is put into a stoppered
glass bottle with a little yeast which is already undergoing
putrefaction. One end of a bent glass tube, communicating
with the interior of the bottle through the middle of the
cork, is passed under another bottle, which is inverted over
a vessel containing water, the temperature being 60° to 70
Fahr. The evolution of gas will soon begin in the bottle
containing the saccharine substance and yeast, and the
poisonous vapour or gas will pass over through the tube
into the receiving bottle. This process can be made to
continue until all the sweet taste has left the fermenting
liquid, which gradually acquires a spirituous flavour. The
residue or lees consists of a brownish mass, and will be
found at the bottom of the vessel. The following chemical
change will have taken p'ace :
C B H l2 0 6 =2 C 2 H b o+2 C O _
Grape Sugar = Alcohol + Carbonic Acid Gas.
The fermented liquid obtained will be found to consist
not only of one form of alcohol, known as ethylic alcohol,
but of some of the higher alcohols, such as propylic,
C s H 8 O ; butylic, C 4 H lO 0 ; amylic, C 3 H l2 O (this is
commonly known as potato-spirit or fusel oil, and is a very
powerful form of alcoholic spirit) ; hexylic, C 6 II 14 O;
heptylic, C 7 H l6 O.”
If, therefore, a wine-bibber were to imbibe this apparently
homologous decoction he would be partaking of at least half-
-dozen poisons of different degrees of toxical properties.
But drinkers of colonial brewers’ poisons are often reminded


of the fact that they are drinking a prepared mixture in
which fusel oil is an ingredient. •'* From the quantities of
it imported into this country (England),” says Richardson,
“ik is believed to be employed largely in the adulteration
of wines and spirits.” Attfield, in his Chemistry , &c., says
that amylic alcohol is called fusel oil “in alluson to the
circumstance that the supposed oil is not simply educed
from a substance already containing it, as is usually the
case with oils, but is actually produced during the operation.
„It was described as oil probably because it resembled oil in
not readily mixing with water ; but it is soluble to some
extent in water, and is a true spirit, homologous with spirit
of wine. It often contains variable proportions of propylic,
butylic and caproylic alcohols.” When amylic alcohol is
pure it is colourless. It is procured from fermented potato
starch or grain starch. “ The odour of amylic alcohol,” says
Dr. Richardson, “is sweet, nauseous, and heavy. The sensa-
tion of its presence remains long. In taste it is burning and
acrid, and it is itself practically insoluble in water. WFen it
is dilluted with common alcohol it dissolves freely in water,
and gives a soft and rather unctuous flavor, I may call it a
fruity flavor, something like that of ripe pears
Amylic alcohol, when it is introduced as an adulterant, is
an extremely dangerous addition to ordinary alcohol.
It produces three stages of insensibility, ending in the
profoundest narcotism, or coma, followed by reduction of
temperature and by muscular tremors. These tremors recur
with the most perfect regularity of themselves, but they
can be excited at any moment by touching the body, or
blowing upon it, or even by a sharp noise, such as the snap
of the finger.
Just here, I ought perhaps to explain to you, so as to
prevent your becoming confused, that although I have
spoken of potato spirit, wood spirit, and spirit produced
fi orn the starch of grain whilst 1 have also told you that
sugai is the only constituent element that can produce
alcohol,” I have really stuck to my text for, to use the
wotds of Dr. Hargreaves, ‘‘Though the cereals, as rye,
wheat, barley and Indian corn, contain but little sugar, they


consist of a large proportion of starch (and the same may be
said of potatoes and other vegetable substances used in the
production of alcohols) which is capable of being converted
into sugar. This change is caused by diastase, a peculiar
ferment (the bacteria, the living organisms similar to
those described in my last lecture have been doing the
work) that is developed during the germination of all
seeds. An impure solution of diastase is produced,
by adding one part of hot water to two parts of ground
malt, or freshly germinated barley, after standing for a
short time. The proportion of diastase in malt is not more
than one part in 500 ; yet this small quantity, at a tem-
perature of 150° Fahr., is powerful enough (the bacteria
multiply so rapidly) as to change 2000 parts of starch into
dextrine, and then into grape sugar. In the operation of
malting this principle is made available. Malt is barley or
other grain, caused to germinate and the germination
arrested by heat. If bruised malt is mingled with the
ground meal of any other grain, and water at the requisite
temperature, the diastase of the malt converts the addi-
tional Starch into Sugar. This sweet liquid contains the
newly formed grape sugar, and can be changed into alcohol
by fermentation.” So, you will remember, although grains
and fruits are used in fermentation, and some of these
contain little sugar, but plenty of starch—-which also, you
will recollect, is a compound of carbon, hydrogen and
ox ygen—the starch must be converted into sugar before
We can procure alcohol. The alcoholic bacteria would seem
lo have a “ sweet tooth.” They feed upon Sugar and
discharge— alcohol. Says Dr. Kate Mitchell :—“An enor-
mous amount of good wholesome food in the form of
cereals, plants, fruits, &c., is yearly wasted in this
destructive process to produce a noxious beverage for
man’s use.” This calls to my mind what Martin Luther
Saul :—“ The man who first brewed beer was a pest for
bmrmany. Food must be dear in all our land, for the
'orses eat up all our oats, and the peasants drink up all our
barley in the form of beer. . . . There is enough barley
destroyed in the breweries to feed all Germany.”


But this is slightly digressing. I was pointing out to
you the deleterious results of the adulteration of common
alcohol with heavier ones. But those in the trade do not
always, unfortunately, confine themselves to a simple
mixture of alcohols, nor to dilution with water only.
There are adepts in the wine and spirit business who are
marvels of ingenious skill in the production of the ‘'genuine
article ” from a combination of shams. Let me read you a
quotation from the Times of December 10th, 1873 :
“ The correspondence which we have lately published on
the manufacture of the liquid sold in this country under
the name of ‘ sherry ” seems calculated to shake even the
robust faith of the British householder in the merits of his
favourite bevei’age. The correspondence had its origin in
the fate of an unfortunate gentleman who was found, by
the verdict of a coroner’s jury, to have died from an over-
dose of alcohol taken in four gills of sherry; and, as it
proceeded, it gradually unfolded some of the mysteries of
the processes by which the product called sherry is obtained.
In the first place it seems that the grapes before being
trodden and pressed are dusted over with a large quantity
of plaster of Paris (sulphate of lime), an addition which
removes the tartaric and malic acids from the juice, and
leaves sulphuric acid in their stead, so that the ‘ must ’
contains none of the bitartrate of potash which is the
natural salt of the wine, but sulphate of potash instead,
usually in the proportion of about two ounces to a gallon.
Besides this, the common varieties of ‘ must ’ receives an
additional pound of sulphuric acid to each butt by being
impregnated with the fumes of five ounces of sulphur.
When fermentation is complete, the wine may contain from
a minimum of about 14 to a maximum of 27'5 per cent, of
proof spirit; but it is not yet in a state to satisfy the
demands of the English market, neither can it be trusted
to travel without undergoing secondary fermentation or
other changes. It is therefore treated with a variety of
ingredients to impart colour, sweetness, and flavour ; and
it receives an addition of sufficient brandy to raise the
alcoholic strength of the mixture to 35 per cent, as a


minimum, or in some cases to as much as 59 per cent, of
proof spirit. When all this has been done, it is shipped
in the wood for England, where it is bottled as ‘ pure ’ wine
or is subjected to such further sophistications as the
ingenuity of dealers may suggest Surely it would not
exceed the duty of a Government which has done so much
to protect the population from disease, by enforcing sanitary
regulations—drainage, house-cleaning, &c.—to interfere
vigorously and repress this abominable traffic.”
Some little time ago Mr. Walter Burton, an ex-Custom
officer, drew the attention of the public to the fortifying of
wines under the very eyes of the Government officials
whilst in the Custom houses. “A wine-jobber,” he says,
“ having, say, 1000 gallons of wine, can add thereto 100
gallons of spirit, making a total of 1100 gallons of wine,
thereby converting in a few minutes 200 gallons of crude
potato spirit diluted with London water, and costing about
one shilling per gallon, into, it may be, a ‘ special sherry ’ or
‘ vintage port.’ ”
This is bad enough in all reason, but Wetherbee says, in
his Toxicology , according to Gustafson, a “ portion of the
so-called champagne wines is composed of the expressed
juice of turnips, apples, and other vegetables, to which
sufficient sugar of lead is added to produce the necessary
sweetness and astringency.” Touching this sugar of lead,
h*r. Orfila says, “ Of all frauds this is the most dangerous.
Sugar of lead gives a sweet, astringent metallic taste, con-
striction of the throat, pain in the stomach, vomiting, fetid
eructation, thirst, coldness of limbs, convulsions, delirium,
c - ’ No wonder the thirsty at the banquets, to use slang,
have “ hot coppers ” and “ heads on them ” the next day.
You will have seen whisky-drinkers smacking their lips
at the peculiar smoky taste of their nominated poison.
ell, “ the smoky taste of whisky is due to the presence of
a minute quantity of creasote (a poison), and it is often
clarified after being removed from the sherry casks in
it has been placed (in order to give it a stronger
uavour and to colour it) by carbonate of soda and epsom
S; dts.” If they only stopped at the epsom salts one might


be contented with a reproving smile, but they go further.
“Whisky,” says Lacey, “is adulterated with sulphate of
copper and sulphuric acid.”
Here is a receipt from Col. J. G. Dudley’s “ Alcohol: its
Combinations, Adulterations, and Physical Effects : ”
“To make an imitation of pure old Monongahela
whisky—
-40 gallons high-proof corn whisky.
3 gallons tincture guinea pepper.
40 gallons water.
1 quart tincture of pellatory.
2 ounces acetic ether.
gallons strong tea.
“ This will produce from the 40 gallons of corn whisky
about eighty-four gallons of what will be sold for pure old
Monongahela. The fusel oil not being rectified out of the
whisky, the intoxicating quantity will be superior ; and,
aided by the tincture of pellatory, disguised with pepper,
ether, and strong tea, enables the dealer to add largely of
water, and also to use cheap whisky.”
Here is another for making brandy :
“To make brandy which can be sold for pale or dark
brandy—
-40 gallons pure spirits ( common prooj.)
1 drachm cognac oil. (This is a deadly poison.)
1 pint spirits of raisons.
1 pint spirits of prunes.
1 ounce acetic ether.
3 drops oil of neroli, dissolved in 90 per cent, alcohol.
“ Color to make dark or light brandy, according to the
market you are preparing for. Fusel oil is found in nearly
all the imitation brandies, showing that the whisky used
for the basis of them has been very imperfectly rectified.
“ When real brandy is first distilled from wine, it is
quite colorless, but after being kept some time in oak casks
it becomes of a pale amber color, the color being derived
from the wood. Very dark brandies owe their color to
caramel or burnt sugar. The characteristic taste of brandy


Is due to the presence of a volatile oil obtained from the
skin of the grape.” ...... , i
There is scarcely an intoxicating drink but can be and
is, adulterated with foreign elements. “It is absolute y
frightful,” says the Cabinet Encyclopedia, p. 201, to
contemplate the list of poisons and drugs with which malt
liquors have been doctored. Opium, henbane, coculus
indicus, and Bohemian rosemary, which is said to produce a
quick and raving intoxication, supplied the place of alcohol,
aloes, quassia, gentian, sweet scented, flag, wormwood hore-
hound, and bitter oranges, fulfilled the duties of hops
preparations of fish, assisted in cases of obstinacy with oil
of vitriol, procured transparancy.
After this we are prepared to receive the testimony of
Dr. Hiram (Jox, a chemist of Cincinnati, who was directed
bv the Ohio Legislature to make an analysis of the liquors
then in the market. He relates “ I called at a grocery
store one day where liquor was being sold. A couple ot
Irishmen came in while I was there, and called for some
whisky. The first one drank, and the moment he drank
the tears flowed freely, while he at the same time caught
his breath like one suffocating or strangling When he
could speak he said to his companion, ‘ Och, Michael, by
the powers ! but this is warming to the stoomach, sure.
Michael drank, and went through like contortion, with the
remark, ‘ Troth and wouldn’t it be fom on a coold frosty
morning, Timothy 1' After they had drank I asked the
proprietor to pour me out a little tumbler. I went to my
office got my instruments and examined it. 1 found i
seventeen per cent, alcoholic spirits, when it should have
been fifty, and the difference in percentage was made up by
sulphuric acid, red pepper, pellatory, caustic potash,
brucine, and one of the salts of nux vomica (strychnine).
One pint of such liquor (at one time) would kill the
strongest man.” .. ~ ,
I have known some drinkers who pride themselves on
their ability to detect foreign ingredients, and they have
often in my hearing recommended “ gin ” as the essentially
“pure stuff.” Yet this is what Dr. Richardson says ot


gin :
rendered creamy and smooth, to be flavoured, to be made
biting to the palate, to be beaded, and what not else. To
be made ‘cordial’ it must be charged with oil of juniper,
with essence of angelica, with oil of bitter almonds, with
oil of coriander, and with oil of carraway. To sweeten it,
it must be treated with oil of vitriol, oil of almonds, oil of
junper, spirits of wine, and loaf sugar ; to ‘ force down ’
the same it must be further treated with a solution of alum
and carbonate of potassa. To be rendered creamy and
smooth it must be sweetened with sugar, and lightly charged
with a small quantity of garlic, Canadian balsam, or Stras-
burg turpentine. To give it piquancy it must have digested
in it shreds of horse-radish. To be made biting to the
palate it must receive that touch of caustic potash of which
I have spoken.”
Speaking of the habitual gin drinker Dr. Richardson
says: “ He holds up the precious liquid in his glass, and
as he sees the oily fluid roll down the side as beads, leaving
each a creamy train behind it, he rejoices in his treasure.
It is creme de la creme of gin. Those wicked pearly
drops are, to his flushed eyes, the proofs of the purity and
excellence of what he would probably tell you was, without
mistake, the genuine article. The genuineness consists in
the fact that our enthusiastic friend’s gin has been beaded
by the addition of the following artistic mixtui’e : —An
ounce of oil of sweet almonds has been added to an ounce
of oil of vitrol. These have been rubbed together in a
mortar with two ounces of loaf sugar until a paste has been
formed. The paste has next been dissolved in spirit of
wine until a thin liquid has been produced ; and this, added
to one hundred gallons of gin, has given the fine pearly
bead that is so much admired ”
You might possibly imagine that the ingredients of
adulterated liquors are harmless as they are small in pro-
portionate quantity to the amount of drink consumed.
You would be mistaken if you did, as you will see by the
following quotation from the Athenaeum : - “ At a meeting
of the Medico-Botanical Society, held in London on the


27th April, 1843, at which attention was drawn to coculus
indicus, it was stated that, ‘ taking the known deleterious
powers of the substance into account, and the proved fact
of its being very extensively used by brewers, it would be
evident that the public health must be injured by the
practice of drugging beer. Indeed, it is probable that the
d'sease and death, often said to result from beer drinking,
ought in many cases to be ascribed to the drugs with
which it is impregnated. In doses of two or three grains,
coculus indicus will produce nausea, vomiting and alarm-
ing prostration. In ten or twelve grain doses it kills
strong dogs by tetanic spasms and convulsions ; and in still
larger doses, death, both in man and animals, is speedily
produced. The drug also kills plants. In small doses it
causes symptoms resembling intoxication (i.e., poisoning by
alcohol), and is believed to be the substance in cases of w hat
is called hocussing.”
Of the gin adulterations and those of others, Dr.
Richardson assures us in his Cantor Lectures, that, . In
even small quantities every one of these agents is injurious
to the body if it be taken for any long continued period of
time. The oil of juniper is an active diuretic, and thereby
is injurious to the excreting power of one of the most
important of the vital organs. The oil of bitter almonds
contains, unless it be specially purified, hydrocyanic or
prussic acid, and exerts then in small and often repeated
quantities a prejudicial influence on the nervous functions.
Rotassa causes a dry and caustic action upon the mucous
uiembrane of the mouth, throat and stomach, for the pro-
duction of which action it is actually added systematically,
that it mav give the peculiar sharpness called £ biting the
Palate.’ ”
If I am not wearying you with too many evidences of
the nefariousness of the liquor trade, no matter how inno-
cent many of the men engaged in it may be, I will cite from
the “ Temperance Cyclopedia ” a few descriptions of the
“poisonous ingredients used in making ale, beer, and
Porter: ”


Coculus ludicus, or Indian berry, is the fruit of a plant
which grows on the coasts of Malabar. It is a small,
kidney-shaped, rough, and black-looking berry, of a very
bitter taste, and of an intoxicating or poisonous quality.
It is extensively used to increase the intoxicating properties
of the liquor.
Foxglove is a plant with large purple dowers, possessing
an intensely nauseous, bitter taste. It is a violent purga-
tive and vomit; produces languor, giddiness, and even
death. It is a poison, and is used on account of the bitter
and intoxicating qualities it imparts to the liquor among
which it is mixed.
Green Copperas, a mineral substance obtained from
iron, is much used by porter brewers and publicans to give
the porter a frothy top. The green copperas is supposed
to give to porter in the pewter pot that peculiar davour
which drinkers say is not felt in glass.
Hartshorn Shavings are the horns of the common male
deer rasped down or scraped down. They are then boiled
in the worts of ale, and give out a substance of a thickish
nature like jelly, which is said to prevent intoxicating
liquor from becoming sour.
Henbane, a plant of a poisonous nature, bearing a close
resemblance to the narcotic poison opium. It produces
intoxication, delirium, nausea, vomiting, feverishness, and
death, and appears chiedy to be used to increase the
intoxicating properties of intoxicating liquors; or, in other
words, to render them more likely to produce these effects
in those who use these liquors.
Jalap, the root of a sort of convolvulus, brought from
the neighbourhood of Xalapa, in Mexico, and so called
jalap. It is used as a powerful purgative in medicine.
Its taste is exceedingly nauseous, being of a sweetish
bitterness. It is used to prevent the intoxicating liquor
from turning sour, and probably to counteract the binding
tendency of some of the other ingredients employed by the
brewer.
Lime, an earthy substance, of a white colour. It has a
hot, burning taste, and in some measure corrodes qnd


destroys the texture of those animal substances with which
it comes into contact. It is used to prevent the intoxi-
cating liquor from turning sour, or to destroy any sourness
that may have begun to appear in it.
Multum is a mixture of opium and other ingredients>
prepared by chemists for the brewer, and used by him to
increase the intoxicating qualities of the liquor. It is of a
highly poisonous nature, and doubtless contributes to the
fatal effects of that liquor.
Nut Galls are excrescences produced by the attacks of
a small insect on the tender shoots of a tree which grows
in Asia, Syria and Persia. They are of a nauseously bitter
taste, and are much used in dyeing. They are also used in
brewing to colour or fine the liquor.
Nux Vomica is the seed of a plant, all parts of which
are of a bitter and poisonous nature. The seeds of this
plant are found in the fruit, which is about the size of an
orange. The seeds are about an inch round, and about a
quarter of an inch thick. They have no smell. It is a
violent narcotic acrid poison, and has been very extensi\e y
used in the manufacture of intoxicating ale, beer and
porter. It is such a dangerous poison that medical men
rarely prescribe it.
Opium is the thickened juice of the white poppy, which
grows most abundantly in India, though it also grows in
Britain. It is the most destructive of narcotic poisons,
and it is the most intoxicating. It has been most freely
used in the manufacture of intoxicating liquors, because its
very nature is to yield a larger quantity of intoxicating
matter than any other vegetable.
Oil op Vitriol, or sulphuric acid, is a mineral poison
of an awfully burning nature. In appearance it is oily
and colourless, and has no smell. It destroys everything
it comes in contact with. It is used by brewers to increase
the heating qualities of their liquor.
Potash derives its name from ashes and the pots in
which it is prepared. It is made from vegetables, mixed
with quicklime, boiled down in pots, and burnt the ashes
remaining after the burning being the potash. It is used


by the brewers to prevent the beer souring, or to change it
if it has become sour.
Quassia is the name of a tree which grows in America
and the West Indies. Both the wood and the fruit are of
an intensely bitter taste. It is used by brewers instead of
hops to increase the bitter in the liquor.
Tobacco is a native plant in America, but is cultivated
in various countries. The leaves, when green, possess little
smell or taste ; but when dried, their smell is fetid and
strong. It is a narcotic poison, of a bitter and acrid taste.
When distilled it yields an essential oil of a most violently
destructive nature. Yet this poison has been, and for
anything we know, is still used to increase the intoxicating
properties of ale, beer and porter.
Wormwood. —A plant or flower with downy leaves, and
small round-headed flowers. The seed of this plant has
bitter and stimulating properties, and is used to increase
the exciting and intoxicating qualities of liquor.
Yew Tops —The produce of the yew tree. The leaves
are of an extremely poisonous nature, and so are the tops,
or berries and seeds. It is used to increase the intoxi-
cating properties of the liquors.
This list is sufficiently long, but you must not conclude
that it is exhaustive. It is, however, sufficient to make us
shudder at the very thought of what men may have taken,
and some will yet take into their stomachs under the fond
belief that they were taking “a drop of something to do
them good.”
“ -Aye,” exclaims such men as the author of the editorial
in a recent issue of the Sydney Evening News, “ we admit
this impeachment. There are bad liquors. They are bad
because they are adulterated, just as you can have adulter-
ated tea, coffee and sugar, which in themselves are good
things. What we want is the pure article. In that
respect there is room for reformation, and if you fanatical
teetotallers would ‘go in' for suppressing adulteration
instead of the traffic altogether—if you would stop talking
so much about Local Option and Prohibition and Vetos
and all the rest, and expose and prohibit the drugging of


the beer at the ‘ poor man’s club’ you would have us with
you. Then you would be worthy of the name of reformers,
and the community would thank you. Set the laws in
motion, and set the Parliament of the country to pass
measures which will provide the public with a guarantee
that what is labelled outside the bottle is contained in it.
Let us have the genuine thing, whether it be tea or
whisky.”
Such men are, in their reasoning, little better than the
Scotchman who said, “ There’s nae bad whesky. There
may be ane betther than anither, but och, mon, there s nae
bad whesky.” They assume that alcohol in itself is not
dangerous, but that added poisons only work the injury.
“ Pew, very few,” says Dr. James Miller, “ever dream of
regarding it as a poison.” But that it is a poison there is
scarcely a record of a single Coroner’s Court but gives us
melancholy assurance. Again quoting Miller, I emphasise
his, not my, italics—“ Alcohol is a poison. In chemistry
and physiology this is its proper place.” One of the highest
authorities, than whom, says Miller, “we know no higher ’
on poisons “ or the articles of materia medica,” Professor
Christison, says : “ The sedative action of alcohol on the
brain constitutes it a powerful narcotic poison. For its
effects as such, if rapidly brought on by a large dose, there
is no antidote knovm —the only efficacious treatment con-
sisting of speedy evacuation of the stomach, and the
employment of brisk external stimuli.” Dr. Thomas
Trotter in his “ Essay on Drunkenness” says : —“ As an
article in Materia medica , physicians have referred alcohol
to the class of narcotics; medicines which induce stupor
and sleep, among which are reckoned opium, barque, cicuta,
belladonna, hyociamus, nicotiana, lauro-cerefus, &c.” In
his paper on the “ Physiological Influence of Alcohol,”
Lr. Edmunds says :—“ The so-called stimulating effects of
alcohol are really only finer shades of that same narcotic
influence which produces general stupefaction and universal
paralysis when the agent is given in large doses.” Professor
Pieira, in his “Materia Medica,” states: —“The local effects
°f alcohol, or rectified spirits, are those of a powerful irri


tant and caustic poison.” Dr. Chadwick affirms that it
“ acts as a poison, and may produce death in a few minutes,
or in the course of some hours, from the taking of it ; and,
when taken in small quantities for a length of time, tends
to shorten the duration of life, and may produce many
different diseases which terminate in death.” Sir Andrew
Clark classifies it with strychnine, arsenic, and opium. Sir
William Gull said, in 1877, before the Peers’ Select Com-
mittee on Intemperance : —“ I should like to say that a
very large number of people in society are dying day by
day, poisoned by alcohol, but not supposed to be poisoned
by it.” Further on he says:—“l should say from my
experience that alcohol is the most destructive agent that
we are aware of in this country.” This view is shared by
Dr. Grindrod, who avers:—“Alcohol, both in its nature
and operation, ranks undoubtedly among the class of
poisonous substances. An intoxicating liquor, in the strict
etymological sense of the word, signifies a poisonous or
deleterious liquor. The word intoxication is derived from
a Greek word which signifies poison , and intoxication
consequently refers to the state of the system produced by
some poisonous agent. Alcohol, even in small quantities,
is destructive to human life.” To this list of authorities it
is scarcely an exaggeration to say I could add hundreds.
What, then, may be said of those who fight for the
continuance and extension of this poisoning? And what
more can be said of those in the trade who add to this
poison, in itself deadly enough, sugar of lead, creosote,
ferrous sulphate, strychnine, essentia bina, tobacco, colo-
cynth, copper, cocculus indicus, oil of vitriol, lime, fusel
oil, lupulit, phosphoric acid, picric acid, prussic acid, tannic
acid, and yet other ingredients? These men, innocently
some, knowingly others, are engaged in a business with
fraud, danger, and death indelibly stamped on it.
There is a view, of which I have in my time been an
enthusiastic defender, which looks upon the production of
alcohol as the outcome of intelligence and civilisation.
Therefore, it is argued, it must be of some benefit because
it comes to us as part of our civilisation This way of


looking at it is somewhat sophistical, but we will admit its
correctness. Undoubtedly the discovery of alcohol was an
important discovery. So also was the discovery of the
properties of opium. What then ? Does it follow that
because opium has some valuable properties for the use of
the physician that we should indulge in the indiscriminate
use of it, as many to their sorrow have done? Everything
is good in its proper place. The question which higher
civilisation is now setting positively at rest is : What is
the proper place of Alcohol ? On this point let me read
to you what Dr. Kate Mitchell says, and thereby conclude
this lecture and echo her views :—“ Without doubt the
discovery of this agent is one of the most meritorious”
[surely this ought to satisfy the most fastidious publican !]
“ man has ever made. It has been as useful to him in his
scientific, artistic and commercial progress, as it has been
injurious to him as a beverage It was found to burn
without smoke or soot, and to give out a considerable
amount of heat, therefore it was more useful in the
chemist’s laboratory than the smoke-laden, evil-smelling
oils and fats formerly used. It was found also to possess
the power of dissolving substances hitherto looked upon as
insoluble, to extract the principles of various roots, seeds,
and plants ; to possess undoubted anti-putrefactive or pre-
servative properties. The physician, the artist, the manu-
facturer, the anatomist were at last in possession of an
article which made progress more easy for them in their
different paths, which opened up avenues of thought and
experiment hitherto only dimly perceived, because the
wonderful agent had not yet been alighted upon. Sulphuric
acid, or oil of vitriol, was obtained by the distillation of
green vitriol (a green crystal found in the earth), and this
oil added to alcohol produced that thin, mobile and volatile
liquid which we call ether. It possesses a peculiar pene-
trating and agreeable perfume, not unlike the smell of
apples ; is sparingly soluble in water, floating on its surface
and on that of Alcohol. It dissolves oils and fats, india-
rubber, gutta-percha, also many resins. It produces a
Sensation of burning on the skin, ancj, when breathed upon.


of intense cold. It speedily evaporates, and is the lightest
known substance. When inhaled it produces ansethesia,
and has been used in conjunction with chloroform, some-
times alone, for operative purposes. Dr. Richardson intro-
duced it into surgical use in the form of the ether spray
for minor operations. From alcohol this wonderful liquid
was obtained, and so also was a still more universally
applied liquid, chloroform, which has been one of the most
beneficial discoveries ever made by man. Chloroform has
brought the science of surgery to perfection ; it has done
more to preserve life, to dispel pain, to bring relief to the
racking and tortured body, than any other known agent up
to the present time. Its discovery was due to the pre-
existence of Alcohol, and was made simultaneously by a
French chemist named Soubieran and the German chemist
Liebig in 1831. The former, in one of his chemical experi-
ments, distilled alcohol upon the hypo chlorite of lime, and
chloroform was the result. It can now be produced by
other methods.
“To the scientific man alcohol has been of immense
service. The anatomical and naturalists’ museums are
filled with specimens of organic structures which could not
possibly have been preserved with the same success in any
other way than through this agent. It possesses the power
of abstracting water from all animal and vegetable tissue,
because of its peculiar affinity—an elective affinity, as
Goethe would say—for this element. It is the presence
of water in decaying animal and vegetable matter which
assists in promoting its putrefaction; but this process of
decay and putrefaction can be arrested if the tissue or
structure is placed in strong spirit of wine and hermetically
sealed. In this way are obtained the beautiful physiological
and pathological specimens with which our scientific museums
are filled, and which are so precious to the scientific worker.
Many colouring dyes and varnishes have been added to
those already known through the aid of this agent, and the
many beautiful and subtle perfumes, which are manu-
factured in such variety and perfection now-a-days, owe
their existence to the attractive adtion of alcohol. A large


majority of the drugs in the Pharmacopoeia—the extracts
and tinctures and spirits—are made from alcohol, which
we are taking in small doses when we are prescribed these
different medicines. The claims of alcohol are indisputable
and manifold. In our denunciation of its use as a beverage ,
we must not overlook its value in other directions, as such
a proceeding would rather weaken than enforce the argu-
ments of temperance reformers.


VI.
Alcohol, undoubtedly, as we saw in my last lecture, can
be put to the service of man, but woe be to that man to
whom it becomes a master. In art and science and medi-
cine we may turn it to good account; but when we indulge
in it as a beverage, however moderately, it becomes an
agent destructive of all that is dearest to humanity.
Physically, financially, mentally, morally, it plants the
seeds of ruin. In health it sows disease ; in hope, despair ;
in purity, depravity; in honour, disgrace; in happiness,
misery; in chastity, vice; in life itself, the most harrowing
kinds of death.
There are some authorities who, I regret to say, by the
weight of their reputations, have popularised the notion
that alcohol in moderation is not only harmless, but
beneficial. Many doctors incline to this belief. Thus, to
take a recent writer, I read in the July number of The New
Review for the present year, in an article by Dr. Robson
Roose on “ A Contribution to the Alcohol Question,” page
72 :—“ It has also been pretty clearly proved that alcohol,
taken internally, is not entirely eliminated as such, but
that some of it is decomposed in the system. As to the
proportion thus changed, no exact statement can be made;
but, admitting the fact, we cannot deny that alcohol is
a food in the strict sense of the word. This inference
is supported by those cases in which only minute
quantities of ordinary aliment are taken during several
months, or even years, but wines and spirits are
freely administered, the patient meanwhile showing
no less weight.” In a work, for which I have profound
admiration for the most part, devoted to the study of
political economy and not particularly aiming at any
partisan view of this great question, this position is very
positively stated. The work is entitled Groundwork of


Economic #, and therein the author, C. S. Devas, in his
chapter on “ Food and Drink,” writes : —“ For the majority
of healthy adults in most employments a moderate amount
of fermented drink is beneficial, particularly, but not
exclusively, for males, and for those in later life and
engaged in head work. The anaesthetic or sedative effects
of alcohol may make it indispensable for the full exercise
of intellectual powers; and it is almost, if not quite, neces-
sary for many of those who have to exert great muscular
force, particularly when, as with metal workers, this has to
be done in a very high temperature. . . . Often a
glass of malt liquor, or cider, or wine of the country, can
be got for less cost than the extra amount of ordinary food
that else must be eaten to preserve health ; for alcohol can
lessen the necessity for food by diminishing the waste of
the system that has to be repaired by food ; and thus for a
temperate workman to forego his glass of beer may be
anything but an economy.”
These authors, who may be taken as fair types of a
numerous class, follow largely in the footstep of the justly
celebrated Liebig. The theory of Baron Liebig, briefly
stated, is :—“ That alcohol is a calorific agent, a heat-giving
food, to be classed with fat, sugar, and the other non-
nitrogenous food elements ; that alcohol is oxidised in the
body, and gives out its latent energy as vitalising warmth
and force.” That I may do justice to Liebig, and it
certainly is not my object to gain anything for temperance
by any injustice, I will give you a few brief quotations
from his works. In his Animal Chemistry he says : —“ The
production of heat and the change of matter are closely
related to each other; but although heat can be produced
in the body without any change of matter in living tissues,
yet the change of matter cannot be supposed to take place
without the co-operation of oxygen. According to all the
observations hitherto made, neither the expired air, nor the
perspiration, nor the urine contains any trace of alcohol
after indulgence in spirituous liquors; and there can be no
doubt that the elements of alcohol combine with oxygen in
the body ; that its carbon and hydrogen are given off as


carbonic acid and water. The oxygen which has accom-
plished this change must have been taken from the arterial
blood ; for we know of no channel, save the circulation of
the blood, by which oxygen can penetrate into the interior
of the body. Owing to its volatility, and the ease with
which its vapour permeates animal membranes and tissues,
alcohol can spread throughout the body in all directions.
If the power of the elements of alcohol to combine with
oxygen were not greater than that of the compounds
formed by the change of matter, or that of the substance of
living tissues, they (the elements of alcohol) could not
combine with oxygen in the body. It is consequently
obvious that by the use of alcohol a limit must rapidly be
put to the change of matter in certain parts of the body.
The oxygen of the arterial blood, which, in the absence of
alcohol, would have combined with the matter of the
tissues, now combines with the elements of alcohol. The
arterial blood becomes venous, without the substance of the
muscles having taken any share in the transformation.
Now, we observe, that development of heat in the body
after the use of wine increases rather than diminishes,
without the manifestation of a corresponding amount
of mechanical force.” Elsewhere the same author says .
“ Since the establishment of temperance societies, it
was thought fair, in many English families, to compensate
in money those servants who no longer drank beer ; hut the
consumption of bread increased in a striking degree. On
the occasion of the meeting of the Peace Congress in
Frankfort, the proprietor of the Hotel de Russie —Herr
Sarg—observed that those who take no wine always eat
more.” And, to place his contention in his most concise
terms, he says :—“ Alcohol occupies a foremost rank in the
respiratory or heat-giving foods. The ingestion of Alcohol
dispenses with the use of farinaceous and saccharine foods.
Yet even the authors I have quoted—l)r. Robson Roose,
C. S. Devas, and Baron Liebig—concede much, even whilst
maintaining the supposition that alcohol is beneficial under
certain circumstances, to the temperance cause. Dr. Roose,
in the article I have quoted, says : —“ The evils of intemper


ance can scarcely be exaggerated; ” and at the conclusion
he says : —“ Let us regard alcohol as a luxury for most of
those who take it, as a necessity for some persons, and as a
poison for others; let us educate our children to do without
it; let us deal with habitual drunkards as we do with
lunatics.” C. S. Devas states: “The Australians and the
Maoris have withered away before the British colonists, and
no small part of this lamentable destruction is due to British
spirits.” Again : “ The vice of drunkenness is an open one,
its mischief obvious.” His concluding words of the chapter
on “ Food and Drink ” are well worth quoting. “ But God
forbid,” he exclaims, “ that I should damp the ardour of
combatants in a good cause, or say that we must give up
enthusiasm because we give up extravagance. It is possible
to pursue even modest aims with zeal and perseverance ;
and it is indeed worth while, when we see our country
burdened by the yoke of an almost compulsory intemperance ,
to do a little, be it ever so little, to lighten this dreadful
servitude.” As to Baron Liebig, it must be understood
that he condemns intemperance in most powerful terms,
and he seems only to defend moderation from a scientific
standpoint. At times he seems to even doubt his own
position. Thus he says:—“Spirits, by their action on the
nerves of the drinker, make up power at the expense of his
body. He draws a bill on his health, which must be always
renewed.”
But, after very careful reading in the light of more
recent scientific information than was available to Liebig, I
am compelled to pronounce the views of this great chemist
to be fallacious. Dr. James Miller gives them very scant
courtesy indeed. “Adopting,” says he, “the tactics of the
alcoholists, we could make out almost as good a case for
tartar emetic as for alcohol. A patient at one time had
much too good an appetite, to his thinking; he was getting
stout and pursy, and by no ordinary means could he keep
the demands of his clamorous stomach within reasonable
bounds. At last a happy idea struck him. He would
have recourse to physic, so as to produce slight sickness —a
morbid condition ; and, accordingly, a small dose of tartar


emetic was taken a short time before every meal. This
succeeded admirably; the appetite lessened ; the £ too solid
flesh ’ began to melt; and the patient was quite satisfied.
Now, this tartar emetic, in one sense, took the place of
food, therefore was a substitute for food, therefore was
equivalent to food, and therefore was food ! ’’
Let us, however, look into this matter a little more
closely. Let us endeavour, by an appeal to facts, to answer
this question : Is alcohol food ?
To be food it must supply some actual demand of the
body. It must either build up the material structure or
help to furnish the conditions under which the building up
process proceeds. It must in some way modify the totality
called “ man ” in the direction of that normal state called
“health.” It must contribute, in some form or other,
life qualities. To ascertain what it can give to man,
we must analyse the human body, and see what alcohol,
as alcohol, has in common with it. I will first direct
your attention to the human composition —the list of
articles, so to speak, required to build up a man in
perfect health. I take the information supplied to the
South Kensington science students in a work entitled
“ Food : Some Accounts of its Sources, Constituents,
Uses,” by A. H. Church, M.A., Oxen. It takes to pieces,
metaphorically speaking, a man in health between twenty-
five and thirty-five years of age, of eleven stone in weight,
and five feet eight inches in height—
lbs. ozs, grs.
1. Water: found in every tissue and secretion ... 109 0 0
2. Fibrin and similar substances forming the chief
solid material of muscular flesh, and occuring in
blood ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 15 10 0
3. Phosphate of lime: in all tissues and liquids,
chiefly in the bones and teeth 812 0
4. Fat: a mixture of three chemical compounds, dis-
tributed throughout the body ... ... ... 480
5. Ossein : organic framework of bones, chief con-
stituent of connective tissues ; yields gelatine
when boiled ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 4 7 350
6. Keratin, with other similar nitrogenous com-
pounds : forms chief part of skin, hair, nails,
and weighs about ... ... ••• 4 2 0


lbs. ozs, grs.
7. Cartilagin : a nitrogenous substance, the chief con-
stituent of cortilage ... ... ... .... 18 0
8. Haemoglobin : a very important nitrogenous sub-
stance, containing iron ; it gives the red colour
to the blood ... ... 18 0
9. Albumen: a soluble nitrogenous substance, found
in chyle, lymph, blood and muscles ... .. 110
10. Carbonate of lime : found chiefly in bone ... ... 1 0 350
11. Kephalin, with myelin, cerebrin, and several other
nitrogenised, sulphurised, or phosphorised com-
pounds : found in the brain, nerves, &c. ... 013 0
12. Fluoride of calcium : found chiefly in bdncs and
teeth 0 7 175
13. Phosphate of magnesia : chiefly in bones and teeth 0 7 0
14. Chloride of sodium (common salt): occurs through-
out the body 0 7 0
15. Cholesterin, fuosite, and glycogen, compounds con-
taining carbon, hydrogen and oxygen : found in
brain, muscle, and liver 0 3 0
16. Sulphate, phosphate, and organic salts of sodium :
found everywhere ... 0 2 107
17. Sulphate, phosphate, and chloride of potassium :
found everywhere 0 1 300
18. Silica : occurs in hair, skin and bone 0 0 30
154 0 0
These, then, are the material compounds of the body. Of
course each compound is further resolvable into its con-
stituent elements. To make, or constitute, these com-
pounds the following elements are necessary :—Hydrogen,
oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, iron, sulphur, phosphorus, cal-
cium, fluorine, magnesium, sodium, chlorine, silicon,
potassium, manganese, and copper, or a total of sixteen.
Before anything can be considered food, then, its con-
stituents must not only contain these elements, but it is
necessary to have them in the various combinations I have
quoted. You cannot say I will take daily so many grains
of phosphorous, sulphur, iron, carbon, and oxygen, &c.
This would be suicidal. The elements must already have
been organised into compounds of a suitable character
before they are fitted for normal nutrition. “It turns
out,” says Professor Huxley, “to be an indispensable
condition that every substance which is to serve perma-


nently as food must contain a sufficient quantity of the
most important and complex components of the body
ready made.” For instance, we require oxygen and hydro-
gen in addition to the complex organic compounds. How
are these two elements taken into the system 1 Chiefly by
means of the liquids we swallow—in other words, through
the medium of water. Water may almost be said to be the
chief constituent of the body, notwithstanding the grog-
drinkers sneers. Huxley says the human body in ultimate
analysis proves to be carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and
nitrogen, plus water and saline matter found in food.
Nature demands this much dispised water to do her work.
How important it is you will see by the following table
showing how largely the teetotaller’s beverage enters into
our structures. Taking each of the parts at a thousand,
Dr. Austin Flint, in his Physiology of Man , gives the
following as the proportionate quantity of water :
Teeth... ... ... 100
Bones ... ... 130
Tendons ... ... 500
Articular Cartilages... 550
Skin ... ... ... 575
Liver... ... 618
Muscles of Man ... 725
Ligaments ... ... 768
Mean of Blood ... 780
Milk of Human Female 887
Chyle of Man ... 904
Bile 905
Urine ... ... 933
Human Lymph ... 960
Human Saliva ... 983
Gastric Juice ... 984
Perspiration ... ... 986
Tears... ... ••• 990
Pulmonary Yapour ... 997
I want to insist on this importance of water, because I
shall have to refer to it again when treating on the action
of alcohol. Dr. Austin Flint states that it “is by far the
most important of the inorganic principles. It is present
at all periods of life, existing even in the ovum. It exists
in all parts of the body ; in the fluids —some of which, as
the lachrymal fluid and perspiration, contain little else —
and in the hardest strictures, as the bones or the enamel
of the teeth.” As to its functions, he says:—“ Asa
constituent of organised tissue, it gives to cartilage its
elasticity, to tendons their pliability and toughness; it is


necessary to the peculiar power and resistance of the bones
.. , and to the proper consistence of all parts of the
body. It has other important functions as a solvent.
Soluble articles of food are introduced in solution in water.
The excrementitious matters, which are generally soluble
in water, are dissolved by it in the blood, carried to the
organs of excretion, and discharged in a watery solution
from the body.”
Bicquerel and Rodier inform us that the blood itself is
thus constituted :
Water 781 600
Globules ... ... ... ... ... ••• 135-000
Albumen ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 70-000
Fibrine ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 2-500
Chlorides of sodium, potassium, magnesium, &c— 3"500
There can be no mistaking, then, the valuable part that
water plays in the economy of our constitution. And it is
equally important in the constitution of our necessary diet,
even that which we look upon as solid. In 100 lbs. of
bread there are 40 lbs. of water ; in 100 lbs. of cabbages
there are 89 lbs. of water; in lean meat, the same weight,
73 lbs.; and in fish, 74 lbs. “When,” says Dr. Kate
Mitchell, “there is a great loss of this primitive fluid in the
system, as in cholera morbus, in severe forms of diarrhoea,
in the disease called diabetes, there is a shrivelled and
shrunken appearance, the skin becomes dry, the bony parts
prominent, the hollows accentuated. Thus water is a
beautifier as well as a necessity of the human form, and it
is better taken in its purest form for these purposes than in
any other way. Man, in thinking to improve upon nature,
has manufactured all sorts of decoctions and beverages,
with which he has more or less vitiated his palate, and
very few people, excepting children and total abstainers,
partake of water in its pure and unadulterated condition.
I have even heard men and women boast of the fact that
they do not like water, and that as water it never passes
their lips. As if it were reasonably possible in a natural
condition to dislike a fluid which is tasteless, colourless,


satisfying, and essential! Civilisation must indeed have
vitiated all the natural wants and propensities of mankind
for such a state of things to be made a boast of.”
I have given you a detailed list of the materials requisite
to form a healthy man, but you must bear in your minds
the fact that in the very effort of living these materials are
used up. We cannot be of precisely the same weight
during two succeeding minutes. To manufacture force we
must use material, and life is a constant manifestation of
force. In the same way that we must burn coal to generate
steam, and in the same way that we must lose water in
utilising steam, the body must use or lose material
and burn its fuel to keep alive. Perhaps the simplest
illustration that could be given of this important fact is
that given by Prof. Huxley in his Elementary Lessons in
Physiology. “ Suppose,” says he “ a chamber with walls
of ice, through which a current of pure ice-cold air passes ;
the walls of the chamber will, of course, remain unmelted.
N ow, having weighed a healthy living man with great care,
let him walk up and down the chamber for an hour. In
doing this he will obviously exercise a great amount
of mechanical force ; as much, at least, as would be
required to lift his weight as high and as often as he
has raised himself at every step. But, in addition, a
certain quantity of the ice will be melted, or converted into
water ; showing that the man has given off heat in abun-
dance. Furthermore, if the air which enters the chamber
be made to pass through lime-water, it will cause no cloudy
white precipitate of carbonate of lime because the quantity
of carbonic acid in ordinary air is so small as to be inap-
preciable in this way. But if the air which passes out is
made to take the same course, the lime-water will soon
become milky, from the precipitation of carbonate of lime,
showing the presence of carbonic acid, which, like heat, is
given off by the man. Again, even if the air be quite dry
as it enters the chamber (and the chamber be lined with
some material so as to shut out all vapour from the
melting ice walls), that which is breathed out of the man,
and that which is given off from his skin, will exhibit


clouds of vapour ; which vapour, therefore, is derived from
the body. After the expiration of the hour during which
the experiment has lasted, let the man be released and
weighed once more. He will be Jound to have lost weight.
Thus a living, active man constantly exerts mechanical
force , gives off heat , evolves carbonic acid and water , and
undergoes a loss of substance
It is to make good this loss of force and substance that
we take our foods —from air, liquids, and solids. Food,
then, must do one or other of two things—some foods, as
the proteids, do both—either it must supply the body with
substance or it must enable the body to gain or maintain
heat—force. Does alcohol supply the body with sub-
stance—that is, does alcohol take the place of any of the
material lost in the processes of life ?
That I may construct my lecture as much as possible on
lines free from argumentative bias, and preserve the calm-
ness and simplicity of science, I will refer you again to
Huxley. On page 136 of the same work he writes:—
“ From what has been said, it becomes readily intelligible
that, whether an animal be herbivorous or carnivorous, it
begins to starve from the moment its vital food-stuffs
consists of pure amyloids, or fats, or any mixture of them.
It suffers from what may be called nitrogen starvation
[observe these italics, which are Huxley’s own, nitrogen
starvation |, and, sooner or later, will die.” On page 139
he says:—“Proteids [nitrogenous compounds] are tissue-
formers, inasmuch as no tissue can be produced without
them."
This, put into other language, means that without the
supply of nitrogen we cannot restore the structures of the
constantly wasting body. That food, then, which has to
build the body must contain nitrogen, and conversely, that
food that does not contain nitrogen cannot build the body.
In former lectures I gave you the composition of alcohol.
You saw that its formula was C 2 H 6 O, or a compound of
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, but altogether devoid of
nitrogen. In the light of this fact we must conclude, if we
rely upon Huxley, whose authority none will question, that


no tissue can be formed by alcohol. To put this striking
conclusion in the words of Dr. Richardson contained in his
Cantor Lectures from which I am about to quote “ the
delivery of which ” says Lacey “ before the Society of
Arts, 1874-75, marked an era in the progress of temperance
enlightenment.” “ Alcohol contains no nitrogen, it has
none of the qualities of these structure-building foods ;it
is incapable of being transformed into any of them ; it is
therefore not a food in the sense of its being a constructive
agent in the building up of the body.” He adds, “in
respect to this view there is, I believe, now no difference of
opinion amongst those who have most carefully observed
the action of alcohol.”
Driven from this vainly imagined stronghold the
alcoholist seeks to entrench himself in another field. He
avers that if alcohol does not actually “ build up ” it, at all
events, prevents waste, and therefore prevents the loss of
substance, thus necessitating a lesser need for repair.
Says Dr. Robson Roose in the article in The New
Revieiv : “ Dram-drinkers, likewise, are often very small
eaters—you will observe that Liebig has urged the
same point—“ in both classes of cases the alcohol, besides
acting as a food,” which, in the sense of a builder,
you have seen it does not, “ doubtless checks waste and
retards normal changes .” I have already quoted Devas ;
but I ask you again to listen to his words, for they contain,
in a brief form, a clear and positive statement of his views
on this point: —“Alcohol can lessen the necessity for food
by diminishing the waste of the system that has to be
repaired by food ” (p. 324).
This excuse for moderate drinking has been popularised
in these colonies by at least three of our most eminent
Anglican Church bishops—Moorhouse, Barry, and Smith.
These men, and others of the like way of thinking, whose
positions give them great influence in the community, have
damped the ardour of temperance reformers, have lent
encouragement to the evils of moderate drinking, and in
consequence have, I fear, unwittingly caused the swelling
of the rank of drunkards. It is very important, therefore,


that we should be very sure, beyond all doubt in fact, that
in lending our moral support and example to this view, we
are not opening the gates of a terrific flood, and that our
position is assured beyond scientific question. Will the
position admit of controversy ? Are there any reasonable
doubts as to its validity? For I contend that, if there be
the slightest doubt on such a life and death matter, our
safety lies on the side of total abstinence.
Permit me to call witnesses. Here is Dr. Hargreaves,
and he says:—“Unfortunately for this theory of Liebig’s
and for Dr. Hammond’s hypothesis, it cannot be demon-
strated, for when put to the test it fails.” Again, he says :
—“ Hence, as a house built on the sand must fall, the
doctor’s theory of alcohol’s power to preserve the waste of
tissue must fall, when the foundation on which it rested no
longer remains.” Hear him, further : —“ Whatever may be
the notions of those who believe that a glass or two of wine
at dinner will lessen the wear and tear of body and mind,
to the true scientist it must appear the very acme of
fallacy.”
My next witness is Dr. D Campbell Black, M.D.,
L.R.C.S., Edin., who says:—“lt seems to me a remarkable
fallacy that physiologists should persist in talking of the
propriety of ‘ sparing the tissues,’ inasmuch as the proper
function of the tissue is, to such an extent, their destruc-
tion, life the resultant of the change. Indeed, when any
tissue is unduly retained in the system, it may of itself
constitute materies morbi.”
Now I call Dr. Charles Jewett, and I ask the bishops to
listen to him :—“ Prevent the waste of tissue ? It does to
a certain extent. It stupih.es the fellow so that he cannot
use his muscle or brain. Wherever you develop power,
you waste tissue. If you develop thought, you waste
brains. When a fellow is dead drunk he saves his tissues.
Toads have lived in rocks one hundred years; but who
wants to live a toad’s life for the sake of saving his tissues 1
I don’t want to save my tissues ! I want to go to my
table every day, and have it well spread with substantial
food, and incorporate the vegetable compounds, and make


them a part of Jewett; and then I want to use up the
energy in advancing the glory of God and promoting the
good of mankind. This idea of saving tissues is all a
humbug.”
My last witness, though I could summon dozens of
authorities, will be James Miller, F.R.S.E., F.R.C.S.E.,
Professor of Surgery in the University of Edinburgh, &c.
What is his testimony ? “ Driven to admit that it has no
power to repair tissue, and restore strength, they will yet
put in a claim for it as a means of retarding the exhaustion
of strength, and diminishing the disintegration of tissue—
on this ground : —Observation shows that a working man,
under the use of alcohol, throws off [the italics are Professor
Miller’s] less waste tissue by the organs of excretion than
he does without it. Granted. But because less waste
material is thrown off, does it necessarily follow that less
waste is made ? Is it not at least possible that the same,
or even greater, waste taking place, more is retained within
the system—in the blood ; contaminating that all impor-
tant fluid 1 In other words, may not the effect of alcohol
be—as the fat globules, so invariably seen by Lallermand
and his coadjutors, in alcoholic blood, may seem to testify
not to delay or diminish the waste of tissue, but rather to
delay and diminish the getting rid of that waste—the
amount of which it may have absolutely increased ? A
little further on he speaks still more positively, if that were
possible. He says : —“ 1. It does not directly repair and
nourish, as azotised food does. 2. So far from really
restraining, it creates a greater—because more sustained—
waste of material, than otherwise would have been the
case; so increasing the ultimate amount of exhaustion.
3. By opposing excretion of the waste, it contaminates the
blood, and, sending down to the muscles and nerves a
fluid not sufficient for their due nourishment and repair,
still further aggravates the evil. In other words, so far
from restraining waste, it enhances it; so far from favour-
ing, it opposes the nourishment, reaction, and repair.
Alcohol does not contribute one solitary brick to maintain
the wall of the animal economy ; nor does it at all avert


the spontaneous crumbling of it. On the contrary, it both
enlarges the existing breach, and thwarts the masonry that
would fill it up. He is surely an unwise builder, therefore,
who uses so distempered a mortar.”
There yet remains to be considered the contention that
alcohol is a force-food. This is the conclusion of Baron
Liebig and Dr. Hammond. If it can be demonstrated that
alcohol can furnish the body with heat which cannot be
better supplied by other substances, or if it can be shown
that the manner of the supply is better, speedier, or more
efficacious than that from other sources, we must admit
an inroad has been made on the temperance fortress. Can
this be done ?
Since the time of Liebig considerable attention has been
paid to this question, and the supposition that alcohol
yielded heat by combustion in the lungs and vascular
system has been thrown in doubt by the experiments of the
French chemists Lallemand, Perrin, and Duroy, who came
to the conclusion after careful and elaborate investigation
that alcohol undergoes no process of combustion “ but when
taken into the body is excreted as alcohol.” I will read
you a few of their results from a translation by Dr. Lees,
who styles it the “ Alcoholic Alphabet.” It is unnecessary
to quote all the alphabet, and I will only give you the
letters having special bearing on the point under dis-
cussion :
“R. We never found in either the blood or tissues, any
oj the derivatives of alcohol. [Which must have been the
case if alcohol underwent complete decomposition.
“S, Only in the stomach was found a trace of acetic acid
generated from alcohol by the ferment of the gastic juice.
“T. Alcohol is rejected from the vital economy by divers
systems of elimination; by the lungs, the skin, and the
kidneys.
“XI. —These organs are found to eliminate alcohol after
the ingestion of very small doses.
“y. The elimination lasts many hours ; even after an
ingestion very moderate, the kidneys continue longest to
reject it.”


W. Hargreaves, M.D., says:—“ By these different ex-
periments we find that, when alcoholic drinks are used, the
alcohol enters into the blood current, and permeates every
part of the body ; that it undergoes no chemical change in
the system, but is eliminated through the excretory organs,
particularly the lungs and the kidneys, within a few hours.”
He adds, in the next paragraph but one :—“ If alcohol is
food, so is ether, chloroform, &c., the difference in their
action being only secondary ; for alcohol taken into the
stomach (or the vapour of ether or chloroform inhaled by
the lungs), as soon as received into the blood current, is
treated as an intruder, a foreign invader, and removed as
quickly as possible by the excretory organs.”
The publication of the prize essay, t: Du role VAlcool , et
des Anesthesiques daus VOrganisme, Racherches Expere-
mentales,” by these Frenchmen, led to a learned contro-
versy and a consequent modification of opinion. Baudot,
Trousseau, Schulinus, Edward Smith, Austie, Thudieum,
Dupre', Parkes (not Sir Henry), Subbotin, and Dr. Richard-
son contributed ably to the discussion of the point in
dispute, and the result of their labours may be stated in
the words of Dr. Richardson : —“ They prove that while it
is true that, under certain circumstances, alcohol taken
into the body will pass off in the secretions unchanged, the
quantity so eliminated is the merest fraction of what has
been injected, and that there must be some other means by
which the spirit is disposed of in the organism.”
This brief indication of the course of investigation on
purely scientific lines into the question of the disposal of
alcohol, a question not yet satisfactorily settled, prepares
the way for the more pointed and instructive researches of
Dr. Richardson. Granting as much as possible to the
alcoholists, for we want the truth and the truth only,
admitting that all alcohol is not eliminated from, but some
is decomposed in, the system, does it supply the body with
heat? For, to quote Dr. Richardson again, if there be
heat, and if there be product of carbon consumed in oxygen,
then alcohol must rank as a heat-forming food.


Remember that Dr. Richardson’s conclusions were the
results of painstaking experiments, conducted as all scientific
investigations should be, without bias, and aiming simply
at the elucidation of truth. In these experiments and
their results he was confirmed by an independent investi-
gator—the late Dr. Edward Smith. What, then, did these
experiments decide?
“I found,” he says, in his Cantor Lectures , “a reduction
of animal heat to the special action of the poison. To make
the research more perfectly reliable, I combined the action
of alcohol with that of cold. A warm-blooded animal,
insensibly asleep in the third stage of alcoholic narcotism,
was placed in a chamber, the air of which was reduced in
temperature to ten degrees below freezing point, together
with another similar animal which had received no alcohol.
I found that both sleep under these circumstance, but the
alcoholic sleeps to die ; the other sleeps more deeply than is
natural, and lives so long as the store of food it is charged
with continues to support life.”
On page 72 he says:—“We are landed, then, at last on
this basis of knowledge. An agent that will burn and give
forth heat and product of combustion outside the body, and
which is obviously decomposed within the body, reduces the
animal temperature, and prevents the yield of so much
product of combustion as is actually natural to the organic
life.”
On page 74 he writes : —“ I cannot too forcibly impress
the fact that cold and alcohol act, physiologically, in the
same manner, and that, combined in action, every danger
resulting from either agent is doubled. Whenever we see
a person disposed to meet the effects of cold by strong
drink, it is our duty to endeavour to check that effort, and
whenever we see an unfortunate person under the influence
of alcohol, it is our duty to suggest warmth as the best
means for his recovery. These facts prompt many other
useful ideas of detail in our common life. If, for
instance, our police [and here I heartily agree with
him] were taught the simple art of taking the animal
temperature of persons they have removed from the


streets in a state of insensibility, the results would be
most beneficial. The operation is one that hundreds of
nurses now carry out daily, and applied by our police-
officers, at their stations, it would enable them not only to
suspect the difference between a man in an apoplectic fit,
and a man intoxicated, but would suggest naturally the
instant abolition of the practice of thrusting the really
intoxicated into a cold and damp cell, which to such an one
is actually an ante-room to the grave ”
In his “ Results of Researches on Alcohol,” he says :
“ I placed alcohol and cold side by side in experiment, and
found that they ran together in fatal effect, and I deter-
mined that in death from alcohol the great reduction of
animal temperature is one of the most pressing causes of
death.”
Professor Binz, of Bonn, testified to the same purpose as
the results of his experiments to the British Association at
Bradford in 1873; and the elaborate experiments concerning
the action of alcohol on pigs, conducted in Paris by Drs.
Dujardin-Beaumetz and Audige, “ seem to absolutely pre-
clude the possibility,” says Gustafson, “of further contro-
versy on this point—that the invariable result of the use of
alcohol as a drink is the lowering of the temperature.”
These conclusions are, moreover, confirmed by experience.
William Cobbett wrote in 1820 :—“ It is said, as an excuse
for the use of spirits, that they keep out the cold. Let a
man once persuade himself of that, and he will soon find
that they keep off the heat ! That they drive out the heat
is very certain; for, in the northern parts of America,
where the cold is so great that the people are frequently
frost-bitten , and are compelled to have their feet or hands
cut off, it is a caution always given to those who are likely
to be exposed to the severity of the weather not to drink
any spirits before they go out. And, though I have known
many persons frozen to death, and a great many more to
have their limbs cut off, I hardly recollect a single instance
in which the suffering party had not taken spirituous
liquors on his way, or before he went out.”


One of the members of the English Arctic Expedition,
Sir John Richardson, M.D., said “I am quite satisfied
that spirituous liquors diminish the power of resisting cold.
Plenty of food and sound digestion are the best sources of
heat.”
Gustafson writes:—“During the campaign in 1812, in
Russia, so fatal for France, it was found that almost all
those soldiers who used alcoholic drinks succumbed to the
cold and fatigue, while only a small proportion of abstainers
fell victims to these rigours.”
The Russian authorities have been so thoroughly con-
vinced of the harmful character of alcohol considered as a
calorific, that they have absolutely prohibited its use in the
army when mobilisation takes place during extreme cold,
and the corporals have had imposed on them the duty of
examining the breath of each soldier on parade, and turn-
ing back all those who have indulged in spirits, “ it having
been found that such men are peculiarly subject to be frost-
bitten and otherwise injured.”
I think, after the evidence I have adduced, you will
conclude, and so be at least on the safe side, that alcohol
does not nutrify, prevent waste, give heat, nor help the
normal man to preserve health. It is a foreign, invading,
unnecessary intruder, a disturbing element, a perverting
ingredient, an irritant foeman introduced to upset the
organic peace of the body. Taking it is as though you
were to encourage burglars because burglary is exciting
and rouses the sleeper up for the time ; it is as a man
wishing to run quickly, filling the thin lining of his pants
with wasps, and then glorifying the wasps for the strength
they have given him !
Some of you may look upon the facts I have adduced as
chiefly of a negative character. Some of you may say, if
alcohol does not do all that some doctors have claimed for
it, alcohol in moderation may do no harm. But it does.
Many of you doubtless have studied a little in physiology.
You will have been struck by the fineness, the delicacy,
the complexity, and subtle adaptability of the human
organism. No mechanical product of mortal workman


ship can compare with it for its delicacy of structure and
adjustment* “ Man,” the philosopher has said, “is the
microcosm of the universe.” Truly the stars in their
courses seem reproduced in miniature in man. The very
periodicities of the seasons appear to have imparted their
laws to him. In man is counterparted the storm defying
bulwarks of rock, the ocean’s tidal ebb and flow, the forest
vegetation, the mainland’s highways and canals, the
volcanic fires of Etnas, the caverns and cavities of the
earth, the smiling slopes and the undulating rotundity of
the globe, the springs and streams and rivers of nature, so
that he may indeed be sagely called “ the fruitage and the
flower of things.” Nay more, all that man has ever
invented may be said to be pre-existent in himself. He is
the compendium and the index of all outward things.
This man is built up of a multiplicity of life-types. Just
as the universe comprises many worlds, so man has, so to
speak, myriads of living organic entities in his composition.
One of the first revelations of the microscope was the
cellular, organic, individuality of the blood corpuscles.
Leuwenhoek observed these red and white cells floating in
the blood-stream. The red ones had a place of their own
in the blood canals—they flowed in the centre of the
stream, and the white ones, moving more slowly, kept
along the banks, the bordering blood vessels. These
corpuscles grow and multiply and die. They have each a
life history, however brief. They feed, they move, they
promulgate their kind. They exist in millions. Professor
Huxley says :—“ The corpuscles differ also in other and
more important respects. The red corpuscles are flattened
circular discs, on an average 3200th of an inch in diameter,
and having about one-fourth of that thickness. It follows
that rather more than 10,000,000 of them will lie on a
space one inch square, and that the volume of each
corpuscle does not exceed 120,ooo!ooo, oooth of a cubic inch.” He
tells us that “ the colourless corpuscles are larger than the
red corpuscles, their average diameter being 2 j (K) tli of an
inch. They are further seen, at a glance, to differ from the
red corpuscles by the extreme irregularity of their form,


‘and by their tendency to attach themselves to the glass
slide, while the red corpuscles Jloat about and tumble fieely
over one another.”
What an interesting theme I have here if I had time to
linger over it! But I must refrain. What I want you to
remember is that Professor Huxley speaks of them as
“living and active,” and observes “that it has been calcu-
lated that no fewer than 70,000,000,000 (eighty times the
number of the human population of the globe) are con-
tained in a cubic inch.” It is these minute organisms that
have to build up the body; they do the work of growth,
repair, and resistance. They repel, actually devour,
invading bacteria, or fall victims in the battle. Their
sickness means our disease, their health implies our vitality.
How important it is, then, that their habitat and substance
should be preserved from abnormal disturbance !
“ If any of you,” says Dr. Richardson, “ ever visited the
Royal College of Physicians you would find there a system
of blood vessels dissected and traced out by the immortal
discoverer of the circulation of the blood himself, William
Harvey; and I think it would strike you, as you looked
on, that all the organs of the body, which constitute the
body in its entirety, are built upon these minute vessels.
It is as though Harvey had suggested the thought that the
vascular system was the primary part of the animal organi-
sation, and that upon it were planted and developed all the
structures. The arteries are all beautifully shown branch-
ing out into their extreme divisions and giving the outline
of the limbs, of the brain, of the visceral parts, and of the
other organs. The veins are seen springing or continuing
from these extreme arterial parts, as rivers may be said to
spring, and to form at last trunks of large and larger size,
by which they bring back the blood to the centre of the
circulation to be vivified there and carried on again. From
this distribution of blood in these minute vessels the
structures of organs derive their constituent parts ; through
these vessels brain matter, muscle, gland, membrane, is
given out from the blood by a refined process of selection
of material.”


When we imbibe alcohol we immediately disturb this
“ primary part” of man. I have told you of the affinity cf
alcohol for water, and of the importance of this fluid to the
system. As I have shown, the blood itself consists chiefly
of water—in a thousand parts of blood there are, roughly
speaking, seven hundred and ninety water. Now alcohol
is “so greedy for water, it will pick it up from watery
textures and deprive them of it.” From the blood it
withdraws the water necessary for the vital activity of the
corpuscles—from every membrane it can touch it appro-
priates the water to its own greed. “ Many tissues and
organs of our bodies,” says Miller, “ consist normally of
from one half to three-fourths of water; and when these
are immersed in alcohol more than half the water is
displaced, owing to the capillary attraction of the tissues
for alcohol and water being less than for water alone.
Hence, doubtless, in part at least, the earthy precipitation
so common in the bloodvessels of the intemperate—the
water in their textures being too scanty to keep certain
saline matters in solution.”
I cannot refrain from again quoting Dr. Richardson.
On page 92 of his Cantor Lectures he says :—“ Animal
tissues subjected to alcohol can be perverted to any degree,
and in the most diverse and apparently contradictory ways.
1 can hold blood permanently fluid with alcohol; I can
solidify it with the same agent. I can reduce the size and
modify the shape of the blood corpuscles, and I can so
modify those fine and delicate animal membranes which
dialyse or allow to pass through them the saline matter
of the blood and secretions, that the process of dialysis
shall be impeded, and that which should pass through shall
be left in combination with the membrane. I can destroy
the elasticity of the bloodvessels in the same way, for that
depends upon the presence in them of a gelatinous colloid.”
As to the normal conditions of the colloids which form the
tissues and the blood canals, he says:—“That these parts
should be kept in their integrity, in the midst of their
diversity, the ultimate structure of which they are com-
posed must be held in proper measure of construction with


water. Disturb the relationship that should exist between
the colloid and its combining water, and the character of
the colloid is at once changed.” This, you will remember,
is precisely what alcohol does.
Still more disastrous is the action of alcohol on the
corpuscles themselves. “Alcohol,” says Lacey, “impedes
their labour and deranges their function. Coming into
contact with these corpuscles, it diminishes their size by
robbing them oj water , for which it has everywhere a
singular affinity, and their value as ensuring purity of
blood and high functional activity, by using up their
oxygen in its own oxydation. The result is a marked and
most disadvantagous interference with a fundamental
process on which life and health depend. There is a
slackened removal of waste tissue, less vitalising of the
various scattered organs, less heat. When the blood again
reaches the lungs, these corpuscles remain in their shattered
state, and return thus into the arterial circulation.
And herein is the explanation of the blotches that some-
times disfigure the face of a confirmed toper, of the
heightened colour of his nose, or of the uniform dark red
complexion that is occasionally met with. The weakened
blood corpuscles lag behind, and being unable to absorb air
in sufficient quantity to renovate themselves, they become
congested beneath the skin.”
Speaking on this point the authority from whom I have
quoted so often in these lectures says alcohol “ may cause
the corpuscles to run too closely together, and to adhere in
rolls; it may modify their outline, making the clear-defined
smooth outer edge irregular or crenated, or even star-like ;
it may change the round corpuscles into the oval form, or,
in very extreme cases, it may produce what I may call a
truncated form of corpuscles, in which the change is so
great that if we did not trace it through all its stages we
should be puzzled to know whether the object looked at
were indeed a blood-cell.”
Whilst we may admit that the blood is the life of man,
as being both of the nature of the building material and
the builder, and that change to this fluid means an equal


change to all our life functions, I do not wish you to
imagine that it is the sole element injured in a direct
manner by alcohol. Along the courses of the flowing blood
there follow the controling and regulating nerves. Wher-
ever the blood carries—and it carries to every part—the
bodily nutrition these telegraph wires deliver the message
as to how much is wanted here or there, and the blood-
vessels contract or dilate in response to the message. How
does alcohol affect them ? “It paralyses the minute blood-
vessels, and allows them to become dilated with the flowing
blood” by narcotising the regulating nerves.
I doubt not, many of you have been at a banquet or a
convivial gathering of friends, and have observed, as the
wine goes round, a flushing of the faces of your companions.
You are pleased with this glow of the face and temporary
sparkle of the eye as indicative of warm good-nature. But
it indicates something else. It reveals the partial paralysis
of the nerves along the blood tracks. The control of the
blood-vessels being deadened, the blood rushes through
them and dilates them, and the “ blush” you see is the
result. This manifestation of the increased blood flow is
not local. It is internal as well as external. If you could
look at the stomach, or the brain, or the lungs, the spleen,
the kidneys, or within any of the vital organs, you would
perceive that they also are gorged with an overflow of the
sanguinary fluid. The whole of the primary nervous
system, and consequently all that it may be said to super-
intend, is deranged. According to the degree of that
derangement will be the character and extent of the injury
done to the health and happiness of the subject.
Another point is self-evident. If the blood is allowed
to flow without the natural nervous check, if the healthy
normal resistance be removed, the blood must flow more
rapidly, and the number of heart beats must be increased.
It is like taking the weight of the pendulum from the
clock, or the break from the train going down hill. Dr.
Parkes and Count Wollowicz have demonstrated this fact
bj actual experiment. They counted the beats of the heart
in a man allowed to drink no alcohol, and then the same


man with gradually increasing doses of alcohol. They
arrived at this conclusion: —“ Adopting the lowest esti-
mate which has been given of the daily work of the heart,
viz., as equal to 122 tons lifted one foot, the heart during
the alcoholic period did daily work in excess equal to lifting
15"8 tons one foot, and in the last two days did extra work
to the amount of 24 tons lifted so far.”
That is their measurement of the work of the heart.
They arrive at their conclusion by counting the number of
heart strokes. They say “ the average number of beats of
the heart in 24 hours (as calculated from eight observations
made in 14 hours) during the first, or water period, was
106,000; in the earlier alcoholic period it was 127,000, or
about 21,000 more; and in the later period it was 131,000
or 25,000 more.”
It may be right, as a competent authority has done, to
make a deduction for the lessened number of the heart
beats during sleep or when the body is recumbent, but the
deduction of 6000 strokes per day will yet force the heart
to do the prodigious labour of normally lifting 116 foot
tons, and one-fourth more under the influence of alcohol.
This prevents the heart getting that infinitesimal por-
tion of time allowed to it by nature for rest. “ When,
says Dr. Maudsley, in his “ Physiology of the Mind,” page
158, “the heart is made to beat slowly by stimulation of
the vagus nerve it will continue to beat for a long time,
but when its pulsations are quickened by irritation of the
symnathetic nerve, it soon becomes exhausted and stops,
owing, no doubt, to exhaustion of its motor centres in con-
sequence of nutrition being unable to keep pace with the
quickened action. . . . The unconscious quiet manner
in which the automatic functions of the spinal centres is
performed, though in one way or another the work is
continuous during waking, might seem at first sight to
render no cessation of action necessary; but a little reflec-
tion shows that here, as elsewhere, the expenditure of force
must be balanced by a corresponding supply ; there must
be alternation of activity and repose. If no rest be
allowed, the exhaustion is evinced, first, in an inability to


accomplish successfully the most delicate or complex
associated movements—in a loss, that is, of design ; then
in trembling incapacity, which, if the degeneration in-
creases, may pass on to actual spasmodic movements, and
finally to paralysis.”
How lucidly this expresses the experience of many a
drunkard, though it is written without any such purpose !
It is simply the scientific statement of a physiological
fact.
I am tempted by the interesting nature of this portion
of my lecture to give you illustrations of the action of
alcohol on the heart and nervous system, but as time will
not permit I must leave them for other lectures. I have
shown you the great importance of the nervous and circu-
latory systems, and it must be apparent to the simplest
among you that they cannot be trifled with or injured
without running serious risks of vital disaster.
Not only does the stimulation by alcohol deprive the
heart of rest, it also robs it of nutrition. The heart by its
own beats has to restore the loss of force and substance
occasioned by its work. If, then, it be overworked it
must exhaust material more rapidly than it can procure
supply, and in consequence, it must suffer exhaustion and
degeneration, and as a matter of experience we know that
this does happen among drunkards. It is one of ’ the
lamentable prerogatives of this poison to injure first and
most the foundation and regulators of our health and life.
The brain and the heart it brings especially under its
demoniac government, and through these every other vital
and dependant organ. It seems to have a preferential
liking for brain matter. It will act soonest and with more
baneful effect on those whose brains are of the finest
character, and whose nervous systems are the most deli-
cately adjusted. He, then, who is possessed of brains
should be especially careful lest be paralyse them with the
drug. To those who apparently believe they require
alcohol to discover that they have any brains at all, I
would say once having made the gratifying and important


discovery, be very careful of them and don’t let loose their
natural and devouring enemy upon them.
But, as I have said, alcohol affects all the organs
necessary to the health and continuence of the bodily
functions. “ The diseases produced by intoxicating drink,”
says an able physician, “ are legion. Thousands, aye, tens
of thousands, die annually whose deaths are ascribed to
diseases that would not seriously have affected them, or
proved fatal, if alcohol had not laid the foundation for the
disease by lowering the tone of the system, undermining
the vital forces, and the conservative energies of the
organism. Many diseases and deaths result from the use
of alcohol, and no mention is made of this drug as the
predisposing cause; yet they would not have existed
without it. If only a small portion of the truth respecting
alcohol as a predisposing and exciting cause were known,
our people would be dismayed ; but as it is, hundreds are
daily dying by it, and no cry is raised, no horror
expressed.”
You will remember then, that apart from those very
often fatal diseases which are all known to be caused by
alcoholic poisoning, such as Delirium Tremens, Alcoholic
Phthisis, or drundard’s consumption, alcoholic paralysis,
cirrhosis of the liver, and others very often produced by
excessive drinking, such as gout, hysteria, epilepsy,
insanity, heart disease, rheumatism, cancerous stomachs,
Bright’s disease, thrombosis of the cerebral arteries &c., &c.,
alcohol prepares the garden for the weeds of almost every
other malady. You will drink it then at your peril.
If you cannot see your way clear to sign the pledge
to-night, go home and think calmly over what I have told
you in these lectures, and I am convinced you, at least,
will never again encourage your brother to drink and
perish. You will mentally see a mighty river flowing
between the banks of Time whose source is lost in dim
antiquity, in the barbarous night of Science. In the track
of this river are perished civilisations, ruined empires,
devastated peoples. In its stygian waters the shapes of
Plutonian monsters disport and gambol and devour. Its


ripples are charged with human blood ; in every eddy are
human hearts. It is swollen with the floods of the tears of
orphans, widows, mothers heart-broken, dispairing fathers,
and famishing families. On its treacherous bosom float
violated maidens, ruined innocence, outraged virtue. The
sound of its waters is a withering, harrowing, terrible
dirge, in which shrieks, yells, curses, sounds of entreaty,
calls for help, appeals for mercy, shouts of dispair, groansJ
of the perishing, mingle and confuse like the thunder, the
cataract and the winds contending for mastery. In its
depths are the treasures of Love, the idols of fond hearts,
the adored of many a happy home. Over its desolate
expanse a forest of ghastly hands uplift—ever they implore,
ever they sink and are lost. It rolls over a bed of coffins,
wherein hope, ambition, virtue, and great deeds are ever-
lastingly buried. It is malarious with the pollution of the
grave; freighted with the germs from the charnel house.
It is the River of Death —of racking Death, of despairing-
Death, of friendless Death. In the name of all that is
dearest, then, I beseech you to lave not in it, taste not
its waters —nay, this very night forsake the vicinity of its
banks. Touch not, taste not, lest the very memory of
you—save for its evil —be forgotten among men.


