

THE TARIFF,
IMMIGRATION,
AND
The Labour Question.
DISCUSSED BY
J. VICARS,
CHAIRMAN OF THE LEAGUE
FOR THE
ENCOURAGEMENT OF COLONIAL INDUSTRIES.
TWEED FACTORY, SIDNEY.
1880.
DE CODRCY, HYDE, & BLAKENEY, PRINTERS, 187 CASTLEREAGH STREET, & 163 YORK STREET.




THE
TARIFF,
IMMIGRATION,
AND THE
LABOUR QUESTION
DISCUSSED BY
J. VICARS,
TWEED FACTORY,
SYDNEY.
(Sgimeg :
Da CoimcY, Hyde, & Blakenet, Printers, 199 York Street,
1879.






INDEX.
The Tariff, Letter No. 1 7
The Tariff, Letter No 2 4
The Tariff, Letter No. &
Immigration and the Labour Question, Letter No. 4 ... 9
Do Do Letter No 5 ... 13
Encouragement of Industries and Employment for the
People, Letter No 6 t g
Encouragement of Industries, Letter No 7 25
The Chinese Question 32
The Decalogue gg
Where Shall our Surplus Stock be Eaten 33
Production and Consumption 4 q
Excise Duty v. Import Duty 4 g
49 -A P P E N D I X ,
Containing a letter, entitled “ Showing- How we
can Get Labour without Paying- for Immigration ”
which should have been inserted after Letters I and
0 on ‘ Immigration and the Labour Question.”


PREFACE.
The following letters have been written from time to time on the
various subjects contained therein, and commanded a great deal
of public attention; and the writer having taken an active part for
years in promoting colonial industi’ies here, thought it desirable
to publish and circulate the same, inasmuch as they contain
carefully collected facts.




THE TARIFF.
To the Editor of the Herald.
LETTER No. 1.
IR, —What could the guiding- principle be, that inspired
the Hon. Treasurer when he launched his new tariff ?
Perhaps it lays claim to none. Any way, if it does,
'"fsty so far as I can judge, it is of that sort which, in an
? inordinate degree, partakes of u fish of one and flesh
of another ,” and yet Mr. Lloyd seems quite jubilant over it.
As a rule, it is a generally admitted fact, that where arts
and manufactures flourish, that place or country is in various
ways marvellously benefitted. For instance, where engineering*,
shipbuilding, machine making, manufacturing, and other indus-
tries are once fairly rooted and established —and it ought to be
a leading object to encourage and even nurse them awhile by all
Governments —l say, when these are once established, there are
in consequence hundreds and thousands of hands employed,
whose aggregate wages are most fabulous, and every Saturday
night, not like a constant stream, but a mighty river, flows on,
in no niggardly manner, and in exchange passes from one hand
to another, thereby, in some degree, enriching all, and ensuring
the permanent success, beyond all doubt, of that place or country.
If such be the case in the old country, and it is so, Mr.
Lloyd may rest assured that the same thing will hold equally
good here.
What, for instance, would Great Britain be without her
seats of industry, such as Manchester, Glasgow, Leeds, Hud-
dersfield, and many other places similarly remarkable ? What,
indeed, would the old country be without these industries, if even
it were sown broadcast with such noblemen as the Dukes of
Bedford and Buccleugh ? A mighty contrast there certainly
would be, but no comparison.


They are both links of the chain for all that, respectively
good and desirable in their places ; and so far as taxation goes,
perhaps not unequally saddled in comparison with the hulk of
the people.
Now in a great measure the squatter takes the place of the
noblemen here—and I like to see it; but how does taxation
touch him in comparison with many others ? I speak not of the
tea and sug’ar part of the business, but rather of special taxes,
to which I shall presently advert.
Ever since the time of Job and Jacob the squatter has been,
and is now, perhaps more so, a most essential portion of the
social chain, which at all times, and deservedly too, holds a
notably prominent position ; but is there any good reason why
this link should be conspicuously exceptional ?
The squatter himself would undoubtedly and at once say
no most emphatically $ but for all that, in respect to taxation, it
is nevertheless the ease.
Wool to the value of £2O or £25 can be sent out of the
country by paying the enormous amount of 3d. towards the
revenue for a woolpack. Surely the squatter does not bear his
burthens so unequally as to require this, for like Nebuchadnezzar
of old he can at least enjoy his grass at leisure without any
dread of competition in this commodity from other countries
afar.
But how is it with the woollen manufacturer '? Why, after
spending thousands and thousands of pounds in bringing the
most expensive machinery into the colony, erecting costly
premises, and employing hundreds of hands, he not being of the
favoured race, is asked to contribute towards the revenue the
very modest sum of only £6 ss. in bringing in a ton of olive oil,
the cost price of which in London is £4O.
Nor is this all, and as if it were not enough, both branches
of the two most important industries in the colony, and both in
their veriest infancy, are to be deprived, it seems, of that
miserable 5 per cent, which is at present entended to them.
The branches I refer to are the engineers and machine makers
together with the woollen manufacturers.
Now, if the Government wishes to encourage industries,
they should extend a helping hand to such as require it at
present in existence, as well as hold out liberal inducements for
many others to spring up. Of course, many industries can not
only hold their own here, but even successfully compete in the
old country. But when a business is of that nature that the
first cost is very heavy, and the capital sunk can be turned over
but seldom, the Treasurer may safely set this one down as
requiring both discriminating and judicious encouragement,


Protection or ad valorem duties may be very proper subjects
for discussion, but, whether or not, I do think there might be
some sense in shaping a tariff somewhat differently and benefit
the country very much indeed.
Now, it is surely not right of the Treasurer to pat one
member of society with a threepenny-bit on the back, and make
his neighbour pay through the nose in bringing in an article
largely required in this branch of industry.
What ill has the woollen manufacturer done the Treasurer
that he, with the most expensive description of machinery, at
g-reat cost, and hundreds of hands in his employment, should be
treated in this most extraordinary and scurvy manner ?
In fact, the two most prominent and extensive industries in
the colony, viz., the engineering and woollen manufacturers, are
made the veriest outcasts, get a slap in the face, and are most
inconsiderately shouldered to the wall.
I do not grudge what little my neighbours enjoy, but
galvanized iron manufacturers have a duty in their favour. Wine-
growers have at least 53 per cent., whilst tobacco and kerosene
manufacturers each enjoy not less than 25 per cent.
What will Mort’s Dock Company say to this treatment, and
how will Messrs. Russell, Vote and Lacey, Chapman, and the
“ Atlas Works ” like it ? They will not shake their chains and
hug them, or I am vastly mistaken ; nor will it be otherwise
with Messrs. Byrnes, French, Houston, Rayner, and Bergin, with
all their workmen included.
JNO. VICARS.
Tweed Factory, October 22, 1873.


THE TARIFF.
LETTER No. 2.
Addressed to the Members of the Legislature,
For ten years I was manager in the largest woollen manufactory
in the South of Scotland, producing tweeds, shawls, and blankets,
as well as hosiery, and in connection with the factory we had
two extensive warehouses, one in Glasgow, and another in
London, which annually shipped thousands of pounds worth of
woollens into the United States, as did other houses as well.
The Americans at once opened their eyes to this, and said,
u Why can’t we manufacture for ourselves, employ our own
people, and encourage more to come and settle amongst us,
instead of paying away our money for imports to other countries ?”
They had no sooner so reasoned than they clapt on a thirty per
cent, duty on our goods, and thereby, to all intents and purposes,
completely shut us out of their market.
In consequence, the result was that they rushed manufac-
tories up right and left throughout the States, and made for
themselves what they had before purchased. But though they
did this to encourage and foster awhile those industries, they never
for one moment meant protection, nor yet do they now.
Americans know very well that what they are doing is meant,
like many other things, to pass away ; but, meanwhile, they
have the consciousness that they are permanently reai'ing up
large, prosperous, and life-giving industries, which in a short
time will not only supply their own wants, as they are now
doing, but boldly stand face to face with any old country in the
world, in competition, and that too, before long, or I am much
deceived. In proof of this, have we not before our eyes a very
recent report that they had already commenced to ship iron to
the old country, and beat even England herself in her own
market, by underselling her ? Facts are very stubborn things,
and, as a rule, tolerably convincing.
Our American cousins are no fools, as perhaps some of the
recent transactions here—denominated “ New York Cuteness ”
can well testify ; hut independent of this, they or any u Two
and Two ”* can coolly calculate how much towards the general
revenue of the country every individual head is worth—a view
* Mr. GK A. Lloyd.


Ihat appears to be supremely beneath the notiee of some of our
people here. And not being above looking into those little
things —for be it known there is nothing too high or difficult for
our friends —they are sensible that the more industries they
encourage and the more people thereby they induce to settle
amongst them, that their finances will have such a constantly
increasing elasticity that any Treasurer might comfortably go to
sleep at night and waken up in the morning and find himself
famous.
Though our American friends can show us the way in many
respects, they are, curiously enough, somewhat behind even New
South Wales in some things, such, for instance, as sending the
newspapers free of charge through the country, though newspapers
quite as much as either flour or hardware, are purely a commercial
commodity, nor am I aware that their Government, in any way,
contemplates allowing paper for printing newspapers on to be
exceptional in respect to taxation.
Our American cousins, however, are both precocious and apt,
and cannot long fail to perceive the beauty of this, and the great
benefit likely to accrue to themselves in imitating our excellent
example in this respect.
It is surely patent to all that, in respect to their commercial
policy, our Victorian friends very closely imitate the Americans,
and so far as regards woollens, will any one in his senses tell
me that they who have reared up half-a-dozen of manufactories
in as many years cannot easily, by virtue of the tax in their
favour at home, come and flood our markets here ?
In fact, by making use of a portion of the tax in their
favour, they could at any time come in here and swamp us and
yet live through it themselves. It needs no one so cute as “Two
and Two” to tell this, and as sure as the sun shines at noonday
and gives us light, this cannot fail to happen if the Tariff in its
present shape be passed.
The manufacture of woollens would, no doubt, be the leading
industry of the colony, if only intelligently and fairly treated.
But the machinery required is most expensive, costing quite 70
per cent, more than manufacturers have it for at home ; rate of
interest on money higher ; oil too, though not less than from
20 lb. to 25 lb. is required for every 100 lb. of clean wool, in
order to make it card and spin properly—costing £lO more per
ton than it can be bought for at home, principally in consequence
of the import duty to which it is subjected. Yet, in the face of
all this, and the manufacture of woollens, a young industry, the
Government treatment of it cannot be otherwise characterised
thm unfair and discouraging in the extreme.


What I want, and I speak of the trade, is a specific duty
(but do not by any means desire it for a permanency) of 3d. or
4d. a yard on piece goods of ordinary width, and say 3d. a
Eound on made-up goods, blankets, &c., that cannot very well
e given in measured lengths. This could easily be done, and
not in any way raise conscientious scruples.
In the face of borrowing money every now and then, and
many a time requiring to do so, I fail to perceive the wisdom of
Mr. Lloyd’s policy in throwing away £9o,ooo—the amount of
duty last year received from woollens. Let the working man
come forward, if no one else will, and see that industries are not
put down, and demand what is simply just, equitable, and fair to
all alike.
JNO. VICARS.
Tweed Factory,
Sydney, October 29th, 1873.
THE TARIFF.
LETTER No. 3.
Addressed to the Members of the Legislature,
It is certainly not due to the want of enterprise, but, rather, to
the fitful nondescript way that the Tariffs have been, and are
still manipulated, that Hew South Wales can only show a mere
dozen sets of woollen machines throughout the colony ; and that,
too after a struggle of thirty years. There is, beyond doubt,
something wrong in this, and if not removed, will carry with it
an everlasting disgrace. And who else but the Governments
are to blame for this, and this one above all others in the super*
lative degree ?
I wonder who ought to be ashamed when I state, as a fact,
that Victoria, at the end of only six years, has not fewer than
twenty sets of machines, all in full operation, and daily adding
more to the number. She knows that this is the leading
industry at home, and is following 1 up the example in the most
commendable manner. Why, twenty sets of machines at the
end of six years, and only a beggarly dozen here at the end of a
thirty-years struggle, tells its own tale without the slightest
comment. The squatter and this industry—producer and
consumer—ought to go hand in hand, as in the ordinary nature
of things it is evidently intended that it should do, but are pre-


eluded through, perhaps not unaccountable circumstances, which
the present Ministry might not unprofitably either explain or
attempt to find out. Depend upon it that this is a question of
such vitality as to demand immediate attention, and if it is either
above or beneath the notice of the present Government, they
must stand aside and let it have the due consideration of some
one else.
With the raw material at our feet, why, in the name, of
common sense, should we require to send it many thousand
miles home, have it manufactured at much expense, and brought
back to us again, not however as we sent it, but with a mixture
of cotton and shoddy, producing a much inferior article?
Would it not be a little more rational to be our own manufac-
turers, as we might, if the Government would only take a correct
view of the question? If the Government will act in this
manner, with what ought to be our leading industry, which
could give employment to thousands of hands, what in all the
earth, I beg to ask, is to become of our population—the rising
generation more especially ?
Though I have no business to be ashamed of this, I am
nevertheless sorry to see such a state of things here. If Govern-
ment would only show the slightest attempt to do this branch of
industry justice, I will guarantee that the manufacturers on
their part wall not be found wanting. The Herald ever and
anon tells us what the old country has done in respect to Free
Trade ; but when Great Britain did this, her industries were not
only fully developed, but had attained an age and strength that
required other fields opened up for their expansion, and what she
naturally required, she advocated—so also would any one else.
But had her industries been merely struggling into existence,
and liable to be swamped from outside by other countries, what
pray, Mr. Herald, would she then have done ? Certainly not at
all what you so very much preach, and so indifferently perform.
Talent of every description I admire; but I admire it very much
more when I find it coupled with consistency. How with all the
talent the Herald is possessed of, and in this respect, speaking
candidly, I think it has a very fair share, but has it consistency ?
If it has, I can only say this, that I would like infinitely more to
see it than to hear of it. The Herald acts as a sort of Bear
leader to the Government —writing leading articles urgently and
eminently suggestive of the course to pursue; and I say boldly,
and without fear of contradiction or favour, that the Herald is
not consistent, and very much resembles a mile-stone on the
wayside, pointing the way for others that it won’t and don’t go
itself. It is constantly prosing over matters as if there were
nothing exceptional in many businesses here. Now let us see
how it ttands with the Herald itself.


I think the Edinburgh Scotsman will compare very favour*
ably with it any day, and in any or every respect. It is rather
a larger paper than the Herald, the matter quite as good, and,
as regards talent, I think the Herald need not trouble about
giving itself airs, whilst such advertisements as Births, Mar-
riages, and Deaths are charged only Is. 6d. each in the Scotsman.
Now, how does it come to pass that the Herald, charging twice
as much for advertisements as I have just mentioned, with not so
large a paper, no better matter, and, to say the least of it,
displaying no more talent—l say, how does it come to pass, that
twopence is charged for it, when a paper fully equal to it, in any
or every respect, can he sold, with a profit, at Home, for a
penny ?
If the Herald will preach up Home matters pure and simple
without regard to controlling circumstances , why doesn’t it act
consistently and show us the example ? Only let the Herald
do this and it will be much more convincing than a whole bushel
full of twaddle. The Herald seems to be a supporter of this
Tariff through thick and thin, and manifests while doing so a
strange and marked difference between its preaching and its
practice. But for all that the Herald will no doubt be able to
explain how its industry should be entitled to exceptional privi-
leges and others none ; it cannot be ignorant that there cannot
be any newspaper imports to come into competition with it or
any other newspaper whatever here.
Now I think I have shown that the Herald, as regards
THE PRICE of the article, in comparison with others, is not
consistent, and if so, how can it be consistent even in a political
sense, when it seems so manifestly selfish as to stoop to any
Government to be gagged and sopped over as it most certainly is.
The Herald is simply and purely a commercial speculation, like
any other speculation, and the sale of the paper is neither above
nor below a business transaction either in fish or potatoes.
Nevertheless it most complacently accepts a postage gag, and as
if to show that its acquisitiveness was excellently developed, it is,
without the least scruple, not above a decent sop by way of the
remission of the duty on paper.
I beg to ask what right has the Herald to be treated in this
exceptional manner, and I should like to be told, too, for what
these little favours have been given bv the Government. But I
dare say people much less shrewd than “ Two and Two ” will
have no great difficulty in arriving at the reason why.
JNO. VICARS.
Tweed Factory,
Sydney, Oct. 30th, 1873.


IMMIGRATION AND THE
LABOUR QUESTION.
LETTER No. 4.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sib, —So we want immigration here, do we ? lam really
puzzled to think who wants the immigrants, and where they are
wanted. The whole country, and Sydney in particular, seems to
have much more labour than employment, and plenty of people,
both able and willing to work, going about in all directions in
quest of work and can’t get it. lam and have been an employer
of labour for the last thirty years —have employed hundreds, and
ought from my long experience both at home and here to be able
to judge pretty accurately whether there is a stinted supply of
labour in New South Walles or not. The fact is, that the labour
market is sadly overstocked at present, and from all I can perceive
is likely to continue so for some time to come. At this factory
I have numerous applicants daily, pleading to be employed, and
almost at any wage. Were many of the lion, members to see
only a portion of my daily experience in this matter they would
think differently and pause before a single shilling were placed
on the Estimates for emigration purposes in any way whatsoever.
Of my own personal knowledge, I know of people working,
and glad to do so, just for little more than pay their board and
lodging. A decent and steady young fellow lately arrived by
emigrant ship, Dalhousie, induced to come out here in con-
sequence of the glowing reports so freely circulated at home as
to the state of things in New South Wales—that the state of tne
country was most flourishing, and no one need be idle who was
willing to work, and so forth. This young man was not only
willing to work, but anxious to get it, no matter what it was,
and at almost any wage. Still he could find no employment,
and his resources being but limited, was at last reduced, in order
to procure a meal of meat, to sell his very shirt from off his back.
In this dire distress and in tears, he applied to a most respectable
grocer in town, mentioning his circumstances, and most humbly,
and abjectly begging for a shirt and something to eat. Another
instance I give of the state of things here, and it is this: a


labouring man, of a few years standing in Sydney, with a wife
and two children, was out of employment, and though a
thoroughly sober and steady man, could not get a job, and not
thinking so much of his circumstances on his own account,
perhaps, as that of his family, could not bear the idea of his wife
and bairns being at the brink of starvation, said to a friend that
he wished some one would shoot him, and end his misery at once.
These instances are all facts, which I can vouch for, and are given,
not as isolated cases, but to show the general state of employment
here at present. Then, seeing that such is the state of things
here, if it is not senseless, it is, to say the least of it, cruel in the
last degree to those who are induced through false reports to
come out here, and for which members who are privy to it ought
to be thoroughly ashamed of themselves. As regards emigrants
being required here at present, I do not believe it for one moment,
and so far as Sydney is concerned, the labour market is not onlv
depressed, but thoroughly flooded with hands out of employment;
and so far as the country is concerned, very few hands indeed are
required, in my opinion—but should the agricultural and pastoral
pursuits really require labour, let everyone who requires it say
how many hands are required, as well as the sort of labour that
the hands are required to perform, and then avail themselves of
the Agreements Validating Act which would answer every
purpose far better than by deluging the colony with indiscriminate
immigration. Tbe Agreements Validating Act might be worked
most usefully as well as beneficially, and, if so, there is no occasion
for a hundred thousand pounds (£100,000) being voted to rush
in people all at once in large batches into the colony.
In respect to immigration, Mr. Parkes, now “ Sir Henry,’!
in that profound style of his, says : “ That if they had millions
of persons settled on the face of this country, if they were of the
right stamp , every soul of the population would be better off than
at present.” How very profound this is ! Why, there isn’t an
old woman in the whole country but could have told this, and
said precisely the same thing. This is exactly what everyone in
the colony wishes to see, but the whole affair is how to get the
■right stamp. My interpretation of the right stamp is, to get people
with capital; for without the means to employ labour, the whole
scheme of immigration is a mere farce, and more like finding a
billet for some one in connectien with it than with a view to
benefit the countr} r .
I could cite innumerable instances in reference to the state
of things here, but the following one will suffice :—On the 22nd
March, five chainmen for a Government survey party were wanted,
they had been previously advertised for, and not five, ten, or even
twenty applied, but one hundred and fifty! —fact. One of the


hundred and fifty applicants —of course, a rejected one—is, and
Has been, in my employ ever since ; and this is not by any means
an isolated ease, but a true ana fair expose of the actual state of
the labour market in New South Wales at the present moment.
Now there can be no doubt in any business man’s mind who
lays claim to a particle of common sense and experience, in regard
to the labour market here at the present time ; but should our
Government be determined to ignore this state of things, why
can’t they institute a Government Labour Office, where all out of
employment could have their names and occupations recorded,
and all individuals actually in want of hands should make their
wants known, and have their requirements in a like manner
recorded also. Were this carried properly into effect, I am
satisfied it would be productive of much good, and might be
worked out at a very moderate expense indeed.
I throw this out merely as a suggestion ; nevertheless, I
think it is a suggestion that might commend itself to the present
or any other Ministry. This injudicious Government immigra-
tion scheme is giving dire and just offence to many people in
Sydney— but, as a matter of course, to the working classes in
particular—who are already up in arms against it, and have
determined to form an Anti-Emigration or Reform League.
As to the desirability of having “ millions of people settled
on the face of the country,” is what no one would dispute, and
is not only what every one is anxious to see, but devoutly wishing
for the same. Then, since, such is the case, would it not be much
better if “ Sir Henry ” would condescend to point out, in a
general way, how the millions could naturally settle down on the
“ face of the country V Where there are plenty of grass and
water, pastoral pursuits will always do, but 1 apprehend that in
this respect the country is already pretty well picked up. Then
as to farmers, whose sole dependence is on grain, crops, milk,
butter, and bacon, 1 am afraid there is not much very tempting
for them by way of remuneration to compensate for their time
and labour in tilling the soil ; nor can T perceive how there can
be, so long as the contruming population are awanting. The
tonmming population is then the Missm* Link , which I very
strongly recommend Sir Henry or Sir John to try and discover
as soon as possible.
To think of having farmers without a consuming population
would be of little or no use, and to have a consuming population
without the farmers would just be of as little use ; in point of
fact, the. two classes must go hand in hand together, as it is
obviously meant in the ordinary nature of things that they should
do. Farming on an extensive scale, however, is not at all likely
to be first wanted in this or any other country, unless we have an
fdea of being able to do an export trade, in wools, and this I


am afraid we can hardly hope for ; and though all the forming
pursuits in the colony were performed in the best manner possible,
they could never create or be the means of creating a consuming
community. But a consuming population producing a demand for
dairy and agricultural produce would very soon bring plenty of
farmers to make the most of both soil and climate ; and in respect,
to soil and climate there should not be much better anywhere
than we have in New South Wales.
Out here we may have a different class of consumers from
what exists in many parts of the world, yet this matters nothing
bo long as we have a class of consumers apart from the producers ;
but if we take a peep at the old country in order to discover the
consuming* classes there, we will soon find the following places
looming broadly before us —viz. : —Manchester, Sheffield, Bir-
mingham, Bradford, Leeds, Huddersfield, Glasg’ow, Paisley,
Carron, Dundee, Arbroath, Hawick, Galashiels, and all similar
places to be the g'reat consuming communities there, and if we
were only fortunate enough to have such places and industries
out here, the whole country from end to enu would soon be both
great and prosperous, and from the fame alone of our well-doing
and well-being', plenty of people would soon rush to New South
Wales, without the smallest particle of assistance, and without
costing the country a single farthing to bring them out. This
then is the whole affair— simply promote and encourage industries f
and thereby save our hundred thousand pounds, which many
people are decidedly opposed to, but the working classes more
especially; nor can this be wondered at either, seeing that it
may be said that it is making’ use of the people’s money to bring
out more labour to oppose their labour in this colony, where too
many are not only out of employment, but without the least
prospect of obtaining it at present.
If our Governments will act in the manner that they are
doing with what ought to be our leading industries, and that
could give employment to thousands, what in all the earth, I beg
to ask, is to become of the population, the rising generation more
especially ? Is it to be life-giving industries, with plenty of
employment for all, or charity y houses of refuge, soup kitchens , and
ultimately the workhouse or gaol? In a word, is it to be either
Stealing or starving ?
Now, in conclusion, I beg to say that if our Governments
have a mania to get rid of their surplus cash, why cannot they
devote a few thousands by way of bonuses to promote a few
new industries that might with profit and advantage be cultivated
here, and thus give additional employment to many.
Yours obediently,
JNO. VICARS
Tweed Factory, June 13th, 1877,


IMMIGRATION AND THE
LABOUR QUESTION.
LETTER No. 5.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —Beyond the slightest doubt the unemployed here at pre-
sent are not only very numerous, but also in the majority of
eases very needy, nor can it be much wondered at that they are
so, for, if a man gets out of employment through slackness of
work or otherwise, what is he to do ? We have, in reality, no
variety of industries that, if hands might not be required m one,
they could always have a chance at another. Then, if the hands
are out of work, whether married or single, but especially married
men who have wives and families to work for and support, how
long can any of them expect to remain beyond a needy position p
But a very short time indeed would be "shouted in reply, and
with a most unmistakable sound, too, throughout the whole
colony. Then, such being the case, where is the sense in having-
many more emigrants on the water coming here, both from
England and America, to further swell the number of unem-
ployed at present both justly and bitterly complaining. It is not
merely the working classes but every one else that has good
reason to complain ; nor can it be wondered at either when such
cases as the following are frequently presenting themselves:—
The Sierra Nevada arrived here about a week ago with a fresh
batch of immigrants from America, many of whom have neither
meat, shelter, nor employment— -fact. Two of this lot, brothers,
Taylor by name, have been lying out under the canopy of heaven
anywhere they could, for the last three nights, and have
been for two days without food of any description. One
of these is now labouring for me at present, but in a job not
likely to last more than a couple of days at most; and he tells
me that every one of them had such a description laid before them
of the flourishing state of this colony by the agent there that in-
duced them to leave without the slightest doubt of having plenty
of employment immediately on their arrival. This cannot but be
complained of. Yet Sir Henry says, “It was not I that did
this, but you, Sir John.” Well, since it was Sir John who was
instrumental for the present stream of immigration he will, no
doubt, have to shoulder the responsibility, and in all probability


will do so too. All this double shuffle, however, will not clear
Sir Henry, no matter how he tries, for who was it that placed
£IOO,OO0 — one hundred thousand pounds —on the present Esti-
mates, and carried it, too, for carrying out his immigration
scheme ? Let Sir Henry Parkes tell me that if he likes. Per-
haps this was a false move on his part, and now considered so by
him beyond doubt, but the game was not by any means forced
upon him, it must be looked upon by every one as his own studied
and deliberate choice, by which he must be judged, let the result
be what it may.
Ever and anon, too, we are told that all this lot of immigrants,
or that, as the case may be, are all absorbed, that they have all
got employment, and of course settled down in the new land of
their adoption ; but is it so ? Anyone may very safely venture to
say that it is not at all the case. Some people, perhaps, persuade
themselves that it is so, because by sending them into the interior
of the country, and consequently out of their sight in Sydney,
that they are all absorbed and employed ; but how delusive, many
could reply, and I am afraid it is just too much the case, “ out
of sight out of mind.” As regards immigration, this colony
cannot be regarded in any exceptional position, and if we are to
judge by Queensland, very many w r ho would come by our
assistance into New South Wales would in a marvellously short
time clear out of it again, instead of settling comfortably down
in it as some would have us to believe. Now, if such be the
case, and I am certain it is so, would it be not more sensible to
spend our money in a somewhat more rational manner ?
Then as regards working people, it must at all times be bad
enough to bear up against the want of employment, but instead
of having some consolation by being’ offered jobs of some sort,
it is really too bad if it has come to such a pass that men connot
be seen on the streets without running the risk of being dubbed
loafers. There are men of this sort in Sydney, no doubt, and so
there are in all large towns, whether on this side of the Equator
or that —men who live somehow, but with whom work and them
do not agree ; but is this any reason for branding decent and re-
spectable men, when unfortunately out of employment, a parcel
of loafers? Very many hands whose misfortune it is to be out
of employment are not only willing to work, but anxious to get
it, and do endeavour, even when surrounded by many difficulties
and adversities, to maintain themselves respectably.
People, no matter in what position of life they may now find
themselves, should never forget, or even be ashamed to own it, that
they themselves have been what is commonly called workers, for if
we have not all had to work at some period of our lives , we may,
as soon as possible, thank “ Providence " that our ancestors must
have been astir in the good old times in which they lived.


But if Sir Henry Parkes or any one else has really and truly a
straightforward and honest desire to give people here additional
employment, and which would of itself encourage a stream of
immigration to our shores, he cannot avoid encouragement to many
industries other than agricultural and pastoral pursuits. Let him
study the great leading industries at home which make the country
great, and give employment not only to thousands, but tens of
thousands and millions, and set about promoting and encouraging
similar ones here, and then he may safely calculate on a steady
onward progress, culminating in after years in the prosperity and
greatness of New South Wales, wherein all classes from news-
papers downward would reap many benefits in no ordinary degree.
Would he only do this, paid immigration could not in any way
trouble him,- for abundance of people would then only be too
anxious to reach us without the slightest iota of assistance, one
way or other. Viewing the thing then from this standpoint, the
the question before us is not one merely of amount—not whether
we shall devote fifty thousand or a hundred thousand pounds to
such a scheme, but whether we should at all give so much even
as a single sixpence, for this purpose. And lam all the more
persuaded that this is a correct view of the matter from the fact
that neither the “ United States ” nor “ Canadas ” had to resort
to such .measures to secure a constant and steady stream of
immigration into those countries. All that they did was simply
to encourage industries among themselves, which they have done
most effectually, and on this becoming known they soon got
people from all countries, and in such abundance too that they
had at times to assist numbers away home again. But we need
not travel so far in order to see this verified—we have only to
look at our near neighbour, Victoria, and study how she is laying
the foundation of future greatness, which she is doing beyond
the shadow of a doubt, and can always get plenty of labour
without so much as having to expend even a single sixpence one
way or . other for immigration purposes. Now, why cannot we
be sensible and not be above taking a leaf for our own advan-
tage out of these, books ? I am certain that there is not a
single individual in the whole country, laying claim to a
particle of sanity, would ever dream of shovelling the money out
of his own pocket for such a purpose as our Government does.
And if private individuals or firms would not do the like of this
Governments could surely not err far in following the example. ’
have lately heard a good deal about the increase of
population of the respective colonies of New South Wales and
that of Victoria. Mr. Cameron was, perhaps, right in his state-
ment as to the relative increase of numbers ; but he just stopped
short of giving the reason why, for the difference in favour of
vJngw South W&i©s as compared with Victoria, Victoria i$


increasing her population beyond doubt in connection with her
fixed and permanent industries, far beyond anything that this
colony can lay claim to ; and all apparent or real retrogression
in regard to population can easily be accounted for by her gold-
fields population alone, who are, as a rule, always a set of
wanderers —here to-day and away to-morrow —increasing at
times to the extent of many thousands in the most sudden
manner, and again, as a rush may direct, just as suddenly
clearing out. As regards .her material progress, no one who
gives it the slightest attention can remain in doubt for even one
moment. In proof of this we may only refer to three industries
which both colonies have in common, and which are all affected by
foreign imports, the production of cheap laboar and lower
ivages , than we pay here. I refer to engineering , machine
making, and woollen manufactures. Anent the two former, "Vic-
toria is daily and steadily adding both to the number of hands
employed as well as, of course, to her products ; while, upon the
whole, we are in reality going back instead of forward ; fewer
engineers than we had some years ago; and machine making,
which goes forward in the sister colony, scarcely exists in name
here. Then as regards woollen manufactures, with which we have
been struggling on for upwards of thirty years, we can only, in
this length of time, show some sixteen set of machines in the
whole colony, of which several are really miserable enough, and
scarcely worth calling sets ! Indeed, were all our sets put under
one roof, they would only make scarcely what we may call one
decent-sized establishment. But, by the way "V ictoria has set
about this business, she can show some thirty-four sets of first-
class machines, and all in the short space of ten years. Besides
ten set of her machines work night and day bringing up her pro-
duction in woollens equal to the turn out of forty-four sets, and
producing goods of about the value of £4200. a week. While
for years we have been going back in this industry, not
sending out on the average much more than the production of
twelve or thirteen sets of machines, in value according to present
prices and the class of goods produced, of about £7 / 0 per week.
Were all our machines kept going full time, our weekly pro-
duction would not exceed a £IOOO a week. Bor a long time back
we have had on an average nearly, if not quite, .20 per cent, of
our machines unemployed, while our "V ictorian friends have been
steadily increasing theirs. This matter has been purposely gone
into in this manner in order to show what can be done elsewhere
without a system of paid immigration. ]S r ow the Land
Question,” “Education,” “Paid Members,” “Eree Trade,” or
“ Protection” we have nothing, in the meantime, to do with.'
The question before us is simply “ Paid Immigration,” which we
have to consider, nothing more. Let us stick to this and we


shall carry it, and then every other reasonable thing will follow ;
but a diversity of subjects will most assuredly be a rock ahead
which must be avoided under all considerations. Then, again, at
our meetings we should at all times avoid setting up class against
class, which, when pursued, can never be productive of any
good ; and since of necessity both employer and employed must
go hand in hand through this world together, it is much better
to do so in a right way, which must always be best for all con-
cerned in the end. Now, in agitating this question, we do so on
its pure merits alone, believing that it has not been fairly treated
by those who have hitherto had the handling of it. . That it is
in the last degree one-sided and unfair none can dispute, for
whether we are all agreed or not on the question of immigration
no one can justify the apropriation of the working classes con-
tribution into the Treasury for the purpose of bringing more
people out here either to divide or displace their labour. We are
sometimes, reminded, too, that it is the proceeds of the land sales
that are being applied for this purpose ; but let those who argue
thus tell me who have got the greatest interest in the land, or
the proceeds of its sales.
Even now according to circumstances, wages may either
rise or fall, but many who employ labour seem to want more
hands into the colony, not, however, that they are needed for im-
mediate wants —for at present we have abundance and to spare
—but for the purpose evidently of reducing wages. What is
the use of those who advocate immigration disguising the matter?
Let them out with it at once and say exactly what they mean.
As regards wages, how does the matter stand ? Though they
are paid higher here than at home, does it follow that workers
are benefitted in a corresponding degree ? Certainly not. if
we look at home wages, we must also look at home disburse-
ments, &c. Out here, money is quite three times as much as
it is at home. House rent, too, cannot be had under 11s.
or 12s. a week here for a working man, but in the old
country quite as good can be had for about 25., and if in the
country, very likely a piece of garden ground included ; and.
then clothing is much dearer here than at home, indeed, nearly
double; and as to fuel and light, why 6d. there will go very
nearly as far as Is. 6d. here ; then vegetables here are some-
thing to pay for, rather ! All these differences between Europe
and the colonies will be nothing short of 13s or 14s. a week:
in other words, the workman at home is quite as well off with
225. or 235. a week as with 365. here. All this clearly shows
that this 13s. or 14s. paid to the workman here benefits him
nothing, but finds its way into the pockets of other people. Now
let those who think of cheapening labour by additional immi-
gration, tell me if the reform of those items just mentioned can


at once be jumped into. Indeed they cannot, and it is mere
nonsense to think so. It is seldom we can find a royal road to
effect such reforms at a jump, and in this, as with many other
things, we therefore must just make up our minds to leave it to
the natural laws which have worked out this labour question in
all the old countries of the world, and which simply means time
to permit things levelling down gradually. These 13s. or 14s.
of reform then must come from those into whose pockets they
find their way —not from the workmen certainly. Before finish-
ing, I again wish to refresh Sir Henry’s memory a bit on this
immigration question by way of reminding him of a series of
resolutions which he brought before the House in May last year,
which were as follows: —
1. “ That the experience of the last three years has established
the fact that the revenue derived from all sources is largely in
excess of the necessary expenditure of Government.
2. “ That the existence of a large cash surplus at the credit of
the Government is unsound in principle and policy , and not to be
continued.
3. “ That the existing surplus ought to be expended without
any unnecessary delay ; not less than £150,000 (one hundred and
fifty thousand pounds) per annum in promoting immigration from
Great Britain and Ireland , and the balance in carrying out works
of public improvement .”
How, after this, Sir Henry Parkes may endeavour to back
out of this immigration scheme in any way be likes ; but he is
fairly within the meshes of this net, and none to blame for it
but his own persistence in the matter ; and since the people have
got him there, it will be for them to determine what they mean
to do in regard to him, as well as several others. In all these
political meetings we must allow other people the same respect and
fair play that we claim for ourselves, avoiding all scurrility, nick-
names, and abuse, which carry no argument, and, therefore, can
be productive of no good : consequently, on all occasions, this
should be avoided. Then let it be for an “ Anti-Immigration or
Ileform league ,” that we band ourselves together, having for our
device, “ The Bundle of Sticks and for our watch-word and
motto, “ United Action .”
Tours obediently,
JNO. VICARS.
Tweed Factory, Sydney, July 7, 1877.


ENCOURAGEMENT OF INDUSTRIES
AND
EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PEOPLE.
LETTER No. 6.
To the Editor of the Herald.
SiR, —Free Trade or Protection is no name for it, they may either
be bugbears or the merest political baubles, but the question
of all questions lies immeasurably beyond, and which is, l< How
are we to employ the people, the rising generation more especi*
ally, and encourage more to come and settle down amongst us
Even if we would, we cannot all expect Government billets either
for ourselves or families, and yet what else have many before
them than Government place and pay for their youngsters that
are growing up ? But if trades were reasonably within reach
would many who hang on to Sir John and Sir Henry’s coat
tails (I wonder they don’t pull them off) not much rather prefer
availing themselves of such than being in Government offices,
doing their daily monotonous rounds like as many horses in a
threshing mill ? Many people, not from choice, but of neces-
sity, are really driven from the nature of things here to solicit
what, in nine cases out of ten, they would much rather not do,
and which places Ministers in that unequivocal dilemma in
which they must either finesse—bluntly say no and thereby give
offence, or make room for aspirants and applicants that are
really and truly not needed, and thereby get themselves pointed
at and soundly rated by the public for having found billets for
their friends or relations to such and such an extent. Again,
look at smart young fellows settling down to employment in
Government grooves and ruts. Why what is there before them
but to remain and die at their posts ? They have not got a trade,
which of itself would be worth any quantity of Government
billets ; and not having been trained to work, what are they to
do, pray, should they happen to get out of such situations ?
Why their plight would be most miserable. But not so a trades-
man, who, if not wanted in one establishment, has plenty more


chances before him in others where his services might be re-
quired ; in fact, with a trade at his fingers’ ends, he may move
about as he pleases without much dread of not getting employ-
ment, and thereby really and truly becomes a citizen of the
world ; but not so a Government official, whose citizenship of the
world simply means his routine work at his desk, within the
four corners of his office. Government billets, forsooth ! Why,
there is scarcely anything else for smart, well-educated young
fellows in the whole colony, and which seems too truly borne out
by facts, if all said be facts, for it is in the mouths of every one
that the Robertson Government, while in office last time, made
no fewer than 700 appointments ! Nevertheless, Ido not blame
them, for I can very well believe that it is not from a mere itch-
ing desire to make such appointments, but rather that they can-
not help themselves ; indeed, they are actually driven to do so
by the state of the colony.
Then, another class that comes prominently under notice is
an active, restless, but unemployed lot, commonly called “ larri-
kins,” who, for want of regular and steady employment, give
vent, in the exuberance of their nature, to all sorts of fun and
frolic which, I doubt not, many a time degenerates into down-
right mischief. Still, it is, perhaps, not so much their fault as
misfortune that this is the case, as we are all, to a very great ex-
tent, mere creatures of circumstances.
As regards being creatures of circumstances, I certainly do
not go to the length of believing all that Robert Dale Owen
wrote and spoke on this subject; nevertheless wo are all in some
measure influenced and moulded by our surroundings. For in-
stance, a farmer’s son is much more likely, from his position
among agricultural and dairy matters, to become a farmer rather
than a chimney-sweep ; while the son of a chimney-sweep, on the
other hand, is much more likely to follow his father’s profession
than try agricultural pursuits. And depend upon it that the
hourly and daily surroundings, and the circumstances in which
this “larrikin ” element is placed, exert a very great deal of in-
fluence in moulding their habits and modes of life.
A few Sundays ago the Sunday-school in Kent-street, in con-
nection with the “ St. Andrew’s Scots Church ” was opened, after
it had been beautifully and comfortably refitted and done up.
Any one who felt interested in the Sunday-school movement
was invited to attend in the afternoon. The Rev. Dr. White de-
livered an excellent address from the text, i( Train up a child in
the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart
from it;” but when he was in the midst of his address a few
youngsters, “ larrikins,” I suppose, were somewhat noisy out-
side—for comfort the street door was left partly open— and their
rompings disturbed the reverend doctor to such an extent that


he said he knew of several individuals who had risen in life to
most creditable positions —they as youngsters had been Sunday-
school scholars, when from the instructions then imparted to
them had instilled and grounded such principles within them
that stood by them afterwards in moving through life ; and
added that he thought, as regards the “ larrikins,” that all that
was wanted was to get them to become Sunday-school scholars
too, which would be sure to produce the desired reform of this
element. I thought at the time that moral and religious training
was quite right and most desirable ; nevertheless it was certainly
not all that was requisite to cure this element ; no, nor is it.
Indeed it only goes half way, for “ larrikins” with all the moral
and religous training in the world will play marbles and cut
capers, unless they have regular and steady employment besides ;
and so would we, or anyone else, I dare say, if placed in similar
circumstances. Let them by all means, then have both moral
and religious training, but at the same time let it be a, sine qua
non that we have industries also, so as to employ them, and
thereby keep them out of mischief, for, as the old saying has it,
“ The Devil always finds something for idle hands to do.”
Well, then, is there no remedy for this state of things here ?
Yes, there is, and it is quite within reasonable reach, too, were
we only sensible enough to avail ourselves of it. There is no
discovery in the matter, and it is simply to acquire a manufac-
turing and commercial position, and to do what all the old
countries of the world have done before us, viz., gave due and
proper encouragement to industries , the great employers of labour.
With a number of industries we are right: without them we are
all wrong together. Industries are the seats and centres of the
busy been, and which give employment to the majority of the
human race throughout the world. And without industries,
where and what would be the amount of accumulated wealth in
the whole world ? This is the point well worthy of consideration,
yet how little it seems attended to. As regards the production
of wealth, the veriest labourer is far greater and more mighty
than a king—for one produces it, but the other spends it.
What is wealth ? Why, in the simplest way of putting it, it is
just the excess of our wants, given in exchange and put into
circulation. Suppose a family to work industriously, say ten
houts a day, for a week, producing everything they required
among themselves, they, at the end of that time, would find them-
selves in possession probably of 20 or 25 per cent, more articles
and necessaries than they required. This surplus then is wealth.
Now it is a somewhat remarkable fact that the vendors and
spenders of our wealth have hitherto been, and are still at the
present day, our lawgivers and dictators—not certainly in the
direction of our interests and wishes, but their own. I scarcely
think this is right, at any rate it is anything but satisfactory to


those classes, the producers of all wealth, who are stirely entitled
at least to have their desires and wishes consulted in some
degree.
At the present day the merest schoolboy almost can tell you
that industries mean employment for the people, and when the
industries are even of moderate extent, they generally form a
nucleus for a large population in a very small space. To give
you an instance with which I am familiar, I may mention
Hawick, in the South of Scotland, a purely manufacturing town.
In the year 1855 we had among the several manufacturers fifty-
four sets of woollen machines, producing tweeds, shawls,
blankets, and hosiery, and employing many hands, whose wages
on pay nights were something considerable, and the circulation
of the same called all sorts of businesses and trades into exis-
tence around them, such as machine-makers, blacksmiths,
joiners, bankers, bakers, tailors, grocers, drapers, shoemakers,
druggists, doctors, lawyers, and ministers to our spiritual wants
in both senses of the term; in a word, around these manufac-
tories we had a gathering of all shades and grades, numbering,
together with the workpeople, somewhere about 14,000 souls ;
and I do verily believe that had the town depended entirely on
the agricultural and pastoral interests that the population would
not have exceeded 1000 inhabitants altogether. Now this is
proof of what industries can do towards employing the people
and supporting a dense population. Nor is this all, either, for
the benefits accruing are both varied and numerous. But let
us view it from a Treasurer’s standpoint, and we will find his
revenue from this population alone to be no less than £§4,000
per annum, reckoning taxation at the rate of £6 a head. Such
a nice amount as this might readily make his mouth water. It
would mine, I know.
Then anent machine making, the following brief sketch
will throw a little light on the want of this branch of industry
amongst us. About eight months ago a burring machine, used
for taking burrs out of wool, got damaged, and, there being no
one in the colony that could sort it, it had to he sent home to
England for repairs. Platts, the best makers, perhaps, in the
world, made it. Well, in order to have it back again as soon as
possible, I sent it by one of the Cape line of fast steamers, and,
after being repaired, had it returned by way of Suez—of course,
at considerable expense, and in about four months from the time
it left here ; but fancy my chagrin, when I came to fit the parts
up, at finding that it was net accurately done ; in fact, it would
not work, and the parts a second time had to go home to England
again to be made thoroughly correct They were this time sent
back via Torres Straits, and will just be in England about now ;
but before I can get the parts back and the machine fitted up end


ready for work again, I will just have lost about ten months 1 work
of it; whereas, had industries received due encouragement here,
I might have had the repairs done in the colony in a week. This
then surely shows a nice state of things here, and speaks volumes
for the wisdom of the powers that he. Now, had Sir John or Sir
Henry not been above anything colonial, they might have had
unmentionables with a few burrs in them, that might have diverted
them quite as much as the minister was when he exclaimed
that he was sure he had God/ in his heart, but he thought the
devil had got into his breeches—he had been standing on an ant
bed at an open-air meeting, and I guarantee they would have
done their duty quite as efficiently as the Duke of Argyle’s
scrubbing-post ever did for the Highlanders.
But how is it possible, under present circumstances, that we
out here can hold our own, when we take into consideration the
great difference in producing anything in the colonies as compared
with what can he done in the old countries of the v r orid, notably
so in England and the Continent. In the first place, bank
interest is scarcely one-third of what we have to pay for money
here, and rents are just about a fourth of what we all have to
pay for business premises, and if in Germany, much less even
than this, while wages are quite in keeping with those other
quotations. The foregoing remarks apply to the products of all
industries and pursuits ; but though all expenses are lower there
than here, and wages notably so, does it follow that we should
send our money out of the country for Continental products, and
thereby employ and pay German labour, instead of our own among
ourselves here? Most undoubtedly and decidedlv not. It is
nevertheless done in the trading community without the least
compunction or scruple; and the sending of the Government
paper contract out of the country was a most flagrant and
disg*raceful instance. Now were this principle carried out to
its logical consequences, what would be the result, and where
would it end ? Why, Great Britain could easily beat us in
everything pertaining to labour; France could beat Great
Britain ; while Germany could beat both; and if it is wished to
carry the matter a little further, why John Chinaman could lick
the lot. Well, then, is this satisfactory '? To my mind, at least,
it is not, nor to any right-thinking man can it be so. All things
being equal, it is right enough to buy in the cheapest market
and sell in the dearest; but when this is said and done, it cer-
tainly does not by any means embrace everything. When we
were at home in the old country we were, as was natural and
in duty bound, interested in everything pertaining to its interests,
prosperity, and welfare but when we left it and made this
colony the land of our adoption, wherein we and our families
mean to settle and remain, what should be our first consideration ?


Should it be for the country we have left, or the country in which
we mean to remain ? Not the old country certainly, but the one
in which we have settled down, which calls for our first and best
consideration. Then, such being 1 the case, away with the pro-
ductions of cheap labour which prevent industries here, and the
employment of the people.
Should it cost a few shillings each per annum in order to
promote and establish industries, and thereby give additional
and steady employment to the people, where is the man that
would not be bettered by far in doing so ? Ido not believe
there is a single individual who gives the matter the slightest
consideration in the direction of his own interests that would
for one moment begrudge doing so. And if the working-classes,
who are the great consumers, are willing to do this, what
business has the merchant or anyone else to bar the way in
carrying out these views and principles ? Should the merchant
have to lay out a little money on a few articles (I do not approve
of taxing all round), he can recoup himself again by an extra
charge to the consumers. This matter, then, certainly does not
come out of his pocket in any way whatever. But one of the
most extraordinary parts of the whole business is the remarkable
shortsightedness to their own interests of the very classes that
would reap the greatest amount of benefits and advantages from
the encouragement of additional industries, which mean, as the
case may be, an increased population—aye, perhaps double of
what it is at present, which in a like proportion would increase
the demand for goods in the warehouses, and in all probability,
increase the price of butcher’s meat at the very least by Id. per
lb., which means 3s. or 4s. more for sheep, and £3 a head more
for cattle, as well as corresponding high rates for agricultural
and dairy produce. I know that, were I following any of these
pursuits, I would stir heaven and earth to promote and encourage
industries of all descriptions, so as to have additional population
into the colony.
Now, why could we not build our own ships, make our own
locomotives and steam engines, produce our own rails for rail-
ways, be our own machine-makers, produce our own tools,
further encourage our woollen manufactures, and hold out
bonuses for cotton and jute manufactures to spring up ? There
is really nothing to prevent this, which would soon bring plenty
of people to our shores, and that, too, without money and with-
out price. In this colony we want but little that Nature has not
provided us with, for the best iron ore, the best coal, the best
limestone, the best clay, we are blessed with. Then, did the
Creator of the world, and all that it contains, place or present
these valuables to us for our benefit or not ? And if for our
benefit— and it is so— is it the pointing of the finger of the
Almighty to those things, or Adam Smith, M'Culloch, or John


Stuart Mill that should have first consideration ? We ought
really to be well ashamed of ourselves, for “ the handwriting
on the wall ” could not be plainer than the lesson that those
infinite treasures point out to us ; yet in our shortsightedness we
do not take advantage of them for our own benefit, but heed-
lessly cast them aside as if they were naught. Are we not told
that miracles will never cease ? Then, what if the Creator of
the world were to appear in person on earth, summon our legis-
lators to judgment, and, addressing Sir John and Sir Henry,
say, u All those riches have I given thee for the benefit,
welfare, and employment of my people, yet ye will not hearken
unto me, nor listen to my voice, but cling to and prefer your
own ways to my ways—depart! ”
JOHN VICARS.
Tweed Factory,
Sydney, August 21st, 1877.
ENCOURAGEMENT OF INDUSTRIES.
LETTER No. 7.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —In a remote period of the world’s history, when the sweat
of one’s brow and forbidden fruit were alike unknown, the
inhabitants were content to subsist on the natural resources with
which land, air, and water provided them, and so far as outward
appearances went, not fig leaves, but a few pigment streaks,
would make many of our worthy progenitors, in their human
vanity, consider themselves no small drink, and from our love of
self-esteem, the heavy swells of our times would no doubt have
their exact counterparts in those days, to whom a paint-pot and
brush would be quite a treasure. But in times much less remote
the different countries of the world, finding quite sufficient
within themselves for all their wants, were no doubt happier
far, and quite content to live on in this unostentatious manner,
thinking of nothing and caring for nothing beyond themselves
and their own country, which was all the world to them. Then,
the human race being eminently progressive, improvements
suggested themselves, which were carried out, and thus step by
step the world advanced until at that period when they were
something more than mere ‘ ‘ hewers of wood and drawers of
water”—they had become agriculturalists, manufacturers, and


mechanics. This was the time when they wanted nothing from
outside, and would have nothing, thereby making their own
constant and steady employment a consideration of paramount
importance.
Some of our modern worthies who sometimes get stride-
legs on their hobby-horses may characterise this as being very
selfish, and so it is ; but who implanted this selfishness within
us, and what was it for? You may be sure that the great “ I
am” did not endow us with it for nothing. Then what if we
render it as the eleventh commandment, viz., “ Man, mind
thyself! ” This commandment, then, teaches us that selfishness
dictates self-preservation in all its bearings, as being the first
law of nature, and we consider we do not misapply this principle
if we look to ourselves, to our families, and to the country in
which we live before all other considerations; in other words,
our common sense points out to us —“ Ourselves first, and any
one else next.” But how different things seem now-a-days ; for
it is not ourselves and our own country that come in for first
consideration, but rather other people and other countries that
we neither know nor care two straws about; indeed some of our
wiseacres would rather let people remain without the chance of
employment, and thereby starve and die, than not carry out
their empyrical views of political economy. With them it is—
“ Live if you can, or die if you like ; ” but certain principles
must be maintained, whether or not. We believe there is
scarcely a country on the habitable globe but what can have
great prosperity within itself, where among its own inhabitants
all free interchange can and should be mutually carried out;
but where is the sense in extending the same liberty and privi-
leges to others, if by doing so we prevent the development of
our own natural resources, and the constant and steady employ-
ment of increasing numbers of our fellow-mortals amongst us ?
This is the point—and without developing our natural resources
and encouraging industries, we say that we cannot have a dense
population—indeed the thing is impossible, and whoever argues
differently has only studied one side of the question, instead of
looking into the natural law of employment of the human race.
Now we maintain that by imposing a tax by way of en-
couragement to industries, that it is not the case, that it is the
plundering of the many for the sake of the few; any one who
says so must take a very contracted and theoretical view of
matters, and must talk more by rote than from actual observation
and facts. “He can’t see an inch before his nose,” and
“ There is none so blind as he who won’t see,” are truisms
which might with much propriety be applied to many. Granted
that a tax is imposed on an article by way of encouragement, is
it in any degree either just or fair to say that this is plundering
the many for the sake of the few, when after a brief period the


article in question is actually cheaper, and continues cheaper
afterwards ? Why this can be seen every day, as we shall have
no difficulty in showing by-and-bye. Now, this being the case,
tell us then, pray, who is plundered, and who protected?
Dickens says that “time works wonders,” and with arts and
manufactures, this is notably the case, for when proper oppor-
tunity is afforded by encouragement to industries, how very
soon the producer is enabled, by availing himself of improve-
ments, to turn out both better and cheaper articles by which the
many are benefited, but not plundered. The term plunder can
only apply where a tax remains a burden, but the experience of
all the countries of the world shows that judicious encourage-
ment has invariably resulted in favour of the consumer by
cheapening the products. Sooner or later it has always been so.
What, we ask, has enabled America, in such a short time, to
outstrip “creation,” as our friend Jonathan would phrase it?
And would she not be in leading-strings now had she not hit out
for herself, as she has most creditably done ? Her having used
protection for her own advancement certainly did not suit the
old country’s interest; but our cousins preferred following up
the eleventh commandment for their own good, whether it suited
others or not; and quite right too. Now, seeing that she has
been able to show so nobly to the front, could we err far in
trying to do likewise? Surely example is certainly always
stronger than precept. Now, were we smote on the one cheek
and then turn up the other—the world may have reached that
point when it might be our duty to consider the interests of others
before our own, but we are afraid we are a long way from that
point yet. Now as to American products. Is she not, both in
quality and price, beating the very best producing countries in
the world ? And is she not sending her iron, her calicoes, her
clocks and watches, her tools and implements, and her power
looms into all the European markets every day, and beating the
very best makers on their own ground, and at their own very
doors ? And what, pray, has enabled her to do that ? Had her
industries not been accorded encouragement, could she have done
this ? Most decidedly not.
Then has the tax in favour of encouragement to industries
in Victoria made it a burden to the many for the benefit of the
few ? If it has, how does it come to pass that they can send
cheaper machinery into New South Wales than we can produce
here ? And how also does it come to pass that they can send
cheaper tweeds and slops into this colony, which she is doing
every day, and undersell the New South Wales manufacturers
in their own market ? Does this look like a tax on the many for
the sake of the few ? And again, pray, what has enabled her to
io this t New, kiwi she fallowed the keek pelitieal eeenomy


of some of our sucklings here, she would have found herself
altogether behind, like the cow’s tail and—us. Such facts
as these will speak for themselves, and ought to convince
even a blackfellow. But we have no occasion to go beyond
our own colony for such proof as we shall clearly demonstrate
presently; for does the result of our kerosene industry not
knock the bottom completely out of this “ tax on the many ”
argument ? I can only say this, that if it does not, that we must
have been sadly misguided when trained in reasoning. Now,
since general statements are often advanced instead of facts, we
wish to be a little more particular in following up this argument,
so as to show who is right and who is wrong, and then leave it
to the public to decide. Previous to the Hartley Company
starting to make kerosene —they commenced in 1867 —the
American oil was selling here at Bs. to 10s. per gallon for whole-
sale parcels, but as soon as the above works commenced the
price was at once dropped to 4s. and 55., at which quotations
considerable transactions took place for both colonial and
American. Then when the Botany works were started in 1869
the American oil, in order to run this work out of the market,
was reduced to 2s. 6d., and afterwards it was, duty paid, actually
sold as low as Is. 3d. to Is. 6d. per gallon !! But at this price it
could not of course remain ; however, the regular, steady market
price for it now is only 2s. ! The result of encouragement to
industries in this case is so very obvious that the greatest old
woman in the country could tell what benefit has arisen to us
through that 6d. duty. And but for this 6d. would we have our
Botany works to-day P Then were this 6d. taken off, the work
shut up, all the hands thrown out of employment, the circulation
of money from their wages lost to the country, and upwards of
£SOO a month for railway carriage lost to the Government—we
say, were all this to happen, would we not have the foreign
article jumping up again in price on us ? Whoever says that
it would not must indeed be very verdant and know but little of
things in general. Aga in, since the candle industry had a little en-
couragement held out to it has the price of candles in our market not
been reduced and cheaper than it was before ? Indeed it has, and
this shows that the 12£ per cent, in their favour has notincreased
the price to the consumer, but lessened it. But let us go into a
few particulars. Well, the “ Apollo” works were started in No-
vember last year, and the imported candles during the last ten
years have ranged from lOd. to Is. 6d. ; this latter price was
reached in June, 1867, and the average price during this time
has been quite llfd. per lb., but the colonial candles have never
exceeded 10|d., while the present price is only 9|d. Now, does
this prove our statement or not ? And is this the way that
some of our milk-and-water political economists would educate


the people into the idea that the moment an industry is en-
couraged that it means the plundering of the many for the- sake
of the few ? Further, let us take the result of a tak ia favour
of another industry that we have amongst us —we mean the
manufacture of vinegar. Why, before there was any encourage-
ment given to this article there was not a drop, of the Simon Pure
produced in the whole colony ; but, when some inducement was
held out to this manufacture, we very soon got the genuine
article itself, and at a lessened cost too—certainly not at an increased
price. Before the duty was put on this article, Is. lOd. to 2s.
}>er gallon was the ruling price; but after the duty brought our
oeal trade into the market, it resulted in cheapening the-com-
modity by reducing the price to Is. 6d., which is the figure at
which it is now quoted. Random assertions may be given by
the bushel, but I beg to ask who is gam© to taclde those stub-
born facts ? They will, I think, be rather hard nuts to crack.
Theories sometimes appear all right at first sight; hut prac-
tice is the test, and ascertained facts are conclusive. Now, since
we are surrounded by so much conclusive and incontrovertible
evidence ; and since we see what America has done; and. since we
see what has been done and is still being done in Victoria ; and
since we see the result of encouragement to industries among
ourselves, why not extend the same principle and encouragement
to other industries which we have within the colony at the present
moment ? If the experiment on some has produced such favour-
able results, we surely could scarcely err in extending it beyond
its present limits. Amongst us we have three of the leading
branches of industry of the world. I mean engineering, machine
making, and woollen manufactories. Then, why should they
be left to struggle on minus encouragement ? By judicious
encouragement these branches might very soon be double their
present extent, employing twice the number of hands, circula-
ting double the money among ourselves, have improved machinery,
and with lessened dead expenses, cheaper products and letter could
be turned out than we can produce at present. Well, then, if such
be the case—and we have clearly shown that it is so—what
becomes of all the twaddle and nonsense that we so frequently
hear? And whence all this opposition to the encouragement of
industries, and consequent employment for the people ? If we
inquire we find it principally among importers, merchants, and
squatters —certainly not among the working classes, who, above
all others, might have been expected to give the greatest amount
of opposition, seeing that they are by far the largest consumers,
and consequently the greatest burthen-bearers in the whole com-
munity. But, no !it is not them. The importers , then, are the
individuals from whom every opposition may be expected, be-
cause encouraged and extended industries simply mean less bread
and cheese for them, by lessening their business from abroad.


Some may live and move, and have their commercial being in
Wharfs, and the more stuff that comes from other countries is
always the more grist to their mills, which, in plain English,
means pocket lining; consequently, they not only don’t care a pin
for us, but it is their interest to retard industries here as long as they
possibly can, and we may look for and expect nothing but the
most strenuous opposition from them, and in every way that lies
in their power. Had we not an attempt in this direction lately,
when Mr. Dibbs tried to upset the kerosene industry here 1 But
the most inconceivable thing of the whole affair is opposition
from wholesale houses, squatters, and shopkeepers of every des-
cription, who in pursuing such a line of opposition commit the
most suicidal policy they could be guilty of, that is to say, if they
study their own interests. For, with encouraged industries, how
soon might we not double our population, and with a doubled
working population the circulation of money from wages alone
would be almost incredibly great, and do much more than double
the business with the wholesale houses and storekeepers, as well
as increase the price for cattle, sheep, and farm produce—a
penny a pound on butchers meat might readily be looked for,
which means 3s. more for sheep, and £3 a head more for cattle,
while farm produce was bound to come in for like benefits, which
could not fail to be the best thing that these classes ever saw in
their day.
Now, as to protection, such as prevailed in by-gone days, we
neither believe in it nor advocate it. In those times everything,
from a needle to an anchor, was protected all round, and as to
duration, why, it was without limit —two conditions which we can
not approve of for one moment. Encouragement to industries,
though sometimes confounded with protection, is quite a different
thing ; and when we advocate encouragement we only mean some
consideration for industries which might readily be reared up amongst
us through natural advantages which exist around us, but not like
protection, to be kept on for all time coming, but only to be con-
tinued until the industries had reached maturity and could stagger
along for themselves; it is only to this extent —an extent which
no one could find fault with —but nothing more than this do we
advocate. The moment when industries could feel for themselves ,
that moment all assistance should cease; and except the industries
we could reasonably rear up amongst us, everything else should be
as free as possible, and as was consistent with the fiscal arrangements
of the colony.
Many industries and pursuits, however, from natural circum-
stances in which they are placed, have the greatest amount of
protection, indeed all that is possible they can have. For instance,
when a business is of that nature that the supply must be had
on the spot, that business has protection. Now we must have
our milk, vegetables, bread, and butchers’ meat on the spot,


consequently, those businesses have protection. Then when a
pursuit is placed in that position that imports cannot be brought
in to oppose it, that pursuit has protection. Now, look at the
squatter, whose sole dependence is on grass and water ; he also
has protection, for it has not yet been discovered how to import
such articles. Again, all the imports in the world in the shape
of newspapers would neither suit nor satisfy us ; therefore they
have protection. Further, at very small expense, we can con-
vert clay into bricks, water pipes, &c., and sell them at a profit
for less money than we can import them, and this is protection.
Soap also is another industry that can not only hold its own but
defy imports, which gives it protection. Indeed, all products
requiring but small outlay to bring the raw material in a manu-
factured state to market has, as a rule, protection. From the
foregoing we perceive that nature frequently indulges in protec-
tion, but in New South Wales man must not. And since such a
thing would seriously interfere with the importers’ interests, it
cannot for one moment be thought of. It is not in defence of the
consumers’ interests that makes the importers cry aloud, but
dread for their own pockets. Have we not proof enough of this
in the kerosene, in the vinegar, and in the candle racket and
other attempts. What between different charges and various
profits on general imports, before articles can reach the con-
sumer there cannot be less than 50 per cent, added to the original
manufacturer’s cost; but this, after a time, might be reduced at
least by one-half by having goods produced on the spot. We
say there is nothing to prevent this, since by supplying ourselves
we save the profit at the far end as well as the freight and other
charges, altogether amounting to nothing less than about 25 per
cent. Now, in order to effect an ultimate saving of 25 per cent,
is it not worth while to submit to a moderate tax in favour of
industries so as to encourage them within the colony p If by
looking at employment for the people, if by looking at the cir-
culation of wages, and if by looking at the ultimate cheapened
products, we would without the slightest hesitation say that it
would be most desirable indeed. But independent of this saving,
look at the benefit that would accrue to business people alone
by the circulation of wages for general commodities to meet
every-day wants, independent of our mere daily existence. Why,
on an average, every working man will not spend less in this
way than—say 16s. a week. Now, 16s. a week on a thousand
hands amounts to nearly £42,000 a year—a very nice sum
certainly to circulate among ourselves instead of sending it out
of the country. Merchants and shopkeepers of every description
should look to this, if not perversely blind to their own interests.
Nor do the benefits end here, for the ordinary revenue of the
country would also come in for a share of the general good to
the extent, at least, of £6,000 per annum, reckoning taxation at


the rate of £6 a head. With every respect, we beg to submit
this for the best consideration of every thinking man. Then
anent the sister colony, we have shown that the Victorian home
trade has only to be supplemented by imports amounting to 4s. 2d.
per head on the population, whilst our supplementary imports
amount to nearly 13s.
The writer who signs himself “ Common Sense ” has surely
made a mistake in the name, for the reasoning is so very un-
common that a mere suckling in deductions would, as John
Chinaman says, have more “ savvy.” If he cannot observe that
even with protection , we may not always get what ice want and just
when we leant it , his case is rather a hopeless one, and he seems
one of that sort that would have everything, like “ Jonah’s
gourd,” to spring up in a night. With encouragement to industries
we make it possible to get what we want , but without it we miss both
the possibility and the chance of having things many a time required.
The repeal of the corn laws extended manufacturing industry, but
protection promoted it. Now, I imagine I have properly squared
up “ Common Sense’s ” iron ideas and views, which will leave
him at liberty to enjoy “ mutton and turnips ” with his friend
“ George the Third.” Then, with best wishes for his appetite,
we make him our bow and take our leave.
Yours obediently,
JOHN VICARS.
Tweed Factory,
Sydney, September 12th, 1877.
THE CHINESE QUESTION.
To the Honorable Sir HENRY PARKES, M.L.A., Colonial
Secretary of New South Wales.
Per favour of the Evening News.
Dear Sir, —From newspaper reports, I observe that you intend
bringing in a bill to regulate the number of Chinese coming
into this colony—rather a ticklish question, allow me to observe
—but it won’t be much of a task either, if you only make it
sufficiently stringent, and the stringency consistent with the cir-
cumstances of the case which, at this moment, so loudly demand
it in the interest of the general public. Having been among
Chinese for several years in Northern Queensland, I thought
my knowledge and experience of them might not, at the present
time, be unacceptable to you.


Allow me then, to observe, that we Britishers, as Jonathan
calls us, would have great repugnance and many compunctious
scruples ere we could make up our minds to assimilate with this
race, and though we might cheerfully adopt a black boy, yet, to
my mind, it would be a great struggle to have to affiliate with the
Chinese. I have no doubt, nevertheless, that the Chinese nation,
like every other nation on earth, has good as well as bad amongst
them, but the working class that is sent or brought here — they
don't come —seem, as a rule, the needy scum and scrapings from
all the slums and corners of the Flowery Land. Their morals,
if they have any, don’t trouble them much, and had Confucius
been living at the present day, the serenity of his temper and
philosophy would not only have been tried, perhaps beyond en-
durance, but he would many a time have been well ashamed, as
well as disgusted, at the ways and doings of many of his country-
men. Of course they are not all alike, and I have been
acquainted with several that conducted themselves in every way
just as correctly as we profess to do, and some of them who were
married to Europeans could not be kinder than they were to their
wives and families. And even the worst of them have many
commendable virtues which would, many a time, do us no harm
to imitate—for instance, they are Civil, Frugal, Economical,
Industrious, and, as Longfellow has it, they have any quantity of
patient Endurance, which the same author says is Q-odlike. But
the bulk of them who herd together are many a time worse than
the brute creation, and grossly immoral and filthy in the last
degree. I have said the working Chinese are sent or brought into
these colonies, and this is the case, for. companies or rich men
amongst themselves, send them in here, and to whom they are
bondsmen or serfs for a number of years —often for a period of
not less thanjftye years, and to whom every penny of their earn-
ings go except the merest pittance—-just what deeds and feeds
them; and these, their rice and clothes, almost all come from
China. This, then, plainly shows that they are not here as we
are. We come here to settle down, make the colony our home,
sink any money we may make, or put it in circulation, and by
doing so, enrich the colony, and contribute our fair quota of
revenue to the colony. But does John do the same ? No, not a
bit of him. He comes here, and gets the benefit of our Grovern-
ment without helping to keep it up ; he comes here, but not to
settle down; he comes here to live of£ us; he comes here to
scratch and scrape up everything, even to the last sixpence, or
the last speck of gold from these colonies; but does he
sink these gains, or put them into circulation as we
do P Certainly not, but sends everything he lays hands
on into China. By doing this John gathers up our
riches, sends them into China, and thereby impoverishes the#e


colonies instead of enriching them. Nor is this all, for as soon as
he can scrape up a little money on his own hook, he very soon
makes tracks and clears out again. Is this then a desirable race
to have amongst us ? I should think not, and I say No most em-
phatically. It is true that we, or the A.S.N. Company, might
get Chinese labour for less than is usually paid here, but let us
see how long and how far this would benefit. Had the A.S.N.
Company been successful in their attempt to introduce Chinese
labour into their vessels, as they have a perfect right to do if they
choose , the question arises, would they have been benefitted by it ?
I reply No. They would not, for other competing companies
would have been compelled, in self-defence, to follow suit. This,
then, being the case, it would have been but a few months, at
most, ere they would all have been on the same level again, and
therefore no better off than when they started on their Chinese
raid of economy. But the matter does not rest here, for while
their purses were in no way improved, they would have ruined
their merchant navy for any case of emergency, by supplanting
our hearts of oak with a foreign mongrel race, who neither could
nor would stand by us if it came to be a case when every man was
expected to do his 'duty ; and this then would be our present hu-
miliating position had the A.S.N. Company been successful in
introducing the yellow agony amongst us. This Company was
quite funky, too, over what they called the strike, but I, who
have been an employer of labour for upwards of thirty years,
say that it was not a strike in the ordinary sense of the term —
it wasn’t a strike against the reduction of wages, nor a strike for
a rise of wages, but it was a strike of far greater importance,
namely a strike of race against race, and a strike against the
attempt to get the thin end of the wedge in, and against being
taken in detail. Then, after viewing these matters in all their
bearings; and, although I regularly employ 120 hands myself,
I say that when it comes to be race against race —John or me —
up goes my shoulder too, and John must slide. It would scarcely
be amusing to think of us coming out here from the old country
to settle down and make the colony something worth while, and
tamely allow ourselves to be shouldered aside by Chinamen. No,
no! this won’t do ; and lam proud to say that I am one of those
whose forefathers knew how to keep possession of auld Scotland
against all comers, aye, even against the ancient Romans, though
generalled and led by Agricola himself. This being the case,
then, it would ill become me to permit John to do me out of my
colonial inheritance, which he very soon would do were he per-
mitted in here unchecked. Again, were other industries to intro-
duce Chinese labour for cheapness, would we benefit by it ? I
beg to say No ; for though we could get them for less wages, they
wouldn’t be consumers of our products, and it is a working class


who would be good customers to us that we want. Suppose I
employed them to produce tweeds: they wouldn’t wear the goods
that I was paying them to make, but would wear their own pro-
ducts, as they invariably do, no matter where they are. They
would therefore receive wages from me, not to benefit me again
by their spendings, but to benefit their own country and country-
men, —most certainly not me nor mine. It might be said that
cheap wages would be a benefit, but I again ask, Where would the
benefit be, if we employed a race that wouldn’t consume what
we produced ? And this is the way to look at the question ; for
it is in an increase of our working population wherein our
strength and prosperity lie, and any scheme by which we could
encourage and support this element would be the very salvation
of this colony. Cheap wages means little to spend ; cheap wages
are all very well, and as a rule, very desirable many a time, still
they are not everything, for there are many considerations
besides ; but suppose I had followed the A.S.N. Company’s ex-
ample, by using Chinese labour, would I have benefitted by it, I
would like to ask ? Would my neighbour manufacturers, in self-
defence, not have followed suit P Most certainly they would ;
and this being the case, how long would it have been before we
were all on precisely the same level again with one
another P In addition to being on the same wage level
again, we would have the disadvantage of having discharged our
old hands who were customers to us, and employed those who
would neither buy nor wear a single sixpennyworth of our stuff ;
and it would be just the same with every other industry that
might employ Chinese labour. Again, had it been followed up
in this way by industries generally in employing this labour, how
long would this have been an English colony in anything but the
name ?
Well, under all these circumstances and considerations the
question arises, What is to be done ? To which I reply, If you
cannot bar the colony against them, as undoubtedly it cannot
yet, you can place them under restrictions which to some extent
will act as a bar against their coming. The £lO poll-tax imposed
by Queensland is scarcely any barrier against the influx of
Chinese into that colony, nor would it be otherwise with us with
a £lO admission tax against them here; and the reason is
this, that the companies or rich men who send their country-
men into these colonies find it profitable to do so, notwithstanding
this payment; and depend upon it they will continue to pour
them in if they meet with no other and more stringent measures.
You have already hinted at some conditions, which I observe
you intend to impose, and I believe they are in the right direc-
tion ; but it just occurs to me that they don’t go far enough to
prove effectual. Permit me to suggest a £lO annual poll tax, as


well as an admission poll tax of £lO, at any rate, an annual tax.
I base this annual tax on what is just, fair, and right , and will
show it presently. Every one is accorded equal privileges by
Government, and, in return, every one should contribute equally
to the Treasury. John consumes scarcely any dutiable goods,
consequently he cannot contribute his quota of taxes to the
Treasury the same as we do, and since this is the case it is nothing
but what is right to call upon him to bear an annual poll tax
equal to what we pay in another way. Now the taxes here are fully
£6 a head , but as the one-half of the population will be children
and youngsters, it follows that the adult population will hare all
the taxes to pay, equal quite to £l2 per adult, and £lO annually
would be letting John down easily. Of course John would say,
“ Tax no good, and me no savvy.” John has always plenty of
no savvy when he does not want to savvy. Some might Bay,
“ Oh,-this is class legislation but I say it is no such thing, it
is simply an exceptional case met in an exceptional manner.
For many years I have advocated this annual poll-tax, and
always thought the Queensland Government would have to resort
to it, and am of the same opinion still. In Friday’s Herald I
observe that an annual £l2 poll-tax is imposed on the Chinese in
British Columbia, and quite right too—they have got John’s
correct measure there ; and, since such a tax is resorted to there,
we needn’t bogle at a similar measure here ; and, were you only
to introduce your bill with such conditions embodied in it, I
believe it would pass both Houses with scarcely any opposition.
Yours truly,
J. VICARS.
Tweed Factory, Jan. 29th.
THE DECALOGUE.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —The following are a few propositions (or decalogue) on an
interesting subject, which we may have to consider sooner or
later, and with your permission I beg- to lay before the public for
their best consideration,—
1. Protection would encourage industries, give additional
employment to the people, and induce many more to come and
settle down amongst us.
2. If we look around us we will find many instances shewing
that where industries have been encouraged and helped at first,
the prices have not been increased but reduced. For instance,


look at American manufactures with 33 per cent, in their tavouy,
and observe how this duty has enabled her to cheapen her pro-
ducts so much as to beat and undersell Great Britain herself at
home in her own markets, as in calicoes, clocks and watches,
agricultural implements, iron and steel, furniture, machinery, &c.,
while here we can adduce several, for instance, kerosene, candles,
vinegar, &c. It is therefore not correct to assume that prices
are raised by protection.
3. Without industries to employ many people (the con-
sumers) how are markets to be had and prices maintained !
Without a consuming population how are producers to get along,
how can squatters and farmers maintain anything like fair and
reasonable prices for stock and produce ? Merely for the want of
consumers, look at the miserable prices of cattle and sheep just
now, and the question is when can they improve ?
4. Producing in the colony instead of buying abroad would
benefit every one here, because all the hands required would be
on the spot, and whose wages would necessarily circulate within
the colony, thereby in some degree enriching all whose hands
they touched. But the benefits arising from the production of
all imports must undoubtedly go to the foreigner —certainly not
to us.
5. As early as the time of Edward 111. England accorded
strong inducements as well as substantial protection to many
industries and manufactures within Great Britain, and but for
that what would those industries and manufactures be at the
present day ? Is this, then, not a lesson for us ?
6. The first consideration of any country should be the
employment of her people, inasmuch as it is from labour that all
wealth springs, and the larger the population she employs the
greater her prosperity, and certainly her revenue would always
be all the more healthy and elastic.
7. I maintain that by encouraging all industries whieh can
naturally be reared up within any country that that would be the
very salvation of such a country, and I appeal to the merchants
themselves if they really did not make more and do better here
under the old tariff than they have ever done since, small though
the ad valorem duty was formerly.
8. Again with a free and unrestricted port what is to be the
result, to many, of the approaching Exhibition ■ Just now and
while it lasts it will be all right and do good, for it will circulate
money, but after it is done aad gone, what then How will it
be with many of the wholesale houses ? Why, foreign countries
will be establishing agencies he»e who will merely have perhaps
a single room for office, keep samples of their goods and do a
trade at the most trifling expense, which will enable them to cut
out and undersell every large house in the trade. How will this


be liked by extensive houses whose expenses one way and another
must of necessity be considerable, I beg to ask, and how will their
numerous employes like it ?
9. Because Great Britain has been long over producing, it is
her interest to sing* out “ Free Trade,” in fhct, there is nothing
else for her ; but the question of all questions for us to consider
is, what is really best under all considerations for ourselves ?
What best suits the old countries may not always be for our own
best interests ; we therefore ought to think. From the advocacy
of the Manchester School they seem to think that the old country
can live for ever, but depend upon it that this is a great mistake,
for all the lessons of history teach us that countries like human
beings, live and grow, attain maturity, decay and die.
10. With the exception of Great Britain and New South
Wales, every other country in the world, we may say, holds by
protection. This surely says but little for the Manchester School,
which in much is, in my humble opinion, not at all sound, and
is nothing whatever to the authority that I rely on, for I fall
back and rely on the teaching of the Creator in his works by
which we are surrounded.
J. VICARS.
April 20th, 1870.
WHERE SHALL OUR SURPLUS STOCK
BE EATEN?
To the Editor of the Herald.
S IR > —The enclosed letter is the maturer result on my part of a
recent conversation. The gentleman to whom it was addressed
joins in requesting you to publish it.
L. DE S.
“ Sydney, June 3rd, 1879.
My Dear Campbell,—l have been thinking over your idea of
bringing mouths to eat our surplus beef here, instead of sending it
away to be eaten elsewhere.
“Under the tinkering shape of immigration with which we are
acquainted, viz., the introduction at once of some 5,000, or even
50,000 adults, the relief to our meat market would be practically nil,
since we have an increase of 500,000 bullocks, counting ten sheep as


one bullock ; but if you talk of the immediate introduction of 500,000
adults, however bold the scheme may appear, there is much to be said
in favour of your proposal.
“ Just now under the present farming depression, England would
readily spare that number of enforced idlers, now probably contem-
plating a move to the United States for the benefit of her commercial
rivals, to convert them into such good customers as Australians are.
“ I believe each adult, male or female, to be worth several
hundred pounds to the colony where he or she may be introduced.
Let us, however, say £100. These 500,000 adults would be worth to
the industry of New South Wales, £50,000,000 ; and would further
pay about £1,000,000 of taxes, at little additional outlay in proportion.
“ According to past experience, such a number of immigrants
might be reckoned upon as increasing our export and import trade by
£10,000,000, and this perhaps each way.
“ But how are we to feed them when here? Our 500,000 surplus
bullocks will supply far more than enough meat. Within three months
after the arrival of the first batches, potatoes, cabbages, and lastly
wheat enough would have been grown. Of the latter the immigrants
might have to bring with them rations for a few months, or we have
to provide it direct from the United States.
“The cost of introducing these immigrants would be about
£7,500,000 —a sum at present to be easily borrowed in England for
the national object proposed. The interest £340,000 would be but
a light charge on so good a national investment.
“ Such immigrants need not expect to make fortunes during their
first unsettled year ; but they need not anticipate the misery, mean-
while, of anxiety, hunger, or cold. I believe that during that time,
by means of their labour, and the capital which would surely accompany
them from Europe, the resources of New South Wales would have
been doubled, and that each of the double population would have
become as ample an earner of wages, as our fewer labourers had been
before their arrival.
“To my mind, there is no comparison between the national
benefit accruing from dear public works unaccompanied by increased
immigration, and that to be expected from the introduction alone of
immigrants who will, w ith or without future Government aid, soon
cover the country with public as well as with the more important
private works.
“It would be obviously of advantage that the majority of these
immigrants should be located in the interior. To insure this, and also
to obviate the sure hardships of their first twelvemonth, I suggest
encouraging the hire of them at greater distances than 100 miles from
Sydney by a grant of 40 acres for each couple so hired—of course in
addition to their labour.
“ I am, yours sincerely,
“LE FANE DE SALIS".
“Hon. A. Campbell, Esq., Rosemont.”


Production and Consumption.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir,— From having observed Mr. De Salis’s letter the other day
in the Herald , I now take the liberty, with your permission, of
making a few brief remarks on the subject.
Squatters and farmers want markets for their stock and
produce, that is all, and certainly when properly considered not a
great deal after all. The question now arises, how is this matter
to be managed and the evil cured ? To which the merest school
boy might most pertinently reply, “Eat it.” Yes, but how, it
might again be asked ? To which it might also be replied, just
the same way that it has always been done in every country since
the beginning of the world—namely by placing the consumers
alongside of the producers. Now this 'is the whole secret, and
isn’t it simple ? Of course it is perhaps possible to find out new
methods of effecting what is sought for here, but everybody
knows the old fashioned way, and not a bad way either after all,
which at least might be followed until we discovered a better.
It is no doubt said with truth, that necessity is the mother of
invention; here, however-we don’t in the meantime need in-
vention—for following up what is already before us is all that is
needed. Though footprints of the Creator are constantly before
us, they are, I am afraid, but little attended to many a time.
Evidently the squatters and farmers, with all their intelligence,
must not complacently congratulate themselves, for have they
not had plenty of lessons constantly before them, and yet sadly
neglected them ? ' J
For instance, when the white man first took possession of this
land, did he not find “ kangaroos and wallabies ” in abundance
here ? Of course he did ; and, what is more, he must have
observed at the time, that the Creator had also placed “ black-
fellows . alongside of them to eat them. Here we observe things
most fitting—“ production and consumption ” side by side, in the
simplest form, yet it is unheeded and seems of no use to us.
Surely we have brains enough to observe a lesson like this before
our very noses, and apply it to our present circumstances, or is
it really the case that we must sit down with crossed hands and
whiningly implore the Lord to deliver us from evil ? lam afraid
that the truth of the old saying, that “ the Lord always helps
them that help themselves ” seems either sadly overlaid or over-
looked by many who might profit much by attending to it and
properly following it up. Mrs. M‘Clarty’s style in “The


Cottagers of Glenburnie ” is scarcely suitable for people anywhere
now-a-days, but it is, I should say, especially unsuitable lor
people in a young and undeveloped colony like this.
In his gropings Mr. De Salis seems to have got hold of the
idea* however, that it is increased numbers that we require here.
And no doubt it is so. But I am afraid that something more
than mere numbers must be considered. Now suppose you
brought a great many people out here, what pray, are you going
to do with them ? That is not only the question, but the whole
question. Merely to think of people on the one hand, and a
boundless expanse of land on the other, would be of no earthly
good in the circumstances, unless you had an idea of turning
them out to grass.
As squatters, they could not in any way be wanted, as we
already have so many of this class that they really do not know
what to do with their stock; while on the other hand, farmers
are not needed either, for though millions of acres of our land
have been got rid of one way or another, yet how little of it is
either required or cultivated for agricultural purposes; nor so
long as markets are required (in other words, mouths) for what
you already have in superabundance, is there the slightest
necessity of any extension of either pursuit. Again, squatters
and farmers cannot become customers either to themselves or to
one another, except to such a small extent as is not worth thinking
about. Then you ask what really is to be done ? Aye, that is
the question ; and I really wonder that you did not think of this
before. People must know that the natural laws can neither be
set aside nor broken with impunity, and surely squatters might
easily have seen the present evil at no great distance from them
had they given the matter the slightest consideration ; for, had
they thought at all, they could not be blind to the Tact that the
increase of population was nothing at all in comparison with
either the vast steady increase of stock or the quantity of land
which we could readily put under cultivation, but I suppose,
because of their easy and affluent circumstances, the evil day
was always put far away in the distant background, and perhaps
indulged in the idea that sufficient for the day was the evil
thereof. Now, however, that the evil day has come we must set
about remedying it, and though it undoubtedly can be cured,
it nevertheless cannot be hurriedly jumped into, and must just
be submitted to with resignation and patient endurance. How
inscrutable and wonderful are the ways of Providence, and who
could have thought that our Christian virtues were to be called
into requisition through an excess of sheep and cattle ? Well,
well, we live to learn.
Now that you have fairly arrived at the conclusion that it is
numbers that we want here to correct the evils complained of,


why do you stop short at this point instead of following the
matter up and showing how the extra numbers can be employed,
for employed they undoubtedly must be ere they can be of any
benefit to us.
A few years ago Sir Henry Parkes said : —“ That if they
had millions of persons settled on the face of the country, if they
were of the right stamp, every soul of the population would be
better off than at present.” We all know this very well, but the
how to do it has never been explained. Now how does it come
to pass that all you gentlemen seem afraid to toe the mark and
come to the point ? Let you only do this, and show how they
are to be employed ; that is all that is wanted. How they are
to be employed is then the next move in the game, and if you,
Sir Henry Parkes, or anyone else, either bogle or jib at it ever
so much, it must nevertheless be faced, whether or not. I have
an idea that some of you gentlemen at a former period have, by
a false move, placed yourselves in a wrong position, and now
don’t like to admit it, or see your way clearly how to wriggle
out of it; but this want of moral courage is not at all the thing,
nor is it what we might expect, and it would surely be much
more manly to come at once forward and say : “ In order to
employ the people, the young and rising generation more especi-
ally, and induce more to come and settle down amongst us, we
must encourage industries and produce for ourselves on the spot
instead of importing.” Now, whether with grace or grimace, this
is really and truly the only solution of the whole difficulty, and
there are no two ways out of it either—no royal road, try as you
like.
Well this very same thing has been pointed out and pro-
claimed for years, yet it was never listened to, nor would it be
listened to even now, if the interested parties who now feel the
shoe pinch them could only rub along in the old “ hech-how ”
way that they did before. But the squatters find that things
will never do—indeed can never continue as they are at present,
and the merchants, too, who not so long ago imagined they were
approaching the commercial millenium, also find that there is a
mistake somewhere and that improvement is not only imperatively
needed, but must be had somehow, come from where it likes.
Well, then, since it not only seems, but is actually the case
that the panacea for our present ills is through increased numbers,
by all means I say let us have increased numbers ; but please to
bear in mind that increased numbers without employment would
but further add to our present difficulties, and prove a curse to us
rather than a blessing. Employment! Aye just so, that is the
word. Now let us see what you will make of it. In feudal times
this was not of so much importance ; for if people then, could
in any way, just scrape up a bare existence, they were not verv


particular about the bow, but this won’t do now-a-days ; and
with our high state of civilization, employment is not only
necessary, but most undoubtedly indispensably so. Generally
speaking the land is the first thing that we naturally turn to in
a difficulty like this, but since, at the present time, we have more
people already on it than can find a living by it, there is but
little use in thinking’ about that. Well, in our present dilemma,
it surely could do us no harm to find out what has been said on
this subject, and ascertain what course has been pursued by
other countries.
Benjamin Franklin says “ Every manufacturer encouraged
in our country makes part of a market for provisions within
and saves so much money to the country as must
otherwise be exported to pay for manufactures he supplies. Here
in England it is well known and understood that wherever a
manufacture is established which employs a number ol hands it
raises the value of land in the neighbouring country all around
it. It seems therefore the interest ol our farmers and owners ot
land to encourage our young manufactures in preference to
foreign ones.”
Adam Smith says '“ The increase and riches of commercial
and manufacturing 1 towns contribute to the improvement and
cultivation ol the countries to which they belong by affording
great and ready markets for agricultural and pastoral products,
as well as encouragement to cultivation and further improve-
ment in sheep and cattle.”
Then the Rev. Lyman Beecher says No calamity is
greater than a capricious market, baffling’ the sober extended
calculations of industry, and converting the husbandmen ol a
nation into a body ol speculators.” And further he says, u that
a steady market and a fair profit for the products ol the field are
among- the greatest national blessings.” And
Alderman Mechi, one of the foremost practical farmers and
land improvers in Great Britain, says :— u It is precisely because
British farmers have their customers—the British manufacturers
—almost at their own doors, and that other corn-producing
countries have not any, that British agriculture is so rich and
thriving.” Then,
Two years ago in writing on this subject, I said “II we
inquire whence this opposition to the encouragement of industries
and consequent employment for the people, we find it principally
among importers, merchants, and squatters —certainly not among
the working classes. But the most inconceivable thing of the
whole affair is opposition from wholesale houses, squatters, and
shopkeepers of every description, who in pursuing such a line ol
opposition commit the most suicidal policy they could be guiltv
of, that is to say, if they study their own interests. For with


encouraged industries how soon might we not double our popula-
tion, and with a double working population the circulation of
money from wages alone would be almost incredibly great, and
do much more than double the business with the wholesale
houses and shopkeepers, as well as increase the price for cattle,
sheep, and farm produce—a penny a pound on butcher’s meat
might readily be looked for, which means 3s. more for sheep, and
£3 a head more for cattle, while farm produce was bound to come
in for like benefits, which could net fail to be the best thing that
these classes ever saw in their day. Again, I say : “If l Sir
Henry Parkes or any one else has really and truly a straight-
forward and honest desire to give people here additional employ-
ment, and which would of itself encourage a stream of immigra-
tion to our shores, he cannot avoid encouragement to many
industries other than agricultural and pastoral pursuits. Let
him study the great leading industries at home which make the
country great, and give employment, not only to thousands, but
tens of thousands and millions, and set about promoting and
encouraging similar ones here, and then he may safely calculate
on a steady onward progress, culminating in after years in the
prosperity and greatness of New South Wales.” Further I say :
“To think of having squatters and farmers without a consuming
population would be of little use ; in point of fact, the two classes
—the producers and the consumers—must go hand in hand
together, as it is obviously meant in the ordinary nature of things
that they should do.”
In conclusion, permit me to say that I think the foregoing
pretty clearly points out that if we look around us we will discover
that not only Great Britain, but all the civilized countries of the
world, find employment for the bulk of their people through their
industries, and that the more varied and numerous these industries
are, the greater the exchanges with one another, therefore all the
more conducive to their own prosperity.
Now, from all this, and from all the lessons we may learn,
from our observation of the balance of employment throughout
the world, we can have little or no difficulty in perceiving that
the law of employment has scarcely ever been once thought of
amongst us.
That such a law exists there cannot be a doubt, and the
operations of which, though perhaps not quite so apparent at a
glance, are, nevertheless as determinant and certain as are the
movements of the solar system. Throughout the habitable globe
the working classes are most undoubtedly the great customers of
the world. Yet the squatters and wholesale houses here—
visibly suffering most—blinded, perhaps, with a first and
ephemeral success, never even dreamt of making it a sine qua


non of looking out for all the industries that they could possibly
have on the spot, and thereby surround themselves with workers
—their natural customers and consumers.
The lesson is obvious, and requires no prophet to tell you
what to do. Go work it out.
Yours truly,
J. VICARS.
Tweed Factory,
Sydney, June 10th, 1879.
EXCISE DUTY V IMPORT DUTY.
To the Editor of the Sydney Daily Telegraph.
Sir, — It is whispered that there is to be an attempt at excise
duties ; but excise duties simply and unmistakably mean de-
struction to young- and strug-g-ling- industries here. An import
duty, however, might not only produce the revenue required, but
would most decidedly act in the direction of encouraging indus-
tries on the spot, thereby giving additional employment and
circulating much more money among ourselves within the colony.
The merest child knows, and knows truly, that every thousand
pounds sent out of the country to bring imported stuff into it,
means the employment of people abroad, and the support of
tradespeople and workers abroad. But were we making the
articles here we would be employing many additional hands—
our own people, instead of foreigners —and thus keeping the
trade to ourselves, as well as all the benefits accruing from it,
instead of stupidly scattering them broadcast on the outside
world at large. Are we not needing, through additional indus-
tries, much more employment for our daily increasing population
—daily increasing, not only by the usual and natural increase of
the colony, but through that wisely devised immigration scheme
of which some of our legislators ought well to be proud ? And
are our squatters not honestly crying- aloud for a larger con-
suming population —a population through whose wages from
steady employment would be the very market required for their
superabundant flocks and herds of sheep and cattle. All those
who live and move and have their being in imports would, per-
haps, not scruple to try on this little game of excise duties on
several of our industries, aye, even though they smothered them,
rather than impose discriminating import duties on many of Our
indents. But let this Government be cautious of what they try,


tor depend upon it, if they even attempt to do so, they never
committed a more egregious mistake in their lives, and 1 (though
no prophet) predict for them a short shrift indeed to their political
existence. Such games, however, as the one just hinted at have
unfortunately been too long in operation here, and that to the
curse of the colony, as too many know ; but though the Colonial
Treasurer may have many, and perhaps unpleasant, duties to
encounter many a time, still let him caution the “ wire-pullers ”
to beware lest they bring a hornet’s nest about their ears.
And I, for one, will move heaven and earth to bring such
a nest about their ears, should they ever attempt it. Our
colonial industries have been long shamefully treated and trilled
with—as an instance, please to look at the one I am connected
with. I ask, Is it fair to me to have to compete with the bank-
rupt stock, shoddy and over-production of all the old countries,
admitted, through the wisdom of our legislators, in here duty
free ? And that too, please to bear in mind, in the face of heavy
ad valorem duties charged on some of the raw materials used in
my manufacture. 1 refer to oil and soda crystals, both largely
used in this industry, the former for oiling my wool batches, and
the latter for scouring my wool and manufactured goods with.
The duty on oil is 20 per cent., while that on the soda is at least
30 per cent, ad valorem. A person at home when overstocked
with goods, and perhaps with some payments to make which are
about due, will rush off to Glasgow, Manchester, or London, and
if he cannot dispose of them there, will get an advance on them.
The g'oods are sent in of course, but cannot be disposed of at
home, and are shipped off to the colonies, in all probability to
Sydney, because of the free port, with instructions to sell, even
if they bring nothing more than what was advanced on them,
together with expenses added —altogether, perhaps, scarcely half
their value. Well most likely they find their way into some of
our auction marts here—slaughter-houses I call them—and are
sold at half-price accordingly, which smothers our industry
within the colony, and is very unfair indeed to the legitimate
importers besides, who have not only this to meet and complain
of, but have the extreme felicity if you please of seeing their
Melbourne friends come in here with their surplus stocks and
dispose of same very much below fair and legitimate prices. But
I again ask, Is this at all fair ? lam sure no one in his senses
would say that it was. Aet we who are employers of labour and
the support of the colony have to put up with it, and in keeping
our ears open sometimes hear such a state of things called
wisdom. And though there are a number of worthy and sensible
gentlemen in both Houses of Parliament, for whom I entertain
the greatest respect, yet I am many a time tempted, through
this sort of u hotch-potch ” legislation, to think that little worse


could emanate from Gladesville. Were any of my workers to
perpetrate such bungling with what they were entrusted, as is
too frequently manifested in our Houses of Legislature, I am
sure they should have their marching tickets at once, with most
significant injunctions to seek the outside of the gate, and that
too in double-quick time. Now let us see what encouragement
would do for industries here. I beg to state that a decent en-
couragement would enable me, for instance, to turn out not only
better but cheaper goods from my manufactory than I am doing
at present. If it be asked how can this be, I reply in this way :
that, through encouragement, I could turn out two or three
times the quantity that lam doing at present. Yet, though I
did this, my set or dead expenses would not in any way be at all
increased ; and every one has surely sense enough to know that
by producing goods in driblets one has to be constantly changing
and chopping about, therefore can neither produce so well nor so
cheap. Instances in proof of encouragement cheapening products
are plentiful enough. Here on the spot, for instance, has it not
enabled kerosene to be reduced from Bs. and 10s. a gallon to
Is. bd. . And vinegar of a superior quality is being supplied at
Is. od. as against 2s. formerly; while stearine candles are now
supplied at 9d. instead of Is. formerly. Again, through
encourapment to industries, look at what America is now doing.
Why, she is every day beating Great Britain herself in many
products, but notably so in calico, clocks and watches, and
machinery. Now then, surely these proofs, the g’reatest old wife
m the country can readily perceive, extend in various ways, for
while they notably increase the business within the country, they
at the same time give additional employment to the people, and
place goods within the reach of all at lessened rates. But could
this have been done without encouragement in the first place 1
1 answer, most certainly and decidedly, No. Now, will any
person be found either verdant or stupid enough to say, in the
face of such proofs, that throug’h proper encouragement prices
are raised to the consumer '! Then, as to wire-pulling, I can
well assure you that it is no myth, but a veritable reality. I
ought to know something about it, seeing that I was at one
time threatened in a business point of view—by an esteemed
friend too, of that body—that if I did not withdraw from this
agitation I might look out for the consequences. Fact. So
much so was this the case that I may say under pains and
penalties I was compelled to g'o down to the Assembly one after-
noon, send for one of the members who had tabled a motion on
the subject of ad valorems, and which was to come on that
evening, and tell him that I withdrew from the movement. In
confirmation of this statement I beg to refer you to Mr. William
Macleay. In consequence of this withdrawal of mine the


Treasurer, Mr. Lloyd, was then sent for, who faithfully promised
to have the duties on oils and soda crystals at once rectified ;
they however, have never been touched, and remain precisely as
before. Now, if we do not shut our eyes to much that is com-
mendable, there are many lessons around us by which we might
profit. For instance : As a hen tenderly rears her chickens
under her “ protecting ” wings, so should a country do with
her young industries, and after such an authority the Creator
who can either point a finger at it, or say it is wrong .
Yours, &c.,
J. VICARS.
Tweed Factory, Sydney.
De Courcy, Hyde, & Blakeney, Printers, 187 Castlereagh-st. & 163 York-st.


APPENDIX.
The following article was inadvertently left out in preparing the matter
for Press. It should have been printed after Letters 4 and son the
Immigration Question :
SHOWING HOW WE CAN GET LABOUR
WITHOUT PAYING FOR IMMIGRATION.
Sir, —The working classes, and many more besides, are not unreason-
able, but they certainly wish to be satisfied, as they are entitled to be,
that there is a demand for so much more labour here, and if satisfied
on this point, a rational view will be entertained as to the best mode of
introducing immigrants into the colony; but it is not in any degree
unnatural for them to look at the whole matter from their own stand-
point, and say that unless you can show us that many more people can
readily be absorbed in employment waiting them, that they otherwise
must come here either to divide or displace our labour. But in case
the labour does not await them, the inevitable result means reduction
of wages. Now, if this be the case, and it undoubtedly is so, how is it
to be expected that the working classes—the principal tax-payers of
the colony—can possibly be satisfied to allow their share of the revenue
to be made use of to their own detriment 1 It is not to be expected,
and rather an absurdity to think that they would. There is no objec-
tion to people coming out here, if at their own expense, and as many
too, as choose, nor do they object to people here sending home for as
many as they please, providing the individuals who wish them out pay
their passages instead of asking the revenue of the colony to do so.
The moment that the general revenue of the colony is touched, that
moment the working classes backs are up, and no wonder either, seeing
that they are the great bulk of the population, and to whom belong
the great bulk of the revenue, whether from land or any other source.
The working classes are as anxious as any to have many more people
out here, but they most decidedly object to the present mode of bring-
ing them. That is all, neither more nor less. Then we are often told
by some of our wise people here, that it is none of the people’s money
that is used for immigration purposes, but the revenue from the land,
and because it is this the people have no right to object. Well, the
wise men, not of Goschen, but of New South Wales, may flatter them-
selves on their discovery that it is not the revenue that is raised from
taxes which is devoted to this purpose, and they are perhaps correct
too when they say so, but they would certainly be much wiser if they
didn’t whistle before they were out of the wood. The idea of the land
of the colony not being ours - the people who come here settle down
and make the colony a colony. Why it may not exactly be childish to
talk in this way, but it is really too absurd to require answering. Is
it those here or people in the old country that have first claim on this,
the land of our adoption. As this is so patent to every one, it would


only be a waste of time in answering it. But let us put it in another
light, and see how the matter stands ; let us suppose a lot of our old
country friends in the shape of ‘‘new chums” to come out here on
the bounce and demand possession of New South Wales—like Russia
with poor Turkey just now—and then ask Sir John to whom the land
belongs ? Perhaps they would’nt get an answer ; and may be he would
ask them to dine with him ; in any case they wouldn’t discover much
green about him. Again, let us put it in another light, in such a way
that even a child might understand : we beg to ask who is to pay for
immigrants when all the land is sold and the money spent, which it
very soon will be or we are much mistaken, and when, too, immigrants
will be more wanted than ever ? Perhaps it won’t be the people* Let
us inform the people that it will just be them, and it is them now,
notwithstanding all the dust that is raised at present from the land by
some, for the benefit of the people’s eyes. The working classes simply
say : Let all come who will, but not at our expense ; no one objects to
their coming, but everyone objects at having to pay for them.
Now, by all accounts, except for Railway Works, labour almost of
every description, is at present going a begging within the colony, nor
can it well be otherwise, when all circumstances are considered, yet
directly in the face of such a state of matters this Government not
only continue the immigration vote of last year, but I suppose in order
to show that they are equal to the situation, they deem it the correct
"}ing * n legislation to place on the Estimates for this year an increase
of 50 per cent, on the former vote ; and the most extraordinary part
too of such wisdom is that this is done when the merest old woman in
the country could tell them that additional labour was least needed.
Had this Government, under present circumstances, said we are
sorry that things don’t look at all promising just now ; and since such
is the case, we consider it our duty not to place a single penny on the
estimates for immigration purposes, they would have denoted both dis-
crimination and wisdom. But just because their mother or grand-
mother did certain things in their day, it appears to be thought the
correct thing to follow suit, and whether right or wrong, to stick to the
old ruts. No originality here, therefore little merit; but I suppose it
is not to be expected, since it is said that a silk purse cannot be made
out of a sow’s ear. It is of no use referring to Shakespeare, and talking
ot rottenness in the State of Denmark, for if we only look into the
manner in which this immigration system of ours is worked, we shall
discover plenty of this sort of thing among ourselves. What, for
instance, with three immigration agents, one in England, a second in
Germany, and a third in America, at £3OO a year each, with capitation
money allowed for every individual sent out, and the chartering and
providormg of the vessels l Besides, we throw ourselves open to be
spoiled in the same way, and quite as effectually as were the Egyptians
7 Israelites, when old Moses, with his brethren, made tracks
through the Red Sea.
We are often told, too, that what they do in the United States just
amounts to the same thing as our making use of the land here for
bringing immigrants out; but we deny it, and say it is no such thing.
Indeed, we need not run away to America for an authority; but to
amuse some people here a little on this score, let us see how this
alleged matter really stands. If we inquire we find that things are
somewhat different there from here ; here the Government builds the


railways, not ao in the States though. In the States, as in Great
Britain, it is left to private enterprise, and in order to induce such
enterprise to be readily taken up, land bonuses are held out, but they
are not offered for the ostensible purpose, as alleged, of encouraging
immigration, though of course, people are likely ultimately to settle
down on them at such prices as may be agreed upon between the
sellers and buyers. This way of putting it makes a somewhat different
case of the matter from what we occasionally observe in some of our
public journals here, and ought to teach us to stick strictly to facts as
we find them, rather than attempt something spurious in order to suit
a purpose.
Though we are practically using only one system of immigration, we
still have two in existence ; the one now in use may be called “ the
indiscriminate system,” whilst the other is known under the title of
“ the Agreements Validating Act.” The former in many ways is very
objectionable, because all sorts of people, whether suitable or not to
our requirements, are permitted to come in here ; consequently, though
the majority may be decent and respectable enough, yet many of them
may be quite unsuitable, if not absolutely useless, whilst what is worse
and worse, a sprinkling amongst them (without particularizing) may be
the very scum and sweepings of the worst slums and corners of the old
country, and could never get here scarcely under any other system.
Nor can it be much wondered at either that such is the case, seeing
that agents in many parts are said to have an interest in the numbers
they can scrape together—a sort of bonus of so much a head. Then is
this a satisfactory state of matters ? On the merits alone of this
system, irrespective of any class, it cannot possibly be. Then, since it
is faulty, why continue it ? Aye ! that’s the rub. The other system,
“ the Agreements Validating Act,” though at present almost a dead
letter, is quite a different affair, and is almost in every respect very
.superior to the other. Under this system, by paying £2 a head, the
sort of labour and just the amount required can be sent for and brought
out here (the Government paying the difference), an amount which no
one requiring labour could grumble at. Yet by some, this system,
though incomparably superior to the deluge system, is not without its
faults, because those coming out here under this system can be bound
to their employers for a period of two years, and, perhaps, at a lower
rate of wages than rule here for the time being ; but this of course
don’t please. Perfection, however, is not of this world, and we will
never, we are afraid, up to the very end of time, get everything we
want, and under such conditions as will please every one. There have
been grumblers from the beginning of the world, and will be to the
very end of it, who are something like <c Carsypoo,’ the farmer, of
whom a friend said, that, though he had the sun in one hand, and a
watering pan in the other, he would never be satisfied. Of two evils
we, if rational, should choose the lesser, which, in our humble opinion,
this Agreements Validating Act is. But if through this system people
are brought out here at a somewhat different rate of wages, is this to be
wondered at; for who is going to be at the trouble and expense in
doing so without some slight advantage ? Since the products of cheap
labour are permitted in here, and received with open arms—products
from the raw materials in the colony we could very well produce on the
spot —the working classes have the evil complained of, in the most
exaggerated form, and ten times worse than through any difference


there might be in wages arising from making use ofUm JcT We are
aware that two blacks will never make a white, yet to find fault with
any difference of wages under this Act is like “ eating the cow and
worrying on the tail,” and in our opinion is much less likely to act so
preiudiciously as the system now in operation; for when people are
brought out here in such numbers, irrespective of the demand tor
labour, they are bound to work for just what they can get, perhaps the
merest pittance, so as to keep soul and body together, and indeed,
many a time thankful for the same. It does not require a great know-
ledge of the world to know how true this is, as many could testily.
Now, the two systems of immigration in existence here at present
we have sketched in the fairest manner possible, and must beg to be
excused, when we state that although we decidedly prefer the one to
the other, yet for good and sufficient reasons we can agree with neither.
Go on with railways and public works ; keep all our contracts within the
colony, even though it should take extra time and require extra money to
do them; d&velop the mineral resources of every description m the colony ,
encourage the establishment of iron, tin, and coppei works, eyymeemng,
machine-making, and ship building, together with several
and we guarantee that from the constant employment and steady wages
which these alone will give, that ice will get plenty of
requiring to pay a single passage out here. Under such
we will get more people here from all parts of the world than we J™ l
possibly employ, without any system of paid immigration one way or
other, Ind this would place the money set aside for immigration purposes
at liberty, so that it could be used in promoting and carrying out public
and other works within the colony. This-s not in any way chimerical but
can be seen every day in the United States of America, the Dominion
of Canada, as well as in Victoria; then, u they can get plenty ot
labour without having to pay for immigrants, surely we in New
Wales should not stand in any exceptional position in this respect, a
are just as likely to obtain all the hands we require on as easy terms
under similar conditions as they Were this earned out, what an
immense amount of good it would be productive of wffhm colony
by the employment of so many more hands, and consequently circu-
lating so much more money in shape of wages. ° nl y cany this out
and every one, from wholesale houses downwards, will be on smiling
terms with one another, when cutting lines and complaints of little
doing will be like the days of the smuggler—things of the past. How-
ever, we won’t press this point on the merchants in question, tor it
they don’t exactly see these matters in this light just yet, they will,
we feel confident, ere long ; but it is not they alone who wou e
under such a state of things, but everyone who deals from squatteis
and farmers downward through all grades and shades of business peop e.
Now, this is our system of procuring labour without any paic imm -
gration system whatever ; and since we have shown that other coun ncs
can obtain labour without paying for its introduction, we pro es
against a single shilling of our money being placed on the estimates or
such a purpose, and pledge ourselves to oppose it in every possi > e
manner within our power.
Yours obediently,
J. VICARS.
Tweed Factory,
Sydney, February 1878.




