

THE MATERIAL PROGRESS
NEW SOUTH WALES.
EDWARD COMBES, ESQ., C.M.Cx.
BRING A PAPER READ BEFORE THE FELLOWS OP
The Royal Colonial Institute,
DECEMBER 8, 1885.
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF MANCHESTER, K.P.,
IN THE CHAIR.
{Reprinted by permission from the Proceedings of the Institute.)
ISSUED BY THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES.
5, WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS, S.W.
1880.




THE MATERIAL PROGRESS
NEW SOUTH WALES.
EDWARD COMBES, ESQ., C.M.G.
BEING A PAPER READ BEFORE THE FELLOWS OF
The Royal Colonial Institute,
DECEMBER 8, 1885
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF MANCHESTER, K.P.,
IN THE CHAIR.
[Reprinted by permission from the Proceedings of the Institute.)
ISSUED BY THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES,
5, WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS, S.W.




THE MATERIAL PROGRESS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
In acceding to a request made by the Council of the Eoyal Colonial
Institute to read a paper on New South Wales, I was actuated chiefly
by a desire to give the British public some detailed information as
to the extent and capabilities of the country, the magnitude of its
shipping and commerce, and the importance of its trade with Eng-
land. I have for the past fifteen years never lost an opportunity of
advocating the principle of Imperial Federation, feeling strongly that
the Empire should be in a measure self-contained and independent
.of other countries ; and also, that this will never be brought about
-until the people of the United Kingdom have a more extended and
■definite knowledge of the vast and varied resources of Australia
its enormous wealth, and the value of its securities. Until within
a few years, the ignorance that prevailed as to Australia and
Australian affairs was most profound; and even now, there is much
need of enlightenment upon most Australian subjects. Capitalists
hnow we are borrowing their money, and say we are borrowing too
fast, not knowing or reflecting that the money so borrowed is
expended in reproductive works, such as railways, which not only
pay interest upon the capital, but are every day becoming more
valuable as an asset. It should also be borne in mind that the
collateral advantages to the Colonies, due to the construction of
.railways, are proportionately great in relation to the number of
miles open for traffic. These advantages may be stated as an
.increased value of land ; an enlargement of the useful area ; as a
diminution in the cost of carriage allows produce to be carried a
greater distance, and largely augments a healthy commerce with
I * |
'<s-Cl_vvO"


the interior : all of which act directly upon public securities, giving
them a greater value in the market. Our public debt is contracted
on these lines, and the works pay the interest. Taking these facts
into consideration, it will be easily understood that for such pur-
poses a country cannot borrow too fast, nor can a safer or more
permanent security be given. In point of fact, Australian securities
are the best in the world, for not only do the works for which the
money is borrowed pay the interest, but the capital is secured upon
what will shortly be the wealthiest country in the known globe.
It is a far cry to Australia, and in speaking of New South Wales
it must not be forgotten that when the colony was founded, and for
fifty years afterwards —nearly half of its life—New South Wales was
practically the whole of Australia; the mother colony, Tasmania,
was colonised from it, when settlers were few and far between
Port Phillip, or Victoria, left its mother when grown into pro-
portions sufficiently great for self-government; and later on Queens-
land separated, taking away half the territory of the eastern portion
of the Continent. In spite of this dismemberment the mother
colony is still two and a half times the size of Great Britain, and
capable of sustaining a population of at least forty millions of
human beings.
In a paper upon the material progress of New South Wales it
would be out of place to give any detailed description t of its dis-
covery. It will be sufficient to say that while Don Pedro Fernandez
de Quiros claimed its discovery in 1609, Dirk Hartog and Tasman,,
two Dutch navigators, visited several portions of the coast between
the years 1616 and 1642, naming the country New Holland.
After them it was visited by the famous English buccaneer
Dampier, of whom Mr. John Evelyn wrote in his Diary “ that he had
met him at dinner at Mr. Pepys’s, in 1699, that he was going abroad
again by the King’s encouragement, that he seemed a more
modest man than one would imagine by the relation of the crew
he had consorted with.” Evelyn alluded to Dampier’s second voyage
to Australia, which he duly carried out, and reported against the
occupation of the land, as there was no trade to be done with the
natives. It was left for that illustrious navigator Captain James
Cook to re-discover, survey, and take possession of the country for
His Majesty King George HI., under the name of New South
Wales.
This happened in 1770, and seventeen years after, on Sunday, the
13th May, 1787, in the 27th year of the reign of His Majesty George


111., the grandfather of our present beloved Queen and Empress, and
during the government of William Pitt, the first fleet, under the
command of Captain Arthur Phillip, E.N., sailed from the
“ Mother Bank ” through the Needle passage, to colonise the
marvellous country which Captain Cook had so lately discovered.
The fleet touched at Tenerift'e, Bio de Janeiro and arrived without
accident at the Cape of Good Hope. On leaving the Cape for their
final destination, one of their number says: “It was natural for
the thinking part of the colonists to indulge at this moment a
melancholy reflection which obtruded itself upon the mind. The
land behind them was the abode of civilised people; that before
them was the residence of savages; when, if ever, they might
enjoy the commerce of the world was very uncertain. The
refreshments and pleasures of which they had so liberally partaken
at the Cape, were to be exchanged for coarse food and hard labour
at New South Wales.” All communication with families and friends
was cut off, they were leaving the world behind them, to enter on
a state unknown ; and, as if it had been necessary to imprint this
idea more strongly on their minds, at the close of the day on which
they sailed, they spoke a ship from London, the metropolis of their
native country : its pleasures, its wealth and its consequence, thus
accidentally presented to the mind, failed not to afford a most
striking contrast with the object then principally in their view.
To me this very affecting statement is replete with pathos. It is
as the voice of one preparing to leave the world. Even in ima-
gination we cannot, at this present time, conceive the position of
these free men who accompanied the expedition. New South Wales
might not even exist. They had only Captain Cook’s word for it.
They were going in search of an unknown world. Well might
they believe “ they were leaving the world behind them.”
The occupation of New South Wales was doubtless decided upon
by Pitt from motives of policy in appointing a place for the banish-
ment of a certain class of criminals, the immediate cause being
the cessation of transportation to America, as in 1783 the American
Colonies had been recognised by England as Sovereign States.
Mr. Eusden, the latest of Australian historians, says ; “ Between
transportation to America and transportation to Australia there
was, however, a wide distinction. Convicts sent to America were
conveyed by contractors, who parted with them for a consideration
to the colonists, and were obliged to prove by certificates that they
had disposed of them according to the intention of the law. In


Australia there were no colonists craving for labourers, and the
Government were compelled to establish a society in the first
instance.” He goes on to say that “ where everything had to be
provided in the first instance by the Government, and every sub-
sequent enterprise needed the fostering hand of the Governor in
promoting agriculture and the arts which sustain life, it must be
confessed that man was brought face to face with an experiment of
which there was no previous example, and the difficulties of which
were enormously augmented by remoteness from the Mother
Country. Governor Phillip had not the task of Cortes or Pizarro
—to conquer and control a civilised community with a select body
of superior troops, nor had a Colony been previously founded in
the manner now to be attempted Labour was to be compul-
sory, but it was to be that of criminals under sentence. There
were no fruits of other men’s labours to appropriate. To preserve
peace and secure order a military force was to be maintained, but
it was to be maintained by governors to whom was delegated the
high and responsible task of making the settlement a nucleus from
which other settlements should swarm, so that the new South
continent might become the undisputed possession of the British.
Crown, and the future home of millions of the British people.”
This is fairly stated. It was the only feasibly plan of colonisa-
tion. At the time there could be no desire on the part of British
adventurers to become possessed of land in this terra incognita, nor
was it likely there would be, until something more accurate and
definite was known of the character of the country and of its
inhabitants. The place was so distant that no colonist would
venture there at his own expense. There can be no doubt of
the illustrious Pitt’s patriotism. In spite of his warnings and
advice, England had lost America. He therefore determined to
found a new State, which in the distant future would be the
equivalent of that which was lost. Legislation was necessary,,
consequently Acts of Parliament were passed giving the requisite
powers to establish a colony and a civil government in New South
Wales.
How this was accomplished is now a matter of history. After
visiting Botany Bay and not finding it a desirable locality for the new
settlement, Governor Phillip landed his living freight in Jackson’s
Bay, a harbour which he designated “ the finest in the world, in
which a thousand sail of the line might ride in the most perfect
security.” He landed 1,030 persons, ten of whom were civil officers-


212 soldiers, including their officers, 45 women and children
belonging to the military, 80 free persons accompanying the
expedition, and 688 convicts. The free population was therefore
847, as opposed to 688 prisoners.
We can easily understand the exultant feelings of Governor
Phillip on having safely fulfilled his mission thus far, and the
hopes he entertained of bringing his prisoners to a sense of duty r .
of honest industry, and good behaviour. His speech to them was
replete with fatherly advice and good counsel, pointing out how
they might regain the advantages they had lost. It must have
been an affecting sight, that planting of the British flag in the
great South land, in the midst of unequalled natural beauties, with
good soil for cultivation near at hand, stone and timber for building,
and a stream of fresh water “ abundant for all purposes ” —what
more could be desired ? The Governor may well have thought
his troubles were fairly at an end, and that everything would
progress favourably.
The sequel, however, proved otherwise. In spite of his strenuous
exertions, well supported by his lieutenant—Philip Gidley King—
whom he made Superintendent of Norfolk Island, the greatest
difficulties were opposed to progress by the unsatisfactory character
of the forced labour of the prisoners. They had to be governed' 1
and guarded, fed and clothed, and these were the material with
which to subdue the wilderness and found a city. With good
reason did he write to the British Government, before all the stores
had been landed from his ships; “If fifty farmers were sent out
with their families, they would do more in one year in rendering;
this Colony independent of the Mother Country, as to provisions*
than a thousand convicts.” Phillip constantly urged upon the
authorities in England the necessity of sending out free emigrants,
so that land might be brought into cultivation, and the breeding of
sheep and cattle commenced in earnest, and on sound principles.
With reference to the outline and physical features of the Colony,
it will be sufficient to say, that while New South Wales originally
included the whole of the eastern portion of Australia, it is now
restricted to the southern half of the eastern coast lying between
the 28th and 37th degrees of south latitude, and the 141st and
154th meridians of east longitude, thus extending over about nine
degrees of latitude and twelve and a half degrees of longitude. On
the east it is bounded by the Pacific. On the west it is separated
from the territory of South Australia by the 141st meridian of


east longitude. On the south it is separated from Victoria by a
line drawn from Cape Howe to the nearest source of the Murray,
and by the westerly course of that river, and on the north it is
separated from Queensland by the Macpherson Range, the Dividing
Range, the Dumaresq River, the Macintyre River, and the 29th
parallel of south latitude. It is nearly 800 miles long, by 500
miles in breadth. Its area is computed at 197,872,000 acres, or
nearly equal in extent to the United Kingdom and France
combined.
Its physical aspect is somewhat peculiar, for at a comparatively
short distance from the coast, varying from twenty to one hundred
miles, there arises a cordillera, or chain of mountains, forming a
great dividing range, separating the eastern from the western
waters. The Murray River receives some of its tributaries from
Victoria, and others from New South Wales, while the Darling
and its tributaries collect the remainder of the supply. The
Darling joins the Murray near the boundary of the Colony, and
all the western waters run to South Australia. Thus all this
enormous drainage of western New South Wales is, as it were,
bounded by ranges of high geological antiquity.
The area of the Colony is therefore divided into what may be
considered as the coast and mountainous district, the northern and
southern tablelands, the western slopes, which undulate for a
considerable distance until they reach the Great Salt Bush Plains
of the interior. The chief rivers that carry the waters of the
country east of the dividing range to the Pacific Ocean are the
Hawkesbury, the Hunter, the Clarence, the Manning, and ten
others of lesser dimensions. These rivers in places open out
into wide reaches, and are intensely interesting and picturesque,
the Hawkesbury particularly so, furnishing landscape scenery
unsurpassable in loveliness.
It is not my intention to take up much of your time in describing
Sydney Harbour, but a few words may not be out of place. It has
been compared to other lovely bays, and has passed long ago
through the ordeal of criticism. I would, however, pause to ask,
Why compare it at all ? It is quite as beautiful in its way as can
well be conceived. Everyone imbued with a love of the fine arts
admires the transcendent merit of Correggio, or Titian, or Raffaele,
or Rembrandt, and although the works of these great men are so
dissimilar they are all exquisitely beautiful, and, as it is with pic-
tures, so'it is with the picturesque in nature, and Sydney Harbour


has its own individual and especial beauties, which cannot fail to
be appreciated so long as they exist. The multitude of jutting
headlands, with their carved and fretted rockwork covered with
tangled and luxurious foliage, the graceful curves of the smaller
bays with their fringe of silver sand, the pile of buildings marking
the city, and the forest of masts of the shipping, all bathed in the
glory of an Austral sunlight, constitute pictures which could only be
attempted by Turner or Claude, and which must be seen to be
understood and appreciated. Strange as it may seem, these scenes
have been connected with poetry and art from the time the Colony
was formed. One of the first ships that returned to England took a
sample of potter’s clay out of Sydney Cove, from which Mr. Wedge-
wood modelled a fine medallion, representing Hope encouraging
Art and Labour, under the influence of Peace, to pursue the
employments necessary to give security and happiness to an infant
settlement. Upon which some beautiful verses were written by the
Dr. Darwin whose illustrious grandson afterwards visited the Colony
with Captain Fitzroy for the purpose of scientifically examining the
fauna of Australia. The verses, which are curiously prophetic, run
as follows;
‘ ‘ Where Sydney Cove her lucid bosom swells,
Courts her young navies, and the storm repels;
High on a rock amid the troubled air
Hope stood sublime, and wav’d her golden hair ;
Calm’d with her rosy smile the tossing deep,
And with sweet accents charm’d the winds to sleep ;
To each rich plain she stretched her snowy hand,
High-waving wood, and sea-encircled strand—
‘ Hear me, ’ she cried, ‘ ye rising realms ! record
Time’s op’ning scenes, and Truth’s unerring word—•
There shall broad streets their stately walls extend,
The circus widen, and the crescent bend;
There ray’d from cities o’er the cultur’d land,
Shall bright canals, and solid roads expand.
There the proud arch, Colossus-like, bestride
Yon glittering streams, and bound the changing tide;
Embellish’d villas crown the landscape-scene,
Farms wave with gold, and orchards blush between,
There shall tall spires, and dome-capt tow’rs ascend,
And piers and quays their massy structures blend ;
While with each breeze approaching vessels glide,
And northern treasures dance on every tide! ’
Then ceas’d the nymph—tumultuous echoes roar,
And Joy’s loud voice was heard from shore to shore,
Her graceful steps, descending, press’d the plain,
And Peace, and Art, and Labour, join’d her train.”
Governor Phillip seems to have done everything that was prac-
ticable with the material at his command. He had innumerable


difficulties to contend with, very seriously augmented by a scarcity
of food, but by firm, just, and humane measures he carried out the
mission entrusted to him with a zealous perseverance which over-
came all obstacles that nature and a combination of misfortunes
had placed in his way. His health, however, had suffered, and was
getting worse, so, having governed for nearly five years, he left the
Colony,
At this time, viz., the end of 1792, the total area of land cleared
was 1,708 acres, of which 1,540 were in cultivation.
The government was administered by Captain Grose until the
arrival of Captain Hunter, in September, 1795. During Hunter’s
term of office the live stock had increased considerably, for it is
stated that at the Governor’s departure the number of live stock
was 13,570, as follows : —203 horses, 1,044 cattle, 6,124 sheep, 4,017
pigs, and 2,182 goats, and 7,677 f acres of land in cultivation,
besides a quantity of garden ground in potatoes and vines.
Governor King had charge of the Colony from 1800 to 1806.
During this period there were better times. His colonial expe-
rience was more extensive than that of any other man of the time,
he knew the wants of the Colony, and, having served an approved
apprenticeship under Governor Phillip, had attained considerable
knowledge of the men and measures he had to deal with.
Governor King was succeeded by Governor Bligh on the 12th of
August, 1806. The country was then in a fair state of prosperity,
but, unhappily, the misgovernment of Bligh soon brought about a
state of things entirely the reverse. On the 26th of January, 1808,
exactly twenty years after the landing of Governor Phillip, the
Colony was convulsed by a mild attack of rebellion. The tyranny
of Governor Bligh had brought matters to such a pass that the free
settlers were driven to desperation. “ Leaseholds had been can-
celled, houses demolished without the smallest compensation, on
the plea of public utility, but in reality from motives of private
hatred and revenge ; freemen imprisoned on arbitrary warrants
issued without reference to the magistracy, and even publicly flogged
in the same illegal and oppressive manner.” Thus has his conduct
been described by William Charles Wentworth. In their extremity
the settlers urged Colonel Johnston to place the Governor under
arrest, solemnly assuring him that if he did not do so an insurrection
and massacre would certainly take place, and that the blood of the
colonists would be upon his head. After consultation with his
officers he deemed it wise to do this, and the New South Wales


corps marched to Government House, where they arrested the
Governor.
That Colonel Johnston’s conduct was mutinous no one can deny.
More than three years afterwards he was tried by a
found guilty, but he was only sentenced to be cashiered. The
lenient manner he was dealt with showed conclusively the Court
believed in the purity of his motive, and also that he was actuated
by a consideration of the novel and extraordinary circumstances
which appeared to exist, and “ which,” as set forth in H.R.H. the
Prince Regent’s acquiescence in the sentence, “ affecting the tran-
quillity of the Colony, called for some immediate decision.” Des-
perate diseases require desperate remedies, and there can be no
doubt on reading the evidence adduced in this important trial,
giving as it does the fullest and most authentic state of the Colony
at that period, that Johnston’s action was productive of the most
beneficial effects, not the least of which was the lesson it gave the
Imperial Government. It taught the necessity of being careful and
guarded as to the class of men to be chosen to control and govern
in Crown Colonies.
Lieutenant-Governor Foveaux, immediately prior to the advent of
Governor Macquarie, at the end of 1809, made the progress of the
Colony, twenty-one years after being founded, to be as follows :
11,900 acres of land in cultivation, 941 horses, 5,233 breeding cattle
and 3,771 oxen, 33,258 sheep, of which 22,451 were ewes, 2,975
goats, and 19,368 pigs.
The flocks and herds were now multiplying so rapidly that the
settlers were eagerly looking about for good grazing country. The
cordillera before mentioned completely hemmed them in, forming an
impassable barrier to the great western interior. Many attempts
were made and wonderful stories related of the formidable obstacles
encountered in these inaccessible mountains by early explorers
Lieutenant Dawes, Captain Patterson, Hacking, Cayley, Mann, and
George Bass, with many others of less note, tried repeatedly to
cross the Blue Mountains, but were repulsed and foiled. A general
idea prevailed that the country was worthless, and it was not until
May, 1813, that a passage was effected, and the mysterious gloom
in which they had been wrapped for a quarter of a century dispelled.
This was accomplished by Gregory Blaxland, William Charles Went-
worth, and Lieutenant William Lawson. They left Mr. Blaxland’s
farm at South Creek on the 11th of May, 1813, and took with them
four servants, four horses, and five dogs, with six weeks’ provisions


for the whole party. They crossed the Hawkesbury, or Nepean, at
Emu Plains, and cut their way through densely-wooded ridges and
deep rocky ravines to the top of the first rise. Their plan was to keep
to the dividing ranges between the rivers Grose and Cox, and it was
really in steadily adhering to this design that they succeeded. On
the 19th they began to ascend the second range, and obtained a view
of the settlement they had left behind, and fixed the locality by
compass bearings. At a little distance further on they found a
cairn of stones, which they concluded had been made by Bass or
Cayley, The place has since been called “ Cayley’s Piepulse.” They
now went forward through a country unknown, but, satisfied they had
gone further than any other Europeans, they persevered, making a
few miles each day through dense underwood, over rocky precipices
and deep gorges. On the 28th they began their descent, and “ con-
trived to get their horses down the mountain by cutting a small
trench with a hoe to prevent them from slipping, where they again
tasted fresh grass for the first time since they left the forest land
on the other side of the mountain.” They had thus accomplished
their task, and left Mount York behind them. Traces of their
camps are still visible. I myself saw not long since on a tree growing
on Pulpit Hill the W. L. cut deeply into the wood. It was still
perfectly legible, although sixty years had passed away.
This mountain region is composed of sandstone, which by the
action of water has been cut away, quite perpendicularly in places,
forming deep gorges or canons, of which the bottoms are strewed
with immense fragments that have fallen, and overgrown with a
tangled mass of creepers and undergrowth, through which it is
almost impossible to cut a track. Mr. Wentworth himself told me
of the determination their party made to keep to the ridges as much
as possible, no matter how circuitous their route, and it seems at the
present day as if these ridges had been designed by Providence for
the purpose of making a road. These worthies did a great work for
the Colony, and Governor Macquarie at once availed himself of
their discoveries by sending Surveyor Evans to follow the marked
track to its end and continue his explorations. Evans thoroughly
carried out the Governor’s instructions, and returned with an
excellent report of the land, which he described as being “ equal to
every demand which this Colony may have for extension of tillage
and pasture lands for a century to come.” A road was roughly made
during the ensuing year, and opened on the 21st January, 1815.
Major (afterwards Sir Thomas) Mitchell later on surveyed and con-


structed a properly graded road, which has been always known as
the Great Western Road.
I have somewhat diverged from my proper track in speaking of
this great undertaking, but in reality it was of almost equal import-
ance to the first establishment of the Colony. Had it been earlier
accomplished many difficulties which had arisen from time to time
would never have existed, as on the wide western slopes there was
found tens of thousands of acres only wanting to be ploughed and
sown to produce most abundant crops.
We must, however, proceed with the material progress of the
Colony, which at first was necessarily slow, on account of the
varied and almost interminable difficulties which had to be sur-
mounted. Privation and hard work are incident to the settlement
of a new country. The wilderness must be cleared. Trees of
gigantic magnitude have to be felled and their roots grubbed before
the plough can do its work and tillage be commenced. Fences
must be put up, and some kind of houses, with barns and stables,
erected. These things take time, and an immense amount of hard
work, causing even the hardiest and most courageous to despond.
Macarthur writes, in 1818; “My feeble attempt to introduce
merino sheep still creeps on almost unheeded, and altogether
unassisted. Few of the settlers can be induced to take the trouble
requisite to improve their flocks.” But we have seen how the diffi-
culties arose, and how they were gradually surmounted until a
time had arrived when the pastoral resources of the country could
be utilised.
At this period the cattle numbered 897,219, and the sheep
4,990,178. Scarcely any improvements had been made on the
land, and no fencing, with the exception of a horse paddock, was
found on any sheep run. The sheep were shepherded by day and
folded at night to prevent destruction by native dogs. Strychnine
had not been thought of for these pests, and it was impossible to
hunt them out of their rocky fastnesses. Many sheep were killed,
and in the panic-caused when attacked, large numbers were trodden
down and destroyed in the crush. It was a great benefit when it
was discovered that these native dogs would take a bait charged
with a small dose of this powerful poison. Their destruction has
been so rapid in consequence that in a few years the Dingo will be
extinct.
A pastoral era set in, and lands were occupied for grazing pur-
poses. Enterprising men took a flock of sheep or a herd of cattle


into the wilderness of the great interior, where there was room enough
for all, and, like the patriarchs of old, camped or squatted down
with them, waiting patiently until the few became hundreds, and
hundreds thousands, and thousands tens of thousands. Thus
originated the term squatter, which has since become so well known
in Australasian history.
The increase in the numbers of live stock progressed so rapidly
that fat sheep became unsaleable for want of a more extended
market. Gloomy forebodings and a general despondency pre-
vailed as to the future. A happy thought, however, suggested
itself to a shrewd and far-seeing colonist, which developed a
new industry and again brought about the sunshine of prosperity.
Mr. Henry O'Brien, of Yass, had read in books of travels that
on the wild steppes of Asiatic Russia the Tartars slaughtered
their cattle and extracted the tallow, which found a ready sale
in Europe, and it occurred to him that if Australians did the
same sort of thing with their sheep a considerable value per
head would be permanently established, as there was practically an
unlimited demand for tallow in European markets. His experi-
ment was successful, and in January, 1843, he made the fact known
to the Colony. Tallow was a product that would not deteriorate
in a long sea voyage, and could be extracted without skilled
labour simply by boiling the sheep. This adaptation of the
Russian system was an immense boon to the Colony. “ Boiling
down ” became general, and continued in force until another
great discovery brought about another and a better state of things.
With varying success the Colony progressed until the discovery
of gold in California seemed likely to denude Australia of its popu-
lation. Hundreds of men emigrated during 1850, causing great
inconvenience and loss to the Colony, for nothing had, up to this
time, transpired to reveal the treasures hidden in Australia. In
May, 1851, gold was found to exist in payable quantities; people
rushed from all parts to the diggings ; the attention of the entire
world was directed to Australia ; population flocked to her shores,
and at once gave the country a national character.
Gold had previously been found in New South Wales by Count
Strzelecki, the Rev. W. B. Clarke, and others, but the fact had not
publicly been made known. It was not until 1851 that any practical
results were obtained. At that period Mr. Edward Hammond
Hargreaves, a gentleman who had visited New South Wales previous
to the gold discoveries in California, to which place he had been


attracted by its reputed richness, was struck with the similarity of
tire geological features, the schistoze rocks, and the quartz reefs of
California to what he had seen in Australia, and he was induced to
return in order to “ prospect ” the country to the west of Bathurst.
Here he fell in with Messrs. Toms and Lyster, and together they
went to Lewisponds Creek and found gold. Mr. Hargreaves had
brought with him the knowledge of the rude mining appliances in use
on the Sacramento, and was the first to make a gold-digger’s cradle
in Australia, thus rendering it easy to extract the gold from the
wash dirt. In doing this he was the pioneer of gold mining in
Australia, for while others knew of the existence of the precious
metal, before the advent of Mr. Hargreaves it had never been
collected in payable quantities.
There can be no doubt as to the value of the gold discovery in
relation to the material progress of the Colony. It brought the
observance of the whole world to bear on Australia. It induced
men to leave England and try their fortunes in New South Wales
and Victoria. There were then, as doubtless there are now,
thousands of young men who, like the “hardy Norseman,” felt
that—
“ Too narrow was their native home
For hearts so bold and free.”
And what more could lovers of the adventurous want than to go to
the Australian gold fields to seek their fortune ? The stories cur-
rent as to the fabulous richness of the new El Dorado were calculated
to inspire not only the credulous, but the strong, sound, sober-
minded man of common sense, who meant to better his condition,
or perish in the attempt.
Emigration to Australia commenced in earnest, and the Colonies
were forced forward with a speed before unequalled in the history
of the world, and thousands owe their first start in life to the gold
they obtained at the diggings. Victoria had separated from New
South Wales in the year of the gold discovery, and as her gold
fields were the richer and her port the nearer, not only Europeans,
but numbers from the other Colonies migrated there. A mighty
rush set in, so that her population at one mighty bound, so to
speak, went ahead of the Mother Colony. New South Wales also
benefited largely, and although labourers were for several years
scarce, agriculture slowly went forward. Better prices were obtained
for fat stock, as the demand had so rapidly increased: in short,
every one was benefited more or less, as a better market had been


opened for their produce. Gold mining prospered, and large quan-
tities were almost immediately exported to England. From this
period prosperity was assured. Colonial affairs progressed with a
rapidity hitherto unknown in history. Constitutional government
had been established, political freedom secured, and liberty un-
trammelled laid the foundation of a great Australian nation.
And here let me commence to give a statement of our actual
resources, and the progress made in their development; dealing
with the Colony of New South Wales proper as it now exists,
and bringing the figures down to the present time. One of the
distinguishing characteristics of New South Wales is its mineral
wealth—gold, silver, copper, lead, antimony, quicksilver, bismuth,
coal, and iron are scattered more or less profusely throughout. In a
compilation made by the Government authorities it is shown that
the aggregate value of the metals and minerals produced has been
as follows : Value mined in New South Wales up to the end of
1888 was £61,064,754, made up of the following amounts : Gold,.
£35,328,887 ; silver, £203,917 ; coal, £14,406,214 ; kerosene,
shale, £756,022; tin, £5,997,590 ; copper, £4,115,486 ; iron,
£181,489; antimony, £51,463 ; lead, £5,835 ; asbestos, £398 ;
bismuth, £3,540 ; mixed minerals, £12,286. The number of
miners employed in New South Wales in 1884 exceeded 16,000,
engaged in the following mines : Alluvial gold, 4,524 ; quartz,
ditto, 1,984; tin, 2,493; copper, 1,177; bismuth, 12; coal, 5,481.
The total area under mineral lease and application to lease exceeds
111,000 acres. In 1884 the mineral output of New South Wales
amounted in value to £8,003,831. The coal alone was £1,303,077 ;
shale, £72,176 ; gold, £386,690; silver bars, £19,780 ; silver lead
ore, £123,174 ; copper regulus and ore, £416,179; tin ingots and
ore, £521,587 ; antimony and ore, £6,458 ; bismuth, £2,770; iron,
£1,747; silver sent from Silverton, £300,000. The minerals
exported in 1884 were valued at £2,250,171, and the total output
of the Colony to the end of that year was worth £64,068,585.
Gold has fluctuated in its yield consequent on the working out
of old, and the discovery of new fields ; the total amount raised to
the end of last year (1884) was 9,601,541 oz., valued at about
£37,250,000 sterling. An immense area of country is known to
be auriferous, that included in proclaimed gold fields approximating
to 35,500 square miles. In all probability gold mining is only in its
infancy, and with skilful organisation and better mining appliances,
greater results will be obtained from poorer materials.


I may mention that at the celebrated Hill End workings at
Tambaroora, some of the vein stuff was fabulously rich, and quartz
was crushed which yielded over 1,000 oz. to the ton. From
Hotterman’s mine I saw a slab of gold ore raised which weighed
080 lbs., and contained over £2,000 worth of gold, and the Sydney
Mint returns from 415 tons of stone gave 16,280 oz., of a value of
£68,284.
There is also a wondrous mine in the neighbourhood of Orange,
at Lucknow, about twelve miles south of the Ophir, and on the
Summerhill Creek, known as the Wentworth, where, on the surface,
the gold was found in a conglomerate, of which the cementing sub-
stance was oxide of iron. In depth these oxides changed to sulphides,
and in connection with the gold is also found a considerable
quantity of silver. Bunches of ore are formed in pockets, or
bonanzas , very similar in appearance to that found in the celebrated
Comstock lode, in America. The difference consists simply in
there being a larger proportion of gold and less silver in the
Wentworth ores. It is exceedingly rich, and often yields over
2,000 oz. of gold and 800 oz. of silver to the ton. The gold-
bearing rocks in this locality are covered with a layer of basalt,
varying from a few feet to several hundred feet in thickness, which
makes it difficult and expensive to prospect. There can be no
doubt, however, but that in the future this will be accomplished,
and mines discovered quite as rich as the Wentworth.
During the past two or three years many valuable silver mines
have been discovered, and New South Wales will shortly be dis-
tinguished among the silver-producing countries. Gold miners in
seeking for gold, which is almost invariably found in a pure state,
often neglect minerals that may be more valuable, for the reason
that they have no appearance of being metalliferous. This was the
case at Mitchell’s Creek, at a mine called Sunny Corner. There the
valuable silver ore was thrown by as useless, or passed through the
stamping battery and was altogether lost. It was known, however,
that the ores contained silver, and through the enterprise of several
gentlemen who were interested in the discovery, the process known as
the “ Pacific Smelter ” was introduced, and proved highly successful.
The lodes about this locality are large and numerous, and there is
every prospect of a vast silver industry becoming established.
The “ Barrier Ranges,” which he on the borders of New South
Wales and South Australia, have also been proved to be rich in
silver. Many mines have been opened, and Mr. Wilkinson, the


geological surveyor, says he examined eighty-one lodes, and many
others exist which he did not inspect. These ranges, which are
almost surrounded by open salt-bush plains, extend for 150 miles
in a N.N.E. direction, varying in width from twenty to one hun-
dred and ten miles. It is almost impossible to form an idea of the
extent and value of these lodes until the country shall have been
thoroughly prospected, and means provided for smelting the ores in
the district. At present the ore is roughly dressed, and the best of
it sent to England for metallurgic treatment. The only idea that
can be formed as to its richness is that, after deducting the charges,
including hand dressing, the carriage of the ore some 180 miles by
tram and 150 by railway to the seaboard, freight, &c., to England,
the price realised leaves a large margin of profit.
At Emmaville an important discovery has also been made, of
which the geological surveyor, Mr. David, says ; “ Rising in places
five or six feet above the level of the surrounding country, the
silver lode forms a conspicuous wall-like mass as it strikes through
the altered rocks. It is a kind of breccia, and the lode can be
traced for at least a mile and a half along the surface. The width
of the lode and its branches varies from one to six yards, but the
metalliferous portion, as far as can be seen on the surface, is
nowhere more than three feet wide, and is confined chiefly to the
centre of the lode. The chief ores found in this lode up to the present
are galena, copper pyrites, mispickel, and a variety of grey copper
containing silver and gold. Much of the galena is fine grained,
and has returned silver at the rate of 148 oz. per ton. Six assays
made from the same sample of this mineral yielded on an average
at the rate of 492 oz. to the ton, and gold at the rate of, at least,
18 oz. to the ton. One assay gave as much as 81oz. of gold, and
others merely a trace. Several assays of the yellow and green
surface ores gave silver at the rate of from 24 oz. to 391 oz. to the
ton. Their composition is difficult to determine, as they are much
weakened. As, however, the ore yields metallic silver on being
heated alone in a furnace, chlorides or bromides are probably
present. The lode is metalliferous, to some extent, vertically.
This is proved by the natural sections afforded by the gullies, which
cross the line of strike, and have worn it down in places over a
hundred feet, showing it to be silver bearing throughout, from the
higher to the lower levels. The occurrence of antimony ores, as
well as the variety of its minerals, and the persistence of its strike,
argue well for its permanence.”


Copper mines have been worked since 1856, since which time
vast quantities of the metal have been produced, and over
£4,500,000 pounds worth exported. The copper-producing country,
according to the geological survey, covers an area of 4,296,000
acres. There are still remaining numerous tracks of country to be
explored, which will largely increase this area. Many of the
lodes at present in work are very large, and the ores yield a high
percentage of copper.
Tin was not known as an export from New South Wales until
1872, although its occurrence was made known by the Rev. W. B.
Clarke in 1852. The metal is of the very best quality, and ranks
with that of the Straits Settlements in the English market. There
appear to be almost unlimited deposits of tin ore, and the value
annually exported exceeds that of gold. During the last twelve
years, tin valued at an amount of over £6,500,000 sterling has
been exported from this Colony. Of other minerals I will
quote from a precis made from the reports of the Geological
Survey Department, showing conclusively their variety and
abundance:—
“ The quantity of tin raised in the Colony was 6,665 tons in 1884,
valued at £521,587, against 896 tons in 1871, valued at £47,703.
Taking ingots and ore together, the export as regards quantity
exceeds that of any previous year. The total quantity of tin
produced in and exported from New South Wales since the opening
of the fields to the end of 1884 is 86,728 tons, value £6,519,177.
“ Large deposits of iron ore occur in many widely-separated
districts. The principal ore is hematite. Titaniferous iron is
abundant in New South Wales. It is found usually with alluvial
gold; as at Ophir, Mudgee, and Wellington, in the country of
Wellington ; Bathurst, Bingera, county of Murchison ; and Uralla,
country of Sandon, in the diamond drift. Large rolled masses
occur at Uralla. Ilmenite, menaccanite, nigirine, and iserine are
said to occur with gold, garnets, and chrysolites in the Five-mile
Flat Creek, Cudgegong River, in the Lachlan and at Talbragar,
with magnetite; also near Wagga Wagga, county of Wynyard, and
the Rocky River, county of Hardinge. In several places there are
coal, limestone, and iron in immediate proximity. At Mittagong
and Jamberoo in the south, and at Lithgow and other localities in
the west, iron ore is found in large quantities. The principal silver
mines are in the western and northern districts. The ores of lead,
zinc, and bismuth occur also in several localities. Lead ores


chiefly galena, are found in the following and other localities:—
Mount Grosvenor, Peel (near Bathurst), Glen Innes, Yass,
Woolgarlo (near Yass), Mylora (near Yass,) Darby’s Run (near
Tingha), Brook Creek, Gundaroo, Silverdale (near Bowning),
Bookham (in the county of Harden), Eavenswood, Wiseman’s
Creek, Murrumburrah, Canberra Plains, Winterton Mine (at
Mitchell’s Creek, Bungonia, Peelwood, and near Bombala.
Cinnabar is found in the Mudgee district. Antimony ores have
been found in numerous parts of New South Wales; the
principal lodes occur in the Macleay, Armidale, Clarence, and
Cudgegong districts. Those on the Munga Creek, near the Macleay
River, traverse sedimentary rock of Devonian age. The ore
consists of oxide and sulphide of antimony, and occurs in
irregular bunches, occasionally of a considerable size, enclosed
in a quartz matrix, which forms the chief constituent of the lodes.
One of the lodes near Armidale contains free gold plainly visible to
the naked eye.” Until quite recently the colonial antimony ores
have been quite neglected, but during the last two or three years
some of the lodes have been worked, especially in the Macleay and
Armidale districts, and there is reason to believe that the out-
put of this mineral will largely increase. The quantity and value
of antimony exported from Sydney to the end of 1888 was 2,591
tons; value, £51,463. Diamonds, opals, rubies, sapphires, and
other gems have been found in various parts. The number of
diamonds found in New South Wales up to the end of 1880 was
estimated at 10,000, the largest being one of 5|- carats, or 16-2
grains. Diamonds are known to exist in considerable quantities
in various parts of Australia. In New South Wales they were
discovered so far back as 1851, but little notice was taken of the
fact. In 1867 numerous diamonds were found by gold-diggers in
the Mudgee district, and in 1869 diamond working was commenced
in a systematic manner. The richest finds of diamonds have,
however, been at Bingera, where during the last ten years many
hundreds have been discovered. In 1884, at Doctor’s Creek,
Bingera, the Australian Mining Company obtained 1,193 diamonds,
weighing 254 carats, worth 225. per carat. The conditions under
which the Bingera diamonds are obtained are much the same as
the Mudgee, where the gems are procured from outliers of an old
river-drift which had in parts been protected from denudation by a
capping of hard compact basalt. This drift is made up mostly of
boulders and pebbles of quartz, jasper, agate, quartzite, flinty slate,


silicified wood, slate, sandstone, and abundance of coarse sand
mixed with more or less clay. Diamonds are also found in other
parts of the Colony. From the Borah tin mine, situated at the
junction of Cope’s Creek with the Gwydir, 200 were obtained in a
few months. Out of a batch of eigthy-six, averaging 1 carat 1 grain
each, the largest weighed 5’5 grains. Diamonds have been found
on most of the alluvial tin workings at Cope’s, Newstead, Vegetable
and Middle Creeks, also in the Stanifer, Ruby, and the Britannia
Tin mines, in the Tingha division, near the Big River, Auburn Yale,
and in the Berrima district. In colour, the diamonds vary from
colourless and transparent to various shades of straw-yellow, brown,
light-green and black. One of a rich dark-green was found in the
form of a flattened hemitrope octohedron. The most common
crystalline forms which have been met with are the octohedron, the
hemitrope octohedron, the rhombic dodecahedron, the triakis and
hexakis octohedron, but they are all usually more or less rounded.
The flattened triangular hemitrope crystals are very common. One
specimen of the deltoidal dodecahedron was met with. The lustre
is usually brilliant or adamantine, but occasionally they have a dull
appearance. This want of lustre is not due to any coating of
foreign matter or to the same cause as the dulness of less hard and
water-worn crystals, but it is due to the surface being covered with
innumerable edges or angles belonging to the structure of the crystal.
These reflect the light irregularly at all angles, and give the stone
its frosted appearance.
Coal, the most useful of all minerals, and the most conducive to
the interests of mankind in developing arts and manufactures, and
in the material progress of the world, has been bestowed upon the
Colony in the most lavish profusion, for New South Wales pos-
sesses the richest, most accessible, and extensive coal and cannel-
coal seams in the Southern Hemisphere, which must eventually
make it the greatest and richest of all the Australian Colonies. The
approximate area of the carboniferous strata is estimated at 25,000
square miles, and thick coal seams crop out along the coast and
mountain ranges from Pier Head, near Lake Macquarie, to New-
castle Harbour, a distance of 18 miles, on the northern edge of the
great coal basin. From Coal Cliff to near Shoalhaven, a distance
of 45 miles at the southern side of it, and on the western side at
the Blue Mountains, Lithgow Valley, Wallerawang, &c., thick coal
and cannel-coal seams crop out alongside the railway from the
metropolis to the western interior, and in the gorges and gullies on


each side of the line; whilst on the Southern and Western
Railways similar outcrops of coal and cannel-coal occur.
The mines, first opened in 1802, are situated in the immediate
vicinity of Newcastle, and it is from there that the Colony obtains
its largest supply, where the shipment of coal is carried on by
hydraulic and steam cranes, and shoots, capable of loading 16,200
tons per day.
The production of coal has increased very rapidly of late years.
In 1838 only 828 tons were raised, whilst in 1884 the total output
was 2,749,109 tons, valued at £1,303,077. There were 64 coal and
shale mines in operation, employing 5,500 hands. The year’s
exports reached 1,690,763 tons, valued at £931,045. When it is
remembered that the coal-fields of Great Britain only cover one-
twentieth part of the area of the country, or about 4,000 square miles,
and that nevertheless the output of this mineral in the Mother Country
is upwards of 120,000,000 tons per annum, it would be difficult to
over-estimate the magnitude of the proportions to which the coal
trade of New South Wales may be expected to grow hereafter.
In certain districts immense seams of coal are found in
immediate juxtaposition with an abundance of iron ores, lime-
stone, and fire-clay. Hence nature seems to have indicated New
South Wales as the great manufacturing colony of the Australian
group.
The coal is of excellent quality for steam, household, smelting,
and gas purposes, and the largest exports are to Victoria, Hong
Kong, San Francisco, South Australia, Manila, Japan, Valparaiso,
Honolulu, India, Tasmania, New Zealand, and Queensland, more
than 1,000 vessels being annually engaged in this traffic.
The average price of the northern coal in 1884 was 9s. 10'16d
per ton, of the southern 10s. 4d., and western ss. 5‘22d. per ton.
The result of careful investigation is to prove that the coal from
the northern coal-field of New South Wales is practically equal for
all purposes to the best English coal; for the use of steamers it
has the advantage of giving a more perfect combustion, with free-
dom from smoke. The coals of the southern coast district differ
from those of the northern coal-field in having generally a duller
appearance, higher specific gravity, more ash, and less volatile
hydro-carbons —in which they approach more closely the Welsh
steam coal. The coals from the western district differ considerably
from the others, and are similar to what is known as Scotch Splint.
Very hard and semi-anthracitic, they are specially suitable for
smelting purposes.


A variety of cannel-coal commonly called “kerosene shale,”
similar to the once famous Boghead mineral of Scotland, but
yielding a much larger percentage of volatile hydrocarbons than
the Scotch Boghead, occurs in saucer-shaped deposits from a few
inches to five feet thick. The richest quality yields upwards of 150
gallons of crude oil per ton, or 18,000 cubic feet of gas, with an
illuminating power of 38 to 48 sperm candles, and on this account
it is found advantageous for mixing with ordinary coal in the
manufacture of gas, and is largely exported to Great Britain,
America, and other foreign countries, as well as the neighbouring
Colonies, for gas purposes. Two companies manufacture petroleum,
shale oil, and other products therefrom. The quantity raised in
1884 was 31,618 tons, valued at T 72,176. This industrv was
founded by Sir Saul Samuel, the present Agent-General of New
South Wales.
I may mention that two attempts have been made to smelt iron ;
first at the Fitzroy works, where a large deposit of the magnetic
oxide of iron exists; and at Lithgow Valley, where the ore used
was hematite. While both works succeeded in turning out iron of
the very best quality, neither resulted in a commercial success.
As, however, ores of the richest class in great abundance exist in
immediate connection with good seams of coal, manganese, and
limestone, the manufacture of iron and steel is simply a question
for the future, and cannot fail to become one of the leading
industries of the colony.
The pastoral industry of Australia was the first to develop itself,
a fact which can be easily accounted for. In a country of compa-
ratively unlimited extent, covered with natural grasses and herbage,
stock-breeding could not fail to be successful, and statistics con-
clusively prove that it has been the backbone of Australia’s com-
mercial prosperity. In 1792 the live stock of New South Wales,
which was then the whole of Australia, consisted only of 23 bulls
and cows, 11 horses, 105 sheep, 43 pigs, and a few goats. In 1882,
or during a period of 90 years, these had increased to almost in-
credible numbers, as follows: 7,177,531 cattle, 53,500,000 sheep,
850,000 horses, and 458,500 pigs ! These numbers only include
the live stock of New South Wales and the two Colonies which
separated from her, viz., Victoria and Queensland, although Tas-
mania and South Australia, as well as Western Australia and New
Zealand, have been chiefly stocked from the offspring of the Mother
Colony. In the annals of the world’s history no country can show
such a marvellous progress in pastoral enterprise.


These sheep are the produce of those 29 brought from the
Cape of Good Hope by Governor Phillip and a few others
which came from India; and although in 1792 the whole stock
amounted to only 105, three years later it is stated that Mr. John
Macarthur, of Camden, had a flock of over a thousand. It is
chiefly to this gentleman’s forethought, skill, and energy that wool-
growing in Australia made such pronounced progress. In the be-
ginning of the year 1804, says Mr. Macarthur, “ some of the most
eminent manufacturers of woollen cloth in England saw by accident
some specimens of the wool I had raised in New South Wales ; its
qualities were so fine that it induced them to find me out and to
make particular inquiries how and in what manner this wool had
been raised. On my communicating to them all I knew upon the
subject, they expressed a decided opinion that the Colony of New
South Wales might, with proper encouragement, be enabled in
time to supply the woollen manufacture of England with the whole
quantity of fine wool which was then with great difficulty obtained
from Spain; and such was the importance they attached to this,
that they signified their determination to communicate their opinion
to Government by memorial, which was soon afterwards done. In
consequence of those memorials being sent in I was directed to
attend a privy council, before whom I was particularly examined
as to the state of my flocks and their probable improvement. The
privy council were so satisfied of the importance of the under-
taking, that they recommended to the Secretary of State that it
should be encouraged, and Lord Camden was pleased to order me
a grant of 5,000 acres of land in a particular situation which
I had pointed out to his lordship; at the same time he wrote
to the Governor of the Colony that I was to be supplied with
shepherds.”
How it came about that this extraordinarily fine wool came to be
produced was entirely the result of accident. Fine-wooled sheep of
the Escurial breed had been presented to the Dutch Government
by the King of Spain, and some of these passed from the Dutch
Government to Colonel Gordon at the Cape of Good Hope, who
was an officer in the Dutch East Indian service. Colonel Gordon
was killed, and these sheep were sold by his widow. The Reliance
and the Supply, two English war ships, had just at that period
arrived at the Cape for the purpose of taking supplies to Sydney,
and twenty-nine of these sheep were put on board these vessels,
and on their arrival in Sydney Mr. Macarthur purchased as many
of them as he could, viz., three rams and five ewes. The rest were


distributed to other breeders. It was only, however, Mr. Macarthur
who had the sagacity of keeping the breed pure, and ten years later
the fine strain of blood had disappeared excepting in the flock of
that gentleman. Mr. Macarthur also purchased other Spanish
sheep from the flock of King George 111. Thus it was that the
growth of fine wool was established in New South Wales. Many
others followed the lead of Macarthur, and sheep were imported
to the Colony from Spain and France. Careful breeding de-
veloped the best types of the New South Wales merino, for accli-
matisation had modified the original Spanish type, and Australia
now stands pre-eminent; for at the French International Exhibition
of 1878 New South Wales obtained the Grande Medaille d’Honneur
in competition against the whole world.
With reference to the pastoral wealth of the Colony generally I
cannot do better than quote from statistics furnished by Mr.
Rolleston, C.M.G., in 1882. He says: “We commenced the
decennial period of 1872 to 1881 with the undermentioned live
stock—horses, 304,100; cattle, 2,014,888 ; sheep, 16,278,697. We
close the decennary with—horses, 846,931; cattle, 2,180,896;
sheep, 33,062,854. It is a noticeable feature in the returns of live
stock that whilst the cattle increased by over a million head during
the first five years of the period under review, they have decreased
by nearly the same number in the last five years, and we have now
to record an increase of only 166,006 head in the ten years. In
our sheep-farming operations the very opposite result is exhibited,
as the numbers are more than doubled. We commenced the decade
with rather over 16£ millions, and we close the decade with over
33 millions. These figures are taken from the returns of the
Registrar-General, but if we take the sworn returns under the
Sheep Act for our guide, they give us at the close of 1881 no less
than 37,279,205. In the face of the exceptionally dry seasons
experienced during the last three or four years, it is a very remark-
able feature in her history of progress that the main pastoral
industry of the Colony should exhibit such expansion. In connec-
tion with this increase in the number of our sheep, the question
that forces itself upon our attention is this : to what extent our
pasture lands will enable us to increase our production of live stock,
so as to supplement the deficiencies of the supply in Europe. It
has been estimated that the production of meat in the United
Kingdom is equal to 1,090,000 tons, whilst the consumption reaches
1,740,000 tons, showing a deficiency of 650,000 tons in the home
supply. It is, moreover, known that the continent of Europe is


not able to feed its own population, the estimated consumption
being in excess of its production no less than 143,000 tons. The
statistics also reveal the fact that the cattle of France and the
sheep of Great Britain are declining in numbers, whilst the average
increase of the population of Europe is advancing at the rate of
three millions annually. The difficulties of conveyance have now
been overcome, since a 70-horse power engine is able to maintain
a temperature 6° below zero in a chamber capable of holding
10,000 frozen sheep, or 250 tons of dead meat. Some idea of the
magnitude of the question of meat supply for Europe may be
formed by the information furnished in the statistics of the Mother
Country. The importation of meat into the United Kingdom has
risen from 144,225 tons, of the value of £7,708,000 in the year
1870, to no less than 650,300 tons, of the value of £26,012,000, in
the year 1880. The increased consumption of meat in Europe, it
may be observed, is not only attributable to the increase of popu-
lation, but in a greater degree to the higher wages that manufac-
turing industry has introduced amongst the masses.”
The improvements that have been made on land occupied for
grazing purposes have been chiefly in fencing the runs into paddocks
by means of iron or steel wire fences, thus obviating the necessity
of employing shepherds. It has also been proved that sheep thrive
better in being allowed to lie out on the run and feed when they
feel inclined, and are not dogged or disturbed in being driven to
their pasture. The wool is also better, heavier and cleaner. In
these paddocks wells have been sunk and provided with machinery
for raising water, tanks have been excavated and dams made, so as
to give a permanent supply of water. These works tend materially
to increase the capability of the runs to maintain a greater number
of sheep, but perhaps the greatest improvement of all is the
universal practice of killing the timber by “ring-barking,” which
invariably doubles the quantity of grass and makes it sweeter and
more nutritious. These improvements are very costly, but they
enable the management of stations to be carried on much more
economically, while at the same time they more than double the
produce. A very general effort is being made to raise a high class
of wool, and the particular climate of the district studied in order
to obtain the best results. No part of the world could possibly be
found where grazing pursuits could be followed more profitably, as
there is no expense to be incurred in housing or artificial feeding
during the winter. Many large fortunes have been made from
small beginnings and leased lands have been converted into real


estate The average clip is about 5* or 6 lbs. of wool in the grease,
while the average crop of lambs is about 80 per cent.
The value of the export of wool from New South Wales
! J “° lUn 1 Unt ® d . to £9 > 598 >761 m 1883, as compared with £4,748,160 in
8/1. Ihe pastoral interest is constantly increasing, the total area
o land leased from the Government for grazing purposes is
returned at 229,320 square miles. There is also an immense trade
done in hides, leather, and tallow.
Agriculture increases in direct proportion to that of the popula-
tion. Land adapted for cultivation is practically unlimited, but at
present wheat growing is chiefly done in the high lands of the
Bathurst Orange, Goulburn, and New England districts, which are
situated from 2,000 to 3,500 feet above the sea level. The soil
vanes according to its situation. Rich light loams, dark volcanic
delms and alluvial flats are all to be met with throughout the
country. Wheat, barley, oats, and maize are the principal crops
and the total area under cultivation is 789,082 acres. More than
76,000 persons are engaged in agricultural pursuits. While how-
ever, only the above-mentioned quantity is under crop the extent of
agricultural holdings is 33,352,998 acres, of which 27,241,009 acres
are enclosed and the remainder unenclosed. Excellent potatoes
are grown, and, where the proper cultivation is exhibited, good crops
are obtained. There was also over a thousand tons of tobacco
grown during the year 1883-4. In this year the area of land in
New South Wales under grain [crops and the quantity of produce
obtained was as follows Wheat, 289,757 acres yielded 4,345 437
bushels ; maize, 123,634 acres yielded 4,538,604 bushels ; barley
5,081 acres yielded 106,496 bushels; oats, 17,810* acres yielded
376,635 bushels; rye, 1,140* acres yielded 16,274 bushels ; millet
284 f acres yielded 4,078* bushels ; sorghum and imphee, 64 acres'
yielded 1,014* tons. The acreage and produce of hay crops was—
Wheat, 49,348* acres yielding 65,119 tons ; barley, 2,158* acres,
yielding 2,785* tons; oats, 107,451 acres yielding 113,8994 tons •'
sown grasses, 19,545* acres, yielding 57,4381 tons.’ The area
under green crop for cattle was—Maize 5,098 acres ; barley 2 8494
acres; oats, 2,464* acres; rye, 1,735* acres; millet, 346 acres ;
sown grasses, 91,601 acres; sorghum and imphee 3,899*, acres'
The acreage of land under potatoes, 14,953* acres; quantity of
potatoes produced, 36,976* tons.
Sugar-growing and its manufacture have together become a
considerable industry, as the cane will grow on all the coast land to
the north of Sydney, and the area under cultivation steadily in-


creases. In 1883-4 the area cropped amounted to 14,985 acres, of
which 7,688 acres produced 1,818,325 cwts. of sugar. The sugar-
growing districts are the lands lying along the valleys of the
northern rivers, where there are many feet of rich alluvial soil.
There is plenty of scope for enterprise in the establishment of
plantations, but the unprecedented low price of sugar in England
withholds many from engaging in what they consider a somewhat
risky business. The average yield is from 20 cwts. to 40 cwts. per
acre. The various varieties of imphee are largely grown, but chiefly
for feeding stock. It is a most valuable plant, and grows luxuriantly
all over the Colony.
The culture of the vine for wine-making has already made
material progress, and no doubt should be one of the leading
industries of the Colony, Excellent wine has been made, and at
the French Exhibition of 1878, and subsequently those at Bordeaux
in 1882 and Amsterdam, it took a good place in competition with
the European wines. The vine was naturalised in New South
Wales in 1820, and in 1831 Mr. Busby made a voyage to Europe, and
collected a valuable assortment of plants in France and Germany.
Sir Wm. Macarthur also spent much time and money in introduc-
ing the most valuable sorts of grapes, and the Camden vineyards
have been justly celebrated for the character of the wines they pro-
duce. Large areas have been planted in the Hunter River District
and also at Albury on the Murray, and excellent wine made.
It is much to be regretted that so little is known of Colonial
wines in England, and there can be little doubt that this is owing
to a vitiated taste. The public of England have been accustomed,
not only to wines strongly brandied or otherwise sophisticated, but
to spurious manufactured wines. If Australian wines were better
known, they would be more generally used, and take a permanent
position among the better class of wines consumed in this country.
Mr. Bonnard, the Secretary to the New South Wales Commission
at the Bordeaux and Amsterdam Exhibitions, suggests that in order
that Australian wines should take this position and enable them to
be disposed of in the markets of England and Europe, they should
be introduced by the vineyard proprietors themselves, and in thefol-
lowing manner : A syndicate of wine-growers should be formed in
Sydney, having special depots in London, Havre, and Antwerp, until
the names, merits, and values of our wines thould be so well estab-
lished that the European consumers and Australian growers could
be brought into direct contact and conduct their own business,
without having to fear the influence of prejudices or the conspiracy


of a ring, and without the intermediate agency of a protective
association merely employing sworn wine brokers, in the usual
way, to their mutual satisfaction.
That Australasian wines will at some future time command a
good market there can be little doubt, and as millions of acres are
well adapted to their growth, there is little reason to fear but that
their production will become one of the leading industries of the
Colony.
The judges of wines at the Sydney International Exhibition of
1879, consisting of representatives from every wine-producing
country in the world, recorded an unanimous opinion to the effect
that Australian wines are on the whole excellent in quality and
destined to enter into successful competition in the markets of
Europe. One of the judges (a Frenchman) compared the valleys of
the Hunter and Paterson with those of the Gironde and Garonne,
from which the best French wines were obtained, stating that as
the climate and soil of the former are both favourable to wine pro-
duction, the wines made in the Colony will every year become
more like the celebrated vintages of France. The yield of wine has
averaged from 100 gallons to 700 gallons per acre, though certain
kmds of grapes have produced over 1,000 gallons per acre. The
area of land occupied by vines in 1883 was 4,3781 acres ; the
quantity of wine produced being 589,604 gallons, of brandy 4,162
gallons, and of grapes for table use the quantity picked was 1,37711
tons. Fortunately phylloxera is yet unknown in this Colony. *
The sale and occupation of Crown lauds has lately been dealt
with by the Legislature, the Act coming into operation on January
1, 1885. It divides the Colony into three Divisions, Eastern,
Central, and Western. The Eastern Division comprises the coast
district from Point Danger on the north to Cape Howe on the
south, and has been roughly estimated to comprise about 61,440,000
acres. The Central Division has been similarly estimated to com-
prise about 58,880,000 acres. The Western Division has been
similarly estimated to comprise about 80,000,000 acres. These
divisions are accurately described in the schedule to the Act.
Ciown lands (irrespective of sales without competition in certain
special cases) can be obtained in either of the following ways
1. Conditional purchases, including the right to acquire addi-
tional conditional purchases.
2. Conditional purchase without residence.
3. Conditional lease.
4. Auction.


All grants under the Act will contain a reservation of minerals
and all alienations are subject to special provisions as to the
auriferous portion thereof.
Crown lands (with certain exceptions, such as those which are
under lease, or within leasehold areas, or reserved for any pur-
pose or dedicated or situated within population areas, or in
occupation for mining purposes or containing improvements)
are open for conditional purchase in the Eastern and Central
Districts, but not in the Western (unless within special areas
proclaimed) subject to certain provisions as to measurement,
form, &c., in quantities as follows; in Eastern Division, 40 acres
and not exceeding 640 acres ; in Central Division, 40 acres and not
exceeding 2,560 acres. By Section 24 certain provisions are made
for special areas in all three Divisions. The must be
sixteen years of age or upwards, and must make his application in
person. The application must be accompanied by a deposit of 2s.
per acre. Within three months of confirmation of application by
the Local Land Board he must commence and continue bond fide
residence during five years. He must fence within two years of
confirmation, but this period may be extended on cause shown.
Within three months of third year, after confirmation, he must
pay Is. per acre, and thereafter pay a like instalment annually
until the balance of 17s. per acre, with interest at 4 per cent, per
annum, shall be paid. At the expiration of the third and fifth year
he must make declaration of fulfilment of conditions as to residence
and fencing. At the expiration of fifth year (conditions of residence,
and fencing, and of payment of instalments to date, being complied
with to the satisfaction of Local Land Board) a certificate will issue,
indicating primd facie ownership, subject to payment of balance of
purchase-money, and grant will issue on payment of the latter.
Conditional purchases, original or additional may be transferred
after completion of residence, but are liable to forfeiture on non-
compliance with any of the conditions or on false declaration. No
person shall make more than one conditional purchase (except by way
of additional conditional purchase) until certificate of complete fulfil-
ment of conditions, except payment of balance. Holders of conditional
purchases not exceeding in Eastern Division 600 acres, in Central
Division 2,520, may make additional conditional purchases adjoin-
ing their holdings (subject to certain provisions as to measurement,
form, &c.), provided same with their original purchases do not
exceed the extreme limits of 640 acres in the Eastern, and 2,560
acres in the Western Division respectively. Applicants of the


Zfl/t iZTt U ? Wards ” ay apply for Cro ™ lalldB . without
conchtiom of res:dence, m quantities of 40 acres and not exceeding
pnTl vf e d ®P° slt and other payments are double those in the case of
purchases proper, the fencing must be performed within
w PBr aCremilst be «P®ded in improvements
issue w T 8 6 certiflcate of fulfilment of conditions can
X N ° P“chaser under this head shall be permitted to make any
other conditional purchase, and vi versa. An applicant for a condi-
tional purchase (with residence) in the Eastern Division (except in
special area) and any applicant for a like purchase in the Central Divi-
sion may apply for a conditional lease of land adjoining his conditional
p chase, not exceeding three times the area thereof, if available,
iiie area of the entire holding, however (both purchased audleased)
ust not exceed in the Eastern Division, 1,280 acres; in the
be"S 2 fr a T S ‘ Rent ’ not I6SS than 2d ’ P er acre-
e fixed by the Local Land Board, subject to approval of Minister.
1 ie lessee, at expiration of five years, to have preferent right, under
certain conditions, either of extending the term for another five
years, or of conditionally purchasing the whole or any portion
( emg not less than 40 acres) of the area in such conditional lease
adjoining Ins original or additional purchase, free from condition of
residence. Fencing and residence conditions same as in case of a
conditional purchase ; residence may either be on the conditionally
purchased or leased land if duly notified. A conditional leasehold
may be transferred with the land in respect of which granted
Crown lands to the extent of 200,000 acres per annum may
be disposed of by auction at upset prices per acre of not less
than as to town lands, £8; suburban, £2 10s.; other lands, £1 5 S
(l Cr °, W “ la ? ds can be occupied (in addition to the occupation by
conditional lease,” which, from its mixed character, is provided
for, as above mentioned) in either of the following ways
1. Pastoral leases.
2. Occupation licenses.
3. Homestead leases.
4. Annual leases for pastoral purposes.
5. Special leases.
All existing pastoral runs (except when too small for the purpose)
are to be divided into two equal parts, one of which will be resumed
and the other granted as a pastoral lease preferentially to the exist-
ing run-holder.
Pastoral leases may be granted as follows: Term, in Western
Division, 15 years ; in Central Division, 10 years ; in Eastern Divi-


sion, 5 years. Rent will be subject to appraisement at not less than
in Western Division, Id. per acre for first five years, increase
of I for next five years, and increase of i for residue ; in Eastern
Division, l£d. per acre for first five years, increase of \ for residue ;
in Eastern Division, Id. per acre. Eight of renewal for five years
(subject to possible increase of rent) and of surrender at expiration
of any five years. Pastoral leases may be transferred.
Occupation licenses may be obtained for resumed areas or vacant
land. They are to be granted preferentially to a run-holder over
the resumed area of his run. Subject to appraisement, the license
is to be not less than £2 per section of 640 acres. They are to be
granted for each year ending December 31, and the rates, when
appraised, are to be published. Failing exercise of preferential
right by run-holder, they will be disposed of by auction or tender.
On lease or sale of the land comprised in occupation licenses, the
same to be cancelled, pro tanto , the license fees paid in advance
being refunded, and compensation made for impro\ements.
In the Western Division, homestead leases may be granted
within resumed areas or of vacant lands in areas not less than 5,760
acres nor exceeding 10,240 acres. Term. —15 years, with same
right to extension or renewal as pastoral leases. Bent Same as
pastoral leases in Western Division (see above). Fencing must be
done within two years. The holder must reside upon the land lor
at least six months of each of the first five years of the term. No
Pastoral lessees to hold a homestead lease or vice versa, nor
shall any person hold more than one homestead lease. Home-
stead leases may be transferred only when residence condition
fulfilled.
Leases may be granted by auction or tender in areas not exceed-
ing 1,920 acres. Term. —Current year ending on any December
3L Minimum Rental—£2 per section of 640 acres. Renewal—
They may be renewed subject to increased rent, if exacted. N.B.
Land so leased is nevertheless open to sale, or to special or
conditional lease.
Special leases may be granted of scrub lands in areas not less
than 640 acres, nor exceeding 10,240 acres. Term, 15 years.
Rent not less than 2s. 6d. per section of 640 acres for first five
years, ss. the next, and £1 for last five years, subject to certain
conditions for clearing the scrub. Special leases may be also
granted for wharves, jetties, irrigation, tramways, and other special
purposes.
Id will, therefore, be seen that land can be easily obtained lor


either agricultural or pastoral purposes, in portions and blocks well
adapted to their respective requirements.
I shall say little with reference to internal navigation, as nothing
has been done in the canalisation of the rivers. The difficulty of
ensuring a sufficient navigable depth of water in all seasons has
been thought too great to overcome. The Murray, Murrumbidgee,
and Darling Eivers are navigable for vessels of light draught for
very considerable distances, but the navigation is intricate, tedious,
and difficult. In all probability, however, works would have been
projected and carried out to effect an amelioration, had the whole of
the territory through which these waters flow belonged to the same
Colony, and it would not be popular for Governments to expend
large sums of money when the effect would be to carry their trade
to another Colony.
The rivers flowing to the Pacific are only navigable for short
distances, and have towns situated upon them which are chiefly
supported by a coasting trade. The Government have wisely
secured the services of Sir John Coode, one of the most eminent
authorities of the day on the subject of dock and ocean harbour
works, to examine and report on the entrances to the Hunter,
Richmond, Clarence, Macleay and Manning Eivers. The coast is
well lighted its whole distance, and storm signals placed on all the
principal promontories are connected with the metropolis by
telegraph; in short, the best and most scientific appliances have
been everywhere carried out for the convenience and safety of the
colonial mariner.
Where, however, rivers are not naturally adapted to navigation,
railways become an absolute necessity, otherwise competition with
other countries would be impracticable, and the limit of useful area
circumscribed. And here it may be remarked that while the depth
of Australian rivers is not generally sufficient for steam-boats, coal,
the source of the power of the locomotive is exceedingly cheap
and plentiful, thus comparatively compensating the hindrance to
colonisation which the want of navigable rivers would otherwise
make.
The first fourteen miles of railway, viz., from Sydney to Para-
matta, was opened in 1855. This line was over five years in con-
struction, the first sod having been turned on July 8,1850. It was
built by a private company, but owing to the gold discovery and
the consequent increase in the price of labour, the Government had
to take over the company’s property in 1855. At the same period
the Government purchased the Newcastle and West Maitland Com-


pany’s property, which is the commen«ement of thereat Northern
hne This was thirty years ago, and New South Wales has now
1,760 miles of railway open for traffic, and several hundreds of miles
possibly be brought forward to prove the
material progress of the Colony than the fact that the improve
means of transit has made a difference in the rate of carnage °
general merchandise from Sydney to Orange, the centre of the
agricultural district, of at least £2O per ton.
& The railways are in the hands of the Government, ami. are prin-
cipally three great trunk lines, Western, Southern and Norther • .
The Great Western line is now open to Bourke a distance of 508
miles with a branch from Wallerawang to Mudgee The Grea
Southern! running to the Victorian border at Albury, on the
Murray River, 886 miles from Sydney, which is there navi S a ®*
It there ioins the Victorian system of railways, which runs to il
bourne, thus establishing direct communication between the two
•11 a iovirney of 576 miles, and which is run m about !•i
hours, or, including stoppages, at the rate of nearlythmty mdes an
hour There is a branch line from Murramburrah to Hay, which is
tM miles f rom Sydney. The Great Northern, which is not yet in
communication wfth Sydney, but which starts from Newcastle and
is open to Tenterfield, 880 miles from Newcastle, and near the
Queensland border. There is also a branch running to Nairabn,
distant from Newcastle 252 miles.
These railways touch nearly all the important towns and centres
, ~, the Co i„nv. The Great Western passes through
vineyards and orangeries to Penrith and Gum Plains, where it
begins the ascent of the Blue Mountain range, the summit level of
which is reached at Mount Clarence tunnel at a height of 3,67 b
feet and thence it descends by the great Zigzag into the Lithgow
Valley, where there are collieries, ironworks, potteries, and ma y
othe/industrial works. In crossing the mountains the engineering
works are necessarily very heavy and costly, but they have been
well designed, and constructed in the most substantial manner, and
the line carries, even at the present time, an enormous amount ot
Here again, I must make a comparison with the former state of
things These Blue Mountains, which during the first twenty-five
years of the Colony’s existence were such an impenetrable barnei
against the interior ot the country to the Z
traversed in a few hours. It seems incredible that this moun


famous region, now passed over so easily, should be the one from
which Hacking returned, after an absence of seven days, stating “ he
had gone twenty miles farther than any other European, and that
an impassable barrier seemed fixed to the westward, and little hope
was left of extending cultivation beyond the limits of the county of
Cumberland.” Mr. Barrallier, a French gentleman, who came out
as an ensign in the New South Wales Corps, tried to gain the
summit, but failed. He gave the Governor a most graphic account
of the difficulties he encountered, and reported the mountains as im-
passable, Mr. Mann made a serious attempt to force a passage across,
but returned baffled, and described the difficulties as insurmount-
able. He says: “ Were it not for the existence of such insurmount-
able obstacles, is it to be supposed that persons, who have resided
above twenty years within sight of this Alpine chain of hills, would
have so long suppressed a curiosity, of the existence of which every
day gives some evidence, and have remained so totally uninformed as
to the nature of a country from which the most distant part of the set-
tlement is far from being remote ? Or is it probable that the settlers,
who reside at the very base of the mountains, would so long have
remained ignorant of the space on the other side if such impossible
impediments did not intervene ? ” I give these statements to show
what the difficulties were that had to be surmounted in first making
a common road, and afterwards a railway. Until this latter was
accomplished, trade with the interior was on a very limited scale,
and while the construction of railways has imposed a heavy
debt on the Colony, it is neutralised by the revenue the railways
furnish, which is about per cent, on the capital, after deducting
working expenses. A complete railway system being a necessity,
as in no other way can the resources of a country without internal
navigation be accomplished and its wealth made available, the
sooner it is done the better; even should the new lines running
far into the interior not pay working expenses for several years.
The experience of Europe and America has been that traffic
follows the railway, and this has been the case throughout New
South Wales. The debt for their construction has been wisely
contracted, and New South Wales railways, if they were to be
sold, would fetch more money than they have cost to construct.
It is, however, much better they should be Government property,
because, on paying more interest than the rate at which the Govern-
ment can borrow, the traffic rates can be reduced, thus benefiting
the entire country without making any loss in so doing.
A complete telegraph system is in operation throughout the


Colony. A message of ten words—exclusive of both the addresses,
which are sent free—is forwarded to any station in New South
Wales for one shilling. The establishment of these lines was soon
accomplished, as will be seen from the fact that while in 1871 there
were only 89 stations and 5,579 miles of wire, in 1884 there were
nearly 400 stations and 18,681 miles of wire. There are open for
traffic more than 28,600 miles of common roads, of which about 5,000
miles are macadamised. Mail coaches carrying passengers do a
large traffic, and run through every district.
Towns exist all over the country, and the cities of Bathurst and
Goulburn are the centres of remarkably fine districts, where farm-
ing is carried out on a most extensive scale, with good buildings
and homesteads. Villa residences are beautifully dotted about the
suburbs, the whole landscape having a permanently settled and
prosperous appearance.
The popular ideal of a squatter’s life is now only to be found in
the “ back blocks,” away in the far western interior. There is a
marked difference in the way of living to that which obtained
forty years ago. Ladies no longer live at the sheep stations in the
rude way they formerly did. They find it is quite as easy to have
things comfortable, and a station is rarely found nowadays with-
out its flower gardens and lawn-tennis ground, and a well-furnished
house with its piano and pictures. Competency and fortune have
induced refinement, and the eternal mutton and damper are
things of the past.
I should not be doing justice to New South Wales were I to omit
to mention the almost unexplored source of wealth she has in her
fisheries. With a coast line of 600 miles, with good feeding and
spawning grounds, with rivers and estuaries and inlets along its entire
distance —in short, all sorts of favourable conditions—and millions
of fish, the fishing industry is simply limited to the catching of a
few fresh fish for the Sydney market; and, even as far as this
goes, is without the conveniences desirable and necessary to
provide one-tenth of the quantity which could be disposed of in
Sydney. In a great measure this apathy exists through the
cheapness of butcher’s meat, for few people of moderate means are
willing to give a higher price for fish than they give for beef and
mutton. Nevertheless, a large industry could be profitably carried
out, if drying, curing, or preserving in tins were instituted on such
a scale and in a similar manner to those in approved use in Canada
and the United States.
Moreover, there are varieties of fish common to the New South


Wales coast which are far more delicious than cod or ling, or the
other dried fish usually brought to English markets. Mr. Oliver
says: “A Lake Macquarie smoked mullet does not suffer in com-
parison with a Finnon haddock, and nothing can surpass a corned
‘ moorra nennigai.’ Corned king-fish is far better food than half
the salt fish which is brought to us from a distance of some 14,000
miles, as though our seas were destitute of fish fit for curing.
* Barracouta,’ * schnappers,’ ‘ whiting,’ and many other descriptions
of fish which take the salt well could be named ; indeed, it would
be difficult to enumerate all the varieties upon which curative
processes may be successfully tried. On the whole, it may be con-
fidently predicted that enterprise in this direction will hardly fail
to bring about satisfactory results ; and it is safe to say that a
large home demand for cured fish would reward any well-conducted
experiments upon such fish as our lake mullet, herrings, tarwine,
whiting, schnapper, king-fish, jew-fish, taraglin, and sea-tailors.”
Mr. William Macleay has done good work in writing the history
of the fishes common to New South Wales ; and Mr. Oliver has ably
pointed out what may be done with our fisheries.
No stronger proof can be given of the material progress of any
country than that of having a successful commerce and an ever-
increasing trade. The development of trade in New South Wales,
and, indeed, of all the Colonies in the Australasian group, is one of
the most remarkable circumstances of modern times. The imports
and exports of Australia in the early days of settlement were neces-
sarily of the most limited character. Until the gold discovery, the
wealth of the Colony was entirely pastoral; and in 1850, which
was previous to the separation of Victoria and Queensland, the
former taking place in 1851, and the latter in 1859, the population
of the whole of the territory included in the Colonies of New South
Wales, Victoria, and Queensland amounted to only 265,503, export-
ing a value equal to £2,399,580, and importing a value of
£2,078,338, so that the total value of the trade at that period was
£4,477,918. This had increased in 1883 to £86,298,843, and at
the close of the present year in all probability it will have amounted
to over £100,000,000.
It is, however, with New South Wales as it now exists that we
have to deal, and while numbering something less in population, it
has again gone ahead of its illustrious daughter, Victoria, in its
imports and exports, as in 1883 they amounted to £40,846,175 and
in 1884 to £41,079,091. The expansion of trade will be best exem-
plified from the following figures:—From 1852 to 1861 the total


ds.
Outv
Tons,
Vessels, j
1,935,189
455,985
748,926
1,464,752
194,273
2,774
867 |
1,074 j
2,064
212
4,799,125
494,926
230,092
6,991
851
648
5,524,143
8,490
import trade for the ten years was £'57,650,058, and the total export
trade £43,125,653, together £100,775,706 ; from 1862 to 1871
the import trade was £84,832,363, and the total export trade
£74,148,876, together £158,981,239, and during the last decade,,
viz., from 1875 to 1884, imports amounted to £167,164,963, and
exports to £152,283,164, making a total of £319,448,127. From
the ten years ending 1871 to the ten years ending 1881 trade ex-
panded from £158,981,232 in the former period to £262,679,618 in
the latter, or equivalent to 65 per cent. About two-thirds of this
trade is with Great Britain and her Colonial possessions.
This wondrous expansion of trade necessitated a corresponding in-
crease in shipping. We find in 1871,1,891 vessels, equal to 706,019
tons, were entered inwards, and 2,133 outwards, equal to 794,460
tons; together, 4,024 vessels, of the aggregate tonnage of 1,500,479
tons. In 1881 there were entered inwards 2,254 vessels, equal to
1,456,239 tons, and outwards 2,203 vessels, equal to 1,430,261
tons; together, 4,357 of the aggregate tonnage of 2,786,500 tons.
It will be observed that, while the number of vessels employed has
not largely increased, the tonnage shows an increase of 1,286,021
tons, equal to 85 per cent. This is explained by the class of ships
now employed to do the trade. Formerly they were the ordinary
sailing vessels, but now these have been superseded by large
steamers averaging 3,000 tons, making three trips yearly. The
following statement shows the amount of shipping entered and
cleared in each Australasian Colony during the year 1883 :
Inwards
Name of Colony.
Vessels.
Outwards
New South Wales...
Queensland
2,071,048
426,506
755,839
1,499,579
194,829
Vessels.
South Australia
Victoria
Western Australia..
4,947,801
507,565
241,630
4,006,237
882,491
1,504,765
2,964,331
389,102
New Zealand.
Tasmania
Grand Total
5,696,996
9,746,926
1,002,491
471,722
11,221,139
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, is most admirably
situated for all purposes of commerce. Her harbour, for facility
and safety of access, capacity, depth of water, shelter, and


conveniences for shipping cannot be surpassed, and in all these
qualities it enjoys an undisputed Australian pre-eminence. It is
central to the Australasian group of Colonies, and the enterpot of
the South Pacific Islands. Well-built and extensive warehouses and
bonded stores front the shores of Sydney Cove and Darling Harbour,
which are divided by a long neck of land giving an immense
amount of water frontage. The city has attained very considerable
dimensions, and extends on both sides of the harbour a consider-
able distance—about six miles east and west, and four miles north
and south. There are 121 miles of streets and nearly 40,000
houses, and its population is about 300,000, or nearly a third of
that of the whole Colony. Here, again, I may compare it with
the Sydney of the time when Wentworth wrote Colonial history in
1819. Its population then numbered only 7,000 persons, now
swollen to the large number I have mentioned.
After much time and research Commissioners appointed for the
purpose decided that a water supply, sufficient for a growing city
like the New South Wales metropolis, could be best obtained by
collecting the head waters of the Nepean River. Their report was
most exhaustive and definite, nevertheless a violent opposition was
raised against it, and it was only after the various schemes had been
reported on by an English hydraulic engineer—expert in such
matters, to whom the matter was referred by the Government —
that the Commissioners’ scheme was adopted and ordered to be
carried into effect. These works, which will supply Sydney with an
abundant supply of the purest water until the population increases
to nearly two millions, are now being rapidly carried out, and will
prove invaluable to the metropolitan district not only for drinking,
but for sanitary and manufacturing purposes. The long tunnel to
connect the waters of the Nepean and Cordeaux Rivers with those
of the Cataract will be 4 miles 2,387 feet in length, of which
2,990 yards have been already driven, and it will be capable of
discharging 97 million gallons of water daily. The Cataract
Tunnel, commencing at the Cataract River at Broughton Pass,
will terminate near the road at Brook’s Point, and, when com-
pleted, will be 9,724 feet in length, and capable of discharging 155
million gallons per day. A sum of £’250,000 has been authorised
for supplying country towns with water, and about a fifth of this
amount has been already expended to meet the pressing require-
ments of the mining townships in the northern, and of many of
the principal towns in the southern and western districts.
The Frozen Meat Trade has already established itself, and, in


my opinion, is destined in the future to become as great a factor in
the production of Colonial wealth, as the wool trade is in the
present. The English people must be fed, and it is daily becoming
less possible that they can find meat for themselves. Population
increases, while the supplying power decreases. It remains,
therefore, that the countries which have meat in excess of their
requirements, or which can produce a practically unlimited quantity,
must supply the deficiency. This was fully pointed out to you
in a most able manner two years since by Sir Francis Dillon Bell.
The industry is comparatively a new one, but it is a great accom-
plished fact, and simply resolves itself, like a great many more
gigantic industries, into the price of coal. It may seem curious
that the production of cold should depend upon the great source
of heat, but so it is. Steam power is almost indispensable in every
industry, and about seventy horse power is equal to the production
of sufficient cold to insure the perfect condition of 10,000 carcases
of mutton in its transit from Australia to this country. If neces-
sary, Australia and New Zealand could send you a million tons of
meat yearly at a price which all could afford to pay. During the
early infancy of this great industry, progress must necessarily be
slow, experiments have to be made, better methods invented, more
economical appliances brought to bear, prejudices to be overcome,
with hundreds of other matters which tend to retard such a revolu-
tion in the meat supply ; but, if slow, it is steadily and surely
advancing, and, like the glacier in its sluggish course down the
valley, its progress is irresistible.
The religious, moral, and intellectual progress of the people
keeps pace with the great interests of the Colony generally, and
scarcely any district is now without its church and school. Every
religious body has its representative, and all are on equal footing
In 1862 all State aid was withdrawn, and the churches of the
various denominations had to be maintained by voluntary con-
tributions. The aid to existing incumbents was to be continued,
however, during their life. With this exception, no further State
assistance to religion has been given. The numbers of the
different religious denominations taken at the Census of 1881 were
as follows : —Church of England, 342,359 ; Lutherans, 4,836 ;
Presbyterians, 72,545 ; Wesleyan Methodists, 57,049 ; other
Methodists, 7,303 ; Congregationalists,. 14,328 ; Baptists, 7,307;
Unitarians, 828 ; other Protestants, 9,957 ; total Protestants,
516,512 : Roman Catholics, 207,020 ; Catholics undescribed,
686 ; total Catholics, 207,606 : Hebrews, 3,266: other persuasions,


1,042 : unspecified persuasions, 13,697: Pagans, 9,845. In 1888
there were 770 ministers of religion and 1,521 churches, with an
average attendance at public worship of 243,369 persons. The
Sunday-schools have 105,162 scholars on their registers.
All matters pertaining to State education are controlled by the
Minister of Public Instruction. School teachers are recognised as
civil servants and paid fixed salaries by the Government, and
during the year 1884, 1,875 schools, embracing 2,032 departments,
were in operation, comprising 8 high schools, 75 departments of
superior public schools, 1,550 ordinary public schools, 237 pro-
visional schools, 111 half-time schools, 40 groups of schools under
itinerant teachers, and 11 evening public schools.
The Public Instruction Act came into operation in 1880, and
since that period there has been an increase in the number of
schools as follows:—8 high schools, 17 superior schools, 518
■ordinary public schools, 4 provisional schools, 24 half-time schools,
and 40 house to house schools, or a total of 611. There has
been a decrease in the number of evening public schools of 36,
making the total increase 575. It will be seen that high and
superior education are being cared for and making satisfactory
progress. In addition to these are six other schools supported
or aided by the State, viz :—The Sydney Grammar School, the
“ Vernon ” and “ Biloela ” Industrial Schools, Two Orphan Schools
and the School for Deaf and Dumb and Blind.
The total school population in December 1884, between the ages
of 4 and 14, was 250,628, equalling 27’2 per cent, of 921,129, the
total population of the Colony. Of this total school population, about
two-thirds, or 168,466, were in attendance at State schools in 1884,
and about one-third received instruction in private schools or at
home. Of the children attending private schools, 24,786 are
reported to receive instruction in Roman Catholic Church schools.
To enforce the compulsory provisions of the Public Instruction
Act, 47 school attendance officers and two assistant officers are
employed. As regards the working of these provisions the principal
officer reports :—“ Experience has shown that in a large number of
cases of prosecution for breach of the compulsory clauses of the
Act the same offenders have repeatedly to be dealt with. This is
•doubtless owing to the fact that the fines inflicted are so very small
that it becomes much more easy to pay the fine once in a half-year
Ihan forego the earnings of their children or wards. In this way
numbers of unfortunate children within the statute age are being
deprived of even the most elementary education.”


Four hundred and six new school buildings and additions to 41
existing buildings were completed in the year, affording accommoda-
tion for 33,027 pupils. The material condition of school buildings
has been greatly improved during the past year, the new public
schools having been planned with a strict regard to sanitary
requirements. Great attention has also been paid to the lighting,
and the importance of securing good ventilation kept in view. The
total expenditure on public school sites, buildings, furniture, repairs
and rent during the last five years, or during the time the Public
Instruction Act has been in operation, amounted at the end of
1884 to £1,130,327.
The Sydney University was incorporated by an act of the New
South Wales Parliament in 1851. Its annual grant from the public
funds is £5,000, which is largely added to by special votes and
private donations, and notably lately by a bequest of Mr.
Challis of £lBO,OOO. Its council is empowered to grant degrees in
Arts, Law, Medicine and Science, and by Eoyal letters patent, under
the sign manual of Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, these degrees are
to be recognised as academic distinctions, and entitled to rank,
precedence, and consideration in the United Kingdom and in British
Colonies and Possessions throughout the world, just as fully as if
they had been granted by any University in the United Kingdom.
It has several denominational colleges affiliated to it, and consider-
able sums have been bestowed by wealthy colonists for scholarships
and prizes. A new University Medical School has been established
in connection with it, provided with laboratories, class-rooms and
theatres for anatomy, surgery, pathology, midwifery, materia medica
and medical jurisprudence.
A Technical College has also been established, under the direction
of the Board of Technical Education, which was appointed on the
Ist of August, 1883. The course of studies for the students, and
system of instruction adopted, is practically similar with that
employed by the City and Guilds of London Institute. The
college contains thirteen departments, viz :—Agriculture, including
agriculture, botany, and veterinary science. Applied mechanics,
including mechanical drawing, naval architecture, and metal-plate
working. Art, including practical plane geometry, practical solid
geometry, perspective model drawing, freehand drawing, &c.
Architecture, including carpentry and joinery, masonry, brick-
laying, carriage-building, plumbing, and cabinet-making. Geology,
including mineralogy and mining. Chemistry, including laboratory
instruction in practical and theoretical chemistry and metallurgy.


Commercial economy, including French, German, Latin, arithmetic
book-keeping, caligraphy, and correspondence. Mathematics,
including civil engineering, surveying, navigation, and acturial
science. Music, including class singing and instruction in
theory, harmony, composition, &c. Elocution, including art of
public speaking and reciting. Pharmacy, including materia
medica, and pharmacy. Physics, including natural philosophy,
optics, sound, electricity and telegraphy. Domestic economy, in-
cluding cookery and household management.
It also gives popular science lectures four nights weekly, in the
large hall of the Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts, for the benefit
of the working classes, and to induce young men to become students
in the college classes. Itinerant lecturers also give instruction in
all the principal towns of the Colony. The number of students in
the college classes amounted last year to 2,128, and at the annual
examinations of the Board 590 attended for examination and 350
passed. The instruction given is of a very high order, and has
been productive of excellent results. The fees are exceedingly low,
so as to give every opportunity to young men of obtaining a
thorough technical education.
The Sydney Grammar School had an enrolment last year of 898
pupils, and at the annual university examinations eight scholars
passed the senior and twenty-six the junior ; and all the scholarships
open to matriculation students were won by pupils of this school.
The Australasian Museum is an excellent institution, containing
large and comprehensive collections. There is also a Technological
Museum and a National Art Gallery, which has an annual Parlia-
mentary grant of £5,000, to be expended in paintings, sculpture,
and water-colour drawings. This is also supplemented by dona-
tions. Admission is free, and it is open on Sundays as well as week
days ; 262,861 persons visited the gallery during 1884.
The Art Society of New South Wales gives instruction in the fine
arts, and has annual exhibitions of original works by Australian
artists. Its management is under a president, vice-president, and
a council of twelve. It has already been highly instrumental in the
development of all matters pertaining to Australian art.
The Free Public Library contains 64,288 standard works, and is
of the greatest utility. During 1884, 99,782 persons used the
reading-rooms, and 62,095 borrowed books from the Free Lending
Library.
Public instruction in the early days of colonial history was of a
voluntary character, supported by payments of the scholars and


contributions from members of religious bodies. The State also
contributed. Thus the Female Orphan School was founded by
Governor King in the year 1800, and at the time Wentworth
wrote his description of the Colony, 1818-19, there were two
public schools in Sydney, at which 224 children received instruc-
tion. There were also establishments in almost every district
that had become settled for the gratuitous diffusion of educa-
tion. The masters of these schools were allowed stipulated
salaries from the Orphan Fund. Particular duties, called “ the
Orphan Dues,” were allotted for the support of these schools, but
they were found to be insufficient, and at a time when the entire
revenue of the Colony amounted only to £20,000, one-eighth of
this sum, or £2,500, was devoted to educational purposes. Two
private institutions also were maintained by voluntary contributions
for the dissemination of religious knowledge, viz., the Auxiliary
Bible Society of New South Wales and the New South Wales
Sunday-school Institution. Both these societies were established
in the year 1817. In 1831, when Sir Richard Bourke became
Governor, in his first address to the Legislative Council he recom-
mends the members to provide for such objects as shall tend to
improve the morals, and gives the greatest prominence to the sup-
port of public schools. He continued his interest in this object
during the whole period of his governorship, and recommended the
Imperial Government to introduce into New South Wales the
national system, which had a few years previously been established
in Ireland. The Imperial Government sanctioned this recommen-
dation, but considerable opposition was raised by the colonists.
Sectarian feeling was too strong to allow of the system being intro-
duced, and the fact of its not being denominational was regarded
as sufficient to justify its rejection at the time.
The limits of this paper will not allow me to follow the gradual
progress of the educational movement. Legislative action was
taken, boards of education were established, and a modification of
a national system established, and a great deal of good was done
under the Public Schools Act of 1866. In 1875 a general impres-
sion began to prevail that further legislation was desirable, and in
1880 the present Public Schools Act passed into law.
The dimensions this department has assumed I have before
briefly stated. It has brought a good sound education almost to
the door of every child in the Colony, and compels parents and
guardians to send children to school. It has placed higher educa-
tion within the reach of every one, so that Mr. Huxley’s simile has


been fairly accomplished, viz., “That a system of education, to be per-
fect, should resemble a ladder which, placed with its foot in the gutter,
should reach to the University.” All the greatest statesmen the
Colony has produced have been imbued with the same patriotic
desire of giving a good education to the masses, and the names of
Wentworth, Cowper, Martin, Parkes, and Robertson will be handed
down to posterity and blessed by future millions. “ Surely this
people have seen a great light.”
In politics, the history of the Australian Colonies demonstrates
the possibility of a people governed in an arbitrary and despotic
manner, rapidly changing into a self-governing and democratic
one without rebellion or bloodshed. It is true that during the
governorship of Captain Bligh his atrocities and oppression
weighed so heavily upon the people that they urged the military
commandant to place the Governor under arrest, but this was done
in the quietest and most loyal manner, and under the English
flag. This has already been referred to. Governor Bligh was suc-
ceeded by a most humane and upright man, nevertheless the
governing system was the same, and although in the West Indies,
Canada, and in other Colonies the elective franchise had been
introduced, there was no semblance of freedom in New South Wales.
Without freedom there can be little progress, and for many years,
although so favoured in soil and climate, South Wales remained
under the poisonous influence of an arbitrary government. The
energy of a people who have no rights and privileges is soon sapped,
or altogether destroyed, and the masses care little to own property
when it can be unjustifiably invaded, or to live in a country where
their personal liberty may be interfered with. It cannot, therefore,
be wondered at, that during these dark days little progress was made
in developing the resources of the Colony.
After thirty-six years, however, there came a change, for the
liberty of the Press and trial by jury were conceded, and the prin-
ciple of religious equality made law in 183 G, and we now find
that an irresistible movement is in operation for complete freedom,
which never relaxed its exertions until the Constitution was granted
in 1853, giving New South Wales absolute political liberty and
self-government under Her Majesty Victoria, Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland.
In 1817, at Sydney, the first Australian banking institution was
founded, with a capital of £20,000 ; but in New South Wales alone
in 1884 the paid-up capital in the various banks was £8,960,000,
with reserve and undivided profits equal to £4,771,005, making a


total of £13,731,000, while the deposits amounted to £26,259,419
sterling.
Only two generations have passed away, and, indeed, many
people living in Sydney at this moment recollect the time when the
-circulating medium consisted of dollars and dumps. The dump
was a quarter portion punched out of the centre of the dollar, thus
forming two coins out of one. At the present time a large
proportion of the gold coin used in the United Kingdom is made
in Australia, and I believe it is a matter of fact that Sydney and
Melbourne coined all the sovereigns which were put into circulation
in Great Britain and Ireland during the years 1881,1882, and 1883.
Many other matters should be spoken of, but I have already
overstepped the limits accorded to papers of this kind. It is
difficult to condense where the subjects are so numerous and where
all are so interesting, and this must be my excuse for the short-
comings which necessarily exist in this paper. I have endeavoured,
by means of statistics and comparisons, to give some notion of the
rise of the Colony and the material progress now in process of
such rapid development, and trust that, inefficient as it undoubtedly
is, it may serve to call attention to that magnificent territory which
in a few years will be the brightest gem in the Imperial crown. In
colonisation the British people have been pre-eminent. Their
language, customs, and laws have been established in every quarter
of the globe. The old Colonies of America have already developed
into an empire, with a population of nearly 60 millions, and most
assuredly Australia will develop itself far more rapidly. At the time
the United States declared their independence the population was
only three millions, or half a million less than the number of white
inhabitants now in Australia. For fully fifty years after the United
States had been recognised as a nation steam had not come to the
assistance of man either in ocean navigation or for locomotive pur-
poses, nor had the imponderable agency of electricity contributed
to our daily requirements. The greatest progress has been made in
the United States, “ in spite of war and wasting fire,” during the last
fifty years. Who can foresee or predict, with any kind of certainty,
the rapidity of colonisation in Australia, when the stream of emigra-
tion is diverted from America? As soon as the most fertile
portions of that vast country have been occupied, it is only fair to
infer that Australia will be the chosen part of the world to which
the rush will be made. Moreover, when a country has to count its
population by thousands, when it has doubled it there are only a
few more thousands; but when millions are arrived at, then the


doubling is another matter—as the late Mr. Dickens made the elder
Mr, Weller observe to his son, “it is like the horseshoe sum,
Hammy.” Australia has already three millions; in all probability
there will be six millions before the end of the century. Then, at
the same rate, some forty years hence there will be 12,000,000, or
more than the entire population of England and Wales at the time
the battle of Waterloo was fought. We may surely anticipate that
the destiny of the Southern people will be a great and glorious one;
that the country will become a “ Greater Britain,” or, as the
patriot Wentworth eloquently expressed it, “ a new Britannia in
another world.”
I have always felt most keenly the fact that so many English
statesmen ignore or refuse to admit the great importance of the
Australasian Colonies, and the necessity of preserving that inti-
mate relationship which exists, and which I sincerely trust will
always exist, between them and the Mother Country. Trade in-
variably follows the flag, and the truth of this is most conclusively
proved by the enormous proportions trade has already assumed
between these Colonies and England. Surely it must be unmis-
takably clear that such commerce is advantageous to the United
Kingdom, as it provides employment for a large section of its popu-
lation. In my opinion it is the duty of the English Government to
cause instruction to be given in the primary schools, not only upon
the geography of the Colonies, but upon the elements of national
wealth, mineral, pastoral, and agricultural, with which the country
teems; pointing out the ample field there is for the employment of
millions, not among aliens, but among their own people, in another
portion of the British Empire. This would very soon dispel the
ignorant mists which seem at present to surround Australia, and
moreover, would serve the purpose of a beacon light to indicate to the
aspiring and enterprising young people of the United Kingdom
another and a larger field for industrial occupation than can
possibly be found at home.
I would like particularly to impress upon the minds of all those
who have not yet given much attention to Colonial matters, that in
the Greater Britain of the Antipodes we have as perfect a system of
self-government as exists in the world, and probably as good a
system of primary education. Law is administered and justice
done as efficiently as in England. The people are loyal, intelli-
gent, energetic, order-loving, and in all things Englishmen to the
backbone, believing in the grand future of the British Empire when
federated and thoroughly consolidated. Their love of freedom has


been nurtured by the unrestricted constitution granted them, and
the bond of union existing between the Mother Nation and the
Mother Colony of Australasia, while tender and true, is powerfully
strong. They are thoroughly British in the manner of conducting
their business pursuits, and enthusiastic in their sports. In cricket,
rowing, football, Australians can hold their own against any men in
the world. These games, as well as the good old English sports
of racing and hunting, acclimatised themselves naturally, and
have taken as firm a foothold in Australia as in the United
Kingdom.
From the insignificant-looking acorn springs the majestic oak,
with his gigantic trunk and mighty arms, and so with New South
Wales. From the small and unimportant beginning in 1778 there
has arisen a group of States, forming a young and vigorous nation,
worthy in every respect of its illustrious parent, and not only will-
ing, but capable, as shown by the New South Wales contingent in
the Soudan, to assist the Mother Country in any Imperial enter-
prise, whether in peace or in war. The Royal Hebrew preacher
said in his wisdom, “If one prevail against him, two shall with-
stand him, and a three-fold cord is not quickly broken.” With such
children as Canada and the Australasian Colonies, united to the
parent stock, the power of the Empire must steadily increase, and
its commerce proportionately spread. Surely we may say, “ Happy
is the nation that has her quiver full of them : they shall not be
ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate.”
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS,' 71a, LUBGATE HILL, B.C.




