

THE LOSS OF THE STEAM-SHIP
“ LONDON.”
NARRATIVE SERIES.
A MONGST the many shipwrecks that occurred
-‘A during the disastrous storms at the beginning
of 1866, none excited so general and deep a feeling
as that of the “London,” bound for Melbourne,
Australia. This ship, launched at Blackwall in 1864,
is said to haye been one of the finest vessels of her
i'o. 1130


class that ever sailed from the port of London. She
left the river at the end of December, but met with
such heavy weather that she was obliged to take
refuge for a time at Spithead ; and subsequently
touched at Plymouth.
The vessel left Plymouth on Saturday, the 6th of
January. On the 7th and Bth it blew fiercely on
the 9th the ship lost jibboom, foretop-mast, top-
gallant-mast, and royal-mast. The large spars were
swinging to and fro with such violence that the crew
were wholly unabfe to* secure them. The state of
things became hourly more critical; but as yet no
person felt anxiety for the ultimate safety of the
ship.
About 3 p.m., a tremendous sea struck the ship
and carried the port lifeboat clean away from the
davits. All that evening and through the succeed-
ing night, the wind blew a very heavy gale, and the
sea ran very high, but Hie screw was still kept steam-
ing easy ahead. At 3 a.m. on Wednesday, the 10th of
January, Captain. Martin sent for Mr. Greenhill, the
second engineer (the chief engineer being ill), and
informed him of his intention to change the course,
and he desired that full steam should be got up
directly. This was immediately done. In half an
iour after the ship’s course had been altered, she
was again struck by a tremendous sea, which carried
way the starboard lifeboat, and the same sea stove
jn the starboard cutter. At noon, on this day, the
ship’s position was lat. 46. 48. n., long. 8. 7. w. A
very heavy cross sea was running, which caused her
to roll heavily. But no danger was even now anti-
cipated, and all through the evening of Wednesday,
and long after midnight, the ship continued to steam


slowly ahead, the captain and his officers remaining
steadily at their posts, and the passengers appear-
ing to have full reliance upon the skill of Captain
Martin.
At 10.30 p.m., on Wednesday, the ship still
rolling deeply in a heavy cross sea, and the wind
blowing a whole gale from the north-west, a moun-
tain of water fell heavily into the waist of the ship,
and spent its destructive force upon the main hatch
over the engine-room, completely demolishing this
massive structure, measuring 12 ft. 6 in. by 9 ft. 6 in.,
and flooding with tons of water this portion of
the ship. Instant endeavours to repair the hatch
were made with a promptitude and vigour com-
mensurate with the imminent crisis. Every spare
sail, and even blankets and mattresses from all parts
of the ship, were thrown over the aperture; but the
mass of water, tearing away the frail resource of the
moment, poured down the hatchway, and not more
than ten minutes after the hatch had been destroyed,
the water had risen above the furnaces and up to
the waists of the engineers and firemen employed
in this part of the ship. The lower decks were also
now flooded with the rush of water the ship was
continually taking in. The engineer remained at
his post until the water had risen above his waist,
when he went on deck, and reported that his fires
were out, and his engines rendered useless. Captain
Martin, with calm conviction, remarked that he was
not surprised; that, on the contrary, he had expected
such a result.
Finding his noble ship at length little more than
a log on the water, Captain Martin ordered his main ■
top-sail to be set. This had scarcely been accom-


plished when the force of the wind tore the sail into
ribands, with the exception of one corner, under
which the ship lay to throughout the remainder of
the night. The donkey engine was supplied with
steam by a boiler upon deck, and all the deck pumps
were kept going throughout the night, and the
passengers of all classes, now roused to a sense of
their imminent danger, shared with the crew their
arduous labours. Notwithstanding every effort, the
water still gained upon the pumps, and the gale con-
tinuing at its height, cross seas with tremendous
force were constantly breaking over the vessel. At
a quarter after four o’clock on Thursday morning, she
was struck by a stern sea, which carried away four of
her stern ports, and admitted a flood of water through
the breach.
From this time all efforts were useless, and at day-
break Captain Martin, whose cool intrepidity had
never for a moment forsaken him, entered the cuddy,
where all classes of the passengers had now taken
refuge, and, responding to an universal appeal, an-
nounced the cessation of all human hope. This
solemn admission was calmly and solemnly received —
a resigned silence prevailing throughout the assembly,
broken only at brief intervals by the well-timed and
appropriate exhortations of the Eev. Mr. Draper, a de-
voted Wesleyan minister, whose spiritual services had
been incessant during the previous twenty-four hours.
There was no screaming or shrieking by women or
men, no rushing on deck, no frantic cries. Dismay was
present to every heart, but disorder to none. Mothers
were weeping sadly over the little ones about with
them to be engulfed; and the children, ignorant of
coming death, were pitifully inquiring the cause


of so much woe. Friends were taking leave of friends,
as if preparing for a long journey ; others were
crouched down with Bibles in their hands, endeavour-
to snatch consolation from passages long known or
long neglected. Incredible, we are told, was the
composure which, under such circumstances, reigned
around. Captain Martin stationed himself in the
poop, going occasionally forward or into the saloon;
but to none could he offer a word of false comfort by
telling them that then’ safety was even probable. He
joined now and then for a few moments in the public
devotions, but his place to the last was on deck.
At ten o’clock, the ship still rolling deeply, an at-
tempt was made to launch the starboard pinnace, but
a sea struck her just as she reached the water, and
she sunk, leaving a crew of five men struggling for
their lives. As the ship was lying to, three of them
managed to scramble up the sides of the ship, and
the other two were rescued by ropes being thrown to
them. After this, the exhausted crew appeared
indifferent to their fate, and no further effort at
launching the remaining boats was made until one
o’clock, when, the water having reached the main-
chains and the ship evidently settling down, the port
pinnace was got over the ship’s side. Even at this
moment the sea was so heavy, that those of the pas-
sengers who were within reach of the boat appeared
to prefer the frail shelter of the sinking vessel to the
obvious dangers of a small boat in a raging sea.
At this crisis, Captain Martin, always at hand, ad-
dressing Mr. Greenhill, under whose command this
particular boat was placed, said, “ There is not much
chance for the boat; there is none for the ship. Your
duty is done; mine is to remain here. Get in and


take command of the few it will hold.” Thus
prompted, Mr. Greenhill, with his fellow engineers,
and some few others, numbering only nineteen souls,
among whom were three second-class passengers,
quitted the ship, with only a few biscuits in the shape
of provisions. The men shouted for the captain to
come with them, but, with that strong sense of duty
which was his chief characteristic, he declined to go
with them, saying, “No, I will go down with the
passengers; but I wish you God-speed, and safe to
land.” The boat then pulled away, tossing about
helplessly on the crests of the gigantic waves. She
had scarcely cleared the wake of the vessel, upon the
poop of which upwards of fifty of the passengers were
seen grouped, when a tremendous sea broke over the
doomed circle, who, when the ship rose slowly again,
were discovered to have been swept into the surging
waters. Another moment, and the vessel herself,
settling down stern foremost, threw up her bows into
the air and sank beneath the waves.
The pinnace was repeatedly in danger of swamping,
and had not been afloat two hours before a full-rigged
ship was seen to sail past them, but at too great a
distance to hail. Early on Friday they sighted the
sails of a brig, the crew of which overheard their
shouts, and stood towards them; but, failing to reach
the boat after making several fruitless tacks, she bore
away. At daybreak a cutter was observed at some
distance, when, hoisting a shirt upon an oar, they
endeavoured, but in vain, to attract attention. Shortly
afterwards the Italian bark, “Adrianople,” Captain
Cavassa, bound with a cargo of wheat from Con-
stantinople for Cork, hove in sight, and the captain
having observed the pinnace immediately shortened


sail, and lay to, preparing to tak ' them on board.
On reaching the ship, notwithstanding the stress of
weather and straitened means for the support of so
large an increase to his number, Captain Cavassa re-
ceived the Englishmen with unbounded kindness and
hospitality, supplying them with all that was neces-
sary in their destitute condition. The violence of
the gale had obliged Captain Cavassa to sacrifice
more than half his cargo, and, during the four days’
run into Falmouth, the weather carried away his rud-
der, and brought into useful requisition the sendees of
his English passengers.
After the pinnace had got away from the “ London,”
and in the brief interval before she foundered, a rush
was seen to be made to the two remaining boats, but
the efforts to launch them were ineffectual, and the
suddenness of the foundering at last—the “ London”
being an iron ship—prevented what might have been
a successful second attempt to save a few more lives.
Some heroic sacrifices were made. One of the
passengers in the boat, Mr. John Wilson, went down
into the cabin and endeavoured to persuade a friend,
Mr. John Hickman, from Ballarat, to attempt to
save his life by going into the boat; but, after being
intreated, he said, “ No, I promised my wife and
children to stay by them, and I will do so.” The
water was then a considerable height on the lee side
of the saloon, indeed over the top of the berths, and
he asked Mr. Wilson to help him in removing his
four children to the windward side, out of the water.
This was done, and then he shook hands with Mr.
Wilson, with “ Good-bye, Jack,” and parted from
his friend for ever. When last seen, Mr. Hickman
was standing in a row with his wife and children.


This occurred about an hour before the boat put off,
but probably they had perished by that time, as
the water had before then poured into the steamer
through her cabin windows; and when the boat left,
the sea was flush with the top of the poop deck, and
the corpses of drowned women and children were
floating oyer the waist-deck.
When the men were all in the boat, one of the
seamen cried, “ There may still be room: fetch a
lady.” Mr. Wilson then sprang over a portion of the
deck in search of a lady whom he knew, but not seeing
her, and knowing that every instant was precious, he
said to a young girl, “ Will you go ?” She did not
refuse. Mr. Wilson therefore seized her and took her
to the bulwarks; but, when she looked over the rails
and saw the distance which she must spring, she said
in despair, “ Oh, I cannot do that.” There was no
time for persuasion or parley; and Mr. Wilson was
obliged to drop the girl, and jump from the steamer
to the boat, into which he fell safely. The ship was
being carried over to the boat, towards which it
lurched heavily.
The captain, who continued to walk calmly up and
down the poop, after he had refused to leave the ship,
just before the boat put off, had the consideration and
presence of mind to give those in the boat their
“ course.” He told them that it lay e.n.e. to Brest.,
which was correct. Before the boat could be got off
it was in great danger of being sucked down with
the ship, which was rapidly settling beneath the
water. The swirl of water round the stern that pre-
ceded the foundering had already begun to be exces-
sive, and the boat was therefore hastily cut away. At
that moment those in the boat were piteously called


upon by a lady about twenty-three years of age, who,
with a face which was, it is stated, livid with horror,
shrieked out, “ A thousand guineas if you’ll take me
in!” But in that solemn hour millions of money
would have been accounted valueless, and to return
must have resulted in destruction to all.
Among the multitude that sunk beneath the waves
were two or three well-known names. There was
the Eev. Dr. Woolley, Principal of the University of
Sydney, a distinguished scholar, and highly esteemed
by the students under his charge and by a large
circle of friends both in England and Australia. On
the first Sunday of the voyage he joined Mr. Draper
in conducting a religious service, which doubtless the
two ministers purposed to carry on together. When,
however, the danger of the vessel became apparent,
and the necessity of all hands that could work being
employed was felt, Dr. Woolley took his place at the
pumps, working with all the strength his feeble
frame possessed, and encouraging others to do so
by his example and exhortations. There was also
Gustavus V. Brooke, a well-known tragedian. Mr.
Brooke exerted himself incessantly, occasionally going
to the cuddy where prayer was going on, and then re-
turning to the pumps, at which he continued to work
till all hope was gone.
Of Mr. Draper and his devoted efforts mention has
already been made. Around him in the cuddy sat
the women with the children reading Bibles, and
occasionally some man or woman would step up to him
and say, “Pray with me, Mr. Draper”—a request
that was always complied with. Up to the time the
ship went down, Mr. Draper, who sunk with her,
continued to minister to the people. He was heard


to say repeatedly, “ 0 God, may those that are not
converted be converted now—hundreds of them.”
The agony of suspense had been so long main-
tained that on the day the “ London ” foundered the
passengers were perfectly quiet and unexcited, and a
surprising degree of resignation was exhibited
throughout. Miss Marks, of Old Kent-road, London,
was at first almost frantic; yet when the boat left
she stood calmly on deck bareheaded, and waved an
adieu to Mr. Wilson. Miss Brooker, from Pimlico,
who had been engaged in comforting a distressed
fellow-passenger, was heard to say, as she clasped her
hands, “ Well, I have done all that I could, and can do
no more.” She then became perfectly calm and re-
signed. On Tuesday night, after the passengers had
been alarmed by the shipping of water, Mrs. Price, Mrs.
Wood, who had with her her husband and five chil-
dren, Miss Brooker, and Miss Marks read the Bible
by turns in the second cabin. There was a young girl
on board whose dying message has reached her mother
written on a slip of paper, and given to one as he
leaped into the pinnace with the request “ Give it to
my mother.” The peaceful message was—“ Dear
mother, you must not grieve for me: lam going to
Jesus.” A young man, who had been requested by his
minister just before he sailed to use daily a prayer
which he had given him, shouted to one who was in
the boat—“lf ever you reach land tell Mr.
(mentioning the minister’s name), that I have used
the prayer he gave me every day, and now can
say, ‘My Beloved is mine, and lam his.’ ” Some
weeks after the wreck three bottles were washed
on shore on the coast of France, containing papers
addressed by passengers to their friends, and


bearing the name of the “London” on.them. On
one paper was written—“ D. W. Lemmon, London,
Thursday, 10th of January, 1866. The ship is
sinking; no hope of being saved. Dear parents, may
God bless you as also me with the hope of eternal
salvation”—words indicating the calm and prayeiful
spirit of this apparently youthful person.
The “ London ” had 163 passengers on board, and
her captain, officers, crew, and servants amounted in
all to 89 persons; of these only 3 passengers and
16 of the crew were saved.
As we read such narratives as this, and mark the
number of souls so rapidly carried into eternity, the
thought will force itself upon our minds, Were they
ready to meet God ? There were some, we know, on
whose hearts, long before, the words must have fallen
with blessed effect: “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shalt be saved.” There were others, we may
hope, whom the exhortations and prayers of the pious
minister who spent his dying strength for them led to
Him who saves “to the uttermost” all that come to
God by him. Were there others —the impenitent,
the unbelieving, the unprepared ? We cannot answer
the question, and we dwell not on it.
But if there were these three classes, reader, let
me ask you, in which of the three would you have
been found had you been a passenger in the
“London ” ? What is your state at this moment before
God ? Are you as yet impenitent, as yet unbeliev-
ing ? And would you not have been in that third
class in the storm? You think, perhaps, that the
terrors of death would have roused you, and that the
stirring words of the minister would have won you to
Christ. It might not have been so. Terrible events


THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY :
sfi, PATERNOSTER ROW; AND 1(54, PICCJDISJLY.
\Price 3s. per 100. 1
and winning words have in themselves no power to
convert a soul. If they had such power, you would
not be what you are. For have not startling events
often met your eyes and ears ? And have not the
moving words of the preacher often been addressed
to you ? Ah no! it is not any thing external that
can bring you to the Saviour; the grace of God’s
Holy Spirit alone can do this.
I need not, then, have carried you into the midst,
as it were, of the terrible scene described. The
question is not, What would you have been then ?
but what are you now ? The day of the disaster is
past. God grant that it may solemnize and move
you to remember it. But the present, with its
many warnings every where meeting your eyes, with
the word of God open before you, with the preacher’s
voice still sounding in your ears—the present, is it
to remain a time of alienation and deathful separation
from God?
You need no disaster to bring you to your death-
bed and your end. All may be calm around you,
your health as good, your body as strong as usual;
and yet —and you know it—your call to eternity
may be more sudden than that of the 233 who
perished in the “ London.” Oh, poor sinner, bethink
you of your danger. Wait no longer, but seek mercy
ere it be too late. The Saviour’s blood to cleans*;
you is free and ready. That blood can justify and
save you. It can bring peace and heavenly joy to
your soul. The faith to believe in it and to be
saved by it is God’s gift. “Seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.”
