

THE ENGLISH ASSOCIATION
Pamphlet No. 79
The Novel and the
Fairy Tale
By
JOHN BUCHAN
July, 1931


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


THE ENGLISH ASSOCIATION
Pamphlet No. 79
The Novel and the
Fairy Tale
By
JOHN BUCHAN
July, 1931


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


THE NOVEL AND THE FAIRY TALE
I
I PROPOSE this afternoon to amuse myself—and, I hope, to
interest you —with something which rarely comes my way—an
informal gossip about literature. It is now a good many years
since I first became interested in books. But all my life I have also
been interested, professionally interested, in other things, so that I
have no title to speak on literature as a man of letters for whom the
written word has been the working instrument of his career. The
result of this imperfect absorption in the subject has been to make
my views on many literary subjects highly unorthodox. I do not
seem to have the right standard of values —at least I have not quite
the same standard as the authoritative critics.
( For example, lam of opinion that Middlemarch is one of the half-
dozen greatest novels ever written, but I do not find many people
to-day who have a good word for George Eliot. Again, I think
that the best modern English prose has not been written by pro-
fessed stylists, but by people like Huxley and Newman, whose one
aim was to say clearly what they had to say and to have done
with it—a creed which would be regarded, I fear, as a sort of black-
legging by most men of letters. Again, I think that, among English
poets since Keats, probably a larger proportion of Matthew
Arnold’s work will endure than that of any other; but I fancy
that there are not many who share that opinion.
But my chief heterodoxy—heterodox, I mean, as regards the
professional critics, not as regards the ordinary reader, who, I
suspect, often shares these views—my chief heterodoxy has to do
with the English novel. It has always been my secret view that the
English novelists of the eighteenth century were a little over-
praised—even Defoe and Fielding. But I think that the nineteenth-
century novel in England is one of the main achievements in our
literature, comparable with the Elizabethan drama. I should rank
without hesitation Sir Walter Scott and Charles Dickens among
the greatest of the world’s novelists, and I should class at least two
novels of Thackeray, one of George Eliot’s, and three of Thomas
Hardy’s, among the world’s greatest works of fiction.
I apologize for these egotistical confessions, but they have
brought us to our starting-point—the Victorian novel. It is hard
to say what is the special gift of our people in literature. Sometimes
I think it is for a kind of lyric; sometimes I think it lies in the writing
of history; but on the whole I believe it is for fiction. The Victorian
1 Presidential address delivered to the Scottish Branch, Nov. 22, 1930.


novel is the most typical product of our national genius. Now that,
I fear, is an unfashionable opinion. The novel, we are told to-day,
has progressed far beyond such jejune methods. To-day it is
weighted with a psychological profundity of which the Victorian
innocents never dreamed. They, poor souls, believed that black
was black and white was white; we now know that there are no
clean colours, but that everything is a muddy yellow. They
thought it their business to tell a story, but to tell a story is to shape
existence into an arbitrary pattern for which there is no warrant.
The true artistry of the novel, we are told, should be a thing of
infinite delicacy and precision, which can catch and register the
faintest whispers of the sub-conscious. It should take the whole
complex of life for its province, neglecting nothing as common or
unclean, and finding its unity not in any pattern super-imposed,
but in what the subject matter itself presents, if viewed with com-
plete detachment and sincerity.
Now, I am not going to argue against that doctrine, but I would
suggest that for the sake of clearness we should get a new name for
the work which it has inspired. These contemporary palimpsests
of sensations and emotions and passions may have their scientific
value, they have undoubtedly their literary value, but obviously
they belong to an entirely different class from the books which we
have been accustomed to call novels. There is no common denomi-
nator which enables us to compare David Copperjield with the fiction
of certain modern French, English, American, and German
writers. Let us confine the word novel, for our present purposes, to
the kind of book which the great Victorians produced, and dis-
regard the question as to whether it is inferior as a literary kind to
that which is produced by the new iconoclasts. It is enough for us
that it is different. A novel, in the sense in which I use the word, is
The Heart of Midlothian and Our Mutual Friend and Vanity Fair and
Middlemarch and Tess of the D’Urbervilles.
II
There is a passage in Coleridge’s Biographia Literaria which I
think puts very well the general purpose of this kind of novel. He
is speaking of Wordsworth’s poetry, and his words apply to any
great work of art, and especially, it seems to me, to prose fiction as
the Victorians conceived it. Its purpose, he says, is:
‘To give the charm of novelty to things of every day, and to excite a
feeling analogous to the supernatural by awakening the mind’s atten-
tion from the lethargy of custom, and directing it to the wonders of the
world before us; an inexhaustible treasury, but one for which, in con


sequence of the film of familiarity and selfish solicitude, we have eyes
that see not, ears that hear not, and hearts that neither feel nor under-
stand.’
From that sentence of Coleridge it would be easy to develop
a whole philosophy of the art of fiction. Fiction deals with ordinary
life; but, without ever losing touch with the ground, it must some-
how lift it into the skies. It must give it for us an air of novelty and
strangeness and wonder, by showing beauty in unlikely places,
courage where one would not have looked for it, the jewel in the
pig’s snout, the flower on the dunghill. A poet like Milton or Dante
brings cosmic sublimities within hail of our common life; a great
novelist makes our common life itself cosmic and sublime.
But we must go farther than the general purpose. If it is to
be attained, certain rules must be observed. Take first the method
by which life is to be presented. Certain modern critics of the
Victorian novel complain of its lack of realism. It sentimentalizes
life for us, they say, and fails to tell the whole truth about it. Life,
we are told, should be allowed to speak for itself, and not be selected
and winnowed by the arbitrary will of the novelist. The novelist
should be merely the medium through which the real world speaks
in all its crudeness and confusion. Well, I would remark that on
that principle you will get an inventory, not a work of art. The
business of art is to present life, the real point of life, and for
that selection is necessary, since a great deal of life is off the point.
It must clear away the surplusage of the irrelevant, the inessential,
the inorganic. It must provide the only true kind of picture, which
is an interpretation.
The real objection of these critics is, I think, that the Victorians
were not ugly enough. They did not believe that the pathological
was the most important thing in the world, and that the most
characteristic thing about a house was the adjacent dust-heap.
They were too deeply interested in humanity to be obsessed by
that side which humanity shares with the brute creation. They
were too interested in the human soul to give all their time to its
perversities and vagaries. They had a cleaner palate and a robuster
philosophy than their critics, and if they are blamed on this score,
then they must share the blame with all the greatest literature of
the world since Homer.
Again, they were not clever people, like those who decry them,
and in this they were akin to the ordinary man, who is nearly as
suspicious of mere cleverness as Mr. Baldwin. The trouble about
cleverness is that it is so rarely greatness. The clever person is much
more interested in himself than in anything else, and in whatever
he does he is always looking at his own face in the mirror. It is a


curious fact that since the War, which meant for all the world such
a noble renunciation of self, most of our poetry and fiction should
be so egocentric. The writers are perpetually wrestling with their
own moods and tinkering with their own emotions, and they
rarely rise to the self-forgetfulness of the greater art. The Victorian
novelist was sublimely unconscious. He was absorbed with life and
lived fiercely in his characters. He was not a showman exhibiting
a set of puppets, boring his audience by telling it constantly what
he felt about it all.
Now it is a futile business to compare incomparables, and the
work of many of our recent novelists, who are in strong revolt
against the great Victorian novels, is not comparable with them.
It is based on a different theory of art, on a different conception of
the novel. Brilliant and valuable as much of their work is, I do not
think that they succeed in what I regard as the central and domi-
nant type of fiction, of which the Victorians have given us the
greatest examples in our own or in any language.
III
But I want to invite you to-night to a different and, I think, more
fruitful kind of inquiry; and all I ask of you is that you fling your
mind back to the literature of your childhood. We have always had
story-tellers and makers of fiction since the days of the cave-man.
There is an eternal impulse in human nature to enliven the actual
working life by the invention of tales of another kind of life,
recognizable by its likeness to ordinary life, but so arranged that
things happen more dramatically and pleasingly—which indeed is
the familiar world in a glorified and idealized form.
That is the origin of what we call the folk tale or the fairy tale —
we need not for our present purpose make any distinction between
them. These tales come out of the most distant deeps of human
experience and human fancy. They belong to the people them-
selves, not to a specially gifted or privileged class, and they are
full of traces of their homely origin. They deal with simple and
enduring things, birth and marriage and death, hunger and thirst,
natural sorrows and natural j oys. They sprang from a society where
life was hard, when a man was never quite certain of his next meal,
when he never knew when he arose in the morning whether he
would be alive in the evening, when adventure was not the excep-
tion in life, but the rule. It was a dangerous world and a cruel
world, and therefore those who dwelt in it endeavoured in their
tales to escape from it. They pictured weakness winning against
might, gentleness and courtesy against brutality, brains as against
mere animal strength, the one chance in a hundred succeeding.


Such things do sometimes happen, and the society where the folk
tales were born clung fiercely to this possibility, because on it
depended their hope of a better time. Like Malvolio, they ‘thought
nobly of the soul’. The true hero in all the folk tales and fairy tales
is not the younger son, or the younger daughter, or the stolen
princess, or the ugly duckling, but the soul of man. It was a world
where a great deal of discomfort and sorrow had to be borne, and
where the most useful virtue was the passive virtue of fortitude; but
in the folk tales it is not this passive virtue that is exalted, but daring,
boldness, originality, brains —because the people who made them
realized that the hope of humanity lay not in passivity but in action.
The appeal of such stories has not been lessened by time. In one
form or other they have delighted youth for a thousand years and
more. Poets and artists have borrowed from them and made
elaborate artistic creations out of their simplicities. Their appeal
is to every class and age; indeed they form a kind of corpus of
popular philosophy. But the particular point I want to make is
this: in a sophisticated society something more is wanted than
the simple folk tale, and that something is the novel. My argu-
ment is that only in so far as the novel is a development of and
akin to the folk and fairy tale does it fully succeed, and that it is in
this kinship that the virtue of the great Victorian novels especially
lies.
I observe about these novels that in the first place they tell a good
story —something which grips and enthrals the reader, with true
drama and wonder in it. In the second place they are full of
characters recognizable as real types, and they pass judgements on
these characters; that is, the story-teller regards some as definitely
good and some as definitely bad. In the third place, their method
of reproducing reality is not that of an inventory of details, but of
a judicious selection. In the fourth place, the story-teller is pri-
marily interested in the events he has to tell of, and not in what the
jargon of to-day calls his ‘reactions’ to them. He does not stop to
obtrude his own moods. Lastly, he has a dominant purpose, a
lesson, if you like, to teach, a creed to suggest, the nature of which
we shall consider later.
Now all these things the great Victorians had. Most of these
things their critics lack. All these things the folk tales possess. Let
us look a little farther into them.
IV
First for the story. I believe that there are only a very limited
number of good plots in the world, though you have endless
variations of them. That was more or less the idea of the Greek


dramatists; it seems to have been more or less the idea of Shake-
speare ; and it is more or less the idea of the great novelists. It
is curious, if you consider the classic novels, how limited is the
number of motives. Moreover, I think you will find them all
already in the folk tales. Let us make a short list of them.
There is first of all what we may call the picaresque motive, the
story based on extension in space, on the fact that the world
is very wide, and that there are a great many odd things in it. A
young man sets out to seek his fortune; an ill-treated child runs
away from its stepmother; a pretty girl is driven into the forest.
There are endless variations on the subject. The hero may be the
pure adventurer in the void, waiting to see what turns up; or he
may have a serious quest to find something or somebody that is
lost, to unravel a mystery, to marry a lady the fame of whose
beauty has reached him. And the thing may be done seriously or
in a spirit of comedy. It may stick close to earth or adventure into
the clouds. The road may be a pleasant and bustling highway
running past windmills and gardens and farms and little towns,
or a mysterious path through enchanted forests. The one thing
common to them all is the conviction that the world is full of sur-
prising things and that anything may happen to the adventurer.
Open Grimm, or Perrault, or any of the great folk tale collec-
tions, and you will find a multitude of examples in this class.
‘Little Brother and Little Sister’, ‘Hop o’ my Thumb’, ‘The Little
Tailor’, ‘The Two Brothers’, ‘Puss in Boots’, ‘The Sleeping Beauty’
are a few of the most familiar. In fiction we have Don Quixote and
Gil Bias', we have Tom Jones and The Cloister and the Hearth. When
D’Artagnan rides to the sea he is doing what the people in folk
tales did. So is Mr. Polly when he sets out on his travels, and so
is Mr. Pickwick when he mounts the Rochester coach.
Next there is the motive which Aristotle said was one of the
chief things in drama, and which he called Peripeteia, or Reversal
of Fortune. It is the commonest subject of the folk tales. We can
picture the peasant in the Middle Ages, groaning under the exac-
tions of kings and nobles and churchmen and accustomed to see
proud cavalcades drive him off the road into the ditch, consoling
himself with tales which told how the mighty were brought low,
and grace was given to the humble. And we can imagine the
peasant’s son, full of young ambitions which he sees no way to
attain, being cheered by the tales of swineherds who became
kings, and goose-girls who became princesses, and the plain
fighting man who married the Sophy of Egypt’s daughter. It is
a very old motive and a very modern one. You will find it in the
Bible, in the stories of Ruth and Saul and David, and of Nebuchad


nezzar the King; you can find it in the latest trashy feuilleton, in
which the beautiful kitchen-maid becomes a duchess. Very closely
connected with it is another theme which Aristotle made the
second staple of tragedy, and which he called Anagnorisis or
Recognition. That is, so to speak, the proper climax of Reversal
of Fortune, and you find it alike in the greatest and crudest of tales.
Its crude form is the child changed at nurse, the missing heir with
the strawberry mark on his arm, and all the business which con-
cludes with ‘You are my long lost brother!’ The mere fact that
you find it in the most elementary literature which possesses any
popular appeal seems to suggest that it is rooted in something very
deep in human nature. The reason is obvious. It is the most
dramatic form of happy ending. One look is given, one word is
spoken, and the prince who has been a swine-herd is a prince again,
while the usurper is cast out upon the world.
The folk tales based on Reversal of Fortune are among the best.
At the top I should put one which is not a folk tale at all, but the
invention of a modern writer, Hans Andersen’s ‘Ugly Duckling’.
It is modern, but it is in the true folk tradition. Among the old
stories I would cite ‘The Hut in the Forest’, ‘The Goose Girl’,
and ‘Cinderella’. If you want parallels from the great Victorians I
would suggest Guy Mamering and The Antiquary, and Ivanhoe from
the beginning of the era, and Thomas Hardy’s The Mayor of
Casterbridge from the close. Mr. Hardy is always very near the soil
and the traditions of the soil, and the ascent of Donald Farfrae and
the descent of Michael Henchard are in the true folk spirit.
The third theme is what I venture to call the Survival of the
Unfittest, the victory against odds of the unlikeliest people. That
is based upon the incurable optimism of human nature. The men
who made the folk tales had no notion how it happened, so they
were forced to bring in enchantments of all sorts to make it
possible—fairy godmothers, benevolent old women, magic rings
and swords and shoes and cloaks. But they had an unshakable
conviction that it would happen and that it could happen, and
they believed in happily fated people who had more luck than
others, more courage, and more dexterity, who were somehow
blessed by the gods, and were able to perform feats impossible for
others. The popularity of certain film stars is a proof that human
nature has not outgrown this belief.
The theme takes various forms. There is courage against im-
possible odds, as in the stories of the conquests of dragons and
giants. ‘Jack the Giant-Killer’ and Jack and the Beanstalk’ are
familiar examples. Dumas is full of the same story, as in the deeds
of D’Artagnan and the Three Musketeers, and the death of


Bussy d’Amboise. Again, there is escape against all reasonable odds,
as in ‘Blue Beard’ and ‘Snowdrop’ and ‘Rumpelstiltskin’ and
‘Hansel and Gretel’. Enchantments are unhappily denied to the
modern novelist; he is not allowed to bring in fairies to help him out;
but you will find the same situation when Dugald Dalgetty escapes
from the dungeon at Inverary, and young Waverley is delivered
from the hands of the Gifted Gilfillan by the Highlanders, and in
Jeanie Deans’s journey to London to see the King. The scale must
be weighted against the hero in the folk tale; he must be the
youngest son with no patrimony, the poor boy with no friends. His
task must be made as difficult as possible, for how otherwise can we
get the full drama—how otherwise can ordinary folk be persuaded
that life has colour in it and a wide horizon?
One of the commonest varieties of this type is the story of the
uncouth lover who at first sight has nothing to recommend him.
You get it in ‘Bear-Skin’, you get it in ‘The Frog Prince’, in ‘Snow
White and Rose Red’, and in ‘Beauty and the Beast’. The hand-
some swashbuckling gallant is all very well, but the folk mind did
not think too highly of him. It suspected the obviously heroic and
preferred to look deeper for quality. In this respect the folk tale
has been followed in some of the greatest Victorian novels. What
is the plot of Vanity Fair ? It is the contest of two suitors for the
hand of a very tiresome young woman—the dashing George
Osborne and the cumbrous Dobbin, and the book is a record of
the struggle of the homely worth of Dobbin against the glamour of
his rival both in life and death, until at long last it is duly rewarded.
In George Meredith’s Diana of the Crossways it is Tom Red worth
who wins the glittering lady, not Percy Dacier; and in Mr. Hardy’s
Far from the Madding Crowd Shepherd Oak, after many ups and
downs, eventually is the accepted lover of Bathsheba Everdene.
Truly the folk tale has august descendants.
V
So much for the plot and the theme of the story. The next thing
to be noted about the great Victorian novelists is their handling of
character. Now, in the folk tale there is never any mistake about
the people. The characters are human beings, and represent
humanity in its central region, and not in its remote suburbs. The
old story-teller was not interested in freaks. He understood a great
villain and a great hero, but above all things he understood
ordinary men, and he makes them reveal their character in their
deeds, and does not make any pother about describing it. ‘lf you
cannot get hold of my people’, he seems to say to the reader, ‘by
seeing the kind of thing they do, then you are past praying for.’


Now this seems to me to be the very essence of good fiction. I have
read novels by able men and women in which the characters could
not get started to do anything because of the meshes of analytic
psychology with which their feet were clogged. Pages of torturous
analysis had to be waded through before the hero could kiss his
wife or eat his breakfast. The trick of dissecting a character before
a reader’s eyes seems to me abominably bad craftsmanship. The
business of the novelist is to make men and women reveal them-
selves in speech and action, to play the showman as little as possible,
to present the finished product, and not to print the jottings of his
laboratory.
Another point. The makers of the folk tales were not afraid to
pass judgement upon their characters. A man was brave or he was
not; he was kind or he was cruel; he was foolish or he was wise.
There is a school of fiction to-day which objects to passing moral
judgements on anything or anybody. It derives principally from
a really great man, the Russian Dostoievsky, and people have
praised his divine humanity which finds surpassing virtues in the
worst of rogues. Now, I have nothing to say against this impartia-
lity, though I think it may as easily have its roots in moral apathy
and intellectual slovenliness as in divine wisdom. Philosophically,
it may have its justification, but I suggest that since fallible men
must have their standards and stick to them, such detachment is
rather for their Maker than for themselves. In any case it is no
virtue in a novelist who can only get drama by strong contrasts.
The moral molluscs of certain fiction of to-day, who spend their
time, if I may borrow a phrase of the late D. H. Lawrence, in
sinning their way to sanctity, would have puzzled the makers of
folk tales, as they puzzle any ordinary man. The great Victorian
novelists have the same clearness of moral outline. They realize
that all of us are a compost of good and bad, but that the orienta-
tion of certain men and women is as clearly towards evil as that of
others is towards good, and they do not scruple to say so.
One last word on the question of character. The folk tale is not
afraid of greatness. It believes that humanity is not a drab collec-
tion of mediocrities, but that nearly everybody has some poetry in
him, and that it can flower at times into something which leaves
the earth altogether and strikes the stars. Because it believed in
human nature it believed that human nature could transcend
itself and become god-like. Its heroes are so full of vitality that
no giant or dragon or wicked stepmother manages to hamper
them in the long run. They go their appointed course with a divine
carelessness. They are immortal until they have fulfilled their
purpose.


Such a creed springs from optimism about human nature, and
I do not think that any great imaginative writer has been without
it. The power of creating a figure which, while completely human,
seems to soar beyond humanity, is the most certain proof of genius.
In such cases the creator seems to be dominated by his creation.
It takes charge of him and has an independent life of its own over
which he has no control.
There are two characters which seem to me to have taken charge
of Shakespeare —Cleopatra and Falstaff. Whenever Cleopatra
appears she dominates the scene, and the author is only a curtain-
raiser in the wings. She and Antony both die, but speaking for
myself, while I believe in Antony’s death, I do not believe in
Cleopatra’s. As for Falstaff, it is a platitude to say that he got
completely out of Shakespeare’s control. The time came in the
beginning of Henry V, when Shakespeare wished to dismiss him to
make room for his reformed hero, and in order to wean the reader’s
affections from him it was necessary to degrade him. But Falstaff
obstinately refuses to go, and all Shakespeare’s art cannot degrade
him. As Professor Bradley says, ‘Shakespeare created so extra-
ordinary a being and fixed him so firmly on his intellectual
throne that when he sought to dethrone him, he could not. A
moment comes when we are to look at Falstaff in a serious light,
and the comic hero is to figure as a baffled schemer, but we cannot
make the required change either in our attitude or our sympathies.
We wish Henry a glorious reign and much joy of his hypocritical
politicians, lay and clerical; but our hearts go with Falstaff to the
Fleet, or if necessary to Arthur’s bosom, or wheresomever he is.’
Let me offer you one or two other instances. There is Becky
Sharp. Becky is too much for Thackeray. She is a little green-
eyed, false, cold-hearted wretch, but vitality has nothing to do
with morals. She keeps the stage to the end of the book and holds
our sympathies even when she is deservedly punished; while
Amelia Sedley, though her creator may sentimentalize as much as
he pleases about her sweetness, remains a doll stuffed with sawdust.
Take Andrew Fairservice in Rob Roy. No sooner had Scott
created him than he obviously began to dislike him, and he depicts
him in all kinds of meannesses and cruelties. But our interest in
the worthless Andrew does not ebb. He has only to appear on the
stage and he blankets everybody else, even Bailie Nicol Jarvie and
Rob Roy himself. Or take Trollope’s Mrs. Proudie. You remem-
ber that in the Last Chronicle of Barset she suddenly dies. A friend
once told me that he remembered the publication of the novel.
One man would go up to another in the club and say, ‘They tell
me that Mrs. Proudie is dead. I don’t believe a word of it.’


So, too, with two at least of Dickens’s characters, Mr. Pickwick
and Sairey Gamp. Mr. Pickwick, as Mr. Chesterton has pointed out,
is simply the fairy prince, unconquerable, immortal, stumbling into
troubles only to soar above them. Happily Dickens never tried to
kill Mr. Pickwick, for he would have found it impossible. We could
have believed in most things which he chose to tell us, but never
in Mr. Pickwick’s death. But a greater instance is Sairey Gamp.
Actually she is a dreadful being, drunken, fraudulent, avaricious;
but she is clearly immortal. Her quarrel with Betsey Prig is the
only scene in literature which ranks beside the scenes into which
Shakespeare introduces Falstalf. Imagine how the ordinary con-
scientious realist of to-day would have managed Sairey. He would
have made her squalid and revolting: he would have blinked no
sordid detail of her life; he would have turned her poor old rag-
bag of a mind inside out; and all the while she would have been as
dead as Queen Anne. As it is, nothing can kill her. She goes her
wheezy, alcoholic way, a certain immortal. We are not told what
became of her, and we do not need to be told, for she is as assured
of continuance as the Solar System.
VI
I will pass lightly over the other two characteristics of the great
Victorian novels which I have cited, and in each of which they
show their kinship with the folk tale. Both represent a world in
which the selective power of art has been at work. The Victorian
novel is often prolix but it is never confused. The main lines of
development are always crystal clear. Scott, for example, is fond
of pouring the contents of an antiquarian’s memory into his pages,
but when things begin to happen there is no prolixity. He selects
infallibly the details which print a great scene eternally on the
memory. So, too, with the folk tales. They never fumble. The
right details are unerringly selected. A proof is their enduring
power over the child’s mind. Young people are gluttons for de-
tails and have an acute sense of what is fit and proper in that
respect. They know that Robinson Crusoe found just the right
number and kind of things at the wreck to satisfy the imagination,
while they remember that that fearsome household, the Swiss
Family Robinson, found so much that every scrap of interest goes
out of the tale. And for generations youth has accepted the folk
tale as never blundering in this vital matter.
Again, both the folk tale and the Victorian novel have the merit
of being unselfconscious. The great Victorians did not lay bare
their souls, apart from the souls of their characters. They were not


concerned to preach a new metaphysic or a new morality. What
they had to give in that respect must be implied. Their view of the
universe is to be deduced from the drama unfolded; it is never
given in set terms. Thackeray, indeed, has sometimes the air of a
coy and sentimental showman, as in the last paragraphs of Vanity
Fair ; but this is a mere trick of his. His real views on the problems
of life must be looked for in the fortunes of Becky Sharp and
Dobbin and Pendennis and Colonel Newcome, and not in any
irrelevant interpolations. The Victorian novelist at his best was as
objective as Shakespeare, and as the anonymous folk tale.
VII
I come lastly to the greatest of the links between the two —the
fact that they have a dominant purpose and the same purpose.
The Victorian novels and the folk tales are not mere transcripts of
life—they are interpretations of life, and they are interpretations
of life in a hopeful spirit. In the folk tale the plain man comforted
himself in his difficulties by showing that the weak things of the
earth can confound the strong; that nothing is impossible to the
courageous and single-hearted; that the unfittest in the worldly
sense can survive if he is the fittest in more important respects.
They are a glorification of the soul of man, an epic of the resurgence
of the divine in human nature. They make the world a happier
place because they show it interpenetrated by hope and oppor-
tunity.
The great novelists do the same thing by subtler methods. With
them it is not the good fairy that solves the problem, but some-
thing unconquerable in the human spirit. They make the world
more solemn, for they show the darkest places in it. They show the
capacities for evil in man’s breast, the cruelty and callousness of
life, the undeserved suffering of the good, and the undeserved
fortune of the evil; they show the transience of human glory and
the fragility of human hopes. But if they make life more solemn
they also make it brighter. They enlarge our vision, light up dark
corners, break down foolish barriers, and make the world more
sunlit and more spacious. If they do not preach any single
philosophy they, in Shelley’s words, ‘repeal large codes of fraud and
woe’. They revive hope in humanity by revealing its forgotten
graces and depths. They are optimists in the largest sense, for
without optimism there can be no vitality. Thackeray, in-
deed, indulges often in a kind of gentle melancholy, but it is not
to be taken too seriously. His gusto, his delight in his personages,


gives the lie to his occasional pessimistic meditations, which in-
deed are only bits of self-humiliation designed to propitiate the
gods.
The optimism of such novels and of the folk tale is a profound
thing, for it is based upon a very clear and candid view of life. The
folk tale knows only too well the stubborn brutality of things; and,
knowing this, it is still prepared to hope. Such optimism is far
more merciless than any pessimism. Also it is far closer to reality.
A tale which describes any aspect of life and makes of it nothing
but a pathological study in meanness and vice is more fantastic
than any fairy tale. You remember Stevenson’s fable of the
Lantern-Bearers, where he pictures a camp of small urchins who
carry their smelly tin lanterns buttoned under their overcoats, and
reflects what asses such a group, sheltering in the cold sand on
a bleak sea-shore on a dark autumn night, must have seemed to the
spectator who could not understand their recondite pleasures. And
from the picture he draws a profound moral.
‘To miss the joy’, he says, ‘is to miss all. . . . Hence the haunting and
truly spectral unreality of realistic books. Hence, when we read the
English realists, the incredulous wonder with which we observe the
hero’s constancy under the submerging tide of dulness, and how he
bears up with his jibbing sweetheart, and endures the chatter of idiot
girls, and stands by his whole unfeatured wilderness of an existence,
instead of seeking relief in 'drink or foreign travel. Hence in the French,
in that meat-market of middle-aged sensuality, the disgusted surprise
with which we see the hero drift side-long, and practically quite un-
tempted, into every description of misconduct and dishonour. In each,
we miss the personal poetry, the enchanted atmosphere, that rainbow of
fancy that clothes what is naked and seems to ennoble what is base;
in each, life falls dead like dough, instead of soaring away like a balloon
into the colours of the sunset; each is true, each inconceivable; for no
man lives in the external truth, among salts and acids, but in the warm,
phantasmagoric chamber of his brain, with the painted windows and
the storied walls.’
You have the same moral in a verse of Francis Thompson’s:
The Angels keep their ancient places—
Turn but a stone, you start a wing!
’Tis ye, ’tis your estranged faces,
That miss the many splendoured thing.
and in some delightful doggerel lines of Mr. Masefield:
I have seen flowers come in stony places,
And kindness done by men with ugly faces,
And the Gold Cup won by the worst horse at the races,
So I trust, too.


VIII
The folk tale belongs to no one country or age. Many go back
to the ancientry of our race. They are part of the common stock
of humanity and are closer to mankind than any written word.
They are the delight of our childhood and they are part of our un-
conscious thought. I have a notion that things so long descended
and prepotent are not likely to be forgotten. I have a notion, too,
that any form of literature related to them, inspired by the same
creed, close to the earth and yet kin to the upper air, will have
the same immortality. To-day we are sometimes told that Scott
and Thackeray and Dickens, and even Thomas Hardy, are back
numbers, that they practised a superseded form of art, that the
novel of the future will be a far more recondite thing, tremulous
with meaning, profoundly ‘aware’, surcharged with subtle psycho-
logy, and that the old crude business of story and character and
moral preference and a cheerful philosophy is only for the amuse-
ment of children. I take leave to doubt that forecast. The other
day I took up a book of essays on the ‘Eighteen-seventies’, and I
found these words by one of the truest of our living poets —Mr.
Walter de la Mare:
‘The distant rumour that thrills the air is not only the sound of Time’s
dark waters, bu t is mingled with the roar of our own busy printing presses.
“As we are, so you shall be!” The very years that we now so actively
occupy will soon be packed up in an old satchel, and labelled “The
Twenties”; and our little hot, cold, violent, affected, brand-new,
exquisite, fresh little habits of mind, manners, hobbies, fashions, ideals,
will have thinned and vanished away, will steadily have evaporated,
leaving only a frigid deposit of history; a few decaying buildings, a few
pictures, some music, some machine-made voices, an immense quantity
of print —most of it never to be disturbed again. In the midst of the
battle maybe it is indiscreet to muse on the tranquil, moonlit indifference
of the night that will follow.’
It is a salutary thing to remind oneself that the judgements of
posterity may be different from our own. But it is permissible, I
think, to claim endurance for things which have the qualities that
hitherto have endured —things that are close to the tap-root of
humanity. I believe that so long as youth ascends the beanstalk with
Jack, and rides in the glass coach with Cinderella, and sets off with
the youngest son to seek his fortunes —that so long all ages will
continue to dance with Becky at the Waterloo Ball, and take the
heather with Rob Roy, and mount the Rochester diligence with
Mr. Pickwick. mim ■■■ imi ■ ■■■


A COPY OF THIS PAMPHLET is supplied to all full members of the Associa-
tion. They can obtain further copies (price is., postage extra) on application to
A. V. Houghton, the Secretary of the Association, 4 Buckingham Gate, S.W. 1.
THE FOLLOWING PAMPHLETS issued by the Association are still in print
and can be purchased by members. Price is. net, except No. 56.
1907-30
10 Romance. By W. P. Ker, LL)D.
11 What still remains to be done for the Scottish Dialects. By W. Grant.
a 1 English Literature in Schools. A list of Authors and Works for Successive
Stages of Study.
22 Some Characteristics of Scots Literature. By J. G. Smith.
23 Short Bibliographies of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, Shelley, Keats.
24 A Discourse on Modern Sibyls. By Lady Ritchie.
25 The Future of English Poetry. By Edmund Gosse, C. 8., LL.D.
26 The Teaching of English at the Universities. By Sir Stanley Leathes.
With a note by W. P. Ker, LL.D.
28 The Poet and the Artist, and what they can do for us. By G. C. Moore
Smith, Litt.D.
29 Bibliographies of Swinburne, Morris, and Rossetti. By C. E. Vaughan,
Litt.D.
30 Wordsworth’s Patriotic Poems and their Significance To-day. By F. S.
Boas, LL.D.
31 The Use of Comic Episodes in Tragedy. By W. H. Hadow.
33 School Libraries. By J. H. Fowler. [Reprinted.]
36 Poetry in the Light of War. By C. F. E. Spurgeon.
38 War and English Poetry. By the Most Hon. the Marquess of Crewe, K.G.
41 The Perspective of Biography. By Sir Sidney Lee, D. Litt.
42 Some Remarks on Translation and Translators. By J. S. Phillimore.
44 Sir Henry Wotton, with some General Reflections on Style in English
Poetry. By the Right Hon. H. H. Asquith.
5 1 Sir Thomas Malory. By E. K. Chambers, C.B.
52 De Quincey as Literary Critic. By J. H. Fowler.
53 The Teaching of English in the Universities of England. By R, W.
Chambers, D.Lit. With a Note by John Bailey.
54 The Continuity of Literature. By Edmund Gosse, C. 8., LL.D.
55 Some Thoughts about Verse. By T. S. Omond.
56 The Problem of Grammar. [Reprinted.] Price 2s.
58 Some Notes on Sir Walter Scott. By John Buchan.
59 On Expression. By John Galsworthy.
60 Fanny Burney. By Edith J. Morley.
61 A Shakespeare Reference Library. By Sir Sidney Lee and Sir Edmund
Chambers. Second edition.
62 Ruskin (and others) on Byron. By R. W. Chambers, D.Lit.
63 Tradition and Reaction in Modern Poetry. By Laurence Binyon, LL.D.
64 On the Relation of Poetry to Verse. By Sir Philip Hartog, C.1.E., LL.D.
65 A Question of Taste. By John Bailey.
66 A Reference Library : English Language and Literature. Second edition.
67 Lord Macaulay : the Pre-eminent Victorian. By S. C. Roberts.
68 The Northanger Novels : a Footnote to Jane Austen. By Michael Sadleir.
69 Presidential Address. By the Prime Minister, the Right Hon. Stanley
Baldwin, LL.D.
70 The Idea of an English Association. By Sir Henry Newbolt, C.H., D.Litt.
71 The Novels of Thomas Hardy. By J. H. Fowler.
72 Shakespeare: Politics and Politicians. By H. B. Charlton.
73 Colloquial Language of the Commonwealth and Restoration. By Margaret
Williamson, Ph.D.
74 Modern Oratory. By the Right Hon. Lord Hewart of Bury, D.C.L., LL.D.
75 The Grammarian and His Material. By J. M. Wattic.
76 Largeness in Literature. By J. W. Mackail, LL.D.
77 Some Thoughts on the Mayor of Casterbridge. By W. H. Gardner.
78 Christina Rossetti. By Dorothy Margaret Stuart.


OUT OF PRINT
Nos. i (Types of English Curricula in Boys’ Secondary Schools), a (The
Teaching of Shakespeare in Secondary Schools), 3 (A Short List of Books on
English Literature from the beginning to 1832, for the use of Teachers),
4 (Shelley’s View of Poetry, by A. C. Bradley, Litt.D.), 5 (English Literature
in Secondary Schools, by J. H. Fowler), 6 (The Teaching of English in Girls’
Secondary Schools, by Miss G. Clement), 7 (The Reaching of Shakespeare in
Schools), 8 (Types of English Curricula in Girls’ Secondary Schools), g (Milton
and Party, by O. Elton, D.Litt.), 12 (Summary of Examinations in English
affecting Schools), 13 (The Impersonal Aspect of Shakespeare’s Art, by Sir
Sidney Lee, D.Litt.), 14 (Early Stages in the Teaching of English), 16 (The
Bearing of English Studies upon the National Life, by C. H. Herford, Litt.D.),
17 (The Teaching of English Composition, by J. H. Fowler), 18 (The Teaching
of Literature in French and German Secondary Schools, by Elizabeth Lee),
19 (John Bunyan, by C. H. Firth, LL.D.), 20 (The Uses of Poetry, by A. C.
Bradley, Litt.D.), 27 (Poetry and Contemporary Speech, by Lascelles Aber-
crombie), 32 (On Concentration and Suggestion in Poetry, by Sir Sidney
Colvin, D.Litt.), 34 (Poetry and the Child, by J. Dover Wilson), 35 (The
Eighteenth Century, by W. P. Ker, LL.D.), 37 (English Papers in Examina-
tions for Pupils of School Age in England and Wales), 39 (The Reaction
against Tennyson, by A. C. Bradley, Litt.D.), 40 (The Study of Poetry, by
E. de Selincourt, D.Litt.), 43 (The Teaching of English in Schools), 45 (The
Greek Strain in English Literature, by John Burnet, F.8.A.), 46 (A Reference
Library ; English Language and Literature), 47 (The Normality of Shake-
speare illustrated in his Treatment of Love and Marriage, by C. H. Herford,
Litt.D.), 48 (Don Quixote, Some War-time Reflections on its Character
and Influence, by H. J. C. Grierson, LL.D.), 49 (A Note on the Teaching
of ‘English Language and Literature’ with some Suggestions, by R. B.
McKerrow, Litt.D.), 50 (The Light Reading of our Ancestors, by the Right
Hon. Lord Ernie, M.V.0.), and 57 (Wordsworth’s Prelude, by the Right Hon.
Viscount Grey of Fallodon, K.G.).
Any member having copies to spare of any of the out-of-print Pamphlets or of ‘Dialogue ’
by Anthony Hope Hawkins, or of Bulletins Nos. 1,2, 4, 5, 6, g, jo, //, is, 13,14,33,
38, 42, 43, and 4g, is requested to communicate with the Secretary, 4 Buckingham Gate,
S.W. 1.
Members can obtain further copies of the Bulletin (price 6d., postage extra)
on application to the Secretary.
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Oxford, by John Johnson
and published by Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press,
Amen House, London, E.C. 4
