

rrniE
I PRESERVATION OF HEALTH
j ( OR,
EVERYONE HIS OWN DOCTOR.
j| BINGHAM CROWTHER, ||
M.E.C.S., L.R.C.P., L.S.A., &c., London. i '{
i \ MS LORDSHIP THE BISHOP OF TASMANIA (HE. SANDFORD) ottupieJ the Ohair. j
{} }
{
{
> \
’* \
\ /
\ .*•
*.* >
PRICE THREEPENCE.
( )
\ \
<}
t (
( {'
faumania;
PRINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE.
) \
o
< Delivered in the Town Hall, Hobart, on Tuesday,
November 17, 1885, under the auspices of
the Y.M.C.A., BY




tn ji ss/p&i
16-577
THE PRESENTATION OF HEALTH
A POPULAR HEALTH LECTURE,
By BINGHAM CROWTHEK,
M.R.C.S., L.E.C.P., L.S.A., Etc., London.
Your Lordship, Ladies and Gentlemen,
A subject of such magnitude as the one I shall endeavour to place
before you this evening, embracing so many ramifications, cannot
be dealt with in the compass of one, nor, indeed, of many lectures ;
and I therefore propose to confine myself this evening to those
points which more closely affect ourselves, and the colony we live
in. Whilst there are certain laws of nature against which no
human effort can avail, yet, by a due obedience of other laws, by
prudence and foresight, we can mitigate many of the “ ills which
flesh is heir to,” and tend to strengthen and prolong the duration
of life, as well as to secure its greatest blessing—the enjoyment of
health. If these subjects were more closely studied, and better
understood ; if parents more carefully realised the responsibilities
resting upon them (securing thus the future health and happiness
of their offspring), much existing misery might be averted, and
the doctor become a less frequent, but possibly more welcome,
visitor in many a household. It is to the matters which come
under our daily cognisance (which may be more or less dealt with
by every householder and every parent) that I desire to draw your
attention ; and if the attention of all those interested be secured,
we should soon see that united action, termed legislation, brought
into force to deal with matters lying beyond the power of the
individual to accomplish. At the present time, in every Australian
colony, the most stringent precautions are being taken, and public
money spent with a liberal hand, to prevent the possible intro-
duction and spread of small-pox, and the people of Tasmania would
soon raise an outcry were their rulers unmindful of their interests
in this matter. Health officers have been appointed, every incoming
vessel is boarded, and its passengers examined ere they are per-
mitted to set foot on our shores, while quarantine stations have
been prepared for the prompt reception of any suspicious cases.
Yet, while we thus guard our shores against invasions of disease
from without, we have in our midst enemies none the less deadly,
because familiarity with their presence has rendered them less
dreaded. Is it not a fact that in the autumn of each year diph-
theria, typhoid fever, and low fever appear in many towns and
country districts to claim their victims, and yet, while we would
carefully spend thousands to keep out small-pox or cholera, we
ok with apathy, almost amounting to indifference, upon diseases


already in our midst —diseases whose causes are known and plainly
traceable, whose effects have been bitterly felt in many a family,
and which only require united and vigorous action to stamp out.
As I shall proceed to show you, there are numerous other ailments
and diseases, the causes of which are within our own doors, under
our eyes daily, and are often produced by our own indifference to,
or neglect of, the most ordinary dictates of care and prudence.
The subjects I propose treating this evening are those entering
into our daily life, and coming under the notice of every house-
holder and parent, including : —The light, the air we breath, the
fluids we drink, our habitations, clothing, and disposal of the dead.
THE LIGHT.
The first element we have to deal with is light, which has a most
important influence on all life, animal as well as vegetable. The
morning freshness is due to atmospheric changes, and should be
more highly valued than it is : the habit of early rising cannot be
too highly recommended, for it colors the blood, as may be seen
from the ruddy look of people engaged in outdoor exercises, as
distinguished from those pent up in close workshops. Light also
has the power of destroying cobra poison, and exerts a
marvellous influence upon other materials, chemicals, etc., by its
decomposing influence. Of artificial lights the electric is the most
valuable, being a non-consumer of oxygen. Indeed, it is almost
as useful as daylight, for it ripens fruit in the old country, and is
used by doctors, on account of its power, when performing
operations. A great danger exists in blocking out natural light
from rooms _by blinds, plants in windows, and other darkening
means ; for it simply means saving one’s furniture at the expense
of one’s bodily health. On vegetation generally the effects of light
are particularly marked, as the giving off of oxygen and absorption
of carbonic acid is arrested at night, and accounts for the heavy
atmosphere then. Thus an absence of the active interchange of
gases accounts for an increase in the number of deaths.
THE AIR.
Hales discovered that two gallons of air, breathed for two
minutes, became unfit for respiration. Black made the discovery
that this was due to carbonic gas evolved, —a fatal product.
Priestly, who immersed a sprig of mint in a bell-jar, found that it
had the power of absorbing the carbon and leaving the oxygen in
its place. Trees, especially the blue gum, also exercise this
influence, and should, therefore, be highly prized. These valuable
trees have exerted such an influence on malaria in the Pontine
marshes, and other dangerous neighbourhoods, that they are now
free from all malarious infection. The blue gum oil has also been
used for diphtheria in New Zealand, and elsewhere, and has been
found a most effectual remedy. Not only has it the recognised
property of other trees in exchanging oxygen for carbonic acid,
but it has a powerful volatile oil, and its roots absorb foul gases
and waters. The advisability of placing these trees in waste
grounds, and all unhealthy localities, is thus self-evident, at least
from a sanitary point of view. The good qualities of nitrous oxide
gas, in minor surgical and dental operations, and oxygen particularly


in throat and lung affections, is well known. It is worth noting
here that the cobra poison is now treated in India by artificial
respiration, it having been found that if air can only be introduced
in sufficient quanity into the lungs, the poison is thereby destroyed.
The effects of air at different elevations are of interest. At a
height the air is lighter and pressure diminished, thus causing
giddiness, headache, short breath, faintness, etc., brought about
by internal congestions, impurity of the blood, and loss of balance
between the external air and gases of the body. I well, remember
how, upon arriving at the summit of a high mountain in Switzer-
land with a friend, we became so overcome by the influence of the
air at an altitude of 11,000 feet that it became necessary to at
once retrace our steps. By cold air the active process of absorp-
tion of oxygen and evolution of carbonic acid is reduced:
congestions follow, circulation fails, soft structures shrink, and
vital forces are checked. It is a well-established fact that every
nine years the number of individuals over 30 years of age
who die in the cold winter w eather is the number of
those who die in the summer, Hybernating animals, the marmot
in Switzerland, for instance, and others go through this cold
stage in a dormant, semi-living state, to be revivified by
summer’s rays. Under the influence of heat, or hot air, both
nutritive and destructive changes are accelerated. The
muscles become relaxed, blood vessels dilate, while the skin, lungs,
and kidneys give out more secretions. This accounts for the value
of the Turkish bath, and its influence for good over gout, rheuma-
tism, and other diseases brought about by retention in the system
of morbid material. As a food, air nourishes orchids, and, attached
as they are to trees in tropical regions, they derive the greater
part of their nourishment by this means. Oxygen,the chief element
of air, accompanies the blood to all parts of the body, where it
supports nutrition, builds up new, and removes old, tissues. The
little red blood discs, or corpuscles, as they are called, are colored
red or blue according as oxygen or carbonic acid is in the blood. If
carbonic acid be retained in the blood and oxygen not inhaled, the
surface of the body becomes livid, short breath, muscular con-
vulsions, coma, and low temperature follows, if the inhaling of
oxygen be not immediately resumed. This is specially the case in
diphtheretic croup, when the air passage becomes blocked by the
croupal deposit, death soon resulting. I remember a case of
diphtheretic croup treated by myself at Launceston. The child
appeared to be dying, and it was only on the urgent solicitations
of relatives that I ventured an operation; but before the air
passage could be opened, breathing had ceased. _On sucking the
diphtheric membrane through a tube, and then introducing pure
air into the lungs by artificial respiration, the child once more
breathed. I have since learned that the little one is now in Queens-
land enjoying excellent health (more than two years _ after the
operation). The favourite mode of committing suicide in France,
as is well known, consists in burning a coke fire in a restricted
space, and inhaling the fumes. Again, when a coke fire has been
made in the poky cabins of small vessels, death has often resulted.
Death by drowning, it is hardly necessary to remind you, is caused
by water, instead of air, entering the tubes. The air passage has
often been blocked by a lump of meat swallowed hurriedly at


meals, hence one cannot over-estimate the importance of imme-
diately clearing the throat, even though death seems to have
occurred. While a student at the Hobart Hospital, a case of this
nature was brought in dead, and a verdict returned of serous
apoplexy by the jury, from the medical evidence produced.
An examination of the body during dissection proved death to
have been caused by a piece of meat sticking in the throat. The
removal of the impediment, along with artificial respiration, might
have saved this and other valuable lives. A knowledge of the
power of air diffusion is important. When gases of different
densities unite, the light ascends, but the heavy sinks. This
accounts for deaths occasionally taking place from carbonic acid
in the lower part of brewers’ vats or wells, during their cleansing,
the victims being individuals who have incautiously gone to the
bottoms of these places. Rheumatism, neuralgia, and consumption
partly owe their origin to damp air. In England, rheumatism is
very common, owing to the dangerous habit of the poorer classes
drying clothing in sleeping rooms instead of in the open air. The
French have made the discovery that measles can be produced by
moistening mouldy hay, a fungoid growth resulting. This should
make us avoid wet straw, or chaff mattresses, which, when dry and
sweet, are healthy to sleep upon. Whilst practising in the Camp-
bell Town district I was summoned to see some cases of supposed
fever. It seemed that while turning over a heap of damp hay the
husband became attacked with symptoms of cold, a severe
influenza, which rapidly communicated itself to the rest of the
family, producing the symptoms and skin eruption similar to
measles. There is no doubt but that this was due to fungoid growth,
the result of mouldy hay which had been turned over, and
incautiously inhaled. Consumption is common in those densely
wooded districts where there is a deficiency of light and too much
moisture. For instance, it is said that the police are known to
suffer from chest affections in certain localities, more especially in
the Huon district. Air assists in the production of animal heat,
through its oxygen being exchanged for the carbonic acid and
water in the lungs. Human beings are singularly adapted to
atmospheric changes, for when the air becomes warmer, perspira-
tion occurs, producing coolness by evaporation. Animals, too, nave
a special protection, in that their fur thickens at the commence-
ment of winter. The pollution of air by gas, lamps, stoves,
overcrowded churches, workshops, etc., is very bad in its effects.
At a certain church in Launceston, warmed and lighted
by gas, and lacking proper ventilation, the carbonic acid
given off by this means, and by its assembled multitude,
produced a torpor among many of the inmates before the sermon
was ended. The Black Hole of Calcutta caused the deaths of many
individuals in a somewhat similar way, while typhus in London
has its origin in overcrowding, fresh air being the most valuable
medicine for this dire disease. I noticed an interesting experiment
on board a vessel coming out from England to this colony, where,
through want of proper ventilation in the second-class compart-
ments, a fever broke out. On placing lime water in a saucer
(whichis an excellent test forcarbonic acidin the the air)—-theresult
of insufficient ventilation it soon became coated with a film of
carbonate of lime, proving the poisonous state of the atmosphere.


Whilst speaking of lime water, one cannot extol its virtues too
highly. To produce it, take a small quantity, say one pound of
lime, and add a gallon of water, in an earthenware vessel, and in a
day or two, when all sediment has settled, the clear fluid should
he poured off into bottles and corked. As the water only takes up
a very small portion of lime, constant repetition of water to the
same lime will yield a fresh supply. The value of fresh air is
known and appreciated in Germany, where that element is pre-
scribed in cases of consumption. Its beneficial effects were
strikingly exemplified by the Blandford tire of 1731, when 150
small-pox cases were removed to the open air, and none died. The
gases from drains and cesspools plainly show the necessity exist-
ing for traps, disinfectants, regular cleansing, and inspection.
There is a great mistake made, speaking from a health point of
view, in depositing rubbish generally in old excavations, instead
of removing it altogether out of town.
FLUIDS.
The fluids we drink constitute a most important element in our
being. Placing water in its order, we have distilled, rain, river,
and spring. The former two are soft, but the latter hard, con-
taining earthy salts and causing indigestion and gravel com-
plaints. Boiling would remove these imperfections, as will
be seen by the fur on the inside of vessels in which the
water has been boiled. 80 per cent, of water is required for the
body uses. It assists digestion, cools in fever, and its in-
troduction into the body in cases of loss of blood, as well as of
cholera, is of extreme value. The early morning glass of
cold water would save money spent in pills and potions,
and materially assist in promoting a natural habit. Water applied
externally also cleanses, for the lungs and skin discharge to a
certain extent identical functions ; and as 38 miles of drainage open
on to the surface of the body, it is evident lioav valuable must be
attention to this matter. Bathing imparts tone to the nervous
system, prevents skin affections, reduces the heat of typhoid and
other fevers, and is used for children suffering from diarrhoea —
the result of hot climates. In these and many other cases no drug
is so potent. Little children are allowed to play in tepid water,
and by a reduction of the heat on which their diarrhoea depends,
a cure is effected. In olden days the leaden pipes and vats used in
Devon, for the production of cider, produced lead colic, a serious
disease, and occasionally seen in the present day in plumbers not
sufficiently cleanly in their habits after work ; similar causes
produce lead paralysis. Newly-painted rooms have been known
to exert, in this way, an injurious influence. The cholera in
London resulted from springs being polluted ; while, in the same
way, the epidemic of typhoid in Campbell Town was due to the
stagnant state of the Elizabeth River, from which the town drew
its chief supply of water. This stagnant river in summer was the
favourite bathing place of all the town animals, but now the water
is brought in a permanent and ever-running stream from lakes at a
distance, hence few cases of typhoid have been heard of lately. The
celebrated hydatid disease, of which we hear so much, is due to
water being polluted by dogs. It is a disease common in Tasmania,


but not nearly so fatal in its effects as in Iceland, where one-sixth
of the deaths are due to this plague ; nearly all the Icelanders
keep dogs. The necessity of legislation in order to secure pure
water cannot be too urgently dwelt on, together with the wisdom
of a proper system of filtration over gravel,sand, and charcoal beds,
a process which would assist in removing worms that may have
some relation to those infesting the human body. Always filter
or boil water, for it removes these and other germs. Tea, fresh
brewed, is wholesome, but must be made with Avater recently
boiled, else the good properties (oxygen in the \\ r ater) are lost. The
habit of allowing tea to stand long, or of adding a little fresh to
that which has been made for some time, is bad, and causes
dyspepsia. All metallic pots are impure from the difficulty of
cleansing. Glazed earthemvare is free from this objection. Coffee
made from pure beans is a valuable nerve stimulant, and is
especially useful in the treatment of fever, since it forms an
admirable substitute for alcohol. For the asthmatic also a strong
cup of coffee is good, and will assist in allaying an attack. Cocoa
is the best of drinks, as it contains more nutriment, especially
phosphate of lime, than any other. Cocoatina, from which the
fatty matters have been removed (which cause dyspepsia in so
many), is a most desirable preparation. Cordials of all kinds, if
taken too freely, are bad. A safe rule to remember is—“ Take
fluids only when the system calls for them.” Even at meal times
it is well to observe this rule. Milk is the only fluid which, taken
alone, will support the body, for it contains all the necessary
nutritive elements, and, Avhen mixed Avith one-quarter of lime
Avater, is the best food for infants. About one-sixth of infants
Avho die do so indirectly from the starchy mixtures given them,
such food being unsuitable for the little ones, they having no
teeth or saliva to digest starchy materials. Some preserved
milks, such as Aylesbury or Swiss, take the place of real milk,
and are useful substitutes. Milk baths, or sponging with milk,
have excellent effects on some of the Avasting diseases of infantile
life, when the stomach is too irritable to retain food. The impuri-
ties of milk, hoAvever, are many. Typhoid, in this country, at
any rate, has had its origin in the dirty Avater added to milk.
Further, coavs kept in close sheds have developed consumption and
cancer, both of which directly affect human beings through their
milk. Were it not that the watering of our streets Avith
salt AA’ater Avas a source of danger to horses, and injured trades-
peoples’ things, I should strongly advocate its substitution for
fresh: it possesses good hygienic properties, and is a natural
disinfectant.
HABITATIONS AND VENTILATION.
We might take the gaol as a model. Its inmates have pure air,
an equal temperature, freedom from dampness, plenty of whole-
some water, Avails free from dust, drainage perfect, regular work
and rest, abstinence from alcohol and tobacco, simple fare, pro-
tection (from bad seasons), medical attendance, and supervision.
The houses of the poor, on the other hand, are low, Avails damp,
and dust accumulates. Whilst speaking of dust, it would be
well to note its power in scattering germs of disease—such as
bacteria and asthma. Poisoning by arsenic, from Avail paper con-


taming a green preparation, slioulcl also be avoided. Consumption,
in part, is the result of close rooms, where the breath and
expectoration of individuals are contagious. The latter should be
sent into a vessel containing some disinfectant. In dusting or
sweeping rooms the practice of using damp tea leaves is a com-
mendable one. Under the process of ordinary cleaning, the dust
ascends in clouds, and alights on every object in the room, after
which it is chased about by the duster. Tea leaves have the
power of absorbing much of this dust, and removing it. To those
suffering from lung affections this is a matter of moment, and it
is well known that the dust or fur from cats causes asthma. A
simple whitewash for walls may be made by slacking some fresh
lime and adding water while hot, with a little size. This is a
simple, cheap, and efficient preparation for walls, more wholesome
than paint or paper, and can be easily done twice a year. Floors,
when washed with too much water, instead of being dry scrubbed,
are apt to produce damp air—an unhealthy product. The lack of
ventilation in many houses is a potent source of disease. A common
habit exists of closing up the fireplace completely with an orna-
mental screen, whereas if a coarse canvas or scrim one were used
instead, efficient ventilation without draught would be secured. It
has more than once come under my notice that individuals sleeping
in rooms thus devoid of proper air, required much professional
attention until this condition was remedied. One most simple
means of ventilation is to elevate the bottom sash and place a
board below it. The air thus admitted between the sashes is con-
veyed in an upward direction into the room, hence there cannot
possibly be a draught. This is of value, as so few windows open
from the top in the cottages of the poor. A simple ventilator near
the ceiling leading into the chimney would carry’off all heated
air above. If anyone ascend a ladder to the top of a room lighted
with gas he will be surprised at the heated state of the air, which,
having no means of egress, must necessarily descend and pollute
the room. Avoid slush or other rubbish accumulations in yards,
for some severe cases of diphtheria in Upper Macquarie-street
recently had their origin in this way. The overflowing cesspools
and other accumulations of Launceston contribute materially to
the epidemics of typhoid in that city annually, noticed more
especially of late.
CLOTHING.
Flannel next to the skin, and sleeping in the same, is most
healthful, especially in rheumatic affections. The dangers attend-
ing a too sudden change of dress, especially in ladies who very
often allow their arms and necks to be bare, cannot be too strongly
condemned. Our dress should also be properly ventilated ; water-
proof coats, for instance, cause rheumatism, preventing proper
skin action. The loss of hair in men, as well as scurf, results from
pressure of hats. The errors of dying dresses, especially with red
and yellow coraline dyes, known as the aniline or coal tar series,
produce eczema and other skin affections. A skein of silk has
been dyed from the extract of the liver of an animal poisoned
thus. Tarletan dresses dyed with a green arsenic preparation are
also sources of poisoning. Cleanliness is an important matter;


scarlet fever owing its spread for a considerable period to the clothes
of a patient infected. A case in point is related in Brighton,
where a serious outbreak of the fever had taken place. A family
entering the house some years afterwards became infected through
a little child encircling its throat with a piece of flannel it had
picked up. Puerperal fever, a serious disease, is carried about
alike by nurse and doctor. Cholera and small-pox have been
known to have their origin in washerwomen washing dirty clothes,
from soldiers’ garments being infected at clothes-making
depots, through covering individuals diseased. Then there is
danger in the wearing of false hair, from different forms of lice
inhabiting it. Here in Hobart great necessity exists for a public
oven, where clothes of the poorer classes suffering from scarlet
fever, measles, and other infectious and contagious diseases might
be disinfected by the influence of heat, the destructive influence of
which on the germs of disease is well known and appreciated. A con-
venience of this kind should be attached to every public hospital
or other large charitable institution. The necessity for frequent
changes of underclothing, according to the amount of bodily work
performed, and the practice of shaking and hanging them up at
night, are matters of importance. If we take our under-garments
and shake them well, we shall be astonished at the clouds of dust
shaken out of them. A natural question, then, would be,
“ where does this dust come from V’ The answer is that
it is due to noisome materials given off from the body,
which, when retained in the clothes, cause ill-health. There
are many mechanical errors in dress, and under this head we
may include belts and bands generally, which are bad. Tight
lacing is especially to be condemned, and when we remember that
stays or corsets are generally purchased four inches smaller than
the waists they are to encircle, it is easy to understand the injurious
pressure exercised on the individual, and how important organs —
the liver, for instance—suffer. In the course of my practice I have
seen a liver nearly divided in half by these means. Generally
speaking, tight lacing is responsible for very many of the ailments
peculiar to women. Men, too, are not altogether free from the
same charge, for the tight cravat worn round the neck produces
congestion of the brain, or impaired mental faculty, and sometimes
even epileptic seizures. In these cases tearing open the neck
bands affords appreciable relief. Garters, as well as the tight
bands worn by workmen on the legs, cause varicose veins. Ill-
fitting boots, too, produce corns and bunions, while high-heeled
ones cause injury to both the leg and foot. Then, again, men
render themselves prone to attacks of lumbago by wearing coats
open behind.
DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD.
The ancient Greeks favoured cremation, for they believed the
soul to be unclean in its earthly state, and that the body required
absolute destruction in order to secure its purification. Cremation
is the most scientific mode of disposing of the bodies of persons
dying from infectious and contagious diseases, for it assures the
complete destruction of all diseases in the body, which, if simply
buried, may find their way to the surface of the ground. The


Egyptians, because of their belief that dead bodies were the re-
ceptacle of the soul, mummied them, so that they might, at some
future time, be reanimated. Naples has a pit for every day in the
year, all dying on a certain day being buried together in this pit or
excavation. The coffin is lowered into the pit, the body shot out, and
then withdrawn. This mode combines economy with efficiency. The
Parsees, a caste of India, have a curious way of disposing of their
dead. The body is taken up into a high tower and pushed through
an iron grating, when the vultures descend and take all the flesh,
leaving the bones to fall into a pit below. When we con-
sider the present situation of the churchyards in Laun-
ceston, we cannot fail to see that they are a standing menace
to the town —potent factors in the dissemination of disease. As a
rule these grounds are on elevated situations, so that their natural
drainage is towards centres of population ; soakage must take
place, for they have clayish bottoms. It is a well-known fact that
the chief fever belts are around these yards, and in the falling
country from them. Kecently, attempts were made to secure
their closure, but owing principally to sentimental obstruction, the
advocates of health were unable to accomplish their purpose. As
the drainage from these graveyards is allowed to pollute the
drinking water of the town, the people of Launceston may truly be
said, “ to garnish their tables with a cold and poisonous infusion of
their ancestors.” How much public use might be made of these
disused areas of land ; I would go so far as to suggest that a hand-
some mausoleum should be built in St. David’s burial ground, and
the bodies at present lying therein, gathered together into the one
tomb, and the area, thus reclaimed, made use of for the public
benefit.
CONCLUSION.
In conclusion, I would say that there is a fallacy in the ex-
pression—“ A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.” Let each
learn and think, and derive some benefit from the elementary
materials placed before them this evening, free, as far as possible,
from all medical technicalities. Remember that loss of time through
ill-health, means loss of occupation and living ; or, to put it in
another way, the loss of health is the loss, not only of individual,
but national wealth. I may be pardoned for observing that the
fact of a doctor assisting the public by lectures of this kind, affords
one proof that in the present day the efforts of our noble profession
are directed as much to the prevention, as to the cure, of disease,
and that money-grubbing is out of the calculation of honest
practitioners. By public health lectures, a large amount of useful
information has been diffused among classes of people most requir-
ing it, and, therefore, any future effort of mine will be conducted
on a similar basis to those of Manchester and other cities, where
they have become so deservedly popular. But one word more.
The taking of much medicine, especially quack mixtures, etc.,
entails a great deal of bodily trouble and unnecessary expense ;
and I should like to say in many cases with Macbeth—“ Throw
physic to the dogs, I’ll none of it! ”
Printed at “ The Mercury ” Office.


