

the
DEATH OF THE -VERBAL THEORY
THE UNVEILING OF CHRIST:
THE BIBLE A “ SUFFICIENT WITNESS”
TO THE “SELF-EVIDENCING CHRIST,
George Maglnnes, M.A., 8.D.,
f I'J} Q




DEATH OF THE VERBAL THEORY
THE UNVEILING OF CHRIST:
THE BIBLE A “ SUFFICIENT WITNESS ”
TO THE “SELF-EVIDENCING CHRIST,”
George Maclnnes, M.A., 8.D.,
THE RIGHT REV. THE MODERATOR OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
cSgbneg:
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO., PUBLISHERS,
George Street.


George Maclnnes, M.A., 8.D.,
The Eight Reverend the Moderator of the General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales.— lB94.


PREFATORY NOTE.
The following pages contain my inaugural address as
Moderator of the General Assembly, with some
additions. I have been induced to publish it by a
combination of reasons. (1) I have received letters
from men connected with all the great Protestant
Churches, and from men connected with no church,
urging me to do so. (2) The attack made on my
address from the floor of the General Assembly has
directed to it an amount of attention which, but for
that happy event, it would not have secured. (3)
The press notices have dwelt on the destructive
analysis of the Verbal Theory in the first part of the
address, and have failed to give equal prominence to
the more important second part, containing the con-
structive argument as to the true function of the
Holy Scriptures.
The numerical feebleness of the attack on my
address in the Assembly was a great surprise to me
I was not aware that the once universal Verbal
Theory had so completely lost its hold on the minds
of the Presbyterian clergy and elders. It was a
moment of deepest thankfulness and joy to me when
the Fathers and Brethren crowded to the platform
at the close of my address to thank me for having
voiced the thoughts of their inmost hearts. Those
brethren who in the Assembly accused rne of
disloyalty to the Confession of Faith were apparently
unaware that it was they themselves who were
heterodox, inasmuch as they proclaimed their belief
in the Theory of Verbal Inspiration, a dogma which
the Westminster Divines deliberately refused to put
into the Confession, because it was not true.
The thought of the “Self-evidencing” Christ,
made known by His “ sufficient witness/ the Bible,


has been in my mind for a dozen years or more. It
rescued me from doubts and fears produced by the
study of the Higher Criticism. I rejoiced when I
was able to confirm and solidify my thought by the
perusal of the works of such giants as Fitschl, Biuce,
and Fairbairn. My hope and prayer are that my
poor setting forth of this great and inspiring thought
may induce ninny to encjuire and to think for them-
selves, and that the result will be their deliverance
from the bondage of a human tradition, and their
establishment in that faith in the “ Self-evidencing ”
Christ, which is the Faith of the Future.
G. Mcl.


THE DEATH OF THE VERBAL THEORY
AND
THE UNVEILING OF CHRIST;
The Bible a “sufficient witness” to the “self-
evidencing” Christ
Fathers and Brethren, —latfifstprepared to address
this Venerable House on the duty of the Church
in relation to Social questions. But 1 came to feel that
another subject of greater —nay, of supreme impor-
tance —had an imperative claim on your attention. I
crave your indulgence, because the shortness of the
time at my disposal has forced me so to compress my
argument that it may not be easy to follow the
details, but 1 trust that the main point will be plain
enough.
A Momentous Change.
Fathers and Brethren, —We are at the beginnings
of a change, the most profound and far-reaching, the
most momentous and the most fraught with promise,
that has ever taken place in the history of the
Christian Church. This change has already been
made by Christian scholars. It must soon be made A €trt j
by the Christian people. If wisely guided from
within, it will be easy and safe. But, if the
of the Church obstinately ignore it, if the officers '
Christ’s army shrink from obeying Christ’s word of, \?i~,
command, “Go forward,” the people cannot long be /
kept in ignorance. Outside the Church they will
get distorted views of the impending change, with
results disastrous to their faith. Be it your care,
Fathers and Brethren, to make yourselves acquainted
with the necessity for, and the meaning and end of,
this great movement, that you may be able lovingly
to safe-guard and cautiously to guide the Lord’s
people committed to your charge, and to save Christ’s


beloved from needless disturbance of their peace, and
some of them perhaps from making shipwreck of
their faith.
There is great peril to the peace and faith of the
Church, not indeed in the change itself, but in a
blind and unwise resistance to it. A sense of this
peril has induced me to call your attention to this
grave subject. I have done so in no rash humour.
W *v» 4 Jor many weeks I hesitated, doubtful of my ability
tfuutTlj to set the subject plainly before you in the Divine
.■% ... light of truth, and fearful lest I should do harm
instead of good. But the longer I thought and the
more I prayed for the guidance of the Holy Spirit,
the stronger became ray conviction that loyalty to the
Lord Christ and faithfulness to'His Church com-
pelled me to speak and i( to speak boldly as I ought
to speak” (Eph. 6 : 20).
This change, because it is inevitable, is in the line
of the fulfilment of the Lord’s great purpose of the
world’s salvation. Therefore let us, the Lords
servants, be men of courage and of faith in a living
Christ and join in leading His Church to a new
vantage ground such as she never before had from
which to inflict a crushing defeat on Infidelity, to
assail the sins and miseries of humanity, and to win
the world for Christ.
This impending and all-important change is a
transition from the theory that the Bible is a
“ Verbally inspired and inerrant Code of Buies to a
more reasonable and truer view of the real nature
K* oUtA M and actual function of the Book. This theory, now
t / / ■. •/- rapidly passing awav, is, that the Scriptures, just as
we now have them, are in all their parts and in all
> * L their contents and in their very words as well as
their ideas, equally inspired ; equally free from error,
/ not only in teaching morals and doctrines, but also in
}■{ L stating facts, even the most unimportant facts,
whether scientific, historical or geographical; and
equally authoritative throughout as a rule of faith
and practice (Hodge I : 163-4). ~
A*. IhcJty, jMk*- <
i w /U* w, vA v
i-d hoi jtUfu //


The holders of this theory make it of the very
essence of Christianity, the very first and funda-
mental principle of our religion. And to their/, ,
Theory they bind our Faith for life or for death.
They make the credibility and authority of the Bible 1
depend on the absolute accuracy and certainty of U ft/* C
minutest statement of fact, “ scientific, historical
geographical” (Hodge I: i 63). They, for instance, ' nU y
with a bond of adamant link the credibility of the f***-
Gospels with the absolute accuracy of the \sy,
of Israel through the Wilderness They
Christianity answer with its life if the
mistake be found in the ages of the patriarchs or in ,
the genealogies of the priests. Hence, since all is at
stake, the contortions and evasions of misguided - -
apologists trying to reconcile such trivial diversities
of statement as that Joseph was stolen (Gen. 37 : 28
and 40 : 15) by Midianites and sold by them to
Potiphar (Gen. 37 ; 36), or that he was sold by his
brethren to Ishmaelites (Gen. 37 : 27-8) who sold
him to Potiphar (Gen. 39 : 1). The holders of this
theory honestly think that by their Theory they
honour the Bible and safe-guard its Divine authority.
But they are unbelieving Uzzahs stretching out their
hands to save the \rk of God. They are like foolish
men who should erect props to keep the sky from ?
falling. "
This Theory makes itself an essential of Revelation:"*:,, /'s.
If it be disproved, it says, all is lost, for that on itsS
validity the Divine mission of Jesus Christ and '
salvation of mankind depend. A Theory ’ V,
claims to be of vital importance to the faith of > v
and their hopes for eternity must have its claim "
tested to the utmost. c
n *< _ T. c >
History of the Verbal Theory. - . . '%
1. The first test is its own history. The Verbal
Theory has been held almost universally from the
last quarter of the 17th century down to nearly our


own time. It has, however, not found a place in the
Reformed Confessions, except in one, the Formula
Consensus Helvetica (1675), which goes the length
of imposing on Christian consciences as an article of
faith the inspiration and infallibility of the Hebrew
accents and vowel points, invented by the Jewish
Massorets, or “ possessors of tradition,” about the
6th to the Bth century, a.d. In spite of strong-
pressure, the Westminster Assembly declined to
countenance the Theory of Verbal Inspiration.
Therefore it does not appear in our Confession of
Faith, and has never received the official sanction of
our Church. The Reformers, Luther and Calvin,
did not hold this theory, as the former plainly showed
when he called the Epistle of James an “ epistle of
straw.” We, however, find the theory stated in
extravagant terms by some of the Fathers as early
as 200 a.d., and it was held by the Jewish Scribes
certainly as early as the beginning of the Christian
era. This, then, is the respectable origin of the
Verbal Inspiration Theory. It is one of those
traditions of the Scribes at which Christ launched
withering invectives !
The New Testament Text.
11. The second test is this : Is there any text of
Ait-t hu** the Scriptures absolutely inerrant, and which thus ? / I
->> M exactly fits the Verbal Theory ?
That the English Authorised Version contains
’ many errors has been shown by the .Revised Version./.; C
/tAw) C,i And the R.V. itself disclaims inerrancy by acknow- 7 TTVjuL:-.
r.Vi-o ledging “defects, blemishes and imperfections ” (pref.;
!’* tUAtsjZt to the N.T.)
tls SUxzr Greek Received Text, or “Syrian’
1. ' text, which underlies the Authorised Version, was
A the result of a recension completed at Antioch about
the middle of the 4th century, a.d. (Westcott and
Hort, 185, 190). Modern critical editions show the
Syrian text to be far from inerrant (Westcott and
Hort, 166).


The text of the N.T. lies in numerous MSS.,
versions in Latin, Syriac, Coptic and other languages,
and in quotations by the Fathers. Comparison of
these sources shows about 150,000 variations, nearly
all of which, however, are trivial. This surprising
number arises from the fact that a great many written h) C* tAstVhJi
copies of the N.T. were made, each new copyist,
adding errors of his own to those of his w j
In face of these numerous variations, the Verbal
Theory breaks down. x>!Za.u— ••
But the purest text of the N.T. that can now be
attained exists somewhere among this multitude of
variations, and it can be ascertained only by a process
of selection and rejection of various readings. This
has been done by Westcott and Hort by means of
their scientific genealogical method. The result is
that the Church now has a text of the N.T. nearer,
the original than any other that has existed since the
autographs left the hands of the writers. But ,
this, the purest existing text, “ makes no W
to be more than an approximation to the purest text c
that might be formed from existing materials” (W.
and H., 371). It repudiates inerrancy by givingtVtvtuu/
many alternative readings, thus confessing its
ability to decisively restore the true text in
cases (W. and H., 376, 377), and, again, by
out the existence of a few “ primitive errors ” which
it is unable to remove (W. and H , 365, 368).
Even the autographs or originals might not fit the
Theory by being inerrant. Paul used to dictate his
Epistles to a shorthand writer, and unless the
amanuensis were inspired as well as the Apostle, the
very first copies may have contained slips of his ear /
and hand. But, granted the autographs were M
inerrant, of what service is that ? The 9 x’'
are irretrievably lost.
Thus, as regards the N.T., the Verbal Theory
breaks down, owing to the physical fact that no text
exists that will fit it.


The Old Testament Text.
The Hebrew (and Aramaic) text of the O.T. shows
very few variations. It is the descendant of one
MS., which about 135 a.d. was selected as an exem-
plar by the Scribes, who suppressed all its riyais.
This uniformity is a disadvantage, for it prevents the
same good work being done for the O.T, text that
Westcott and Hort did for that of the N.T. We
cannot get within centuries of the 0 T. originals.
We cannot get behind the one MS. chosen by the
Scribes.
That various readings existed before this choice of
one M.S. is shown by a comparison of such parallel
passages as 2 Sara. 22 and Ps. 18 ; by quotations in
the N.T. and in apocryphal books, such as the Book
of Jubilees, written about the beginning ot the first
century, a.d. ; by the variations in the -Samaritan
Pentateuch, which dates from the middle of the sth
century, b.c. ; and by the great and notable variations
in the Septuagint, or Greek Bible, translated in
Alexandria about the middle of the 3rd century, b c.,
for Ptolemy, King of Egypt. In view, then, of
those ancient variations, the conclusion is that the
Hebrew text of the one MS. selected by the Scribes
was not inerrant.
But the Hebrew text so fixed consisted of conso-
nants only. The vowels were not added till the 6th
to the Bth century, a.d., so that the text as w r e have
it, the Massoretic text, dates only from that period.
During all the previous centuries, those who read the
Hebrew had to supply the vowels to the best of their
ability. The Scribes had a tradition what vowels
should be supplied to each word, and one generation
learned this tradition from its predecessor by oral
instruction. In different passages different vowels
would have to be added to the same consonants to
make sense. The liability to error under this system
was very great, as may be seen by an example. The


consonants PK with various vowels added might
represent the words ‘pair,’ ‘peer,’ ‘pyre,’ ‘pore/
‘ poor,’ ‘pure,’ and many more. If in English hooks
the consonants alone were printed, it would be
extremely difficult, and often impossible, to decide
which of these words PK represented. For the
inerrancy of the Massoretic text it is necessary that
from generation to generation the Scribes down to
the Bth century, a.d., should have made not the
slightest mistake in selecting the right vowels for
every word in the O.T. The Verbal Theory, if it is
to be logical and consistent, and jf it would shun
self-destruction, must deduce the tremendous conse-
quence that, if the Scribes made a single blunder, if j
a single vowel or accent can be proved to be wrong,
the authority of the Bible goes by the board, and
Christianity is shorn of Divine sanction. The risk
is too great ; we cannot take it. The price is too
high ; we cannot pay it. /
The Septuagint, or Greek Bible, is quoted in the
N.T. indiscriminately with the Hebrew. It was the
Bible of the primitive Christians, and was the O.T.
of the Church down to the sth century, a.d. It is
owing to Jerome (420, a.d.) that the Church is not
to-day using it instead of the Hebrew, from which it
differs so considerably. It, and not the Hebrew, was
the O.T. which the Fathers regarded as verbally
inspired. But its numerous variations from the
Hebrew and the confusion and blunders in its own
text show' that the Septuagint is anything but
in errant.
. It is, however, not infrequently found that the
Septuagint presents a purer text than the Hebrew.
As a specimen, the narrative of the introduction of
David to Saul may be cited. The Hebrew text
gives two inconsistent accounts of this event (I Sam.
16 ; 14-23, and 17 : 55, to 18 : 5). The Septua-
gint has only one account (1 Sam. 16 ; 14-23). The
Septuagint omits two sections of the narrative in the
Hebrew text (1 Sam. 17 : 12-31, and 17 ; 55, to


18 : 5). Without these the story is consecutive
and coherent; therefore those sections are interpola-
tions in the Hebrew text.
Thus, no absolutely inerrant text, such as the
Verbal Theory requires, exists in English, Greek or
Hebrew. Therefore the Theory is mere lumber.
If it were possible, regardless of facts, to say that
o/ , the text at any stage was inerrant, it would be
. c , necessary to 'assert and to prove the inerrancy,
infallibility and inspiration of aTT the ag"ents who
had been engaged in producing the inerrant text,
u >u ** including, according to the stage fixed on, the Scribes
1» that chose the one Hebrew exemplar, all the gene-
, Rations of Massorets who knew the right vowels and
invented the vowel points, the Fathers at Antioch
'i " who made the ‘Syrian’ recension of the N.T., all
v the monks who in the dark ages did penance by
copying the Scriptures, all the makers of versions
from King Ptolemy’s translators to King James’s,
fi pi- from Wycliflfe and Tyndale to the Company of
Revisers ; and the critics, Westcott and Hort, who
o'* by their critical judgement have constructed the
. ’ purest existing text. But this, especially this last,
is more than the most ardent Verbal Inspirationist
is prepared for. His Theory breaks in pieces under
the strain.
lf Verbal Inspiration were necessary to the autho-
**7 ** rity of the Scriptures, God would have inspired not
V ’'f'hjuejs V> '~4 only the original writers, but also, we must suppose,
/. //o every copyist, and so caused every transcript to be a
facsimile of the original. But He did nothing of
/ >' / m He allowed the copyists of the N.T., for
■' - e ■*" instance, to pile up errors for 14 centuries, and then,
** through His servants, Westcott and Hort, He made
n t/ of those very errors a means as effectual as inspira-
ej* /”./ tion would have been—and much more satisfactory,
.1 w because it can be thoroughly tested—of restoring to
. a Church in the 19th century the text of the N.T.
in almost pristine perfection. It was owing to the
J / , verv number and variety of the readings that
OumP ° J ®
a.XfU-y, >y/ :- a - I tL/J .


Westcott and Hort were able to form their genealo-
gical method, and by it restore so completely the
true text of the N.T. The more numerous and
various the readings, the wider the induction, the
more certain the method, and the more perfect the
result. Thus God at once vindicates His providence
in the care of the Holy Bible, and repudiates, as
unnecessary and false, the Theory of Verbal
Inspiration.
The Higher Criticism
111. A third test of the Verbal Theory is its
relation to the results of the Higher Criticism.
Assuming for the nonce the correctness of those
results, one example will suffice. To adopt without
inquiry the speculation of the Scribes that Moses
wrote the whole of the Pentateuch just as we have
it, and that therefore it is in every part verbally
inspired and inerrant, is easy enough. But when it
is ascertained that the first six, and not the first five,
books of the Old Testament are really one work—a
Hexateuch, not a Pentateuch—and that the Hexa-
teuch comprises the writings of several anonymous
authors (J, E, P, D, etc.), whose works were
combined and reduced into their present form by a
number of redactors ; then the application of the
Verbal Theory becomes extremely difficult. The
only alternative to its abandonment is to assert the
inerrancy and inspiration of the unknown authors
and redactors. And this is impossible when the
twofold narrative of, eg., the Creation (Gen. 1 : 1 to
2 : 4, and 2 : 4 to 2 : 25), the Flood (Gen. 6 : 9 to 8:
19), the wives of Esau (Gen. 26 : 34, 35 and 36 .
2-3), the deportation of Joseph (Gen. 37 : 12-36 and
39 : 1 and 40 : 15), and the Plagues of Egypt (Ex.
7; 14, &c ) is looked at; when the varying and
sometimes amended laws, as e.g., the law of the
plurality of Sanctuaries (Exod. 20 : 24-25) and the
law of the one Sanctuary (Deut. 12: 5, 13, 14), are


considered ; and when it is noticed that such men as
Samuel (1 Sam. 7 : 9), of the tribe of Ephraim, and
David (2 Sam. 6:13, 17, 18) and Solomon (l Kings
3 : 3 ; 8 : 22, 54, 55, 56) of the tribe of Judah,
discharged without blame priestly functions, which
by the Law were confined to the tribe of Levi, and
the house of Aaron.
The Old Testament Canon.
IY. The fourth test of the Verbal Theory is the
history of the Canon or Collection of inspired autho-
ritative books called the Bible. The Verbal Theory
regards the Bible as one book, homogeneous and of
equal authority in all its parts. But the Bible is
really a library, a literature of many books by many
authors, mostly anonymous, and written at different
times extending over many centuries. Each of these
books was separately published and circulated. Now
all are gathered into one Collection. The fact of a
book being in that Collection stamps it with Divine
authority. Many of the books make no direct claim
to that authority. Their being in the Collection
depends on the judgement of those persons who placed
them there. The Verbal Theory requires in those
persons absolute inerrancy. If they wei e not inerrant,
they might have blundered into admitting an unin-
spired or excluding an inspired book.
The Canon may be said to have begun with the
promulgation of Deuteronomy by King Josiah in the
7th century, b.c. (2 Kings 23 : 3). Then in the sth
cent., b.c., Ezra and Neheraiah (Neh. 8 : 1-9) added
Gen., Exod., Lev., and Num., and formed the
Pentateuch, containing and called the Torah or Law
of Moses. After their time the Prophets were
gradually added through popular use, though they
were still regarded as inferior to the Law, and were
not written on the same rolls. The Psalter was
added owing to its use in the Temple service ; and
finally, before 100, b.c., the Hagiographa, or Sacred


Writings, comprising the remaining books of the
0.T., were added, on grounds that are unknown.
The Canon was, however, still open in the. time of
Christ, the claims of certain books being yet under
debate, and it was not finally completed till the close
of the Ist century, a.d.
The debated books were called Antilegomena, or
“ books spoken against.” Among these were the
Apocryphal books and fragments still found in the
Septuagint, which were finally shut out of the
Hebrew Canon. Down to the time of the Council of
Laodicea (360, a.d ) the Greek Fathers, to whom the
Septuagint was the 0.T., regarded the Apocrypha
( Maccabees, Tobit, Judith, the History of
Susanna, Bel and the Dragon, &c.) very much as
they did the books included in the Hebrew Canon.
A ugustine held the same view. The Roman Catholic
Council of Trent (1546, a.d.) formally placed the
Apocryphal books contained in the Vulgate (I and 2
Esdras and the Prayer of Manasses being omitted)
on the same footing with the O.T. Scriptures as
“ Sacred and Canonical,” and anathematised both
Jews and Protestants for refusing them that position
of authority.
The other debated books, Chron., Prov., Ezek,,
Eccl., Esth. and Song of Songs, were finally admitted.
The admission of Ezek. was secured by Rabbi
Hananiah, who lived in the time of Christ, and the
Talmud says (Hagiga 1 ; 3a) the price he got for his
decision was 300 measures of oil. Eccl. and the
Song of Songs were admitted by the Assembly ot
Scribes at Jamnia in 90, a.d., but only by a majority
vote; and but for the violence and anathemas of
Rabbi Akiba, the Song of Songs would have been
excluded (Mishna, Jadaim, 3,5).
The process of forming the O.T. Canon was thus
a twofold one of selection and rejection of books, and
the agents were the Scribes. On their judgement,
the 0.T.., as it stands, is received by Christians as
containing inspired Scriptures and nothing besides.


What is the guarantee that the Scribes did not make
mistakes ? The only guarantee that will suit the
Verbal Theory is the inerrancy, infallibility and
inspiration of the whole tribe of Scribes, including
Rabbi Akiba, a supporter of Bar Kokhba, the false
Messiah, and including those very Scribes and
Pharisees who made the tremendous blunder of
rejecting the Christ.
The New Testament Canon.
The early Christians got from the Jews with the
O.T. the notion of a Canon. The Christians had
sacred books of their own, which they read publicly
in the churches. In the first half of the 2nd century,
A.n., they began to place these in the same rank as
the 0.T., and this was the beginning of the N.T.
Canon. The process, as with the 0.T., was one of
selection and rejection of the great mass of literature
in circulation. Local collections were first made.
These differed from one another and from the N.T,
as we have it, both as to books included and books
excluded. The Church in each district felt at liberty
to make its own selection, and each Father had his
own list of authoritative books. It was not till the
beginning of the sth century, a.d., that all differences
disappeared, and the N.T. Canon, as we have it, was
tacitly agreed on by all except the Syrian Church.
The first list exactly the same as our N.T. is that
decreed by the provincial Councils of Carthage in
397 and 419, a.d.
All the books now in the N.T. were, however, in
some local collection before the end of the 2nd
century, a.d. ; and some were without question placed
in all the collections from the first. These, called
Homologoumena, or books “agreed on,” were the
Four Gospels, Acts, the Epistles of Paul, 1 Peter
and 1 John. Before the middle of the 2nd century,
a.d., the Four Gospels, as containing the words and
deeds of Christ, were regarded by all as being Scrip-
ture just as much as the Law, the Prophets and the


Psalms. They were selected out of a host of frag-
mentary gospels (Luke 1 : 1), heretical gospels, as
that of Marcion, and apocryphal gospels, such as
those of the Hebrews, the Egyptians, and Peter,
which were highly regarded for a time in sortie
localities, but were finally rejected.
The date of the composition of the N. T. books
must not be confused with the date of their admission
to the Canon. Towards the beginning of the 2nd
century there were two main streams of N". T. text,
the Western and the Neutral, showing great diver-
gencies (Westcott and Hort, 169). The auto-
graphs of the original writers, the one source of
these two divergent streams, must be placed well
back into the Ist century in order to account for
these two texts with their numerous and marked
divergencies. Therefore, by a purely scientific
method it is proved that the N. T. (with the possible
exception of a small portion : Westcott and Hort,
368) existed within the lifetime of the Apostle John.
This fact destroys at one blow the Mythical Theory
of Strauss and the Tendency Theory of Baiir, and
for ever precludes every other speculation requiring
like them] that the date of the composition of the
N. T. books be placed later than the Apostolic age.
Of the N. T. Antilegornena there were two classes.
One comprised books now in the N. T., but whose
claim was for centuries debated. These are —
Hebrews, the Apocalypse, James, 2 Peter, 2 John,
3 John, and Jude. Till about the end of the 4th
century the Church in the West refused to place
Hebrews, and the Church in the East, with the
exception of Alexandria, refused to place the
Apocalyse in the Canon. The debate then died out,
to be renewed at the Reformation. Luther disputed
the claim of Hebrews, James, Jude, and the Apoca-
lypse, and placed them at the end of his German
Bible. Calvin, in his Antidote to the Council of
Trent, says the question as to certain books being in
the Canon must remain open.


The other class of Antilegomena comprised those
books which for centuries were regarded and quoted
as Scripture and were read in the churches, but
which were at last excluded from the N. T. by com-
mon consent. Among these were the Ist Epistle of
Clement, which is attached to the N. T. in the Codex
Alexandrinus, and therefore was Scripture in the
sth century ; the Epistle of Barnabas and the
“ Shepherd ” of Hernias, which are bound up with
the N. T, in the Codex Sinaiticus, and therefore were
Scripture in the 4th century ; also the recently
recovered Gospel of Peter, which was read in the
Church at Bhossus in Cilicia, till Serapion, Bishop
of Antioch, about 200 a.d, condemned it as heretical.
Thus, for three centuries the N. T. Canon was a
variable quantity, while the long process of selection
and rejection went on. The Verbal Theory requires
that in forming the N, T. Canon no mistake shall
have been made, such as excluding 1 Clement, which
claims to be inspired (1 Cl. 59 : 1 and 63 : 2), and
wrongly including 2 Peter, which does not claim
inspiration, and the right of which to appear in the
N. T. is regarded as doubtful. The Theory cannot
hold its ground except on the assumption that all
who co-operated in forming the N. T. Canon, i.e., the
Fathers, the Church officials, the whole body of the
Christian people, and even the heretical leaders and
sects, were inspired and in errant in making an
infallibly correct Collection of authoritative sacred
books.
The Verbal Theory Breaks Down.
The Verbal Theory requires that, as well as the
agents, the process by which the Canon was formed
be perfectly inerraut. The principle of the Scribes
was that nothing should be admitted that was not
written by a prophet. To apply this principle
implied a perfect knowledge of the author and the
date of every book, which knowledge the Scribes


certainly did not have. The principle of the Fathers
was that no hook should be in the N. T. that had not
been written by an Apostle or an apostolic man.
But they blundered in the application of their
principle. For instance, the Church in the Fast
rightly decided that Hebrews was not written by
Paul, and for that reason wrongly refused it a place
in the Canon. Centuries afterwards they changed
their minds. They admitted the book, and rightly,
but they dijd it on the wrong ground that Paul was
the author.
Thus the Verbal Theory utterly'collapses. It is
a mere speculation for which there is not a particle
of evidence. It requires an absolutely inerrant text,
but no such text exists. It requires a Collection
formed by an absolutely inerrant authority, but no
such Collection exists. Therefore, the theory, even
if were true, is useless ; there is nothing to which to
apply it. And it has to make the monstrous
assumption that the whole host of Jewish Scribes and
other agents, who at any time had to do with the
text and the Canon of the Bible were inerrant, infal-
lible, and inspired.
The Bible as a “ Code ob Biles.”
The Verbal Theory was evolved as a consequent
of the notion that the Bible is a “ Code of Rules,”
which, like an Act of Parliament, has an enactment
in every clause, must be strictly construed according
to the letter, and has the express sanction of the
Sovereign Power in every syllable. This “ Code of
Buies" notion is nothing but a tradition of the
Scribes. It originated in the fact that Ezra’s Canon
was the Torah or Mosaic Law. The notion took
strong hold of the legal mind of the Jews, so that
when the other O.T. books were placed in the Canon,
it was extended to them, though they have plainly
nothing of the character of a “ Code.’ The


Christians, with the 0.T., took over from the Jews
the ready-made Rabbinical notion of a “ Code,”
so that when the Christian sacred books were put
into the Canon, they were stamped with the same
character, but most improperly, fo.r the notion
involves a total misconception of their nature and
function. The Reformers, having on the one hand
renounced the view that the Church is the seat of
authority in matters of faith and life, and, on the
other, recoiling from the Naturalistic principle that
Reason is the sole authority, and having failed to
discern the real source of authority in Christ Himself,
were driven to emphasise the notion of the Bible
being a “ Code of Rules.”
This notion is, on experiment and examination,
found to be unworkable and untenable. It has to
assume that the Bible is one homogeneous “ Code ”
of equal value and equal authority in* every parts
It takes no account of the fact that in the Bible there
is a development of revelation and a progression in
morals. It is indifferent as to the part of the Bible
in which it finds its proof verse of doctrine or its
moral precept. It takes them with equal prompti-
tude and confidence from the Law of Moses or the
Gospel of Christ. It puts Esther on a level with
John, Ecclesiastes with Paul, and the Song of Songs
with the words of Jesus. If this Rabbinical notion
were strictly applied, the proper way to use the Bible
would be to open the Book fortuitously, stick a pin-
point on the page at random, and take the transfixed
verse as an oracle. This use of the Bible, like Sortes
Virgilianm, would lead to nothing but confusion and
disaster in doctrine and morals.
The N.T. does not countenance this “ Code of
Rules” notion. The object of the Epistle to the
Hebrews is to prove that the Old Covenant was
imperfect and transitory, and had been fulfilled.
Paul urges the same thing ( e.g ., 2 Cor. 3). Christ
Himself repeals Jaws of the 0.T., and substitutes


laws of his own, with the expressive formula, “ Ye
have heard that it was said to them of old time
. . but 1 say unto you” (Matt. 5). Therefore,
to regard the Bible as a “Code” homogeneous and
equally authoritative and binding in every part, is to
disregard Christ’s express words and to contemn
Christ’s authority.
The True Function of the Bible.
What, then, is the true nature and function of the
Bible ? To whom shall we go for an answer to this
all-important question ? We go to the Lord Jesus
Christ. To the Scribes and Pharisees He said:
“Ye search the Scriptures, because ye think that in
them ye have eternal life ; and these are they which
bear witness of Me ; and ye will not come to Me
that ye may have life” (Jo. 5 : 39-40). He blames
them for mistakenly (“ye think”) seeking in the
Scriptures that which was not in them as Scriptures
—eternal life, which they failed to find, because they
did not seek it where alone it could be found—in
Him, and in Him only. But He is in the Scriptures,
for they “ bear witness ”of Him, If the Scribes
had searched the Scriptures for Him, they would
have found both Him and eternal life.
Christ thus sternly repudiates the notion of the
Scribes that the Scriptures are a “ verbally inspired
Code of Rules” as to what men should believe and
do to win eternal life ; and in contradiction sets forth
His own view, which, just because it is His, must be
the true view. The Scriptures “ bear witness” of
Him. This He said of the O.T. He afterwards
virtually said the same of the N.T., when He thus
commissioned His Apostles : “ And ye shall be My
witnesses unto the uttermost part of the earth”
(Acts 1 : 8). The Apostles were His witnesses at
first by word of mouth, and the N.T. is just their
testimony written down.


%J {^ V Christ tells us that the real and sole function of
Bible and its supreme value lie in this : that it
is His witness, making Him known to men. The
7 Bible is therefore invaluable and indispensable,
because without the Bible men could not know
Christ, could not stand in His presence face to face
and hear His voice. The Bible reveals to men the
flawless character, the perfect life, the stainless soul,
gracious and glorious personality of the Son of
. Man who is the Son of God.
He promised His Apostles the aid of His Spirit
that they might be true and sufficient witnesses of
Him (Jo. 14 : 26). But the question as to the-
inspiration of the Bible writers, its nature, extent
and mode, is of really no importance whatever when
. we regard them as witnesses. The real question is :
Are they “ Sufficient Witnesses'?” And the trium-
\ phant proof that they are “ Sufficient Witnesses” is
y the simple fact that they actually have revealed and
A |v< t< tK do reveal Christ and make Him known to men.
L P* The highest degree of inspiration could not enable
upi. Them to do more. And if any deny them inspiration,
do not pause to argue ; we say : “ Let that be
so, it you will. Still, they have done all that was
required, and the utmost they could do they have
X/ made Christ known to men.” The Bible is like a
great cathedral “ with storied windows richly dight.”
. -0 In each window stands the emblazoned figure of a
an ] sa i a } tj a Paul, or a John, and through
0 fAjA them a glory of light tinted with the richness of
A M their several colours and individual forms, streams
out into the darkling world. This radiance is not their
own. But for the light within, which they variously
reveal to the enchained gaze of men, those glowing
Vi figures would be only dim outlines of dusky shapes.
LA jP The light that shines with such splendour through
I ofi them is the white effulgence of the Light of the
\ jP World.
. Christ thus revealed, directly in the Gospels and
V indirectly in the other/Scriptures, is perceived by
■


JflXns, -iisrus o l-yiOsy, */ ft*> <ft t^^rr,
py 9V& / -/ A /**— eb **/ . Z/u*?
Q* pjctf out l V
each man acconling tv3 that man’s power of vision.
All who read the Gospels witTTearnest attention see 4L
a radiant vision they can never forget and
ignore, and they get to know One whom they can
never again class among common men. However
men try to account for Him, all acknowledge Him
to be Wonderful, Unique, Transcendent, such as a
thousand Shakespeares could not have conceived,
transcending the comprehension of the very inspired
men who saw Him and wrote of Him; and tran-
scending the imagination of men through all the ages.
And the better He is seen and known, ever the
greater He appears to the wondering eyes of men.
Those who study Him most closely and most lovingly
as He is revealed in the Gospels, and specially those
who with all their might try to form an image of
Him in their own selves, they see Him most clearly,
they know Him best.
Christ is “ self evidencing ” (John 8: 14). He
needs no man, not even an inspired man, to vouch
for Him (Jo. 5 : 34). Let Him only be s££nJby men,/&y
and He vouches for Himself (Jo. 4 : 42). All
will readily acknowledge that if ever there was
perfect sinless man, it was Christ ; if ever there was -
a miracle-worker, it was Christ; if ever there was
an inspired soul, it was Christ; if ever God was
manifest in the flesh, it was in Christ.
/7 <hsof „ X ui ’fvc'i Inrrtf
ft is only in these latter days that men have begun ;
to perceive the independent, self-evidencing Christ.^^
. . . /, In the last century Paley, in his “ Evidences,” set ,
U~ a k ou t; proving the possibility of miracles and the*
r reality of the Gospel miracles. Then, and not thU* M
ju> then, he concluded that Christ was Christ. And
hv why ? Because He wrought the proven miracles. V
An eminent modern scientist once said : “ If I had
/Tin, off believing in Christ until I had argued myself
J. // ( - u _into believing in miracles, I should never have
y believed in Him. But I believe in Christ because I
Him, and just because He is Christ; and as


He is Himself the most stupendous of all miracles, I
am quite disposed to believe that He wrought
miracles.” That is precisely how Christ Himself
puts it. He makes Himself the first evidence, and
the evidence of miracles He puts second. He said :
“ Believe Me, that I am in the Father and the
Father in Me ; or else believe Me for the very works’
sake” (Jo. 14: 11).
The Verbal inspiration Theory insists that faith
/l cLw?kvtLi i n Christ must come after and be a consequence of
q//f faith in the inspiration of the Bible writers. It puts
Cu, ~ first last the last first * Hit if we must P at
believing in Christ until we have conclusively
” . proved the possibility and the reality of the miracle
yW™/ ftw i nS pi r ation ; also that a large number of men were
inspired, men who lived thousands of years ago, and
rj * q £ whose very names, in most instances, we are
7<,n~^^£^.^ig nora nt; and that certain writings were assuredly
the work of those inspired men; we should never
reach the stage of believing in Christ. On the other
band, if we believe in the “ self-evidoncimr ” Christ,
l\nmj IJhUCZZ&k His own authority, we shall find it easy enough to
L / U believe in the inspiration of the Scriptures, without
” * yUOti fi ne . S pun theory, and without any proof but this
. convincing one: that they are the “Sufficient Wit-
w*** U nesses ” who have revealed to us the “ self-evidenc-
ing” Christ.
It is faith in Himself as Himself, and that alone,
that Christ demands. He constantly says: “
lieve in Me.” When with Peter we have looked
t full on the “ self-evidencing ” Christ, we have no
U C* bought of other so-called evidences or certification
f or sa y a t once w ith intensest conviction :
A** h4ni/t**i u qq lou arfc the Christ, the Son of the"Tiving God.”
nd in this simple direct faith there is unspeakable
# peace and joy and power.
hsuy Lf hAv UnruUi lu^y
UIU^ f U>


The Unveiling of Christ.
The momentous transition from tne Rabbinical
view that the Scriptures are a “Verbally inspired
Code of Rules ” to Christ’s view that they are His
“ Sufficient Witnesses,” brings enormous gain to the
Christian Faith. One almost regrets the loss of the
Verbal Theory. 11 was totus, teres , atque rotundus:
it was complete, perfect, satisfying —if it only had
been true ! But it is gone, and its loss is great gain.
For it has been the ally, the vantage ground and the
trenchant weapon of the infidelT . It has banned
enquiry, and “ loved darkness rather than light. It
has narrowed, perverted and bewildered theology.
It has cramped the energies of the Church, checked
her development and growth, and made the faith of
many only a wretched half-faith. It has turned
many to indifference or to unbelief, who but for it
would have believed and followed Christ.
The Verbal Theory, instead of being, as was fondly
supposed, a bulwark against Infidelity, has always
given Infidelity its one effective means of attacking
the authority of the Holy Scriptures and the Chris-
tian Faith. The Verbal Theory having disappeared,
the power of Infidelity to injure the Faith is gone.
The Verbal Inapirationist and the Infidel occupy the
same ground. Both say that the Verbal Theory
and the authority of the Bible stand or fall together,
The Infidel argues :—“ The Verbal Theory has been
disproved ; therefore the authority of the Bible is
destroyed.” The Verbal Inspirationist says: —“ ihe
authority of the Bible will be if our
Theory is disproved. Therefore, in order to preserve ,
that authority, we must at all hazards preserve our
Theory by forbidding afLenquiix and by
every hostile fact.” This is indeed “ doing evil ***
good may come,” and brings the Theory another ally///
the Jesuit. To both the Verbal Inspirationist and
his Infidel ally the answer is, that their common^
*j /Lq hpist-i /'bcjjy - hjjU/ j/mj Crrryyr^c^tuA^
'-/(/tJruf JL-n ey /.IVUJ • {
4 X *^' 7 rh&C %-A'J c* \ 'Aw oL* b


hflo 1 Aune 6Ute> h# 4 fhtxv iwht
Ae co : styn/o a C fa~nj» ouf hc-Le* ’ ~z*<-t-*—
<l* (Aj /<ZyIArU/ 1W (/if*/ h(-W £OCf t{? 4iU***f~
zr “ & /le ' i/ tn/te> &/jt/**-t***f *U
assumption is wrong. The authority of the Bible is
not tied to the Verbal Theory. That has gone into
the limbo of exploded fallacies, but the Bible and its
authority remain, and are all the better for being
quit of a false and baneful theory.
The greatest gain from the disappearance of the
“Verbal Code of Buies” Theory is that Christ is
aL ct \ t^ restored to His proper place and authority.
' 14 j. ) Strange it is, that Christ has been hidden from men
'yuiLf Jry ( during all the ages, and is hidden still. Among
fat ßomanists the Pope has taken His seat of authority,
faj/t and Christ is only the Bambino. Among Anglicans
His authority has been given to the officers of the
J Church and to the Fathers. Among Protestants a
tradition of the Scribes has robbed Him of His due.
is a marvel to think that Christian men, Fathers
fj hixi} and Reformers, orthodox theologians and evangelical
h Aa* Churches, have been, and are, humble followers of
Scribes and Pharisees whom Christ denounced
renounced, —the very Scribes and Pharisees who
itied the Son of God.
19th century has been fertile in discoveries »
1 i nven tions, almost miraculous. But its chief y°
discovery, that which will make it an epoch in
fa worldT history, is the discoverv of Christ, the real//--^r
face and to know better than ever before, better than^rype^W
He was known in the Council of Nicaea, or in th
Hiet of Augsburg or in the Assembly at West-^J^
J/ . minster.
(/hem njL-aM^
. , ; In the Providence of God the agents in this dis-
™ '** covery, which is like a Second Advent of Christ,
have been Historical Criticism, which has torn away
/zrfch the veil' of Rabbinical tradition that obscured His
& glorious person, and the Historical Imagination,
tiLvCr whose function it is, and will through the ages be
If quickened and enlightened by His Holy Spirit, to
, . study with ever clearer and deeper insight His
environment, His words, His life and Himself, and
™ to develop into greater sharpness of outline and truth
JjS ffuAj ho fhf ji<rk Cfl/ <*yfa
Asy, '/uUvlol y ht
*


of colouring His great figure before the adoring eyes
of mankind.
The Verbal Theory not only obscured Christ, but
it degraded Him by putting His words on a dead
level of authority with the words ol men, of even a
man who made proverbs, Agur, the son ot Jakeh
(Prov. 30). The “Code” notion thrusts Him from His
place of authority, and the Book, the sole function
of which is to be His “ Sufficient Witness,” has been
made His substitute. To it His very name has been
appropriated, for He alone is truly the Word of God
(Jo. 1). From Christ to His “Witness” the
characteristics which He expressly claims as His
own have been transferred. “I am the Truth,” “ I
am the Way,” “ I am the Life,” “ I am the Light,”
are His claims. I and no other I
In the consciousness of the “ self-evidencing ’
Christ there is the highest possible inspiration, the
one inspiration we need and are sure of, and the one
that requires no proof. He said, “ I and the Father
are one ” (Jo. 10 : 30) ; He it is that makes a Divine
revelation to men ; “ The word which ye hear is not
Mine, but the Father’s who sent Me ” (Jo. 14 : 24).
He Himself in Himself is that Revelation. To know
Him is to know God. “He that hath seen Me hath
seen the Father” (Jo. 14: 9). We take Christ at
His own valuation. If He be not inspired of God,
there is no inspiration in prophet or apostle. His
inspiration guarantees theirs, not theirs His. If He
be not a Revelation from God, there is no Revela-
tion. If God has not spoken ii\_Christ, He has not
spoken by any man. The Bible is not a written
with independent authority the
factslhat Christ is the Son of God and the Saviour
of men. It is simply His “Sufficient Witness,”
making the “self-evidencing ’ Divine Christ known
to men. Christ is His own certificate. We believe (p]up
that He is the Son of God and the Saviour on His jrj,/
own testimony, the highest we can have, and the
only testimony we need care about. Whosoever has - r
Jtldue u* huOA? //i ***■
-/V fa


CU*S fi*~Q4**f * oiUUnt/
Jj rf frjOPiPrykrts? (P w 6/ *0
* really perceived Christ can no more help believing in
/— —rHim than a seeing man can help believing in the sun
'// of a cloudless noon.
PtA t'/u* CUUu*i Christ is therefore the sole authority. He is the
/ „ one Teacher, the one Lord, and the one Master
_ (Mt. 23 :8, 10, and Jo. 13 ; 13). The Confession of
Faith rightly states that the Scriptures are “ the rule
of faith and life ” ; and they are so, not because they
contain statements of truth and rules of conduct
otherwise undiscoverable by man, but because they
and reveal to us Christ, who Himself is the
go j e t( ru j e G f f a ith, and life.” He is the one “ rule of
faith,” for He alone teaches with authority. “ Be-
lieve Me !” (Jo. 14 : .11) He ever says. And when
He tells of Divine things, He speaks that He knows,
and bears witness of that He has seen (Jo, 3 : 11).
Christ is the one “ rule of life.” “ Follow Me I” is
His command, and that is enough. They that have
Christ for a rule need no other, and by following
Him they will fulfil all righteousness.
Results of Seeing Christ.
The Restoration of Christ to the place of authority
which is rightly and solely His, carries with it vast
consequences. A wonderful vision of that which
shall be passes rapidly before my mind, and must be
as rapidly sketched.
Christian scholars will have freedom to seek the
truth without fear and without suspicion, for their
criticism cannot touch the inherent authority of the
“self evidencing” Christ, and can only result in
making surer and clearer the testimony borne to Him
by His already “ sufficient witnesses.”
There will come a change in the methods of
Missions, and the work will be more rapid and sure.
Instead of trying to show the inferiority of Hindu
metaphysics to the metaphysics got by Christianity
from Greece, instead of trying to indoctrinate
savages with the complex and perplexing dogmas of
d -fa CV>t/W/ tlttj
JlUu*, tj a e*yr(*jUt eX (Vi-ottbP CfsUZuuj CZZ
Cjcnrt\ Xf cu&to *1


JI \ hzus 29
X * Cucm-y tt/tU alt' #cA _ I
$ | scholastic theology, alike to learned pundit and I
J S k untaught savage the Gospel preached will be simp } /
| S.r the “ holdino- forth of the Word of Life, the simple J
I Christ Himself. The heathen world
| I will soon feel the spell of the fascination that is m
? \ Him and will crowd to touch the hern ot His
K t $ garment and be made whole. Already the hoary^
§ 5 J religions of the East are front to front with^*
§ 'tv* Christianity. When once Christianity has
how to show Christ Himself to the peoples,
\ victory will be won. When once the sun ot Christs
® I I unique personality rises above the horizon of th
\ I 4 East those brilliant stars of the night, the >c.
4 v K Sages, Zarathushtra, Gautama, Lao-tsze, and K
j Fh-tsze, will pale and wane and be lost in His “L, '
sr All Churches and religious institutions will be
< tested by being brought face to face with Christ--^
Whatever doctrine, ceremony, practice, or polity
alien from Him must go. Walls of separation
between the Churches have been by the pride and
folly of men built up—of fragments of Judaism and
Paganism, such as the .sacerdotal superstition,—ot
traditions and fictions of men, such as apostolic suc-
cession, of things made essential about which Christ
showed no interest, such as rite and ritual and forms
of politv. When once the Church indeed sees
Christ and acknowledges His sole authority, these
woful divisions will melt away like mists in the sun-
shine, and Christ’s prayer will be fulfilled, that
they may be one” (Jo. 17 : 22.)
To every nation of the world and to every human
custom, law, and institution, without exception, the
question must be put—“ What think ye of the
7... . ,n\ T!U n nam V (,hriST, IS
Christ?” (Mt. 22 : 42). The more plainly Christ is
shown to the world, the more disposed will the world
be to acknowledge Him as the King of men to seek
to know His will in all its affairs private and public
to find in His teaching the solution of all social
problems, and to enact His laws as the laws of the
State Already Christ is a moral and political force


such as He never has been before, and we can see
this hopeful sign of the times —all sorts of men, even
those who hate the Church that bears Christ’s name,
speak with profoundest respect of Him and try to
show that He is on their side. When the world
really sees Him, its King, He will reign not onl_y in
the hearts and lives of individual men, but also in
society and in the State. His will be “ a dominion
such as no Caesar ever exercised, and a throne such
as no monarch ever filled.’ The earth will be full of
the glory of Christ, the King of Men.
The New Theology.
The most immediate consequence of the recognition
of Christ’s sole authority will be its effect on practical
Beligion and on Theology.
When once a Christian sees in Christ Himself
the sole “ rule of life,” he will no longer limp along
laden with innumerable legal fetters, which gall him
at every limp. He will be a free man, gladsomely
following Christ. His one aim will be Chnstlikeness,
and growth in Christlikeness will be his spiritual
history. And when once Christ is acknowledged as
the sole “ rule of faith,” and His consciousness as the
one authoritative source of the knowledge of Divine
things, it will be seen that theology must be re-stated,
and the Creed of the Church re-written, from this
new point of view. That is the work of reconstruc-
tion that lies before Christ’s Church for many a year
to come.
The theology of the future will not be systematic
and rationalised, as at present. It will be Biblical
in a historical setting, and will be based on a thorough
criticism of the Scripture books. But the centre
round which all its parts must be grouped, and to
which they must all conform, is Christs infallible
intuition of the Fatherhood of God. For the theology
which has been shaped by philosophers and scholas-
tics, and which has had incorporated into it diverse


elements of Hebrew ideals, Rabbinical traditions,
Greek speculations and Roman jurisprudence and
polity, there must be substituted the theology of
Christ, who alone is the pure fountain-head of Divine
truth. /i) C yf tftfhCVyr#
The presenCorthodox theology has for its
the Sovereignty of God, and from this it
grows and spreads. It was elaborated by Calvin,
but was fashioned by Augustine, whose mind was
dominated by the image of Imperial Rome, which is
reflected in his conception of the “ City of God.”
The primary ideas are : —God is aji autocrat. Man *
is a subject, a rebel and a criminal. All the relations '
of God and man are stated in forensic terms borrowed '
from the jurists. Suffering is penal and is inflicted
in the interests of “law and order.”
On the other hand the root-idea of the theology of
Christ is the Fatherhood of God. The Sovereignty Ajt
of God is also fully recognised. It is, however, the -£^7 —
sovereignty, not of an absolute despot who rules by .
irresistible might, but of a Father w 7 ho rules by love.
In the consciousness of Christ, God is a Father. Man
is a son, disobedient indeed, but capable of being
reconciled. And suffering is chastisement inflicted
for the reformation and good of the sufferer. The
real attitude of God to sinful men is indicated, not in
the ideas of Roman jurists, but in the parable of the
Prodigal Son.
Further, Christ, by his intuition of God, interprets
the universe for us. As a fixed point amid the
speculations of science, He gives us this faith, that
the universe is not made and ruled by an inscrutable,
inexorable, passionless Force, but by a loving Father. *
At one moment Nature, with smiling face, tells of
the goodness of God the Maker. Anon “ Nature,
red in tooth and claw with ravin, shrieks against that
creed.” But above the storm of contradiction we
hear the calm clear voice of the Son of God assuring
us that God is the loving Father of Men.


2v/tM/ tfyyi is? ~/uuj> @ —
4yb*4y y /Is
sftUrj yisy, L_ . 'ZcA&'l /d>^/ /^J^K,
* “tk te 7 Stss
Fathers and Brethren, your sacred and joyous
o work lies before you. Set the people of Christ free
from the traditions of the Scribes, “ heavy burdens
fytuuue™ grievous to be borne ”; carry light to souls be-
wildered in the darkness, and peace to souls groaning
2t> an( j trembling under the dire suspicions and terrible
y or? doubts engendered by a false Theory of the Bible,
y?/ /e Ever “ look unto Jesus, the author and perfecter of
j faith,” and to Him alone. Ever study with
intensest ardour His words, His life, and above all
f Himself, that His great figure may ever become
f mo re clearly defined to your own souls. The deep
/uc? Tf~ need of the Church and of the individual Christian
Qms 2) is that felt by Augustine when he cried in
j-. y pain, “ Oh, that I had seen Christ in the flesh I ”
CJw This | s passionate cry of the men of to-day :
C* /rurrJ* “^ e would see Jesus!” Fathers and Brethren,
. . show the people the glorious Person of
y u* hrist without any veil of human tradition. Learn.
y to conceive of God as Christ conceived of
/2uA. Him; and fervently teach men so, with faithful
/ 7 / words and Christ-like life, that the happy time may
be brought nearer when all men shall look up to
and say, “ Our Father,” and shall cast their
ruy /C Brothers.”
Fathers and Brethren, the greatest moment in the
history of Humanity was when Jesus Christ in the
e T c " depths of His own soul first said, “My Father,” The
-&*!•> , perplexing problems of human lile were solved, the
re l a fi° ns °f man 1° Ood °f man to nian were
the real character of God was proclaimed, when
Jesus Christ taught sinful suffering men to say with
unfaltering faith, “ Our Father—Our Father which
art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy name. Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done, aa in heaven, so on
earth.” Amen.






TEE MODERATOR'S ADDRESS.
A SETTLEMENT ARRIVED AT.
In the Presbytery of Sydney last night, there was
resumed the adjourned debate on the Eev. W. M.
Dill Macky’s motion, —“That the presbytery proceed
to consider ctfrn periculo the motion of the Eev. J.
Paton,” which asked for a conference between the
presbytery and the Moderator of the General Assem-
bly with reference to the address delivered at the
opening of the Assembly on the 6th March last.
The Rev. W. Dill Macky said that at this point
ho was in a position to say that they might come to
an understanding which would set the Church at
rest—(hear, hear)—and which would set their minds
at rest. He rose because he hoped the matter would
never come before the General Assembly to be de-
bated. He had spent four consecutive hours with
the Moderator over his address, and with the excep-
tion of the placing of the canon of the Old and New
Testament, he could assert for Mr, MTnnes that so
far as he (the speaker) was concerned, Mr. MTnnes
was firm in the faith. (Hear, hear.)
The Eev. E. M‘Kinnon : I do not understand this
procedure.
The Moderator (the Eev. S. T. Dickinson) said he
thought it would be very wise to allow Mr. Dill
Macky to proceed.
The Eev. W. Dill Macky, continuing, said he
wanted to make an explanation because he had taken
a prominent position in opposing the Moderator and
in denouncing him on account of his address. After
having spent four hours with Mr. MTnnes, he could
say that, with the exception of the closing of the Old
and New Testaments, Mr. MTnnes and he were at
one.
The Eev. E. M‘Kinnon: What has that to do
with it ?
The Eev. W. Dill Macky said that he had mis-
understood the Moderator when he referred to the
texts of Scripture. He had misunderstood him when
Ls thought Mr. MTnnes referred to the originals,
and not to the texts or the translations. Mr.
MTnnes had stated to him that he never referred to
the original texts, which altered the whole position.
The Rev, R. M‘Kinnon : I certainly object to this
apology for the Moderator,
The Rev. Dr. Kinross said Mr. Dill Macky was
going too far. He ought to withdraw the motion.
The Rev. W. Dill Macky said he was telling
them why he was going to withdraw. The Moderator
did not refer to the originals, he referred to the texts,
whereas the impression which was made upon the
whole Church was that the Moderator had directly
attacked the originals. The verbal theory,
as referring to the authorised version and
to the English versions was at an end.
None of them ever doubted it, none
of them ever debated it. The other mis-
understanding was in regarding the Bible as a code
of rules. Mr. Maclnnes did hold that it contained a
“code of rules, Sht he Wanted it made plain that not
every text, not every passage, could be quoted as
God’s will. For instance, the argument of Bildad,
in the Book of Job, was an inspired record, but it
did not follow that it was God’s will, God’s mind.
Then, with the exception of the closing of the canons
of Scripture, so far as Mr. Maclnnes had spoken to
him he held that Mr. Maclnnes was as firm in the
faith as he was. (Hear, hear.) He withdrew the
motion.
The Rev. E. Dill Macky, as seconder of the
motion, in concurring in its withdrawal, said he also
had understood that Mr. Maclnnes had attacked the
original manuscripts. If he had known, as he knew
now, what the Moderator really meant, he would
have been very sorry to have raised the note of
alarm in the General Assembly.
By consent the motion was withdrawn.
The Rev. Dr. Bruce gave in reasons for dissent
and appeal against the decision of the Presbytery in
allowing the competency of the Rev. J. Baton’s
motion.
The Eev. T. Clouston said that no assembly or
presbytery would settle this matter. We were living
in a formative age, and the opinion of men would
settle the question. How the matter would be finally
left he was not prepared to say.
The Eev. P. F. M'Kenzie said that what was
contained in the Moderator’s address had been
known to them long ago. There was not a single
new idea in it. There could be no doubt that many
people who knew.very little about theological matters,
I and who had considerable and influential positions in
the Church, had been very much irritated by the
address.
The Rev. Dr. Kinross urged upon Mr. Paton to
withdraw his motion. Dogma could no* be secured
jby church discipline. The only way to secure dogma
; was by the manifestation of the truth.
The Eev. J. Paton, in answer to the evident wish
( of the Presbytery, withdrew his motion, and Dr.
j Bruce withdrew his reasons for dissent and ap-
-1 peal.
Mr. Sidey said that as all this withdrawing was
i going on-perhaps the Moderator would withdraw his
address. (“ No, no.”)
Tfip Eev. W. M, Dill Mackay thought it would
be extremely pleasing if Mr. Maclnnes would make a
statement. (Voices: “ No, no ; next business.”)
The matt " then dropped.
S \\ ,
1 3


“There are only two orthodox men in the
parish,” explained a good old Scotchman to
the new minisfer, “myself and Duncan,
and to tell ye‘ the truth, I hae my doots
aboot Duncan.” Mr. Dill-Macky is rather
more liberal than this gentleman, for he
now admits that “with the exception of the
date of closing of the Canon, the Moderator,
Mr. Maclnnes, is as sound in the faith as
himself.” There certainly remains a trace
of “doot,” but as it is only in reference to
a matter of detail, he is willing to accept
the Moderator’s orthodoxy as practically on
a par with his own. This is no rashly-
made concession either, as Mr. Macky tells
us that it was only decided upon “after
spending four consecutive hours with the
Moderator over his address,” so that it was
for a long while evidently touch-and-go with
Mr. Maclnnes. Having arrived at this un-
derstanding, the “verbal inspiration” ques-
tion is declared settled on the basis of com-
promise. Jeremiah, about whose status as
an inspired prophet all the trouble arose,
is to stand good in the original Hebrew,
but no one is found to accept any transla-
tion of his utterings as necessarily correct.
It seems, therefore, that Mr. Maclnnes has
got all the best of the settlement. So long
as he has secured liberty to doubt in Eng-
lish, he may well agree to conform in
Hebrew. And it may be asked what is the
use of an uninspired translator interpreting
an inspired prophecy? As far as moderns
are concerned it is only the translation that
counts, and if there is no necessity to be-
lieve that, the day of the original may be
Adeemed virtually at an end. How can
people who have no knowledge of Hebrew
undertake to believe something told in that
language, and which loses its orthodoxy in
translation? The Moderator has plainly
yielded no ground, but still stands on that
taken in his address. All the same, it is
a good thing that the dispute is settled.
With the world in its present state, the
strong men of Christianity can afford to
waste none of their strength fighting oTcr
points of barren orthodoxy^
