

MODERN HOMES
THE CAMPBELL
HOME
MODERNISING
SERVICE.
FROM OLD HOUSES
JAMES CAMPBELL & SONS PTY. LTD.
CREEK ST., BRISBANE.




INTRODUCTION
SINCE its introduction just over a year ago, Home Modernising has
become a most important work in the City of Brisbane. It was through
the enterprise of James Campbell H Sons Pty. Ltd. that the advantages
of Home Modernising have been brought to home owners, and it is now
a common sight to see well-planned alterations and additions being made to
many of Brisbane’s out-of-date houses.
The photographs overleaf definitely prove the wisdom of the words “It Pays
to Modernise.’’ Many of these homes, before being modernised, could neither
be let nor sold, but after modernising they became not only a prontabxe
investment, but an attraction to the locality.
Land values in streets where homes have been modernised have increased, much
to the delight of property owners and real estate agents.
Modernising is an exclusive service offered by James Campbell & Sons Pty.
Ltd., and their wide knowledge of this work, plus 79 years’ practical experi-
ence in the building trade, assures the homeowner of complete satisfaction.
The testimonials published on the next page are typical of the many unsolicited
letters of appreciation which are now regularly received in the mail.
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LTD.
Citv Office: Creek St,, Brisbane; Phone B 1051. Sawmills and Potteries: Albion,


MODERNISE YOUR HOME—THE CAMPBELL WAY
Real these Unsolicited Testimonials
A Hamilton resident on the 30th January wrote:—
“Messrs. James Campbell & Sons Pty. Ltd.,
Albion Sawmills, ALBION.
Gentlemen:
I wish to take this opportunity to extend my hearty
congratulations to your firm, its architect, and the selected
contractor for the excellent result produced and for the
great convenience of all your arrangements which reduced
my trouble to the irreducible minimum.
The design, worked up by you on my rough sugges-
tions, was very satisfactory, the actual execution of the
work by the contractor, under your firm’s supervision (Mr.
E. C. Campbell attending) was splendid, and the modernised
appearance of the house is a most
pleasing and useful transformation.
I congratulate your firm on the
whole job, and wish to express my
thanks for your unfailing courtesy
and assistance.
In conclusion, I wish to pay a
tribute to the excellent service of
the firm of James Campbell & Sons,
with whom it has been a pleasure
to transact business. Many thanks.”
Modernising is essential if you have a house that is
untenanted or unsaleable. Campbells are the recognised
experts on Home Modernising.
Get their advice on any renovations or repairs.
The following letter was received from an Ascot resi-
dent dated 24th May, 1932:
“Messrs. James Campbell & Sons Pty. Ltd.,
Creek Street, BRISBANE.
Dear Sirs:
Please find enclosed cheque being in payment of my
account. I must congratulate your firm on the good work
done, also the fine lot of men you employ. I always knew
I could leave the house open and have no worries, and
that is a big thing to say at the present time.
I shall always take pleasure in recommending your
firm to all my friends who require any building done, for
good work and at a reasonable price.”
A Corinda resident on the Bth April, 1932, wrote:—
“To James Campbell & Sons Pty. Ltd.,
Creek Street, BRISBANE.
I very much appreciate your help throughout the
whole of the job, and not only will I be pleased to place
any further work in your hands, but consider, in recom-
mending your Company to my friends, I will be rendering
them a “valuable service. ‘ MY CHOICE WAS FULLY
JUSTIFIED.”


NEW HOMES FROM OLD HOUSES
A Wonderful Transformation
A Hamilton Residence Modernised
by the Campbell Service
THE photograph before modernising work was commenced, shows
this house as an ordinary residence without individuality. The
photograph after the modernising work had been completed
JAMES CAMPBELL & SONS PTY,. LIMITED Phone: 81051
shows a new home —modern, at-
tractive and original.
As will be noticed, a very wide
front verandah, having a room
at either end, was added. These
rooms were completely enclosed
with leadlight casements, mat-
ing ideal sleeping-out porches,
which are becoming so popular
for the Queensland climate. The
improved appearance of the
house was also effected by
altering the roof lines, adding
attractive gables, and repainting.
The cost was most reasonable,
and the owner was delighted
with the results.


IT PAYS TO MODERNISE—THE CAMPBELL WAY
Once an Old Home at Clayfield—Now a Modern Dwelling
HERE is an excellent
example of what
Modernising can accom-
plish. This old home was a
difficult letting proposition,
but before the modernising
work was completed, the
owner had let it to a suitable
tenant. The photograph
showing the modernising
work in progress will demon-
strate the skilful planning
and building experience that
is required.
Although this home appears
to be larger, it was not in-
creased in size. A portion of
the verandah was taken away,
and in its place a bay window
added to the front bedroom.
The roof was altered, and
three gables built, which
were panelled with Endurite
Asbestos Cement Sheets, as
shown in the last photograph.
The old iron palisading on
the verandah was replaced
with neat Endurite Asbestos
Cement panels. Square bat-
tening under the house, sep-
tic installation, concrete path
from front gate to steps, and
the house painted outside,
put the finishing touches to
an attractive property.
JAMES CAMPBELL b' SONS PTY. LIMITED


MODERNISING INCREASES PROPERTY VALUES
This Ascot Home was
Improved by Modernising
the Campbell Way
THE difference between the old and
the new, forms a striking contrast.
This home was out of place in the
street, because the majority of homes
were of modern design.
JAMES CAMPBELL 0 SONS PTY. LIMITED
The change in appearance was effected
by altering the roof lines, and adding
gables at each end of the front verandah’s
main roof. The vestibule entrance was
formed on the left hand side, and panel-
led inside with “Beaver Board.” Shingle 3
were fitted under the sills of the porches
and panels of Endurite Asbestos Cement
sheets formed in the centre, replacing the
old balusters. The steps were altered to
a new position, leading up to the vesti-
bule.


BRING YOUR PROPERTY UP-TO-DATE—MODERNISE THE CAMPBELL WAY
This Residence at Bowen Hills
was improved by a Tiled Concrete Porch
THE smaller photograph below shows the front of this residence before
the additions were made. Note how the everlasting tiled porch with
Jacobean columns, also the tiled window shade over the front bed-
room, add to the appearance of this fine home, and also provide protection
to the casements and front door.
Even with the most modern homes, small alterations and additions can
improve their appearance, and add to
their convenience. Modernising may
be carried out in many different ways.
Some homes may need only a few_
improvements such as a new fence,
concrete paths and steps, a new porch,
or it may be the repainting of a house
that will bring back its charm.
The interior offers wonderful scope
fQr beautification with the latest pat-
terns in wall papers, and the panelled
effects which can be obtained with
Beaver Board, Endurite, Celotex, Ply-
wood, and other Campbell wall boards,
filed walls in the kitchen and bath-
room greatly assist in the modernising
of these two important rooms. Every-
thing necessary for bringing a home
right up-to-date is embraced in the
Campbell Home Modernising Service.
JAMES CAMPBELL ft SONS PTY. LIMITED


MODERNISING CAN BE CARRIED OUT ON EITHER A LARGE OR SMALL SCALE
These Charming Additions gave Extra Room
to this Modern Residence at Yeerongpilly
TO harmonise with the rest of the building, this new maid’s room and
bathroom incorporating a septic installation, were built —the walls
being rough cast on timber frames.
The photographs show the effect of these charming additions. With the
large range of building materials available, and expert workmen who are
trained in every phase of building work, no problem is too difficult for the
Campbell Home Modernising Service. Suggestions and ideas are gladly
offered to home owners who wish to improve their properties.
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED


MONEY WISELY SPENT ON MODERNISING IS A PROFITABLE INVESTMENT
Modernising made a
different home of this
Bulimba House
BY extending the front bedroom and
building a gable over it, also adding a
bay window, the once plain outline
was changed to a modern, pleasing design.
The verandah was also extended to form a
JAMES CAMPBELL ft SONS PTY. LIMITED
porch, thus allowing a modern set of steps
to be fitted, and still making use of the
existing path from the front gate.
The pergola from the front gate to the
steps replaced the old iron frame work as
shown in the first photograph.
Most old homes are soundly built, and with
a few well-considered alterations, designed
and supervised by the Campbell Home
Modernising Service, they compare favour-
ably with new homes.


CONSULT CAMPBELLS ON ALL MODERNISING AND BUILDING PROBLEMS
One of Campbells First
Modernising Jobs
The modernising programme called for alterations
of the roof lines, and the front bedroom was
extended and gabled, and by moving a partition,
two good sized bedrooms were made.
The remainder of the verandah was extended and
gabled, giving the other rooms greater protection
from the sun, this home having a westerly aspect.
At the rear of the house, a breakfast room was
added. The front fence was rebuilt, and attrac-
tive wire gates replaced the old wood ones.
This house is a concrete example of how money
wisely spent in modernising is a sound invest-
ment, earning profitable interest for the owner
of the house.
CAMPBELLS are rather proud of this
modernising job, because it demon-
strated the practical benefits of
modernising. Situated at Kangaroo Point,
the old house, as shown in the first photo-
graph, could neither be let nor sold.
Before the modernising was completed,
many inquiries had been made and a suit-
able tenant was selected.
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED


FOR BIGGER RENTS AND MORE COMFORT—MODERNISE THE CAMPBELL WAY
How Modernising can
assist Business
The old awning was taken down and re-
placed by a parapet awning panelled with
“Endurite Asbestos Cement” sheets. The
old windows and doors were replaced
with plate glass windows and swing
doors. To a section above the plate glass
windows, a margin of leadlight was
added, and the balance tiled as shown in
the photograph of the finished building.
Naturally this shop will now attract more
customers because it is more inviting.
This is one of the many cases in which
modernising can be used to advantage
for increasing business patronage.
JUST compare the photographs “Before”
and “After,” of this butcher’s shop
situated at New Farm.
The former building had nothing attractive
about it, and as a butcher’s premises should
be clean and hygienic in appearance, the
owner decided to modernise it the Campbell
way.
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED


MODERNISING ASSISTS EMPLOYMENT BY CREATING WORK AND CIRCULATING MONEY
Another Fine Example
of
Campbell
Modernising
dah was ceiled and panel-
led, with “Endurite Asbes-
tos Cement” Sheets.
The main bedroom was
made larger by extending
it across the verandah.
The dining room was
panelled with Queensland
plywood. The fireplace
was tiled, and another bay
window added, giving
extra light and seating
accommodation. In th e
kitchen, alterations were
made to the sink by tiling,
and modern plumbing fix-
tures were installed.
THE l'ront of this resid-
ence at Ascot was
modernised by ex-
tending the front bedroom
and altering the roof lines
by building a gable roof
over the main building.
The added bay window
with leadlights also helps
to give a modern appear-
ance.
The spacious side veran-
JAMES CAMPBELL -8 SONS PTY. LIMITED


HAVE YOU AN OLD HOME YOU CAN'T SELL OR LET?—THEN MODERNISE THE CAMPBELL WAY
Another extension was made at the back,
forming a bathroom and bedroom.
Alterations to the kitchen provided a larger
stove recess lined with “Endurite Asbestos”
sheets, new sink and draining board. A
new tank, hath, concrete wash tubs and a
repaint, together with the above mentioned
improvements, turned this old home into a
very comfortable modern residence.
The two photographs on this page show the
wonderful transformation in the front and
side views.
Side
View
Front and side views before modernising,
A Home on the Southport Road
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED
THIS old home was made up of three
buildings built close to the ground,
with floors at different levels. They
were raised to a height of about five feet.
The old roofs were removed, the ceilings
brought to the one height and a new roof
constructed over the whole building.
As it was desired that the front bedroom
be enlarged it was decided to extend this


INVESTIGATE THE ADVANTAGES OF MODERNISING—CAMPBELLS OFFER SUGGESTIONS
Side
View
What a difference after modernising,
Modernised the Campbell Way
partly across the verandah and the forming
of a gable over same gave the roof a bal-
anced appearance. Part of the front
verandah was enclosed with casements and
ceiled, making a very fine room.
The remaining verandahs were also ceiled.
The ceiling of verandahs would give added
comfort to many homes.
JAMES CAMPBELL ft SONS PTY. LIMITED
Modernising on either a large or small scale
is profitable. A modern dwelling com-
mands attention and very seldom fails to
attract a suitable buyer or tenant.
Modernising also assists in arresting depre-
ciation.
Repainting will often make a house look like
new, and preserve the woodwork and other
fittings from decay. The Campbell
Modernising Service is complete in every
respect. No job is too difficult.


MODERNISING IS THE ONLY METHOD OF MAKING AN OLD HOME UP-TO-DATE
Rear of Red Hill Residence
Modernised by Campbells
the westerly aspect of the house. The veran-
dah was enclosed with casements and ceiled.
One can imagine that this portion of the home
now has plenty of use, because it is comfort-
able and convenient.
In rebuilding the backroom, Campbells ex-
tended it slightly, and in doing so, were able
to form a bathroom, lavatory, and laundry, the
foundation and floors of which were built of
concrete, and the walls of “Endurite Asbestos
Cement” sheets. A special Campbell Ironite
floor was also installed in the bathroom, giving
it a finished appearance.
THE verandah and back room of this house
were in a state of collapse, due mainly to
being in contact with the ground. The
Campbell Home Modernising Service was called
in, and the verandah was rebuilt with Endurite
Asbestos Cement Sheeting which is a per-
manent building material. A rather large
overhang was added to the roof on account of
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED


MODERNISE YOUR HOME AND STOP DEPRECIATION OF VALUE
Attractive Improvements help to Modernise Properties
JAMES CAMPBELL & SONS PTY. LIMITED
Top: A brick fence which replaced an old wooden fence at a Paddington residence. Bottom: A modern wooden fence at Clay-
field with one of the latest types of iron gates. Centre: An attractive wooden pergola, erected at Ascot. Top Right and Bottom
Right: Modern aviaries erected at Clayfleld. These are a great improvement on the ones usually seen. Campbells have built a
number of aviaries of similar design, and the owners have been very pleased with the results.


MODERNISING INCREASES PRIDE OF OWNERSHIP
was laid and a sleep-out room on the verandah was
built. The whole house was repainted. The owner
expressed appreciation of the Campbell Modernising
Service.
This view shows the beautiful sun room which was
added to a residence at Eagle Junction. Georgian
Pattern leadlights in the casements on three sides
transformed an old verandah into a delightfully airy
room for summer, and a warm room for winter. A
plain but solid arch was built to set off the living
room from the sun room.
Campbell’s have built many attractive sun rooms
they are a decided acquisition to any home.
Panelling
on Old Walls and Ceilings
Modernises Homes
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED
THE top photograph shows two rooms which were panel-
led and arched, in a residence at Wooloowin. Treated
with “Beaver Board,” both on walls and ceiling, a
delightful finish was given to the interior.
Beaver Board is specially adapted for interior decoration,
and any selected colour of Bergers Matone Paint to harmonise
with the other appointments in the room miay be applied.
Among other fittings which helped to modernise these rooms
were swing doors. Modern electric light fixtures were also
installed. In the bathroom of this home, an “Ironite” floor


THERE’S A MIRACLE IN MODERNISING
T 2Sn in the''inside ° f windows greatly assists the modernising plan. They are attractive from the outside, and more so
The window box is a very comfortable seat when the front panel is constructed so as to avoid coming in contact with the feet
the interior views of the bay windows shown above give an excellent idea of the added comfort and convenience leet '
Ihe seat consists of two lift-up lids, the underneath portion forming a convenient cupboard
Charming Bay Windows added to Homes at Windsor and Ascot
JAMES CAMPBELL « SONS PTY. LIMITED


MODERNISING COSTS ONLY WHAT YOU CAN AFFORD
An Attractive Living Room in a Modernised Hamilton Home
JAMES CAMPBELL ft SONS PTY. LIMITED
r T* HIS room was previously lined and ceiled with Queensland pine. The modernising’ work entailed a new plaster-set ceiling and
frieze, panelled walls and china shelf with horizontal panels above. Between this room and the sitting room shown opposite,
sliding doors were fitted. Other improvements included a tiled and brick fireplace, also new electric light fittings.


EVERY STREET IN BRISBANE HAS ITS OUT-OF-DATE HOUSES—WHY NOT MODERNISE?
Modernising made a Wonderful Improvement to this Lounge Room
JAMES CAMPBELL r d SONS PTY. LIMITED
LIKE the dining- room, this portion was also previously lined and ceiled with Queensland pine. In the modernising work
a plaster-set ceiling, frieze and walls were added. The walls were then papered up to the picture rail and a china shelf
added, the lower edge of the frieze thus forming an unbroken line around the room—a beautiful finish to an attractive room.


IF NOT A NEW HOME—WHY NOT A BETTER ONE?
The Old and the New!
A BATHROOM MODERNISED BY CAMPBELLS
AT TOOWONG
r y HE old bathroom was enlarged, the window being replaced with two
single casements between which an attractive mirror was hung.
The old floor was replaced by one of
Campbell’s special “Ironite” floors,
which can he obtained in grey, red, or
black, and when once installed are there
for a lifetime. The old bath was re-
placed by the square type bath framed
up and enclosed with “Tilux.” The gas
heater was replaced by a modern elec-
tric heater. A beautiful pedestal basin
took the place of the old type wash basin
and the walls were panelled with
“Tilux” with an “Endurite Asbestos”
frieze and ceiling. Campbells have
modernised a number of bathrooms in
the suburbs, and all clients state how
delighted they are.
JAMES CAMPBELL & SONS PTY. LIMITED


MODERNISE YOUR HOME AND KEEP PACE WITH THE TIMES
Another Bathroom Modernised by Campbells
JAMES CAMPBELL ft SONS PTY. LIMITED
'T’HE chief modernising; features of this bathroom are the tiled walls and floor, the modern pedestal suite and the method
adopted for the concealment of the water pipes to the bath and heater. Other fittings are to be replaced by modern ones later.


NO HOME IS TOO OLD FOR MODERNISING—ASK CAMPBELLS FOR SKILLED ADVICE
A Modern Tiled Stove Recess
Note the modern way of fitting the sink to the drain-
ing board. Here is another Campbell Modernising idea.
Instead of the usual practice of overlapping the sink
with the draining board, leaving a harbour for insects
and dirt, Campbells install their sinks into the draining
board from the top, which makes a neat clean flush job.
Tiles or other materials replace the old iron on the
back. The plumbing work is concealed, and the water
pipe taken through the lining and tiles, and then
finished off with a rosette. Many of these sinks have
been installed by the Campbell service.
CLEANLINESS and plenty of room wece the main
features in this job. Both wood and gas stoves
were installed, because of their various advan-
tages. The wood stove may be considered out of
date. Nevertheless, in conjunction with either the gas
or electric stove, it is very handy to the housewife and
family during the winter months.
JAMES CAMPBELL fc SONS PTY. LIMITED


THE SURFACE” WITH BERGERS B.P. PAINTS (Prepared)
A T moderate cost, many improvements can be made which will
/-> /A materially alter the appearance and comfort of your old home. Even
the modest out-of-date home can be made like new —perhaps with
such alterations as changing the roof lines—modern doors and windows- —
verandah enclosed with casements —panelling—painting—septic tank installa-
tion—drainage—concrete paths, etc.
Campbells offer a specialised service for all kinds of home improvement work
on Easy Terms.
Enquire now about the Campbell Easy Payment Plan—Bergers’ Australian-
made paints are used exclusively, and all specifications are prepared and lowest
quotations obtained for your approval.
IF YOU DO NOT WISH TO BUILD A NEW HOME,
WHY NOT MODERNISE YOUR PRESENT PROPERTY?
PAINT NOW PAY LATER
One-fifth Deposit—balance in 10 equal Monthly Payments.
Free Descriptive Leaflet on Application.
JAMES CAMPBELL 8 SONS PTY. LIMITED Phone: B 1051


VIEWS OF THE CAMPBELL WAREHOUSE, SAWMILLS AND POTTERIES
JAMES CAMPBELL « SONS PTY. LIMITED —' Phone: 81051
The top view shows the ex-
tensive Campbell Sawmills and
Joinery Works at Albion, near
Brisbane. Campbells also have
their own timber lands in dif-
ferent parts of the State. The
view below is of the Campbell
Brick and Pottery Works, also
at Albion, where all classes of
bricks, pipes and pottery ware
are manufactured.
Here is the spacious Campbell
Warehouse, right in the heart
of the City of Brisbane. New
display windows and retail
showrooms have recently been
installed, and a cordial invita-
tion is always open to the pub-
lic to call and inspect the large
and modern stocks.


WAREHOUSE
Glass, Mirrors
Galvanised Iron
Rainwater Goods
Electrical Fittings
Bathroom Fittings
Chinaware
Kitchen Utensils
Bergers Paints and Varnishes,
Endurite, Celotex,
Beaver Board, Tllux,
Sanionyx, Tiles
Roofing Slates and Damp-
course
SAWMILLS
Valley Branch: Ballow Street.
Builders' Hardware
Tools of Trade
Cement
Wire and Wire Netting
Cattle Dip
Wood Preserving Oil
Sporting Materials (Tennis,
Cricket, Golf, Fishing Tackle,
eto.)
Gas and Electric Stoves
Gas, Electric and Chip Bath
Heaters
Nails, Screws, Bolts, and all
Building Accessories
City Office: Creek Street.
Timber (All Kinds)
Joinery
Woodwork
Queensland Pine
Oregon
Silky Oak
Maple
Plywood
Hardwood
Mouldings
Cases
Redicut Buildings and Homes
JAMES CAMPBELL & SONS PTY. LTD.
POTTERIES
Bricks
Glazed Pipes
Fire Bricks
Garden Tiles
Terra Cotta
Majoirca Ware
Acid Jars
Household Earthenware
Plaster Work
Agricultural Pipes
Sawmills and Joinery Works: Albion Potteries: Albion


Copyright, April, 1933
(All Rights Reserved)
