

TERRITORY OF PAPUA
The Blending of Cultures:
An Essay on the Aims of
Native Education
By
F. E. WILLIAMS
M. A . ( Adelaide ); B.Se., Dip. Anth. ( Oxford )
Government Anthropologist
Anthropology, Report No. 16
1935
Port Moresby:
Walter Altred Bock, Government Printer




TERRITORY OF PAPUA
The Blending of Cultures:
An Essay on the Aims of
Native Education
By
F. E. WILLIAMS
M.A. ( Adelaide ); B.Sc., Dip. Anth. (Oxford)
Government Anthropologist
Anthropology, Report No. 16
1935
Port Moresby:
Walter Alfred Bock, Government Printer.—7ss7/10.35.


PREFACE
essay, under the title of Education and
IP? Culture Contact , was written in 1933 and gained
the Wellcome Medal for Anthropological Re-
search for that year. The terms of reference,
laid down by the Royal Anthropological Institute, require
a “ research essay on the application of anthropological
methods to the problems of native peoples, particularly
those arising from intercourse between native peoples, or
between primitive natives and civilized races.” The claim
of native education to represent such a problem needs no
defence.
Since my own practical experience has been limited
to Papua some of the more concrete suggestions in what
follows may be considered to have special reference to
local conditions. But the essay represents a theoretical
approach to the problem of native education as a whole,
and its main conclusions, whatever their validity, are set
down as if for general application.
Port Moresby,
June, 1935.
E. E. W.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Native Education and Native Policy ... ... 1
Cultural Change and the Justification for
Education ... ... ... ... 1
Education in Eelation to Culture ... ... 4
"The Error of Europeanization ... ... 5
A Blend op Cultures ... ... ... 7
The Three Tasks op Education ... ... 8
The Task op Maintenance, ... ... ... 9
The Attitude of Neutrality ... ... 10
The Attitude of Encouragement ... ... 11
The Task of Expurgation ... ... .... 14
Bad Elements in Culture ... ... ... ■ 15
The Eisks of Elimination... ... ... 17
Intellectual Education . ... ... 19
Suggestion and Example ... ... ... 21
Punishment ... ... ... ... 22
The Task op Expansion ... ... ... 25
A Eeformed Horticulture... ... ... 26
Scholastic Education; English ... ... 28
Christianity ... ... ... ... 31
The Ultimate Aim ... ... ... ... 37
A Society and Its Culture... ... ... 38
The Imperfection of Culture ... ... 39
The Evaluation of Culture Elements ... ... 41
The Development of Personality ... ... 42




The Blending of Cultures: An Essay on the
Aims of Native Education.
Native Education and Native Policy.
Education is something more than a mere
department of Native Policy. Viewed in the
wider sense it is no detached subject, but rather permeates
the whole problem of administration. Eor every new
measure adopted in native interests, or in the combined
interests of native and European, will depend for its
success on a favourable reaction. It must be acceptable,
and permanently so; and this implies, again and again,
the necessity for educating our native up to the mark.
And further, if he is to help in solving those problems
which are gathering inevitably ahead of us, which are his
as well as ours, then he must be definitely armed for the
fray. Indeed, if we allow a sufficiently wide meaning to
the term, it appears that education is the very essence of
native administration. Where government aims at some-
thing more than compromise or temporary expedient,
where in short it is progressive, it must recognize that
progress depends on education and merely keeps pace with
it. If, then, we are content to say, somewhat vaguely,
that what we have in view is native welfare, conditioned
by the just claims of the country and its European in-
habitants, then it may almost be said that the aims of
native education and of native policy are one and the same.
Cultural Change and the Justification for Education.
It is very obvious that there is change ahead for every
primitive society that is brought under European control
or influence. Most prophets agree that there must be a
transitional stage of moderately rough weather, though
the ultimate forecasts, guided by the prophets’ tem-
peraments and to some extent by their professional outlook,


differ extremely; some would have it that we shall succeed
in bringing the ship to safety, others that we are heading
for disaster. But whatever the final state we may be sure
that it will differ from the present. In short, some change
is inevitable. >
It is mercifully probable that nowadays no anthro-
pologist really thinks that the best course is to leave native
culture exactly as it was. It would be hard to imagine
that anyone who was at once a serious student of human
affairs and genuinely interested in native welfare could
maintain such a view wholeheartedly. But nevertheless
we still see many who continue to speak with such con-
tempt and even bitterness of the reforms which Government
and mission attempt that we are led to suspect in them a
subtle resentment against change of any kind. And native
institutions are defended with so much cunning and per-
tinacity that it sometimes seems as if their champions took
the view that they were sacrosanct or worthy of preser-
vation in their own right. It is indeed to be expected
that a deep interest in cultural phenomena should engender
a respect for culture as it exists; and this sentiment may
prove a useful brake on too-eager reform (though, over-
developed, it may equally well lead into the dangers of
reaction). But some have gone further than this. It is
not out of keeping with human nature to elevate the object
of one’s interest to the status of an end, and we shall not
be wholly surprised if the student of culture has sometimes,
unconsciously or no, adopted this attitude. It is doubtful
whether such an attitude is ever expressly formulated —
indeed to formulate it would be to abandon it. But there
nevertheless exists in some quarters a tendency to idealize
culture forms, to treat them as ends, or as worthy of
preservation for their own sake; and such a tendency,
which I take to be the expression of a sentimental attach-
ment to the culture in question, is liable in questions of
native welfare seriously to vitiate our judgment.
The administrator is happily free from any obligation
—and usually from any inclination —to preserve the old
culture in toto. To him the end is represented, not by the
culture, but by the people who live under it, or in it. In
framing and carrying out his native policy he is concerned
with the ultimate welfare of his people, and if it appear


that they will lead a fuller, more satisfying, and more
effective life -under a somewhat changed culture, then the
somewhat changed culture is what he will hope to see and
strive to bring about. This in itself would be reason enough
for encouraging change, quite apart from the possible
requirements of his territory and of his policy at large.
It may seem hardly necessary to prove at length that
native culture admits of or calls for improvement, though
much of this paper will be devoted to that task. In the
minds of those who are responsible for the government
and education of natives the question is already answered,
and I think correctly: cultural change is not only inevit-
able but desirable.
It is, I think, solely these assumptions —that change
is inevitable and desirable —that justify us in attempting
to educate the native. Were it possible, and were we
satisfied, that the old culture should remain precisely as
it was, then we might wash our hands of any responsibility,
since the educative mechanisms which the old culture
already possesses are all that is needed to maintain it.
But having made the above assumptions we must realize
that the pre-existent means of education will be unable to
cope with the new conditions and requirements. Not that
such means are to be despised; they certainly exist, and
such as they are might well be adapted to new purposes.
But by and large it may be said that institutionalized
education as we know it has no parallel in primitive
society. If we wish the primitive to raise himself to a new
level, then we must ourselves set about providing him with
the means of reaching it.
There are several good reasons, of different order, why
we should do so. In the first place it is.obvious that our
civilization is incomparably richer than the native’s, and
that we, who happen to be the masters, are in a position
to broaden and elevate the life of those who are in the
position of pupils. With due precaution lest we destroy
too much in our desire to build afresh, and with a proper
sense of limitations to govern our zeal, we may extend
widely, and yet we hope judiciously, the scope of the
native’s mental experience. All this, we may judge, is
worth while doing for the native’s sake. It represents the
altruistic aim which inspires and justifies the work of the
missions,


There may be some who regard that work as purely
gratuitous, yet these perhaps will recognize the force of a
second argument, viz. our moral obligation to help the
native adjust himself to the vastly changed conditions
which we ourselves have brought about. We, the intrud-
ers, have shattered his neolithic complacency; we have
swept him off his feet. In fairness we should set him on
them again.
Lastly, for those who remain unconvinced, there is a
harder-headed argument. It is distinctly in our own in-
terest as well as that of the native to prepare the way for
a modus vivendi between him and ourselves, one which will
be distinguished by mutual understanding and mutual
help ; and this will be expressly the work of education.
In fine it appears that native education has, in the
face of cultural change, a three-fold justification. It is in
part altruistic: it will be an act of grace to open the gates
of understanding and to remove incompetence and un-
happiness. It is in part a matter of justice : it is “up to
us ” to help the native in difficulties which we have thrust
upon him. And it is in part a matter of expediency: it
will be at least sensible to equip the native for a life of
mutual understanding and co-operation with ourselves.
Education in Relation to Culture.
It is sometimes said that the purpose of education is
to fit the man for the society in which he is to live. It
may well be objected that this definition is inadequate in
that it does not allow sufficiently for the development of
individual personality; but it is much to our purpose here
because it lays stress on the factor which we shall have
mainly to consider —that of society, or better culture,
considered as the body of practices, beliefs, sentiments, and
values to which the individual must be taught to conform.
The obvious but all-important fact is that education must
have due regard to the society or culture in which the
educand is destined to live.
Now in the case of the native, that culture is not the
stable, comparatively balanced, and withal somewhat
restricted, system in which his forefathers lived out their
lives; it is a culture which is already changing and taking


new shape under our eyes. We may take it as certain
that in the future the life of the native will become more
and more interconnected with that of the European ; and
that greater demands will be made upon him to aid in the
development of his country. In fact he will have to adapt
himself to a more complex social environment and learn
to play some useful part in,the life of a large unity. We
may watch and in some measure control these changes.
Indeed it seems that in the special case of native education
the order of the definition might be reversed. Instead of
fitting the man for the society or culture, we must attempt
to fit the society or culture for the man. That is to say,
we have it in our power to shape the new culture, or at
least to influence its shape; and this, I take it, is the’real
problem and responsibility of education and of native
policy at large. What then should we aim at ?
The Error of Europeanization.
Answers to this question range between the two
extremes of absolute non-interference and complete
Europeanization —from changing nothing to changing
everything. The first of these extreme views we have
already discarded: in spite of the conservative bias dis-
cernible in many quarters, it probably has no serious
advocates in theory. The other extreme, that of Euro-
peanization, may likewise have no theoretical support in
its fullest sense, yet there are many whose practical aim
seems to be the closest possible approximation to it.
Notwithstanding the sincerity of their motives the
exponents of this policy have been responsible for some of
the worst errors in native education. The complacent
conviction that our own culture is at all points superior
to the native’s and the idea that it may be transplated by
simple straight-forward conversion has led us to force
European traditions and learning upon him without regard
to their fitness or usefulness. It is only within compara-
tively recent years that we have recognized that the
methods, and the very subjects, used and taught in
European schoolrooms are not immediately suitable for the
native pupil; and that “ education for life ”in his case is
education for a life which is at many points radically
different from the European’s.


The out-and-out Europeanizer —if such there he —
may claim however that his methods are justified because
his ideal is the right one. But it is the ideal itself which
we call in question. There are few perhaps who nowadays
think it even practicable; and there are certainly many
who think it undesirable. One of the strongest arguments
against a policy of Europeanization is that it entails the
loss of much that is intrinsically admirable in native
culture and of a great deal more that is peculiarly fitted,
by generations of selection and confirmation, to the native
genius. To dismiss all this as worthless in comparison
with foreign institutions and values is the mark of a narrow
loyalty on the part of the teacher to his own culture. A
little more sympathy would enable him to see that the
native is inspired by the same loyalty, perhaps in an in-
tenser degree, to his culture, and the recognition of this
fact would perhaps do something to modify the reformer’s
enthusiasm.
There is another argument against too. thorough
Europeanization which is here put forward with some
diffidence as a personal and not very well substantiated
impression. Wherever the “ colour line ” is strongly
defined, as it undoubtedly is in all British dependencies,
we may frequently observe a trace of resentment at too
close an approximation on the part of the native to
European standards. This takes many forms and is not
always wholly consistent: in some things, for instance in
language, we rather expect the native to do as we do;
but in many others —in manners, dress, amusements, and
the rest —we expect him to keep his distance. It is
impossible to say that this prejudice —for such presumably
it is—will be shared by all of our race who come into
contact with natives; but it is widely spread and, I think,
deep-seated, and as such it is a force to be reckoned with.
It is no doubt one of the methods we adopt for defending
our sense of superiority; and in effect it means that, so
long as there is a marked and distinctive difference in
culture, we may be prepared to tolerate and sometimes to
admire, whereas any approach to sameness or equality
may stir our resentment.
This purely practical argument may be added then to
that of the intrinsic worth and proved suitability of native


culture in order to strengthen its defence against the
attacks, urged on by pushfulness, benevolence, and self-
conceit, of the Europeanizer.
A Blend of Cultures.
If we are right in rejecting the two extremes of non-
interference and complete change it is obvious that our
ideal should lie somewhere between them; and I venture
to suggest that the solution of the problem will be found
in what may be called a Blend of Cultures. Some kind
of blending must follow naturally from contact, but my
point is that we should deliberately view it as an ideal —
making as it were a virtue of necessity —and that we
should set ourselves to determine as far as may be its
proportions and character.
The ideal blend will retain the best of the old
culture —perhaps the mass of it —which has been tried
and proved and is at least, to use a plain phrase, to the
native’s liking. But it will be found necessary or advisable
—and of this more hereafter —to remove some features
which work for evil in native culture itself or which are
clearly incompatible with the ideal which we envisage.
The resultant gaps must be filled, or the weaknesses
repaired, by such substitutes as we can devise; but over and
above this the native culture may be vastly enriched and
enlarged by contributions from our own. If these changes
can be carried out gradually and with understanding, or if
we can successfully guide the changes as they take place of
themselves, then we may foresee an invigorated, growing
culture, necessarily more complicated by reason of many
new relations, enriched by borrowings from European
civilization, and yet still retaining enough of the old
material to make it distinctively native. We shall require
the primitive to learn a good deal from our own civilization
in order that he may play his part in a wider scheme of
co-operation; and he is welcome to learn much more, to
enter new worlds of experience, if he will. But at the same
time he must be allowed figuratively to stand his ground,
to keep his grip on the past. We can overwhelm him if
we will, or drive him like a fugitive out of his own culture.
But that is neither to his advantage nor to ours. Instead
of becoming an indifferent copyist, definitely accepting a
position of inferiority, he should'keep enough of the past


to ensure a measure of cultural independence wherewith
to sustain his pride and his corporate self-respect. ' In the
long run I believe we shall be better pleased with the
native, and he with himself and us, if he remains a native.
In the somewhat special circumstances of European
contact, education, as we have seen, not only undertakes
the duty of developing individual minds in a certain
conformity with a given culture, but is mainly responsible
for the moulding of the culture itself. That is to say, it
will be the special work of education in this distressful
period of adjustment to bring about the blend of cultures
which we picture as an ideal.
The Three Tasks of Education.
The accomplishment of this work involves three more
or less distinct processes or tasks. The first is that of
maintaining and encouraging all that is good in the old
culture, or all those parts of it which can find a place in
the ideal blend which we contemplate. This we may call
the Task of Maintenance. The second is that of removing
from the old culture its evil elements, or such as are
incompatible with the new blend and likely to hinder its
functioning. This may be called the Task of Expurgation.
The third is that of making positive contributions from
our own culture such as will make the new blend some-
thing richer and fuller than the native has hitherto known.
This finally may be called the Task of Expansion.
We might, to use a very inadequate figure, regard
native culture as a sum or total which we have in hand.
We are forced to subtract something from it, but we are
able to add something to it. The net result should be a
substantial increase; for the necessary subtraction will be
much less than the possible addition.
Or let us compare our work to the renovation of an
old dwelling. We do not set about razing it to the ground
in order to build afresh in an entirely new style. We
leave it largely as it was. But we tear down and replace
those parts of the structure where salt-damp or the white
ant has got in, and we do away with the poky, old-fashioned
features that can only make for inconvenience. Finally,
with due regard to the original style of architecture, we


make extensive additions. Thus we have a dwelling,
altered, enlarged and improved, but still the same —the
same with a difference.
This simile of the renovated dwelling will serve well
enough to illustrate the three tasks which we are to
consider; but it is a lifeless simile and therefore a very
inadequate one. A brighter imagination might have
drawn some more accurate parallel from the organic world ;
for we must remember that culture is in a sense a living
thing, with its own power to change, either towards decay
or growth. When we speak of Maintenance, then, we
should mean something more than mere continuance or
repetition: the word must be taken to cover the idea of
fostering something that can respond to care by growing
or developing. Again, when we speak of Expurgation we
must bear in mind that we shall actually endanger the life
of the whole if we clear away what is irreplaceable or of
deep importance. And lastly, the task of enlarging or
enriching native culture, which for lack of a better term
I have called that of Expansion, is not a process of
inflation or stuffing, but one, literally, of incorporation.
Our contributions should be such as to form a living blend
with the old culture.
The Task of Maintenance.
The problem of what to change and what to leave
alone is perpetually before us. Many conscientious
educators of the native have been led by an enthusiasm
for European traditions in general and for the letter of
Christian law in particular to think that we should change
as much as possible: we should rub the slate clean in
order to start afresh. This indeed argues that there really
is something to change. Few of us can dismiss the
question and the responsibility so easily as the missionary
who cried, “ It is often complained that we are European-
izing the native, and that this should be avoided. How
are we to avoid it ? These folk have no civilization
which we might be accused of changing.” There is on the
contrary a great deal to change—or maintain, according
as we think fit. ,
Those who stick unimaginatively to European
standards may find it difficult to approve of anything in


purely native culture: to them the intrinsic superiority
of everything European is a postulate. I have known
one missionary who thought native decorative art not
worth bothering about; another who regarded native folk
tales as poor stuff, to be kept out of the schoolroom in
favour of the ogres and castles of the fairy tale; and
another who, despising the restrained and exquisite figure-
dances of his district (because they were lacking in “ kick ”)
turned on the gramophone and encouraged his pupils to
jazz. It may be inevitable, when we assume the re-
sponsibility of teaching the native, that we should adopt
something of a superior attitude towards him; but this
does not absolve us from the necessity of studying his view-
point ; and we should beware of underestimating his
achievements. It is not for us to take up a patronizing
attitude, much less a scornful one; and to dismiss his
culture as worthless in comparison with ours is, as I have
already suggested, merely the mark of narrowness, or a
kind of cultural bigotry.
Now while the policy of changing as much as possible
seems to me wholly pernicious, I do not know that we
can safely adopt the opposite policy of changing as little
as possible. There is some danger in this latter course
as there is in the former. It may lead to the loss of oppor-
tunities or the evasion of responsibilities. In short I think
we should be prepared to make some changes, and not
unimportant ones. But a policy of reform should be
conditioned by a genuine respect for that which exists at
present. It should be realized that native culture has
been evolved to meet the needs of native life and that
through many generations it has served its purpose reason-
ably well. Further, anthropology has shown —and each
new investigation confirms the conclusion —that culture
at least partakes of the nature of an organized whole, so
that any change of an important part, or say the
elimination of any important part, involves a change
throughout the system. This in itself is a strong
argument against too drastic interference, and there is no
doubt that all who are capable of an appreciative,
sympathetic attitude will be content to leave things much
as they are.
The Attitude of Neutrality. If, however, we really
wish to see native culture survive we must be prepared to


take up some stronger attitude than one of mere neutrality.
It is often argued that native customs must stand or fall
on their own merits; and this view is often again coupled
with the melancholy conviction that they are naturally
doomed. Those —often true sympathizers —who hold this
view will recommend that we take no action either to
hasten their demise or to bring them back to life : all we
can do is to stand regretfully by and watch them expire.
This seems unduly pessimistic. Yet there is a real danger
that many features of native culture, quite admirable in
themselves, will become extinct under pressure of alien
influences. For instance, too great a preoccupation with
European interests —by no means unworthy in themselves
—may lead to the decay of native art; or reliance on
Government appointees, councillors, or deacons, may
undermine the institution, such as it may be, of native
chieftanship; or European employment, even the time
expended on Government labour, may interfere with the
performance of feasts' and ceremonies; or a strict
missionary discipline may forbid the dance. Everywhere
new influences and temptations are at work: cutters and
launches are displacing the sea-going canoe; the con-
venience of hardware stores is damaging the craft of
pottery; and the example of the white man is leading the
villager to discard his traditional dress in favour of felt
hat, singlet and long trousers.
The Attitude of Encouragement. In the face of these
influences, sometimes direct, sometimes insidious and in-
direct, it is not enough for us to pursue a policy of laissez
faire. For, while the well-wishers of native culture stand
idle, there are many who, whether with good intent or
with no intent at all, are really its enemies. If we wish
native customs and institutions to survive we must on the
one hand guard against too drastic changes in the culture
as a whole, such as may remove their motive and support;
and on the other we must do something actively to en-,
courage and foster them.
As an example of what I mean let us consider the
case of native art. We are familiar with the expressions
of regret that village arts and crafts should be on the
decline. There is here indeed a general consensus of regret
in which even the most intransigent Europeanizers are


ready to join. But all too seldom does the regret pass
over into any kind of action. The decadence of native
art under modern conditions is deplorably common,
though the causes remain rather obscure. It is possible
that we sometimes take rather an exaggerated view of the
case; seeing a village denuded by collectors of its finest
objects of art we are apt to forget that they were the
products of individual artists, produced at intervals and
treasured perhaps for many years. We should be in error
if we supposed that formerly every villager was an artist
and that he was ever at work creating. Then as now it
is reasonable to suppose that the potential artists formed
only a proportion of the population. But what they then
'possessed, and seem often now to lack, was a tradition of
art which encouraged every man to express and develop
such power as was in him. It is the tradition which we
should endeavour to keep alive or to reawaken, so that it
will still be considered worth while to carve the canoe
prow or decorate the rim of the pot, and those who dis-
cover a real talent will have scope for its expression.
Not a little of the blame for the break-down of this
tradition is chargeable to the greedy collector of curios;
nor can some scientific collectors be wholly absolved from
responsibility, for in their zeal to preserve concrete records
of native art they have sometimes shown a cool dis-
regard for that art as a living thing, or have assumed
that it is necessarily on the way to extinction. The native,
bereft of his most highly treasured objects or wheedled
into parting with them, is left without models and with-
out inspiration. He shows little inclination to replace
the things that have been taken: he is discouraged, and
the tradition is broken.
Again, changes in culture may prove to have an un-
foreseen effect on native art in that they remove the motive
—perhaps a magical or religious one —for some manifes-
tation of it. Against such influence wo must guard as we
may, recognizing however that risks will have to be taken
and sacrifices made: it may be in the general interest of
the native that certain changes should be effected and if-
current forms of art suffer as an indirect result it may be
necessary for the humanist to swallow the disappointment
he feels as an artist. In a certain tribe studied by the


writer, to take an extreme instance, the finest expression
of decorative, art is found in the fashioning and painting
of war arrows, and the finest achievement from a crafts-
man’s point of view in the preservation and stuffing of
the severed heads of victims. With the suppression of
head-hunting the motive for this art will go. We can
only regret it as a side-issue.
One would be loth to think, however, that artistic
gifts, where they exist, cannot be sustained and developed
by the proper kind of encouragement. In the first place
it is in the power of the educator to give a place to art in
his curriculum, and by this I mean the furtherance of
of existent native art, not the introduction of alien forms.
It should be feasible and inexpensive to provide for
{esthetic education, since the teachers are to hand in the
persons of the native artists themselves. The function
of the European teacher would be guidance without too
much interference, and it is assumed that he will be imbued
with a proper respect for native art as such and for the
artist himself. The most valuable help he could give
would be in suggesting new applications for old motifs
and techniques. Nor need we be afraid of using com-
mercialism as a stimulus. Within the educational
establishment the commercial stimulus could be controlled,
while beyond it we must face its inherent risks if we are
to make use of a powerful motive in a good cause.
I have dwelt rather long on native art because it
provides a good instance of a department of native culture
which it is obviously worth while encouraging. Several
other subjects we may consider more briefly. In manual
education it seems obvious that before seeking to introduce
new crafts we should fully exploit native aptitudes and
materials. It will be one of our problems to discover new
applications for them, partly within native culture itself
(those who now make clay water-pots may some day learn
to make clay storage urns), but inevitably to some extent in
relation to needs introduced by Europeans (leather workers
may become bootmakers, and the man who can make a
hoe may turn his skill to making a ploughshare).
We can help in another way also, by improving the
native’s technique. To teach him the use of European
tools is not to transform native crafts in point of character,


but rather to transform the craftsman in point of efficiency.
One meets frequently enough the conservative critic who
deplores the use of modern tools in native carving; but
even he would not begrudge the native gardener his steel
axe and trade knife, nor the canoe-maker an adze to hollow
his dugout. Some kinds of work can be done better with
pocket-knives and files than with cockle shells, and if a
man can fashion a wooden bowl better for the use of
hammer and chisel, then we have conferred a benefit upon
him. It is a mistake, so obvious as hardly to need correct-
ing, to suppose that with the use of better tools the native’s
artistry must suffer.
Under the heading of Maintenance one might speak
at length of native political institutions and the possibility
of developing them and turning them to account in govern-
ment ; of the economic balance which is maintained with
such exemplary precision; and of the ritual life which
perhaps more than anything else excites the admiration
of the European. All these, and others like them, are
fighting for survival. The last-mentioned in particular
may find itself pitted against the missions, and where
this is the case it seems as if the final issue must be a
foregone conclusion unless the native ritual receives some
backing of encouragement. Happily there are some
missionaries who can advocate the incorporation of native
ritual in Christianity itself, but there are few who are
prepared to follow them in so bold a course. In the mean-
time—if an anthropologist is permitted to engage in
counter-propaganda —I think we should do well to foster
native ceremonial by guarding it, as far as we can, against
inimical influences, and by the simple but effective method
of showing a kindly front towards it. Toward this
indeed, as toward all the other elements of native culture
which we desire to maintain, we must adopt more than
a merely neutral or passive attitude. We must give them
some real support.
The Task of Expurgation.
We may now turn to the second task of native
education, that of eliminating the bad elements in existent
culture. It may be questioned, first, whether we are en-
titled to call anything really bad in such a culture, and
second, whether we should run the risks of trying to


eliminate it. I shall attempt to answer these questions
here before proceeding, but shall return to them, because
of their theoretical importance, in the final section.
Bad Elements in Culture.
Now to one possessed of the Functional outlook it is
immediately apparent that much can be said for what are
prima facie the worst of social practices. Head-hunting
itself has its good side, and a case can be made for it.
Viewed in its manifold aspects, economic, political,
religious, it appears to lie at the very heart of the culture in
which it is found. We may dwell on its social ramifications,
its effect on individual status, its ritual importance: the
taking of a head may be viewed, for instance, as a
qualification for marriage, or as a very condition of full
manhood, and the raid may be the motive cause for a whole
cycle of ceremonies. We may dwell again on its value as
a stimulus to energy and efficiency and above all as a force
making for social solidarity. It seems indeed that the
viewpoint of the man who loses his head has not always
been sufficiently considered by those who have taken up
a brief for the head-hunter; but it is undeniably true that
the functionalist can, and should, make out a case for an
institution which most of us would be satisfied to condemn
outright.
Then there is sorcery. We need not review at any
length the arguments in its favour. It is perhaps every-
where one of the strong sanctions of native morality; it
is often a pillar of chiefly authority; it provides the
puzzled primitive with an answer to the riddles of
causation and affords him an outlet for pent-up emotion.
Here once again it seems that attention has been directed
rather exclusively to one side of the question and that
the defenders of sorcery, in their search for recondite
justifications, have missed the obvious. But there is no
doubt that a case can be made for sorcery too : it is almost
inextricably intertwined with native life and thought,
and it is responsible for good as well as evil.
Now the first of these two factors which we have
chosen as examples will perhaps find no serious, whole-
hearted defender; if anyone justifies head-hunting we
shall be free to suspect him of being a sophist or a leg-
puller. But the second, that of sorcery, approaches the


border-line of disputability; and there are innumerable
practices —insanitary burial rites, prolonged seclusion of
widows, ritual defloration, sexual laxity and the rest —
which are ever the region of debate.
Now the anthropologist usually reveals a tendency
to resist the artificial change of native culture, not
necessarily through any sentimental or self-interested
attachment to the objects of his study (though this, I fear,
is sometimes the reason) but because he can see better than
others what is good in debatable customs and better realizes
the risk by which change is attended. He can in fact
assume the role of Counsel for the Defence, and his argu-
ments constitute an invaluable counter-blast to the zeal
of the reformer.
When he assumes this role he is already half-way
to surrendering his cold objective attitude. ' To use a
parliamentary figure he appears as an anthropologico-
political Conservative sitting in opposition against the
Radicals; and while we may take it for granted that pure
unbending conservatism is eternally wrong we may be
equally sure that a generally conservative bias in our
attitude towards native culture is a very safe thing. The
anthropologist, then, when he adopts this attitude, is
adopting a cause; and it is, I think, altogether desirable
that he should thus sometimes descend from the serene
heights of objectivity onto the bumpy and controversial
ground of values. For he should make his presence use-
fully felt in the deciding of both the general and particular
issues of native policy, and since such policy (although,
we trust, keeping in touch with ascertained facts) is in
the long run a matter for normative judgements, the
anthropologist will be expected sometimes to adopt the
normative attitude. He must indeed form his own judge-
ments of what is right or wrong, good or bad, if he wishes
to bear any active part in the application of his science to
practical problems. The present writer, then, is prepared
to submit his opinion that some parts of a culture may
be intrinsically bad and would be better out of the way;
furthermore that some parts may be incompatible with
the blend which we envisage as an ideal, and should there-
fore be removed to make way for what we consider an
improvement.


Whatever view the anthropologist may take in this
matter, however, he will frequently find that the question
has been already settled by the administrator. In a wide
area to which the writer has devoted some study there
exists the universal practice of sodomy. It is associated
with ritual initiation to the bull-roarer, and each individual
male in his turn plays successively the passive and active
parts over a long period. The anthropologist will be able
to show that sodomy is thoroughly established in the
culture of the region, and plays a highly important part
therein, with repercussions in many departments of life.
He will be able to show also that it is a practice to
which the natives in question feel a very strong attach-
ment ; and he may be of sufficiently liberal .mind himself
to regard it morally with complete indifference. But the
administrator or educator, though he may listen with
patience and sympathy to the • defence, will, when all is
said and done, continue to regard sodomy as a vice and
cast about for means of exterminating it. To sum up
therefore I submit that some parts of native culture may
be actually bad and should be got rid of if we can manage
it; and that, whether anthropologists agree with this
view or not, they must for practical purposes accept it,
since it is the view of those who are ultimately responsible
for native policy.
The Risks of Elimination.
We saw however that over and above this question of
value there arose the further question as to whether we
could safely run the risk of eliminating what we thought
to be bad.
I am bound to think that this risk has been somewhat
exaggerated. The conception of culture as an integrated
whole, highly organized throughout, leads logically to the
conclusion that interference with any part of it will more
or less seriously affect the whole. No part indeed is to
be regarded as a functionless “survival,” but each, down
to the smallest and apparently most insignificant, is
supposed to play a vital part in the life of the whole
system.
Without presuming to gainsay the doctrine that
every part of culture has its function, we may say that
for many parts of it the function is at least difficult to


find, or requires some ingenuity to nominate. And it is
plain that while some parts have great functional signifi-
cance, in that they affect widely the rest of the culture,
others have very little: in fact the functions of various
parts range from all-importance down to utter insignifi-
cance. While therefore it may be theoretically impossible
to alter or remove any part, however small, without
disturbing the whole, the effect may be something like
that of a trivial event on the physical universe. If you
let a pin drop in England, the reverberations reach the
antipodes; but the plain fact is that they make no
appreciable difference.
So much for the parts of admittedly small importance,
the trivial details, of a culture. But it is rightly said
that neither anthropology nor administration is greatly
concerned about these. It is over the functionally
important parts, those that have many bearings on the
rest, that the doubt arises and the discussions rage. It is
perhaps conceivable that a custom or institution should
be of such importance that its removal would be like a
death blow to the culture at large, involving its general
disintegration. But it is undeniable that customs and
institutions of an importance which is very considerable
can be done away with and yet the culture as a whole
continue to function and thrive. So many instances of
this kind thrust themselves upon our notice that we must
forever abandon such familiar similes as that of the care-
fully planned and balanced structure, which, if we but
remove one of its pillars, will come toppling down in
wholesale ruin.
Culture is emphatically not “ merely a very compli-
cated piece of machinery,” as a distinguished Eunctionalist
has pictured it; a system in which all the different parts
“ interlock and have to work together, or the machinery
is of no use.” 1 I venture to put forward the heterodox
suggestion that the view of culture as an integrated,
organized, system has been carried too far. Culture is
after all only the work of human minds and has been put
together in a strangely haphazard manner. It would
indeed be surprising then if we found it completely
organized; nor, I think, do the facts justify such an as-
1. Driberg: “At Home with the Savage ” (Routledge, 1932), p. 14.


sumption. The most that can be said of culture is that
it is partially-organized, semi-integrated. And it is only
such a conception which is in keeping with the fact that
relatively important customs can actually be done away
with without involving the ruin or stoppage of the whole.
The conception of culture as an “ organism ” comes
much nearer the truth than does the mechanistic com-
parison which I have quoted. Without trying to ride
the analogy too hard we can at least say that culture has
a power of continuance, or figuratively speaking, a life.
And personally I am more and more impressed by its
adaptability, its plasticity, its power to heal over wounds
and survive even drastic changes.
After this somewhat lengthy introduction we may
proceed to deal with the Task of Expurgation. Assuming
that there are bad elements in native culture and that we
are justified in trying to eliminate them, how should we
set about it ?
Intellectual Education.
This Task of Expurgation is essentially educative
throughout, if we give a wide meaning to the term. But
it will be followed by the soundest and most lasting results
if it is approached through education in the stricter,
intellectual, sense. If we can convince the native that
some of his beliefs are untenable or that some of his social
habits are harmful, then he may give them up of his own
accord. It is true that the beliefs will linger in the back
of his mind and that evil practices will tend to reassert
themselves in spite of his new convictions; but as time
goes on and his education strikes deeper we may expect
these reversions to occur less often.
Let us consider the effect of education on a factor of
great significance to our problem —the belief in magic.
It will not be regarded as an exaggeration to say that we
here touch upon the most important distinguishing feature
of the mental life of primitives. Magic is not only
übiquitous but so firmly implanted as to seem almost
ineradicable. We cannot claim indeed that twentieth
century Europeans are whole free from the magical
way of thinking; but the contrast between our largely
deterininist viewpoint and that of the native, where mystic


or personal forces are so constantly invoked as the cause of
natural events, is striking in the extreme. It points to a
revolutionary advance in thinking; and it forces upon us
the conviction that any sincere attempt to better the
condition of the native’s life must view his emancipation
from magic as one of its main objectives. However we
may justify magic—and here I am speaking of the good
as well as the evil, anti-social kind —on its functional
merits, the fact remains that it is a deadening, stultifying
influence, the negation of intellectual progress. Were
it our object to preserve native culture intact, then
recognizing the value of magic in that culture we should
leave magic alone. But this is not our object. We are
bound to admit the necessity for change, and one of the first
steps in the progress which the world at large demands
of the native must be towards the replacement of magical
thinking by true thinking.
We shall not expect the substitution to take place
rapidly however. It can come about only in the course of
education, through a. gradually increasing realization of
causes in relation to effects. Intellectual and practical
instruction will show the native, a little more clearly every
year, that results for which he has depended on charms
and spells may be better achieved by properly directed
human effort; that irrigation is more dependable than rain-
making, and that a purgative is more effective than blood-
sucking. In the interests, then, of native efficiency and
welfare it seems desirable that magical beliefs and practices
should go out of use; and to bring this about we must rely
on the slow but sure means of education. 1
More specifically one might mention many minor
customs which are safely classed as pernicious and which
again are best attacked through education. Insanitary
practices of burial, the embracing of the newly dead, the
indifference regarding the disposal of faeces and rubbish,
over-strict food tabus on nursing mothers, the habit of
bathing when feverish —such customs as these will yield
to better knowledge in the long run; when the native fully
realizes the danger or ultimate inconvenience which they
involve he may be content to give them up of his own
accord. On the moral side also there is some ground for
1. There is no doubt that Christianity contributes largely to this end. Whatever its
truth it provides an alternative explanation which tends to displace magic,


optimism. A relative indifference to suffering, disregard
for the value of human life, the idealization of revenge —
these and other factors will at least be modified by moral
training; and we may hope that the native will someday
develop moral scruples against such practices as the blood
feud; that he may be more considerate to his women folk;
that he may feed his dog better; despatch his pig more
mercifully; and cease to pluck the tail feathers out of his
live rooster.
Suggestion and Example.
It may well be objected that we are asking a great
deal of education if we expect change to depend on fully
reasoned conviction, as if the native must first come to an
intelligent realization of a custom’s futility or harmfulness
and then give it up of his own accord. This does indeed
represent an ideal of education which is to be striven
after; but for the time being it is largely beyond our
reach. It is accompanied, however, or perhaps preceded,
by another very effective method of approach, that of
suggestion and example. It is by these means that the
missions secure some of their most striking results, not
only in this expurgative process of education, but also in
its more constructive tasks. By dint of consistent example
and of drumming their opinions into the minds of their
pupils they are able, apart from any rational demonstration,
to build up therein the conviction that this or that practice
is wrong. One may take the liberty of disagreeing with
some of the missions’ opinions, but that is beside the
question here. Whether those opinions be right or wrong,
this is a legitimate way of establishing them in the native’s
mind. If a powerful, authoritative body, which is further
held in high respect and admiration, declares that dancing
is wrong, and if it forbids dancing to all those immediately
under its control, then the opinion will gather ground
that dancing really is wrong. Or if the same body con-
sistently condemns cruelty to pigs it will eventually
succeed in building up among those that come under its
influence a prejudice against such cruelty. Or if it con-
tinually discounts magic it will create a doubt of the
efficacy of magic. 1 It is well known that the great
proportion of our own judgements, intellectual and moral,
1. It sometimes seems that the doubt is no more than superficial, even that it represents
a kind of lip-service to the mission. But there is no question that scepticism regarding
magic is abroad among the missionized; the superficial doubt is the beginning of disillusion,


are formed under such influences, and it is recognized
accordingly that suggestion and example play parts of
fundamental importance in education. The prestige
enjoyed by Government and mission places them in a
strong position to use these means to mould the native
mind and character, and thus incidentally to eliminate
those features of native culture which are judged to be
undesirable.
Punishment.
I have spoken of the appeal to reason as the ideal
method of inducing the native to discard these undesirable
features, and then of suggestion and example as methods
which, while falling short of the ideal, are yet to be regarded
as indispensable. We may now briefly consider a third
method which we would all gladly dispense with, but which
as educators we must be prepared to use when necessary.
I refer of course to the device of punishment. Since its
proper motive is reformative we may at a stretch be allowed
to include it under the heading of education.
Some unnecessary squeamishness has, I think, been
evinced in certain quarters upon this question. Clemency
and a large measure of toleration are assuredly demanded,
but a Government must still reserve its right to use the
penal sanction in the preservation of law. It is true that
the methods already discussed are to be preferred in that
they deal in persuasion rather than force; but it is evident
that they are at best gradual in their effect. We should
have to wait a very long time for certain bad customs to
be discarded voluntarily; and in the meantime, where the
Government, in all sincerity and with what wisdom it
possesses, has seen fit to prohibit them, it must be allowed
to use punishment as a sanction for the prohibition.
Few would question this right in the case of head-
hunting, if I may be permitted to use this institution again
as a crucial example. Whatever its functional value may
be its principal effect is to spread fear and misery, and
despite the arguments used in defence of native warfare it
seems obvious that in the main it is a disintegrative force,
continually shattering the hope of friendly communication,
contact, and co-operation. In the common interests of the
natives and ourselves, and particularly to protect the weak
against the cruelty of the strong, this warfare must be


stopped. It is conceivable that moral suasion and in-
tellectual education should eventually achieve this result,
conceivable that the native should develop moral and in-
tellectual convictions that head-hunting is wicked and
dysgenic, and thereupon give it up of his own accord. But
this consummation is a long way off. It would be a sad
look-out if we had to wait for it, and with European
example before our eyes we may well doubt whether such
convictions will ever amount to a practical preventive.
In the meantime we are so happily placed as to be able to
punish acts of warfare among the native peoples set under
our control, and we find that this method is effective. It
is hard to imagine where punishment, of which reform is
the ultimate justification, could be more justifiable.
In relation to many other customs however the penal
sanction remains the subject of controversy. It is plain
that we should use it with circumspection, being satisfied,
firstly that what we propose to punish is really deserving
of suppression, and secondly that punishment is a sound
and effective method of suppressing it. In no connection
has this question of punishment been more fiercely debated
than in relation to sorcery, and I propose to touch briefly
upon this highly controversial matter before leaving the
present section on the Expurgation of culture.
• By sorcery I mean to include all kinds of magic
intentionally devoted to harmful or anti-social ends. It
is thus only a specific kind of magic in general. Now it
is plain that the root of the evil is the belief in magic.
If we could only banish that, then we could snap our
fingers at the sorcerer; in fact he would automatically go
out of business. The belief itself, however, is obviously
something which we cannot punish. All we can do is to
persevere with education in the hope of reducing it, recog-
nizing that we must expect to wait a long time before the
belief is so reduced as to cease being a potential danger.
In the meantime the sorcerer plies his trade.
Whatever defence may be offered for sorcery it seems
to the writer that the good in it is vastly outweighed
by the evil. It provides a means for the strong and
cunning to impose upon the weak and credulous; it is
the instrument of extortion and terrorism; its general
effect is to create an atmosphere of suspicion and vengeful


ness; and (here I speak from my own experience only) it
is viewed by the native himself as a crime. I proceed on
the assumption, then, that the practice of sorcery is a
pernicious feature of native culture and would be better
out of the way; and further I assume that its elimination
would not endanger the continuance of the culture; in fact
that we shall be justified in taking measures to suppress
it.
The second point on which we had to assure our-
selves was whether the practice of sorcery is a fit subject
for punishment. Here it is very necessary to distinguish
between the practice of sorcery and the belief that it is
practised. We should in fact recognize the existence of
three categories: (1) the cases were a sorcerer actually
practices sorcery but keeps it secret; (2) the cases where
he makes the fact known that he is practising sorcery, or
openly pretends or threatens to practise it; and (3) the
cases where he is merely supposed by others to practise
it. I suggest that these three categories stand respectively
in a ratio something like 1:10:100.
The first category does not greatly concern us. Pro-
vided he keeps quiet -about it a man may practise sorcery
to his heart’s content without fear of Government interfer-
ence. For one thing we may be well assured that the
harm he does is negligible; and for another we cannot take
action, for the good reason that we hear of nothing to take
action against. These cases are therefore unpunishable.
The same is true of the third category. We shall
take no action in those innumerable cases which are
brought before the court with only unfounded suspicions
to support them. Such cases are simply dismissed for
lack of any evidence.
When however we consider the intermediate category
I believe we shall find that there is ground for action and
that punishment is justified. For it is when the sorcerer
opens his mouth that his sorcery becomes dangerous, and
it is then also that he provides evidence against himself.
It is well known that he can successfully practise extortion
and that he can intimidate his victim —even frighten him
to death —by threats or pretence, i.e. by overt sorcery. It
is therefore plainly in the interests of the public safety to
check this practice; and I conclude that overt sorcery,


where corroborative evidence is to hand, or where the
sorcerer pleads'guilty, may be regarded as a punishable
offence. For the man who says he practises sorcery
(whether he does so in fact or not is of no great con-
sequence) is a social menace and may be deterred by
punishment from continuing his activities. The punish-
ment should not be a light one, lest it serve merely to
advertise the sorcerer’s power, to give his reputation a fillip
by government recognition; it should be severe enough to
teach him a lesson, to make it psychologically impossible
for him to pose as a sorcerer again. Without statistical
evidence at hand to justify the assertion I feel confident
that the enforcement of the law against sorcery has in
practice done much to check this abuse in its overt, and
therefore harmful, manifestations.
It is realized that there are many difficulties to be
overcome, especially in regard to obtaining evidence from
scared witnesses; and Ido not pretend that the present
brief discussion has taken them all into account. My
object has been only to justify punishment in this con-
nection as a deterrent. Finally it must be understood
that punishment is not represented as an ultimate cure for
sorcery. It is an expedient. Its purpose is to prevent the
misuse of a power vested in certain individuals by the false
beliefs of the masses. The real cure is to banish or rectify
those false beliefs, and the only sound way of doing this is
by education. But while we wait patiently for education
to take effect we must recognize our obligation to protect
the weak from victimization.
The Task of Expansion.
While we set ourselves to maintain what is worthy
of maintenance in the old culture and while we undertake
to purge it of what is undesirable, we have yet a third
task to perform, viz. that of enlarging and enriching it
by positive contributions from our higher civilization. It
is not enough that these contributions should merely
conterbalance the losses entailed in the second of the
above-named processes. We should certainly recognize
our obligation to provide fit substitutes for what we take
away; and although I have not dealt with the subject
expressly in this paper it may be taken that such an
obligation is implied when we presume to suppress or


discourage any part of any culture. But we ‘ still aim at
more than a restoration of the quantitative balance; we
want not merely to bring native culture up to the old
level again but to raise it to a higher level. That is to
say our contributions should make it possible for the
native to live a richer and fuller life than he knew before
our coming.
Once more however we must beware of these analogies
with the inanimate. Our contributions must be more
than additions : they must enter into and combine with,
indeed grow with, the living system of culture. And it
must be realized that an ill-chosen contribution may create
as much disorganization in the system as does the extrac-
tion of any essential element from it. It is incumbent
upon us therefore to consider as far as may be the congruity
of what we offer. And, as it is proverbially a risk to fill the
old bottles too full with the new wine, we should perhaps
be content with offering our fresh contributions in moderate
quantity; or at least, if we have extensive aims, with
hastening slowly. There is a certain good manners about
innovation. Where reform is a stranger it should enter
unobtrusively among the old elements of culture; it should
fraternize and co-operate with them ; and if at last it reach
a position of power or even domination, it must never
forget the claims and feelings of its fellows.
I shall not attempt the impossibility of enumerating
the contributions which we are in a position to make, but
content myself with referring to a few of major importance.
A Reformed Horticulture.
Certainly one of the greatest benefits we can confer
upon the native is a practical training calculated to raise
his standard of living. The forms such training must
take will be to some extent regulated by the special needs
of the country under consideration and by the special
circumstances of intercourse with its European popula-
tion. It will include training in various crafts, new as
well as old, and in what is generally called domestic
science; but it will be directed importantly towards an
improved food quest in general, and above all to an
improved culture of the soil.
In the country from which the writer draws his
experience it seems that the last-mentioned might well


figure as the first and foremost aim of education at the
present stage. - There we are dealing with a primitive
horticulture based on the root crops, where tillage is
practically unknown, where there are no garden tools save
the digging stick, where there is no irrigation, and where
the gardener moves from one part of the forest to another,
felling and burning the timber in order to plant his tubers,
and, after one year or two, abandoning his clearing to
the undergrowth. In order to improve this style of
horticulture we should first study it, and finding, as we
shall, that it is not to be despised, we may then proceed to
develop it along natural lines, advancing by short easy
steps and seeing to it that the improvements we offer are
not hopelessly in advance of the standard already reached.
If we limit our early aims, as I think we should, to
advancing the gardener’s technique and producing better
and more varied products for home consumption rather
than the economic crops for sale abroad, then our horti-
cultural education must have particular regard to the
limitations of the native’s mind and character as we find
them and to the possibilities of his environment. We
need not immediately introduce tractors and twelve-
furrow ploughs or irrigate the land by means of electrical
pumps and engineering schemes. There is little educative
value in these. We should aim rather at helping the
native to help himself, enabling him to build up an
improved horticulture by degrees and by his own efforts.
Perhaps, then, for those who have never turned the soil
with anything save a digging stick, the iron hoe will be
an adequate beginning (the single-furrow hand-plough
being altogether too revolutionary); and where the lie of
the land permits it, a simple gravitational scheme will be
not only a sufficient, but also the best, means of irrigation.
It may be suggested indeed that the agricultural methods
of the relatively advanced native peoples are for the time
being better models for the most backward than are the
methods of modern scientific farming.
The general object of such horticultural reform is to
change the chena system-, which is wasteful in land and
labour and which favours decentralization and the per-
petuation of small groups and small ideas, for a more
intensive cultivation of the soil, which will favour stability
and a wider integration with all its social consequences.


And here, in this new kind of occupation, we may look
for the birth of interests which will not only compensate
for those which are lost, but will lead to wider oppor-
tunities for self-expression and usefulness. It is surely
much to be regretted that in the past this practical training
has been largely neglected in favour of a traditional
education, less suited to natives than to Europeans.
Scholastic Education: English.
This leads us to the second contribution with which
I wish to deal, viz. that of literary or scholastic education,
and in particular the teaching of the English language.
It is now generally recognized that school-work has
occupied too prominent a place in the education of natives.
The recent reaction against it, arising from a whole-
some recognition of the value of “ education for life,”
represents a highly sensible tendency, but there is perhaps
some danger that the reaction may go too far. We
who receive a literary education as our birthright may
not fully realize its fitness for and potential value to the
native races. One of our novelists 1 recently remarked
that to know how to read English was worth a legacy of
a million pounds —a simple truth which yet comes rather
as a revelation. And this is not a monopoly of the Anglo-
Saxon. Those who really wish the native well in the
future cannot submit to closing the way to this intellectual
revolution in his life; so that, while a practical training
may rightly take precedence, we must not forget that
literacy remains one of the aims of education, and that
when sufficiently realized it will represent a gift of price-
less value to the native —even if he does not get his full
million pounds’ worth.
The worth of the gift indeed depends largely on the
standard of ability reached by the pupil. Unless he be
able to read with some facility, enough in fact to make
reading a pleasure or an urge, the gift will be of com-
paratively small value. And this proviso raises a question
of profound importance upon which opinions are dia-
metrically opposed. At present, with such means in men,
money, and goodwill, as are available, a great percentage
of “ educated ” natives achieve no more than a smattering.
1. J. B. Priestley.


The missions (in so far as they are responsible for secular
education) are not to blame, for they are already taxed to
the uttermost; nor can the exchequer of the average
native administration supply more for the purpose than
it does at present. It is obvious that the available forces,
if concentrated upon a chosen percentage of pupils, could
produce, in them at least, results of a much higher
standard; and the question is whether a little education
widely dispersed is ultimately of greater or less value to
the people than the higher education of a chosen few.
This question may perhaps be answered from a study of
the successes and failures of native administrations in the
in the past, but it is one which I do not presume to tackle.
Nor do I propose to venture expressly upon that
vexed question of the medium of instruction —whether
English or vernacular. I will merely suggest that, within
the limits of scholastic education, English per se is the
most valuable gift we can bestow upon the native. Let
the educator choose for himself what subjects he will teach,
from algebra to botany or economic history, and let him
give instruction in whatever medium he likes; but let
him not forget that English, for that vast majority of pupils
who never reach the higher standards, is the subject, and
in teaching this subject at any rate he will best use
English as a medium. I suggest, then, that our language
should not be treated merely as one of the subjects of the
curriculum on a par with the others, like a foreign language
in our own schools, but that it be regarded emphatically
as the first and foremost subject, the principal aim of
scholastic education at the lower grades.
It is sometimes said that to deprive the native of his
mother tongue, would be a cruel injustice. Whether or
no this be an exaggeration it is neither contemplated
nor likely that such a thing should come to pass.’ While
we make a definite set at teaching our native pupils English
we can surely do so without impairing their knowledge of
their own language. If there be any such danger it is
probably well, apart from any other advantage it may
bring, that the teacher should continue to use the ver-
nacular in general instruction. But the danger, I think,
may be ignored. Our aim should be, not to substitute
English for the native’s own language, but to give him
English as a second language.


The advantages are two-fold. In the first place the
ability to speak, and better still to read, the superior tongue
will open the gate to far wider fields of experience and
knowledge; it will provide for the development —to what
limits we cannot foresee —of the intellectual powers which,
however hidden at present, we must assume the native to
possess.
Secondly English will provide a means of communi-
cation between the white man and the black. In view of
the important principle that education must have a just
pertinency to the society in which the educand is to live,
and further since the society in which the native is to live
is bound to change towards closer inter-connection with
European interests, we must see to it that the education
we give him provides fully for this new set of relations.
Now at the very base of the maladjustment between native
and European lies the fact that we do not understand one
another. We may recognize well enough that we know
very little of the native; but it seems sometimes to escape
our notice that the native knows still less of us. Could
we but achieve a fuller mutual knowledge and sympathy
I feel confident that much of the present misunderstanding
and friction would vanish; and further, that we should be
able to enter into many forms of co-operation which are
now impossible, often for the simple reason that a white
man may find it more trouble than he thinks it worth to
make a native understand him. What we require is a
medium of communication: and, speaking as practically as
possible, this is nothing more than a common language.
Two alternatives present themselves: either the Euro-
pean should learn the language of the native, or the
native should learn the language of the European. The
ideal thing might be for each party to learn the language
of the other; but we must take the white man as we find
him, and I fear it must be accepted as final that, speaking
at large, he will not make himself master of the vernacular.
Without elaborating reasons which are obvious it seems
that the only sensible course, if we want a common
language, is to teach the native English.
For these two reasons then, first that it will provide for
his intellectual growth, and second that it will enable him
to understand and co-operate with the European —in a


phrase, to get on with him, it seems that the teaching of
English is one of the most valuable contributions we can
make in the native’s education.
Christianity.
The third and last of the major contributions to which
I shall refer is that of Christianity. There are many who
wish the native well, even devoting much practical effort
to the cause of his welfare, who yet view the project of
converting him to Christianity with doubt or disapproval.
It is argued that the native is best left undisturbed with
such religion as he already possesses', and that this religion
should lie unprotected from the attritional influence of
secular education, until in the natural course it gives place
to something like rationalism. It is a mistake, according
to these critics, to substitute one kind of superstition for
another.
Now no student of culture and culture-contact will
imagine it possible for native religion to remain exactly as
it was: it must be severely shaken by education and will
inevitably tend to disintegrate. Nor must we of necessity
shed tears over its disappearance, partial or otherwise.
It is the native whom we have to consider as an end, not
his religion; and if another is found to suit him as well or
better, we shall not deplore the change. It is at any rate
unlikely that the primitive will be content to do without
any religion at all. If a genuine power to dispense with
religion exists anywhere it is only among those who are
possessed of the rational or scientific outlook in an
advanced degree. They may rise superior and no longer
feel the need for it; but they must not conclude that it is
unnecessary or of no benefit to others. There is a wide
stretch between primitive religion and rationalism, and we
cannot expect the native tp cover the distance at a stride.
In the meantime scientific determinism will give him
cold comfort: he craves a more tasty diet and one that he
can digest more easily. Without passing any opinion on
its ultimate truth or merit I believe that Christianity is
for the present and the long future the best available kind
of spiritual diet we can offer to the primitive peoples. At
any rate, if administration is to continue its very fruitful
co-operation with the missions it must be prepared to
regard conversion to Christianity as part of the general


programme of native administration. Let us attempt
then to assess its value as a contribution, not forgetting
that, although Christianity may be in principle one, there
are in effect many different kinds of it, some cast in a
rigid mould, others more liberal and plastic, and perhaps
more suitable to native acceptance.
By an effort of abstraction we may consider ifs
several aspects separately and in turn. When we begin
with its ethical aspect we are immediately confronted by
the common dislike of the “missionized” native: he is in
many quarters regarded as altogether less desirable than
the raw native, and is frequently branded outright as a liar
and a thief. Prima facie it is incredible that so much patient
effort devoted to inculcating the Christian virtues should
have led to these results; and I have little hesitation in
dismissing this common dislike as sheer prejudice. The
faults attributed to mission training are rather the results
of sophistication by intercourse with Europeans and the
opportunities and temptations which it offers. Since so
many of the natives who fail in their responsibilities have
been qualified for those responsibilities by mission educa-
tion, and since so many who steal from their employers
have been qualified for that employment by the same
means, we are apt to ascribe their lapses from honesty to
the mission who trained them. Obviously the lapse has
occurred, not because of, but in spite of the training.
Perhaps our indignation against the mission boy is ag-
gravated by a feeling of disappointment; if he is found
out in a lie while calling on God to testify that he speaks
the truth, then he brands himself as a hypocrite, and in
our disgust we may be led to brand all his fellows as
hypocrites and assume that they are liars. The real com-
parison, however, is between the sophisticated mission boy
and the equally sophisticated -boy who has never been
under mission influence. There are no grounds for sup-
posing that the former is worse than the latter. Apart
from any faults we may find in the mission boy, however,
it seems probable that in many cases his unpopularity is
merely the by-product of an antipathy towards the mission
itself. This unfortunately is a very common phenomenon,
discovered notably among those Europeans who have
found the missionary an obstacle to their methods of
exploitation. Hating the mission, they dislike the mission


boy; and this impression gains ground among a population
which is not distinguished for the impartiality of its judge-
ments.
Altogether, allowing for certain mannerisms, such as
an occasional sanctimoniousness, which may excite our per-
sonal distaste, it seems that the bad opinion of the mission
boy is a matter of prejudice. In actual effect the moral
training given by the missions brings about some regard for
and some (necessarily imperfect) observance of rules such as
those of truth, honesty and kindness, which are more
pronounced in our code than in that of the native. For
added to (rather than substituted for) the current sanctions
of native morality we now have the religious sanction of
heavenly reward and punishment, together with the
perhaps more powerful sanction of mission surveillance and
the chance of excommunication; we have the continual
example and teaching of the mission itself; and finally a
certain moral tradition which grows up in every community
of Christian natives. Apart from such virtues as discipline,
cleanliness, and a sharpness in response which are largely
the result of secular training, we may thank the missions
for creating in their pupils a keener sense of duty and of
punctuality in obligation, of willingness, and I believe of
kindness, truth, and honesty, all of which are essential to
satisfactory relations between native and European.
Let us now turn to the intellectual content of Christi-
anity, towards the more or less simplified dogma which is
offered for native acceptance. It is here principally that
we find the critics apply their strictures. In the first place
it is said that the missions make no real converts. At
most they succeed in laying a veneer of Christianity upon
an internal structure of heathen superstition; and further
it is suggested that the teaching thus partially assimilated
leads to confusion and disintegration.
It is, I think, beyond question that in the strangeness
and sometimes the difficulty of Christian doctrine there
exists some real danger. It must be recognized by all that
conversion is largely a matter of degree, and that in the
mind of the convert there often exists a strange medley of
heathen and Christian notions. This is inevitable, and
up to a point should give us no cause for anxiety. But
the native, thanks largely to. our imperfect means of


communication, is peculiarly prone to get hold of the
wrong end of the religious stick; distortions arise which
may turn him into a zealot or a fanatical Puritan, or again
may reduce him to a state of perplexity bordering on
mental confusion. We must then be on the look-out for
strange freaks of behaviour, first in the individual and then
in the mass. There is no doubt that many of the new
cults or “ movements ” which have been so marked a
feature of the reaction of the dark races to European
influence are associated in the beginning with misunder-
stood religious teaching. All this points to the advisability
of simplifying Christianity for the native, and perhaps also
of mitigating the contrast with old belief by some kind of
adaptation and assimilation.
But there is another and more drastic criticism. It
is argued that even in the case of the most complete con-
version the Missions have done no more than supplant
one kind of false belief with another. I have already
attempted to answer this criticism by suggesting that,
whatever its truth or falsity, Christianity serves as a
convenient half-way house between heathenism and the
enlightened rationalism which is presumably the goal
toward which these critics would have the native directed;
and by present indications it is a house which he will long
continue to occupy. It may be that the dogmas of Christi-
anity are no nearer the truth as explanations than are the
multifarious beliefs, magical or animistic, of the primitive.
But it will hardly be questioned that they represent a
philosophical advance, and there is one signal effect of
Christian belief among natives to which I would draw
attention as one of the justifications for conversion. This
is its effect upon magic.
The claim that Christianity tends to supplant the
belief in magic is, I believe, eminently sound. It is of the
essence of magic that some human agency, some person,
is conceived to be behind it; when good fortune is ascribed
to good, and ill fortune to bad, magic, it is postulated that
there is a good or a bad magician who is responsible. But
when we step up to the higher plane the responsibility
shifts from the human being to the divine. The priest
may continue to resemble the magician, but his functions
change : he is no longer the prime agent, but merely the


go-between. The effect of this transference is seen in the
dwindling of sorcery under Christianity. Instead of blam-
ing a fellow man, the sufferer must ascribe his misfortune
to the wrath of God, or perhaps to the mischief of the
Devil. This, it is true, may be psychologically less satisfy-
ing if he is seriously grieved or annoyed, but it will at
least forestall suspicion and strife. It is one of Christi-
anity’s good marks that it has helped to throw the sorcerer,
the general poisoner of good will, out of his job.
Turning finally to the emotional value of Christianity
we shall admittedly find this hard to assess except in
constant relation to its doctrinal content. But it is
notorious that many who find difficulty in accepting its
doctrines yet contrive to retain enough of their Christianity
to derive from it a wealth of emotional satisfaction. It
would appear to follow that it is the emotional satisfaction
which constitutes for them the chief value of their religion;
and this, I believe, is accepted as generally true for the
majority of the religious, whether they be doubters or full
believers. That is to say the main importance of Christi-
anity, apart from its ethics, consists in its appeal to the
emotions, or in what are somewhat vaguely called its
spiritual blessings. We may take this to be pre-eminently
the case with the native convert. Whatever doctrinal
confusion may reign in his breast it will suffice if his ideas
are clear enough to ensure him the emotional satisfactions
which are enjoyed by more civilized Christians. If he can
understand the major doctrines of a beneficent God and
of a hereafter (conceived in a far more vivid sense than
any hereafter of his own mythology), then he has, not only
a more satisfying intellectual explanation of the super-
natural, but also a basis for comfort and hope such as he
has never known before; and furthermore he has found a
point on which to focus those feelings of awe which form
the material and dynamic of religion. Nor should one fail
to mention certain more mundane benefits —his satis-
faction in membership of the Church as a strong corporate
body and particularly his satisfaction in the rites of worship
and the Communion. Altogether there can be no doubt
that Christianity in itself is of real value to the native,
and save for the sacrifices which conversion so often entails
there can be no doubt that he would welcome it with open
arms.


But it is just these sacrifices, demanded of the native
by the mission, that raise a doubt in our minds and throw
the whole question of Christianity in native education
open to debate. If we may be permitted to regard con-
version, not as a final end in itself, but merely as a con-
tribution offered towards the final end of native welfare,
then we are at liberty to examine the contribution in a
critical spirit, to ask whether it does always conduce to
native welfare, in fact whether it is really a contribution
at all. In fine, where mission policy involves a great
number of restrictions, we must pose this question —
whether the convert, with all the restrictions to which he
is subject, is really in a better position than the heathen
without them.
Many Christian missionaries arc liable to beg this
question —if indeed they realize that there is any question
to beg. To them it seems that certain native practices
are incompatible with conversion ; but there is no thought
of balancing the one against the other. Conversion to
Christ is the way and the life, and the subject is closed
before it is opened. If however we can put aside our pre-
convictions and view the matter squarely, it appears that
there is.a question. Apart from the possibility that the
restrictions may seriously disorganize the society or culture,
there arises the question whether they may not seriously
impoverish it. That is to say they may impair its scope
and efficiency as a medium for the satisfaction of those
needs and interests which animate the human beings to
whom it belongs.
Happily it is not necessary to regard out-and-out
heathenism on the one hand and puritanical Christianity
on the other as exclusive alternatives. There is a way
out of the difficulty. While Christianity is in itself a gift
of great value, a reasonably liberal attitude in its apostles
may provide that its acceptance does not involve the
sacrifice of the most significant and valuable of the native’s
cultural achievements. I refer especially to the feasts,
ceremonies and dances which are often the object of
mission disapproval but are still, sociologically and psycho-
logically, of intense importance to the native. It seems
obvious that if the missionary can allow his converts to
dance, feast and make merry, and to practise some at least


of their own ceremonies while they practise Christianity,
then their lives will be enriched by conversion, for it will
be an added blessing. But if he insists that feasting and
dancing and the performance of ceremonies are incompat-
ible with Christianity, and that a man must put them away
before he can enter into the Church, then after due sub-
traction has been made, the final question must be asked
—whether the life of such a convert is any fuller and more
satisfying than that of the heathen.
The Ultimate Aim.
The difficulty of this situation should remind us that
we have not fully settled the question of what is the
ultimate end of native education. It might seem reason-
able to have decided this question before beginning to write
on the subject at all: but we have so far got along with a
provisional definition, and the addition which I would
make to it is really implicit in what has so far been said
in this paper.
The provisional definition was that the aim of edu-
cation is to fit a person for the society in which he is to
live: and it was observed that this did not make full allow-
ance for the development of individual personality. Now
modern education, I believe, is in theory “individualistic.”
It recognizes that each human being has his own poten-
tialities ; and it aims at a full and balanced development
of these, always with due regard to the needs and re-
strictions of society as a whole. This individualistic
method may be observed in the education of natives as it
should be in that of Europeans, though it is less a matter
for those who have to frame a general policy than for the
individual teacher (and considering the numerical ratio of
pupils to teacher he will admittedly find it a large order).
In attacking the wider problem we must be content to
blur over the details; but the essential principle remains
the same: the purpose of education is to provide means
for the full and balanced development of human personality
with proper regard to the conditions imposed by society.
We have seen also, however, that the society —or
rather culture, as a less confusing word —is in a shifting,
unstable condition; and it has been suggested that in
considering a general policy of native education we may


best direct our attention to this end of the problem. That
is to say, our real task is to fit the culture to the man
rather than the man to the culture. Since then we have
it more or less in our power to govern the trend of cultural
change, how shall we ensure that what we aim at is in
keeping with the true purpose of education ? What is
the value of culture in part and in whole ? Since we have
presumed to alter, to delete, and to add, on what general
principle can we evaluate culture at large and the several
parts of it with which we have to deal so as to be satisfied
that we are not merely meddling but interfering with a
purpose ?
A Society and Its Culture.
In order to clear the ground it is necessary to differ-
entiate between the words “ society ” and “culture” which
I have used elsewhere in this essay as if they w r ere inter-
changeable. The difference which I desire to stress is the
rather obvious one between “ a ” society, in the sense of a
group of people, and the culture associated with it, viz.
the more or less organized system of institutions, beliefs,
and sentiments which its members hold in common. The
former of course is made up of human beings, of flesh and
bone and brain tissue. The latter exists essentially in the
mental sphere, i.e. it is composed essentially of mental
habits, and incidentally of the material objects which
subserve those habits.
Now although a society and its culture are mutually
inseparable it is of the first importance to see that they
really move upon different planes. Each of them —the
one literally, the other figuratively —is a living entity and
therefore subject to change. But the significant facts are
that they do not change in the same way nor do they
change at the same rate. The society continues renewing
itself by virtue of the biological power of reproduction;
its culture persists by virtue of human memory and
transmission. The society increases or decreases, but it
does so .only in point of numbers; its culture increases by
invention or by borrowing, and it may decrease by forget-
fulness or sloth. It is almost too obvious to need showing
that the processes of change in the respective cases are of
an entirely different order. Furthermore, while the
society is waxing or waning its culture may remain


relatively constant; or vice versa, the culture may change,
perhaps be radically altered by some discovery or turn of
events, and yet the society to which it belongs remains in
its make-up unaltered. To repeat, then, the society and
its culture are both subject to change, but they change in
different ways and at different rates.
It becomes obvious that the existence of a society
does not depend on the continuance of its culture un-
changed. We are familiar with countless examples of
discoveries, of new fashions and cults, of the acquisition
of traits from without, all of them expanding and com-
plicating the culture in which they occur. On the other
hand we are familiar with the lapse or going out of fashion
of customs, or sometimes with their suppression. Strictly
speaking we may say that the culture changes with each
addition or loss; but it would be absurd to say that the
society changed with it. Whether the change be for good
or evil, the society in the normal case goes on, adjusting
its life to the circumstances.
Towards the beginning of this essay it was asserted
that the administrator is under no obligation to preserve
any culture as it stands and for its own sake. For his
responsibilities are toward his people: it is they who
represent the end. He will take the view that culture is
made for man, not man for culture; and it is important
to recognize that he is right.
If his people represent an ultimate end, then it may
be said that their culture represents a means. It is in
fact the means which they have so far perfected for making
the most of their lives in relation to their environment
and to one another. It is not permanent or immutable;
nor is it ever the best means possible. It is merely the
best which society has succeeded in devising for the time
being. An event or a discovery or a gift received in contact
with another people may virtually transform it. The
change may be for the worse. But it may be for the
better —and this is our charter for education.
The Imperfection of Culture.
Culture being relegated to the position of a means it
is as well to recognize further that the means is necessarily
far from perfect. Strains and stresses, abuses and mal


adjustments, are all too evident in the cultures of Western
Europe in which our own harassed societies strive to make
the most of their lives. In the relatively static cultures
of the primitive peoples the conflict is less in evidence,
but it would be a grave mistake to assume that it was
wholly absent. Where so many random contacts, accidents
of history, brain-waves of individuals, have been thrown
together and have somehow contrived to work themselves
into a kind of system, it is not to he expected that the
result will be a perfect organization. How often has some
borrowed trait, some new kind of black magic perhaps, or
a new and attractive method of divination, or the ritual of
a society, been seized upon and copied, perhaps without
understanding, until it is established by usage in the new
culture. Room will be found-for it amid all the other
existing elements of the culture. But it cannot be supposed
to find a place immediately in a perfectly working system.
The very fact that culture can receive any such addition
shows how radically wrong is the mechanistic theory. We
need not go to the other extreme and visualize culture as
a hotchpotch,'a sort of general receptacle into which every
new addition is rammed home, regardless of what is already
there. It is far from being that; but it is likewise far from
possessing the complete systematization of a “machine,” or
even that of an “ organism.”
Culture then appears to be imperfect in the sense that
it is only partly organized. But beyond that it contains
elements, perhaps very deep-seated and long established,
which entail suffering and unhappiness, or which, although
contriving to persist, seem yet to he disruptive. Of such
a nature, to choose some outstanding examples, are sorcery
and obligatory homicide, the blood feud, the immolation of
widows, the sacrifice of slaves. Recognizing how deeply
implicated such customs are in the body of culture one
would hardly hesitate to resort to pathology for an ana-
logue, and to say that sorcery and the rest of them were
cultural diseases or malignant growths. This is frankly
metaphorical, just as the comparison of culture with an
organism is metaphorical; and there is one point at which
the analogy is conspicuously at fault: for whereas the
malignant growth eventually kills, the evil custom only
mars and restricts the culture without killing it. Perhaps
we might draw a closer parallel with parasitism; but if


these are thought too fanciful let us adopt some plaine r
language which brings us much nearer to the actual . fact
of the matter. Customs are cultural habits; some are
good and some are bad; yet all are as much part of the
working system of culture as an individual’s habits are
part o}f his character. Some of them have outlived their
usefu ness, but society does not wish, or does not trouble,
or does not possess the power, to throw them off. The bad
customs remain to hamper, efficiency or to perpetuate ill
will and suffering: they are the bad habits of society.
In yet a third way culture is imperfect —because of
its limitations. I have already touched upon this subject
in suggesting that culture was merely the. best means
which any society has devised hitherto, or up-to-date, for
living well; and also implicitly in dealing with the positive
contributions which we could make under the Task of
Expansion. It is often remarked that culture is cumu-
lative; and it is hardly necessary, so obvious is the
contrast, to point out that our civilization is immensely
larger in content than the culture of any primitive people.
What further is in store for ourselves we cannot foresee,
but we can look back at the relatively cramped cultures of
the native peoples and realize the possibilities of expansion
that lie before them.
The Evaluation of Culture Elements.
We have seen now that no culture is to be regarded
as an end in itself, but only as a means, and a very
imperfect one at that. It may be said further that no
part of culture is to be evaluated simply by its relation to
the whole, but by the degree in which it contributes toward
the ends which the culture subserves. It is for this reason
that Functionalism, when restricted to the purely socio-
logical field, can only be of limited service in application
to the problems of native policy and native education; for
it does not furnish us with a final criterion for evaluating
those parts of culture on which we have to pass judgement.
We have observed the false tendency towards the idealiza-.
tion of culture as it exists, and it seems to the writer that
sociological Functionalism must logically force its ex-
ponents into the position of conservatism. But it is no
ultimate justification for any part of culture to show that
it is bound up with all the other parts, entering with them
into a functional unity. It must stand on other merits.


The Functionalism which takes into account the
fundamental needs and interests of human nature, which
does not reject or evade the findings of psychology, but
rather frankly co-opts them, is in a better position to offer
real help in the solution of practical problems. For culture
I take to be the means which society has so far developed
of fulfilling and satisfying those needs and interests. It
is a means by which its members do their best to live well,
adjusting their lives to the conditions of their physical
environment and to the claims of their fellow beings.
Owing to the countless and incalculable chances of history,
culture appears in an infinite variety of forms; but always
underneath it lies the same substratum of human nature.
And that nature is always striving for expression and
fulfilment, sometimes groping for improvement, sometimes
accepting innovations and sometimes rejecting them, and
most often holding blindly to what it already possesses, in
the belief that its own culture is all-sufficient because it
knows of nothing better.
Culture, first of all, must provide for the satisfaction
of the so-called primary needs —those of food, protection,
comfort, sex, and the upbringing of the young. Nor need
we go beyond the first of these to show that one culture
may be far in advance of another in any given respect.
Under identical conditions of soil and climate, one society
may live in plenty, and another —through the inferiority
of its cultural means —in toil and poverty. But there are
other urges and interests which, although not possessing
the same self-evident survival value, lie deep in human
nature and strive upwards for expression. Every society
has its aesthetic and recreational, its religious and intel-
lectual interests; and here again the worth of a culture,
in whole and in part, is to be measured by the scope and
opportunity which it allows for their expression. How
much further will a man’s intellectual interests extend if
he can but read; and how much loftier his musical flights
if he perform on the piano instead of the tomtom !
The Development of Personality.
Unfortunately the psychologists seem as yet unable
to decide specifically what these fundamental urges and
interests are. I shall not seize upon a list of them as
supplied by any one psychologist; still less attempt


presumptuously to offer a list of my own. But there is
at least unanimity enough in recognizing the existence of
human personality with an inward pressure of needs and
interests which may be well or ill satisfied, and of poten-
tialities which may be well or ill developed.
It is our opportunity, with the native’s future in our
hands, to govern the trend of cultural development so that
he shall have a superior means of developing this per-
sonality. It is indeed a responsibility, not made any
easier by the fact that our ideas on the subject of personality
itself remain indistinct. And, as I have frequently said,
there is always some risk in tampering with a culture.
Not only are we liable to hinder the functioning of some-
thing which, however imperfect, is still a going concern;
but we may forget that the culture has for many generations
met the needs and interests of society in such a way as
to give satisfaction to the society itself. If we repress or
remove any part of it, then we may unwittingly leave
some such need or interest without adequate means of
satisfaction, and this is to prepare the way for repression
and trouble.
There is ample scope here for the collaboration of
anthropology and psychology; indeed to determine the
fundamental needs and interests of human nature is work
for the psychologist himself, or at least for the anthro-
pologist with a psychological training. Lacking such
training the writer will be excused for fighting shy of
technicalities and using instead some very ordinary words
in pointing to one great danger which attends our efforts
at reform. With the best of intentions we may succeed in
taking half the amusement, half the enjoyment, and perhaps
more than half the pride out of the native’s life. The
native, like the rest of us, must have his fun; he is entitled
to his occasional excitement; he should be allowed to
assert himself, and to strut, metaphorically and literally,
in his paint and feathers; and above all he should be
encouraged to keep his individual and corporate pride.
His own culture gave him plenty of scope for entertaining
himself and for preserving a good conceit of himself. Let
us beware that wo do not deprive him altogether of these
means of expression and leave him bored, discontented,
and with a sense of hopeless inferiority.


But if we can see and avoid these risks we have
before us a great opportunity of helping the native along
the path of self-development and progress. Recognizing
that his life in the future must of necessity come into
closer relation with European influence we shall be well
advised to educate him up to the point where he can
understand, and co-operate, and enter fully into the life
of a larger unity; but we shall also find in this circumstance
of European contact an opportunity for widening his
cultural horizon, for developing powers that have hitherto
lain dormant for lack of means to express themselves.
Our purpose in fine is to guide and assist the development
of a new culture in which all that is best in the old native
life shall blend with elements and forces derived from our
own civilization.' If it provide for understanding, help-
fulness, and good-will, between native and European, and
if it enable the more backward race to develop its latent
powers, to live a fuller and richer life, then the main aims
of education will have been fulfilled.


INDEX
Administration, administrator, 1,2, 18
29, 39
’anthropologist and, 17
missions and, 31
Anthropologist:
administrator and, 17
attitude of, towards culture change,
2, 16
judgements of value by, 16
Art, native, 10
decay of, 11
motives for, 12, 13
preservation of, 11-13
Blood feud, 21, 40
Bull-roarer, 17
Burial rites, 16, 20
Ceremonies, 11
missions and, 36, 37
Christian law, 9
Christianity, 31-37
magic and, 20 fn.
native ritual and, 14
Collection of curios, 12
Colour-line, 6
Communication, means of, 30, 33, 34
Crafts, 26
Culture:
as a means, 36, 39, 42
as “ organism;” 19
bad elements in, 7, 14 fi., 16,19, 40, 41
change of, 1,2, 38, 39
contact, 7,8, 31
definition of, 4, 38
disintegration of, 31
education and, 4
idealization of, 2
imperfection of, 39-41
intentional change of, 3,5, B,' 10, 38
living character of, 9, 26
loyalty to, 6
mechanistic theory of, 18, 19, 40
organization of, partial, 10, 18,19, 40
plasticity of, 19
preservation of, 2, 16, 38, 39
society and, 39
Cultural independence, 8
Curios, 12
Dances:
missions and, 10, 11, 21, 36, 37
Disintegration, 31, 33
Domestic Science, 26
Dress, 6, 11
English language, 28-31
Europeanization, 5-7
Functionalism, functionalist, 15, 18, 41
42
Functions, 17, 18
Gardening, 26-28
Habits, 41
Head-hunting, 15, 23
Horticulture, 26-28
Irrigation, 20, 27
Literacy, 28
Magic, 19, 20, 40
christanity and, 31, 35
missions and, 21 fn.
sorcery as, 23
Manual education, 13
Missions:
administrator and, 31
altrustic aim of, 3
dances and, 11
Europeanization and, 9, 10
example of, 21
magic and, 21 fn.
moral training by, 33
native ritual and, 14
prestige of, 22
restrictions imposed by, 36
secular education by, 29
Missionized native, 32
Personality, 4, 37, 42, 43
Pigs, cruelty to, 21
Pottery, 11, 13
Psychology, 42, 43
Punishment, 22-25
Rationalism, 31, 34
Sexual Laxity, 16
Society:
culture and, 38, 39
education and, 4, 37, 38
Sodomy, 17
Sorcery, 15, 23-25, 35, 40
Standard of living, 26
Stuffed heads, 13
Survival, 17
Tasks of education, 8 ff.
Tools, 13, 14
Vernacular, 29, 30
Warfare, 23
Widows, 16, 40


PRINTED AND PUBLISHED
BY WALTER ALFRED BOCK
GOVERNMENT PRINTER
PORT MORESBY


List of Anthropological Reports
issued by the Government of Papua
Obtainable from the Government Printer, Port Moresby,
with exception of Nos. 6,7, 8,10 and 15, which are pub-
lished by the Oxford Press and sold by booksellers . . . .
No. I — ''Report on.the Suau-Tatvala. W. E. Armstrong, Assistant
Government Anthropologist, with notes by W. M. Strong,
Government Anthropologist, pp. 47. 1922.
No. 2 —*(l) Anthropology of the South-Eastern Division ; and (2)
Native Taxation (both by W. B. Armstrong); (3) Notes on
Houses and Canoes (by various Eesident Magistrates), pp. 79,
with 16 figures. 1922.
No. 3 — The Collection of Curios and the Preservation of Native Culture.
P. B. Williams, Assistant Government Anthropologist, with
Preface by W. M. Strong, pp. 20, with 8 half-tone plates.
1923. Is.
No. 4 — ''The Vailala Madness and the Destruction of Native Ceremonies.
F. B. Williams, with Introduction by W. M. Strong and
Memorandum by J. H. P. Murray, C.M.G., Lieutenant-
Governor, pp. xiii and 78, with 6 half-tone plates and map.
1923.
No. 5 — The Natives of the Purari Delta. F. E. Williams, with Intro-
duction by J. H. P. Murray, pp. vi and 283, with 30 half-tone
plates, 85 figures and map. 1924. Paper cover, 7s. 6d.;
cloth, 10s.
Nos. 6, 7 and B —Orokaiva Magic : (No. 6 — The Taro Cult, A Study of
a Primitive Religious Movement ; No. 7 — The Garden Culture
of the Orohaiva ; No. B—Qrohaiva8 — Qrohaiva Magic). F. E. Williams,
with Foreword by R. R. Marett, demy Bvo., pp. 244, with 7
half-tone plates, 3 figures and map. Oxford University Press.
1928. Booksellers, 12s. 6d.
No. 9 — Native Education (Intellectual). F. E. Williams, Government
Anthropologist, pp. 25. 1928. 6d.
♦Out of print. To be reprinted.


No. 10 — Orokaiva Society. P. E. Williams, with Introduction by Sir
Hubert Murray, K.C.M.G., Lieutenant-Governor, demy Bvo.,
pp. 380, with 37 half-tone plates, 25 figures and map. Oxford
University Press. 1930. Booksellers, 255.
No. 11 — The Species of Tobacco Grown in Neio Guinea. J. S. L. Gilmour,
with Preface by A. C. Haddon, pp. 9, with 6 half-tone plates
and 4 figures. 1931. 9d.
No. 12 — Sentiments and Leading Ideas in Native Society. F. E.
Williams, with Introduction by Sir Hubert Murray, pp. 16.
1932. 6d.
No. 13 — Depopulation of the Suau District. P. B. Williams, pp. 75,
with 5 half-tone plates. 1933. Is. fid.
No. 14 — Practical Education : The Reform of Native Horticulture.
P. E. Williams, pp. 67, with 9 half-tone plates. 1933. Is. fid.
Nos. 13 and 14 are also published together bound in cloth under title
Population and Education in Papua. ss.
No. IS — Papuans of the Trans-Fly (in press). Oxford University Press.
No. 16 — The Blending of Cultures : An Essay on the Aims of Native
Education. F. E. Williams, pp. 44. 1935. Is.
Also— The Papuan Villager (in progress). A Native Newspaper in
English, Edited by F. E. Williams. Monthly ; 8 pages
(illustrated). Annual subscription overseas, 2s. post free.
Single copies, 2d.
