

3ft f p




THE REAL
RICHARD JOHNSON


RICHARD JOHNSON


THE REAL
RICHARD JOHNSON
WILLIAM H. RAINEY
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Australia Council
of the British and Foreign Bible Society.
S, JOHN BACON
(Marshall, Morgan, and Scott Ltd.)
317 Collins Street, Melbourne




FOREWORD
I accept with alacrity the Rev. W. H. Rainey s invitation
to append a brief preface to his illuminating sketch of
Richard Johnson.
Australia must always recognise with deepest gratitude
her stupendous debt to the circumstance that the first
foundations of her religious life were laid by good men
like Johnson and Marsden. They struck the keynote
which has vibrated across the continent through all the
years.
Moreover, it is right that we should recall, at every sixit-
able opportunity, that the best life of the younger nations
—America and Australia —is rooted in the mighty spirit-
ual pulsations that swept the Motherland.
It would be easy, for example, to prove that the sturdy
faith of Abraham Lincoln, which has exercised so creative
and abiding an influence in shaping the destinies of the
Western world, was derived through the camp meetings
attended by his immediate antecedents, and a sequence
of similar links, from the altar fires lit by the English
Puritans.
In precisely the same way, we in Australia owe the
brave testimony of Johnson and Marsden, our pioneer
preachers, to the new life that surged through English
thought and action with the great evangelical revival.
These first chaplains were selected for their Australian
appointments by men who owed their very souls to the
gracious movement that, like a wind from heaven, had so
recently swept over the Homeland, affecting everybody
and transfiguring everything. At that crucial moment,
England was throbbing with spiritual intensity, and was
aglow with evangelistic fervour. A new age was being
born, and the choice of Johnson and Marsden was an
essential part of its rich fruitage.
I rejoice that Mr. Rainey has devoted his fine mind, and
his scholarly command of facts, to the telling of this
noble story; and, with all my heart, I wish his venture the
amplest possible success.
F. W. BOREHAM.




INTRODUC HO N
The Rev. J. B. Marsden, in his life of Samuel Marsden,
despatched that great man’s predecessor, Australia’s first
preacher, with a single patronising paragraph. He says —
"He (Samuel Marsden) had, for a short time, a single
associate, in the Rev. R. Johnson, the senior Chaplain, a
good and useful minister, but unequal to the difficulties
peculiar to his situation. This gentleman soon relin-
quished his appointment and returned to England.”
Feeling that justice was hardly being done to Richard
Johnson by this writer, or by others speaking in a similar
vein, the author decided to study the records available in
our libraries, and see for himself what kind of man he
really was. The results of the reading will be found in
the following pages.
There is nothing in them that is not already familiar to
students. We are trying, however, to make the life of a
great Australian pioneer familiar to the general public.
Information has been drawn from many sources; we be-
lieve we have acknowledged them in the text, except the
"Historical Archives of New South Wales,” from which
most of the letters were taken.
—W.H.R.




The Real Richard Johnson
THE BEGINNING OF A GREAT ADVENTURE.
Richard Johnson, Australia’s first preacher, was fortun-
ate in his friends. Among them was William Wilberforce,
famous as the leader in the anti-slavery campaign; both
he and Johnson studied at Hull School under that famous
headmaster, the Rev. Joseph Milner. On leaving Hull,
Johnson went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, which
was renowned for its religious atmosphere, and in 1874, at
the age of 29, took his B.A. degree. Meanwhile, Wilber-
force had not forgotten his friend, and it was he who per-
suaded Pitt, the Prime Minister, to allow a Chaplain to
accompany the Convict Fleet, and to appoint Johnson to
that post. Once this was done he, together with the Rev.
John Newton, and their mutual friend, the poet, William
Cowper, united their efforts to persuade Johnson to accept
the Botany Bay chaplaincy. They were successful, and
Australia’s first chaplain was appointed on the 24th
October, 1786, at a salary of £IBO a year. All these gentle-
men belonged to the Eclectic Society, an association of
ministers and laymen, both Church of England and Free
Church, that existed for the "investigation of truth under
its various aspects, and the adoption of it wherever it was
found.” In the liberality of their views and their desire to
co-operate with all Churches, they were far ahead of their
time, and it was inevitable they should be frowned upon
by more conservative elements. It was in one of their
meetings that the project of sending a Chaplain to Botany


Bay was born. Moreover, it was at a meeting of the Eclec-
tic Society held at the Castle and Falcon Inn, in 1799, that
the Church Missionary Society was founded.
Richard Johnson was a clergyman of the Church of
England, ordained by the Archbishop of Canterbury, but
attached, like Wilberforce, to the Methodist movement.
Indeed, Lieut.-Governor Gross complained of Johnson to
the Rt. Hon. Henry Dundas, as "one of the people called
Methodists,” and the Rev. Thomas Syach, who knew the
Chaplain in Sydney, went still further, and called him "a
Moravian Methodist.” The answer to this apparent con-
fusion is contained in the fact that Methodism had not yet
separated from the Church of England; thus it was pos-
sible to be an Anglican and, at the same time, a Methodist
influenced by Moravian views, as indeed was John Wesley
himself. The fact, however, that Johnson followed this
school of thought explains the missionary zeal that led
him to volunteer for the post that had nothing to offer
except isolation, hardship and danger. Indeed, John New-
ton specifically mentions the difficulty of finding someone
to accompany the convict vessels, and continues by stating
that for three years they had searched in vain for a man
for Calcutta. Evidently the missionary spirit was at a low
ebb at this period. Even the severest critics of Johnson
must, we think, agree that his action in accepting the
Botany Bay Chaplaincy, when, as an Oxford graduate, he
might have aspired to something better, stands to his
credit.
FIRST CONTACT WITH REALITY.
Some writers say that the Government’s decision to send
a Chaplain with the expedition was due to a last minute
appeal by Wilberforce. Pitt was certainly influenced by
Wilberforce in making this decision, but the appeal, if
there was one, was certainly not made at the last minute.


for Johnson was appointed at least five months before the
fleet sailed.
During this time, on the 22nd October, 1786, to be pre-
cise, he made a trip to Woolwich, and on the hulk
"Leviathan,” was introduced to 250 of his future parish-
ioners. James Bon wick, in his book, "Australia’s First
Preacher,” thus describes the scene:
"The poor creatures were fetched up from the dark
caverned depths of the lower deck, fetid in atmosphere,
and reeking with disease germs. They were gross and dis-
gusting in bodily appearance, dull in intellect, depraved in
morals. There was no light in their eye, no smile on their
face. They had mirth without joy, laughter without plea-
sure. Did one know at what they laughed, at what they
swore, fear would be added to horror. Yet these were
human beings; the erect stature still parted them from
the beasts of the forest or field. What did the preacher
think of them? He shrank from them. He pitied the sal
low, hopeless, looking ones, and shuddered at the more
youthful, who, brought up in homes of filth, misery and
vice, had never known the guilelessness and brightness of
childhood.”
This was the Chaplain’s first contact with the dark side
of life. He was evidently appalled by what he saw; the
stench was overpowering, and so was the blasphemous
cursing of both men and women. The hard, crime-stamped
faces of the convicts were far from friendly; to them the
Chaplain appeared not as a friend, but as the servant of
the Law that had condemned them. The horrors connected
with the transportation of convicts to Botany Bay were
such that it needs a mental effort to remember that the
idea was a philanthropic one, introduced not merely to
empty the jails, but to mitigate the severity of a Criminal


Code that condemned to death almost all who came within
its clutches. It was about this time that a child of 12 was
hanged for stealing a few sweets on her way to school.
Transportation offered a chance to make good in a new
land, and this, its sponsors argued with reason, was better
than capital punishment. It is interesting to note that Dr.
Lang, in his "History of New South Wales,” after taking
into account the spirit of the age, considered the objects
that inspired the settlement in Botany Bay as altogether
worthy of the enlightened legislature of a great nation.
Had the scheme been carried out in the spirit of those who
conceived it, things would have been very different.
We cannot help thinking that this visit to the hulks,
this first contact with reality, cooled Johnson’s ardour. He
wrote to his friend Newton, who was also his spiritual
director, complaining of conditions, and speaking of his
unpleasant experience. So great was the shock that, when
he was specially invited to attend a meeting of the Eclec-
tic Society called for a week later, where a subject of
burning importance to Johnson was to be discussed, viz.—
"What is the best method of planting and propagating the
Gospel in Botany Bay?” —he did not turn up. Nor did he
again visit the hulks, but spent bis time seeing the sights
of London and enjoying the countryside. It would seem
that at this time Johnson passed through a period of
spiritual decline, for the observant Mr. Newton, writing
to him two years later, said: "This spirit (the firmness
necessary to be a missionary) I judged you had when you
accepted the service. I found you had lost some of it
before you left England, but I seemed satisfied by your
journals that the Lord had revived it in you by the time
of your arrival in New Holland.”


JOHNSON SAILS.
Chaplain Johnson sailed, with the first fleet, on the
"Golden Grove.” He took with him Mary, his newly
married wife. One wonders whether the masterful John
Newton was responsible for this romance. It would almost
seem so, for in December, 1786, Pastor Bull, who suc-
ceeded Rowland Hill as minister of the Surrey Tabernacle,
Blackfriars, wrote to him:
"So at last you have given the good Bishop of Botany
Bay a wife to take with him—a very good thing if she
is a good wife. I pity and rejoice.”
Pity was not out of place, for the nine months’ voyage
was a terrible experience. However, whoever arranged the
marriage, the engagement was certainly not a long one,
for only a short time had lapsed since Johnson had
presented the Archbishop of Canterbury with an appar-
ently insoluble problem.
"If,” he said, "I should decide to get married in the
Colony, who would marry me?” Perhaps, appalled by the
magnitude of the problem, he determined the conditions
should never arise.
The voyage, as we have said, was a terrible one. Quar-
ters were small and uncomfortable; the food, judging by
home standards, poor. Seas were rough. Johnson, who
was never robust, suffered terribly; his wife became so ill
that her life was despaired of. We learn these details from
the diary of Surgeon Bowes, medical officer in charge of
the ships. On the 19th December, 1787, he says laconic-
ally, "Mrs. Johnson is very ill,” and on the 10th January,
1788, "The 'Golden Grove’ shipped a sea, washed Mr.
and Mrs. Johnson out of bed, and broke the cabin win-
dows/’-Then again, on the 2nd March of the same year,


"Chaplain ill from dysentery.” Yet Johnson struggled on,
fulfilling faithfully the duties of his office. He visited two
of the ships each Sunday, and conducted divine service.
Moreover, he provided books for those who wished to
have them, for the Society for Promoting Christian Know-
ledge, to whom be all honour, had provided him with a
good stock of literature. This included 100 Bibles, 400
New Testaments, and 500 Psalters, 100 Prayer Books, and
200 Catechisms, as well as such books as White’s "Dis-
suasives Against Stealing” and Woodward’s "Against
Swearing.” Moreover, Johnson’s heart rejoiced in the fact
that the same Society had offered a grant of £lO towards
the stipend of any school teachers who might work in the
Colony.
FIRST CHURCH SERVICE IN AUSTRALIA.
The ships reached Botany Bay on 20th January, 1788,
transferring to Port Jackson on Saturday, 26th, and im-
mediately began to unload its passengers and cargo. John
Newton’s thoughts were with his beloved disciple, for
shortly afterwards he wrote:
"The travels and voyages of St. Paul will have pecu-
liar weight, and you will feel comfort from them which
you never had before. Nothing can hurt you while the
Lord is with you.”
"When you land there, may you, like Noah when he
left the ark, meet a special blessing from on high to
welcome you on shore. If the Lord bestows upon you,
and maintains in you, the true spirit of a missionary, I
conceive of you as the greatest and most honoured
minister of our Established Church. My heart hopes
that you will carry with you a spark from which light
may proceed to enlighten the whole Southern Hemi-
sphere.”


The beginning, however, was not auspicious. The
weather was wet, and the need of erecting shelters was so
urgent that no religious service was held. It was not until
the 3rd February that the first divine service was held on
Australian soil. Robert Brown, master of the storeship,
"Fishburn,” says in his blunt seaman’s way—" Very hot,
went on shore and heard Divine Service by ye Rev. Mr.
Johnson.” But Lieut. Ralph Clark gives us further details:
"We had,” he said, "a very good sermon, the text being
taken from the 116th Psalm, and the 12th verse, 'What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards
me.’ ” Critics claim that Johnson lacked humour, and
that his choice of this text is an illustration in point, but we
cannot help thinking that the choice was rather apt, for it
seems to us that after such a long and dangerous voyage,
even the convicts would be glad to find themselves on "terra
firma.” Moreover, they could not foresee the hardships
and suffering that lay before them. The first communion
service was held a fortnight later. Lieut. Clark is again our
informant. He says, "Major Ross sent down to ask me if
I would be so good as to let the Governor have our
markee to take Sacrament in, which I could not refuse,
and I am happy that it was to be my markee; never did
it receive so much honour. I will keep this table also as
long as I live, for it is the first table that ever the Lord’s
Supper was eaten out of in this country.”
JOHNSON, AS A PREACHER.
In spite of Lieut. Clark’s recommendations, we do not
know whether Johnson was a good preacher, for, to the
best of our knowledge, none of his sermons have been
preserved. It is unfortunate that most of Johnson’s let-
ters have been lost, for this handicaps us considerably in
our efforts to understand his character and methods of


work. However, the Rev. John Newton, writing to him
on the 29th March, 1794, throws a little light on methods
which, if we are disposed to criticise, we must remember
were those of his time. "You often speak of 'preaching
awfully’,” says his mentor, "yet too frequent denunciation
of wrath, instead of working savingly unto them, rather
tends to increase the enmity of their minds against God.”
Governor Philip himself was a severe critic of Johnson’s
sermons, but on other grounds; at an early stage he asked
him to stress the moral rather than the doctrinal. Philip,
a bluff seaman, as honest as the day, was not a religious
man, and we can understand his impatience if Johnson
confined himself to doctrine and did not press for practi-
cal results in better living. However, Johnson, whatever his
methods and subject-matter, could certainly not claim to
be a popular preacher. On several occasions he complained
bitterly to the Governor of the small attendrnce at his
services. Writing in 1798, Johnson says that about 20
convicts attended service, mostly his own servants. "The
great majority stayed in their huts and slept in their
hammocks. At night the whole camp was a scene of riot.”
Finally, Philip, exasperated by Johnson’s complaints,
took strong action and issued the following decree:
"The Commissary is directed to stop two pounds of
meat from every overseer, and a pound and a half from
every convict, who does not attend divine service, unless
prevented by sickness or other sufficient cause.”
It is believed that this order was not enforced. Never-
theless, Captain Tench, who was well disposed towards
the Chaplain, Writing on the 12th November, 1790, says
in his diary:
"Went to Rose Hill (Parramatta) with the Rev. Mr.
Johnson. Divine service is performed here, morning and


evening, one Sunday a month, when all the convicts are
obliged to attend Church under penalty of having part
of their allowance of provisions stopped; this is done
by the Chaplain, who is a J.P.”
Governor Hunter, who was very strict on a proper
attendance being observed on the Sabbath, ordered "all
sentinels and watchmen to confine every person who may
be strolling about the towns of Sydney and Parramatta
during the hours of Divine Service.” Lord Hobart, how-
ever, to whose ears the complaints eventually came, sug-
gested that better attendance at Church would be achieved,
not by punishment, but by giving those who attended an
extra issue of rum. This is sound psychology, and would
have been in keeping with the spirit of the age.
Johnson, however, whether his congregation was
voluntary or not, did not limit himself to conducting
divine service. He visited the sick in hospital, and the
convicts in their huts. A convict, writing from Port Jack-
son on the 9th April, 1790, after describing vividly the
suffering and disease of the Colony, continued, "I believe
few of the sick would recover if it were not for the kind-
ness of the Rev. Mr. Johnson, whose assistance out of his
own stores makes him the physician both of body and
soul.” The Chaplain, too, refers to his own visitation work.
In one of his letters he says, "I have found more pleasure
at times in visiting convicts in their huts than in preach-
ing.”
THE FIRST CHURCH.
As we have said, Governor Philip, although possessed
of many solid virtues, was not a religious man. Johnson’s
continued requests for a Church were received by him
without enthusiasm; the Colony, facing starvation and
fighting a deadly war against disease, had, he maintained,


more important problems. Then, in 1793, a Spanish
exploring expedition visited Sydney, and the Priest of the
Commodore’s ship, noticing the absence of a Church, said
to Johnson, ' Had the place been settled by our nation, a
House for God would have been erected before one for
man.” This touched Johnson to the quick, and he took a
bold step. On 10th July, of the same year, without ask-
ing permission from anybody, he began to build a Church
Australia’s First Church, Opened 25th August, 1793,
Burnt Down Ist October, 1798
on land at the corner of Hunter and Castlereagh Streets.
It was built with wattle walls plastered over, and had a
thatched roof; there was a seating capacity for 500. In
this work Johnson laboured with his own hands, as well
as employing convict labour, which he paid partly in
tobacco and rum prepared on his own estate.
The total cost was £67/12/1 but it is said that after
mature consideration, he added another three pence to
this account. Philip having returned to England, Johnson


promptly sent in the bill to Lieut.-Governor Gross. It
was this action that inspired Gross’s furious letter to
Dundas, to which reference has already been made, in
which he not only called him a Methodist, but "a trouble-
some, discontented character.” It is interesting to note
that Colonel Collins, who was in closer relationship with
the Chaplain than the Lieut.-Governor, thought differ-
ently. He said, "Owing to his (Johnson’s) splendid ener-
gies, the early Sabbath days were not allowed to pass with-
out the ordinary observances of a civilised land. All that
human effort could do was done.” There is no doubt that
Johnson would never have been reimbursed for the money
spent on the Church if Wilberforce had not taken up the
cudgels on his behalf. The great philanthropist wrote to
Dundas as follows: "Johnson is one of the worthiest of
men, the most active, the most humble.” He then goes on
to say that £67 for a Church is a most moderate charge.
"He worked very hard with his own hands by night as
well as by day.” Wilberforce thoroughly understood
human nature, and his estimate of Johnson’s character is
of the greatest importance.
In 1797, after a special appeal by Governor Hunter
for a better attendance at Church, the building was burnt
down, it is believed by the convicts themselves. Hunter,
not to be outdone, immediately had a store-house pre-
pared so that the following Sabbath should not be without
a service. The Bible and the Prayer Book used in this first
Australian Church were rescued from the flames, and are
preserved at St. Philip’s Church, Sydney. They are always
used on the anniversary of the first service.


JOHNSON’S VERSATILITY.
Johnson was a very versatile man. It is interesting to
note that no sooner had he opened his Church than he
started a day school there; thus he was the pioneer of
education in the Colony.
He was also the first to attempt to civilise the aborig-
inals. He took into his household a native girl, named
Abaroo; he and his wife went to immense pains to civilise
her. They taught her to pray, to read and to speak Eng-
lish. She was happy with them, and only returned to her
own people in order to get married. Some of Johnson’s
critics suggest that he only took this girl into his home
because he needed help for the children. No doubt such
help was necessary, but convict labour was cheap and
abundant.
Moreover, Lieut. Tench tells of Johnson’s kindness to
a native woman whose husband had been sent on a mes-
sage to the camp, leaving her alone. To quiet her fears,
the Chaplain, attended by Abaroo, agreed to remain as a
hostage until her husband’s return.
Johnson, however, was no linguist, and, as far as we
know, did not succeed in learning any native language. It
was Lieut. Tench who, notebook in hand, never seemed to
lose the opportunity to jot down native words, comparing
one dialect with another as he travelled around the
country.
Johnson thoroughly understood agriculture, and Cap-
tain Tench, no mean judge, called him "the best farmer in
the country.” Bernard Eldershaw, in his book, "Philip of
Australia,” says: "Johnson had the gift of farming and
making money out of it. In the starving settlement his
cabbages and pumpkins were no doubt accounted to him
for righteousness in the heavenly record, even when, by care-


less book-keeping, his discourses might have been omitted.”
This criticism seems to us to be unjustified. It was to
Johnson’s credit that he worked hard in his garden, and
by producing the best vegetables in the Colony, helped
to prove to sceptical people that the parson is not the use-
less individual he is sometimes thought to be. Then we,
too, owe Johnson something, When we eat our luscious
oranges we must remember with gratitude that he planted
the first orange tree in New South Wales with seed he
brought from Rio de Janeiro. His action in bringing this
seed to Australia was that of a practical, farseeing man,
even then thinking of the good of the people among whom
he was to dwell. As to the charge that he made money out
of his farm, we can find no evidence to support it, but,
as we have said, there is definite proof that he was gen-
erous in his gifts of fruit and vegetables among the scurvy-
strickened people. We need not be scandalisd that he
grew tobacco, and made wine from grapes grown on his
farm, for such was the custom of the day.
The temperance movement, destined to create a con-
science on the drinking of alcoholic liquors as a beverage,
was only just coming into being. However, it is significant
that no charge of over-indulgence in alcohol was ever
brought against Johnson. Living as he did in a Colony
where drunkenness was the order of the day among all
classes, and where wages were paid largely in rum, his
moderation does him credit.
DID JOHNSON MAKE MONEY?
There is a tendency among Johnson’s critics to suggest
that he found his position at Port Jackson a lucrative one.
This was certainly not so; Johnson’s letters are those of
a man who finds it difficult to make both ends meet. It is
true that he was not badly paid. He received 10/- a day


and a house, and later the farm at Canterbury to which
reference has been made, but living was very dear in the
Colony. Unfortunately most of the Chaplain’s letters have
been lost, but a communication from the Rev. John New-
ton to the Rev. Richard Johnson, dated the 29th March,
1794, and preserved in the archives of the Religious Tract
Society, throws some light on this matter. Mr. Newton
writes:
"I do not wonder that you often feel care and anxiety
regarding your temporal. concerns. Yet if we are in
the path of duty such cares are needless, because God
careth for you. But when you speak of the time spent
in your necessary employment as so much time lost, be-
cause it keeps you from your books and prayers, I
think you distress yourself without just cause. I wish
you to consider your mission as a whole, composed of
various parts, each of which has its importance. Preach-
ing, reading, and study are of the first consideration, but
if necessity requires you to work with your hands to
procure necessary subsistence for your family, this was
a part of your calling likewise. I believe the Apostle was
employed no less lawfully when gathering sticks for the
fire than when preaching the Gospel. You understand
the Gospel too well to confine religion to devotional
exercises.”
As Johnson’s family increased, so did his financial posi-
tion became more difficult. In one of his letters he said:
"My principal complaint is that I cannot provide
better for my family. We are now eight in number, and
Mrs. Johnson far gone with child. Our allowance at
present is scanty, and is likely to be still less. ’Tis seldom
we can get fresh meat, and then in general it is at a dear


rate. Fresh pork costs one shilling a pound. A moderate
size fowl, 3, 4 or 5 shillings, Indian corn 10/- a bushel.”
Indeed, the whole background of Johnson’s life is that
of a man struggling against adverse circumstances, and
finding it hard to make both ends meet. Had he gone in
for trading in rum, no doubt, like so many of those whom
he met from day to day, he would have become rich.
JOHNSON’S LACK OF POPULARITY.
Unfortunately, Johnson, in spite of his devotion to
duty, was not popular. James Bonwick, whose life of
Johnson has already been referred to, says:
"Johnson was of delicate health, of sensitive nature,
of retiring habits. With the tenderness of Henry Martyn,
he lacked the courage of a Livingstone, the ardour of a
Felix Neff, the active benevolence of Oberlin.”
In a word, he was retiring and shy, by no means a good
mixer, and not likely to be popular with the rough and
ready people who formed the colony of Port Jackson.
Professor Wood, a good judge of character, says:
"Johnson was not popular. He was too sensitive be-
cause too egotistical. He thought too much of his dignity
as a gentleman, and too little about the greatness and
glory of the 'First Apostle to the South Seas.’ In his
studies of the convicts he never seems to have got much
deeper than the conception that convicts were very
wicked persons, and that the main business of a pastor
was to tell them so. One is almost tempted to say that
he doubted even that a convict had a soul. He was un-
touched by pity, and this made him invulnerable. If the
convicts were wretched, it was the just punishment of
their evil doings. That was something fixed and definite
in their mind. He had never hope for, or faith in, his


flock. He attended executions and heard last confes-
sions as a part of his routine duties. It is not of such
things that he writes in such an impassioned strain,
but of the blow to his dignity, having no Church, in
having to preach under trees and in boat-sheds, and
the colds he caught in so doing.”
There is undoubtedly some truth in this statement, hut.
to fully understand Richard Johnson, we need to under-
stand the conditions under which he lived. We believe
that, fresh from the relative purity and refinement of home
and university life, he was overwhelmed by the sin and
misery of this new world in which he found himself. The
horrors of the convict ships eat into his very soul. We have
seen him shrink from his first contact with them, but what
must he have felt when the "Neptune,” the "Surprise,”
and the "Scarborough” arrived and flooded the settlement
with rotting humanity. Of the 1038 convicts on these ves-
sels, 273 died at sea, 486 were landed sick, 124 of them
died in hospital. No wonder that Johnson’s face was
green when he came ashore from visiting these hell-ships.
Investigation showed that conditions were worse than on
slavers. It was in the interest of slave owners to keep the
slaves alive, for they were worth money, while it was in
the interests of the contractors that the convicts should
die, and that as soon as possible, for they would eat less
—they being paid for the number they took on board,
and not for the number landed. Governor Philip, in a
fine burst of righteous indignation, denounced the captains
as murderers, and demanded that action should be
taken against them when they reached home. Johnson
was the only Chaplain in the Colony. He sat at the bed-
side of dying men and conducted funeral services until it
all seemed like a dream. In one month, considered by him
as quite normal, sixty men died. Then there were periods


when famine stalked the land; the theft of food from the
public stores was punished by death, but starving men
care little how they die, so executions were so numerous
that they, too, became almost a routine matter to one
forced by his duty to attend them all. The convicts were
hopeless and desperate. Any return to their native land
seemed hopeless even to those who were serving short
sentences, for, through sheer carelessness, the official
records had been left behind in England, and the very
term of their punishment was unknown.
Moral conditions were appalling. The "Public Adver-
tiser,” in the number corresponding to May, 1790, gives
us a glimpse into the conditions obtaining in the Colony
when it says:
"Governor Philip finds great difficulty in the due
appropriation of husbands. At first he allowed six to
each wife, but, at present, the number of female convicts
having greatly increased, the number allotted is not
more than three. This necessary regulation has pro-
duced great animosity among the fair sex of the settle-
ment.”
Such were the surroundings under which Johnson lived
and worked. They would have affected the sensibility of
almost any man. He stands a lonely figure amid this scene
of misery, overwhelmed by the vice and antagonism
around him, determined to do his duty, clinging desper-
ately to God lest he himself be swept away. He seems to
have lost faith in his power to present a redemptive Gos-
pel, and his parishioners, whether bond or free, gave him
little encouragement.
The Chaplain lacked faith, too, in the future of the
land where he worked. It has been said that in the midst
of dearth "he had no prophetic vision to perceive coming


years of plenty, a smiling land, a contented people, the
spread of school and Church, the growth of freedom, the
progress of humanity.” Yet, while accepting this fact, we
must remember that it is easy to be wise after the event.
At that time 90 per cent, of the inhabitants of the Colony
would have agreed with Johnson. Yet it is greatly to John-
son’s credit that, although he lacked the support and.
stimulus of faith, he held grimly on to his post. Writing
about this time to a friend at Portsmouth, he said:
"I believe that few have met with more or greater
trials, but after all I assure you that I have no imme-
diate intention of returning to Europe. I am persuaded
that I am where God aims and intends me to be, and I
think it is my duty to remain where I am.”
He also wrote to a Mr. Pricker:
"I believe there are few, if any, but who wish them-
selves back in Old England. I must declare that it is my
opinion that the soil is Naught and ye Colony never
likely to answer the wishes and expectations of Govern-
ment.”
We cannot help contrasting this pessimism with the
optimism of Governor Philip, whom disease, famine,
drought, bush fires or failure of crops could not move.
Serene and confident, carrying the whole Colony along on
the wings of his own faith, he wrote to Lord Sydney in
1789: "Nor do I doubt that this country will prove the
most valuable acquisition that Great Britain ever made.”
THE DEPARTURE OF PHILIP.
When Philip was forced, by bad health, to return to
England, morale immediately fell. Soldiers and civilians
threw aside every restraint, and gave themselves up to
licentiousness and money making. The officers of the
New South Wales Corps followed the general example.


James Bonwick sums up the situation well when he says:
"Lieut.-Governor Gross, who was C.O. of the New South
Wales Corps, sold commissions for personal profit. Such
an organisation as his, so constructed, became, by sheer
corruption and audacity, the one dominant power in the
Colony. They centralised, by improper means, the exist-
ing channels to wealth and influence, the seizure of land,
and the possession of all avenues of trade, particularly the
traffic in spirituous liquors. Their only difficulty in the way
of absolute reign was the Governor himself, who honestly
sought to carry out the views of the British Government.
They worried Philip out of the Colony, as well as Hunter
and King. It was the rebellion against Bligh which brought
about their destruction. Such was the power against which
the Chaplain had to contend, and with which he struggled
for several years with a courage and tenacity never sup-
posed to belong to his nature. In fact, without intending
it, he had placed himself at the head of disaffection, and
fought for the downtrodden and the oppressed, not less
than for his own hand.”
After the departure of Philip, Major Gross, who had
always disliked Johnson, became definitely hostile. On one
occasion, seeking to humiliate him and lower his prestige,
he marched his men out of Church in the middle of a
service. Moreover, in pursuance of a policy to suppress
civil government, Gross deprived Johnson of his position
as a Justice of the Peace. Johnson complained bitterly,
both to Dundas and Newton. On the 27th August, 1796,
the wise Newton wrote Johnson:
"You must not bother yourself about Major Gross.
You take the best method of relieving your own mind
from the remembrance of his injurious treatment and
the best means of retaliation, by praying for him.”


HUNTER-GOVERNOR.
The appointment of Captain Hunter, a deeply religious
man, to succeed Major Gross, must have overjoyed Chap-
lain Johnson. In a letter dated the 4th December, 1794,
the Rev. John Newton had already written to prepare him
for the change. He said:
"The new Governor has already expressed his friendly
regard to you strongly and frequently, and is deter-
mined to support you. Much of the opposition and un-
kindness you have met with has not been against you
personally, but it came upon you for the Gospel’s sake,
and, therefore, instead of taking it so much to heart,
you are warranted to rejoice and be exceeding glad.”
On the first Sunday of the new Governor’s period of
office, Johnson, we are told by the Rev. Thomas Syach,
who was in Sydney at the time, "exposed the last Govern-
ment, their extortion, their despotism, their debauchery
and ruin of the Colony, driving it almost to famine by the
sale of liquors at 1200 per cent, profit.” Johnson’s fearless
exposure of iniquity did him credit, for the supporters of
the old regime were still strong and dangerous. Never do
we see the Chaplain more to advantage than at this period,
when, harassed on every side by his enemies, his nerves
torn to shreds, he makes his stand for righteousness. His
fearlessness had its reward in a proclamation by Governor
Hunter decreeing that no officer should sell liquor.
DECLINE OF JOHNSON’S HEALTH.
It is about this time that we become aware of the con-
sciousness of failure which tormented Chaplain Johnson.
His health had been poor for several years, and perhaps
this preyed on his mind and produced a sense of insuffi-
ciency. Writing to his friend John Newton, he again and


again complained of his want of success. Newton, who
was a far-seeing, broad-minded, man, did bis best to en-
courage him. On the 10th March, 1791, he wrote:
"I have not been disheartened by your apparent want
of success. I have been told that skilful gardeners will
sow and raise a salad for dinner in the short time while
the meat is roasting. But no gardener can raise oaks
with such expedition. You are sent to New Holland
not to sow salad seeds, but to plant acorns, and your
labour will not be lost, though the first appearance may
be very small and the progress very slow. You are, I
trust, planting for the next century. I have good hope
that your oaks will spring up and flourish and spread
among the islands and nations in the southern seas.”
Unfortunately Johnson himself had no such vision of
the future, no such hope, as he held on grimly awaiting
reinforcements which never seemed to come.
On the 19th July, 1792, the Rev. John Newton again
wrote to him. After speaking of Johnson’s difficulties, he
continues:
"I pity you, but not greatly. The Lord is with you.
and you have eminently the post of honour. I should
shrink, if not sink, under your difficulties, but you are
upheld through them and come off in almost every
fight a conqueror. Why then should I pity you? Your
cause is good, you serve the best Master, for He does
not make you responsible for your success. I will leave
my pity for those who live at ease. Endeavours are being
made to send you a companion. The door seems open,
but you live in such an awkward, uncompromising cor-
ner of the Lord’s great house, that it is not easy to find
a competent person willing to go to you. It is not a ser-


vice for mere flesh and blood to undertake. A man with-
out that Apostolic portion of the spirit and peculiar call
which the Lord alone can give, would hardly be able
to maintain his ground.”
At last, however, the long-looked-for reinforcement did
arrive in the person of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, who is
described as a Methodist local preacher, but nevertheless a
clergyman of the Church of England. Here indeed was a
man of action, who, not content with holding the fort,
would carry the war far into the enemies’ country. There
is no record of the first meeting of Johnson and Marsden.
It must have been a great moment, for here were two
men, the one tired and worn, the other fresh and eager,
both of whom, although so different one from the other,
had in their character some of the elements of greatness.
After thirteen years in New South Wales, the Rev.
Richard Johnson, worn out by hard work, privations and
opposition, returned to England on furlough. After two
years’ rest, on being asked to resume his post, he resigned
and took a curacy in Essex. In 1810 he became Rector of
St. Atholin’s Church, in London, and in 1817 perpetual
curate of Ingram, in Norfolk, both of which livings he
retained until his death on 13th March, 1827. Thus, in
spite of his Moravian Methodist tendencies, he remained
attached to the Church of England to the end of his days.
Australia owes much to the Rev. Richard Johnson, for,
as we have seen, he was not only a clergyman, but a
pioneer in education, aboriginal welfare, and farming. If
he lacked the strong aggressive qualities of Samuel Mars-
den, if he failed to share the wide vision of John New-
ton, we cannot blame him; it was just not in his character.


That he made the best of the talents that were given
him—faithfulness, devotion to duty, tenacity and courage
—few will deny. He was a much greater man than is gener-
ally acknowledged, and we believe that as the years go by
this will be increasingly recognised.


Printed by Spectator Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd., 134 a Little Collins Street.




{Jgp/1
iSTf!
