

1 1 '' , ■, ' ■
Cbe Doctrine.of t6e.iLorlTs Supper
AS TAUGHT IN HOLY SCRIPTURE AND BY THE CHURCH
OF ENGLAND.
A SERMON
Peeaghed in St. John’s Chukch, Heading,
ON MONDAY, OCTOBER 1, ISB3,
THE EVENING BEFORE THE MEETING OF THE
CHURCH CONGRESS.
CHARGES PERRY, D.D.
Late Bishop of Melbourne,
LONDON:
HATCH ABBS, PICCADILLY.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND BOOK SOCIETY, 11 Adam St., Adelphi.
1884.
Trice Sixpence.


a ■ _ ■;■: ■.„.■•■■ ;;
i .- ■ ■ • . ---a. 1
. . , ' . • ■ ' ' f ■
:•a - ,
’ ■ •; ■ ' >, -
- ;a - - ' a fev'V-’:vy ,;


I' Im-
C6e Doctrine of t6e ilorti Supper
AS TAUGHT IN HOLY SCRIPTURE AND BY THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND.
A SERMON
PREACHED IN ST. JOHN’S CHURCH, READING,
ON MONDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1883,
THE EVENING BEFORE THE MEETING OE THE CHURCH CONGRESS.
CHARLES PERRY, D.D,
Late Bishop of Melbourne.
LONDON:
HATCHARDS, PICCADILLY;
CHURCH OF ENGLAND BOOK SOCIETY, 11 Adam St. Adelphi.
1884.




(Tin- goctriiu of the Jorh’s Supper.
I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you, That the Lord Jesus the same night in which He was
betrayed took bread: and when He had given thanks, He
brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is My Body, which is
broken for you: this do in remembrance of Me. After the
same manner also He took the cup, when He had supped,
saying, This cup is the new testament in My Blood: this do ye,
as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of Me. For as often as
ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s
death till He come.’—l Cor. xi. 23-26.
To preach, upon the doctrine of the Lord’s Supper,
which I propose, in dependence upon the help of the
Holy Spirit, to do this evening, is difficultnot, as
appears to me, from any obscurity in the language
either of the Scriptures or of our own Church con-
cerning it, but from the necessity of pointing out the
errors which have prevailed in respect to it during a
long course of years in other churches, and which now
prevail to a great extent in our own. Hence there
needs great care on the part of a preacher that he
does not, by any mistake he may commit, impair the
force of his argument, or, by any expression into which
he may be betrayed, give just cause of offence to those
who differ from him: and I am well aware of the


responsibility upon me to use sucb care on tbe present
occasion, Nevertheless, I feel so strongly tbe duty of
endeavouring, according to tbe ability which God gives
me, to promote a right understanding of the nature of
this holy ordinance, that I am constrained to undertake
the task.
My purpose is to direct your attention .to what God
in the Scriptures, and what our own Church in her
Articles of Religion, her Catechism for the instruction
of the young, her Order for its administration, and her
Homilies, say concerning this Sacrament. I shall not
refer to the writings of ancient Christian authors (the
Fathers, as they are commonly called) nor to the works
of any of our English divines, but only to the Bible
and the authoritative language of our Church. I
shall restrict myself to these ; because human writings,
although often very valuable for helping us in the
interpretation of the Scriptures, are not to be regarded
as having any authority upon a question of doctrine;
nor ought to be allowed, as they frequently are, to super-
sede or overrule the Word of God; and also because
I believe that the true doctrine of Christ upon every
important subject may be much more surely learnt from
a careful examination, with prayer for the help of the
Holy Spirit, of the Scriptures and the documents of
our Church by themselves, than from the study of the
voluminous works of a number of human authors, or,
what is a more common practice, the study of a
collection of quotations from them.


I. First, then: What saith the Scripture concerning
the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper P The institution
of it by our Blessed Lord upon the evening on which
He was betrayed is, as you know, recorded by each of
the three Evangelists, as well as by the Apostle Paul
in my text. The observance of it by the early Christians
is also mentioned, under the term ‘ breaking of bread,’
several times in the book of Acts. But there is no
allusion to it in the Epistles, except in the passage of
1 Cor. xi., from which my text is taken, and in the
preceding chapter. This omission is noteworthy ; but
I shall not now draw any inference from it. The
sayings of our Lord, recorded in John, vi., upon the
necessity of eating his flesh and drinking his blood,
were spoken before its institution; but they may be
regarded as having a prophetic reference to it, and as
indicating its spiritual significance. They therefore
are not to be overlooked in our examination of the
Scriptural doctrine concerning it.
The question which has caused so much painful
controversy in the Church, and which I now wish to
bring before you for your careful consideration, at once
arises' from the words of our Lord at its institution.
These have been most fully recorded by St. Paul in my
text, which I will read to you again : ‘ The Lord Jesus,
the same night in which He was betrayed, took bread:
and when He had given thanks, He brake it, and said.
Take, eat; this is my Body, which is broken for you :
this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner


also He took the cup, when He had supped, saying.
This cup is the new testament in my Blood: this do
ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me/
What did our Lord mean by ‘ This is my Body ?’
Did He mean that the bread, which He then took and
brake and gave to his disciples to eat, was actually his
body ? And when He said, ‘ This do in remembrance
of me/ did He mean that always afterwards the bread
solemnly set apart, consecrated, by one of his ministers
to be eaten in remembrance of Him, should become,
or should contain, his actual body? You will observe
that the words which He used with respect to the wine
were not ‘ This is my blood/ but ‘ This cup is the Hew
Testament’ (or the new Covenant) ‘in my blood;’ so
that they cannot be understood literally; and there
might fairly be drawn from this difference an argu-
ment against the literal interpretation of his words
concerning the bread ; but I shall not press that now.
I shall direct your attention wholly to these latter
words.
The question therefore for us to determine is,
whether our Lord intended the disciples to understand
that the bread was actually his body, or that it only re-
presented, or was a symbol of, his body : i. e. whether
the words are to be interpreted literally or figuratively.
The Church of Rome affirms that they are to be under-
stood literally, and teaches that, upon consecration by
a priest, the substance of the bread in the Lord’s
Supper is changed into the very body of our Lord


Jesus Christ. This change, which is called Transub-
stantiation, our Church, in her Twenty-eighth Article,
declares to be repugnant to the plain words of Scripture ,
to overthrow the nature of a Sacrament, and to have
given occasion to many superstitions. Hence none of
her clergy can, consistently with their ordination
vow, preach or teach it. The Lutheran Church re-
jects the Homan doctrine of Transubstantiation, but
yet holds that the words are to be understood lite-
rally ; and teaches that, while the bread remains un-
changed, the body of Christ becomes united with it,
so as to form one substance. This doctrine, which
is called Con-substantiation, our Church has not in
her Articles expressly condemned; but what she has
said in condemnation of Transubstantiation seems to
apply equally to it. The literal interpretation is likewise
held at the present day by not a few of the clergy of
our own Church, who teach that our Lord’s body is, in
some inexplicable and inconceivable manner, after con-
secration, present in the bread as it lies upon the table.
This doctrine appears to me to differ nothing from con-
substantiation; but those by whom it is held affirm
that it is altogether different. However that may be,
it, like the doctrine of the Roman and Lutheran
Church, rests upon the assumption that our Lord’s
words are to be understood literally.
Are they then to be so understood? I unhesi-
tatingly answer that they are not. For, first, so to
understand them would be inconsistent with the


whole character of our Lord’s teaching. Gall to mind
some of the many instances in which his words
are acknowledged by all to have, not a literal, but
a figurative meaning. When He said to the Jews,
‘ Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
up,’ He did not allude to the temple at Jerusalem, but
to his own body. When He declared to Nicodcmus
the necessity for a man to be born again, in order that
he might enter into the kingdom of God, it was not a
new birth of the body, but a renewal of the soul of
which He spoke. The living water, of which He told
the woman of Samaria that whosoever drank of it should
never thirst, but it should be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life, and of which, He
told the Jews, rivers should flow out of the belly of
the man who believed in Him, was not natural water,
but the inward influence of the Holy Spirit. When
He said to the Apostle Peter, ‘lf I wash thee not,
thou hast no part with Me, 5 He spake not of the wash-
ing of the body with water, but of the cleansing of
the soul by his own most preious blood. This general
character of our Lord’s teaching would, in my opinion,
alone suffice to prove that his words, ‘ This is my body,’
are to be understood in a figurative, not in a literal
sense.
But, secondly, to interpret them literally seems to
be directly forbidden by his own remarks with re-
ference to the eating of his flesh and the drinking of
his blood, which all agree to be the spiritual grace of


the Sacrament, in John, yi. You will remember how,
when many of his disciples, understanding literally
his words recorded in vv. 53-58, were offended at
them, He corrected their misapprehension, saying unto
them, ‘lt is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh pro-
fit eth nothing: the words that 1 speak unto you , they
are spirit, and they are life.’ Having in our minds
this correction of a similar literal interpretation of his
words by our Lord, can we suppose Him to have
intended us to believe that a piece of bread should
become, or should in any sense whatever contain, his
body? Moreover, it is to be observed that, if his
words are to be so understood, they must mean that
his natural body, the very body which was broken upon
the cross, is that which is present in the piece of bread.
As well might we believe that the words of the Apostle
Paul, in Eph. v. 30, are to be understood literally, and
that all believers are members of the natural body of
Christ, ‘ of his flesh and of his bones.’
Again; it deserves our notice that, although in
1 Cor. x, 16 the cup and the bread are, with reference to
those who partake of them, said to be the communion
of the blood and the communion of the body of
Christ, yet the bread and wine themselves are never
called his body and his blood. In the book of Acts
the ordinance is always mentioned as the breaking
of bread; and in 1 Cor. xi, the Apostle three times
in three successive verses describes the partaking
of it, not as the eating of the body and drinking of


the blood of Christ, but as the eating of this bread and
the drinking of this cup. There is no indication what-
ever of his belief in the Lord’s presence in the bread
and in the cup.
Once more; the figurative interpretation of the
Lord’s words is confirmed by the analogy between
the Lord’s Supper and the types by which, under
the Mosaic dispensation, Christ was represented as
the spiritual food of his people. The Passover under
that dispensation occupied the same place that the
Lord’s Supper occupies under the Christian dispensa-
tion. The Paschal Lamb of which the Israelites
ate was a type of Christ: ‘ Christ our Passover ’
{i.e. our Paschal Lamb), wrote St. Paul to the
Corinthians, ‘is sacrificed for us.’ So likewise the
manna, which St. Paul in 1 Cor. x., calls spiritual meat,
was a type of Christ; but no one would say that either
the lamb or the manna was literally Christ. Of the
rock from which the water flowed in the wilderness the
Apostle uses words exactly similar to those used by our
Lord of the bread. ‘ That rock was Christ,’ says
St. Paul; ‘ This is my body,’ saith our Lord. As
reasonably might we understand the rock in the wil-
derness to have been the ‘man Christ Jesus,’ as under-
stand the bread in the Lord’s Supper to be the human
body of Christ.
Yery strange it seems to me that wise and holy
men should have put this literal meaning upon our
Lord’s words. That they have done so should make


us refrain from speaking harshly of those who, in our
own day and in our own Church, hold and teach it.
But we must not, therefore, hesitate to point out how
contrary it is to the whole tenor of the Holy Scrip-
tures, and guard men, so far as we are able, against
being led into its adoption. This is the more necessary,
because they who believe our Lord s body to be really
present in the consecrated bread are frequently led
on to a yet greater and more dangerous error, viz., the
belief that, in the celebration of the Lord’s Supper, not
only are the bread and wine received in ‘ remembrance
of the sacrifice of the death of Christ,’ but the body
and blood of Christ are presented as a commemorative
sacrifice unto the Father.
For this doctrine the only alleged grounds in the
Scriptures, so far as I know, arc that the two Greek
words rendered in my text do and remembrance (‘ This
do in remembrance of Me ’) are elsewhere applied to
the festival of the Passover ; —that the word show (‘ ye
do show the Lord’s death till He come’) indicates a
showing forth, or exhibition, of Christ s death to the
Father —and that the saying in Heb, xiii. 10, ‘We
have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which
serve the tabernacle,’ refers to the Lord s Supper, and
therefore what our Church calls ‘ the Lord s T able is
an altar, and the Sacrament a commemorative sacrifice.
With respect to the two words, do and remember ,
it is quite true that they sometimes occur elsewhere
with reference to the Passover; and it is not impro-


bable that the Lord bad that festival, which He had
just been keeping with his disciples, in his mind when
He used them. But, supposing that the Lord’s Supper
was, as I believe it to have been intended by our Lord
to take the place of the Passover as a commemorative
festival, it does not therefore follow that there is in
it any presentation of Christ to Hod; for there was not
in the Passover any presentation to God of the Paschal
lamb. There wais only a sprinkling of its blood upon
the two side-posts and the upper door-post of the
house, and then the eating of the flesh in the prescribed
manner, whereby was shown to be in it a typical feeding
upon Christ, just as now in the Lord’s Supper there is
a sacramental feeding upon Him. The term sacrifice
is, indeed, applied to the Passover, but only in the wide
sense in which that term is often used. The Passover
was not a sacrifice in the proper sense of the word. In
the book of Leviticus it is mentioned, not among the
various sacrifices, but among the feasts or festivals.
And, what is particularly noticeable, the Israelites were
commanded (Lev. xxiii. 8) to offer an offering made by
fire unto the Lord seven days (/. e. daily during the
seven days of the festival), a commandment which im-
plies that the Paschal Lamb was not an offering made
unto Him. The argument from the word shoiv could
hardly, one would think, be adduced by any Greek
scholar; for the word so rendered really signifies to
declare or proclaim, and means proclaiming to men, not
showing to God. On the much disputed question,


What is the Altar alluded to by the sacred writer in
Heb. xiii. 10 ? Dr. Kay, in the Speaker’s Commentary,
justly, as I think, remarks that it cannot be understood
of the ‘ Lord’s Table.’ The argument of yy. 11,12 (he
says} compels us to carry our thoughts to the Altar
on which Christ offered Himself once for all as the
world’s sin-offering. ‘ The Lord’s Table (he adds) is not
that Altar.’
I may observe that the description, in the chapter
from which my text is taken, of the manner in which
some of the disciples at Corinth profaned the Lord’s
Supper, makes it impossible to suppose that there was
then believed to be in it a presentation of Christ to
God. The Scriptures, therefore, certainly do not war-
rant the doctrine of a commemorative sacrifice.
Having seen what the Scriptures do not teach us
concerning the Lord’s Supper, I would mention two
particulars which they do teach us concerning it. First,
they plainly teach us that, although the Body and
Blood of our Blessed Lord are not contained in the
sacramental bread and wine, yet all true believers, in
the eating and drinking of these material symbols, do
really eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ in the
spiritual sense in which our Lord (as recorded in John, vi.)
declared such eating and drinking to be necessary unto
salvation. Secondly, they also teach us, what I think
is too much overlooked, that the Lord’s Supper was
designed to show the spiritual fellowship of Chris-
tians with one another in their partaking together of


the spiritual food, symbolised and supplied to them in
this holy ordinance. Both these truths are distinctly
taught us in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17: ‘The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion ’ {the par-
taking together) ‘of the blood of Christ P The bread
which we break, is it not the communion ’ {the par-
taking together) ‘of the body of Christ? For we being
many are one bread, and one body: for we are all par-
takers of that one bread,’
11. Let us next proceed to examine what our Church
teaches concerning this holy Sacrament. In her
twenty-fifth Article, ‘Of the Sacraments,’ she says.
‘ Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or
tokens of Christian men’s profession, but rather they be
certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs of grace, and
God’s good will towards us, by the which He doth work
invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirm our faith in Him.’ And in her
twenty-eighth Article, ‘Of the Lord’s Supper,’ she
says ; ‘ The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the
love that Christians ought to have among themselves
one to another; but rather is a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ’s death : insomuch that to such
as rightly, worthily, and with faith, receive the same,
the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of
Christ; and likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking
of the Blood of Christ.’ And further, after condemning
the doctrine of Transubstantiation, she adds ; ‘The Body
of Christ is given, taken, and eaten, in the Supper,


only after an heavenly and spiritual manner. And the
mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten
in the Supper is faith.’ Again, in her Catechism for
the instruction of the young, she defines a Sacrament to
mean, ‘an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace given unto us, ordained by Christ Him-
self, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof.’ Afterwards, however, this
definition is not adhered to ; for a Sacrament is de-
scribed as consisting of both the outward visible sign
and the inward spiritual grace. There also appears
to be a confusion between the ‘ inward spiritual grace ’
and the ‘thing signified ;’ for there is no mention of the
thing signified in Baptism, but only in the Lord’s
Supper ; and no mention of the spiritual grace of the
Lord’s Supper, except indirectly as the benefits whereof
we are partakers thereby. If this latter portion of the
Catechism stood by itself, it might be argued that the
thing signified was contained in the sign; and that the
statement that the Body and Blood of Christ are verily
and taken and received hy the faithful in the Lord’s
Sapper is to be understood literally ; and, in support of
this interpretation, the word taken might be adduced as
evidence that his Body and Blood were received in the
hand of the communicant. But such an interpretation
(since what is true of one sacramental sign must be true
of the other) ■would lead us to the conclusion, which
I believe all would reject, that the Holy Ghost is pre-
sent in the baptismal -water. It is also proved to be


inadmissible by the twenty - eighth. Article, which
plainly intimates that only such as rightly, worthily,
and with faith, receive the same (the bread and the
wine), actually partake of the thing signified, the body
and blood of Christ; whereas all would partake of
them, if they were contained in the sign. The twenty-
ninth Article declares this yet more distinctly; for
it affirms that ‘ The wicked, and such as be void of a
lively faith, although they do carnally and visibly
press with their teeth (as Saint Augustine saith) the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ (that is,
the bread and wine), yet in no wise are they partakers
of Christ; but rather, to their condemnation, do eat and
drink the sign or Sacrament’ (the word Sacrament de-
noting the outward visible sign) ‘of so great a thing.’
These passages prove conclusively that, according to
the teaching of our Church, the thing signified is not
contained in the sign of the Lord’s Supper ; nor, there-
fore, the Body and Blood of the Lord ‘taken and
received ’ into the hands of the communicants. They
prove also, that by the faithful cannot be understood all
the baptized, but such only as have a lively faith in
Christ.
There is no passage in our Communion Office itself,
which is directly contradictory to the doctrine of an ob-
jective presence, as it is called, of Christ in the Lord’s
Supper ; but in the Declaration at the end of the Office
that doctrine is plainly condemned. For therein it is
said that the natural body of our Lord cannot be pre-


sent in the sacramental bread ; and, as I have already-
remarked, if our Lord’s words are to be understood
literally, the bread must be, or must contain, the very
same body which was broken upon the Cross.
The whole tenor of the Homily upon the Sacra-
ment is adverse to the doctrine of an objective presence.
With respect to the alleged sacrificial character of
the Sacrament; the first Post-Communion prayer shows
us that the only sacrifices which our Church contem-
plates in it are the sacrifice of prayer and praise, and
the sacrifice of ourselves, our souls and bodies; and
the Homily contains an express caution, Test of the
memory of it (the Lord’s Supper) be made a sacrifice/
What the doctrine of our Church concerning this
Sacrament really is we may learn from her language
respecting it in the Catechism, in the Office for its ad-
ministration, and in her Homily upon it. In these she
teaches us that, to penitent, believing recipients, it is a
means of strengthening and refreshing their souls by
the feeding in their hearts through faith upon Christ.
Her description of its effect upon those who receive
it with a ‘ true penitent heart and lively faith ’ is,
that thereby they dwell in Christ and Christ in them;
they are one with Christ and Christ with them. In
the second Post-Communion prayer she expresses the
thanks of the communicants to God for that He doth
vouchsafe to feed them, who had duly received these
holy mysteries, with the spiritual food of the most
precious Body and Blood of his Son our Saviour Jesus


Christ In the Homily occurs this remarkable passage;
‘We must be sure to hold that in the Supper of the
Lord there is no rain ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue
figure of a thing absent; but, as the Scripture saith,
the Table of the Lord, the Bread and Cup of the
Lord, the memory of Christ, the annunciation of his
death, yea, the Commnnion of the Body and Blood of
the Lord in a marvellous incorporation (not, as I have
known it to be understood, in the bread and wine, but),
which, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, is through
faith wrought in the souls of the faithful, whereby not
only their souls live to eternal life, but they surely
trust to win their bodies a resurrection to immortality.’
Such is the strong language of the Church ; but in
it is nothing to justify her ministers in teaching the
‘objective presence’ of our Lord, or the presentation of
Him as ‘ a commemorative sacrifice,’ in the Sacrament.
Such doctrine, I do not hesitate to say, may be rightly
described in the words of the twenty-eighth Article
concerning Transubstantiation. It ‘is repugnant to
the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature
of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many super-
stitions.’ They that hold it think that by it they exalt
this distinctive ordinance of the Christian religion; but,
surely, in believing and teaching that a minister of
Christ by consecrating—breaking and setting apart with
certain words —a piece of bread for its celebration, can
cause the body of our Blessed Lord to come into that
bread, and by holding it up can present Him in it as a


commemorative sacrifice to God, they do grievous dis-
honour to the Lord.
I am aware that by speaking thus I lay myself open
to the reproach of presuming to condemn many of my
brethren, who are far superior to me both in learning
and in holiness of life. lam very sorry to do so; but I
dare not be silent. I dare not refrain from lifting up
my voice against a doctrine, which will, I fear, if it
continue to prevail and increase as it has recently done
and seems to be doing among our clergy and people,
provoke the Lord to remove our candlestick out of its
place. lam thankful indeed to believe that not a few
of those who hold and preach it are, like Luther and
many a Roman Catholic, true Christians, children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus. But the Apostle Paul
has taught us that it is possible for a man to build
upon the one true foundation, ‘ which is Jesus Christ,’
‘ wood, hay, stubble,’ and that in such a case, his ‘ work
shall be burned,’ and ‘he shall suffer loss ; but he himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire.’ Whosoever preaches
this doctrine cannot but himself, as I believe, suffer
loss; and, although he may be saved, yet it shall be
so as by fire. I believe also that, while injurious to the
souls of all, it will prove fatal to the souls of many
both of those who teach and those who hold it. If it
had prevailed in a Church which St, Paul had founded,
the Apostle would, I think, have said to that Church,
as he said to the Churches in Galatia, ‘I am afraid of
you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain.’


I will not prolong my sermon by dwelling upon the
particular evils, wbicli appear to me to result from it •
but I would express my earnest prayer, and I would
ask all of you, my brethren, who concur in my opinion
of its pernicious effect, to make it your prayer, that
the Lord will not allow Satan, by this or any other
false doctrine, to corrupt our Church, as he has cor-
rupted other Churches, but will enable us to continue,
what we have for three hundred years been accustomed
to call ourselves, a ‘ pure and reformed branch ’ of his.
Holy Catholic Church.
LOXDOX:
Printed by Strangeways & Sons, Tower Street, Upper St. Martin’s Lane.




