

“ Little Fools They Drink Too Much, and Great Ones Not at All,”
THE
! PUBLICANS’ QUESTION.
“ T E A. V ELLEE.”
iizb i V
(one who knows them.)
4 --idP' *
N.B.—Ant Profits Arising from the Sale of this Publication will be Handedato the
Treasurer of the Licensed Victuallers’ Orphan School.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY:
JOHN L. SHERRIFF, PUBLISHER,
18, WYNYARD SQUARE.


m
SYDNEY,
S. BENNETT, EMPIRE OETICB,
PITT STREET.
’
k
SYDNEY,
S. BENNETT, EMPIRE OEYICS,
PITT STREET.
’


THE PUBLICANS’ QUESTION.
When at the social board you Bit, and pass around the wine,
Bemember, though abuse is vile, that use may be Divine,
That Heaven, in kindness, gave the grape, to cheer both great and small—
That little fools will drink too much, and great ones not at all.
The “ Publicans’ Question ’’ is one of the most exciting, if not one of the
most important questions of the day. It must he calmly weighed by the class
mostly interested—the temperance class —and then it will be of small
importance what extreme iolks say, whether they are unfortunate total
abstainers, or equally unfortunate drunkards.
The object the writer has in view in the present publication, is to assist
each party to arrive at some sound and useful principle upon which to
legislate, the details of which should be in harmony with common sense and
decency, without infringing upon the liberty of the subject. He particularly
desires two parties to understand, that, in any remarks he may have occasion
to make respecting them — i.e., the publicans or total abstainers —he does not
make them offensively; and from his extensive knowledge of all classes in
this beautiful colony, it is just possible he may give each of the two-named
parties additional arguments ; but he will be especially pleased if such should
preponderate in favour of the respectable publican.
There are in all societies irrational people—folks who hold what might be
fairly styled “ insane notions” upon some particular topic or topics in science,
religion, art, trade, or business; and the legislation necessary in any parti-
cular branch should not be left to persons entertaining those “ notions.” For
instance, a man who abhors a “ glass of good beer,’" who never tasted the
virtue in a glass of pure wine, who is ignorant of the refreshing influences of
a drop of pure brandy to a brain over-wrought, or the nourishing effects of a
glass of “ real Jamaica rum ” to a hard working man after his daily toil; who
knows alcohol only by the absurd images presented to his mind by some
equally “ insane ” friend of strong imaginative powers, who assures him this
spirit is the veritable “ Old Nick,” and is reducing to pap his noble and
affectionate heart, altering the colour of and rendering his healthy liver in-
active, reducing to something like water the once large, firm, and active
brain, besides drying up the necessary secretions of the bones, sinews, and
muscles of a person who drinks moderately ; it is simply ridiculous to listen
to such a man, except to pity him. And to allow him to legislate upon the
manufacture or sale of drinks for the general public, is as.absurd and unjust
as it would be to appoint the editor of the Freeman’s Journal to make laws
for loyal Protestant citizens, or the writers of the late Protestant Banner to
perform a like office for our Koman Catholic friends. And yet the water-
advocate, an ultra-allopathist, the late Minister for Lands—has this
particular duty on his hands 1 But there are some pure-minded individuals
connected with that deceitful and cleverly designed institution —“The Politi-


cal Temperance Society”—who, if they reflected but a few minutes, would not
give their countenance to such a fraudulent society —I allude to the
respected Dean of our Church, the eloquent minister of Pitt-street Congrega-
tional Chapel, the gifted minister of Bourke-street Wesleyan Chapel, and
the caustic but talented Unitarian minister of Macquarie-street. I do not
mention the Rev. Mr. Luckie because of the doctrine of “ intention” in his
Church ; but I think the other gentlemen named should insist, if only for the
system of ct fair play,” Avliich I trust they each would advocate, that their
banner should bear the inscription, Cf Maine Liquor Law,” or “ Licensed, only
by two-thirds of the source of all power —the people,” not let the former slip
out by accident from mouths which should proclaim “ the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth,” not be ft dissimulators,” as I am quite sure
not one of those I have named would be, knowingly.
The temperance man requires public-houses and hotels. The total
abstainer, if true to himself, would rather drink dirty water than beer
wines, or spirits ! The latter class are either so from childhood or have left off
drinking spirituous liquors against their inclination—may have a morbid taste
for them, and cannot part with them until they become worse than beasts—
drunkards ! But are there no other unfortunate beings like them ? Look at
the present filibustering expedition to Cuba! by men who have shown their
skill in the use of the rifle and Colt’s revolver on those bloody plains of
America ! Was that really “ well-conducted man,” (now he is at work and
inside high Avails and guarded by the best shots in Darlinghurst) Gardner,
satisfied with once robbing ? No ! he soon got a “ morbid taste” for other
people’s property, which he could not control. Yet temperance people are to
be denied what they think will do them good, because men who have “ mor-
bid tastes” and no wills of their own, become improvident and filthy drun-
kards !
Temperance is best advocated by example , not by calling people ugly and
improper names. Make it respectable to be temperate, and shun a drunkard
as you would the society of a thief, except your occasional visits to him to
improve his mode of life. At the risk of differing from that earnest advo-
cate of temperance, His Honor the Chief Justice, I sincerely believS in
the truth of the following :
A bumper of liquor
Will end a contest quicker
Than justice, judge, or vicar !
And I seriously suggest his keeping some choice spirits (I could tell him
where to send for such) near him, when two stupid people appear before
him, with an £ ' array of talent” under heavy wigs, followed by other
gentlemen of the “learned” profession, with a retinue of clerks and wit-
nessess, to bore the good Chief a whole day, perhaps, upon a matter which
ought never to have appeared before a Court. Doubtless, the Chief often
thinks (but not aloud !) —
Stratigb that such contests should be
’Twixfc Tweedle-dum, and Tweedledee !
"When such cases appear (and they are very numerous) I ask him to invite
the parties outside and try the less dry and quicker way of “ arranging” by
a “ bumper.” Oh ! how many cases would never reach an attorney’s office,
if some kind third party would suggest a discussion over a single bottle of
the world-famed “lfiper.”


I would remind all £ ‘ Vicars ” and ministers of religion of a fact that is
too plain for then. to miss, viz.—that although the wise Solomon, whose life
of pleasure shortened his days, the majority of which must have been spent
in the actual realization of an old toast, still popular, but very popular when
it was fashionable for a guest to be carried from the table after having drained
his second or third bottle, when your ee jolly convivial friend” was marked
by his intemperance on that prominent and useful feature—probably of an
otherwise well delineated face —the nose! making its owner, when sober and
thoughtful, to exclaim, —
The ladies don’t love me ! and this I can trace,
To the loss of my aquiline nose I
Like an overgrown strawberry stuck on my face,
Still larger and larger it grows.
I refer to the toast of “ Old wine and young wofhen,” always acceptable to
temperate people. Solomon said, “ Wine is a mocker and strong drink
raging.” But a far greater authority than he, One ie in whom there was no
guile,” who heard His and our Father’s strengthening voice saying, “ Thou
art my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,” bringing courage to His
oppressed soul, the Great Captain of our Salvation, skilled in all the wars of the
soul, and ready to shed His blood for our protection; our Ambassador at the
court of God, intimate with all the necessities of our state, friendly to the
highest projects of our hearts, devoted to our most sacred interests, and
qualified, in every vicissitude of our fortune and in every modification of our
character, to advocate our cause ! Ye total abstainers —ye over zealous
ministers of His pure, simple, and holy teachings—think of Him : reflect upon
what He did at the Marriage Feast, when, finding there was no wine to enliven
the intellects, brighten the eyes, and warm the hearts of those assembled to
inaugurate a day which should be sacred and joyous to every man
and wife, He turned Heaven’s pure stream into wine, thus adding
health and vigour, mirth and gladness, to those assembled, besides
giving elasticity and gracefulness to the admirers of the goddess Terpsichore,
and, doubtless at whose shrine much of the “ snobbery” of society is lost, by
friends and neighbours rubbing shoulders together, in passing pleasant hours,
exchanging merry and witty remarks, and finally, after much enjoyment,
“ going home with the girls in the morning.” But he did more, at His Last
Supper, bread and wine were on the table, the usual custom of the times and
country, as we have our biscuits and wine, and our Saviour invited his friends
to meet thus as brethren—“ Do this in remembrance of me.” Now,
although most of us, having been taught so from infancy, believe, that meeting
partook more of a sacramental character and less of a social friendly one, I
think it is open to doubt, whether we are correct, or our silent but valued
countrymen, the Society of Friends who never, I believe, have it in their
religious services. But there was the wine ! And will any one professsing His
name, much less one who calls himself His minister, dare to hurl the shafts
of derision or calumny at his lellow-christian, because he is possessed of
a constitution which the valued juice of the grape might improve ; or
because, in the entertainment of his friends, he treats them hospitably, gives
them the best his cellars and larders possess, or that his purse can afford ?
Far sweeter is the foaming ale,
That circles with the fireside tale;
While sacred words and beaming eyes
Proclaim, we pledge the souls we prize,


Fill high! Fill high! while truth stands by
To echo back the the lauding cry;
But let the glad libation prove
The meed of friendship, worth and love,
Let warm affection light the draught,
Then, be the nectar deeply quaff’d ;
Let Genius claim it,—gift divine,
And all shall drain the hallow’d wine;
Let goodness have the honor due,
Drink to the poor man, if he’s true ;
And ne’er forget that star’s the best
That’s worn not on, but, in the breast.
Fill high! fill high; while truth stands by
To echo back the landing cry;
But gall be on the goblet’s edge
For him who yields the ivortMess pledge.
“Temperance” is on my banner, and I have the highest authority for keeping
it there.
Hotel-keepers and Publicans are tabooed by a large portion of their fellow-
countrymen, because they are not (as they allege) respectable. Upon the
first look at the question it may appear correct, for we all know how
offensive it is to a respectable individual, one whose parents were intelligent
and rational creatures, never polluting their mouths with obscenity, or the
use of unmeaning, filthy, and blackguard language which is met with at the
corner of every street, in every highway, in the manufactory, the workshop, the
warehouse, the store, and even in the parlours and drawing-rooms of those
who flatter themselves they belong to the “ Upper ten thousand” as well
as in public houses. This is the worst feature of a publican’s trade, he and
those who serve at the bar, or whose apartments are near the bar, have to
listen to language of the worst order, to hear tales of the vilest description
from both the scum and polished portion of humanity, but, I am proud to
say, there are many, very many, who will not allow such language and such
tales to pollute their household, nor will they allow a filthy drunkard to re-
main on their premises they have too much respect for their wiv(» and
children. I could name them by scores, such as Winch, of Newcastle ; Eaton,
of Mus well brook ; Jamieson, of Tamworth ; Glover, of Bendemeer ; Colls, of
Yass ; and Jones, of Goulburn ; who keep their houses equally as respectable
as Skarratt and Williams of Sydney. Of course, there are
persons in the trade, who ought never to have had a license
—men who enter into it for the sole purpose of robbing some one, or all
they can. You ought not to sleep under their roof without a trusty dog
and a Colt’s revolver near you. You should not entrust your horse to them,
nor drink th'eir mixtures In fact, their movements are known to the police as
well as to others, and they should not be allowed to keep a public house—
they should be forced into private life. But because of such, the few, are the
majority to suffer ? Are all the various members of other businesses, trades,
and professions, pure and unsullied ?
Politicians, all will agree, are far from such a suspicion !
All ministers of religion are not what they should be. I could
name one district in which three “ ministers of the Gospel” have had
four illegitimates ! besides many others of them possessing “ failings” or
human “ weaknesses” of a grave but more minor character.


Is the learned profession pure ? An answer is to be found in the law re-
ports of all countries, when efforts are made to remove some member from
its honorable roll ! .
Bankers are not perfect, or our gaols would not contain so many !
The Civil Service is not clear, as California, our gaols and the Insolvency
Court can answer !
The large trading houses and merchants list show the same result, when
“ respectable” men place labels and brands upon their own manufactures,
which falsely allege they are goods from well known houses in the old
country, or elsewhere; or they trade recklessly upon the faith and capital of
their creditors, make extravagant settlements upon their wives and daughters,
and then work their trade for a “ burst,” with assets from some three shillings
in the pound down to nothing ! .
The retail traders are not, as their lying advertisements, their “ eccentric
scales and weights, and the manner in which some of them keep their books,
especially the butcher class, being quite as curious as the double score of some
of the publicans, for those who have the “ honor ” of an account.
Then there are the large classes of artizans and labourers, for whom princi-
pally, the alteration of the Publicans’ Act is asked. How stand they ?
In my opinion, in comparison to their numbers, they contain the largest body
of really honest, independent, manly, open faced, industrious body of men
this or any country possesses—men who, I trust, will avail themselves largely
of that scheme of education for their children, so that, if our more wealthy
classes do not improve, some of their sons will be able to bring the blush of
ignorance on the face of any future aspirants for the various posts of honor
always open to the “ best man ” in this or any other British settlement.
Well then, after a review of the various strata of society, I affirm positively
that licensed victuallers, as a body, pay their vvay as well, give as good
value for their money (considering their heavy license, &c.), and are as
“ respectable ” as any other class of men in the colony ; but they tvant less
tyranny exercised towards them, and if they do not effect such a step it will
be their fault, as I hope presently to show.
Drunkenness is a social evil of such magnitude that it cannot be over-
stated, and drunkards are the worst customers of the publicans. I hey may
drink more for a given period, for a few days or a week, but then they
“ take the pledge,” or may die. The temperance man takes daily what will
do him good, and, like his daily bread, takes it continually ; he learns some-
thing of the trade doing, by meeting his neighbour, or reads a newspaper, and
returns to his business refreshed and instructed by taking his glass of ale or
other beverage. But the unfortunate drunkard is a disgusting, loathsome
wretch, who, if he speaks to you, sends forth an odious vapour from his pol-
luted stomach, sufficient to cause gastric fever to those who inhale
it! Drunkenness is a crime against the man himself, if single, and an
additional crime against his dependent wife and children, if married, in
addition to being a crime against society, for each and all of which the police,
in my opinion, should have power to lock him up, and the fine should in no
case be less than £l, nor more than £lO, the former amount being enough
for a working man, the latter amount being mere suitable for the “ upper
ten thousand ” the alternative being solitary confinement for not less than
one week, nor more than two weeks. I have such a horror of these poor
wretches, who not only kill themselves, but by continually . shouting for
the landlords, some of whom fancy their trade would suffer if they refused to


drink with them, that they undermine the health of some of the best men in
the trade ! and thus add other victims to their list. If the drunkard is single,
so much the better ; but if married, and has a family, so much the worse : he
has been robbing them, possibly, of their daily bread. In any case
his conduct is unnatural and unlawful , and he should be bound to make
provision for those who are dependent upon him, before he poisons his body
and destroys his soul. If he has the funds, society should not be called
upon to sustain those he leaves behind him. The money or property he has
should be seized for them and society’s benefit, by a Commission or a
magisterial inquiry, before not less than five jurymen, to inquire into his or her
intemperate habits, as in lunacy. Drunkards seldom think, or I would ask
them to
B 3 sober now —wby drink ye so
Until ye cannot walk or go ?
The beasts aioundye, better do,
They drink when thirsty, not so you.
Be sober now— the drink ye take,
Will rot yeur guts, until they break,
Then quickly ye will also rot !
And then forgetting, be forgot.
Be sober note, —time flows a-pace,
Age seems already on your face !
Eternity is very near—
A drunkard’s death may soon appear !
This curse, drunkenness, will not he abated by lessening the number of
public-houses, because these “ unfortunate,” these deluded, selfish beings
could do, as many do now, send home their case of gin, or two gallons of
rum or other liquors, and there, in the presence of those who they have
sworn to love and cherish, and their offspring, sit sipping
Sip, sip, sip!
’Mid singing and swearing and roar,
Till their bands refuse to visit their lips,
And their heads incline to the floor!
Many are the cases where the law should step in for wives and children
where there are no creditors to take them in hand.
The appearance of drunkards is so dissimilar, that the
publican should not be compelled to say when a man is
drunk. Let it be done at the risk of the police. But in all cases the
Police Magistrates and the J.P.’s must not be drunkards, as was some few
years since, many of whom Sir James Martin weeded from the various
benches, but still there are many remaining. It is not many years since when
the dying deposition of a man, was taken by a drunken P.M., his C.P.S. being
equally so! I believe it had to be written twice before being signed, and
upon this precious document was a man convicted, of course, in combin-
ation with other evidence. I can safely affirm that this vice, this crime of
drunkenness, is an “ imported article.” The young men and women, natives
of this colony, who will soon supersede many of us, are not drunkards. In
all the phases of colonial society this is to be noticed. It is the men and
women from the United Kingdom, and those especially from Melbourne and
Queensland, who have seen “ good times ” and “ knocked down ” their
“ hicky ” hits very briefly ! I was in one of our towns some time since, and
was asked to join a “ drunken bout ” or “ spree,” by the man who was


giving it, but as I loathe a drunken fellow, I declined the treat Some forty-
eight pounds sterling was spent in some of the vilest champagne ever opened.
The idiot who paid for it had made what he considered a good sale that day ;
but before a month had elapsed, the papers disclosed the fact; that the
money belonged to a bank ! The steady German emigrant is a sober, well-to-do
colonist in all parts I have visited.
The Bill now before Parliament is as follows. Let us examine it in detail.
The promoters say it is to “ limit the number of public-houses ” :
“ Preamble.
“ Whereas in several parts of this colony hut especially in certain of the
cities and towns thereof many more public houses have been and continue to
be licensed than the convenience and reasonable accommodation of travellers
or the neighbourhood require whereby an undue competition in the sale of
spirituous and other intoxicating liquors is excited and temptations are held
out to persons of dissolute or drunken habits to indulge in their use to the
grievous injury of the public health and morals the increase of poverty and
crime and the destruction eventually in many instances of entire families but
there exists at present no law by which additions to the number of such houses
if in other respects eligible can be restrained And whereas the existing
Public-house Licensing Act called the ‘ Sale of Liquors Licensing Act of
1862 ’in that respect and.in some others requires amendment Be it there-
fore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as
follows :
I would leave out, as unnecessary, the words from “ require ” to “ families.”
“ Provision for limiting number of Public-houses in Licensing Districts.
“1. If in any year there shall be delivered to the Clerk of Petty Sessions
acting for any district within which meetings of Justices for considering appli-
cations for Public-houses Licenses are by law periodically holden a certificate
in writing under the hands of not less than three of the Justices usually act-
ing as such in that district (or within the Sydney Licensing District under
the hands of not less than six of such Justices) that a certain number of pub-
lic-houses mentioned in such certificate is sufficient for the convenience and
accommodation of travellers and the inhabitants in such district no license
shall be granted at any time within twelve months thereafter for or in respect
of any house within the same district in excess of the number so mentioned
unless upon a requisition to the clerk under the hands of not less than six (or
in Sydney twelve) resident householders not one being a publican or person
interested in any house for which a license is intended to he applied for at a
general meeting of the Justices to be convened by such clerk the majority of
them acting as aforesaid then present shall by writing under their hands decide
on increasing the number mentioned in such certificate.
“ The lilce as to portions of any such district.
“ 2. If in like manner there shall in any year be delivered to the clerk acting
for any such district as aforesaid a certificate in writing under the hands of
two Justices residing in any municipality or township or other defined area
within such district (or in respect of any such municipality under the hands of
the Mayor and two Aldermen thereof) that a certain number of public-houses
mentioned in such certificate is sufficient for the convenience and accommo-
dation of travellers and the inhabitants of such municipality township or area


no license shall be granted at any time within twelve months thereafter for or
in respect of any house there situate in excess of the number so mentioned
unless upon a requestion to the clerk under the hands of not less than six (or
in the city of Sydney twelve) householders resident within the same munici-
pality township or area not one being a publican or person interested in any
house for which a license is intended to be applied for and at a general meet-
ing of the Justices acting in and for the district to be convened by such clerk
the majority of them present shall by writing under their hands decide on
increasing the number mentioned in any such certificate.”
The enactment of such a clause as clause 1 would be an injustice of the
grossest character. We know how easy J.P’s are made—both drunken and
gober and we all know how the Bench is packed by J.P ’s who deal in spirits
and wines. I know a case where the J.P. was a merchant, and of course
could not “ sit ” on the day a license would be applied for by a new cus-
tomer ! There were three J P.’s and a P.M. on the Bench, but the license
was refused, an d, in my opinion, properly so, because, although the house had
the number of rooms &c., with a wretched yard and an equally wretched
building called a stable, there was the better reason, viz., that there were two
other houses within a few yards of it, and both well built, which the third
was not! Well, is it supposed the wine and spirit J.P. was to be foiled ?
No ; the new customer, at the proper time, made another application, and the
license was granted; because every J.P. in the district, known to this mer-
chant and another in the same trade in an adjoining district, was written to,
or personally begged to sit that day, and so swamp the other J.P. s who had
opposed its issue. The P.M., seeing he was beaten (“licked into a cooked
hat,” was the remark of one of the merchants), left the Bench before it
was’ decided to grant it! Why not adopt the English system, which is as
follows: —If a new license is required, six weeks’ (I think) notice is given
to the clerk of the peace (C.P.S. here), and a notice pasted, or otherwise
fastened upon the door of the house intended to be used as a P.H., stating that
such an application is filed, and will be applied for on the day named therein.
The dav arrives, the application is made, and is generally supported by
a petition stating the necessity for such, signed by as many of the
neighbours as the new landlord or his friends can procure. In most
cases of the kind, a counter petition is before the bench, then appears the
police report (verbally or written) ; these, together with the knowledge seve-
ral on the bench possess, from a visit to the premises, form plenty of material
upon which to say “ Yea ” or “ Nay.” In some cases, barristers of eminence
are engaged to cross examine opponents or to examine friends and to address
the bench before they deliberate on its issue or otherwise. The character of
the signatures give weight to the petitions, and the license is granted or refused,
the latter often occurring for several successive periods, without any arbitrary
number of inhabitants or the absurd number of J.Ps., as suggested in clause
1 and 2, as above.
“ Householders may in certain cases oppose the grant of a license.
3. If in any year there shall be delivered to the clerk acting for any such
districts as aforesaid a representation in writing under the hands of not less
than three (or in Sydney or any other municipality not less than six) house-
holders on the Electoral Roll of and residing within the locality to which such
representation applies that any house within that district for which a license
is sought or about to be sought for the sale of liquors therein has not the ac-


commodation required by law or that no licensed public-house (or additional
public-house as the case may be) is required for the accommodation of travel-
lers or others in the neighbourhood or that such house is in the immediate
vicinity of a school or hospital or place of Divine Worship or that if licensed it
would probably be the cause of disturbance or disorder or otherwise injurious
to the peace of the neighbourhood such representation shall be taken into con-
sideration by the Justices sitting to determine respecting the issue of a license
for such house and no certificate for such license, shall be granted unless the
Justices present or the majority of them shall in open court declare their
opinion that the representation so made is unfounded. Provided that the
applicant for the opposed license shall have had or shall have such notice of
the representation as the Justices shall deem reasonable and that the consider-
ation of the same and of his application shall or may be adjourned for further
injuiry if either party shall so desire and the Justices think further inquiry
necessary. . .
“ The like as to existing Licensed Houses.
ff 4. A representation may be made and delivered in like manner in
respect of any house already licensed that the same has not the accommoda-
tion required by law or that the holder of the license or new applicant is
not a person of good character or is of dissolute or drunken habits or that. the
house has generally during the previous six months been conducted in a
disorderly manner or been on several occasions during that period the scene
of riotous or disorderly conduct or otherwise the cause of disturbances in the
neighbourhood or that the premises are in a filthy condition And the like
proceedings shall be had and the same course be taken upon and in respect
of every such representation and the holder of the license or applicant shall
have the same notice and the like time for further inquiry be allowed as
there is provided respectively in the preceding section with regard to repre-
sentations affecting houses not theretofore licensed.
“ As to representations by Police.
“ 5. In every case whether as to public-houses already licensed or houses
for which severally a license is sought the representation may be made in
writing by any Police Magistrate or inspector of police or police sergeant and
delivered under his hand to the clerk acting as aforesaid and shall have the
like effect as a representation by and under the hand of three or more resident
householders and electors as aforesaid And it shall be the duty of every
sergeant or senior constable in charge of any district to ascertain and report
in writing to the Justices at the Annual Licensing Meeting in respect of the
licensed houses within his district whether the provisions of the “ Licensing
Act of 1862 ” and also the provisions of this Act as to the accommodation
and cleanliness of such houses have been and (in respect of houses already
licensed) continue to be complied with.
« Accommodation required in houses licensed after 1869.
«< 0_ After the thirty-first day of December next no certificate or license
shall be granted for any house not previously licensed unless the same shall
contain at the time of applying for such certificate six rooms at leas for
public accommodation each of which shall not be less than twelve feet in
length by ten feet in width and nine feet in height with sufficient light and
air And there shall be on the premises in all cases not less than two decent
and cleanly places of convenience and if such rooms and places or any of them
shall at any time during the continuance of his license be in a filthy state or


not reasonably fit for public accommodation and ready for use wben required
the holder shall be liable to a penalty of from one to ten pounds And if
convicted more than once within twelve months under this section such
holder may at the next annual meeting be refused a renewal of his license.
“ The like as to existing houses.
“ 7. The like provisions shall apply and the like penalty attach in respect of
all public-houses now licensed or that may be licensed before the first day of
January next and to the licensed holders thereof severally where the accom-
modation required by the aforesaid thirty third section shall during the
license not continue to be provided or the required rooms or place of con-
venience shall be at any time in a filthy state or not reasonably fit for public
accommodation and ready for use when required.’’
Clauses 3,4, 5, 6 and 7, there would be very little objection to, so long as
the publican or party intending to apply for a new license has proper notice
given him to attend the meeting of the bench at which such objections are
to be raised. So many of the hotels and inns in the country are so filthy
in their stables, yard and necessary out-offices, that the people who belong to
them, could never have lived in any wholesome place before, or they are so
careless and dirty in their habits that they are a disgrace to decent people.
Closets never washed, and the soil and liquid sewage up to the seats, or floating
about the only space a person can stand upon; parlors and bed-rooms smell
dirty, like the people who keep them—folks, who seem to have a great
aversion to soap and water. In my opinion, such people should not be
allowed a license. I know that one of the Judges can bear me out in my
assertion, because he has felt the nuisance of living under such a roof. In-
spection, occasionally, will be of immense service, both to the respectable and
clean class of landlords and to the general public, for whom such houses
exist. The charges vary from 18sto25sa day for a gentleman with a horse
and buggy, and it is only right that he should not be introduced to a pig-
stye. But, with regard to that portion of clause 6, which refers to the
number of rooms and the size of such, it does not say whether such rooms
are for bed-rooms, or otherwise. If for bed rooms, they are too large for
single beds, which should predominate in all public-houses, because the habits
of people differ so much some want thorough ablution every morning and it is
not necessary that other people should witness such an operation. Again,
some dirty people expectorate in every room they enter, as much as they do
in the streets, and it is not the most comfortable thing in the world to find
that, upon getting out of bed, you step into such filth. There are many
other circumstances, equally or more objeetionable which the reader can
imagine, besides, not knowing at times who may be in the room with, you,
as was the case in Cowra a short time since, when two (or more) men were
sleeping in one room, and one of them rose from his bed during the night,
found his knife, and performed the painful but unnecessary operation of
opening the other man, by stabbing him just over the umbilical, running
his knife downwards, so that his bowels were greatly protruding ! But there
should be one room suitable for a married couple. Some very suitable and
well ventilated bed-rooms are to be met with at Reid's clean and comfortable
hotel, Richmond. The number proposed is too large for some towns, and
too small for other spots. I think the present Act provides for a proper
minimum number, and it is the interest of every landlord to provide for as
many as he can fill, so that the number, over the minimum, can be safely left
to him.


il Times for Licensing Meetings.
a B. After the passing of this Act no meeting shall be holden for the granting
of public house licenses or certificates under the recited Act except on the
third Tuesday in April (being the annual licensing meeting and the third
Tuesday in July October and January respectively nor shall any such certificate
be granted or license be transferred or removed or authorised so to be except
at one of those meetings or on some day of adjournment thereof of which
public notice shall have been given Provided that any two Justices or any
Police Magistrate may at any time in cases of emergency authorise the transfer
of a license from one holder to another under the twenty-third section of the
said Act to take effect the next licensing meeting and until the question of con-
firming or disallowing such transfer shall at such meeting or some adjourn-
ment thereof have been disposed of.
“ Music and Dancing Saloons and Bagatelle Flaying.
“ 9. After the first day of July next the thirty fifth section of the recited
Act shall be repealed and no dancing (or unless by special license as herein-
after provided musical entertainment of any kind) shall be permitted in any
licensed public-house in any city or town in this colony in any part of such
house open to public resort at any hour nor any bagatelle or billiard-bagatelle
board or table be allowed or be used or kept therein under a penalty of not less
than two nor more than twenty pounds Provided that a special license may
be granted under the hand of the Police Magistrate of the district (or where
there is none under the hand of two Justices) for the performance of music
vocal or instrumental or both in any such house on a day and between hours
to be specified in such license. No such license to be in force for any period
longer than that so specified.
“Keeping Houses open after Ten at night.
“ 10. After the said first day of July no licensed public-houses in any part
of the colony shall be kept open or any liquor be sold or person be permitted
to remain drinking therein after the hour of ten at night without a like
special license from a Police Magistrate or two Justices under a penalty of
not exceeding forty shillings or for a second or any subsequent offence not
less than that sum or more than five pounds Such license may be for any
period not exceeding six months but shall not authorise the keeping of any
house open after midnight and it may be renewed from time to time as shall
be thought proper.
“ Exceptions from last two clauses.
“ 11. Nothing in the preceding ninth section shall apply to the casual using
of any room or rooms in a licensed house for dancing or music by any person
being really a lodger or inmate therein or by the licensed holder in some part
of his house not open to public resort for himself and his family such lodger
inmate or licensed holder not receiving or charging anything on account or
by reason of such entertainment directly or indirectly Nor shall the tenth
section be construed to prevent the supplying of refreshment at any hour
to any such lodger or inmate or to any actual traveller on a journey.”
I see no objection to clause 8.
Clause 9 aims at sweeping away the billiard and bagatelle tables. This is
an absurdity, because they will be removed to gambling-houses. Is that desir-
able ?At present, barely any gambling goes on ; the landlord will not allow it.
But it is allowed at private rooms., where, by the-bye, neither the landlord


of the room nor the owner of the table pay any license, which is an injustice
to the publican . If the evils, the very worst evils of these boards, are wished
to be seen, go to California, to the London hells, or to the private rooms
in this city, and gambling can be witnessed which would rather astonish the
opponents of temperance men, like the writer. They are as bad equally
as bad—in their results , as the gambling houses of the Chinese on our gold
fields. The youth of the best, as well as of the fastest families about Sydney,
are being ruined at these private rooms, and more than two families of the
highest respectability, have to thank the connections formed at these private
gambling houses for their son’s ruin and departure from this colony within
the last three years I was informed by one, whom I censured for being away
from his counting house duties over one hour, that “he had been a little
longer than he had expected, but he had been playing a game of billiards for
half a sovereign.” At another time, he informed me, he had lost les. over a
game, but, his losses were too heavy for him, and the colony lost a smart,
intelligent youth, through a private billiard room—for he would not have
been seen at a public-house ! If the tables are at public houses “ nobblers
may be played for “ Sub rosa,” but very little else is done, except tor w at
is known as the science of the game —learning how, geometrically, to ®
the balls, so as to produce the largest number of scores. I would almost be
a new hat,” —that those who oppose the use of those tables never used a cue
in their lives ! I was in a billiard room some time since and saw a gentleman
there, whom I heard remark, “they were the worst places in the colony ,
but, strange to say, he was in the room for the first time in his life, and 1
not see the matter then , in such a light! The quakers and their wives, play
at the game, without gambling, and surely they are “ respectable . u n
fortunately for society and themselves, there are a number of people in the
world, who have no life, no laughter, no enjoyment, in anything out of their
own melancholy line ! Everything is evil, which is outside their very circum-
scribed circle, and if they are allowed full swing, a good horse race, a man y
boat race, the sports of the field, and gun would cease, and our lmmorta
Shakespeare, with Sheridan, Bulwer and a host of other geniuses, o ie
highest order, w r ould have written for us for—nought! I wonder they die no
strike out “Dancing” as well as billiards. Ihe time for closing is now
limited to midnight on six days of the week, and 10 p.m. on Sunc ays, o
which I cannot see any objection, since 10 o’clock p.m. was made the lmi
(on Sundays) in London, and no sale allowed before one p.m. (excep o
travellers.) much good has followed, less drunkenness and some litt eex ra
repose for the publican and his family.
“ Fees for Licenses.
“12. There shall be paid on the issue of any such ‘ music license’ the sum
of twenty shillings and on the issue of any such “ late-hour license or
every month embraced by it the sum of ten shillings.
“ Certain restrictions on the Sale of Liquors.
«13. No liquor whether spirituous vinous or fermented shall at any time in
whatever quantity be sold given or delivered by any licensed publican or from
his licensed house to any child under the age of fourteen years or apparently
under that age or to any aboriginal man or woman or to any person being at
the time intoxicated or apparently intoxicated or to any person whom such
publican shall know or have reason to believe to be an habitual drunkar
under the penalty in every such case of not less than one pound nor more


than five pounds or for the second or any subsequent ofience not less than
two nor more than ten pounds.
“ Admittance of Justices Sfc. into Public-houses under special circumstances.
“ 14. Any Justice, inspector or sergeant of police or constable in charge of
a district having reasonable cause to suspect that a breach of this or the herein
recited Act is being committed in any licensed public-house may demand
admittance into the same at any hour before midnight (or in case of actual
disturbance therein at any hour) and if admittance be refused or unreason-
ably delayed the licensed holder shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
five pounds nor more than fifty pounds and the Justices may at their next
annual meeting if they think fit direct that his license shall not be renewed.
“ Title of Act. Both Acts incorporated.
15. After the passing of this Act the recited Act may be styled for all
purposes “ The Publicans Licensing Act of 1862 as amended by the Act of
1869”—and this present Act of 1862 not inconsistent with any provision in
the present Act shall for the purposes of this Act be taken to be incorporated
herein and to form part hereof.
Clause 12 is not at all necessary, the publicans pay more taxes, have less
thanks, and are subjected to more annoyances than any other class of traders,
and such petty charges should not be, even thought of.
Clause 13, is not required, because the present law, makes it illegal to
supply •‘Aboriginals.” It is as absurd to expect a publican to know the
size of a child “apparently fourteen years of age” as it is to ask him to
learn how to know a man who is “ apparently drunk.” Let the police look
after the drunkards, as is their duty, and the question of children going for
a pint of “ stringy” for their hard-working father may be safely left, to the
option of the parents.
Clause 14. I think there would be no objection to allow the Inspector or Ser-
geant of Po'ice as by the present Act, to enter, if he were in uniform and
informed the landlord why “he wished to look over the premises al otted to
the public,” but, such privi’ege should not be al owed to a private constable,
it would be too often and too offensively exercised.
If a J.P. or the P.M. knew of any infringement of the Act, he could in-
form the Police Inspector.
The present law, which enables a publican to call in a constable, to re-
move persons who are creating a disturbance, or to clear his house at mid-
night is quite sufficient. The promoters of the Bill, as above, to perfectly
carry out their notions, should insert a c’ause, making it part of every
policeman’s beat and his duty to go over every publican’s premises several
times a day !
Such is the Bill now before the Parliament. I think a few alterations in
the present law is called for, and I ask the trade to give the subject consider-
ation, both individually and collectively, and to prepare a reasonable and
sensible measure—one that will command the respect of outside intelli-
gent and reasonable temperance folks, the others they can afford to leave to
themselves; set the present machinery (the Association) to work up the
country trade, both for the “ sinews of war” and their co-operation. There
are 2,195 houses in the colony for selling retail, besides wholesale
dealers and merchants. There are about 2000 landlords who let their pre-
mises to the trade. The publicans collect all the duties on wines, spirits, and
beer, amounting to £521,791 35., and pay for licenses (1867) £70,224
15s Id., making a total of £602,215 18s. Id., and have, at the lowest


computation, at least two millions invested, with about four thousand single and
and married men engaged in the trade, including importers, wholesale dealers,
travellers, brokers, retailers, storemen, barmen, ostlers, and others. I find
there are 109,104 registered electors on the roll of this colony, and that only
about one-half go to the poll at a general election. Each of those interested
in the spirit trade need only influence, say about twelve, and that gives nearly
all who usually vote, or about one half of the entire electors who can vote.
Let the “ Drunkards’ Punishment Act ” of 1866 (30 Vic. No. 5) be ex-
tended, with a view to put down this crime. Let the trade purchase their
« grog ” of respectable houses, who do not manufacture “ Colonial Old Tom”
and other vile compounds, who are above the thievish practice of pirating
their fellow-man’s good name, by using his labels or trade mark; and here I can-
not help giving the names of some of the leading houses who are above such
things, as D. Cooper and Co., Tidswell and Co., Tucker and Co., and a very few
others. Let an example be made occasionally of those who sell poison, mix-
ing ‘‘Davis’ painkiller” with that vile compound, known as “ Bull,” and selling
it for rum ; as was the case only a few months since in the country, when the
publican happened to be without the genuine article ! or, as happened
only a few weeks since in Sydney, when “ Vitriol ” was sold for Gin ! Why
should there not have been a magisterial enquiry as to the use made by the
landlord of that article ?
The absurd and unjust clause, number 37 of the present Act (1862)
should be repea 1 ed. Why should a man be allowed to drink one or two glasses
of refreshment daily, and be enabled to laugh at a respectable publican at the
end of the week, or month, when he, receiving his wages, should pay his
way ? One tradesman, by keeping his books, daily, should be in a position le-
gally to recover, as well as any other class, and the clause 29, should be so modified
as to allow, the landlord, or his lodgers to have a game of Whist or such other
game, with Cards, as they, and their friends might elect, without incurring a fine
or being subject to the intrusion of some overbearing and ignorant policeman ;
but, in all future enactments, all clubs, so far as the sa 7 e of liquors, the play-
ing at cards and billiards, and those pests, drunkards, are concerned, the
same law should embrace all, the legislator should not be allowed to get
drunk, nor gamble at his club with impunity any more than the lowest class
of society, for
“ What is the law, if those who make it,
Becomes the forwardest to break it?”
Of this I am convinced, that the large majority of the trade deal
honestly by their patrons, and only desire to obtain their living legitimately.
These should rather court an occasional “ inspection,” which will weed out
those from the trade who bring disgrace upon the whole, and with such
“ weeding,” the trade need not fear asking “ our Sailor Prince,” upon one of
his visits to the colony, to imitiate his noble-hearted father, “ Albert the
Good,” and become the Patron of the “ Licensed Victuallers” schools for
orphans, and asylum for the aged, of the present and future influential and
respectable body of “ Dealers in fermented liquors ” in this beautiful colony
of New South Wales.
