

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, Tasmania,
JANUARY 8, 1892.
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTIONS.
Section
Anthropology.
I.—THE STORY OF TU AND REI ; A MANI-
HIKIAN MYTH.
2.—OMENS OF PREGNANCY, MANGAIA,
HERVEY ISLANDS.
THE REV. WILLIAM WYATT GILL, LL.D.




Section eft.
I.—THE STORY OF TU AND REI; A MANIHIKIAN
MYTH.
By THE REV. WILLIAM WYATT GILL, LL.D.
Introduction.
*66'77
Almost in the centre of the South Pacific, about 700 miles
N.N.W. of Rarotonga, lie the twin atolls of Manihiki and
Rakahanga. These islands, twenty-five miles apart, are
inhabited by one race descended from a single pair, Toa and
Tapairu, natives of Rarotonga.
The following interesting myth was communicated to me
by loane, a native minister of Manihiki. loane derived it
from his aged father, one of the recognised repositories of
ancient wisdom, who was past middle age when Christianity
was introduced to those atolls in 1849.
The original text of the native is subjoined—the only
specimen of the Manihikian dialect ever printed. A few
Rarotongan words have how r ever crept in, owing doubtless
to loane’s perfect acquaintance with the language of the
political capital of the Hervey Group.
Two years and a half ago these atolls were, at the earnest
request of the natives, annexed to Great Britain. .
The food of these islanders consists merely of fish, coco-
nuts, and a coarse kind of Caladium (called by the natives
“ puraka ”) grown on Rakahanga. Annual voyages are made
by the natives of Manihiki to the sister island in canoes, for
the purpose of obtaining a supply of “ puraka”; in these
expeditions many lives are lost through sudden storms. The
voyage should be accomplished between sunrise and sunset.
Myth,
In spirit-land, in the district 1 of Kurakau, lived Tu and his
wife Rei. Now Rei conceived, and in due time gave birth to
a daughter called Ina. A long while afterwards Rei again
conceived. The husband, judging from her appearance, con-
cluded that there would he twins, and said to his wife, “If
1 In Polynesian mythology Spirit-world is mapped out into districts, under
the rule of chiefs, as the islands themselves are. Av \ v :
S


my expectations prove correct, we will name the first-born
Taramaakiaki, the second Taramahetonga.”
One day they determined to go to the ocean to dive for
clams. Accordingly they launched their canoe and paddled
to a distance where they knew clams to be abundant. Now
a female demon, Tuherepunga, whose home was at the
bottom of the ocean, caught sight of Rei, who was indeed a
woman surpassingly beautiful to look upon. The demon
coveted the lovely form of Rei and resolved that it should
become hers.
Utterly ignorant of the plottings of this foe, Tu and his
wife arrived right over the vast bed of clams, and Rei 1 at
once dived down to the coral bottom amongst them. While
the wife was thus busy, the envious demon rose up out of the
ocean in human form, exactly like Rei in face, locks, and
even the size of her abdomen. Tu gazed on the woman and
concluded that it was his wife. The demon said to Tu, “ Let
us paddle a little farther on.” Forthwith she got into the
canoe and away they paddled, Tu all the while believing her
to be his wife. But they had not paddled far, say a dozen
fathoms, 2 when Rei came up from the bottom bearing with
her some clams. To her surprise she found that Tu and the
canoe were gone. On looking again, she saw her husband
with a woman in the canoe paddling away from her. She at
once shouted out, “ Oh, Tu, ’tis a stranger woman that you
have in the canoe. Here am I, even Rei.”
At this the female demon said to Tu, “ Do not gaze upon
her, for she is the evil spirit, Tuherepunga, calling to us. Fix
your eyes on me, for I am Rei and there are twdns in my
womb.” Thus was Tu deceived and led to forsake his true
wife, Tu, assisted by the female demon, now paddled back
to shore.
In her distress Rei prayed 5 [to her god] for a great billow
to carry her ashore. An immense wave rose round her.
Still her incantation proceeded that it might rise higher yet.
Even so it came to pass; the vast volume of water curled up
and carried her ashore to the sandy beach. And now the
1 Only one could dive; the other must remain in the canoe to prevent it
from capsizing or drifting away. Rei is appropriately represented as diving,
Clam-diving being now, as from time immemorial, women’s work on those
atolls.
2 Polynesians always measure hy the fathom, i.e. both arms of a tall man
outstretched.
3 Rei being enciente, felt that she could not swim to land after the exhaustion
of diving. The only resource left was to invoke the aid of her god.


pangs of child-birth commenced; after awhile twins were born. 1
[ln accordance with her husband’s wish] she named the first
Taramaakiaki, and the second Tarainahetonga. The place
where the twins were born was a wild uninhabited spot, far
from the dwelling of her husband.
Rei carefully tended her twin children until they became
able to take care of themselves. The place where they lived
abounded in coco-nut palms, and the sandy soil was covered
with fallen nuts. It was on the rich kernel (scraped fine)
and soft pith of these nuts that the children were nourished.
Fish of all kinds could easily be obtained.
One day the twins, now grown up into big lads, asked the
name of their father. Rei answered, “Yon post 2 of the
house [you see] standing is your father, and I am your
mother.” Another day they repeated the question, but Rei
would not satisfy their curiosity. At length she asked the
boys, “Do you really want to know your father ? ” “We do
indeed,” was the reply. The mother therefore taught them
the house-incantation. 3 In a short time they got it off by
heart. Rei made them chant it; but found that whereas the
elder lad dropped out a word here and there, the younger
one recited it with absolute correctness.
Rei then told the boys to go in search of her brother.
“ Tell him my wish that he fell 4 a tree [to make] a canoe for
you my children ; but the tree to be felled must be one grow-
ing in a wild 5 spot. The boys started off and carried out
their mother’s instructions. The maternal uncle assented and
pointed out a suitable tree. The twins now scraped the
kernel of some coco-nuts, enough to fill two baskets. This
done, the elder lad called to the great land crabs (= tupa),
the tiny land crabs (= karaii), and the medium-sized land
crabs (^=kakara) —in fact to crabs of all sorts and sizes that
crawl over the sandy soil—to come and fell the tree for their
1 Native women on those low-lying atolls know exactly what to do for
themselves under such circumstances. When the husband is at hand, it is
hi* duty to perform the office of accoucheur.
2 This is the native way of evading an awkward question.
3 A house-incantation is one that is used on entering your own dwelling,
lest any mishap occur. It is, of course, a family secret.
4 The uncle (to the native mind) felled the tree, because (1) he pointed out
a suitable tree growing on his land, (2) the scraped coco-nut was his property,
(3) the crab carpenters belonged to the estate. No land in those atolls is
unclaimed. Timber fit for canoe building is especially valuable. Compare
the legend of “ Rata’s Canoe,” “ Myths and Songs,” page 144.
5 Evidently to correspond with the wild place where the twins had been
born and brought up. The scene is still laid in Spirit-land,


canoe. So the crabs came, but not in sufficient numbers.
Observing this, the younger brother called to the crabs, even
as the elder brother had done. Vast multitudes now came at
the voice of the younger boy. The crabs [with their clawsj
felled the tree, dug out the canoe, and finished it off. In a
single night the canoe was made and dragged to the sea.
When the task was finished the crabs came back [from the
sea] to feast 1 upon the delicious morsels prepared for them
[by the boys].
At daylight the twins paddled back to their mother, who
now desired them to go to the most distant part of the atoll.
If they saw on the sea abundance of drift-wood and rubbish,
it was not the right place. But if they came to a white
sandy beach—all glittering in the sun—it would be their
destination, the home of their father Tu, and of their sister
Ina, and of Tuherepunga.
So the boys paddled on until they arrived at the place
indicated, and then landed. On coming to a spot near the
sea where fishbones and other refuse were thrown, they hid
their canoe by sinking it. Advancing now a little way, they
perceived a man, a girl, and a woman very like [their mother]
Rei. The man and the girl were in one hut, the woman in
another [close by] engaged in mat weaving. 2 But the lads
were unseen by all three.
The twins now changed their shape. They transformed
themselves into robber-crabs and crawled to the side of the
hut occupied by the woman, making the usual noise of those
crustaceans. The man called out to the woman, “ What is
the noise outside?” The woman replied, “Don’t you
perceive 3 that it is only the crabs—of all sorts and sizes—of
this our island ? ”
After awhile the noise was again heard, and the woman rose
and went outside to see. She found it was made by a couple
of fine robber-crabs. The delighted woman called out,
“ What a treat 4 I have got! ” At this she secured them
with strong sennit-cord, and pulling them into the larger
dwelling, tied them to the principal posts. Husband and
wife then proceeded to heat the oven in order to bake the two
1 Payment for work was usually made in food. The work must be done
ere the hungry carpenters taste the feast.
2 Mat-weaving was practised on Manihiki and Rakahanga from time
immemorial. Yet on some volcanic islands (notably Mangaia) this useful
art was unknown.
3 A native answers a question by putting another. This habit is universal.
4 A great delicacy in the estimation of the islanders.


great robber-crabs. Now the crabs were made fast to separate
posts [to prevent their escape,] The daughter [lna] came
and sat down near the captive robber-crabs, who now
plaintively spake thus with human voice :
“Oh ! Ina, we have the same father, even Tu ; and the
same mother, even Rei,” At this the girl ran to tell Tu,
who replied, “ Don’t go 1 near them, lest you be tempted to
release them, and so they escape.” Ina, however, came
back, and the robber-crabs again plaintively uttered the same
words. The girl again ran to her father and told him what
they said. Tu desired her to ask their names. Ina did so,
and the robber-crabs informed her that Taramaakiaki was
the name of the elder, and Taramahetonga the name of the
younger. As soon as Tu was told this, he grasped the
situation, for he now recollected the covenant he had [long
ago] made with his wife as to the names of the twins when
they should be born. He reflected, too, that the woman
whom he and his daughter called Rei had been seemingly
pregnant for six or seven years Without giving birth to a
child !
Tu ran into the hut, but the lads now resumed their
human form. He demanded of them whether they knew the
the house-incantation. They replied, “ Yes.” Tu immediately
put their knowledge to the test. The elder lad went through
it, dropping out, however, as Tu noted, a word here and
there. The younger lad then went through it, and Tu knew
that it was absolutely correct. It was in this way that Tu
became convinced that these lads were his own children.
Tu now asked the demon wife whether she knew the house-
incantation. “ A little bit of it has slipped from my memory,”
she replied. The husband said, “ 2 Chant it then.” She
accordingly chanted these words :
In the far-away deep sports the great white shark ;
But in the near sea moves the common blue shark.
Catch ! Slay !!
At this Tu gripped the hands of the demon wife—inasmuch
as this was not the house-incantation—and threw her on the
oven which they had just been been heating for the children.
I Tu was sceptical about the statement of these wonderful crabs ; but that
the crabs should speak did not surprise him at all.
2 The demon-wife utters an incantation which smacks of her original form
and true home in ocean depths. She is made to tell the man she so cruelly
wronged to “ catch ” and “ kill ” the denizen of the deep, which he does with
great zest.


In a short time the abdomen of the demon-wife burst with
the heat, and lo! a great lump of lime-making coral fell out.
As soon as the twins were sure of the death of the demon-
wife, they ran to their canoe and paddled back to their
mother 1 ; Tu and the sister following in another canoe.
When Tu arrived at the place where Rei was, he wept over
his wife and the twin sons, Rei too wept over her husband
and daughter. Finally they all returned to their ancient
home in peace and prosperity.
Song of Ina and her Brothers.
1. —Marama hiti ake te tauaruea.
Ko hiti mai a tia oa !
Hiti ake!
Hiti ake i tua o Matavera te tauaruea,
Ko hiti mai a tia oa !
Ka hakune!
Ka hakune! Kahapopo!
Ta kainga ta mahu a hapa e !
Te tauaruea.
Hail glimmering light of the rising moon !
Shine forth in thy full glory !
Shine forth!
Shine forth from behind Matavera, thou lovely one !
Shine forth in thy full glory !
(In thy presence we partake of) our stale food ;
Stale food; —food covered with mildew ;
Scraped “puraka”—all bad.
Hail lovely (moon-goddess)!
2.—Koai e ana tama i ana mua e, te tauaruea ?
Ko hiti mai a tia oa !
Na ! Ko Ina !
Ko Ina rangai vaka,
Te tama a Rei vaka, te tauaruea.
Koai e ana peke i ana tua e, te tauaruea ?
Ko hiti mai a tia oa !
Ko Tarama,
Ko Taramaakiaki, te tama a Rei vaka, te tauaruea ?
Koai e ana peke i ana muri e, te tauaruea ?
Ko hiti mai a tia oa !
Ko Tarama,
Evidently Tuherepunga, with her craft and strength, was well-known to
Rei; hence she did not seek out her husband until her boys were grown, or
she would have been no match for her foe.
There is a play upon the word “punga,” which in those islets means “a
lump of lime-making coral.” Accordingly the demon’s name is “Tuhere-
punffa," i.e. “ Tu-who-carries-about-lime-coral,” or “Tu -enciente with coral,”


Ko Taramahetonga, te tama a Rei vaka, te tauaruea.
Ko liiti mai a tia oa ?
Ka hakune!
Ka hakune! Ka hapopo!
Ta kainga ta mahu a hapa e!
Te tauaruea!
Where is the first-born of his children, thou lovely one ?
Shine forth in thy full glory !
Yonder is Ina,—
Ina the pride of the land,
Daughter of Rei, the renowned.
Where is the next-born of his children, thou lovely one ?
Shine forth in thy full glory !
Here is Tarama, —
Even Tararnaakiaki son of Rei, the renowned.
WhereSisithe next-born of his children, thou lovely one?
Shine forth in thy full glory !
Here is Tarama, —
Even Taramahetonga, son of Rei, the renowned.
Shine forth in thy full glory !
(In thy presence we partake of) our stale food ;
Stale food; —food covered with mildew :
Scraped “puraka”—all bad.
Hail lovely (moon-goddess) !
The worship of the moon-goddess is intermixed with
farcical allusions to the very indifferent diet of her worshippers.
This is eminently characteristic of Polynesian idolatrous
cult.
“ Matavera ” is the name of the most distant district of
spirit-land. There may he seen the aperture through which
the lovely moon-goddess climbs up at night.
This song is unique.
Ko te tua teia ia Ta raua ko Rei; e tua no Manihihi.
Ko Tu te tane, ko Rei te vaine, ko Kurakau te enua (tei
Avaiki). Kua nui a Rei, kua anau, e tamaine, ko Ina te
ingoa, E roa akera, kua nui akaou a Rei, kua akara te
tane i te vaine, kua tuke te kopu o te vaine, tera ta raua
tuatua, e maanga paa tei roto ite kopu. Me anau mai e, e
maanga, tera nga ingoa, ko Tararnaakiaki tetai, ko
Taramahetonga tetai, E tae akera ki tetai ra, kua inangaro
raua ka aere ki taatai, ka ruku paua. Aere atura raua na
runga ito raua vaka, e tae atura kite ngai e ruku ei ite
paua, tera tetai vaerua kino tei raro i te moana, te akara ua
ra kia Rei, no te mea e vaine purotu a Rei i te akaraanga.


Ko Tuherepunga te ingoa o tana vaerua kino ra, Kua
noinoi tana vaerua kino ra i te tutu o Rei, kia riro ei tu nona.
Kua tae raua ki taua ngai ruku anga paua ra, kua ruku iora
a Rei ki raro ite moana. Kua ea mai taua vaerua kino ra
ki runga. Kua tu a tangata te tu, niei te tu tikai o Rei
tona tu, te mata, te rauru, ete maata ite kopu. Kua akara
aTuki te vaine, ko tana vaine ia. Te karanga rate vaine
kia Tu, o atu ka oe taua. Kua kake ki runga ite vaka,
kua oe atura raua. Kua vare a Tue, ko tana vaine ia.
Kare raua i mamao ke atu, ka tau kite okotai ngauru tna rua
etateta te roa, kua ea mai a Rei mei raro i te moana ma nga
paua, e kia akara aia, kare ua a Tu e te vaka atu : E kia akara
atu aia, kua oe ma te vaine katoa i runga i te vaka. Kua
kapiki atura aia, ETu e! e vaine ke te vaine i akauta atu
ei koe na, Teia au ko Rei!
Te karanga ra tua vaine ra kite tane, Aua e akara atu,
ko Tuherepunga tera e kapiki maira kia taua. Akara mai
koe iaku, teia rai ko Rei, akara koe i te maanga i roto i
taku kopu. Te vare ra a Tu, akaruke atura i tana vaine
tikai. Oe atura raua kite enua.
Kua tautopa iora a Rei ki tetai ngaru tai, ei kave iaia ki
uta i te enua, kua akaututuaia maira tetai ngaru, kua kapiki
aia kia teitei, e kua teitei ua atura taua ngaru ra, e kua aatu
ki runga iaia. Riro atura aia, na te ngaru e taoi ki uta. Tei
tona tae anga atu ki uta, kua mamae anau iora aia, e roa
akera kua anau aia, e puke tamariki tokorua, e maanga raua.
Te tapa ra aia i nga ingoa, ko Taramaakiaki tetai, ko
Taramahetonga tetai. E ngai motutaa ua teia ngai, e mamao
te ngai i noo ei te tane.
Kua ikiiki iora aia i ana puke tamariki tokorua e mamaata
raua. Kua inangaro nga tamariki kia kite i to raua metua
tane. Te ui ra kite metua vaine, Koai to maua metua
tane? Kua karanga a Rei, Ko te pou etu mai na to korua
metua tane. (E pou are nei taua pou ra.) Ko au to korua
metua vaine, Kia tae ki tetai ra, kua ui akaou, kare rai a Rei
i akakite. I reira a Rei i karanga i kia raua, Kua inangaro
ainei korua kia kite ito korua metua tane? Kua karanga
raua, Kua inangaro maua. Tera ta te metua vaine i apii ia
raua, e pe’e no te are. Kare e roa kua mou ngakau ia raua.
Kua inangaro a Rei kia tumu i te pe’e nga tamariki; e
topatopa aere te pe’e i te tuakana, ko te teina kare ia e
topatopa, Te karanga ra a Rei ki nga tamariki, E aere
korua e kimi i toku tungane; e akakite korua te karanga
atu nei au, e tipu i tetai vaka no korua, ko te rakau i te ngai


ngangaere ote enua ko ta koma Va e tipu. E kua aere ran a
kna akapera i ta te metua vaine i tuatua maira. E kua
akatika te tungane, e kua akakite ki nga tamariki i te rakau.
Tera ta aua nga tamariki i rave, kua varu raua i etai akari
ki runga i e rua kikau. E oti, kua kapiki te tuakana kia
aere mai te tupa, te karaii, te kakara, te an manu totoro
ravarai mei te reira te tu, ei tipu ito raua vaka. E kua aere
mai, kare ra i maata tika. E kua kapiki akaou te teina, mei
ta te tuakana ra, e kua maata ua atura tei aere mai i te reo o
te teina. Riro atura na ratou e tipu ite rakau, ena ratou e
maani ite vaka. Okotai po, kua oti te vaka, e kua kika ki
te tai. Kua oki mai aua manu kua kai ite akari. E kia
popongi kua oe atura aua tamariki ra kite metua vaine.
Kua akakite te metua vaine kia raua, E oe korua na tera
pae enua ; me kite korua i te rakau panu aere rna te teita, e
ngai ke anake Va. Me kite korua i tetai ngai moteteakaua,
koia ia, tei reira to korua metua tane, ko Tu te ingoa, e tei
reira to korua tuaine, ko Ina, etei reira katoa a Tuherepunga.
Kua oe atura raua, e tae atura ki taua ngai ra, kua kake
ki uta. Kia tae kite ngai tiringa teita ite pae tai, kua
akatomo raua i to raua vaka kite tai, kua aere atura raua,
kua kite i tetai tangata, e te ramaine, e tetai vaine mei te
mea eko Rei tona tu. E are ke to taua tangata ra ma te
tamaine ; e are ke to te vaine. Tera ta te vaine angaanga,
e raranga moenga. Kare ra ratou i kite mai ia raua.
I reira kua akatuke raua ia raua. Kua akatutu a unga-
onu ia raua, kua totoro mai kite pae ite are o taua vaine ra,
kua akaparaparara kite pae are. Kua kapiki mai te tane
ki taua vaine ra, Eaa teia paraparara i vao ? Kua karanga
te vaine, Kare koe e kite, ko te kakara ma te karaii, e te
papaka ito tatou enua ? E roa, kua paraparara akaou; e
kua aere atura taua vaine ra ki vao, kua akara, e ina! e
unga-onu teia, e rua. Kua rekareka. Tera te tu reo kapiki,
Aue ! taku tauanga fakariki! Kua tapeka kite taura e kua
kika. mai ki roto ite are maata, e kua tapeka kite tumu ite
pou; e kua aere raua, te tane ete vaine kite tan ite umu no
aua unga-onu ra ; e kua tapekaia tetai ki tetai pou, tetai ki
tetai pou. Kua aere mai te tamaine kite pae o nga unga-
onu ; kua tuatua a tangata atura nga unga-onu kiaia, E Ina
e! okotai o tatou metua tane ko Tu, okotai o tatou metua
vaine ko Rei. Kua oro atura aia e kua akakite kia Tu.
Kua tuatua maira a Tu, Aua koe e aere kite pae, ka tatara
aea koe, eka oro aea. Kua oki maira Ina kia raua, kua
tuatua akaou atura i taua tuatua ra, e kua akakite akaou


atura aia kia Tu. Kua tuatua maira a Tu, E ui atu koe,
koai ma o raua ingoa? Kua ui atura Ina, e kua aaki maira
kiaia, kua akakite atura Ina kia Tu, ko Taramaakiaki tetai,
ko Taramahetonga tetai. Kua marama iora te manako o Tu,
ma te akamaara ki ta raua tuatua i oti e, ko te ingoa rai ia me
anau mai. Ko te ingoa o taua vaine ra ite kapiki anga a
Tu e te tamaine ko Rei, akamaara, kua tae kite ono e te
itu ote mataiti, kare akera taua vaine ra i anau. Kua oro
maira a Tu ki roto i te are, e ina! kua tu a tangata raua.
Kua ui atura aia kia raua, Kua kite ainei korua i te pe’e o
te are ? Kua tuatua atura raua, Kua kite maua, Kua timata
iora aTu kia kite aia ito raua pakari eto raua kite. Kua
timata kite tuakaua. Kua pe’e aere te tuakana ; e kua kite
aTue, te topa rikiriki aere ra tetai ngai, E kua pe’e te
teina ; kia akarongo a Tu, kare e ngai i topa iaia. E kua
maara tikai a Tue, nana tikai eia tamariki.
Kua kapiki atura aTuki te vaine, Kua kite ainei koe ite
pe’e o te are ? Kua tuatua maira te vaine, Ko tetai taka
tuatua ngaro ia! Kua tuatua atura te tane e, Pe’e mai koe.
Kua pe’e atura aia,
Tei tua la parata,
Tei tai ta mango,
E pi! Epa !
Kua mou atura Tu i te rima o te vaine, no te mea kare, ia
pe’e i te pe’e o te are, kua titiri atura a Tu i taua vaine ra ki
runga ite umu ta raua i tau no ana tamariki ra. E kia ngaa
te kopu o taua vaine ra ki runga ite umu, e ina! e punga
maata tei roto i te kopu, mei te punga ngaika nei te tu.
Kia kite nga tamariki e, kua mate taua vaine ra, kua ooro
atura raua ki to rana vaka, e kua oki atura kite metua vaine.
E kua aru atura a Tu e te tamaine ia raua ; e vaka ke rai to
raua. E kia tae kite ngai tei reira a Rei, kua aue iora aTu
kite vaine, eki nga tamariki. E kua aue katoa a Rei kite
tane, e kite tamaine. E kua oki atura ratou ki to ratou
ngai tikai ma te meitaki.
The native text for Ina's song having been already given,
need not be repeated here.


2.—OMENS OF PREGNANCY, MANGAIA, HERVEY
ISLANDS.
By THE REV. WILLIAM WYATT GILL, LL.D.
If a married man dreams of catching prawns, or of gathering
red pandanus drupes, 1 it is a sure sign that his wife will con-
ceive and the child will he a boy. Should the dream be of
Gardenia * flowers, the expanded blossom prefigures a boy,
the unexpanded a girl. Should the dream be of a bed of
buried stone adzes, one very large and the rest much smaller,
and that a friend is with you at the time of the discovery;
then you and your friend will both become parents. The
party who gets the big adze will have a boy, the other a girl.
My valued Polynesian friend, Mamae, had been married
a year without expectation of increase, when he dreamed
that he and Anui (his friend and relative) had luckily
discovered a bed of stone adzes at a place called Touri, in
the district of Tevaenga. Early next morning Mamae started
off with his brothers to secure the treasure trove, i.e. the
buried adzes 3 , then much in request. The brothers dug for
hours at the place indicated in the dream ; but all in vain!
Late in the afternoon they gave up their bootless search.
Their old uncle Tiaea hearing what the young fellows had
been doing, sent for Mamae and angrily demanded how he
dared to dig the sacred soil of Tevaenga. To appease the
wrath of the old heathen, Mamae told his dream. At this
the uncle laughed heartily and remarked “ the dream means
that you and Anui are about to become parents.” And so it
turned out; for Anui’s wife bare him Teara, his eldest son
and successor in the chieftainship ; Mamae’s wife also bare a
son who died early.
A night or two afterwards, Mamae dreamed that he was
gathering red pandanus drupes. So, emphasized Mamae,
1 These were strung together for necklaces, alternating with the bell-like
blossoms of the Hernandia. In full dress a man or a woman might wear
half a dozen of these necklaces, some doubled and others reaching the knees,
3 The Gardenia blossom (the flower of flowers in native estimation) was,
and still is, worn in the pierced ears of both sexes.
3 On the eve of battle it was customary to bury the stone adzes of the
family in some out-of-the-way place. Beds of these (in heathen times)
priceless treasures are still occasionally discovered. About a dozen adzes,
large and small, were arranged in a circle, the points being towards the
centre. The knowledge of the localities where to find them was carefully
handed down from one generation to another until the last of the tribe was
slain. Sometimes a couple of adzes would be hidden in the cleft of a rock,
well wrapt up in native cloth to elude observation.


both omens proved true! I found it impossible to shake the
faith of my otherwise very intelligent native friend. I may
add that Mamae, who at baptism received the name Sadaraka,
was grandson of the poet Koroa, many of whose songs are
given in my “ Myths and Bongs from the South Pacific.”
WILIIAM GRAHAME, JON.,
Acting government printer, Tasmania.




