









The
Gospel of Strength
according
to
SANDOW
Price 1/.


BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS.
TH‘
"F.MPRFSS OF RUSSIA says: “I am enchanted with 'he beautiful pictures."
A complete li-
brary for tlie chil-
dren, of the best
nursery r h y m e s,
fairy - tales, fables,
stories of travel,
etc., that have ever
been written for
the little ones
illustrated with
2,000 drawings.
Each set consists of
1,500 pages, in 24
books, bound in
12 volumes, printed
o n stout paper,
with stiff cloth
covers, au d en-
closed in a strong,
h a n dsome, cloth-
covered cab inet.
The volumes and
cabinets are bound
in tinted cloth.
No greater hap-
piness could be
granted to your
little ones than an
introduction to the
host of queer
animals —to say
Vol.
CONTENTS OF THE BOX.
. I JEsop’s Fables. Part I. With 216 Drawings.
I ) „ Part 11. ~ 152
i Nursery Rhymes. With 79 Original Drawings,
j Nursery Tales.. »• 164 »» •*»
i Reynard the Fox. „ 134 „ ..
lU* I Itrpr [lfthbit. if 138 if yf
, Cinderella and Other Fairy Tales. With 81 Drawings.
IV. ' The Frog Prince and Other Stories from Grimm s
V.
VI.
VII.
rm.
IX.
XI.
XII.
Fairy Tales. With 68 Original Drawings.
Runyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. Part X.
With 68 Original Drawings
Runyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. Part 11.
With 58 Original Drawings.
The Story of the Robins. Ry Mrs. Trimmer.
With 68 Original Drawings.
The Story of a Donkey. (Retold and adapted from Ihs
French). With 48 Original Drawings. (
The Christmas Stocking. By the author of ” Ths
Wide, Wide World.” With 58 Drawings.
Ths Christmas Tree and Other Fairy Stories.
By Hans Andersen. W'ith 70 Drawings.
Gulliver’s Travels Among the Little People of Lihput.
BV Dean Swift. With 50 Original Drawings.
Gulliver Among the Giants. By Dean Swift. VV ith 44
Original Drawings.
The Ugly Duckling and Other Stones from Ham
Andersen. With 55 Original Drawings.
Eyes and No Eyes, and the Three Giants. With 60
Original’ Drawings.
Our Mother Queen.
With 52 Original Drawings.
The Jubilee Story Book.
With 67 Original Drawings.
('Twice One are Two. With 135 original Drawings.
) More Nursery Rhymes. ~ 62 „ »
I Tales from the Travels of Baron Munchausen.
With 58 Original Drawings.
\ Sindbad the Sailor (from “The Arabian Night*. )
[ With 54 Original Drawings.
nothing of giants, ... . ,
tairi«B, and other ’ quaint folk—that
people the child’s fairy-land to be
found within the covers of the 12 vol-
umes of the Books for the Bairns,
And no other children’s library sup-
plies the means as effectively as this
wonderful collection. Children’s litera-
ture of every land, has been laid under
contribution. Every page is illustra-
ted and the drawings throughout, num-
bering over 2,000, ate original, and exe-
cuted solely for this series by the well-
Known children’s artists, Miss Gertrude
Bradley and Mr. Brinsley Le Fanu.
Sent to any address Post Free, upon receipt of 10/-, by the
Publisher, T. SHAW FITCHETT, 167-9 Queen St., Melbourne.


The Gospel of Strength
ACCORDING
TO
SANDOW.


Copyrighted by
T, Shaw Fitcliett,
167-9 Queen Street,
Melbourne,
Australia.


THE
GOSPEL OF STRENGTH
ACCORDING
TO
SANDOW.
.4 iSeries of Talks on the Sandow System of Physical
Culture, hy its Founder.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
T. Shaw Fitchett, Publisher, 167-9 Queen Street.
lOCS.


Introduction.
At the outset, let me say to the reader that
this little booklet is not a text-book on how to
win strength. It does not aim, that is, to give
in detail the instruction and exercises which
form my system of Physical Culture, and
which are elaborated in my larger book, en-
titled “ Strength, and How to Obtain It.”
The title, “ The Gospel of Strength,” sug-
gests its purpose, which is that of a “ message”
to those who have given little or no thought
to the scientific systematic development of
their bodies. It is an astonishing fact that 90
per cent, of men and women die without taking
up half the good gifts of life that lie within
hand’s reach. A well-developed body implies
a well-developed brain, and for a full enjoy-
ment of life both are absolutely necessary.
There is, of course, no royal road to strength;
but the high road is so plain, and the journey
so pleasant, that, once pointed out, it can
hardly be missed. That, in a word, is the ob-
ject of this booklet. I trust it may be achieved.
EUGEN SANDOW.


THE GOSPEL OF STRENGTH
According to Sandow.
TALK I.
WHAT IS PHYSICAL CULTURE?
Perhaps I cannot do better than begin this
series of talks with one which shall serve as a
definition of Physical Culture. First of all, I
should like to make it clearly understood that
I do not propose by my system to produce a
nation of athletes. To make a heavy-weight
lifter, or a runner, or a wrestler, is to apply
Physical Culture to weight-lifting, or running
or wrestling, as the case may be. But Physical
Culture pure and simple is the development
along natural lines of that wonderful combina-
tion of muscles that the Creator has given to
man and woman. Indeed, the reader will find
that the keynote of this booklet is Nature, and
that the word “ Strength ” in the title refers
rather to perfect robustness of constitution
than to mere muscular power that permits of
a man performing Herculean tasks.


It is possible, for I have demonstrated it in
my own person, for men to become naturally
capable of achieving - extraordinary feats of
strength; but every man does not wish to
devote his life to performing unusual feats.
The deliverance of the Gospel of Strength—in
other words, the teaching of Physical Culture—
I regard as my life-work, and my aim is to
teach men how they may arrive at that con-
dition in which they will be best able to carry
out their life’s work, whatever it may be.
I say whatever it may be, for there is no
department in life in which Physical Culture
does not bear a part, and in which the physi-
cally cultured man does not stand the best
chance of ultimate success. And the secret
lies in the fact that Physical Culture is all-
round development. Nature abhors lopsided-
ness next to a vacuum. The lopsided article
topples over, and the man who is partially
developed is lopsided. One has but to glance
round to find a dozen illustrations. Take the
field of manual labour. One man is strong and
handy with the spade; another is quick and
sure-footed with the hod; a third has a true
eye for building a wall. But it is the all-round
man who rises to be foreman. The same rule
applies in the commercial, the social, and the
scholastic worlds. And, lastly, Physical Cul


hire plays no insignificant part in the moral
realm.
' Health is a divine gift, and the care of
the body is a sacred duty, to neglect which
is to sin. But whilst this may be
termed a sin of omission, it is also true
that a great deal of the sins of commission are
due to an unhealthy state of body and mind.
For instance, a man who keeps his body in
good condition, and his system in good tone,
will feel less desire for intoxicating liquor, and
less effect from what he does take, than the
man who is careless about the state of his
body. There can be no doubt, either, that
one of the greatest elements in making for a
pure mind and a lofty imagination is a pure,
healthy body,
I should just like* to quote here the
remarks of the Rev. Henry Howard, one
of the ablest ministers in Australia. In a ser-
mon preached while I was in Adelaide, Mr.
Howard said: “ Those of you who have seen
Mr. Sandow perform know what a wonderful
power he has of controlling his muscles. Now,
there is a twofold advantage in that faculty.
Firstly, there is the strengthening of the will-
power, Though I do not take much notice
of phrenology, I believe the phrenologists
when they say that colonials lack power of


concentration; that they like change, and do
not care to be fettered down to a thing; that
they are desultory in their studies, and soon
grow weary. If Sandow’s method can help
them, by concentrating the mind on the par-
ticular sets of muscles they wish to exercise,
it will eliminate this weakness in the next
generation or two, and have a lasting effect
on the Australian race. The second advan-
tage of the faculty of concentration is the de-
velopment of muscle. The care of the body
is a moral duty. All those wonderful powers
stored up in our muscles are a sacred 'trust,
which we are bound not only to guard from
disgrace, but to definitely direct to the highest
ends. It is more than a personal matter, it
is a sacred duty owed to society for us to bring
ourselves to the highest degree of physical
and mental efficiency.”
I might add that I fully concur with Mr.
Howard's remarks. I believe that it is the
Divine will that we should make the most of
our bodies, and that it is by the aid of that
Power that we are enabled to attain a pitch of
perfection.
A word as to the history of Physical Culture.
The first nation known to have pursued Phy-
sical Culture systematically and individually
was the Greek. With the Spartans, men,


women, and children exercised in the public
parade ground, the children beginning their
daily exercise as soon as they had gained the
age of five. Every town in Greece had its
gymnasium, and this was remarked as an infal-
lible sign by which a Greek town might be
recognised.
When Rome was at its highest and greatest,
each Roman citizen exercised in the Field of
Mars. The Emperors themselves joined in
these sports, and Marius declared that he never
missed a day at the Field of Mars. In the
days of Rome’s decline, the cult of the body
degenerated.with other studies, and these exer-
cises became to the majority spectacular con-
tests only. From that date Physical Culture
almost died out in Europe, in spite of the at-
tempts of Luther and Zwingli to restore it.
The next great name on the roll of Physical
Culture is that of Ludwig Jahn. This great
teacher introduced the German system, and
established his turn anstalt, or gymnasia, first
in Berlin, and then throughout the whole of
Germany, in the days when Napoleon was
overrunning Europe. So manifest were the
advantages which this national interest in the
development of the body produced in Germany
that Louis Philippe introduced a French gym-
nastic system into the French army in 1844.


But the French system was not in any way
as thorough or scientific as the German.
Although the custom in England of engag-
ing in outdoor sports has made the English
remarkable as a nation for their physique, yet,
strangely enough, no attempt was made to in-
troduce, and indeed no thoughts had been en-
tertained of introducing, any such system of
training until 1825. At this date, Clias was
appointed teacher in the Royal Academy at
Woolwich, working on the German system.
Clias’ teaching, however, did not go very far,
and after the Crimean War a Royal Commis-
sion was appointed to inquire into the matter.
The result of this was that Archibald Mac-
Laren was appointed teacher, and in 1861 took
charge of the Military School at Aldershot.
Shortly after this, gymnasia were established in
all military barracks. The movement rapidly
spread from the army to civilians, and latterly
was introduced to the public schools. In a
later chapter will be found some details of the
growth of Physical Culture in England. I


TALK II.
HOW I BECAME A STRONG MAN.
When the life-story of, say, a poet is being
written, the author usually tells how at a very
early age he developed signs of genius, and
wrote rhymes almost as soon as he could talk.
Tt would add to the picturesqueness of my
story if I could recount wonderful tales of
childish feats of strength; but, alas for pic-
turesqueness ! I must say that as a youngster
T was anything but an infant Hercules.
I was born at Konigsberg, Prussia, in 1867.
and, though extremely fond of sports and ath-
letics at school, was not by any means robust.
As a matter of fact, I was so delicate that \v
1877 I was taken down to Italy by my father,
in the hope that the change would build up
my constitution. The desired result of the
trip was achieved, but hardly in the expected
manner. It was not by strolling under the
blue Italian skies in the ozone-laden breezes
from off the Mediterranean Sea, but by spend-
ing every available moment in the art galleries
and museums of the great cities, that I learned
the - secret of health and strength. The works
of the old masters in sculpture and painting
roused a thrill of half-envious admiration in


me, and the more I studied them the more
they fascinated me. Eventually I came home
from Italy with the fixed determination that,
if training could do it, I would become a strong
man. Years passed, however, before I was
able to accomplish my ambition. Then the
idea struck me that there was something more
than mere mechanical working of the muscles
behind the perfectly developed bodies I had
seen. Such perfect development could not be
reached by any amount of running or lifting
or fighting! These old Greeks and Romans
must have possessed some secret of which we
moderns knew nothing. Then I set to work to
study anatomy and medicine. I got a thorough
knowledge of the muscles and organs of the
body, and, by dint of a great deal of time and
thought and hard work, I devised a set of ex-
ercises which would treat all the 400 muscles
in turn, and so produce a harmonious result.
Then the work began. Realising that the
brain governed the muscles, I brought the
whole force of my will-power into the work,
and kept at it day after day. The result was
magical. I grew strong rapidly and surely,
became a leader in various forms of athletics,
and finally came to the conclusion that my
life’s work was to teach men the benefits —nay,
the necessity—of Physical Culture.


Of course, one does not become known in
a day, and I had to win my way first to the
front rank, then to the foremost position, and
finally into public recognition. In a later talk.
I propose to recount a few of the more exciting
incidents of my career that, I venture to think,
will not be uninteresting; but I might conclude
this chapter with the account of how I first
became known in Holland.
I had passed my twenty-first birthday, and
had, in company with a friend, Professor Atilla,
given some exhibitions of strength in Ger-
many ; but on parting with Mr. Atilla I went
alone to Amsterdam, and applied at all the
theatres for an engagement. All I asked was
to guilders —less than £ i—per night; but there
was no opening anywhere. At last I was
pretty low in funds, and had to sit down and
think out a scheme for obtaining an engage-
ment. As I s#it wondering, I caught sight of
a machine that registered the amount a person
could lift, and a notion struck me. That even-
ing I engaged a cabman, and went round to
all the weight-lifting machines in the city to
“see how much I could lift.” Well, I found
I could lift more than the makers bargained
for, and so I lifted the handle out of them all.
It was a case of the tester tested.
Next day there was a tremendous hubbub,
and inquiries were set on foot to find out what


band of marauders had been wrecking the
machines. My friend the cabman kept quiet,
and nothing was discovered. The perform-
ance was repeated several nights later, and still
there was no discovery of the supposed wreck-
ers. However, the third time I succeeded in
being discovered, but the porter who saw me
at the machine was so amazed that he ran to
the police station and brought a posse of con-
stables to arrest me. Of course, I went along
quietly. When I got to the station, I ex-
plained that T had paid the necessary coin into
the machine, and was entitled to exercise my
arms. Of course, they refused to believe that
one man could be strong enough to break the
machine, and sent for the chief officer. When
he came along, he, too, was doubtful of my
story; but when the strongest man at the
station accepted my invitation to try his
strength on me, the commissary was not only
convinced, but became quite friendly, and T
was released on my own recognisances.
The success of my advertising scheme was
immediate and immense. A great crowd had
gathered round the police station, and they ac-
companied me back to my hotel, and cheered
me for a long time. News of the affair spread
all over the town, and the “ Paleis Vood Volk-
svlyt,” which had refused me an engagement


at 10 guilders a night, made an engagement
with me to perform at a salary of 1,200 guilders
a week!
From Amsterdam I went to England, then
returned to the Continent, and, after spending
a couple of not uneventful years, the greater
part of them in Italy, I once more (in 1889)
went back across the Channel, and ever since
then England has been my adopted country.
The incident which brought me before the
English public, and practically settled my
future, occurred in November, 1889, and as I
have by me a newspaper cutting that relates it
far better than I could, I will reproduce it here,
devoting a special chapter to it.


TALK III.
“THE WAR OF THE TITANS.”
In introducing' this report from the London
“ Daily News,”. I should explain that I
went to London to accept a challenge that
had been thrown down by Samson, who was at
that time supposed to be the strongest living
man. In a preliminary contest I defeated his
best pupil, Cyclops, and on the night of No-
vember 2, 1889, was to compete with Samson
himself for ix,ooo, which he had offered to
any man who could beat him at his perform-
ance. The “ Daily News ” says:—
“ Athletics had an exciting, not to say up-
roarious, field-night on Saturday at the West-
minster Aquarium. The rival athletes^Sam-
son, the Alsatian, and Sandow, the German,
gave a public trial of strength, with the object
of proving which was 1 the strongest man on
earth.’ The tobacco smoke, gradually rising
like incense on high, became thick enough to
dissect before the curtain rose; but you could
make out quite clearly that the theatre was
packed with a very fair specimen of athletic
humanity, men who could give a literally
striking account of themselves in a scrimmage.


Samson came to the footlights, dapper, radiant
in medals, tights, and dainty boots, and smil-
ing with confidence. He wanted fair play;
he offered £SOO to anyone who would come on
the stage and perform the feats he performed.
Never mind where such a man came from; let
him appear. There was no response, only a
babel of cries from the audience.
“ The next commotion was caused by a
number of gentlemen reaching the stage by
flying leaps from a side-box, sweating and
touzled after fighting their way through a
frenzied mob in the crowded hall outside. It
was Sandow and his friends.
“At last Sandow entered, amidst general
cheering; Captain Molesworth, apologising
for the delay caused by the besieged state of
the building and its approaches, announced
that the Marquis of Queensberry and Lord de
Clifford had consented to act as judges, and
asked for fair play for the competitors. The
two men were in the centre of the stage. Sam-
son in his gay athletic costume, Sandow in a
plain, pink, sleeveless under-vest, and black
trousers encircled by a leather belt. Neither
of the men is of more than medium height,
but their arms were a rare spectacle, by reason
of masses of muscle brought by practice to
the hardness of metal. Sandow, however,


has the more spacious chest and largest arms,
and a connoisseur would probably fancy him
as best for a trial of sheer strength.
“ The first feat was with one of the iron
pipes. Samson belaboured himself upon the
chest, leg, and arms, bending it and straight-
ening it back again by the blows. He did it
gracefully and swiftly. Sandow laboured
more, was clumsy, and took more time, but he
performed the feat. After the inevitable dis-
cussion raised by Samson on the stage, and a
tumult amongst the audience, who, apparently,
were by this time largely on the side of the
phlegmatic German, Captain Molesworth
stated that Sandow wished it to be known that
he had never done the trick in his life before.
Samson darted to the front and dashed into a
speech that was drowned in uproar, save the
one sentence, ‘ Why, he did it six years ago.’
Next came a prolonged squabble about a strap
trick, which the judges decided Sandow was
not called upon to imitate. Then there was a
feat of breaking a wire rope fastened round
the chest. Samson performed it with the
neatness of one accustomed to the trick of
twisting the ends of the wire strands together.
Sandow was obviously unacquainted with the
knack, and it was only after prompting from
the audience as to the twisting, and several


fruitless efforts, that he succeeded. It was a
splendid effort of strength. The man seemed
like to burst in his effort to obtain the requi-
site expansion of chest, and when the iron rope
burst asunder, like the withes of the Philis-
tines around the limbs of the original Samson,
the audience leaped to their feet, and shook
the place with deafening cheers.
“ The next thing was a chain-breaking con-
test. Samson, always theatrical, put one set
on his forearm, and offered one to Sandow.
It was too small for such an arm, and he re-
jected it with a slight gesture of contempt.
There seemed to be a hitch here. But San-
dow settled it. For once he abandoned his
statuesque attitude. To the astonishment of
all he whipped out from his trouser-pocket an
armlet of his own, and it was then necessary
to wait until the audience had bawled them-
selves out. The proof of equality with an
emergency was- another feather in Sandow’s
cap. The unfortunate Samson protested, ges-
ticulated, argued, trod the deck, and gener-
ally cavorted around. Another appeal to the
judges was a matter of course. At last the
rivals put on their chains and smashed them
by sheer expansion of muscle, the one as
cleverly as the other. Samson snatched up
the fragments of Sandow’s armlet and ran


about shaking them derisively, asserting that
they were not of the same material. A gen-
tleman in the audience, however, handed up an
invoice from a Leicester Square firm certify-
ing that they had supplied to Sandow one
dozen yards of jack chain, the same as used by
Samson. It was a long while before order
could be restored, the incident apparently be-
ing regarded by the audience as a clincher.
“ There were at this time many demands
from the gallery for a trial of lifting weights,
but no notice was taken of them. Other pro-
positions were made, amidst much talkee
talkee on the stage, without avail. Samson’s
cloak was now off, and now on, and a more
than usually tiresome consultation was ended
by Captain Molesworth stating that the judges
had decided that as Mr. Samson would not
give a lead, Mr. Sandow might perform some
feats of his own. The young German ac-
cordingly lifted a stiffened and upright man
from the ground, and performed some aston-
ishing feats with a Brobdignagian dumb-bell,
weighing 150 lbs. A gentleman in the stall
offered Samson £5O if he would do what San-
dow had done with the dumb-bell, and San-
dow’s manager publicly challenged him to the
same test. The challenge was not accepted.
Midnight was by this time approaching, and


Captain Molesworth virtually closed the pro-
gramme by announcing, amidst general cheer-
ing, that the judges had decided that Sandow
had done everything that Samson had done.
I he audience gave the victorious man an ova-
tion, and it was then observed that Samson
had disappeared from the stage. Special cheers
were given for the judges and for Captain
Molesworth, and there were calls for the rival
gladiators to publicly shake hands. Samson,
however, was seen no more; but Sandow, in
a few words of German, returned thanks.”


TALK IV.
WHAT MY SYSTEM IS.
As I mentioned before, I devoted some con-
siderable time to the study of anatomy and
medicine, and the result was that I grew to
understand something of the close connection
existing between brain and muscle. On this
principle I founded my system, and years of
experience have convinced me of its truth. I
have, it is true, invented a series of exercising
devices —of which details will be found in a
later chapter—but the secret of success in
physical development lies not in the construc-
tion of the apparatus, nor in its regular use;
it lies in the brain, which directs the exercises.
It may be summed up in a brief sentence —It
is not HOW MUCH you exercise, but HOW
you exercise.
My system is a form of physical education
by means of which every part of the body is
properly exercised, developed, and made
healthy; the will-power increased; the various
organs brought to and maintained in a healthy
condition, and the individual made as nearly
as possible physically perfect. It is not, as I
previously inferred, a question of learning to


perform acrobatic feats with dexterity or of
lifting heavy weights; and I make use of only
the lightest weights, thus avoiding undue
strain upon any part. As the physical needs
of no two people are alike, I find it necessary
in some cases to employ at the start the use of
light dumb-bells, in others not. Exercise,
however, without a judicious use of will-power
(brain-power), is of little value. In some cases
it is absolutely necessary to stimulate will-
power by the use of dumb-bells. All depends
upon the individual. The exercises can easily
be gone through in less than half an hour. At
first, fifteen minutes is ample time. The move-
ments are simple, and may be learned in a very
short time.
My system is divided into four groups:—
The first group consists of exercises for the
treatment of obesity, indigestion, constipa-
tion, liver and kidney troubles, and other
complaints and weaknesses located in the re-
gion of the abdomen.
The second group consists of exercises
principally for the development of the lungs
and chest, thereby improving the circulation,
strengthening the heart, restoring sleep, in-
creasing the respiratory power, and giving
that mobile chest which is associated only with
sound and robust health, and which is also of


so much value to those who study the art of
singing-. It is a notorious fact that the de-
velopment of the lungs is too often left en-
tirely to chance, when a few natural, healthy,
and simple exercises, such as I prescribe, prac-
tised regularly, would fit one out with lungs
that will defy pulmonary or anv other chest
trouble.
The third group consists of exercises that
will strengthen the great muscles that support
the spine, the weakness of which is mainly
the cause of curvature —a deformity so very
prevalent among young girls, and which is
apparently increasing in frequency. To cor-
rect this, gymnastics and other forms of recre-
ation are often resorted to, which attempts
at cure not infrequently bring about a worse
state of affairs than before. Such cases re-
quire the most careful attention, and only such
movements must be used as are contained in
this particular group.
The above three groups are divided into
numerous grades or series, so that, no matter
what age or size or what condition a pupil
may be in on coming to me, the exercises can
be adapted to his or her particular case.
The fourth group consists of series of ex-
ercises for the general development of the
whole of the muscular and nervous systems.


Prescriptions from this group are only given
to those whose health is what is usually de-
scribed as robust —i.e., those who know no-
thing of chest or stomach trouble, and who do
not require work such as is set forth in groups
I, 2, 3. It is what I call my body-building or
double-contraction series. After a pupil has
been made sound and healthy and the weak
spots strengthened and all the previous ail-
ments removed by the use of judiciously se-
lected preliminary exercises, I begin to pre-
scribe from this group, for the purpose of
building up the body, making the physique
more beautiful, and maintaining the organs in
a healthy condition, thus increasing the mus-
cular and organic strength, improving the
carriage, and increasing the symmetry of the
body. It is from this group that I maintain
my own strength and keep myself always fit.
It is possible for any man to follow my
example. It is what I live to teach. It is
the mind—all a matter of the mind. The
muscles really have a secondary place. It
you lift a pair of dumb-bells a hundred times
with your attention fixed on some object
away over in Kamtschatka, it will do you very
little good. If, however, you concentrate your
mind upon a single muscle, or set of muscles,
for three minutes each day, and say, “ Do thus


and so," and they respond, there will be imme-
diate development. The more you waste, the
more you make.
It is mental culture first, physical afterwards.
The whole secret of my system lies in the
knowledge of human anatomy —in knowing
just where one is weak —and going straight to
work bringing that particular part up to the
standard of one’s best feature, for there is a
best feature in every man, as there is also a
worst. And yet, as a chain is as strong only as
its weakest link, so is the body as strong only
as its weakest member. The secret is to
“ Know thyself” as Pope says, and, knowing
one’s weakness, to concentrate the mind and
energies upon that weakness, with a view to
correcting it.


TALK V.
FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS—
A TALK TO WOMEN.
I have often thought that if advocates for
Women’s Suffrage would spend their time in
urging women to take advantage of the certain
physical privileges that lie at their feet, instead
of agitating for political rights, that may or
may not prove to be privileges when they are
obtained, they would do much more for their
sisters of to-day, and vastly more for those of
the generations to come.
It ought not to be difficult to persuade a
woman that inestimable treasures —the gifts of
health and strength, of elasticity of body and
freshness of mind —have only to be stooped
for and picked up.
And yet the task is not as easy as it seems,
and the stumbling-blocks are Fashion and
Custom. Women, more than men, are guilty
of neglect of physical culture, though even
with men it is often necessity rather than vir-
tue that is responsible for the saner treatment
of their bodies.
The nature of men’s work compels them to
dress rationally, and bring their muscles into


play, so that they are obliged to keep up a
certain standard—not a very high one, it is
true —of bodily development. But, unfortu-
nately, it cannot be denied that within recent
years the physique of women has been on the
down-grade. What we call our higher civili-
sation has brought with it artificial conditions
of life that are responsible for this physical de-
cline, and the irony of it is that it is not a
necessary adjunct of civilisation. There is
absolutely no reason why the broader life, the
higher education, the deeper sympathies—the
wider outlook, in a word—of the twentieth
century woman should be attended by a
weaker body, a less shapely figure, and a less
robust constitution. Nevertheless, it must be
admitted that such is the case. The women
of fair France—that land of sunshine and plea-
sure—form a most striking example of the
physical retrogression consequent upon a
slavery to fashion. The French race is slowly
but surely losing its place among the civilised
nations as regards physique and even actual
numbers, and the reason is the systematic sac-
rifice of bodily health and beauty upon the
altar of fashion. There is a great danger that
English women are following in the footsteps
of their sisters across the Channel, and, as the
fashions of the Homeland seem to be the


fashions of these colonies, it might not be out
of place for me to sound a note of warning as
a preface to a few words of advice on Physical
Culture for Women.
It is interesting to glance back through the
generations, even as far as the ancients. II
we stop midway back we find that we drive
where our ancestors walked; we are replacing
the stairs with the lift; the automobile is dis-
placing the bicycle; we favour indoor amuse-
ments rather than outdoor games and contests.
In short, we are in danger of becoming a race
of people whose sole physical exertion will
consist in pressing buttons and turning levers.
It is not difficult to understand how the ideas
of womanly beauty came to demand that the
figure should be twisted and contorted. Rodin,
far and away the greatest living sculptor, gives
it as his dictum that an artist’s tendency ought
to be towards the accentuation of Nature’s
lines. That is to say, the tendency ought to
be towards making the full parts fuller, the
slender parts more slender, the broad parts
broader, and the small parts smaller. And in
this I consider he is right. Doubtless the
same idea, unexpressed, is at the bottom of
the cramping corset and the pinched foot. It
is forgotten that there is an ideal which must
be observed, and which cannot be passed, and


it must be remembered that the ideal must be
attained by development, not by contortion.
It passes the wit of man to discover how self-
respecting 1 women can employ the various de-
ceptions so commonly used, with a view to
heighten their attraction. We have the high-
heeled shoe, the pointed toe, and many another
artifice which will occur to the minds of my
lady readers. Now, this is all bad. It is
foolish, to begin with; for the creation of
woman was not so imperfect that it requires
the art of man to improve upon it. Such con-
trivances in men would be properly despised,
and in women they often are. But few women
can escape from the thraldom of fashion. What
high personage it is, or secret conclave of great
power seated in some mysterious dictatorial
throne, I know not; but, once the edict has
gone forth, no tyranny, no imperial Caesar,
was ever obeyed with such absolute and slavish
obedience. The word goes forth that the
skirt is to trail along the ground. No one
knows where the word comes from; but from
country to country, and continent to continent,
it goes, and the world of women wears the
trailing skirt. I regard this compulsion to
obey fashion as the great cause of the physical
decline of women. Whatever the cause is,
the results are serious.


CAUSE.
EFFECT.


Women, I take it. were meant to be healthy.
A woman was not meant to go through life a
tremulous mass of disease and weakness. But,
in spite of this, the modern mother teaches her
growing girls as though this were one of the
first laws of Nature. Now, let it be under-
stood, to begin with, that any arrangement of
dress that does not give free play to the body
is bad. The narrow, thin shoe, for example,
not only destroys the foot and makes it ugly,
but interferes with the circulation, causing
chilblains, etc. Not only does it interfere
with the local circulation; it also does with the
general circulation. I have seen women faint
from wearing too small shoes, and half the
colds and chills are brought about by the feet
being insufficiently protected against the cold.
It is hardly necessary for me to say anything
here about the corset; my views on this subject
are well known.
The changes which T should like to see in
the life of the modern woman are three; —(i)
Loose, easy clothing; (2) encouragement to
engage in outdoor snorts in girlhood: (i)
systematic exercise, carried on throughout life.
As regards clothing, the corset should be so
mobile as to give the muscles of the trunk free
room for play. Of course, the ideal figure is
one in which the muscles are so developed that


they will need no support, and yet allow the
figure to be graceful. The Venus of Milo is
for us the absolute type of feminine beauty. If
any curious reader takes the trouble to secure
a picture of Venus de Milo, and sketch in a
“ corset-waist ” over the figure, she will find
how little it improves the statue. But that
pitch of perfection is not for our day. Gene-
rations of destruction must be followed by
generations of construction; and I do not
think it at all likely, or indeed advisable, that
women should leave off corsets at once. What
I do advise, however, is the use of common
sense in the choice of the corset. The dress-
maker’s law is that the woman is made to fit
the corset. Reverse this law, and make the
corset fit the woman. Then as the muscles
grow they must be allowed room to contract
and expand, and not be put in splints.
Just think for a moment of the results of
corset-wearing: lateral curvature of the spine,
short-windedness, susceptibility of lung dis-
ease, anaemia, congestion of the abdominal
organs, are some of them. Now, I want
women to understand that they can be healthy;
and with health comes beauty. But neither
can be obtained by the aid of the dressmaker.
But the corset is not the only article of wear
that harms the body. Take the average wo


man’s foot-gear, and you will find that it is an
instrument of malformation —an implement of
torture as surely as the infamous “ boot ” of
the Inquisition, and borne with equal heroism
in a less worthy cause. The two simple
illustrations given here explain them-
selves.
It would be absurd, however, to attribute
all the ills to which woman’s flesh is heir, to
corsets and shoes. Negative evils as well as
positive evils are responsible. There has
been dire neglect, as well as foolish distortion,
and whilst the adoption of common-sense
clothing is a step in the right direction, exer-
cise is the one thing that will first bring all
the muscles into a healthy condition, and,
second, make them of true value to their pos-
sessor.


Now, it was exercise, simple life, and un-
trammelled bodies that made the Grecian wo-
men what they were, and it is exercise, simple
lives, and untrammelled bodies that will make
our modern women modern Venuses.
“What exercise?” you say.
First: Simple exercise on the hill-side; un-
conscious, recreative exercise.
When Sydenham, the father of English
medicine, was dying, he said that he died
happy because he left behind him two great
physicians —fresh air and exercise. Nothing
could be truer; and I am happy to say that
these two essentials to health and strength are
not denied to women to-day as they were one
hundred years ago.
Second: Systematic exercise.
“ But,” you will say, “ the Greek women
never exercised systematically.”
Yes, that they did, and in public too, day by
day, in Athens and Sparta. In Sparta, both


male and female had to exercise publicly in
the parade ground from the age of five. What
exercises they did we know not, nor shall we
ever find out, lam afraid. Their system of
movements, which must have been an ideal
one to produce such ideal results, is irrecover-
ably lost, but I do not despair of replacing it.
Science has taught us much which the Greeks
did not know, and with a combination of
science and experience much may be done.
What is the effect of exercise? one may ask.
The first, but, in my opinion, by no means the
most important result is the increase in physi-
cal strength. And yet this means that the
woman is capable of standing a greater or a
longer strain than before; that tasks which be-
fore were exhausting are now performed with
ease, or even become exhilarating. It is by
no means the muscles of the limbs that stand
alone in need of development. It is the mus-
cles of the trunk.
To over-estimate the importance of these
muscles would be impossible. The great
muscles of the torso are the muscles which
usually give way under a strain; and strength
in the limbs is of but little use unless there be
present also strength of the great trunk
muscles.


And when we can secure a system of exer-
cise which does not omit a single part of the
organic and muscular system, then we may
rest assured that the practice of it will give a
complete balance of health and vigour in every
part 'that will make the individual’s life an
enviable one.
The ordinary out-of-door sports are excel-
lent, although they are not so good as the an-
cient Greek game of ball; but exercise, to be
of proper avail, must be systematic, to secure
an even development and symmetrical pro-
portion of all parts.
Fencing has come more into vogue in late
years, but it is almost certain to cause curva-
ture of the spine in a girl whose spinal muscles
have never been permitted to become strong,
but have been kept weak by the support of
artificial stays. Even in strong men “fencer’s
scoliosis ”is extremely common. Rowing
and cycling tend to contract the chest; and
dancing in a close room, with intervals of ices
and sitting out, can hardly be classed among
the exercises.
We must therefore fall back upon a system
of exercise specially constructed so as not to
omit the development of any single part or
organ. And let it be remembered that the
great objection to women exercising—namely,


the fear of becoming muscular—is quite with-
out foundation. It cannot be too often re-
peated that woman is not simply a weaker
man: she is physically an entirely different
being. The muscles in women are long, and
never develop in size so as to form large
masses or hard, abrupt lines. In men the
muscles are short; and, when they are power-
ful, one sees all over the frame the strong,
striking lines and muscular masses character-
istic of men of vigour. In women the muscles
simply become firm, close-knit, and well-
rounded, and show under the layer of fatty
tissue intervening between muscle and skin
only in soft, hardly discernible masses, just
sufficiently to give a delicate moulding to the
form.
This layer of fatty or adipose tissue is pe-
culiar to women: it exists in the male until
adolescence, and then disappears; but in
woman it persists, except in disease or bad
health, until the age of fifty. It softens all
the outlines, so that the danger really is, not
that a woman should have too strong lines,
but that want of exercise should cause her to
have no lines at all, but a sort of shapeless
rotundity.
As this layer of adipose tissue does not form
where no muscle lies between bone and skin,


there is in woman where the bones are sub-
cutaneous an exquisite dimpling which is
a characteristic beauty of the sex. In man,
the bones in these situations show as hard, pro-
minent masses. So it will be seen that in
these and many other points women cannot
approacli to the masculine type, even if they
tried.
Exercise makes every tissue healthy by
strengthening the heart and circulation,
deepens the lungs so that the blood is properly
oxygenated, assists the venous circulation by
movement and muscular contraction so that
the portal vein is properly emptied and tlu
liver circulation is not allowed to become slug-
gish. The improved digestion which follows
as a matter of course, together with the other
changes, gives a health and purity of skin, a
cleanness and firmness of tissue, symmetrical
proportions, bright eye, and clear brain, with-
out which the beauty, vigour, and happiness
of health can never be attained.
Until my system was published, there was,
if we except the Greeks, practically no such
thing as the physical education of women. In
England, calisthenics, as they were called, con-
sisted chiefly of exercises, or rather movements
with light wands, which were practised more
for spectacular effect than for physically l>ene


ffcial results, and were given to young ladies
in high-class boarding schools, and described
in prospectuses as physical education and de-
portment. These might be graceful when
performed in concert, but would have abso-
lutely no effect upon the physical well-being
of the body, as in most cases the pupils were
encouraged to be lackadaisical rather than to
exert any physical energy. The style of de-
portment that was prevalent only a few years
ago was responsible, to a large degree, for cer-
tain common malformations.
Married ladies are frequently writing to me,
testifying as to the value of my system of
Physical Culture, which, as they say, has made
them such healthy mothers, and signifying
their intention of bringing up their children on
the principles laid down by me for the culti-
vation of sound health and strength, since
these were the means of rescuing them from
an unhealthy and weakly existence. This is
a point on which too much emphasis cannot
be laid, and women should remember that in
properly developing the trunk muscles they are
not only saving themselves untold agony, but
are really building for the generations to
come.
With children I have been particularly suc-
cessful, by paying special attention to the de


velopment of the lungs. The development of
the lungs in children is practically the only
safeguard against pulmonary diseases; and
mothers should make sure that these organs in
their children are correctly developed, thus re-
ducing the possibilities of consumption and
other lung diseases to a minimum. The pre-
valence of post-nasal growths is remarkable in
these days; but let me say that these growths
in children can be prevented by proper atten-
tion to nasal breathing. I have devised a
special series of light and simple exercises for
this purpose, that have proved conspicuously
successful in a number of cases where the sur-
geon’s knife has failed to remove these
growths.
In my book on “ Strength, and How to Ob-
tain It,” I have given a regular set of exer-
cises, arranged on scientific principles, and in
them I have taken into consideration the harm
already done, and have given the weakened
parts special attention. These exercises ought
to be gone through before a meal, not after,
and should invariably be followed by a cold
sponge, cold chest sponge, tepid sponge, warm
bath, or cold bath, according to strength. The
spinal spray or spinal douche is also good. If,
after the bath, a splendid glow is not felt, then
you are not getting the full benefit, and you


must modify it, making- it tepid, instead of cold,
for example, or limiting it to the chest instead
of making it general.
No unnecessary time should be spent in the
bath, and the clothes should be resumed as
soon as possible. It is a mistake to stand
about in the bathroom elaborately drying the
body, on account of the risk of cold. While
one part of the body is being vigorously
scrubbed to induce warmth and dryness, an-
other part may catch cold. My advice is that
the body should be wiped rather than rubbed,
and as soon as the superfluous water is removed
the clothes should be put on while the body is
still damp. There is less danger of cold being
taken if this course is followed than if great
pains be taken to dry the body before putting
on the clothes.
The exercise should last about twenty
minutes, though it is advisable to work up to
that. At first it should be gone through
gently, and in a day or two the movements
may be performed more thoroughly and with
more will-power.
I have designed special apparatus for wo-
men, with lighter bells and more flexible
cords, so that there is no danger of strain. I
might specially mention here my latest inven-
tion, which has been termed “ The Obesity


Reducer,” but which is of special benefit to
women of all ages.
If exercise is taken at night instead of in the
morning, it should be followed by the bath or a
sponge down. If the bath before retiring
causes sleeplessness, take your exercise earlier,
but do not give up the cold bath; it is one of
the surest known preventatives against catch-
ing cold.
It will be instructive, while dressing after the
exercise and bath, to stand with back to the
wall, heels, hips, shoulders, and back of head
touching the wall. Now attempt to button the
corset as you wore it before. You cannot.
Well, you are beginning to see the difference
between being your dressmaker’s woman and
Nature’s woman.
If a woman persistently neglects to exer-
cise those muscles which Nature has provided
her to assist her in the great crises of life, she
will have to pay the price—a double price of
pain to herself and risk to her offspring.
Civilisation has rendered maternity a painful,
dangerous and tedious business. The women
of the olden days were saved much suffering
and danger. The Roman and Grecian women
did not wear corsets, but they accompanied
their husbands to the wars, and when a child
was born they took it up and walked on. We


find savage women doing the same thing now;
but in highly “ civilised ” countries a child is
born only after exhaustive exertions, and the
mother is often ill for weeks, and her whole
nervous system is shattered.
A Cartoon from Physical Culture.


THE GRIP DUMB-BELL-CLOSED.


supply that want, because when using l them
the brain (will-power) is always striving as a
natural tendency to overcome that resistance
set up by the springs in the bells, and the more
the brain strives, the more muscular energy is
put into the exercise. Consequently, the
maximum results are reached in the minimum
time; and a power that is so valuable to us all
in all conditions of life becomes fully and in-
telligently developed, the possession and con-
trol of which is the great secret of a successful
life.
The advantage of my grip dumb-bell lies in
the fact that with its use I am able to absolutely
control the amount of will-power used by my
different pupils. Some require very little,
others much. Were it not possible for me to
control the amount of will-power expended, I
could not determine with any degree of ac-
curacy the character and quantity of work ac-
complished. Neither could I feel sure the
pupil would not overdo. By the substitution of
coil springs of a known power between the two
halves of this dumb-bell (see illustrations) I can
absolutely control the work of every pupil,
whether at my side or a thousand miles away.
At the time when I conceived this idea of
the grip bell I had given up all idea of my own
development and endurance being further in


creased; but to my gratification I bud that
both have largely increased since practising
with my grip-bell, and I feel sure that I would
have possessed even greater development to-
day, had I hit upon this idea in my early days.
You should use the Spring Grip Dumb-bell
because: —
1. Exercise is of little value without judici-
ous use of will-power. The grip on the dumb-
bell compels the use of will-power without ex-
cessive mental strain.
2. There is no danger of any strain on the
heart.
3. The heaviest Spring Grip Bell weighs
only 3 pounds.
4. An athlete can do more work with a
pair of these than he can with a pair of 20-
pound bells.
5. With light springs a child can use them.
6. They last a lifetime, and you do not re-
quire to be continually buying heavier bells.
7. As your development increases, you can
keep pace with it by adjusting the springs.
8. They prevent swing and jerk getting into
the work,
9. Exercise becomes a pleasure.
10. Brain-workers arc relieved of undue
mental strain while exercising.


SANDOW’S OWN COMBINED DEVELOPED.
1 propose to say very little about my Com-
bined Developer. It is so well known, and
so many hundreds of thousands are in use at
the present time, that the public are already
sufficiently familiar with its principles. The
idea of devising - the apparatus came to me
shortly after I started teaching Physical Cul-
ture. It soon became obvious that a rubber
Developer of some kind was necessary. But
the makes in use at that time possessed too
many imperfections to be of sufficient service
in the task I had set myself. The old-fashioned
rope and pulley devices in very general use at
that time were, of course, out of the question,
as, in addition to being cumbersome and
costly, they have a tendency to make the ath-
lete slow and too deliberate in his movements.
Undoubtedly rubber was the ideal material,
but rubber by itself was not enough. After
much thought, I invented, and have since
brought to perfection, the apparatus known as
Sandow’s Own Combined Developer.
The machine is simply made, and is easily
fixed on a door or wall. It does no damage
to the object to which it is fixed, and cannot
get out of order. There being no pulleys, no
oiling is required, and there is no fric-


THE SANDOW DEVELOPER.
In Its Various Uses.


tion to wear out the covering of the rubber
cords.
The wonderful variety of exercise that the
Developer embraces is one of its chief charms.
The student of Physical Culture finds a plea-
sure in working out the different forms of
healthful exercise figured on the charts. Day
by day, almost imperceptibly, he increases in
health and strength.
There is none of the monotony of
doing one set of exercises morning
after morning. The injurious use of
medicated “ pick-me-ups ” is no more ne-
cessary, for the Developer, combined with the
Dumb-bells, is the finest pick-me-up on earth.
It opens the lungs, gets the liver into proper
working order, and sends the blood coursing
through the veins in a healthy flow that brings
with it a feeling of life and vigour unattainable
by any other means.
THE OBESITY KEDUCEK.
My latest invention is what has been termed
an Obesity Reducer. It is really a developer
specially adapted for persons who are too
weighty, or who suffer from derangements of
the stomach, liver, and kidneys. The need
for a special apparatus to cure Obesity may
not at first be apparent, as the Combined Dc


vclopcr can be used with effect in combating
the almost universal tendency to corpulence
existing among healthy, full-blooded persons.
It is a fact that the Combined Developer can
be used for this purpose; but in the case of
ladies, and indeed many men in whom the ab-
Reducing His Weight.
dominal muscles are particularly weak and
relaxed, the effort necessary to localise the
Developer work on the abdominal regions is
apt to cause undue fatigue. I have conse-
quently invented a distinct apparatus, which


will act solely on this region, and which will
automatically concentrate its action on the
abdomen.
It consists of a rubber cord with handles,
the former passing- over pulleys and terminat-
ing in a belt, which, when in use, passes over
For Women the Obesity Reducer is Invaluable.
the stomach. Each movement of the arms,
therefore, causes the belt to press upon the
abdominal region, thus calling forth the re-
sistance of the abdominal muscles. By this
means is secured both friction and muscular


action, the only two methods of attacking cor-
pulence, and at the same time such friction of
muscular action is localised to the region
which it is necessary to operate upon.
The arm movements are varied, and many
excellent breathing exercises are given, thus
bracing up the chest and strengthening the
diaphragm, the relaxed condition of which is
almost as much the cause of the protruding
abdomen as corpulence itself. I have already
strongly recommended the use of this appa-
ratus, as I believe that its effect will be to cause
a very distinct improvement in the develop-
ment of the bust, and will impart to the figure
generally that lithesome and graceful figure
that it is the aim of every woman to possess.


TALK VII.
EXERCISE FOR ALL AGES.
Physical Culture is applicable right through
life, from its dawning day till its closing hours.
The principle on which the human body is
constructed is not that of adding a little, day by
day, to the old bulk, but of destroying atoms,
and then replacing them with new and addi-
tional ones. Nature teaches the babe in the
cradle the rudiments of physical culture.
Watch the chubby little fellow when he wakes.
His fists are clenched and bored into his eyes;
his tiny legs are drawn up and stretched out.
“ He is rubbing the sleep out of his eyes,”
says the fond mother; but the fact is that he
is taking his first lessons in muscular develop-
ment in response to a natural impulse.
In his crawling days, if left alone and not
encumbered with outrageous clothing, the
youngster continues to develop, and does it
naturally and mechanically. >lt is when he
gets a little older that the danger of physical
neglect is greatest. It is one of the highest
duties of the parent to see that their children
begin to build the foundation of a sound body
and healthy mind early in life. It will save
them countless pitfalls, and make for their


physical , mental and moral wellbeing - . It stands
to reason that if a boy or a girl is allowed
to contract round shoulders through habitu-
ally stooping, or an ungainly walk through
habitually slouching along, they will be
heavily handicapped if they desire to take up
physical culture in later life. Prevention is
always better than cure, and I have carefully
worked out a chart which may be begun when
the child is, say, five or six years old, and fol-
lowed till he is well on in his teens. The ap-
paratus that the child will exercise on will, of
course, be suited to his age and build.
Readers may think that the preceding
chapters contain my views on Physical Culture
for the normal man or woman in the prime of
life alone. But it is scarcely necessary to say
that the benefits to be obtained by conscienti-
ously working upon the system are by no
means confined to the young and vigorous.
On the contrary, it is particularly suitable for
the middle-aged, who are all too apt to suffer
ffWnTthe effects of the period of physical in-
dolence which has succeeded their youthful
activity. To such, the system should prove in-
valuable. It is quite a false notion to suppose
that, when once youth is passed, exercise is no
longer necessary. So long as life lasts, if an in-
dividual wants to keep healthy, regular exercise


is just as necessary as food. It is through
neglecting to recognise this that so many men
'become aged before their time. When a man
begins to get into middle life he has a natural
tendency to “ take things easy.” He lives
more luxuriously, devotes more time to the
pleasures of the table, and exerts himself as
little as possible. Is it anything to wonder
at that his health suffers, that he grows fat and
flabby, and that his digestive apparatus
quickly gets out of gear?
Of course, while it is advisable that the
middle-aged man should exercise regularly, he
must be warned not to do too much. He must
remember that what is perfectly safe and pru-
dent at five-and-twenty may be rash and
hazardous at fifty; in short, that he, while«
exercising consistently and steadily, must be
careful not to overtax his powers. If he bears
this in mind he will find that the discomforts
and ailments which he has perhaps got to re-
gard as natural to his time of life are quickly
banished, and that, in spite of his grey beard
and thinning hair, it is still “ good to be,
alive.”
As regards physical culture for people of ad-
vanced years in comparison with men in their
prime, the same principle, but perhaps not the
same method, applies to them. If a man finds


at sixty that he is weak, he need only to go to
work to make himself strong, just like one half
his years, but, of course, intelligently, and from
his own standpoint. I have had pupils of
eighty-six years of age, and built them up
astonishingly. Oh, it is never too late; never
while there is life and will-power. Cato
learned Greek at eighty, did he not? And
the late good Queen Victoria mastered Hin-
dustani in her seventy-fifth year, I believe.
Age has nothing to do with progress if the en-
thusiasm and will-power are still there. Of
course, I direct my teaching most of all to
young men, for the elders think they have
passed the age of physical improvement. It
is my ambition to revitalise the youth of this
generation and make them physically fit for
the highest duties. But I repeat that, while life
lasts, a man should make the most of it, and he
can do that by careful physical culture adapted
to his age.


TALK VIII.
PHYSICAL CULTURE AND
ATHLETICS.
It has been said that I and my system are
opposed to athletics. This is quite a mis-
taken notion. No one could admire more
than I do the swift runner, the powerful swim-
mer, the strong oarsman, the fleet footballer;
and it may be added that the would-be runner,
rower, footballer, sportsman of any kind, could
have no better friend than my system of Physi-
cal Culture.
But I am in quarrel at two points with ath-
letics as practised to-day. In the first place,
they are used as a substitute for Physical Cul-
ture, and in the second they are wrongly fol-
lowed out.
Take the first point. Most men are strictly
limited as to the amount of time which they
can devote to sport, and few are able to follow
up more than three or four games with any-
thing like thoroughness. In Australia, for
instance, there is football in winter and cricket
or tennis in summer, with perhaps ping-pong
and billiards indoors. Now, while one game
may develop one set of muscles, no man can
afford the time to play so many games that


he is able to get all his muscles developed.
Wrestling is, perhaps, the sport that brings
most of the muscles into play, but compara-
tively few men care to indulge in wrestling as
a pastime. Football touches something like
64 muscles, cricket 34, and riding, which is
commonly supposed to be a very good form of
exercise, only brings 12 muscles into play.
Therefore, in order to achieve thorough de-
velopment, a man must take some form of ex-
ercise that will bring all his muscles into play.
But, the reader may ask, “ Do you propose
that I shall give up all sports and devote my-
self entirely to dumb-bells and rubber de-
veloper?” Certainly not. Physical culture
and sport go hand in hand, but physical cul-
ture should come first, because a well de-
veloped, robust constitution is essential to last-
ing success in sport. A systematic course of
physical culture fits a man for excelling in any
branch of sport.
If two men start to train for a race or a
fight or a football match, and one has done a
course of physical culture and the other has
not, I would back the physically cultured man
every time. Ido not, of course, say that it
will make a slow man into a swift runner, but I
do say that it will bring him to the highest
possible pitch of which he is capable in the


shortest possible time. He will, moreover,
run a minimum amount of risk in undertaking
training, as he will be practically building up
a reserve fund of strength.
I had a striking instance of the benefit of
physical culture in sport a few years back. The
University boat race had been won year after
year by the Oxford crew, and one year, when
there was no prospect of a reversal of the de-
cision as far as could be judged by the form of
the crews, I offered to bring about a change
in the result if I were allowed to train the
Cambridge crew for the race. The matter
was, however, delayed so long that it was only
four weeks before the race that the crew began
to train under my system, and they lost the race
by about a foot, and that was due to bad steer-
ing. Next year, the Cambridge eight adopted
my principles earlier, so as to give the system
a fair chance. When the day of the race
came, they were perfectly fit, and simply ran
away with the victory. It was to my mind a
convincing proof of the value of physical cul-
ture in sport.
Then, in the second place, athletics are
wrongly indulged in. If a man is an en-
thusiastic oarsman, he develops a certain num-
ber of muscles and devotes his whole energies
to their training. The upshot is that his


Other muscles suffer through inaction, and
when the crisis of the race is over and his
“ rowing ” muscles have been strained to their
utmost, he simply collapses, because he has no
reserve strength. The same thing applies to
training for cricket, football, boxing, and so
forth.
It should be remembered also that the man
with a great biceps or a wide pair of shoul-
ders is not necessarily a strong man. The man
with magnificent thighs is not always the pos-
sessor of a sound chest. It is true that as a
chain is only as strong as its weakest link,
so a man is only as strong as his weakest
member.
Is it not a fact, too, that a great many men
follow only one branch of sport, and, during
the season that that sport reigns, they take
very violent exercise and then neglect their
muscular culture all the rest of the year? It
is much better to avoid violent exercise alto-
gether than to act in this manner. Other
men, again, follow muscular sports for a num-
ber of years, then suddenly give them up alto-
gether. Men are sometimes enthusiastic
footballers or cricketers or oarsmen in their
young days, and, as they advance in years,
they settle down, perhaps get married, and
concentrate the whole of their attention upon


business and home matters. Consequently
they have no time for following 1 the sports in
which they indulged in their youthful days,
and so neglect their physical culture entirely,
allowing fat to take the place of muscle. Such
a procedure as this very frequently produces
a breakdown of health, because, as the muscles
degenerate, the nerves suffer correspondingly,
and the whole system becomes deranged.


Specially taken by Swiss Studios, Melbourne.
EUGEN SANDOW.




TALK IX.
EMBROCATION AND MUSCLE.
Many modern athletes and muscular men
have too much confidence in their training
and development to call in the aid of any out-
side means which may render their muscles
supple and pliant. It is a common thing to
see a sprinter take a run up the track just be-
fore the race, and before a hurdle race to see
the competitors leap one or two hurdles and
comeback to wait for the pistol shot. A weight-
lifter will always begin with the lightest
weights first, coming to his greater efforts
after he has exerted himself a little. The
phrase “ preliminary canter ” is proverbial.
The reason for this is obvious to the initi-
ated. The muscles when at rest, and when,
further, the body is stripped, become cold and
comparatively stiff. A few minutes’ mild
exertion brings them into action and warms
them, after which they become “ fit,” and are
ready for work.
These mild efforts may not, indeed, exhaust
much energy, but that they do use up some
small amount there can be no doubt —and
that at a moment when every iota of power is
needed. It has been left for men of these


latter days to waste their energy in warming
their muscles before testing them.
The Spartans, the Greeks, and also the
Romans knew better: before each contest they
were carefully yet vigorously rubbed and
anointed with various stimulating and sooth-
ing oils, and for a month before the great
Preparing for the Great Games in the Coliseum.
Games the competitors were rubbed night and
morning. Thus they found themselves, at
the commencement of a race or contest, with
muscles pliant yet firm, strong yet elastic,
warm yet unfatigued in the slightest degree.
I have lately come across an embrocation
which, as a stimulating lubricant for the
muscles, to warm them and render them fit


for work, I have found unequalled. Some of
the embrocations which are on the market are
undoubtedly very good indeed, and I have
found them most useful and beneficial. But
somehow, I always felt there could be some-
thing more in any one of them than there was ;
in other words, something was wanting in
all of them. Consequently, I began to experi-
ment on my own account. Picking up a hint
here and a wrinkle there in my wanderings,
which have been fairly extensive, I at last ob-
tained a compound which I thought, and stdl
think, with difficulty can be further improved
upon. I have used it on big occasions and
on little; I have tested it before some of my
most trying stage performances; and I have
no hesitation in saying that my years of experi-
menting have resulted in the production of
the finest and most beneficial embrocation that
can be obtained.
Having arrived at this desirable end, I re-
solved to give my pupils and friends the bene-
fit of the knowledge I had gained, a few of
whom used it and found it as useful as I did;
and it has at last become so popular among
them that I have resolved to have it manu-
factured and put on the market in order to
introduce it to my wider circle of friends in
physical culture and sport.


So far, so good. I hope many athletes and
physical culturists will profit by my experi-
ence. But I want to emphasise the need of
discriminating use of the embrocation. A
sprinter will need to rub, or have rubbed, a
different set of muscles from the footballer,
whose exercise calls for the active use of a
distinct set more than the former. It is most
necessary to know where and how to rub, and
to this end a chart is given away with every
How to Rub Scientifically.
bottle, showing the whole of the muscles of the
body; these are fully numbered, and a cor-
responding table, with such heads as Swim-
ming, Boxing, Running, etc., will, I hope,
make a discriminating use of the embrocation,
before exercise, an easy matter.
Of course, no one doubts the efficacy of an
embrocation after strenuous exercise, when


Figure of Athlete, Showing Muscles, Anterior Aspect.
1. Annular ligament. 2. Flexor longus pollicis. 3. Flexor carpi
radialis. 4. Palmaris longus. 5. Pronator teres. 6. Supinator
longus. 7. Biceps. 8. Triceps. 9. Coraco-brachialis. 10. Teres
major. 11. Deltoid. 12. Pectoralis major. 13. Serratus magnus.
14. Trapezius. 15. Supinator longus. 16. Brachialis anticus. 17. Ex-
ternal oblique. 18. Gluteus medius. 19. Gluteus maximus. 20.
tensor vagina femor's. 21. Rectus abdominis. 22. Adductor longue.
23. Gracilis. 24. Semi-membranosus. 25. Rectus femoris. 26. Vastus
interims. 27. Sartorius. 28. Vastus externus. 29. Gastrocnemius.
30. Tibialis anticus. 31. Soleus. 32. Tendo Achillis. 33. Anterior
annular ligament. 34. Fascia lata.


perhaps a strain or bruise has been sustained.
The physiological explanation of this every
one probably knows, the effect of which in all
cases is to cause a congestion of the blood in
the injured part. In order to lessen this a
counter-irritation is set up on the surface so as
to draw the blood from the injured part into
the fine blood vessels in and under the skin.
For this purpose nothing is better than a
warming embrocation scientifically applied ac-
cording to the directions on the chart.
But there are many other things for which
the embrocation will be used. For rheuma-
tism, lumbago, sore throat, colds on the lungs,
and anything affecting the system in the treat-
ment of which a restored circulation and a
healthy glow of the skin is to be desired, it
will take its place amongst other preparations
now on the market, and will I believe surpass
them. But it is equally necessary, in these
cases, to remember that the rubbing must be
done intelligently, and with a knowledge of
the position of the affected muscles or nerves.
The chart, I believe, will make all this clear to
the most uninitiated understanding. I have
devoted more time to the study of human
anatomy than almost any living man,
and this chart contains the result of many
years of study.


TALK X.
THE QUESTION OF DIET.
Ever' since I introduced my system I have
been overwhelmed with correspondence, a
great part of which is devoted to the question
of diet. To my mind, one of the most objec-
tionable people on the face of the earth is the
faddist, and lam certainly no faddist. I be-
lieve that Nature is the best guide as to what
we should eat and drink; and provided that we
do not eat or drink too much, I think one
cannot go far wrong in taking those things
which a healthy appetite and a natural inclina-
tion suggest. The danger lies not so much
in the quality as in the quantity of the food
and the manner of taking. I would rather
eat six times a day—a little at a time —than
live on two heavy meals.
The general opinion of the medical profes-
sion is that there is too much meat eaten in
England, and I am informed that a similar
state of affairs exists in Australia. My own
opinion is that the amount of food consumed
by the average person is considerably in ex-
cess of the amount required. If the quantity
of food taken were smaller, the substance


lighter, and the mastication more thorough,
the labour of the excretory organs would be
less, and the general health much better.
The question of alcohol is one which seems
to trouble a great many of my correspondents,
and is the subject of many anxious inquiries.
Now, I myself am not a total abstainer. In
moderation I believe alcohol is a valuable
food; but, of course, one cannot but shrink
from the enormous drink traffic of civilisation.
Let me say, then, that alcohol is not neces-
sary to the upbuilding of the muscular system,
but if taken in strict moderation can do little
or no harm. In the same way, tobacco in
excess is bad. But a man who is a follower of
Physical Culture need not fear an occasional
pipe or cigar. Coming more particularly to
the strengthening quality of foods, those ar-
ticles which contain the most albumen are, of
course, the most nourishing. Milk, cheese,
and eggs contain large percentages of al-
bumen; but the stomach cannot deal with
more than a limited quantity of these foods
without being upset. Of recent years, how-
ever, a method of extracting albumen from
milk—or rather from buttermilk —has been
discovered, and the extract has been put on
the market under the name of “ Plasmon.”
This plasmon was discovered by an enter-
prising German chemist, and its use is spread


ing all over England and the Continent; in fact,
all over the world, for I have seen it on sale in
America and Australia. It is used medi-
cally as an article of diet. Doctors who
are about to perform operations give their
patients plasmon instead of drugs before the
operations, as the bulk is very small, and the
waste practically nil.
As to its sustaining qualities, I can bear
personal testimony. I lived entirely on it for
seven weeks, taking about eight teaspoonfuls
a day, dissolved in water, this being my only
food during that period, and I was perform-
ing twice a day. It is prepared in various
ways, being free from flavour and smell, and
perfectly soluble. It can be dissolved in water
and made into soup, or added to other soups
or gravies, or may be kept on the table and
added dry. It can be dissolved in milk, and
then added to tea or coffee, and is now, I be-
lieve, made up in chocolate bars, beef extract,
biscuits and bread. Whenever I travel, I
carry some with me.


TALK XI.
HOW TO SPEND A RATIONAL DAY.
Without doubt the world generally is begin-
ning to take a more commonsense view of its
physical life. If the advance of knowledge
has brought with it fads and follies of many
kinds it has at least added to the common
stock of happiness and health. In coming
years there can be but little doubt that the
physical condition under which nations live
will be as near perfect as possible. The reward
will then come for the long intermediate period
between the natural life of the early world
and the perfected application of knowledge
to the circumstances of physical life, which is
surely coming. Homes will be made sanitary,
every household will possess a bath and an
abundant supply of water, every river will be
kept pure, adulteration of food will be ren-
dered impossible, the air will not be laden with
impurities, and science will repair the evils
which science has created.
I wish, in this talk, to make a few remarks
on the various conditions which go to make
life healthy. I take chiefly the points on which
lam daily consulted by correspondents. The


modern press and strain of life has militated
greatly against rational habits. There are
thousands and thousands of people who go to
bed tired at night and wake up tired in the
morning. An even greater number know
what it is to suffer daily and nightly under
nervous strain caused by excessive competi-
tion. In such cases it is supremely necessary
that a man should study his physical life.
One is only too apt to get up in time for
breakfast, tumble off to business, spend the
day in an insanitary office, with the exception
of an hour, during which a heavy, indigestible
meal is bolted, returning home at night to
another heavy meal, and so to bed. Here is
a life in which the physical element does not
exist, and which is absolutely certain to end in
physical ruin.
I have often been asked to sketch out what
I should prescribe as a healthy life for a man
who works hard, either mentally or muscu-
larly, A general description of a healthy habit
of life under these circumstances would be as
follows: Early rising should be practised, sum-
mer and winter. I believe this to be con-
ducive both to health and to a good day’s
work.
This should be followed by about twenty
minutes’ exercise, with or without apparatus.


The exercise should conclude with a cold
bath. There should be no time wasted in
rubbing down. The water should be
merely whisked off. After an interval
of rest, during which the morning papers, etc.,
may be read, and private correspondence gone
through, a short walk should be taken in the
open air before breakfast. I must say I be-
lieve in a substantial breakfast for those whose
duties begin early in the day; but Sit is not good
for anyone to eat to satiety. Plenty of
time should be allowed, and no rushing for
trains, ’buses, or trams should be indulged in.
I would recommend everyone to walk at
least a part of the way to business, during
which walk most of the problems of the day
can be solved, thus leaving the mind free for
detail work. The lunch should, in my opinion,
be light and nourishing. The ordinary “ busi-
ness” lunch is heavy and unwholesome. In
the evening, when the day’s labour is over, the
day’s worries should be completely forgotten.
Easy to say! you reply. Yes, and easy to do,
if you stick to a healthy habit of life and regular
business habits.
Part of the way home, at least, should be
walked. Dinner should consist of at most
three courses. The greatest mistake of the
day lies in the heavy dinner in vogue.


As regards sleep, the hours of sleep should
be regular, if at all possible. The old saw
about early to bed and early to rise is literally
and absolutely true in practice. Ten hours for
youngsters and eight hours for adults is about
the stretch.
An apple or an orange first thing after the
morning bath is a very healthy habit, and is
more generally practised than people think.
The cold bath every morning is now an es-
sential in the life of every self-respecting man
or woman. Regarding this, I can only say
that, to my mind, the morning bath is an ab-
solute necessity if health of mind and body is
desired. But it should not be overdone. If
you do not feel glowing and happy after your
dip, cut down the time you are in the water, or
take the chill off the water until you feel no
discomfort, but the reverse, after your bath.
In some cases, when the heart is weak, you
may have to restrict it to a chest sponge, or a
sponge-down, but experience is the only cri-
terion.
The morning exercise should be honest
work —the whole mind should be bent upon
each movement, and you should leave off
warm, if not perspiring, and happily tired for
the time being. A minute or so should elapse
between the exercise and the cold bath, to let


the heart get regular in action again. After
the bath, brush off the water with a towel, and
dress quickly.
I emphasise the point about exercise being
honest, downright hard work, because that is
what constitutes the distinction between sys-
tematic and recreative exercise. On the Satur-
day afternoon or Sunday, when recreative ex-
ercise is indulged in, the mind should not be
set on the muscular work at all. I always
think that a man who fixes a mechanical walk
or cycle ride is wasting his time. Recreative
exercise should be made recreative exercise—
unconscious to the body, enjoyable to the
mind. The country passed through and the
various historical or archaeological features
should be studied or recalled. Botany and
geology are valuable studies to the walker or
the cyclist. One pleasant companion of simi-
lar tastes in the Sunday walk is invaluable.
The Sunday should be sacred from business for
health reasons. One day’s rest is necessary
from the mental strain of the week. But it is
not conducive to mental relaxation to spend
the Sunday indoors or loafing. It should be
spent in the open-air, when possible under
change of scene and atmosphere. I trust the
reader will bear in mind the distinction between
systematic and recreative exercises. In the


morning's grind the mind cannot be too fixed
upon the action of the muscles. In recrea-
tive exercise, competition, sport, study, con-
versation or curiosity should fully occupy the
mind, leaving the body movements mechani-
cal. If the bowels are sluggish, start off with
a purgative twice a week. Exercise will soon
make you regular. Above all things, do not
suffer yourself to become constipated, or your
liver to become overladen. A sallow skin
should never be permitted. Your eye should
be bright and your skin clear. If not, your
digestion is out of order. Sports of all kinds
—cricket, football, golf—whatever they may
be, are the life of the country and of the indi-
vidual.
Clothing should be sensible, night clothing
not too heavy. The bedroom should be well
ventilated, so that it does not smell stuffy in
the morning; otherwise you will not awake re-
freshed and invigorated.
In these remarks I have endeavoured to give
as broad a view as possible of what I regard as
a healthy habit of life. Each reader has, of
course, the limitations of circumstance; but,
generally speaking, the above regime will
enable one to cultivate and develop the life
physical, on which are built the life mental and
the life moral.


TALK XII.
HOW TO BREATHE.
“ The nostrils, as you know from your ana-
tomical studies, form part of the respiratory
tract. The mouth has no business to form
part of the respiratory tract. It never
was intended for respiration; it was in-
tended for mastication and deglutition.”
The foregoing quotation, from one of
the chief authorities on physiology, is so
apt that I shall make it the text for this talk.
I wish to treat of the chest and its develop-
ment with special reference to the lungs.
Experience has taught me that, as regards
both health and strength, the first and most
important part to be attended to is the chest.
The three points in breathing are: ist, lung
development; 2nd, nasal breathing; 3rd, pure
air. To take the last point first. One would
think that, of all classes in the world, the
naval class would be most exempt from
chest disorders, in virtue of their open,
healthy life. Yet the British Admiralty’s
own figures show that consumption is
three times as prevalent in our naval training
ships as it is among the general population.


Commander Dawson attributes this to the
close packing - in the sleeping-rooms, and also
to the system of tricing the hammocks to
within a foot or so of the ceiling, all the foetid
air naturally stagnating in the upper part of
the sleeping-chamber. I imagine that the
army barrack room shows quite as insanitary
conditions. The barrack-room atmosphere
has been a bye-word for many years.
The necessity of adequate breathing-space
may be gathered from the fact that in repose
the ordinary man uses up about half a million
cubic inches of air every day. If working
hard, he uses a million and a half cubic inches
of air daily. Now it is of the first importance
to see that this air is pure. Air should never
be breathed twice. The custom so prevalent
in churches and halls of letting the meeting
warm the place with breath and gas is full of
dangers. Leaving a place like this, with
lungs and throat relaxed by the hot, foetid air,
and allowing the cold night air to pass through
the mouth and strike directly upon these parts,
is certain to have an evil if not a fatal result.
The nose is the natural passage for the air.
In passing through the nasal passages the air
is both filtered and warmed.
Nothing is more simple than to acquire the
habit of nasal breathing. Many people will


tell you they can't—“ My nose is stopped, I
cannot do it.” It only requires practice. Do
all your deep-breathing exercises with the
mouth shut, no matter how uncomfortable it
is at first. In a few days it will be less un-
comfortable, and in a week or two you will
sleep naturally with the mouth shut. So much
for nasal breathing.
Now I come to the part which lies more par-
ticularly in my province. How are we to
deepen the shallow chest and expand the
power-chamber of the body ? If a fire gets
choked up with ashes and the draught of air
is prevented, then it smoulders low and will
eventually go out. The water in the engines
will not give off steam and the engine will stop
running. The cure is simple. Get away all
ashes and debris and allow the life-giving air
to get at the fire. The fire burns strongly
and soon the engines are working again at full
speed.
Now, the fireplace represents the lungs; the
engine is the heart; the water is the food; and
the machinery to be set in motion is the body.
If you breathe foul or impure air, not only
is there not enough oxygen to keep the engine
going, but the tissues are poisoned. You can
feel the effects of this poisoning on the brain,
for a headache is the result —Nature's warning


against impure or insufficient air. Men with
big chests do not suffer from headaches.
Now let us see what can be done to increase
the draught of air and get away 'the debris
from the fire. Ordinarily you breathe 30
cubic inches of air with each inspiration. By
a very deep inspiration, as deep as you can
make it, you can inhale another 100 cubic
inches, making 130 in all. By a complete
expiration you can send out 100 cubic inches
of air beyond the usual 30, making 130 in all.
In addition to this you have about 100 cubic
inches of air in your chest, called residual air,
which remains even after the completes! ex-
piration.
From this it will be seen that instead of the
ordinary 30 cubic inches of air, you can inhale
and exhale 230 cubic inches at each inspiration
by deep-breathing, or eight times as many.
This is increasing the draught, and sweep-
ing away the debris and ashes as well. The
blood is thoroughly purified and fully stored
with oxygen; and parts of the lungs are sud-
denly awakened into splendid life that have
lain asleep for years, closed to everything but
disease. If you possess a “Sandow Developer’’
and a pair of grip dumb-bells, you will find
that with them arc charts giving exercises


specially arranged to develop the chest, with
the heart and lungs.
The muscles of the upper part of the trunk-
are also brought into play. Some of the ex-
ercises are free, others are done with dumb-
bells, and the rest with the developer. The
combination of grip dumb-bell and developer
or obesity-reducer exercises is a very happy
one, as it brings the muscles into play in
various groupings and supplies the two strains,
horizontal and vertical. With the dumb-bell,
especially if heavy weights are used, the strain
is vertical, opposing gravitation. The developer
supplies the horizontal strain and makes the
exercise complete. The bells and obesity-
reducer will bring down the weight and pro-
duce a perfect figure in both sexes.
After practising the exercises conscientiously
until an intelligent understanding has been
arrived at as to the method of performing
them, and as to the true value of breathing,
the pupil should make a special and careful
study of the development of the chest wall.
By this I mean that mobility and prominence
of chest so remarkable among our leading
singers. By so doing, you relieve the pres-
sure on the lung and enable it to expand with-
out resistance. At first, you will probably
find, on attempting to expand your lungs
fully, that the chest wall acts as a dead


resistance. This resistance of the chest wall
is the cause of people becoming’ puffed or
blown in running to catch a train. The lung,
in this instance, not being fully developed,
forms the first obstacle to the capacious breath-
ing demanded by the rapid exercise; and, in
the second place, even if the lung had the
power to expand, the rigid structure of the un-
developed chest wall would hamper its ex-
pansion.
An athlete has the advantage that his sport
gives him a certain amount of chest develop-
ment unconsciously gained, whereas the ordin-
ary individual, who has neither time nor in-
clination for following outdoor sports, has
merely that chest capacity that will take him
through life at the very lowest vital standard.
While in this condition he will never know
what health is or what energy is, and he will be
a prey to various pulmonary diseases. Every-
one is conscious that to take a deep breath is
good for him. In the first place it assists
the circulation of the blood in the great veins
of the chest and in the heart. It is for this
reason that we sigh. A man sighs when his
heart is surcharged with blood. It may be
through heart depression, brought about
by mental depression, or it may be actual


disease. A habit of sighing always calls the
physician's attention to the state of the heart.
Sighing is Nature’s means of relieving the con-
gestion of blood in the chest by taking a deep
breath.
For the athlete the importance of chest de-
velopment cannot be overestimated. In fact.
I would recommend every man in training to
work steadily day by day through the chart
for grip dumb-bells and developer. He will
find that his going power and his staying power
have been enormously increased, and that,
when he comes to the actual test, his superi-
ority over his former rivals is both sudden and
striking, especially in long-distance work.
Remember, it is not the muscle that gives out
in an athlete, it is invariably the engine-room
—the heart or the lungs —where the point of
weakness lies. Nay, further, I can promise that
there will not be so many cases of over-strain
under trial if the heart and lungs are made
sound by systematic exercise. This especially
applies to sports like rowing and sprinting,
where so many young athletes utterly ruin
their physique. There are, in my schools,
many such wrecks, slowly repairing the
damage they have sustained by over-effort
without fit preparation.


Now the method of securing the mobility
of the chest wall I spoke of lies in expanding
the chest by muscular effort without inhaling.
Stop breathing and raise the chest wall by
muscular effort. This develops the inter-
costal muscles, the serratus and also the mus-
cles of the neck, all concerned in forcible in-
spiration and in raising and maintaining the
arch of the chest.


TALK XIII.
EXERCISE VERSUS MEDICINE.
Perfect health is a consciousness of full
vitality, of exhilaration, keen enjoyment of life,
and strength to perform any task, and it is a
melancholy reflection that not one in a thou-
sand men and women of middle-age has it.
Yet the average healthy child fulfils these con-
ditions, simply because of his unceasing
activity—an activity that knows no tiring from
early morning till, tired out, he falls asleep at
night—keeps the various organs of his body
in constant exercise. No muscle has the
chance of stiffening, no organ grows weak
from disuse, or sluggish because of tasks set
beyond its powers. The savage knows no-
thing about the secret of health, but his life
is spent in the manner of an irresponsible
pleasure-loving child; hence the ailments of
civilisation are practically unknown to him in
his normal state.
Weakly people talk enviously of others who
have had a heritage of health, and undoubtedly
there is such good fortune inherited by some.
But it should not be forgotten that a heritage
may be built up as well as inherited, and that


while we are building it up we are enjoying
its accumulation ourselves, as well as laying
up treasure for those that come after. It is
my firm conviction that every young man who
has not yet begun life hopelessly handicapped
by an inheritance of organic disease, may
build up a constitution and health which will
enable him to live his life as gladly as does a
child; to perform, without undue pain, the part
in life Nature has destined for him; and to
leave to his offspring, in later years, such a
heritage of health as will make them bless his
memory.
Of course it will be thought by the foolish
that all this talk of mine is a bit of special
pleading for the system of Physical Culture
with which my name is associated. Nothing,
however, could be further from the truth. The
children and savages whom I have used, by
way of illustration, have no scientific system
of physical exercise, and yet they represent a
state of health to which two-thirds of civilised
mankind are strangers. So it is clear that
health may be enjoyed apart from my system.
Only, it must be remembered that children
and savages lead a perfectly natural life;
plenty of open air and plenty of exercise, and
no duties which involve unnatural postures of
the body, late hours, or over-work. The spe


cial value of my system is that it accomplishes
scientifically, if artificially, what in former
cases is accomplished naturally and without
thought.
All good things suffer from exaggeration of
their virtues. The moment any drug is recom-
mended as a panacea, a cure-all, it 'becomes
degraded to quackery, and I am afraid that
exercise has suffered to some extent by the
vague and general manner in which it has been
recommended for every ailment under the sun.
No such thing exists in nature as a universal
remedy, and it is unwise in the highest degree
to exalt any remedial measure to such a
height.
Before closing this chapter, I should like to
say something about medical exercises and
their field. First, discussing the question
from a very general point of view, I must re-
mind you that the exercise of any faculty is
necessary to the retention and development of
that faculty.
The love of play and recreation develops
the physical powers. Existence itself demands
the continual exercise of the mental powers,
and the problems of this life arc quite suffi-
ciently many and mysterious to exercise from
day to day the moral faculties.


The use of any function brings improvement
and perfection; its disuse brings degeneration
and decay.
The tendency of the day is, of course, to' take
less and less exercise, partly because of want
of time, partly because of facilities for rapid
transit. Now, of course, this denial of bodily
activity makes for physical degeneration and
must be in some way replaced. Systematic
exercise is exercise reduced to a science, and
when we come to compare it with recreative
exercise the result is as follows: —
Systematic Exercise.
A.—Occupies little time.
P). —Is immediately invigorating and re-
freshing.
C.—ls a distinct addition to the permanent
strength.
Recreative Exercise.
A. —Occupies a long time.
B. —ls fatiguing.
C. —ls not a considerable addition to the
permanent strength.
Physiologically speaking, exercise is univer-
sally beneficial; that is to say, the health and
energy are naturally improved and increased
by exercise and every tissue is beneficially af-
fected. But it would not be wise to argue


that because this is so therefore medical exer-
cises form a cure for all diseases. In the first
place, all acute disorders fall outside the scope
of medical exercise; the field rather confines
itself to sub-acute or chronic disorders.
To take deformities in the first place. Of
course nearly every muscular deformity can he
cured by exercise; especially is this so in the
case of lateral curvature, where certain muscles
become weaker and weaker, while the oppos-
ing muscles' become stronger, thus rapidly in-
creasing the vicious habit of the curvature.
Another muscular group is that of bad de-
velopment or under-development. Take, for
example, the case in which the muscles of one
limb have fallen behind in consequence of
some congenital defect. This, of course, can
easily be cured. A third group we might
take is that associated with nervous disorders,
such as wry neck, writers’ cramp, paralysis,
etc. In the case of paralysis the scope of ex-
ercise will be much clearer if the following
point is quite understood. Where there is
the possibility of exercising will-power it
should be used. Some kinds of paralysis are
so advanced that the sufferer has entirely lost
the power of conscious movement. These
cases, of course, must be treated with hand
massage or electricity. But where the power


of movement exists, in even a slight degree,
immeasurably better results will follow if
actual exercise, with the employment of will-
power, be used along with massage. That is
to say, the more severe the paralysis, the more
we must fall back upon hand massage and
electricity; the less severe it is, the more we
must employ movement massage, resistive
movements, and voluntary exercise.
Another muscular group is that associated
with bony deformity. Into this group come
club-foot, knock-knees, the severer kinds of
curvature, many rickety deformities, etc.
These require almost special treatment, in
which surgery must work hand in hand with
exercise.
Leaving muscular disorders, we come to
organic complaints, in which the great arteries
are more or less diseased. In the first place,
one danger which has to be pointed out is the
prescription of exercise by an incompetent
man. The danger is not in any way, how-
ever, so great as that of leaving hand massage
at the discretion of an ignorant person. For
this reason, then, if there is any doubt, a medi-
cal man should be consulted. It must be said,
however, that many conditions exist which are
generally supposed to make exercise danger-
ous, but which are, as a matter of fact, im


proved by exercise. Taking two of these I
may mention cases of rupture and of heart dis-
ease. In the first case, provided a truss is
worn whilst exercising, exercise may be taken
without danger and with distinct benefit. As
a preventive of rupture, exercise is infallible.
Heart affections fall into two classes: one
where actual disease is not present, the other
where the valves are affected. The first con-
dition can generally be absolutely cured by
exercise, the second condition can generally
be considerably ameliorated. Of course it
goes without saying that, in cases of heart
weakness, exercise should be prescribed only
by an expert.
The three great organic groups where exer-
cise comes as a sovereign remedy are: —First,
nervous disorders; second, lung disease; third,
ailments which have as their cause abdominal
congestion. In the first group come all kinds
of nervous prostration or disorders. In the
second, of course, the case resolves itself into
combating that great scourge of civilisation —
consumption. lam convinced that exercise,
combined with the taking of cod-liver oil, will
be an effectual cure, except in the last stages.
The third group of abdominal disorders in-
cludes congestion of the liver or sluggish liver,
constipation and its attendant train of evils.


TALK XIV.
WHAT THE YEARS HAVE SEEN.
PHYSICAL CULTURE IN ENGLAND.
Jt was in 1893 that I began seriously to
preach the gospel of strength in England. My
public performances had aroused such interest
in the subject of physical culture, and I re-
ceived so many letters on the subject, that I
published a book, “ Strength, and How to
Obtain It," giving illustrated instructions for
carrying out the sets of exercises which I
had personally used. This merely had
the effect of increasing the volume of cor-
respondence, and, recognising that an ounce
of practice is worth a pound of theory, I
opened a school of instruction in Physical
Culture in St. James’ Street, London.
The success of the school was immediate,
not only in the number of pupils, but in the re-
sults attained. Very soon a second school
was established, then a third and a fourth, till
there are now nearly twenty schools in Eng-
land, five of them being in the metropolis itself.
When I say that in Great Britain alone over
300,000 pupils have passed through my hands,
either directly or indirectly, in ten years, I


think I may claim, without boasting, that I
have been successful in my endeavours to raise
the standard of health and strength in the
United Kingdom. The Prince of Wales is an
ardent admirer of my system, has himself
undergone a thorough course of instruction,
and uses the bells and developer. When he
and the Princess—as Duke and Duchess of
York —set out on their tour of the world, I
fitted the dressing-rooms on the Ophir with
my exercisers, at His Royal Highness’ special
request.
AMERICA.
I have paid three visits to America, and am
happy to say that in the States Ph} r sical
Culture has taken a firm hold on the public.
There is a very large school at Boston, and as
soon as I leave Australasia I am going back to
America to establish others.
AUSTRALASIA.
I need not say that the main object of my
present visit to Australasia is not to entertain
the public with feats of strength—that is
merely a living illustration, as it were, of what
may be done by persistent work. What I
most earnestly desire is to awaken in the minds
of the people of these States a sense of the true
value of their bodies, and give them what I


consider the most rational system for achiev-
ing physical perfection that has been invented.
But my object is not to pass the whole
British race through my schools, even if that
were possible. What I aim at is the recogni-
tion that Physical Culture should be part of
the national system of education. I firmly
believe that in England the day is not very
far distant when every child from the age of
five to fourteen will exercise, daily, under pro-
per supervision.
In Australia, climatic and other conditions
seem to me to be exceptionally favourable to
the pursuit of Physical Culture. I have been
reminded that Australia is a land of
long, hot summers, but I find that
the best results from my system are
obtained in the summer, especially with
beginners, because the circulation is then
freer and perspiration more easily created;
and, consequently, the impurities of the sys-
tem (if any exist) are more easily got rid of
through the skin, thus relieving the liver and
kidneys of unnecessary work. If one is
troubled with excess of adipose tissue, the
amount removed will be far greater if exer-
cise is taken in the summer. It is in the
winter that the greatest amount of wear and
tear of our vitality takes place.


I have already made arrangements for the
establishment of Schools of Instruction in
several of the larger cities of Australia, and
I hope, ere long, to see instructions in all the
larger Australasian cities. I will send out
from England trained instructors to each of
these schools—men who have been through at
least a ten years’ course in one of my English
schools and have obtained a certificate.
INSTRUCTION BY POST.
It may happen that out in Australia there
are some people who are not living within con-
venient distance of a School of Instruction. To
such I would recommend a course of Physical
Culture through the post. I have given in-
struction to thousands of persons in all parts
of the world through the medium of the Post
Office. All that is necessary is to obtain the
necessary forms, fill them np, and forward
them to me at my London address, when they
will be immediately attended to.
On receipt of my prescription for you, I
wish you to thoroughly study the movements
and instructions contained therein, also the
general instructions concerning my system be-
fore beginning work. I shall endeavour to
underestimate your strength at first, so that
you can put all your will-power, which means


energy, into your work without fear of over-
doing it.
Be most careful to let me know every detail
concerning any particular weakness or com-
plaint you may be suffering or have in the past
suffered from, in order that I may be able to
fully understand your needs at once. Do not
hesitate to write me often, should you have
any doubts or questions. Every letter shall
have my immediate attention.
One important point I wish to impress upon
you is not to hand your prescription of exer-
cise to a friend to try, even though he or she
may be in the same apparent physical condi-
tion as } r ourself; for it does not follow that
two individuals possessing similar physical
weakness should be treated in a similar man-
ner, because the natural physical condition of
the one may be decidedly inferior to the other,
which would require a material altering of the
prescription of exercise.


TALK XV.
A PHYSICAL CULTURE COMPETI-
TION.
One of the most interesting events in the
history of Physical Culture was the Thousand
Guineas Competition which was held in Eng-
land three years ago. In order to extend the
interest in Physical Culture throughout Great
Britain, I offered a prize of £5OO f° r the best-
developed man in the United Kingdom who
had trained under the Sandow system. Second
and third prizes of £3OO and £2OO respectively
were offered, and a number of medals in gold,
silver, and bronze were struck. The idea was
to hold a series of local competitions in th,e
counties, award the medals to the three best-
developed men in each county, and then have
a final competition for the bigger prizes, which
took the form of a gold statuette of myself by
Pomeroy, first; a silver replica of the statuette,
second ; and a bronze one, third.
A wonderful amount of interest was created
in the contest, and on the night of the final
competition in the Albert Hall, ten thousand
persons were turned away. Dr. (now Sir)
Conan Doyle and Sir Charles Lawes were the
judges, and T as referee.


To me, the most interesting - feature of the
Competition was that the prize-winner was a
young clerk from Nottingham, who, eighteen
months before, had been ordered to get out of
England to save himself from the ravages of
consumption.
It is my intention to inaugurate a somewhat
similar competition in Australasia. And lam
hoping that it will be one incentive to young
men to take an interest in physical culture.
THE SANDOW MEDAL.
In Gold, Silver, and Bronze.


TALK XVI.
SOMETHING ABOUT MYSELF.
11l this chapter I do not wish to make any
boast of my strength as if it were by my own
unaided efforts that I have attained it. All
that I have done is to develop, as far as I
know how, the muscular outfit which the
Creator has given me.
Dr. Sargent, of Harvard University, whose
letter I append, described me as “ the most
perfectly developed man the world has ever
seen,” and, that being so, I think it may not be
uninteresting to give readers my present mea-
surements.
Some years ago, a rather stupid attack was
made on my system by some envious persons,
who declared that Sandow exercises not only
do not improve the general health, but actu-
ally damage the vital organs and the constitu-
tion. In very truth, the effects of my system
are exactly the opposite. Hundreds of men
and women have come into my schools
narrow-chested and weak-hearted, and have
gone out broad and strong and healthy.
Scores of young people have come to me as
“ refusals ” from life insurance companies, and


have gone back and been accepted within six
months.
It was also stated that I personally suffered
from weak heart and was in bad condition.
My reply to this statement was to go to the
Norwich Union Company, and ask if they
would insure my life for a large sum. The
Company’s doctor examined me, and not only-
passed me in the highest class, but expressed
great surprise at the wonderful soundness of
all my organs.
When I first went to America, Dr. Sargent,
of Harvard, was kind enough to take a great
interest in me. He examined me carefully, and
was enthusiastic in his praise of my physique.
When I returned to the United States nine
years later, I again saw the doctor, and he sent
the following letter to the “New York Herald” :
“ Dear Sir, —It was nine years ago that I
first made measurements of Eugen Sandow;
and I have, naturally, been interested to learn
whether he has continued to advance toward
even greater development and power. From
my personal observation of Sandow at that
time, I was led to believe that his living habits
were of so correct a nature and his system of
physical culture so intelligently conducted,
that his advancement would be steady. I have
not been disappointed.


“ At that time Sandow was but twenty-five
years old, and it was apparent that the climax
of his power would not be reached for many
years. In my recent examination I found
that he had made the improvement that I had
expected.
“ His superb physical condition may be at-
tributed to his regular habits and his intelli-
gent method of going about his work. It is
easy to see at a glance that Sandow takes the
best care of himself, and this is shown by the
brightness of his eye and the clearness of his
skin; and a perfect circulation is also easily
apparent.
“Muscularly, he shows that same symmetry;
but greater power also shows in the increased
size of the man. He is also possessed of a
great reserve of nervous energy, and this is
apparent in his every action.
“ That he is in perfect physical condition is
shown in his great good humour. He seems
to be at no time overworked or trained to a
point of nervousness, as many athletes are
likely to be. He seems to have worked out
his own system, and solved for himself the
question of how to stay constantly at his best
without overdoing and without mental strain.
“ A gentleman who has built up for himself
such a remarkable physique, and has aided


others to emulate him, is a particularly valu-
able object-lesson to young men of America.
Sandow’s visit to the university will stimulate
great interest among the students. The fact
is impressed upon them that what he has been
able to do, others may do.
“ In conclusion, I do not hesitate to say that,
in my opinion, Sandow is the most perfectly
developed man the world has ever seen.
“D. A. SARGENT.”
Dr. Sargent also lectured before the stu-
dents, and used me as an object-lesson. At
the close of the lecture I presented to Harvard
University a plaster cast of myself. This cast is
one of but three in existence, the original being
in the British Museum, London, England.
The gift was received with great demonstra-
tion by the students, who packed the great
room of the new Harvard Union, where the
lecture was given. An account of how this
unique cast was taken is, I think, worth a
separate chapter.
My “personal statistics” at latest date arc:
Age 35 years
Weight 14 st. 61b.
Height 5 ft, in.
Neck 18 in.
Chest . . 48 in.


Chest expanded 62 in.
Waist 30 in.
Hips 42 in.
Thigh 26 in.
Knee 14 in.
Calf 18 in.
Ankle in.
Upper Arm in.
Forearm in.
Wrist . in.
“Personal Statistic* .** —( Continued .)


TALK XVII.
THE CAMERA AND THE CAST.
Every public man nowadays spends no small
amount of his time with the newspaper re-
porter and the photographer. I have given
my views to several hundred reporters, and
have had my “ views ” taken by about as many
photographers. I have been photographed
wholly and in sections; nor has the photo-
grapher confined himself to the exterior of my
person only. In London I had two very fine
Rontgen Rays photographs taken, and medi-
cal men, as well as the photographer, remarked
upon the extreme smallness and delicacy of
my bones. If the life-sized photograph of my
arm, which appears as a supplement to this
book, were an X-rays photograph, it would be
noticed that the bony structure is almost as
small and fine as that of a woman. This
proves what I have always contended, that
the texture of a bone counts for more than the
size of it.
But the most trying experience I have
ever undergone was the operation—or rather
series of operations —of taking the moulds for
my life-sized cast. This was done at the re-
quest of Professor Lankester, who desired to


place a cast in the British Museum. It is a
unique exhibit, for this was the only occasion
when a living - man has been moulded for a
plaster cast in a state of contraction.
Of course, the ordinary process of making
a mould for the reproduction of a statue is a
simple one. A mould roughly corresponding
in shape, but somewhat larger than the object
of which the cast is to be taken, is fixed round
the statue. The space between the statue
and the rough mould is filled in with plas-
ter of Paris in a semi-fluid condition, and
when this hardens a perfect mould of the
figure is quite easily obtainable. Before the
plaster is poured in, the object is oiled to pre-
vent sticking. But there is a mighty difference
betwen pouring liquid plaster of Paris round
an inanimate statue and performing the same
operation on a living, breathing, human being,
particularly when that human being has to be
reproduced with all his muscles set. For one
thing, the smallest movement would disturb
the hardening plaster and spoil the mould.
Messrs. Brucciani, who undertook the work,
were very doubtful as to its success, and it was
indeed a long and wearisome task, with oc-
casional disappointments.
A hundred times I thought I would have to
give it up. The strain at times was terrific.


When they were moulding- my chest, abdo-
men, neck, and face, I thought I was on the
point of suffocating. No one can form any
conception of the suffering I endured. In
fact, when the sculptors applied the plaster to
my chest for the first time I could not stand
the pain for more than ten minutes.
You see, I had to keep the muscles of the
chest and abdomen still; and, to do that, I had
to take short, quick breaths. I could never,
of course, empty or fill my lungs. I had to
take in—almost continuously—-just enough
fresh air to replace what I used up. And at
the same time, of course, I had to keep the
muscles up to their highest tension, so as not
to disturb the cast.
That was very hard. I kept it up as long
as I could; but at last that awful feeling of
suffocation came over me, and with an effort I
threw the plaster off. I had been under an
intense strain then for ten minutes. Two
days later, however, I tried it again; and that
time the mould was a success.
You can imagine that, apart from the danger
of suffocation, the difficulty in regulating the
breathing so as not to disturb the contour, and
the peculiar “ biting ” feeling of the plaster as
it dried on the skin, made the experience one
to be dreaded. When they had taken the


mould of my chest, I thought, of course, that
my sufferings were over; but, heavens! that
was nothing compared to what I endured
when they took the cast of my face. They
told me that, compared to the operation on the
chest and abdomen, I would not mind it—that
one man in two hundred could stand having
the face done, but that one man in a million
could not be found who could stand having his
chest moulded in a strained position.
So I took them at their word. They placed
linen over my hair and moustache, oiled my
face thoroughly, told me to close my eyes, and
strike the attitude. I did so. Then they ap-
plied the plaster. There was not merely the
weight of the plaster, that pulled on my skin
and eyes until I thought the latter would come
out, but in addition the sculptors had to keep
their hands on my chest and on various places
on my head and face; and to me the merest
touch seemed like a great weight.
Four times, when the work was almost com-
pleted, I brushed the men aside, threw off the
plaster, and drank in the fresh air; and I was
winded more and perspired more after each of
these trials than after any of my severest
weight-lifting performances.
The fifth trial, however, was successful; and
the entire cast was concluded. But all the


money in the world could not tempt me to
undergo the suffering again. Of course, I
realise that it is a great honour to have my
cast in the British Museum as an example, as
the trustees declare, of the perfect man.
But what gives me greater pleasure is the
thought that succeeding generations will have
the specimen before them as an illustration of
how an originally delicate child can perfect
himself physically by simple and natural
means.
A rough outline in paper of my figure was
taken to serve as a guide for the making of
the “ shells ” for the support of the plaster
forming the moulds. After the shells were
made, the figure was worked into sections,
each of which was moulded separately. For
the purpose of maintaining the same pose
throughout the position of the feet was worked
out on the floor, and a support for the right
elbow and the fingers of the right hand was
provided. These of course were merely helps.
The muscles had to be kept contracted by an
effort of the will. The Messrs. Brucciani, the
famous Italian sculptors, executed the work.
The cast is now in the South Kensington
branch of the British Museum, and a fac-simile
has been exhibited throughout Australia.


“Physical Culture.”]
OVERHEARD IN A DRESSING-ROOM.
Little Tom Noddy: “Ah, yes, great strain, of course,
being cast in plaster. Still, I'm thinking of being
done.”


TALK XVIII.
PHYSICAL CULTURE FOR SOLDIERS.
For many years I have been advocating-
and, I am happy to say, not unsuccessfully—
the introduction of scientific Physical Culture
into the British army. And wherever I have
been in my tours through America and Aus-
tralia I have always been pleased to give free
instruction to the officers and men of the local
military forces. The British soldier has, al-
most from time immemorial, been famous for
his strength. Indeed, looking at history, one
cannot but be struck by the emphasis nearly
all chroniclers lay upon the point. Troops of
other nations may, at certain periods, have
been more mobile, more highly trained and
organised, but the characteristic of the English
soldier would always appear to have been a
superior “ sturdiness ” which pulled him
through at the critical moment. lam speci-
ally referring to bodily “ sturdiness,” although,
of course, that without pluck would avail men
little; but the two have more in common than
many people suppose. I don’t suggest that all
bravery depends upon bodily strength, but in
that bravery which is specially called for on


the battle-field a sound body, healthy organs,
and a well-balanced nervous system, are no
inconsiderable factors.
Perhaps the “ sturdiness ” of the British
soldier has been best shown by the success
with which he has undergone the hardships
arid privations of campaigning, which try an
army so severely. Hunger and hardships
and fatigue—these, in almost every campaign,
kill more men than the weapons of the enemy.
That marching is infinitely harder work than
actual fighting, entailing, as it does, not merely
great physical exertion, but the additional
nervous strain owing to the constant expecta-
tion of being attacked, is universally acknow-
ledged by those whose authority is accepted as
beyond question. And it seems to me that
here the British soldier has invariably shown
himself without a peer.
Then, naturally, the question comes to be
asked, What is the reason of this? How is it
that the personnel of the Army of England is
superior to those of other nations? How is it
that the British soldier is physically so much
finer and hardier than the men of Conti-
nental armies ? How is it that, when it comes
to hand-to-hand combat, in “ soldiers’ battles,”
where the issue depends more upon the
strength and hardihood of the rank and file


than upon the skill of the commanders; in long
marches, when the deadly enemies—fatigue,
starvation and disease —have to be faced, that
he comes out of the ordeal so triumphantly?
Honestly, I firmly believe that it is largely,
if not entirely, due to the fact that the young
Britisher has grown up with a tradition of
athletic excellence of prowess in sports and
manly pastimes.
Some ten years since and for several years
onwards, many people who had the best in-
terests of the Army at heart were seriously dis-
turbed by the fact that the British recruit did
not at all come up to their ideas as to what he
should be. In consequence of the lively in-
terest shown in my system by Colonel Fox,
the then Inspector-General of Army Gym-
nasia, I not only gave a demonstration of my
system at Aldershot, but gave some tuition to
the non-commissioned officers who were going
through an instructor’s course. What Colonel
Fox thought of my system is apparent from
the letter he wrote me which is published in
my book, “ Strength, and How to Obtain It.”
He was, indeed, so delighted with it, that he
made great efforts and succeeded in getting a
modified form of it adopted throughout the
Army, with, I believe, the happiest results.
Of course it takes time for an innovation of


this kind to “catch on,” nevertheless I believe
that even during - these few short years the im-
provement in the physique of recruits after
their gymnasium course has been very marked.
Not only that, but many men, quite apart from
their compulsory course, have gone in for the
system in its entirety and kept it up steadily.
I have had many letters from soldiers serving
both at home and abroad telling me that the
writers do the exercises with dumb-bells or de-
veloper regularly, and thanking me for the
benefit they have derived therefrom. As for
the officers—well, the names of those who have
taken up the system, either at one of the
schools or “on their own,” are legion. If I
attempted to enumerate them, I should prac-
tically have to copy out the Army List,
In conclusion I may give the views of the
military expert of the “ Daily News ” with re-
gard to Physical Culture in the Army, as ex-
pressed by him in the issue of December 23.
After quoting Napoleon’s maxim that legs win
more battles than arms, he goes on to say, “ I
want to impress upon the City Fathers and Mr.
Wilson that Sir W. Gatacre being, in his view
of the physical training of the soldier, wholly
right, and Lord Durham merely wrong, it is
essential to the efficiency on landing of the
corps they are so patriotically sending out that


there should be ample facilities on all the ships
for regular and steady daily exercise for horses,
officers, and men. On some of the best ships
that were sent out to the Cape this - was amply
provided. On some it was wholly wanting. It
is not at all difficult to manage for the horses.
In addition to ordinary exercise, opportunities
for officers and men, I would suggest a large
number of Sandow’s equipments. I know
that where one or two officers had remembered
to take these, there has been a rush by the
foolish virgins who had forgotten so to trim
their lamps to obtain the use of them.”


TALK XIX.
SOME EARLY REMINISCENCES.
The career of a man who has been perform-
ing before the public for fifteen years is natur-
ally full of incident.
A TRICK AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
One of the happiest periods of my life was
when, as a comparatively unknown man, I
made a very successful tour in France and Italy
in company with a genial fellow whose name
was Francois, and who was an exceptionally
clever circus performer. We used to give an
amusing little performance entitled “ L’Affi-
cheur ”(“ The Billsticker ”), and we appeared
under the stage name of the Rijos Brothers.
Francois used to dress up as a doll, and I
would throw him about all over the place, now
in at a window, now out by the door, and it
was only after a time that the audience realised
that Francois was not really a rag doll of huge
proportions. Then Francois would rapidly
change from one costume to another, each one
representing some article of daily use. Each
time he appeared, I would catch him up and
throw him up against the wall as high as I


could, and he would very cleverly hang there,
whilst the audience, recognising the poster he
was personating, laughed and applauded. The
show became very popular, and we had a
splendid run.
Later on, I was induced to give up the stage
and become a wrestler. Whilst I was per-
forming in Rome, King Humbert and his
Court took a great interest in the performances,
and came to see me wrestle and achieve feats
of strength. Tt was whilst I was in Rome, too,
that the incident I am about to relate took
place.
If the photographer who took the picture of
my arm for the frontispiece had taken the front
instead of the back, there might have been seen
in the photograph a peculiar scar. That is the
reminder I carry about with me of the occur-
rence. I had challenged and beaten a number
of famous wrestlers, and one day I accepted a
challenge from a man named Muller, a wrestler
who was noted for his unfairness in the arena.
I had been warned against wrestling with him,
but I was determined to meet him, and equally
determined not to allow him to take any unfair
advantage of me. We had not been in the
ring for many minutes before he began his
tricks, but T succeeded in warding off all his
attacks, and soon saw that as a wrestler pure


and simple he was not very much to be feared.
After several vain attempts, he managed to
grasp my right forearm with both his hands,
with the evident intention of breaking the limb
and so disabling me. He was unable to obtain
sufficient leverage, however, to snap the wrist,
but succeeded in forcing two of his fingers
into the flesh with such power that the veins
burst. The pain was maddening, and, snatch-
ing away my arm from his grasp, I clasped him
round the waist and simply hugged him. I
am afraid it was not a loving hug, for his face
became purple, and he dropped limply from my
arms to the sawdust. When he recovered
consciousness, his injuries were found to
amount to four broken ribs, which everybody
agreed was not a whit more than he deserved.
I myself was laid disabled for four months, the
veins of the arm being 'badly torn and the
nerves lacerated.
SOME WRESTLING HONOURS.
Those early days when wrestling was in its
prime were grand. I remember well the series
of contests by which I became the champion
wrestler. The first match of importance was
the outcome of a challenge from Bartoletti, a
noted Roman wrestler, who offered 5,000
francs if I could beat him. The issue was


never in doubt, and I was proclaimed an easy
winner.
Some time after, I met Bartoletti again, with
the same result. Then Sali, acknowledged to
be the best wrestler in Italy, came forward.
He had a wide reputation, having won laurels
in various parts of the world, even in Australia.
The match created a tremendous amount of
enthusiasm, and the gymnasium of Milan put
up the money for the stakes. It was a much
better match than the previous one against
Bartoletti, but after an hour’s wrestling I came
out triumphant. Sali afterwards put up a
pupil of his, named Milo, but I had him on his
back in about five minutes.
It was next suggested that I should tackle
two men at a time, so I agreed that a challenge
might be issued. The stakes were fixed at
3,000 francs, and quite a number of competi-
tors came forward. Eventually, however, they
were thinned down to two, whose names were
Sarini and Vocoli. There was considerable
interest in the affair, but it was only a matter
of a few minutes, and both my opponents were
down.
As this was rather a tame contest, I pub-
lished a further challenge, offering to wrestle
any three men who would come against me.
The conditions were that all three might tackle


me at once, and if they succeeded in throwing
me, theirs was the victory. On the other hand,
if I threw one of them, lie could take no further
part in the contest while I was dealing with the
other two. Sarini and Vocoli again came for-
ward, and succeeded in getting Eartoletti to
join them as third man.
It was a good battle, and a great crowd of
people witnessed the match. We were wrestling
for about an hour and a half, and everything
was fair from first to last. T managed to upset
Sarini early in the match, and eventually car-
ried off the honours.
A ROYAL GIFT.
There was naturally a great deal of con-
gratulation and applause from my friends on
my victory over the triple alliance; but what
was my surprise and delight to receive a com-
mand from the late Emperor of Germany, who
was at San Remo, undergoing treatment for
his throat, to come and see him. I gave an
exhibition of my muscular powers, and His
Majesty seemed greatly pleased. At the close
of the audience, the Emperor asked me if I
had done any card-tearing, and, sending for a
pack of cards, he tore it down the middle. I
replied by taking two packs, placing them to-
gether. and tearing them into halves. His


Majesty vvas; as eager in his applause, and not
only said many kind things, but gave me a
gold ring of considerable value, which he had
worn for eighteen years. The ring, which, of
course, I treasure very highly, is of beautiful
French enamel, encircled with brilliants, with
the initial F and a crowa over it, the letter and
crown being composed of diamonds.


SOME RECENT TESTIMONIALS.
Since coming to Australia I have received the fol-
lowing letters from America. They are but samples
of hundreds which come to me weekly:—
Somerville, N.J., Aug. 19, 1902.
Mr. Eugen Sandow, Boston, Mass.
Dear Sir, —In trying to express my opinion of the
improvement in general health and strength which
I derived in this last course with you, and that which
I have gained in following as best I might the laws
set down in your book, I am at somewhat of a dis-
advantage at that. Thanks to your system of training
as laid down in the nook, I have not known Avhat it
was to feel otherwise than healthy.
At the age of sixteen I feared consumption, and
tonk up your system of Physical Culture. To-day—
six years later—people laugh at me for ever having
feared it, and say they would do anything to have
muscles as well developed as mine. When I tell
them that it is all due to Sandow, they say it is too
hard work, or that I was strong naturally, which is not
true, as I was always sickly, and had regular sick head-
aches, which have disappeared almost entirely under
your system.
I can say, and am glad to say, that anyone in no
matter what a deplorable state physically they may be,
if he will follow Sandow’s System of Physical Culture,
as he should, will be made a new man, and in the
majority of cases a stronger and healthier man than
the average of his fellows, who call themselves “ per-
fectly in health.”
Next summer I take with you the full course, and
am more enthusiastic than ever about you and your Sys-
tem. —Yours very sincerely.
WM. K. TERRIBERRY.
Mason & Hamlin Co., Boston, Mass., 8/8/02.
Dear Mr. Sandow,—The satisfaction and benefit de-
rived by myself from your method gives me a great
pleasure to say the following:—ln a few months’ time,
by conscientiously following the exercises given me by
you, my muscles have been developed to a remarkable
degree, as also has my general health been improved.
Your System has cured me completely of dyspepsia and


constipation, the effect has been immediate, and almost
beyond belief. I have iaoav no more difficulty in as-
similating and digesting food consumed.
HaAdng always appreciated the advantage to be de-
rived from proper exercise, taking gymnasium work for
years, and having also tried all kinds of exercisers, i
must say I never received anything like the benefit or
development that nas resulted from the application
of your most excellent system. Your patent “ SandoAV
dumb-bell” is the most wonderful, and, at the same time,
simplest apparatus I have ever seen to develop muscles
and to concentrate the mind to the Avork at the same
time. I also appreciate very much the individual atten-
tion which you gave me, and Avill say that if there is any-
body desiring information in reference to your System,
refer them to me. I am, believe me, —Very gratefully
yours,
R. D. GERTZ,
Superintendent.
Niantic, li.L, May 26, 1902.
Dear Sir, —Allow me to thank you for your kindness
for the past two months, and for your instructions,
which has been to me one of the richest blessings that
I have ever received. At the time of beginning your
exercises I was simply a nervous wreck, was easily over-
taxed when attempting work of any kind, and it seemed
almost impossible to recuperate Avithout leaving off
for months all mental and physical labour; but, thanks
to you, 1 Avas enabled, Avith your exercise, to continue
my Avork, and now I feel like a neAv man —strong and
tireless.
J. E. PHILLIPS
(aged 54 years).
Cleveland, Ohio.
Mr. Eugen Sandow, Boston, Mass.
Dear Sir, —I take great pleasure in writing to tell
you that I think your methods and system far superior
to all others. I have tried the Swoboda system
for about six months, and I have made comparisons,
with the above results. One great thing you have
accomplished in your methods, and that is: to have the
pupil concentrate his mind on his work. Hh cannot
help but do this when using your clever device, the
“ Spring Grip Dumb-bell.” Wishing you unlimited suc-
cess, I am,—Yours in vitality,
HENRY W. UHL.


AN OPEN LETTER
REGARDING MY PHYSICAL CULTURE
APPLIANCES.
To my Readers, —I occasionally hear of
people who have been using’ one of my ap-
pliances, and are somewhat disappointed in the
results. I therefore pen this postscript to ex-,
plain the method of using my appliances.
In the first instance, my Spring-grip Dumb-
bells should be used according to Charts ac-
companying them. This gives an all-round
and symmetrical development of every muscle
of the body, rendering them firm and strong,
and my Developer or Obesity Reducer should:
be used afterwards, in conjunction with the
Grip Dumb-bells.
The Developer renders the muscles flexible,
and gives an even and finished appearance to
the form.
Both these appliances are necessary to the
attainment of the full benefit of my system.
All those desirous of improving their
physique—young, old, healthy, weak and deli-
cate of both sexes—will find full informa-
tion and instructions in my Book, entitled
“ Strength, and How to Obtain It.”


Half a Million
*
American Women Use
“Mode!” Paper Patterns
and No Others .
If you are wise, you will do so too. They are now at your
command. They will be a revelation to any woman who has
been used to buying any other pattern. They are offered for the
first time to Australasian women, through the medium of “The
New Idea.” Send 3d. in stamps for our Catalogue of 200 designs;
it Mill be mailed you by return. Then choose a pattern and send
us 9d. in stamps. If you arc not satisfied with it, we will re-
turn your money. Don’t take it for granted that “ Model
Patterns won’t suit you because other kinds have proved out of
fashion, expensive, and cumbersome. For this very reason we
are introducing “ Model ” Patterns, and for the same reason you
should try them.
WEIGH THESE FACTS!
“ MODEL ” PAPER PATTERNS are Perfect Paper Patterns.
“ MODEL ” PAPER PATTERNS are the creation of American
and Parisian artists.
“ MODEL ” PAPER PATTERNS are introduced in Australasia
by “ The New Idea ” —a guarantee they are the best.
“ MODEL ” PAPER PATTERNS are sold throughout Austral-
asia at the uniform low price of 9d. each, post free.
“ MODEL " PAPER PATTERNS are already used by half a mil-
lion American women.
Send 3d. in Stamps for Catalogue of 200 designs to
T. SHA W FITCHETT, 167-9 Queen Street, Melbourne,


The “Enterprise”
Rubber
Massage
Roller
Makes, Keeps and Restores
Beauty in Nature’s own way.
The cup-shaped teeth have a suction
effect on the skin that smooths out
wrinkles, rounds out the beauty mus-
cles, and gives perfect circulation of
the blood.
It is so constructed that it treats
every portion of the face and neck per-
fectly, even to the “ crow’s feet ” in
the corners of the eyes.
Sample Jar of “SKIN FOOD" is
Given Away with each Roller. 4/®
Roller and Sample Jar - - Post Free.
For
THE ENTERPRISE CO.
Box 133, G.P.O.
MELBOURNE.
Printed and Published by T. Shaw Fitchett, for the Review Printing
Company Proprietary Limited, 167 9 Queen Street, Melbourne.


Supplement to ‘ The Gospel of Strength, by Eugen Sandow. Published at 1
W
%
■ .
Kfiw*
'
■ %
n
r>s
Ci
as®
* i
IB
W&
m
5®
i
4' .
V
■at--.-;
i-J
til
m-:.
This is Sandow’s Arm. Why Get One Like it ?
(Life-size Photo; specially taken by the Swiss Studios, Melbourne,)




... ONE OFTEN SAYS ...
ineed a. Filip.
Before we’ve done Advertising, it will be in the
Mouths of Millions !
WHAT IS IT?
You often say, “ I’m out of sorts, run down, below tone. I find
pork a burden, am not myself, a bit miserable, under a cloud.: i
WEED A FILIP.”
That’s so, you’ve got “nerves” and need “ picking-up.” Now, right
acre, get rid of your depression and “out-of-sorts-ness,” dyspepsia, rheu-
matism, sleeplessness, melancholia, and brain-fag, by admitting the fact
that you are a burden to yourself, an affliction to others, and say,
“Well, the fact is; ‘ I NEED A FILIP,’ ” and go straight away to the
chemist and say—
INEEDA FILIP,
end see that you get if, for there is no other like it.
If he hasn’t it, tell him to send for it, to address below. Or write
yourself and get it by post.
It’s the very tonic you need. Get it, and now. If you are •
woman, you are losing your beauty and your vivacity, your power to
please, by not “ toning-up.” If you are a man you are losing money
by going to work tired and depressed.
INEEDA FILIP is' the purest and best tonic on the market. It
will make your nerves as true as a well-strung harp-string, give a pleas-
ant “tang” to life, and make you stout of heart, to grapple with life’,
difficulties.
Price, 2s. 6d.; Posted to any Address, 3s.
UNEEDSUM MANUFACTURING CO.,
395 Bourke Street, Melbourne.


Madame Melba.
A Special Article on Australia's Queen of Song will appear in
“Cbe new Idea” for nooember
(The New Woman’s Home Journal for Australasia).
Published at 3d. all over Australasia.
Melba’s Article makes the first of a striking series on “Noted Australlar
Women at Home.”
“ THE NEW IDEA ’’—though only three months old—has estab-
lished itself firmly in the affections of scores of thousands of women in
Australasia. It is the only monthly journal that adequately reflects
the interests of the Australasian housewife and her bairns.
Out readers are enthusiastic, the press is enthusiastic, we are enthusi
- astic, you will be enthusiastic.
YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS (OR A LADY FRIEND’S) ON A POST
CARD WILL BRING A SAMPLE COPY BY RETURN POST. j
The class of matter appearing in “ THE NEW IDEA ” is shown by the
SPECIAL FEATURES IN OCTOBER ISSUE:
in addition to some dozens of regular departments, such a*
“ Mothers’ Page,” “Talks to Girls,” etc., the following appear:
“ FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS,” by Eugen Sandow.
“ CORONATION ROBES.” A won derful description of the robes won*
by the Queen at the Coronation (illustrated).
OUR £5O “GOOD TASTE” COMPETITION—StiII open to you.
ADVANCING WOMEN, by Miss Vida Goldstein.
AUSTRALIAN AUDIENCES, by Charles Alexander.
PERSONAL CHAT ABOUT MELBA, with two full-page illustrations.
A ©HAT WITH MRS. SANDOW, with portrait of her little girl.
Eighty pages, with about 70 illustrations.
MONTHLY : PRICE 3d., ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Mailed for One Year to Any Address in Australasia for 3s.
T. SHAW FITCHETT, Publisher, 167-9 Queen St., MelF-








