



The Grampians
Travellers on the Melhourne-Adelaide railway, when in the vicinity
of Stawell, looking to the westward, can see the bold serried peaks of
the Grampians rising prominently from otherwise flat and uniform
surroundings, and again on the branch line from Ararat south-west to
Portland, as the train makes its way over the plains, a magnificent view
is obtained for 40 miles or more.
The general shape of the mountains is that of a giant boomerang.
Mount William (3,830 feet above sea-level), the culminating point, being:
on the bend; the northern extremity, Mount Zero, is 32 miles away in a
straight line, while Mount Sturgeon, at the other end, is 28 miles south-
westerly. Properly, the Grampians are the section from Mount William
north; to the south the mountains take the name of Sierra.
LOOKING OUT OF HALL’S GAP FROM CHATAUQUA PEAK.
At one point only, Hall’s Gap, are there facilities for tourists, and
this is 16 miles from the nearest railway station, Stawell. It is central,,
however, with some grand scenery on every hand. The locality plan shows
Hall’s Gap to be at the junction of three mountain chains known respec-
tively as Mount William range, Mount Difficult range, and Sierra range.
At this point a fairly large stream, Fyan’s Creek, after joining the waters
of Stony Creek, makes its exit from the mountains.
The Grampian scenery is unique, for not only are the mountains a
striking mass in relation to the surrounding flatness of the tertiary
plains, but within themselves they have a character of their own. There
is nothing else in Victoria at all like them. Bold in outline, of most
varied nature, they appeal in a remarkable manner to the taste for
exploration and adventure. Whether it be the rocky valley with fragrant
plants and splashing water, or the deep recesses of the mountain side
with tree ferns, a waterfall in shaded aisles of giant eucalypts, or the
mountain slope strewn with battered rock and scored with clefts
innumerable, or mountain top pinnacled in the sky, whence panoramas


are obtained no pen can describe—there is enough on every hand to
interest and entrance. But the tourist who will appreciate the Grampians
most is the one prepared to exercise both muscle and lung.
Fishing there is none, of shooting very little, but of scenery there is
surfeit, and of such a character as is worth working for.
The rock scenery is of the finest description, and what adds to the
general effect is the high coloration of all the cliffs. Nature has stained
the rock faces with her universal pigment, iron rust, in all shades of
yellow and brown and red.
Many of the wilder and more rugged portions of the Grampians are
at present almost out of reach, but within a day’s outing from Hall’s
Gap various trips may be taken, and these will afford a good idea of the
features of this wonderland. There are two roads, one up Stony Creek
valley, and the other up Fyan’s Creek, to the water reserve, which allow
ON THE GRAND STAIRWAY, MT. ROSEA
the tourist to get about freely, and there are several well-preserved
tracks built by the timber-getters in the early days that facilitate
walking.
Gold has been found in Stony Creek valley and on Mount William,
but the outcrops are limited in area. Practically the whole of the
mountains are sandstone, coarse and tough. A very good building stone
of light colour is quarried at Mount Difficult; from it the facades of the
Town Hall, Melbourne, the General Post Office, and Parliament House
have been built. Sedimentary rock, the mountains have been laid down
once upon a time, layer upon layer, on the bottom of some ancient sea.


When in time upheaval took place the beds were slightly tilted toward
the west at an angle of about 30 degrees. The characteristic form of
most of the peaks of to-day is due to this low and regular angle of dip.
The rock weathers into series of sharp-pointed peaks having a long slope
on one side along the line of dip and a steep escarpment or cliff face on
the other where the sandstone beds break off abruptly.
The ascent of any of the peaks along the back slope is a comparatively
easy matter. The cliff faces call for more care and labour in negotiating
them. Two of the large peaks—Mount Redman and Mount Rosea—have
cliffs over a mile long and about 500 feet high, impassable at first sight,
yet in the case of Mount Rosea there is a remarkable natural stairway
by which the ascent is easy.
For cliff faces and wild flowers the Grampians might well be called
the Blue Mountains of Victoria. They can boast of many species peculiar
to their sandstone slopes. Quaint grass-trees are a feature of the moun-
tains; there are the well-known Thryptomene and Calycothrix in
abundance, besides showy Grevilleas, Boronias and Epacrids, with orchids
and ferns in great variety. The native heath is finer nowhere in the
State, and its flowering season is a long one. Bird life is comparatively
scarce. There are neither the numbers nor the variety one might expect
in an area so remarkable in other respects. The emu is found throughout,
but, together with the wallaby, it is protected by the Game Act the
year round.
SPLITTERS FALLS.
The panoramas to be obtained from any of the prominent peaks are
not the least interesting feature of the mountains. A vast section of
Western Victoria lies stretched out before one like a giant relief map.
To the south from Mount William lies portion of the famous Western
District basaltic plains, stretching to the seaboard, broken here and there
by dead volcanic cones. Eastward on the horizon lie the bold outlines
of the Pyrenees and other adjacent ranges, and to the north is the long
unbroken skyline of the Wimmera plains. To the west lie masses of
rugged sandstone ranges, seldom trodden by man and unbroken by settle-
ment of any kind, and forming a gathering ground for water for Wartook
Reservoir and Lake Lonsdale.
Hall’s Gap has for some time lacked accommodation and communica-
tion, but this season two houses are to be opened for visitors, and Mr.
J. R. D’Alton now runs a coach to Stawell.
The only other settlement on the mountains is Pomonal, on the east
slope of Mount William range, to the south of Hall’s Gap. This place is
making great progress, and bids fair to become one of the chief apple-
growing districts of the State. It is but little heard of, however, in
Melbourne, as the produce goes almost entirely to European markets.


Just o| Outings about fall’s Gap
EASY TRIPS FROM PICNIC RESERVE
Venus’ Bath and lower part of Stony Creek valley.
Cherub Peak, ascending one track, descending the other.
The Diggings, via Stony Creek road.
Splitters’ and Turret Falls en route.
Wonderland Canyon, via Stony Creek road.
Chatauqua Peak and others.
Sentinel and Boronia Peaks.
Clematis Fa*lls and the Watchtower.
Wildflower garden outside Hall’s Gap.
IN WONDERLAND.
DAY TRIPS FROM PICNIC RESERVE
Wonderland Peak, via Stony Creek road.
Grand Canyon and Wonderland avenue, descending on east side
to Fyan’s Creek road.
Signal Rock and Gates of the West.
Bellfield Peak and Sundial; either from Fyan’s Creek road or via
Stony Creek road.
Silverband Falls on Dairy Creek.
Mount Difficult, via White Cliffs Creek.


Ordinary Return, available for two
£ s.
d.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
£ s. d.
months
Holiday Excursion (issued when
advertised, duration as per
1 17
6 .
.. 1 5 0 ... 0 19 0 .
.. 0 12 8
advertisement)
1 10
4 ..
. 1 o .. 0 15 6 ..
. 0 10 0
LONGER TRIPS-
Mount Rosea, via Stony Creek diggings and the Stairway
Wartook Reservoir, via Stony Creek road and track.
Victoria Valley, via Stony Creek road and track.
Lake Lonsdale Reservoir.
EASY TRIPS FROM WATER RESERVE-
The weir and aqueduct of Stawell Water Supply, 7 miles up Fyan’s
Creek road.
The Barbican and Barney’s Castle, via Barney’s Creek.
Silverband Falls and Dairy Creek.
Fyan’s Creek and adjacent Tree Fern Gullies.
DAY TRIPS FROM WATER RESERVE-
Along the aqueduct, 6 miles to the tunnel.
Mount Redman, via Barney’s Creek and old mill track.
Mount William, ascending back slope.
Mount Rosea, or Goat Rock, via Sanderson’s mill track.
Middleton’s Gap and adjacent peaks.
Victoria Valley, via Middleton’s Gap.
The Basin and Mount Lubra.
The head of the Wannon River.
hall's gap, from chatauqua peak.
ACCOMMODATION.
Comfortable accommodation is now obtainable at Bellfield Park and
at Mr. D’Alton’s boardinghouse, “ Morningside,” and intending visitors
require to travel to Stawell, where trains will be met by the conveyances
of either establishment by arrangement with the proprietors. The tariff
at either house is 30s. per week, or 6s. per day, and tents are available
for those desiring them. At both establishments guides are at the service
of those who wish to explore the recesses of the ranges.
Mr. D’Alton’s coach leaves Stawell every Saturday at 4 p.m. Fares—
6s. Single; 10s, Return; and special trips will be run at any time for £l.
Trains leave Melbourne for Stawell at 7.40 a.m., 11.0 a.m. (11.55 a.m.
Sats.), and 4.30 p.m.
RAILWAY FARES
From Melbourne. From Ballarat.
Ist Class. 2nd Class. Ist Class. 2nd Class.
.rarity: j. Kemp, Government Printer, Melbourne.
r«- m .




Photo bffioqrophed\ at tho'Department of Lands and Survey j£dobowme> by T.P2f9Gaurom,
