

THE CULT OF KULTUR
A COMPARISON OF ANCIENT JEWISH AND
MODERN GERMAN IMPERIALISMS.
SERMON
Preached to the Newcastle Synod, 17th May, 1915
BY
GARNET V. PORTUS, B.A., B. Litt.
The whole of the proceeds of the sales of this sermon will be given
to the Australian Red Cross Funds, the printers, Thos Dimmock, Ltd.,
of West Maitland, having generously undertaken the expenses of its
production on this understanding.
Price 3d.


SERMON.
PREACHED TO THE NEWCASTLE SYNOD.
17th MAY, 1915.
BY THE
REV. GARNET V. PORTUS, B.A., B. Litt.
S. John 7, 45-49; “Then came the officers of the chief priests
and Pharisees; and they said unto them, ‘Why have ye not
brought him?’ The officers answered, ‘Never man spake like
this man.’ Then answered them the Pharisees, ‘Are ye also
deceived? Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on
him? But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.’ ”
This incident, and this speech of the Pharisees, like so many
other incidents and speeches in the early chapters of the fourth
Gospel, gives us a glimpse of the political attitude of the Jewish
leaders at the time of the Incarnation. This attitude determined
the rejection of Jesus by His own people. It was the real reason
for that rejection. And it grew out of an idea that was inter-
woven with the whole fabric of Jewish life. Round this idea,
their religion, their politics, their history, their social customs
were clustered. And, put shortly, that idea was this. The nation,
tutored by its priests and rulers, was firmly convinced that the
Jewish people were God’s elect, and were destined to extend
God’s Kingdom over all the earth. But this extension was to be
accomplished through the adoption and recognition, voluntary or
involuntary, on the part of the Gentile nations, of the Jewish
theocracy and the Jewish civilisation. The extension of the
Kingdom of God really necessitated, as a corollary, the political
and religious exaltation of the Jews. This was the conception of
their destiny, to which, in their eyes, their history pointed. And
we can see the gradual emergence and domination of this idea as
we follow their history as recorded in the Old Testament.
That history has not been seriously changed in its main out-
lines by criticism. First a tribe is called out from the heathen


dom of the Chaldees. The main part of it migrates to Egypt, and
returning thence is established on the hills of Canaan, alongside
the commercial routes between Egypt and Assyria. A kingship
supervenes on the old patriarchates, but its failures as well as
its successes point forward to a nobler King than David. The
expatriations by Assyria and Babylon immensely strengthen both
the moral fibre of the Jews and the hope of a future deliverer.
The return from Babylon confirms this, and henceforward the
history of Israel is one long prophecy of a Messiah. Throughout
this history we can trace the development of two great religious
ideas —the particularism and the universalism in the Jewish con-
ception of God.
1. At first God is the frankly particularist deity of the Hebrews.
“God is our God.” He will look after us if we worship Him and
no other. You can find the attitude reflected all through the
Psalms. “We make our boast of God all the day long (xliv. 9).
“Whensoever I call upon thee, then shall mine enemies be put to
flight; this I know; for God is on my side (Ivi. 9). “Through
God will we do great acts; for it is He that shall tread down our
enemies” (lx. 12).
2. Then later, the prophets struck the note of universalism.
God was not only the God of the Hebrews, but the God of the
whole earth. Assyria was only His instrument wherewith to
forge Israel. Here they have risen out of the concept of a par-
ticularist, purely tribal God, to one which postulates the unity
and universality of His Person and Being. This, too, finds ex-
pression in the Psalms —that religious autobiography of Judaism;
“Consume them in Thy wrath, consume them, that they may
perish, and know that it is God that ruleth in Jacob and unto the
end of the world” (lix. 13). “For all the. world shall worship
Thee, sing of Thee, and praise Thy name” (Ixvi. 3).
The Jews, faced with these two conceptions of Jehovah and
His workings, combined them in later Old Testament times into
the curious compromise of proselytism. Mankind, they thought,
might all enjoy the divine favour, but only on condition that
mankind worshipped God in the revealed and acceptable way.
That way was, of course, the Jewish way. The correct worship
of God meant the adoption of Judaism. And Judaism was more
than merely a creed. It was a civilisation. 1 o adopt it meant to
adopt its external rite —circumcision —its social and religious
customs, in short —its national culture.
And that national culture contained not only a distrust of all
Gentiles, but a certain contempt for the humbler occupations of
life. The manual labour of their temple had been largely
supplied by foreigners. Even their prophets, in their highest
moments of inspiration rejoiced in the thought that in the
restored kingdom of Israel, the Gentiles were to do all the


work while the Jew enjoyed the fruits of their toil. Thus
Isaiah Ixi., 5-6, “And strangers shall stand and feed your
flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your ploughmen
and your vinedressers. But ye shall be named the priests of
the Lord; men shall call you the ministers of our God; ye shall
eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast
yourselves.” And one of the saddest as well as one of the most
illuminating chapters in the Bible, is Ecclesiasticus xxxviii.,
which reveals the later Jews’ contemptuous estimate of honest
labour as contrasted with a life of cultured leisure.
Thus had grown up this conviction of their national mission in
the minds of the Jewish leaders, and when any new theological
or political or religious idea came to be proclaimed in Judaea, it
had immediately to be measured by the standard set by this firm
national conviction. Our Blessed Lord’s mission and ideas were
so measured—and, not being in conformity with the standard,
they were rejected. For Jesus substituted for the idea of a
Jewish world theocracy the idea of the kingdom of mankind
bound together by common faith in God and common love to
man. Thus, by disavowing the popular political role of the
Messiah, He made an open breach with contemporary Judaism.
It was this that infuriated the rulers and the Pharisees —the
common people may have heard Him gladly, attracted by His
personality, His gifts, His sympathies. But who were the com-
mon people? People “who knew not the law and were ac-
cursed!” potters, carpenters, smiths and artisans, who knew not
how to sit in the seats of the mighty and pass judgment. The
personality and gifts of Jesus hardly came into the question with
the leaders. As Professor Gwatkin finely says: “The gospel was
not rejected because Jesus of Nazareth made Himself the Mes-
siah—hardly even because He made God His Father. It was not
the shock of blasphemy which stirred the deepest hatred of the
Pharisee, but his own shuddering fear that this strange teaching
was no narrow Judaism, but merged the privilege of Israel in the
higher revelation of one Father of all men.”* If this new doc
trine claimed —and it did claim —that all men had entrance to
the Kingdom of God irrespective of their nationality, or of their
conformity with the Jewish national and social and religious cult,
then it was anathema to the rulers. By-Judaism, by the law, by
the deliberate Judaization of the world (even if this had to be
accomplished by force), and by the magnification of the Jewish
theocratic state, was the world to be converted and live. But
Jesus said no! Then Jesus must die!
There Is something very modern about this. In these latter
days we have heard the same claims —the same assertion of a
* “Early Church History,” by H. M. Gwatkin, Vol. 1., p. 18


positive imperialism—the same threat to make the world better
by the imposition upon it of a national cult. You know to what
I refer—the German claim to Germanize the world for the
world’s good —this quasi-new imperialism which has for prophets
Williamowitz and Treitschke, Bernhardi, and von Bulow —and
which is at least as old as the theocratic imperialism of Judaea.
There are two kinds of imperialism in the world to-day.
There is the German sort —based on a belief in the virility and
efficiency of national culture —which claims that all nationality
must be stamped out, except the one conquering, forceful nation-
ality of the strongest people, which cannot, or will not, conceive
of that state as a stable state in which diversities of manners,
customs, religions, and governments are permitted to exist. And
there is that other sort of imperialism as typified by the British
Empire, and to a lesser degree by the United States, in which
the Empire is not regarded as a world state, but as a world
commonwealth; in which separate nationalities are not crushed
out, but encouraged to flourish; in which the contributions of
different races and civilisations and cultures are not despised
because these races have not been able to resist the military
power of the conquering people, but are welcomed for the diver-
sity of gifts which they may bring. It is an ideal of imperialism
under which it is the wisdom of the central government not to
duench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed of nationality,
anywhere within its confines. This kind of imperialism, the Ger-
man theory says, is impossible. “If it were possible,” writes von
Bulow, in his recent book on “Imperial Germany,” “for members
of different nationalities, with different language and customs,
and an intellectual life of a different kind, to live side by side in
one and the same state without succumbing to the temptation of
each trying to force his own nationality on the other, things on
earth would look a good deal more peaceful. But it is a law of
life and development in history, that where two national civilisa-
tions meet they fight for ascendancy. In the struggle between
nationalities our nation is the hammer, and the other the anvil;
one is the victor and the other is the vanquished.”
There is the position in a nutshell —the hammer and the anvil.
The German official mind cannot get beyond that conception of
nationality. Not only von Bulow, but professors like Haeckel
and Eucken—leaders of thought in their own fields—are caught
up with this extraordinarily brutal and foolish idea that national
civilisation (Kultur as they call it) must be propagated by the
sword. This we passionately deny, and we point to the facts for
confirmation of our denial. Why must Germany and Austria arm
against France and Russia and England? Canada does not arm
against the United States! Why must preponderance be guarded
against in Europe by the policy of balancing powers against one
another? No one fears that the preponderance of the United


States over the whole Western hemisphere is menacing the
peace of the world! Why, finally, to press this logic home, are
not the English constantly fighting the Scotch in Scotland, the
Irish in Ireland, the Welsh in Wales, the French in Canada, and
the Dutch in South Africa? The fact is that the German states-
men have missed the chief lesson of the nineteenth century in
politics, and that is that the human race, in its evolution, is
tending to group itself into associations and political partner-
ships which are no longer nation states, but are rather common-
wealths of nations, inside which room may be found for the
particular contribution which each nation has to bring to the
commonwealth ideal. In this matter then at least, we can feel
that we have avoided the ancient political error of the Jews, that
blinded them to the possibility of the new life of the spirit which
Jesus preached. And we feel that our enemies, far from avoiding
this error, are actually repeating it 1900 years afterwards, with
all its old stubbornness, with all its old machinery of autocracy,
with all its old national attractiveness, and, please God, with all
its old futility.
But I would not leave you at this stage in any mood of com-
placent self-approbation. We, as a people, are far too prone to
that already. If we have accepted this theory of nationality as
our imperial policy, we have laid ourselves under terrible respon-
sibilities. And if we call God to witness that, at least, our hands
are clean in this matter of imperialism, we must remember that
God’s eye roves over other aspects of our civilisation and cul-
ture. The German Empire is not our only foe. It is not even
our most strongly entrenched foe. Within the camp we are
suffering from the philosophy of selfishness. It has often been
inveighed against. It has often been exposed. But “to an extent
that it is difficult to exaggerate it has been the motive acknow-
ledged and relied upon, without shame or apology in commerce,
in politics, and in practical life.t
We have been shocked at Germany’s military barbarity, at her
open and cynical adoption of the policy of frightfulness. Lou-
vain, Scarborough, the Lusitania —these things appal us. But
this policy of frightfulness is but the instrument by which the
philosophy of selfishness is realised in military affairs. We had
not realised that principles like “success at all costs,’’ and “the
strongest must win,” and “the will to dominate” which have
underlain so much of our commercial and industrial life, could
issue in such excesses of barbarity in the field of politics, when
pressed home ruthlessly by military force. For it is well for us
to remember that Prussia only adopted, she did not invent the
philosophy of violence. Bismarck, it is true, enunciated the
policy of blood and iron, but before Bismarck men were com-
f “The War and the Church,” by Bishop Gore.


plaining of the iron law of wages, which tended, in the present
state of civilisation, to drive wages down to a bare subsistence
level. We are familiar with Bernhardi and his principles now-a-
days. But these principles are only the application of a doctrine
to military affairs which has already been preached in other
spheres. What of syndicalism, with its doctrine of a general
strike to paralyse the industry of a continent? What of its adop-
tion of sabotage, or the destruction of the property of employers
in order to terrorise them. And yet the syndicalists claim as
their justification that they are only copying the methods of
capitalism! Again, there are those forms of modern capitalistic
organisation known as trusts and monopolies. We constantly
see a small man crushed out of business by the weight of metal
at the disposal of a trust, by prices lowered for a period to put
the individual competitor out of business. His ultimate fate does
not concern the trust. It is done with him when it breaks him.
It is not the affair of the trust if he is cast, a broken man, upon
the industrial dunghill to perish. Do we thrill with anger at the
thought of this? Or have we consoled ourselves with the
specious maxim, “Business is business.” That is what Bern-
hardi says: “Business is business;” only his particular business
happens to be war, and so he renders it “War is war” and we
•shudder.
We have to face not only a political reconstruction of Europe.
That will not suffice. I am a believer in democracy, and I look
forward to and hope to serve its extension. But democracy will
not save the nations. It may check the predatory spirit, but a
world of democracies might easily give itself over to materialism.
There is a spiritual reconstruction of the world necessary as
well. A new spirit in the nations is needed to release us from
the chain of self-interest—both individual and national—and “to
replace the watchful selfishness of the past generation.’! If our
country seems to be standing for this, if only in politics, and
polities we can thank God and take courage even in this dark
hour. But dark hours are the hours when men and nations see
their souls. Can we see ours? Can we resolve not only to main-
tain our struggle against force and cynicism and pride in the
region of foreign politics and international relatons, but also to
extend that struggle into every sphere of our individual and
national lives? If we can do this our tribulation shall not have
been in vain, our dark hour shall not have been wasted. We
shall have made our country, our Fatherland, our Britain, for
whom thousands of her bravest sons are dying, more than ever
w r ort.hy of their devotion.
§ “The War and Democracy,” by A. B. Zimmern.
T. Dimmock, Ltd., Printers, Maitland.
