

THE
BURKE AND WILLS
EXPLORING EXPEDITION:
AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
CROSSING THE CONTINENT OF AUSTRALIA,
FROM
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA,
WITH
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
OF
ROBERT BURKE, AND WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.
Illustrated with Portraits
OF
BURKE, WILLS, KING AND GRAY.






R. O'H. BURKE.
W. J. WILLS.
JOHN KINC
C. CRAY.


THE
BURKE AND WILLS
EXPLORING EXPEDITION:
AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
CROSSING THE CONTINENT OE AUSTRALIA,
FROM
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA,
WITH
Biographical Sketches
OF
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE AND WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.




THE BURKE AND WILLS EXPLORING EXPEDITION.
This pamphlet is not put forth as a
history of the Exploring Expedition. It
is but the last chapter of a sad history : the
thrilling narrative of the successful but
fatal feat of crossing the continent of Aus-
tralia, by Burke, Wills, Gray, and King.
To understand it, however, it will be
necessary to bear in mind a few facts con-
nected with that history.
On the 20th of August, 1860, the Expe-
dition, organized under the auspices of the
Royal Society of Victoria, left the Royal
Park, Melbourne, taking with it twelve
months’ supply of stores, consisting of
twenty-one tons of goods in all, which were
to be but slightly trenched upon while with-
in the bounds of civilization. The names of
the members of the expedition were—Robert
O’Hara Burke, leader ; George James
Landells, in charge of the camels, and
second in command; William John Wills,
astronomer and surveyor; Thomas Beckler,
medical officer; Ludwig Becker, artist,natu-
ralist, geological director, &c.; Charles Fer-
guson, foreman ; and Thomas M'Donough,
William Patton, Patrick Langan, Owen
Oowen, William Brahe, Robert Fletcher,
John King, Henry Crocker, and John
Drakeford, associates.
Some changes in the party were subse-
quently found necessary, and several were
dismissed.
On the 24 f h the Expedition camped at
Sandhurst, and on the following day pro-
ceeded en route to Swan Hill, reaching
it on the 6th September, where it
was most hospitably entertained by the
leading inhabitants of the township, prior
to its taking leave of Victoria. From
thence it proceeded to the Darling, which
it reached towards the end of the month.
There Mr. Burke established his first
depot, at the Laidley Ponds, now named
Menindie. An advanced party of eight,
under Burke, now pushed on to Cooper’s
Creek; and as the season had been un-
usually wet and late, there was such an
abundance of grass and water, that they
reached that point with comparatively little
difficulty on the 11th November. The
party then travelled slowly down the
creek, in order to recruit the strength of
the animals, and in search of a suitable
spot for the establishment of the per-
manent depot, which was fixed upon at
camp 65. Having made all his arrange-
ments, and written a despatch to the com-
mittee on the 13th December, Burke did
not wait for the arrival of the remainder of
the party under Mr. Wright, whom he
had engaged at Menindie, and to whom he
had given orders to bring on the bulk
of the stores ; but leaving the depot in
charge of Brahe, Patton, M'Donough,
and Dost Mahomed, he set forward, on
the 16th December, for Eyre’s Creek,
taking with him Wills, King, and Gray,
six camels, a horse, and about three months’
supply of provisions. In his despatch
he says, “ I shall leave the party which
remain here under the charge of Mr.
Brahe, in whom I have every confidence.
The* feed is very good. There is no
danger to be apprehended from the
natives, if they are properly managed,
and there is therefore nothing to prevent
the party remaining here until our return,
or until their provisions run short.”
Brahe and his companions, thus left in
charge, immediately set about forming a
stockade to protect themselves from the
annoyance of the natives, who appeared in-
clined to be troublesome, though subsequent
events show that this was more apparent
than real, and arose, probably, from the
difficulty of holding intelligent intercourse
with them. Four months passed awav
without any tidings either of those
who had gone forward to the interior, or
from those behind at the Darling; scurvy
broke out amongst the small party, and
Brahe was fearful of being reduced to


extremities. He said, in his statement to
the committee, “ after most seriously
considering all the circumstances,” he
made up his mind to start for the
Darling on Sunday, the 21st. April.
He did so; having first deposited
a small quantity of stores, consisting of
501 b. flour, 501 b. of oatmeal, 501 b. of sugar,
and 301 b. of rice, at thq foot of a large
tree, on which he marked the word “ Dig.”
On the 28th Brahe fell in with Wright’s
party, which had broken down, reduced
by sickness and death, in the vain at-
tempt to reach Cooper’s Creek, and was
now about to make an immediate retreat
to Tarrugutta. He at once placed himself
and party under the command of Wright,
who then remained at Bulla till the Ist of
May, when he commenced his contem-
plated return to Tarrugutta. In his
despatch of the 20th June, Wright says,
“ Upon reaching the next camp, Koorli-
alto, I resolved to give the sick a further
spell, while I advanced with Mr. Brahe
to the depot at Cooper’s Creek, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether Mr.
Burke had returned, or the provisions left
there by Mr. Brahe had been discovered
by the natives. I found no signs of
Mr. Burke’s return or of the cache of
stores having been disturbed ; and re-
turned to Koorlialto on the 12th of May,
finding the men at the camp there all safe,
but very little improved in health.”
Assisted by Brahe and his companions,
Mr, Wright was enabled to convey the
remainder of his party back to Menindie,
though, owing to the “ difficulty of
moving men so extremely weak” as were
the sick, the journey was very tedious.
He then sent on despatches with Brahe,
who was met at the inn known as the
“ Durham Ox,” on the Loddon, by Mr.
Howitt, in command of the contingent*
party which had been sent forward from
Melbourne, in consequence of the anxiety
excited to know the fate of the Exploring
Expedition. Howitt returned to Sand-
hurst, in company with Brahe, and, on
their arrival, he sent on the following tele-
gram :
“ Sandhurst, June 29.
“The Hon. John Macadam, M.D.
“ I met Mr. Brahe at the Loddon with de-
spatches, and received the following message :
‘Mr. Wright has reached Menindie with eight
men, having been joined by Mr. Burke’s depot
party from Cooper’s Creek. Messrs. Becker, Pur-
cell, Stone, and Patton, died on the journey. Mr.
Burke left Cooper’s Creek on the 16th December.
Nothing has been heard of him since that date.
He was accompanied by Messrs. Wills, King, and
Gray. The natives proved hostile, and the country
for 150 miles was waterless. Two camels and
three horses died, and one was lost.
(Signed) “‘ W. Wright.
“ I shall be in town with Mr. Brahe to-morrow
morning.
(Signed) “A. W. Howitt,
Leader of Contingent Party.”
The intense excitement caused by this
painful information, induced the Com-
mittee promptly to increase the strength of
the contingent party, and Mr. Howitt
again started on his mission, with instruc-
tions to proceed with all possible dispatch
to Cooper’s Creek, there to search for
Burke’s track, and, if possible, carry relief
to his party. The results are now before
the public.


THE VICTORIAN EXPEDITION.
THE CONTINENT CROSSED.
DEATH OF BURKE AND TWO OF HIS PARTY.
Late on Saturday, November 2, informa-
tion reached Melbourne from Sandhurst
of the arrival there of a messenger (Mr.
Brahe) from Mr. Howitts searching ex-
pedition, with a despatch from that leader,
conveying the melancholy intelligence
that Burke and Wills had perished at
Cooper’s Creek in the month of June last,
of exhaustion, from fatigue and want of
proper food; and that a third member of
the party (Gray) had died on the return
journey between the Gulf of Carpentaria
and Cooper’s Creek. The fourth (King)
was found on the creek, living with the
natives, by whom he had been treated
kindly, and, we are happy to say, he is
now restored to health. In his posses-
sion were the journals of the leader of
the Expedition and Mr. Wills’s maps and
notes (which are now in possession of the
Royal Society) which show that Burke
and his companions successfully accom-
plished the crossing of the continent to
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria,
which they reached on the 11th February.
The chart kept by Mr. Wills shows that
the party followed Sturt’s track to its
farthest point, in lat. 24, when, finding
the country to the north utterly imprac-
ticable. a course was struck direct east to
the 140th parallel of longitude, wh ch
they followed north, almost in a straight
line to the Albert River. They rested
three days at a point on the river, in lat.
17deg. 53min. south, within the tidal in.
fluence, thus having accomplished the
great feat of crossing the continent from
sea to sea. They then turned back, al-
most by the same route, travelling for the
most part of the way on foot, killing their
horses and some of their camels for food,
and suffering much from hunger. They
reached Cooper’s Creek on the evening of
the 21st April,—the very day on which
Brahe and the dep3t party undir his
charge left the creek to return to Menin-
die. A small quantity of provisions hidden
by the depBr.-pirty was found by Burke
and his companions, who, feeling them-
selves too weak to travel to Menindie
(about 403 Miles), made two successive
attempts to reach the South Australian
settlements, and were driven back on
both occasions by want of water. In
these attempts the month of May was
spent.
The very small quantity of provisions
that had been left by Brahe’s party, be-
came soon exhausted, and they had to
gather the seeds of a native plant which
they found —the same plant which Lyons
and Macpherson had to rely upon for
some time. Without proper food, and
worn out by the labour of gathering it,
and doubtless prostrated in mind by the
hopeless position, that week after week
found them in, their strength wasted
away, and towards the end of June and
about the same time that the tidings of
the other deaths reached Melbourne, and
about the time Mr. Howitt’s party made
its first start from this city, pour Burke
died while in the act of making a last
attempt to obtain succour from the blacks
for himself and his companions ; and W 11s,
alone in his hut, and about the same
time as his friend Burke, breathed his
last. Prom June till the 15th September,
when he was found by Howitt, King, the
last survivor of the party, lived amongst
the natives of Cooper’s Creek, by whom
he was kindly treated. He was origi-
nally a soldier in the Indian army, and
arrived here with Mr., Laudells. Gray,,


though apparently the hardiest of the party,
was the first to perish. King, on the other
hand, was not strong, and had left India for
the benefit of his health. His narrative,
which we give, will be found extremely
interesting.
Melancholy interest attaches to the
last despatch written by Mr. Burke,
briefly but comprehensively announcing
the success he had achieved, and to the
last few lines traced despairingly by the
hand of poor Wills.
The following is Mr. Howitt’s des-
patch, announcing the results of his
mission. It is dated from a camp on
the return journey to Menindie :
Poria Creek, Oct. 10,1861.
Sir, —I have the honour to report my arrival
here with the Contingent Exploring Party, on
my return journey, having, on September 15, in
latitude 27deg. 44min., and longitude 140 deg.
40min., found John King, the only survivor of
Mr. Burke’s party, living with the Cooper’s Creek
natives. Mr. Burke and Mr. Wills had died some
time previous to ray arrival, from hunger and ex-
haustion, and Gray died before reaching Cooper’s
Creek, on their return journey from the Gulf.
King was in a very weak, exhausted state when
found, but, I am happy to say, has recovered
wonderfully since, and Mr. Wheeler has just re-
ported him to me as being out of his hands. The
full particulars will be found in my diary, which,
with King’s narrative, is enclosed. I may state
regarding my diary, that I have only transcribed
that portion subsequent to our reaching this place
on our outward journey, as up to that time we
had followed the Expedition track, and nothing
of interest had occurred. It may suffice for me
to say, that from leaving Menindie we had tra-
velled without meeting with any particular
hindrances, finding splendid feed almost the
whole way, and sufficient water for our
use, with the exception of three nights, when
our horses were without. The rain had
been very partial, and in places we only
found just sufficient for our immediate use. Toro-
woto and Carriapundy swamps and the mud
plains were perfectly dry, and no water that
could long be relied on, without subsequent rain,
from Nuntherungee Creek to this place, a distance
of about 180 miles. I had intended leaving the
Expedition track at Carriapundy, but was de-
terred from doing so by the very dry appearance
of the country; and, therefore, followed the
track to this creek, which is permanent. lam
happy to be able to state, that the party are and
have been in perfect health, and that the horses
are in excellent working order. The camels are,
on the whole, in as good condition as when they
left Menindie, and may be pronounced cured of
the scab, which I cannot help attributing in a
great measure to the bad management of the
sepoys. So far, I have met with no loss or acci-
dent of any kind, and the natives, wherever I
have seen them, have been friendly. I expect to
be down at Menindie in three weeks, and may
probably spend two or three days at Torowoto to
endeavour to find permanent water, as I know of
none there that can be relied on. I forward
these despatches by Mr. Brahe and Weston Phil-
lips, with four of our best horses. I consider
that they will have no particular difficulties in
going down, excepting as regards water, which
would not be lessened by a larger party, and I
cannot well spare more men, from the number of
camels and pack horses to look after. Should
there be horses at Menindie fit for the journey
down, I have instructed Mr. Brahe to proceed at
once to town, taking with him the documents
and field book belonging to Mr. Burke and Mr.
Wills, and relating to the journey to and from
the Gulf. King I shall send down on my arrival
at the Darling
I beg to urge on the committee the necessity of
sending me immediate instructions to Menindie
respecting the further disposal of the party and
equipment.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
A. W. HowTTT,
Leader of the Contingent Exploring Party.
To the Hon. John Macadam, M.D., Hon.
Secretary the Exploration Committee,
Melbourne.
BURKE’S LAST DESPATCH.
The following is the last despatch written by
Mr. Burke. It was found amongst the papers
deposited on Cooper’s Creek :
Depot No. 2, Cooper’s Creek, Camp 65.—The
return party from Carpentaria, consisting of
myself, Wills, and King (Gray dead), arrived
here last night, and found that the depot
party had only started on the same day.
We proceed on to-morrow slowly down the
creek towards Adelaide by Mount Hopeless,
and shall endeavour to follow Gregory’s track;
but we are very weak. The two camels are done
up, and we shall not be able to travel faster than
four or five miles a day. Gray died i>n the road,
from exhaustion and fatigue. We have all suf-
fered much from hunger. The provisi ns left
here will, I think, restore our strength. We
have discovered a practicabl route to Carpen-
taria, the chief portion of which lies on the 140th
deg. of E. longitude. There is some good coun-
try between this and the Stony Desert. From
there to the tropics the country is dry and stony.
Between the tropics and Carpentaria a consider-
able portion is rangy, but it is well watered and
richly grassed. We reached the shores of Car-
pentaria on February 11, 1861. Greatly disap-
pointed at finding the party here gone.
(Signed) Robert O’Hara Burke, Leader.
April 22,1861.
P. S.—The camels cannot travel, and we cannot
walk, or we should follow the other party.
We shall move very slowly down the creek.
May 30, 1861.
We have been unable to leave the creek.
Both camels are dead, and our provisions are
done. Mr. Burke and King are down on tha
lower part of the creek. I am about to return
to them, when we shall all probably come up this


way. We are trying to live the best way we can,
like the blacks, but find it hard work. Our
clothes are going to pieces fast. Send provisions
and clothes as soon as possible.
(Signed) William J. Wills.
The depot party having left, contrary to in-
structions, has put us in thii fix. I have de-
posited some of my journals here, for fear of
accidents
(Signed) W. J. W.
KING’S NARRATIVE.
Mr. Burke, Mr. Wills, and I, reached the
depot at Cooper’s Creek on April 21st, about
half-past 7 in the evening, with two camels—
all that remained of the six Mr. Burke toon,
with h m. All the provisions we then had con-
sisted of a pound and a halfofdriedmeat. Wefound
the party had gone the same day, and looking
about for any mark they might have left, found
the tree with DIG, April 21. Mr. Wills said the
party had left for the Darling. We dug, and
found the plant of stores. Mr Burke took the
papers out of the bottle, and then asked each of
us whether we were able to proceed up the
creek in pursuit of the party. We said not; and
he then said that he thought it his duty to ask
us, but that he himself was unable to do so,
but that he had decided upon trying to make
Mount Hopeless, as he had been assured by the
committee in Melbourne that there was a cattle
station within 150 miles of Cooper’s Creek. Mr.
Wills was not inclined to follow his plan, but
wished to go down our old track, but at last
gave in to Mr. Burke’s wishes. I also wished to
go down by our old track. We remained four
or five days to recruit, making preparations
to go down the creek hostages of four to five
miles a-day, and Mr. Burke placed a paper in
the plant, stating what were our plans. Tra-
velling down the creek, we got some fish from
the natives, and, some distance down, one of the
camels (Landa) got bogged, and although
we remained there that day and part of
the next trying to dig him out, we found
our strength insufficient to do so. The
evening of the second day, we shot him as he
lay, and, having cut off as much meat as
we could, we lived on it while we stayed to dry
the remainder. Throwing all the least neces-
sary things away, we made one load for the re-
maining camel (Rajah), and each of us carried a
swag of about 261bs. W e were then tracing down
the banches of the creek running S., but found
that they ran out into earthy plains. We had
understood that the creek along Gregory’s track
was continuous; and finding that all these creeks
ran out into plains, Mr. Burke returned, our
camel being completely knocked up. We then in-
tended to give the camel a spell for a few days, and
to make a new attempt to push on forty or fifty
miles to the south, in the hope of striking the
creek. During the time that the camel was b. ing
rested, Mr. Burke and Mr. M ills went in search
of the natives, to endeavour to find out how the
nardoo grew. Having found their camp, they
obtained as much nardoo cake and fish as they
could eat, but could not explain that they wished
to be shown how to find the seed themselves.
They returned on the third day, bringing some
fish and nardoo cake with them. On the follow-
ing day, the camel Rajah seemed very ill, and I
told Mr. Burke I thought he could not Unger out
more than four days; and as on the same evening
the poor brute was on the point of dying. Mr.
Burke ordered him to be shot. I did so, and we
cut him up with two broken knives and a lancet.
We cured the meat, and planted it; and Mr.
Burke then made another attempt to find the
nardoo, taking me with him. We went down
the creek, expecting to find the natives at the
camp where they had been last seen, but found
that they had left; and not knowing whether they
had gone up or down the creek, we si pt in their
gunyahs that night, and on the following morn-
ing returned to Mr. Wills. The next day Mr.
Burke and I started up the creek, but could see
nothing of them, and were three days away,
when we returned, and remained three days in
our camp with Mr. Wills. We then made a
plant of all the articles we could not earn’ with
us, leaving 51b. of rice and a quantity of meat,
and then followed up the creek to where there
were some good native huts. We remained at
that place a few days, and finding that our pro-
visions were beginning to run short, Mr. Burke
said that we ought to do something, and that if
we did not find the nardoo, we should starve,
and that he intended to save a little dried meat
and rice to carry us to Mount Hopeless. The
three of us then came to the conclusion that it
would be 'better to make a second attempt to
reach Mount Hopeless, as we were then as
strong as we were likely to be, our daily allow-
ance being then reduced. Mr. Burke asked each
of us whether we were willing to make another
attempt to reach the South Australian settle-
ments, and we decided on going We took with
us what remained of the provisions we had
planted—two and a-half pounds of oatmeal, a
small quantity of flour, and the dried meat—this,
with powder and shot, and other small articles,
made up our swag to 301 b. each, and Mr. Burke
carried one billy of water, and I another. We had
not gone far before we had come on a flat, where
I saw a plant growing which I took to be clover,
and, on looking closer, I saw the seed, and called
out that I had found the nardoo. They were
very glad when I found it. We travelled three
days and struck a watercourse coming South
from Cooper’s Creek. We traced this, as it
branched out and reformed on the plains, until
we at last lost it in fiat country. Sandhills were
in front of us, for which we made, and travelled
all day but found no water. We were all greatly
fatigued, as our rations now consisted of only one
small Johnny cake and three sticks of dried meat
daily. We camped that evening about four
o’clock, intending to push next day till two
o’clock, p.m., and then, should we not find water,
to return. We travelled and found no water,
and the three of us sat down and rested for an
hour, and then turned back. We all felt satisfied
that, had there beeen a few days’ rain we could
have got through. We were then, according to
Mr. Wills’s calculation, forty-five miles from the
creek. We travelled on the day we turne d back
very late, and the following evening reached the


nearest water at the creek. We gathered some
nardoo, and boiled the seeds, as we were unable
to pound them. The following dav we reached
the main creek ; and knowing where there was a
fine water-hole and native gunyahs, we went
there, intending to save what remained of our
flour and dried meat for the purpose of making
another attempt to reach Mount Hope'ess. On
the following dav, Mr. Wills and I went out to
gather nardoo, of which we obtained a supply suf-
ficient for three days; and finding a pounding-
stone at the gunyahs, Mr. Burke and 1 pounded
the seed, which was such slow work that we were
compelled to use half flour and half nardoo. Mr.
Burke and Mr. Wills then went down the creek
for the remainder of the dried meat which we i ad
planted, and we had now all our things with us,
gathering nardoo, and living the best way we
could. Mr. Burke requested Mr. Wills to go up
the creek, as far as the depot, and to place a note
in the plant there, stating that we were then
living on the creek, the former note having
stated that we were on our road to South Aus-
tralia. He also was to bury there the field-books
of the journey to the Gulf. Before starting he got
31b. of flour and 41b. of pounded nardoo. and
about a pound of meat, as he expected to be ab-
sent about eight days During his absence I gath-
ered nardoo and pounded it, as Mr. Burke wished
to lay in a supply in case of rain.
A few days after Mr. Wills left, some natives
came down the creek to fish at some water-
holes near our camp. They were very civil to us
at first, and offered us some fish ; on the second
day they came again to fish, and Mr. Burke took
down two bags which they filled for him ; on the
third day they gave us one bag of fish, and after-
wards all came to our camp. We used to keep
our ammunition and other articles in one gun-
yah, and all three of ns live together in another.
One of the natives took an oilcloth out of this
gunyah, and Mr. Burke seeing him run away
with it, followed him with his revolver, and fired
over his head, and upon this the native dropped
the oilcloth. While he was away the other blacks
invited me away to a waterhole to eat fish ;
but I declined to do so, as Mr. Burke rvas away,
and a number of natives were about who would
have taken all our things. When I refused, one
took his boomerang and laid it over my shoulder
and then told me by signs that if I called out for
Mr. Burke,as I was doing, that he would st ike
me. Upon this I got them all in front of the
gunyah and fired a revolver over their heads, but
they did not seem at all afraid, until I got ont
the gun, when they all ran away Mr. Burke,
hearing the report, came back, and we saw no
more of them until late tint night, when they
came with some cooked fish, and called out
white fellow.” Mr. Burke then went out with
his revolver, and found a whole tribe coming
down, all painted, and with fish in small nets
carried by two men. Mr. Burke went to meet
them, and they wished to surround him, but he
knocked as many of the nets of fish out of their
hands as he could, and shouted out to me to fire,
I did so, and they ran off. We collected five
small nets of cooked fish The reason he would
not accept the fish from them was that he was
afraid of being too friendly lest they should be
always at our camp. We then lived on fish until
Mr. Wills returned. He told us that he had
met the natives soon after leaving us, and that
they were very kind to him, and had given him
plenty to eat, both on going up and returning.
He seemed to consider that he should have
very little difficulty in living with them, and as
their camp was close to ours, he returned to
them the same day, and found them very hos-
pitable and friendly, keeping him with them two
days. They then made signs to him to be off.
He came to us and narrated what had happened,
but went back to them the following day, when
they gave him his breakfast, but made signs for
him to go away. He pretended not to understand
them, and would not go, upon which they made
signs that they were going up the creek, and
that he had better go down. They packed up,
and left the camp, giving Mr. Wills a little nar-
doo to take to us.
During his absence, while Mr. Burke was
cooking some fish, during a strong wind, the
flames caught the gunyah, and burned so rapidly
that we were unable, not only to put it out, but
to save any o' our things, excepting one revolver
and a gun. Mr, 'Wills being returned, it was
decided to go up the creek and live with the
natives, if possible, as Mr. Wills thought we
should have but little difficulty in obtaining pro-
visions fiom them if we camped on the opposite
side of the creek to them. He said he knew
where they were gone, so we packed up and
started. Coming to the gunyahs, where we ex-
pected to have found them, we were disappointed,
and seeing a nardoo field close by, halted, in-
tending to make it our camp. For some time
we were employed gathering nardoo, and laying
up a supply. Mr. Wills and 1 used to
collect and carry j|)me a bag each day, and
Mr Burke generally ponded sufficient for our
dinner during our absence, but Mr. Wills found
himself getting very weak, and was shortly un-
able to go out to gather nardoo as before, nor
even strong enough to pound it, so that in a few
davs he became almost helpless. I stillcontinued
gathering ; and Mr. Burke now also began to
feel very weak, and said he could be of very
little use in pounding. I had now to gather and
pound for all three of us. I continued to do this
for a few days, but finding ray strength rapidly
failing, my legs being very weak and painful, I
was unable to go out for several days, and we
were compelled to consume six days’stock which
we had laid by. Mr. Burke now proposed that
I should gather as much as possible in three days,
and that with this supply we should go in search
of the natives —a plan which had been urged
upon us by Mr. Wills as the only chance of
saving him and ourselves as well, as he clearly
saw that I was no longer able to collect sufficient
for our wants. Having collected the seed, as
proposed, and having pounded sufficient to last
Mr. Wills for eight days, and two days for our-
selves, we placed watVr and firewood within his
reach, and started. Before leaving him, however,
Mr. Burke asked him whether he still wished it,
asunder no other circumstances would he leave
him ; and Mr, Wills again said that he looked
upon it as our only chance. He then gave Mr.
Burke a letter and his watch for his lather, arid


we buried the remainder of the field books near
the gunyah. Mr. Wills said that, in case of my
surviving Mr. Burke, he hoped that 1 would carry
Out his last wishes, in giving the watch and
letter to his father
In travelling the first day, Mr. Burke seemed
very weak, and complained of ereat pain in his
legs ard back. On the second da}' he seemed to
be better, and said that he thought he was
getting stronger, but, on starting, did not go two
miles before he said he could go no further. I
persisted in his trying to go on, and managed to
get him along several time , until I saw that he
was almost knocked up. when he said he could
not carry his swag and threw all he had away.
I also reduced mine, taking nothing but a gun
and some powder and shot,and a small pouch and
some matches. On starting again, we did not go
far before Mr. Burke said he would halt for the
night, but, as the place was close to a large sheet
of water, and exposed to the wind, I prevailed on
him to go a little further, to the next reach of
water, where we camped. We searched about,
and found a few small patches of nardoo, which
I collected and pounded, and, with a crow which
1 shot, made a good evening’s meal. From the
time we halted Mr. Burke seemed to be getting
worse, although he ate his supper. He said he
felt convinced he could not last many hours, and
gave me his watch, which he said belonged
to the committee, and a pocketbook, to give
to Sir William Stawell, and in which he
wrote some notes. He then said to me,
“ I hope you will remain with me here
till I am quite dead—it is a comfort to know
that some one is by; but when lam dying, it is
my wish that you should place the pistol in my
right hand, and that you leave me unburied as
I lie.” That night he s£ke very little, and
the following morning I found him speechless, or
nearly so; and about eight o’clock he expired. I
remained a few hours there, but as I saw
there was no use in remaining longer, I went up
the creek in search of the natives. I felt very
lonely, and at night usually slept in deserted
wurleys, belonging to the natives. Two days
after leaving the spot where Mr. Burke died, I
found some gunyahs, where the natives had
deposited a bag of nardoo. sufficient to last me
a fortnight, and three bundles containing various
articles. I also shot a crow that evening, but
was in great dread that the natives would come
and deprive me of the nardoo.
I remained there two days, to recover my
strength, and then returned to Mr. Wills. I
took back three crows; but found him lying
dead in his gunyah, and the natives had been
there and had taken away some of his clothe . I
buried the corpse with sand, and remained there
some days; but finding that my stock of nardoo
was running short, and being unable to gather it,
I tracked the natives who had been to the camp
by their footprints in the sand, and went some
distance down the creek, shooting crows and
hawks on the road- The natives, hearing the
report of the gun, came to meet me, and
took me with them to their camp, giving me
nardoo and fish. They took the birds I had
shot and cooked them for me, and afterwards
showed me a gunyah, where I was to sleep with
I three of the single men. The following morning
they commenced talking to me, and putting one
finger on the ground, and covering it with sand,
at the same time pointing up the creek, saying,
“ Whilefellow,” which 1 understood to mean that
one whiteman was dead. From this I knew that
these were the ti ibe who had taken Mr. Wills’
clothes. They then asked me where the third
white man was, and I also made the sign of
putting two fingers on the ground and covering
them with sand, at the same time pointing up the
creek. They appeared to feel great compassion
for me when they understood that I was alone on
the creek, and gave me plenty toeat. After being
four days with them, I saw that they were be-
coming tired of me, and they made signs that
they were going up the creek, and that I had
better go downwards; but I pretended not to
understand them. The same day they shifted
camp, and I followed them; and, on reaching
their camp, 1 shot some crows, which pleased
them so much that they made me a breakwind in
the centre of their camp, and came and sat round
me until such time as the crows were cooked,
when they assisted me to eat them. The same
day, one of the women, to whom I had given part
of a crow, came and gave me a ball of nardoo,
saying that she would give me more only she
had sucli a sore arm that she was unable to
pound. She showed me a sore on her arm, and
the thought struck me that I would boil some
water in the billy and wash her arm with a
sponge. During the operation the whole tribe
sat round, and were muttering one to another.
Her husband sat down by her side, and she was
crying all the time, After I had washed it. I
touched it with some nitrate of silver, when she
began to yell and ran off, crying out, “ Mokow!
Mokow!” (Fire ! fire From this time, she
and her husband used to give me a small quan-
tity of nardoo both night and morning, and
whenever the tribe were about going on a fishing
excursion, he used to give me notice to go with
them. They also used to assist me in making
a gourley, or breakwind, whenever they shifted
camp. I genera ly shot a crow, or a hawk, and
gave it to them in return for these little services.
Ever} - four or five days the tribe would surround
me. and ask whether I intended going up or down
the creek ;at last I made them understand that
if they went up I should go up the creek, and if
they went down I should also go down, and from
this time they seemed to look upon me as one of
themselves, and supplied me with fish and nardoo
regularly. They were very anxious, however, to
know where vr. Burke lay; and one day when
we were fishing in the waterholes close by I took
them to the spot. On seeing his remains the
whoe party wept bitterly, and*covered them with
bushes. After this they were much kinder to me
than before; and I always told them that the
white men would be here before two moons; and
in the evenings, when they came with nardoo and
fish, they used to talk about the “ whitefellows”
coming, at the same time pointing to the moon.
1 also told them they would receive many pre-
sents, and they constantly asked me for toma-
hawks called by them “Bomayko.” From this
time to when the relief party arrived—a period of
about a month—they treated me with uniform


kindness, and looked upon me as one of them-
selves. The day on which I was released, one of
the tribe who had been fishing came and told me
that the whitefellows were coming, and the whole
of the tribe who were then in camp sallied out in
every direction to meet the party, while the
man who had brought the news took me across the
creek, where I shortly saw the party coming
down.
BRAHE’S MEMORANDUM.
The following is the memorandum deposited
by Brahe with the provisions, when he left the
depot, at Cooper’s Creek, on the 21st of April. It
was found by Mr. Burke’s party on the evening
of the same day:—
Depot, Cooper’s Creek, April 21,1861.
The depot party of V.E.E. leaves this camp
to-day, to return to the Darling. I intend to go
S.E. from camp 60, to get on to our old track near
Bulloo. Two of my companions and myself are
quite well; the third—Patton—has been unable
to walk for the last eighteen days, as his leg has
been severely hurt when thrown by one of the
horses. No person has been up here from the
Darling.
We have six camels and twelve horses, in good
working condition.
William Brahe.
HO WITT’S JOURNAL.
Camp 20, Poria Creek, Sept. 1. Lat. 28deg.
44min. long. 142 deg. 42mih. —The country, after
leaving camp 19 (Koorlejur), was generally sandy
ridges, running variously from N.E. round to
N.W. Between these sandy tracts we passed a
good deal of clayey flat ground—in places hard
and smooth, in others spongey and rotten, and
cracked deeply by the heat, polygonum and cane-
grass growing in great quantities. The feed
everywhere poor and scanty and very dry. I
believe that very little rain has fallen here this
season. After about ten miles, the sand ridges
became more marked, and of a red colour, and
the flats wide, and draining to N.E. Scattered
box-trees began to appear, and birds were more
numerous. At five miles more, struck Poria
Creek, a deep channel coming from a northerly
direction, and containing abundance of water; its
general width appears to be about sixty feet, and
the banks are lined with small box-trees; water
plants and a species of water moss grow in the
bed, and, from fish and cray-fish being found in
it, I have no doubt that it is permanent —in
fact, the only water I can consider such of all
these we have seen on this side of the Daubeny
Ranges. At a distance of above half-a-mile, the
course of the creek is followed by high red sand
ridges, running parallel to its course. There is
no timber any where but on the creek, and only
small bushes, and one or two kinds of pittisporum
and mulgar on the sand ridges. The country is
very inferior, in every respect but water, as we
proceed. Signal fires in two places as we were
travelling; both very large, and no doubt in-
tended to announce our arrival. On some of the
flats I observed quantities of the plant growing
from the seeds or which the natives make their
bread. It appears to choose a loose blistered
clayey soil, subject to be flooded, such as is gene-
rally found in polygonum ground. The leaves
resemble clover, but with a silvery down, which
is also found on the seed when fresh; these grow
on short stems springing from the root, and are
flat and rather oval; in places where the plant
has died down, these seeds quite cover the
ground; they are gathered by the native women,
and, after being cleaned from the sand, are
pounded between two stones and baked as cakes.
Camp 20, Sept. 2.—Spelled here to-day, before
starting across for Cooper’s Creek. Mending
pack-bags, dressing camel*, baking four days’
bread, &c. Day warm; wind from S.E , which
seems to be the prevalent quarter. Flies begin
to be troublesome.
Camp 21. Sept 3. Lat. 28deg. 33 min., long.
142 deg. 31min.- Started at eight o’clock, and left
the expedition track at Poria Creek. Strucka course
for Cooper’s Creek N.W. bv compass. For seven
miles travelled over sand ridges running N.E.
and S.W., with wide clayey valley between, in
which were occasional small pools of muddy water.
The feed everywhere very dry, but tolerably plen-
tiful on the sand hills. Bushes and small mulgar
trees were growing in places. VV e here crossed a
dr} 7 box swamp, where crows, wood swallows,
kites, and small birds were numerous; and I ob-
served here several trees with a roundi bark, re-
sembling cork, aud with bunches of long,
pointed, dark green leaves growing at the ends
of the small branches. The sand hills here be-
came low and flat, and the valley wider.
Shortly afterwards crossed the track of a large
camel going N.E., apparently about eight months
ago. The country undulating and well grassed,
and, as far as I coidd make out, the watershed
both to the N.E. all S.W. At twelve o’clock,
after crossing a dry swamp full of watercourses,
and passing a low sand hill, came upon a creek
running S.W., thickly timbered with large box
trees, the bed wide and banks steep, and in
several places large pools of clear water. Marsh-
mallows and other vegetation, now perfectly dried
up, were on the banks. Native camps were nu-
merous ; but none that I saw were verv recent.
Mussel-shells and the claws of cray hsh were
lying near them. I have every reason to believe
that some of these ponds are permanent. Cross-
ing this we passed several branch creeks running
through a clayey plain, and all lined with trees;
large pools of water in several. I named this
creek after the Hon. David Wilkie, M.D., M.L.C.
On leaving the clay flats at the creek we
again crossed sand hills and undulating country
for several miles, mostly well grassed, but
much burned up. Saltbush and cottonbush
plentiful in the hollows, aud scattered timber
beginning to appear. At half-past two came on
a watercourse running N., and containing large
but shallow pools of water. The feed round
about excel'ent, and enough timber to be called
a thin gum forest. The gums here a new
species not before seen by us, several feet of the
butt having a rough semipersistent bark, above
which it is smooth and greenish, with a red
tint; leaves thick and glossy, very much re-
sembling one growing at Omeo. Ducks here
very tame. Camped, having made eightettt


miles, and country not looking so well ahead.
The general fall seems to be to the westward.
Samla. the largest of our camels lay down just
before reaching the camp ; he is the only one of
the lot that has not improved in condition, and
he keeps himself poor by constantly watching the
other camels, and driving them away from the
females. He only carries 2cwt.
Camp 22, Stokes’ Ranges, Sept. 4. Lat. 28deg.
20min., long, 142 deg. 19min.—Left camp at
half-past seven. Travelled for three miles through
open gum forest, growing on clayey land. Water
channels frequent, with occasional small pools
of water. Saltbush and grass, but very dry.
Then crossed an open plain with claypans, the
drainage of which, running westward, forms
numerous small box creeks, which form and
spread out again on the plain. No water here,
only liquid mud. At about five miles passed a
small box creek with pools of water, and came
on an open sandy plain destitute of vegetation,
excepting the remains of salsolaceous plants
grown last season. At ten o’clock crossed a
large dry gum creek, full of gravel and boulders,
coming in an easterly direction from the range.
As it lay in our course we followed it up for
some distance, but found no water, although
crows, rose cockatoos, and crested pigeons were
on it. The country here became stony, but with
more dry grass, and gradually rose to the
range; from this point the travelling was very
severe upon the horses, and consequently very
alow, as the ground is everywhere covered with
fragments of sharp flinty stones. The ranges are
of no great height, and slope gently upwards,
but are cut by numerous deep gorges, filled with
blocks of stone and scrub, and mostly containing
a dry gum creek. These lying across our track
made it difficult to get om The mulgar scrub
was very thick in places, deal of it dead,
and numbers of shrubs new to me. Camped
at half past three at the edge of a deep
scrubby gorge, with plenty of dry grass, but
no water. Went down the gorge after camping,
to look for water, but found none, nor could I
see any chance from the loose gravelly bed and
large boulders Scrub very thick; among other,
the native orange, of large size, and covered with
unrire fruit. Distance, twenty miles.
Camp 23, north side of Stokes’ Ranges, Sept.
5. Lat 28deg. lOmin., long. 142 deg. Bmin. —Had
some difficulty in crossing the gully this morn-
ing, the sides being steep and covered with large
blocks of stone; thick mulgar scrub up both
sides. From here, travelled over similar stony
ridges to those described yesterday for several
hours, crossing two wide deep gorges, each with
a dry creek and large gums, and flanked by
precipitous stony ranges. On reaching the sum-
mit of the range, found it to be a stony table
land, almost devoid of vegetation. Some re-
markable flat topped peaks to the N. about
twelve miles. At noon, suddenly came to the
edge of a bluff overlooking the Cooper’s Creek
country; apparently a boundless extent of plains,
with dark lines of scrub or timber on the horizon.
To descend from this bluff to a wide basin of
open country below, probably seven or eight hun-
dred feet, occupied an hour, and I could only
consider it a happy chance that some of the pack-
horses or camels met with no accident among
the large blocks of loose stone. I could not have
believed that camels could have carried their
loads up or down such places as we have crossed
to-day. On reaching the basin, found it stony
to "a degree difficult to describe. The ground
was literally paved with angular and rounded
fragments of sandstone and flint, coated
with a shining oxide of iron Vegetation
very scanty, and water nowhere visible
although I saw birds which I have seldom
seen far from springs. Travelling for several
miles over this country, surrounded by a chain of
abrupt square hills, we slowly picked our road
as best we could. Several of the horses were
very footsore, and most of them fagged with the
severe day’s work and want of water. The day,
too, was unusually warm. At 3.30, found it
necessary to camp, the camels and horses being
very tired. No water, scarcely any feed.
After camp went to a square steep hill, with
Mr. 3rahe, to reconnoitre the country. From it
had an extensive view towards Cooper’s Creek,
and was pleased to see that the stony country
does not probably extend more than four miles
from us. Beyond that open plains, and on the
horizon what seem to be sandhills and timber.
A large body of smoke to the west. I found the
summit of the hill to be covered witn large masses
of a white crystalline stone, grouped in irregular
columns, and ringing with a metallic sound when
struck. It is the same stone as that universally
strewn over the country, and of which and a
coarse sandstone and conglomerate the ranges
are mostly formed. Managed to give the horses
two quarts of water each, in the hope that they
would feed. They were so thirsty that two tried
to take the quart pots off the fire.
Camp 24, Sept. 6. Lat. 28deg.; long. 142 deg.
2min. —Left camp shortly after six. The horses
had not fed during the night, partly from thirst,
partly being afraid of the stones. Followed
down a gully leading into very stony plains, which
we crossed for several hours, being obliged to
lead the horses very slowly. No timber and
scarcely any vegetation; the most desolate stony
wilderness imaginable. About ten o’clock came
near the sandhills, and the country improved as
regarded travelling, but not for feed or water.
On a dry watercourse came on a party of natives,
of whom some ran away; the others, consisting
of an old grey-haired man, an old hag of a
woman, a younger man, and two or three lubras
and children, waited until I rode up. They were
in a very excited state, waving branches, and
jabbering incessantly. The younger man shook
all over with fright. Sandy could not understand
them, and I could only catch “ Gow ” (Go on).
At last, by the offer of a knife, I prevailed on
the old man to come with us to show us the
nearest water, but after half a mile his courage
gave way, and he climbed up a box tree to be out
of reach. Mr. Brahe rode up to him, when he
climbed into the top branches, jabbering without
stopping for a moment. Finding that he would
not come down, and kept pointing to the N. W.
(our course), we left him. All the natives were
naked, and the old man was the only one
who had any covering for his head—a net.
We here entered undulating sandy country,


slightly scrubby and well grassed, and at the
same time came on Brahe’s down track. Our
horses at once struck into a belter pace, going at
least three miles and a half an hour. The camels
also pushed on well. The loose horses kept wide
of the track, looking out for water in the
polygonum ground, and at ten minutes past
twelve, one old stager found an ample suppty in a
channel on the right hand. The horses at once
made a rush, and it was almost impossible to
prevent thur drinking as much as they wished.
Three had for the last hour shown unmistakable
signs of giving in, and all W’ere very much pinched
with thirst. Camped by the water in first rate
feed. Bain came on steadily from N.E. shortly
after, and has continued. The horses have just
been a third time to water.
Camp 24, Sept. 7.—lt rained very heavily
during the night, with strong gusts of wind from
N.E.. and this morning the flats and the claypans
are swimming with water, and the ground very
soft. Besting to-day, as the horses require it.
Drying things, shoeing horses, and digging tank
to try and hold water later in the season.
Camp 25, Cooper’s Creek, Sept. 8. Lat. 27deg.
51min.; long. 14ldeg. 45min.—(Half a mile
abovecam p si x ty of V ictorian Expedition.)—Tra-
velled N. fiOdeg. W., through a succession of sand
hills, with flats of rotten polj’gonum ground
between. The vegetation very green and in full
flower, and box-trees growing on most of the flats.
Towards noon, after crossing some high red sand
hills, came into the earthy plains through which
the various channels of Cooper’s Creek run to
the westward The ground very rotten, and
cracked by numerous deep fissures; dry channels
in every direction. About six miles brought us
to a patch of sandhills, where the bare loose
summits were crested with apinkfloweringmesem-
brvsanthemum ; the pink flowers with the orange-
coloured sand and the bright green vegetation,
produced a very singular effect. We here sud -
denly came upon a native camp of four wurleys.
Only one black fellow was at home,and the three
leading men of our procession came suddenly
upon him as he was lying on the ground playing
with his dog. H e gave a succession of yells, and
then ran off as if electrified. Here we crossed
the first branch of Cooper’s Creek, a wide shallow
bed. full of green weeds and grass, and lined
with box. From this we crossed about three
miles of loos? < arthy plains, devoid of vegetation,
and camped on the N. side of a large branch,
near a shallow sheet of water. No feed on the
plains, but grass and green weeds in the channel.
Large box-trees on the bank. Distance travelled,
twenty-four miles.
Camp 26, Sept. 9. Lat. 27deg. 49min.; long.
141 deg. 38min—V\ hile loading up this morning,
five blackfellows made their appearance on the
opposite side of the creek, and, as usual, com-
menced shouting and waving their arms. We
cooed in return, and one waded across, but
waited on the bank until I broke a branch, and
beckoned him to come up. The others then fol-
lowed him. They were all fine well-built young
men, with open intelligent faces, and very
different from the natives usually met with.
They wore nets wrapped round their waists , and
one, apparently the head man, had his front teeth
knocked out. Sandy said he could only under-
stand “ narrangy word ” they said ; bull believe
that he could not understand them at all, as he
was quite unable to make them comprehend that
I wished to know if they had seen any strav
camels about the creek. Before we had finished
loading, they returned to the opposite bank, and
sat down watching us. On our starting they
waded across to our camp—probably to pick up
anything left behind, which would be very little.
To day we travelled over earthy plains for thirteen
miles; they were cracked in every direction, and
covered with a network of channels. In times of
flood, the whole of them must be under water,
and I can scarcely imagine anything more
luxuriant than the appearance of these plains
after a wet season. At present everything is dry
and withered, but everywhere the stalks of marsh
mallows and other flowering plants are as high as
a horse’s back, and very close together Tufts of
grass line each side and cover the bed of the water-
courses. Here and there clumps and lines of tim-
ber mark the course of the larger creeks, and
sandhills rise like islands from the plains. To
the S of W., at about nine miles, we had a range,
probably stony—and following its baseastrongly
marked line of timber, which I believed to be the
main creek. No flood appears to have come
down for two seasons, and waterholes which were
tolerably well filled five months ago are now dry,
or nearly so. At thirteen miles crossed a branch,
where Mr. Burke’s marked tree, LXI., stands, and
camped at a claypan under a sandhill, about a
mile to the W. Strong breeze from the N.E. and
N. all day, and steady rain at night. Near here,
I observed for the first time a new tree, with
a rough scaly bark and thick foliage, the leaves
small and oval, and set in pairs on a stem. The
tree grows to fifteeiww twenty feet, and bears
numbers of flat each containing from
four to six hard light brown beans, known by us
as the bean tree.
Camp 27, Sept. 10.—Lat. 27deg. 39min.; long.
141 deg. SOmin.—The rain ceased shortly be-
fore sunrise, and the travelling was in conse-
quence very heavy, the earthy plains being not
only soft, as before, but sticky. Shortly after
leaving camp saw several natives on a sand hill
making signs. I went up to them witti Mr.
Welsh, and after a great deal of trouble, persuaded
one to come to me. He was a fine-looking fellow-
painted white, skeleton fashion, and carried a
very long boomerang stuck in his girdle benind.
I could make nothing of him, excepting that he
gave me a small ball of what seemed to be
chewed grass, as a token of friendship, and in
return I gave him a piece of cold doughboy I had
with me for lunch, which he seemed to relish
very much. We travelled till noon over a suc-
cession of earthy plains, broken by numerous
box channels, one of which contained a large
reach of water; but the feed everywhere was
miserably dry and scarce. The country looks
wretched. After passing this channel, seven
natives made their appearance, one of whom Mr.
Brahe recognized as one of the party who tried
to surprise the depot last season. They pre-
sented him with a small quantity of some dried
plant Irom a bundle which one of them carried;
it had a strong pungent taste and smell, and lam


at a loss to conjecture its use, unless as a kind of
tobacco. Our black boy was frightened, and
;old me be thought they meant to “ look out, kill
aim as I understood—by witchcraft, or en
chantment. or poison. They followed us at a
distance to our camp, where they sat down a little
way off, making signs that they were hungry,
and wanted tomahawks. After an hour’s waiting,
they decamped. Killed two deal adders and a
snake of a sulphur colour on the track. Halted
near a small pool of water, where there was a
little green feed, which has become a rarity. The
country looks miserable ahead. Travelling very
heavy on the horses, as the mud balls in great
lumps. Stony ridges to the S. of the creek, at
about four miles, and a good deal of timber
visible on all sides. Weather still threatening
rain ; flies verv troublesome.
Camp 28, Sept. 11, Lat., 27deg. 35min.;
long., 141 deg. I9min.—Our horses strayed for
feed during the night, and made it late before we
started. Travelled through a box forest lull
of channels, when we came to a dry creek
coming from the N. E., with a rocky bed.
From here, and for some distance, stony ground
to the right hand, and deep channels running
parallel to each other in a westerly direc-
tion. 1 observed flood marks considerably higher
than our heads on horseback, and the water must
be much confined by the stony rises on each side
of the creek, although they are probably two
miles apart Mint was growing on the edges of
the channels and tea tree of large size. W e
then came on a large reach of water, about sixty
yards wide; the country miserable, not a vestige
of feed to be seen anywhere, except the withered
and blackened remains of plants on the plains
and occasional patches of gn en couch grass in
the creek bed. After this we traversed a box
forest, and came on a deep channel from the
N. E., where Mr. Burke’s first depot was situated.
The feed was slightly better, owing to the sandy
nature of the ground. About noon, passed large
reaches of brackish water, and numerous pools
of brine, in the channels of the creek, but saw
no feed anywhere. At length found one place
where patches of couch grass, with green plants
and tufts of coarse grass, were growing among
the stones, and halted, as the clay pans before
us were perfectly bare. It is long since 1 have
seen such a barren, miserable place as this part
of Cooper’s Creek. Native camps numerous,
but all deserted During the day, flights of
cockatoo parrots passed us, migrating to the
eastward. Where we are camped the creek is
wide, with a stonj’ bed; the south bank is formed
of limestone, and large quantities of opalized
wood was lying about. A short distance above
the rocky banks come close down to the creek.
Camp 29, Sept. 12. Lat. 27deg. 35min.;
long. 141 deg. 6min.—Travelled over clayey
plains, with scattered timber and a good deal of
withered herbage. A rugged range, apparently
sandstone, with flat-topped hills and peaks to
the N., running N. E. and S. VV., at about nine
miles distant. At four miles passed a wide
deep reach of water, several miles in length, be-
tween steep banks, and probably brackish, from
its colour. Numbers of pelicans, spoonbills,
cormorants, and other water fowl on it. On
each side bare cracked plains, extending to the
stony rises. At three miles more, the stony
country on our right hand closed in numerous
deep channels, forming the creek, some of which
were rocky, some sandy. Here, as elsewhere,
was gieen grass and plants growing on the sand.
Rather thickly timbered. At noon, came to
where the creek forces a passage between rocky
ridges; the channels are deep and tortuous, and
in places encumbered with large blocks of stone.
I here saw red gums for the first time on the
creek. This continued for four miles, with
narrow ridges of hard clay, covered with dense
polygonum, separating the watercourses, when
we came on more open country, witn detached
sandhills, and better feed, though very dry.
Large reaches of water; rocky banks of sand-
stone in places ; bars of rock cross the
creek. Camped near some sandhills, at a large
waterhole. After camping, tried fishing, and good
success, only that L lost two hooks, which 1 can
ill spare. 'Caught five silver perch, weighing
from l£lb. to 3tt>, and several others were caught
by the party by firelight. The fish excellent,
and of a fine flavour. Distance, seventeen
miles.
Camp 30, Sep. 13. Lat 27deg. 38min.; long
141deg.—Made a short stage to-day, for the sake
of feed for the horses, which is a thing to be
considered, from the dry appearance of the
country. Reached the depot, Fort Wills, in
three miles, through country r ther better than
we have seen for some days. More rain ha
fallen here lately than elsewhere, and the grass
is just springing, but too short to be of much use.
I believe this to be the first rain for many months.
The water all down the creek as far as we have
come, has fallen at the rate of about three feet
in the last four months. Found the depot as Mr.
Brahe left it, the plant untouched, and nothing
removed of the useless things lying about, but a
piece of leather. But from the very evident fact
that things are buried, I cannot understand why
the natives have not found them. From here
followed down the creek for several miles, and
camped at some sandhills near a pool of water.
Saw here the track of a large camel going up the
creek. The small crested pigeon spoken of by
Stmt, numerous. Cool wind from S. E.
Camp 31, Sept. 14. Lat. 27deg. 42min.; long.
14(ldeg 42min.—We had a late start this morn-
ing, as three of the horses were away, and one
ill—indeed, 1 doubted at first whether he would
be able to travel. Followed the course of the
creek down tor about nine miles, crossing several
branches which go out south, and form a reach ot
water before re-entering the main creek. Here
the rocky ridges on both sides close in, and the
water has forced a narrow deep channel through
a perfect wall of rock, forming below the finest
reach of water we have yet seen—about 500 yards
wide, and several mites long, and very deep.
The rugged hills on the north side, and the fine
gums on its banks, produce a fine effect. The
rock through which the channel has been worn is
of a hard flinty nature, inclined to be columnar,
but forming hugh masses of boulders. Deep
round hollows have been worn in these by the
floods, and at the water’s edge in one place
where I tried the depth, the rock is per-


pondicular below the surface. Waterfowl, fish
and turtle are plentiful. The immediat
neighbourhood, and as far as one can se
on each side is destitute of vegetation ant
very stony. We had some trouble in gettin
the horses and camels the masses of roug
-tone which block up both sides of the creek
Leaving this, we struck across a large bend, ove
stndy country, with large red sand hummocks
and better grassed than any we had yet seen o
the creek. More rain must have fallen here, a
pools of water were visible in many placei
About three o’clock struck the creek again, wit
a wide sandy bed, heavily timbered with box anc
gum, and scrubby. The creek, I think, ha
been running slightly, from the water marks, and
a good deal of green grass was growing on th
banks. Camped on a large waterhole about
quarter of a mile below Mr. Burke’s first camp
after leaving the depot. We could see where th
camels had been tied up, but found no marked
tree. To day I noticed in two or three places ole
camel droppings and tracks, where Mr. Brahe in
formed me he was certain their camels had neve
been, as they were watched every day near the
depot and tied up at night. Mr. Burke’s camels
were led on the way down. It looked very much
as if stray camels had been about during the
last four mouths. The tracks seemed to me to be
going up the creek, but the ground was too stony
to be able to make sure.
Camp 32, Sept. 15. Lat. 27deg. 44min., long
140 deg. 4('min.—On leaving this morning I went
ahead with Sandy, to try and pick up Mr. Burke’s
track. At the lower end of a large waterhole
found where one or two horses had been feeding
for some months; the tracks ran in all directions
to and from the water, and were as recent as a
week. At the same placei found the handle of
a clasp-knife. From here struck out south for a
short distance from the creek, and found a dis-
tinct camel’s track and droppings on a native
path; the footprint was about four months old
and going E. I then sent the black.boy to follow
the creek, and struck across some sandy country
in a bend on the north side. No tracks here; and
coming on a native path leading my way, I fol-
lowed it, as the most likely place to see any signs.
In about four miles this led me to the lower end
of a very large reach of water, and on the oppo-
site side were numbers of native wurleys. I
crossed at a neck of sand, and at a little distance
again came on the track of a camel going up the
creek; at the same time I found a native, who
began to gesticulate in a very excited manner,
and to point down the creek, bawling out,‘‘ Gow,
gow!” as loud as he could; when I went towards
him he ran away, and. finding it impossible to get
him to come to me, I turned back to follow the
camel track and to look after my party, as I had
not seen anything of them for some miles. The
track was visible in sandy places, and was evi-
dently the same I had seen for the last two days,
found horse tracks in places, but very old.
Crossing the creek, I cut our track, and rode
alter the partv. In doing so I came upon three
pounds of tobacco, which had lain where I saw
it for some time. This, together with the knife-
liandle, the fresh horse tracks, and the camel
track going eastward, puzzled me extremely, and
led me into a hundred conjectures. At the lower
end of the large reach of water before mentionec
I met Sandy and Frank looking for me, with the
intelligence that King, the only survivor of Mr
Burke’s party, had been found. A little furthe
on I found the party halted, and immediately
went across to the blacks’ wurleys, where I found
King sitting in a hut which the natives had made
for him He presented a melancholy appearance
wasted to a shadow, and hardly to be distin-
guished as a civilised being but by the remnants
of clothes upon him. He seemed exceedingly
weak, and found it occasionally difficult to fol-
low what he said. The natives were all gatherec
ronnd, seated on the ground, looking with
most gratified and delighted expression Campec
where the party had halted on a high bank, close
to the water I shall probably be here ten days,
to recruit King before returning
Camp 32, Sept 16.—King already looks
vastly improved, even since yesterday,"and not
like the same man. Have commenced shoeing
horses and preparing for our return. Wind from
S.W , with signs of rain. The natives seem to
be getting ready for it.
Camp 32, Sept. 18.—Left camp this morning
with Messrs. Brahe, Welsh, Wheeler, and King,
to perform a melancholy duty which has weighed
on my mind ever since we have camped here, and
which I have only put off until King should be
well enough to accompany us. We proceeded
down the creek for seven miles, crossing a branch
running to the southward, and followed a native
track leading to that part of the creek where
Mr. Burke, Mr. Wills, ana King camped after
their unsuccessful attempt to reach Mount Hope-
less and the northern settlements of South Aus-
tralia, and where poor Wills died. We found the
two gunyahs pretty much as King had described
them, situated on a sandbank between two water-
holes, and about a mile from the flat where they
procured the nardoo seed, on which they managed
to exist so long. Poor Wills’s remains we found
lying in the wurley in which he died, and where
King, after his return from seeking for th natives,
had buried him with sand and rushes We care-
fully collected the remains and interred them
where they lay; and, not having a prayer-book, I
read chap. xv. of 1 Cor., that we might at least feel
a melancholy satisfaction in having shown the. last
respect to his remains. We heaped sand over the
grave, and laid branches upon it, that the natives
might understand by their own tokens not to dis-
turb the last repose of a fellow being, I cut the
following inscription on a tree close by, to mark
the spot:—
W. J. WILLS,
XLV. Yds.
W.N.W.
A.H.
The field books, a note-book belonging to Mr.
Burke, various small articles lying about, of no
value in themselves, but now invested with a deep
interest from the circumstances connected with
them, and some of the nardoo seed on which
they had subsisted, with the small wooden trough
in which it had been cleaned, I have now in my
possession. We returned home with saddened
feelings; but I must confess that I felt a sense of


relief that this painful ordeal had been gone
through. King was very tired when we returned;
and I must, most unwillingly, defer my visit to the
spot where Mr. Burke s remains are lying until
he is better able to bear the fatigue.
Sept. 19. Shoeing horses. A. verv slow and
troublesome job, as many have never been shod
before, and our forge is of the most primitive
description. This afternoon got the pigeons in
order of flying Their tails being rubbed down
by travelling so far in a cage, I got the tails
from several crested pigeons, and inserted feathers
in the stumps of our carriers, fastening the
splices with waxed threads ; the plan answered
far better than I had expected, and the birds
can now fly about the aviary we have made of a
tent with the greatest ease.
Sept. 20.—Started the pigeons at daybreak,
each with a message fastened to its legs. On
throwing them up they commenced wheeling
round the camp, but separated, one being chased
by one of the large kites which are always hover-
ing about the creek After flying round in
various directions with great speed they gra-
dually drew across the creek, when we lost sight of
three; the fourth, after making a large circle,
pitched in a tree about a mile off. After
breakfast he was found under a bush, with a kite
watching him; and the feathers of one of the
other pigeons was found not far off, having been
killed. Of the two others, nothing has been
seen, and I hope that they got clear away, but 1
am much afraid that the experiment has proved
a failure; however, I should have thought more
of it if the pigeons had made a more decided
start. Last night the wind change dfrom N. E.
to S.W., and brought up a slight shower. This
morning S.W., with heavy clouds, threatening
rain. King improving slowly, but very weak
Turned out the white pigeon again this after-
noon ; he flew into a gum standing in the camp,
and has taken up his quarters there —not a proper
proceeding sor a carrier-pigeon, according to my
ideas.
Sept 21. —Finding that it would not be prudent
for King to go out for two or three days, I could
no longer defer making a search for the spot
where Mr. Burke died, and with such directions
as King could give, I went up the creek this
morning, with Messrs. Brahe, Welsh, V\ heeler,
and Aitkin. We searched the creek upwards for
eight miles, and at length, strange to say, found
the remains of Mr. Burke lying among tall
plants, under a clump of box-trees, within 200
yards of our last camp, and not thirty paces from
our track. It was still more extraordinary that
three or four of the party, and the two black boys
had been close to the spot without noticing it.
The bones were entire, with the exception of the
hands and feet; and the body had been removed
from the spot where it first lay, and where the
natives had placed branches over it, to about five
paces distance. I found the revolver which Mr.
Burke held in his hand when he expired
partly covered with leaves and earth, and cor-
roded with rust. It was loaded and capped. We
dug a grave close to the spot, and interred the
remains wrapped in the union jack the most
fitting covering in which the bones of a brave
but unfortunate man could take their last rest.
On a box-tree, at the head of the grave, the fol ■
[owing inscription is cut: —
E. O’H. B,
21 1 9 | 61.
A. H.
Sept. 22. —The pigeon still keeps its quarters
at the camp, and comes down to feed now and
then. I have removed the message, and '.had
leave it to its fate. It has been trying hard to
rain for two or three days, but does not seem
able; great clouds drift over, looking ready to
burst, but only squeeze out two or three drops,
and then pass over. I expect fully that it will
clear up without rain; another dry season will
make Cooper’s Creek look fearfully miserable.
When the hot weather comes on, the water holes
will many of them be dry, unless filled by rain
or a flood. I have written down King’s
tive as much as possible in his own words. Shall
annex it to this diary. Finished shoeing the
horses. , x ,
Sept. 23. —Went down the creek to day, in
search of the natives. One of the party accom-
panied me, and we took two days’ rations, incase
it should be necessary to prolong our search. Two
days after we camped here, the natives left, and
have not been seen since; and I could not think
of leaving without showing them that we coma
appreciate and reward the kindness they* had
shown to Burke’s party, and particularly to King.
For three miles we travelled over alluvial Hats
along the creek, timbered with box and large
gums, and dotted with bean-trees, orange-trees
of large size but at present without fruit, various
kinds acacias, and other bushes. To the right
hand level flats and sand ridges,apparently toler-
ably grassed. We then came on a large reach ot
water, where four or five natives had just been
fishing; their nets were lying on the sand to dry,
and the fire yet burning. Not seeing any one
about, and getting no answer to a cooey, we went
on. At three miles more, we passed the first
feeder of Stralezki’s Creek, going to the south-
ward, and at a large reach of water below louncl
the natives camped. They made a great commo-
tion when we rode up, but seemed very friendly.
I unpacked my blanket, and took out specimen a
of the things I intended giving them—a toma-
hawk, a knife, beads, a looking-glass, comb, and
flour and sugar. The tomahawk was the great
object of attraction, after that the knife, but 1
think that the looking glass surprised them most.
On seeing their faces some seemed dazzled,others
opened their eyes like saucers, and made a
rattling noise with their tongues expressive ot
surprise. We had quite a friendly palaver, and
mv watch amused them immensely. «h*n 1
gave them some of the sugar to taste, it was ab-
surd to see the sleight of hand with which t..ey
pretended to eat it, I suppose from a tear ot being
poisoned, which I suppose is general, as our b ack
boys are continually in dread lest the “ wild b ack
fellows” should poison them by some means. 1
made them understand that they were to bring
the whole tribe up next morning to our camp to
receive their presents, and we parted the best ot
friends. The names of the principal men are
Tchukulow, Mungallee (three in number), To-


quarter, Pitchery (three in number, one a funny
little man, with his head in a net, and a kite’
iea< her in it—another, a tall man, with his beard
tied in a point), Pruriek-w, and Borokow.
Sept 24.—This morning, about ten o’clock,
our b.ack friei ds appeared in a long processioi
men, women, and children, or, as they here als(
call them, picaniimieg nd at a mile distanc
they commenced bawling at the top of thei
voices as usual. W hen collected altogether on
little flat, just below our camp, they must hav
numbered between thirty and 'ortv, and the up
roar was deafening. With the aid of King,
at last got them all seated b fore me, and distri
bated the presents—tomahawks, knives, necklaces
looking-glasses, combs, among them. I think nc
paople were ever so happy before, and it was ver
interesting to see how they pointed out one o
another who they thought might be overlooked
-the picamnnies were brought forward bvthei
parents, to have red ribbon tied round their dirty
little heads. One old woman. Carrawaw, who
had been particularly kind to King, was loaded
with things. I then divided 6olb of sugar be
tween them, each one taking his share in
Union Jack pocket handkerchief, which they were
v ery proud of. The sugar soon found its way into
their mouths; the flour, 501 b. of which I gave
them, they at once called “ white-fellow nardoo,’
and they explained that they understo d that
niese things were given to them for having fee
r n ?‘ k° me ol d clothes were then put on some
ot the men and women, and the affair ended in
several of our party and several of the black-
tellows having an impromptu “ corr-boree,” to
the intense delight of the natives, and, I must
say, very much to our own amusement. They
left, making signs expressive of friendship, carrv-
mg their presents with them. Tbe men all wore
a net girdle, and of the women, some wore one of
leaves, others of feathers. I feel confident that
we have left the best impression behind us, and
that the “ white fellows,” as they have already
learned to call us, will be looked on henceforth
as jriends, and that, in case of emergency,
any one will receive the kindest treatment at
their hands.
Sept. 25.—At camp 31. This morning I
t imed my face homewards. The object of
our mission being fulfilled, I had to do so,
but I return with a great regret at not
being able to go on. We take back five months’
lations from this date, at the scale we have been
using, and which has proved sufficient. 1 he party
are in the best of health, the horses in fine
order, and the camels none the worse for their
journey, and decidedly in better health than
when they left the Darling. On the edge of a
cour try so well worth exploring, in a tolerably
goo l season, and with the means I now have at
my disposal, I feel how much might be done,
ue camped to-day at our last camp but one,
coming down the creek, making an easy stage
lor King. Got in by noon, as tbe horses were very
iresh after their spell. The camels gave us a
good deal of trouble this afternoon, and from a
cause which may and probably will constantly
occur. One of the male camels has taken to
driving tbe females about, and fighting with the
ether male, Sami, who up to this time had been
master. To-day the other camel was furious, and
in spite of being short hobbled, and having his
head tied down to his knee, chased the whole of
the camels from the camp, ten minutes after
they were let loose, and although Brahe went
immediately after them, and was for three hours
on their tracks, he was unable to overtake them
Coming back for a horse, he took Sandv with
him, and cut across to where he had left the
tracks, running N over some very rough stony
country. It was dark belore they returned
having found the camels some miles away. From
this and similar occurrences, I find it very un-
wise to take male and female camels on s
journey together. One is never safe for a dav
from their straying, and from continual fights be-
tween the male camels for mastery. The result
is, that the camels are continually harassed, and
watch each other instead of feeding. With
either all male or all female camels there would
be less, or certainly not more, trouble than with
horses; and, with this drawback, I firmly believe
in the suitability of camels for exploring.
Sept. 26. Made ten miles, and camped where
the creek forces a passage through the rocks.
Sept. 27.—Obliged to stay where we are, as one
ot the mares foaled during the night. Knocked
the foal on the head. Blowing hot wind.
Sept. 28.—Camped at the fish-pond,' having
made only fifteen miles. King very tired ; can-
not ride on a camel, as he thought, and had to
give him a horse to try if it would be easier
for him. Dug up the things planted by Mr.
Burke and Mr. Wills, and found the field books
and papers all safe. All hands fishing this even-
ing, and a large number of fish caught, varying
from a quarter of a pound to three pounds and
a-quarier. Blowing a strong hot wind from N
and N.E.; will dry up the surface water very-
fast.
Sept. 29.—The doctor does not consider that
King should travel to-day, so shall remain here.
Could not have a much better place on the creek
—plenty of feed and abundance of fish. A dozen
caught this morning weighed nearly twenty*
pounds. Two of the party caught seventy-two
pounds weight from three o’clock to sundown.
They are most excellent eating, Ido not know
any fish of as fine a flavour. Strong gale
from N. and N.E., and very hot. If this
goes on without rain we shall have some
pushing to do before reaching Kolialto; and,
without rain has fallen, I do not think we can
depend with certainty on any water from Poria
to Nunderungee Creek—about 180 miles.
Sept. 30.—Camped at our 28ih camp. Surface
water nearly all gene, and no feed. Found a
small pool at the mouth of a gully, but all the
other water in the creek was as salt as brine. Hot
wind again.
Oct. 1. —Halted above our 27th camp, at a
number of water holes, where there was prettv
good feed. Passed our black friends on the road,
who invited us to stop and eat fish and nardoo, and
have a corroboree. Strong hot wind from N.W.
round to N.E. —the fifth day now; and it seems
to have blown away every sign of clouds. The
sky looks hard and blue, with a grey haze on the
horizon, and the vegetation is withering fast.
Where we camped happened to be not more


I mv a couple of hundred yards from a large
live camp, situated in a branch channel, and
mpletely hidden by dense t imber and scrub,
hea we arrived, all the men excepting three
i fellows were away, and only the lubras and
vaninnies were at home, in a terrible fright at so
my white-fellows squatting down close to them,
ley began to pack up their things for a flight;
it an amicable understanding being brought
iout, and some of the men returning, we were
on the best of friends. I distributed the few
maining presents, and they gave in return
me chewed pitchery and nardoo balls. One
d greybeard had been as far as Wonominta
reek, and could repeat the names of the various
aters between here and that place, via Bulla;
it I found him impenetrable on any other road,
here were about twenty men, all well made and
ell fed, and several were old patriarchs, and
ime of them apparently old rascals, too. They
ere far more incline I to be troublesome and
aportunate than our friends lower down—parti-
xlarly one tall young fellow, rubbed all over with
sd earth, who pestered me for a tomahawk. One
' them had had his arm broken above the wrist,
ad roughly bandaged up with rags and grass
vrd; the doctor set it properly, and it was re-
larkable to see the perfect composure with
hich the blackfellow bore the operation. In
ssisting I had to use my clasp-knife to cut bark-
plinls, and laying it down beside me it of course
anished, and I saw no more of it; but strange
o say, in the same place shortly afterwards o ie
f the knives was found which I had given the
dackfellows, which, 1 suppose, they had ex-
hanged for mine, on the principle of the old
aying that “ exchange is no robbery.” After a
irhile the natives began to draw in too close to
ur camp, talking a good deal about our ,l portos,’
r bundles, so that we had to draw a line as a
ioundary, a hint they took at once, and all
quatted down beyond it. At dusk I fired off two
ockets, to their* unbounded surprise, but they
vere not so alarmed as I expected, probably from
feeling that we were kindly disposed towards
hem. I believe that the sight of us smoking,
md seeing the smoke coming out of our mouths,
darmed them much more, as some made signs to
>ut the pipe awav, and others got up and walked
)ff, looking behind them. At dark they retired
;o their camp.
Oct. 2.—'This morning the natives came up and
;ommenced a brisk trade in nets, grass-string
girdles, boomerangs, and other things, for old
dothes, rags, and such like valuable property. For
part of an old blanket I obtained two boomerangs,
i large staff used in digging roots, one of the long
pointed sticks used in fishing, a stone tomahawk
cemented into a boxwood handle, and the head of
a larger one, about the size and shape of an
American axe, which the proprietor, a tall old
warrior with one very sinister eye. scraped up
from the sand by his hut. The smaller tomahawk
he dropped twice between his camp and ours, and
pretended he had never had it, until I made him
understand that I was not going to be done, when
he burst out laughing, and sent his Jubra back for
it. The whole mob sat down by our camp, and
observed us packing up with great interest, but
were terribly frightened at the horses, far more
I» than at the camels. They accompanied us for
alf a mile on oar road, and then waited looking
'ter us for a while. Camped at some sand-hills
ear our - 26th camp, the only water near being
pool of liquid mud, from which we obtained a
nail supply of water by draining the surface,
a going up this was a fine channel. Day rather
ot, but the wind from the S„ and a great im-
rovement on the last five of hot winds.
Oct. 3.—This morning the clouds began to
ank up from the south, drawing northward, with
very sign of a thunderstorm. During the
ime we were tra.elling, before reaching our
amp, the clouds continued to gather in masses,
hreatening rain, but dispersed as they passed
ver towards an arch of blue sky to the north.
The country much greener since we came down,
wing to the two nights’ rain we had. Camped
the remains of what had been a large sheet of
vater in one of the branches of the creek. It has
low a very unpleasant taste of soda, and pro-
luces thirst’rather than quenches it. Sent
J hillips away after dinner on one of the spare
mrses, to run our track as far as possible before
right among the sand-hills, to see if there was
my water in the polj T gonum flats. The clouds
dill gathering, and thunder and heavy rain to
the north east and south-east. We lit a fire at
lark on the edge of the plain, but had great dil-
iiculty in keeping it up, as the natives had burned
ill the dead wood near the water. By means of
this, and rockets fired occasionally, Phillips
returned about nine o’clock, having been ten
miles on the track. He reported the water to be
almost all dried up, and had only seen two small
pools of mud The night very dark, with thunder
and lightning, but no rain.
Oct. 4. —Started late this morning, as I wished
all thehorses to drink well before leaving thecreek
and also as I had to send the camels two miles to
fill the water-bags, this pool being scarcely drink-
able. I went on ahead of the party to search for
water, but did not leave the track for the ten
miles Phillips had been over. The sand-hills are
looking splendid, the two nights’ rain having
covered them with grass andherbage.and even the
earthy flats between the ridges show some signs ot
vegetation. About three o’clock I came on four
native children sleeping under the shade of a box-
tree, and covered with nets, One waking sm -
denlv, started up in a terrible fright at such i n
unusual sight, and ran off screaming into tl e
polygonum, where I saw its mother peeping nt
me through a bush. When I called out to heno
come she did so, but kept at a very respectfi i
distance. I asked for water, and to re-assuie
her gave her an old handkerchief. She got her
children gathered round her, two on her back and
one carrying a fourth, all of them screaming
loudly, and having pointed out a little pool «f
mud, moved off to a sand-hill, where she com-
menced bawling to some of the natives, who
seemed to be about half a mile off. I went off to
hunt over the flat for water and shortly heaid
shouts of “ Gew, gew,” behind me, from three
natives, who came running up in an excited state
each with a boomerang or a waddy. We soon,
however, came to a friendly' understanding by
means of a few words I knew, and the promise
of* kt ife decided them to show me the water.


One of them, a jolly-looking young fellow, minus
his Iront teeth, took the lead ; the other two, both
of them dressedin red paint and a head net keeping
a little on one side. We kept up a sort of conversa-
tion, and in half an hour came to their camp a large
hut on a sand-hill, with a small pool of water near
among the clay-pans. I was very much amused
at the ceremonious way in which my guide led the
way, pointing out the best road, and very
earnestly making me notice the bushes in my way
as if I were in danger of falling over them. They
gave me as usual a ball of chewed pitchery, and
seemed very much surprised that neither I nor
my horses cared about drinking. I found it quite
impossible to make them understand that the
waterhole was too small. My guide having re-
ceived his knife, was now very anxious to have
my shirt, which, of course, T objected to; and,
as I could learn nothing more, I gave them a few
matches and'rode on my way. My four black
friends, however, either out of politeness, or in
the hopes of getting my shirt, followed me and
kept so close behind the tail of my horse, each
with a waddy in his hand, that I thoughtit best to
send them back to their camp, whither they went,
after some yabbering among themselves. 'About
three miles further on I found eight small chan-
nels of water in a polygonum flat, containing suffi-
cient water for ourselves and our horses for two
days. Camped here, when the party came up, in
splendid feed.
Oct. s.—Camped to day at the tank, which,
with the channel by it. is brimful of water.
The country looks beautiful, the sandhills are
covered with flowers and bushes in full bloom
and swarm with birds of all kinds. It has every
appearance of being spring here. Passed several
fine channels of water by the track. Natives in
various places scattered through these sand-
hills. It is very difficult to estimate the num-
ber of the blacks here, but I believ e they can-
not be far short of 400, belonging to Cooper’s
Creek.
Oct. 6. —Stokes’ Ranges, Surprise Creek-
Left the tank this morning, carrying as much
water as possible on the camels, and two horse
loads sufficient for ourselves for four days and
one drink for the horses; calculating on making
Koliatti or Poria Creek, in four days. If I find
water on the track 1 intend striking for Wilkie’s
Creek. The sandhills covered with grass and
flowers, and even the bare clayey plains, and the
miserable stony country, between them and the
ranges had struggled into something resembling
vegetation. The ranges, where we entered them,
by Brahe’s Gap, are not so high as where we
crossed them more to the westward, but run in
low ridges along wide stony valleys formed by
the numerous gorges we found so difficult to
cr )ss. Mulga and acacia shrub everywhere, but
rot much feed; only saltbush and very short
herbage grown since the rains. We were agreeably
s.-rprised by a fine waterhole in the first creek
we came to, which proved to be the lowest of
several of nearly the same size higher up the
creek. I believe it to be about ten yards wide
and eighty long, and some three or four feet
c eep. Distance, eighteen miles,
Oct. 7.—Stokes’ Ranges, Keppel’s Creek, lat.
£Bdeg. 17 min., lon. 142 deg. 30 min.—We were
late in leaving camp this morning, as nineteen of
the horses had followed the track back for
several miles. The country travelled through for
fifteen miles was much of the same character—
wide stony flats surrounded by low ridges, and
intersected by gum creeks coming from the
gorges in a northerly direction. We passed
through a succession of gaps, in each of which
we found a creek with pools of clear rain-water,
and from the very loose gravelly nature of the
ground, I am inclined to believe that these
creeks are still running slowly underground
since the rain. At fifteen miles came on the
south slopes of the range, with a wide view to-
wards Koliatti and Poria. Camped on a small
watercourse near its junction with Keppel’s
Creek Two tolerable pools of water. Another
make-believe thunder-storm to-night, with violent
gusts of wind, but no rain, excepting at two places
to the N.W., where it appeared to be raining,
about a mile wide. Everything looks spring-like
here.
Oct. B.—Junction Camp, No. 21.—Crossed
Keppel’s Creek and travelled over stony slopes,
for six miles, when we crossed the creek on to
barren sandy plains. At three miles entered
the sandhills and found the country terribly
burned up, and no sign, of water Rain can-
not have fallen here for some time. Made our
old camp in twenty-two miles from K-ppel’s
Creek, and found water still in the small creek,
but the feed very dry and scanty.
October 9.—Poria Creek—When the party
started this momin. I went to the westward of
the track, and found that at a short distance the
sandhills terminated in the gum forests and poly-
gonum swamps before-mentioned From a high
sandhill 1 could see across these for many miles
towards the range in a westerly direction, and I
believe that they also extend to or across Wilkie’s
Creek to the south I found no water, but I am
convinced that there are other channels similar
to the one we camped on last night, which will
contain water for months after rain. At Wilkie’s
Creek I again left the track, and followed the
creek upwards, crossing several deep channels
running in and out of it, and full of water.
At a short distance I came on a large sheet of
water, certainly more than a mile long, and about
eighty feet wide, and with the couch grassgrowing
on its banks, and large box timber, having a
striking resemblance to some of the smaller
branches of Cooper’s Creek. It is a far finer
watercourse than I had at first supposed. Made
Poria Creek about two o’clock. The country
very dry and parched—we seem, in one day s
journey to have travelled from spring into
summer.
WILLS’ JOURNAL.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 1.
[The omissions in the diary are supplied by
the information contained in the maps, with the
exception of the last two days on the shore of the
gulf.]
Sunday, Dec. 16,1860. —The two horses having
been shod, and our reports finished, we started


at forty minutes past six a.m. for Eyre’s Creek,
the party consisting of Mr. Burke, myself,
King, and Charley having with us six camels,
one horse, and three months’ provisions. We
followed down the creek to the point where
the sandstone ranges cross the creek, and
were accompanied to that place by Brahe,
who would return to take charge of the depot
Down to this point the banks of the creek are
very rugged and stony, but there is a tolerable
supply of grass and saltbush in the vicinity. A
large tribe of blacks came pestering us to go to
their camp and have a dance, which we declined
They were very troublesome, and nothing but
the threat to shoot them will keep them away;
they are, however, easily frightened, and,
although fine looking men. decidedly not of a
warlike disposition. They show the greatest, in-
clination to take whatever they can, but will run
no unnecessary risk in so doing. They seldom
carry any weapons, except a shield and a large
kind of boomerang, which I believe they use for
killing rats, &c ; sometimes, but very seldom,
they have a large spear j reed spears seem to be
quite unknown to them They are undoubtedly
a finer and better looking race of men than the
blacks on the Murray and Darling and
more peaceful, but in other respects I be-
lieve they do not compare favourably with them,
for, from the little we have seen of them, they
appear to be mean-spirited and contemptible in
every respect.
Monday, Dec. 17.—We continued to fol-
low down the creek. Found its course very
crooked, and the channel frequently dry for a con-
siderable distance, and then forming into magnifi-
cent waterholes, abounding in waterfowl of all
kinds. The country on each side is more open
than on the upper part of the creek. The soil
on the plains is of a light earthy nature, sup-
porting abundance of saltbush and grass, Most
of the plains are lightly timbered, and the ground
is finer, and not cracked up, like at the head of
the creek. Left Camp No. 67 at ten minutes to
six a.m., having bieakfasted before leaving. We
followed the creek along from point to point, at
first in a direction W.N.W, for about twelve
miles, then about N.W. At about noon we passed
the last water, a short distance beyond which the
creek runs out on a polygonum {Tolygo-
num Cunningham i') flat; but the timber
was so large and dense, that it deceived us
into the belief that there was a continuation of
the channel; on crossing the polygonum ground
to where we expected to find the creek we be-
came aware of our mistake. Not thinking it
advisable to chance the existence of water a-head,
we camped at the end of a large but shallow
sheet of water in the sandy bed of the creek.
The hole was about 150 links broad, and feet
deep in most places. In most places the tem-
perature of the water was almost incredibly high,
which induced me to try it in several places.
The mean of two on the shady side of the
creek gave 97.4 deg. As may be imagined, this
water tasted disagreeably warm, but we soon
cooled some in water bags, and, thinking that it
would be interesting to know what we might call
cool, I placed the thermometer in a pannikin
containing some that appeared delightfully cool,
almost cold in fact; its temperature was. to our
astonishment, 78deg. At half-past six, when a
strong wind was blowing from south, and tcm -
perature of air had fallen to 80deg., the lowest
temperature of water in the hose, that had been
exposed to the full effect of evaporation for
several hours, was 72deg. This water for
drinking appeared positively cold—too low a
temperature to be pleasent under the circum-
stances. A remarkable southerly squall came on
between five and six p.m , with every appearance
of rain. The sky however soon cleared, but the
wind continued to blow in a squally and irregular
manner from the same quarter at evening.
Wednesday, Dec. 19.—Started at a quarter-
past eight a.m. Leaving what seemed to be
the end of Cooper’s Creek we took a
course a little to the north of west, intending to
try and obtain water in some of the creeks
that Stuart mentioned that he had crossed, and
at the same time to see whether they were con-
nected wfith Cooper’s Creek, as appeared most
probable from the direction in which we found
the latter running, and from the manner in which
it had been breaking up into small channels
flowing across the plains in a N. and N.N.W.
direction. We left on our right the flooded fiats
on which this branch of the creek rims out, and
soon came to a series of sand-ridges, the direc-
tions of which were between N. 2 W. and N.N.W.
The country is well grassed, and supports plenty
of saltbush. Many of the valleys are liable to
be inundated by the overflow of the main creek.
They have watercourses and polygonum flats,
bordered with box-trees, but we met with no
holes fit to hold a supply of water. At about ten
miles we crossed a large earthy flat, lightly tim-
bered with box and gum. The ground was very
bad for travelling on, being much cracked up,
and intersected by innumerable channels, which
continually carried off the water of a large creek.
Some of the valleys beyond this were very pretty,
the ground being sound, aod covered with fresh
plants, which made them look beautifully green.
At fifteen miles, we halted where two Urge
plains joined. Our attention had been at-
tracted by some red breasted cockatoos, pigeons,
a crow, and several other birds, whose pre-
sence made us feel sure that there was water
not far off; but our hopes were soon destroyed
by finding aclaypan just drying up. It contained
just sufficient liquid to make the clay boggy. At
ten minutes to seven p.m. we moved on, steering
straight for Eyre’s Creek, N.W. by N., intending
to make a good night’s journey, and avoid ths
heat of the day; but at a mile and a half we
came to a creek, which looked so well that wc
followed it for a short distance, and finding two
or three good waterholes of good milky water, we
camped for the night. This enabled me to secure
an observation of the eclipse of Jupiter’s I satel-
lite as well as some latitude observations. The
night was so calm that 1 used the water as a
horizon, but I find it much more satisfactory to
take the mercury, for several reasons.
Thursday, Dec. 21 (20?). —We did not
leave this camp until half-past eight, having
delayed to refill the water-bags with the milky
water, which all of us found to be a great treat
again. It is certainly more pleasant to drink


than the clear water, and, at the same time, more
satisfying. Our course from here, N.W. by N.,
took us through some pretty country, lightly
timbered and well grassed. We could seethe
H ie of creek timber winding through the valley
on our left. At a distance of five miles
there was a bush-fire on its banks, and
beyond it the creek made a considerable bend to
the S-W. At two miles further we came in
sight of a large lagoon, bearing N. by W., and at
three miles more we camped on what would seem
the same creek as last night, near where it
enters the lagoon. The latter is of great extent,
and contains a large quantity of water, which
swarms with wildfowl of every description. It is
very shallow, but is surrounded by the most
pleasing woodland scenery, and everything in the
vicinity looks fresh and green. The creek near
its junction with the lagoon contains some good
water-holes, five to six feet deep. They are
found in a sandy alluvium, which is very boggy
when wet. There was a large camp of not less
than forty or fifty blacks near where we stopped
They brought us presents of fish, for which we
gave them some beads and matches. These fish
we found to be a most valuable addition to our
rations. They were of the same kind as we had
found elsewhere, but finer, being nine to ten
inches long, and two or three inches deep, and in
such good condition that they might have been
fried in their own fat. It is a remarkable fact,
that these were the first blacks who had offered
us any fish since we reached Cooper’s Creek.
Friday, Dec 21. We left Camp 70 at
half past five a.m., and tried to induce one
or two of the blacks to go with us. but
it was of no use. Keeping our former course, we
were pulled up a', ihree miles by a fine lagoon,
and then by the creek that flows into it;
the latter being full of water, we were obliged
to trace it a mile up before we could cross.
I observed on its banks two wild plants of the
gourd or melon tribe; one much resembling a
stunted cucumber, and other, both in leaf and
appearance of fruit, was very similar to a small
model of a water melon (probably muckia
micranthu ). The latter plant I also found at
Camp 68, On tasting the pulp of the newly
found fruit, which was about the size of a
large pea 1 found it to he so acrid that it was
with difficulty that I removed the taste from my
mouth. At eight or nine miles from where we
crossed the creek we passed another large lagoon,
leaving it two miles on our left, and shortly after-
wards we saw one nearly as far on our right.
This last we should have availed ourselves of, hut
that we expected to find water in a creek which
we could see, by the timber lining its banks,
flowed from the lagoon on our left, and crossed
our course a few miles ahead. We reached it at
a distance of four cr five miles further, and found
a splendid waterhole, at which we camped. The
creek at this point flows in a northerly direction,
through a large lightly timbered flat, on which it
partially runs out. The ground is however,
sound and well clothed with grass and salsola-
ceous p.ants. Up to this point the country through
which we have passed has been of the finest de-
scription for pastoral purposes. The grass and
saltbush are everywhere abundant, and water is
plentiful, with every appearance of permanence.
We met with porcupine grass (T/iodia pungans,
Br.) and only two sand ridges before reaching
Camp 71.
COOPEE’S CEEEK TO CAEPENTAEIA.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 2. LAT. 27 DEG. TO 25£ DEO.
STATIONS 72 TO 78.
Saturday, Dec. 22.—At five minutes to five
a.m. we left one of the most delightful camps
we have had in the journey, and proceeded on
the same course as before, N.W. by N., across
some high ridges of loose sand, many of which
were partial!}' clothed with poicupine" grass. We
found the ground much worse to travel over than
any we have yet met with. As the ridges were
exceedingly abrupt and steep on their eastern
side, and although sloping gradually towards the
west, were so honeycombed in some places by the
burrows of rats, that the camels were continually
in danger of falling. At a distance of about six
miles we descended from these ridges to undula-
lating country of open box forest, where every-
thing was green and fresh. There is an abundance
of grass and salt bushes and lots of birds of all
descriptions. Several flocks of pigeons passed
over our heads, making for a point a little to our
right, where there is no tjoubt plenty of water,
but we did not go off our course to look for it.
Beyond the box forest, which kept away to the
right, we again entered the sand-ridges, and at a
distance of six miles passsed close to a dry salt
lagoon, the ridges in the vicinity of which are
less regular in their form and direction, and con-
tain nodules of limestone. The ground in the
flats and claypans near has that encrusted sur-
face that cracks under the pressure of the foot,
and is a sure indication of the presence of saline
deposits. At a distance of eight miles from the
lagoon, we camped at the foot of a sand-ridge,
jutting out on the Stony Desert. I was rather
disappointed, but not altogether surprised, to find
the latter nothing more nor less than the stony
rises that we had before met with, only on a
larger scale, and not quite so undulating. During
the afternoon several crows came to feed on the
plain. They came Irom a K N.E. direeton, no
doubt from a portion of the creek that flows
through the forest that we left on our right. In
the morning, as we were loading, a duck passed
over, but it was too dark to see which way it
went.
Sunday, Dec. 23.—At five a.m., we struck out
across the desert in a W.N.W. direction. At
four miles and a half wo crossed a sand ridge, and
then returned to our N.VV. by N course. We
found the ground not nearly so bad for travelling
on as that between Bulloo and Cooper’s Creek;
in fact, I do not know whether it arose from
our exaggerated anticipation of horrors or not,
but we thought it far from had travelling ground,
and as to pasture, it is only the actually stony
ground that is bare, and many a she -p run is,
in fact, worse grazing than that. At fifteen
miles we crossed another sand-ridge, for several
miles around which there is plenty of grass and
fine saltbush. After crossing this ridge, we de-
scended to an earthy plain, where the ground was
rather heavy, being in some places like pieces
of slaked lime, and intersected by small water-


courses. Flocks of pigeons rose from amongst
the salt bushes and polygonum, but all the creeks
were dry, although marked by lines of box timber.
Several gunyahs of the blacks were situated near
a water-bole that had apparently contained water
very lately, and heaps of grass were lying about
the plains, from which they had beaten the seeds.
We pushed on, hoping to find the creeks as-
suming an improved appearance, but they did
not, and at one o’clock we halted, intending to
travel through part of the night. About sunset
three flocks of pigeons passed over us, all going
in the same direction, due north by compass,
and passing over a ridge of sand in that direction.
Not to have taken notice of such an occurrence
would have been little short of a sin, so we
determined to go eight or ten miles in that di-
rection. Starting at seven o’clock p.m., we, at
six miles, crossed the ridge over which the birds
had flown, and came on a flat subject to in
undation. The ground was at first hard and
even, like the bottom of a clay pan, but
at a mile or so we cane on cracked earthy ground,
intersected by numberless small channels running
in all directions. At nine miles, we reached the
bed of a creek running from east to west; it was
only bordered by polygonum bushes, as there
was no timber visible on the plains, we thought
it safer to halt until daylight, for fear we would
miss the water. At daylight, when we had
saddled, a small quantity of timber could be seen,
at the point of a sand-ridge, about one and a half
to two miles to the west of us, and on going there
we found a fine creek, with a splendid sheet of
water, more than a mile long, and averaging
nearly three chains broad; it is, however, only
two or three feet deep in most parts.
Monday, Dec. 24.—We took a day of rest
on _ Gray’s Creek, to celebrate Christmas.
This was doubly pleasant, as we had never in our
most sanguine moments anticipated finding
such a delightful oasis in the desert. Our camp
was really an agreeable place for we had all the
advantages ot food and water attending a position
on a large creek or river, and were at the same
time free of the annoyance of the numberless
ants, flies, and mosquitoes that are invariably
met with amongst timber or heavy scrub.
Tuesday, Dec. 25. We left Gray’s Creek
at half-past four a.m., and proceeded to
cross the earthy rotten plains in the direction of
Eyre’s Creek. At a distance of about nine
miles, we reached some lines of trees and
bushes, which were visible from the top of the
sand-ridge at Gray’s Creek. We found them
growing on the banks of several small
creeks, which trend to the N. and N.N.W.
At a mile and a half further we crossed a small
creek, N.N.E., and joining the ones above-
mentioned. This creek contained abundance of
water, in small detatched holes, from fifty to one
hundred links long, well shaded by steep banks
and overhanging bushes. The water had a sus-
piciously transparent colour, and a slight trace of
brackishness, but the latter was scarcely per-
ceptible Near where the creek joined them is a
sand-hill, and a dense mass of fine timber. The
smoke of a fire indicated the presence of blacks,
who soon made their appearance, and followed us
for some distance, beckoning us away to the N.E.
We, however, continued our course N.W.
by N., but, at a distance of a mile and a-half,
found that the creeks did not come round as we
expected, and that the fall of the water was in a
direction nearly opposite to our course, or about
west to east. We sir uck off W. for a high sand-
ridge, from which we anticipated seeing whether
it were worth while for us to follow the course of
the creeks we had crossed. We were surprised
to find all the water-courses on the plains trend-
ing rather to the south of east; and at a distance
of three miles, after changing our course, and
when we approached the sand-hills towards which
we had been steering, we were agreeably pulled
up by a magnificent creek, coming from the
N.N.W., and running in the direction of the
fire we had seen. We had now no choice but to
change our course again, for we could not have
crossed even if we had desired to do so. On fol-
lowing up the south bank of the creek, we found
it soon keeping a more northerly course than it
had where we first struck it. This fact, together
with magnitude and general appearance, lessened
the probability of its being Eyre’s Creek, as
seemed at first very likely from their relative
positions and directions. The day being very hot,
and the camels tired from travelling over the
earthy plains, which by the by, are not nearly
so bad as those at the head of Cooper’s Creek, we
camped at one o’clock p.m., having traced the
creek up about five miles, not counting the bends.
For the whole of this distance we found not a
break or interruption of water, which appears to
be very deep. The banks are from twenty to thirty’
feet above the water, and very steep they are
clothed near the water’s edge with mint and other
weeds, and on the top of each side there is a belt
of box trees and various shrubs The lower part
of the creek is bounded towards the north by a
high red sand-ridge, and on the south side is an
extensive plain, intersected by numerous water-
courses, which drain off the water in flood time.
The greater portion of the plain is at present very
bare, but the stalks of dry grass show that after
rain or floods there will be a good crop on the
harder and well-drained portion, but I believe the
loose earthy portion supports no vegetation at
any time. The inclination of the ground from
the edge of the creek bank towards the plain is
in many places very considerable. This I should
take to indicate that the flooding is or has been
at one time both frequent and regular.
Wednesday, Dec. 26.—We started at five a.m.,
following up the creek from point to point of the
bends. Its general course was at first N. by W.
but at about six miles the sand ridge on the west
closed in on it, and at this point it takes a turn
to the N.N.E. for half-a-mile, and then comes
round suddenly N.W. Up to this point, it
had been rather improving in appearance than
otherwise, but in the bend to the NW. the
channel is very broad, its bed being limestone
rock and indurated way; is for a space of five
or six chains quite dry, then commences another
waterhole. the creek keeping a little more
towards N. We crossed the creek here, and
struck across the plain on a due N. course, for
we could gif t the line of timber coming up to' -
the sand-ridges in that direction, for a distance of
seven or eight miles. We did not touch the creek


and the eastern sand-ridge receded to a distance,
in some places of nearly three miles, from our
line, leaving an immense extent of grassy plain
oetween it and the creek. The distinctly marked
feature on the lower part of the creek is, that
whenever the main creek is on one side of a plain,
there is always a fine billybong on the opposite
side, each of them almost invariably sticking
close to the respective sand-ridges Before
coming to the next bend of the creek, a view
from the top of a sand-hill showed me that the
creek receives a large tributary from the N.W.
at about two miles above where we had crossed
it, A fine line of timber running up to the N.W.,
joined an extensive tract of box forest, and the
branch we were following was lost to view in a
similar forest towards the N. The sand-ridge
was so abrupt when we came to the creek,'that it
was necessary to descend into its bed through
one of the small ravines adjoining it. We found
it partially run out, the bed being sand, and
strewed with nodules of lime, some, of which
were one and a-half to two feet long. They
had apparently been formed in the sand-downs
by infiltration.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO. 3. LAT. S. 25£ DEG. TO 23| DEG.
STATIONS 78 TO 85.
Sunday, Dee. 30.—Finding that the creek was
trending considerably towards the east, without
much likelihood of altering its course, we struck
off from it, taking a ten days’ supply of water,
as there were ranges visible to the north,
which had the appearance of being stony.
A N.E. by N. course was first taken for about
seven miles, in order to avoid them. The whole
of this distance was over alluvial earthy plains,
the soil of which was firm, but the vegetation
scanty.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO. 4. CAMP 85 TO 9<\ LAT. 23j
DEG. TO 22J DEG. FINE COUNTRY —TROPICS.
Saturday, Jan. s.—On leaving Camp 84 we
found slight, but distinct indications of rain in
the groves, and a few blades of grass and small
weeds in the. little depressi ns of the plain.
These indications were, however, so slight that
but for the fact of our having found surface
water in two holes near our camp, we should hardly
have noticed them At a distance o about two
miles, in a N.N E direction, we came to a creek
with a long, broad, shallow waterhole. The well-
worn path, the recent tracks of natives, and the
heaps of shells, on the contents of which the
latter had feasted, showed a once that this creek
must be connected with some creek of consider-
able importance The camels and horses being
greatly in need of rest, we only mov ed up about
half a mile, and camped for the day.
Sunday, Jan 6 —Started at twenty minutes to
six o’clock, intending to make an easy day’s stage
along the creek. As we proceeded up in a
northerly direction, we found the waterhole
to diminish in size very much, and at about two
and a-half miles the creek ran out in a Jot of
small water-courses. At the upper end of the
creek we found in its bed what appeared to be an
arrangement for catching fish. It consisted of a
small oval mud paddock, about 12 ft. by Bft., the
si les of which.were about nine inches above the
bottom of the hole and the top of the fence,
covered with long grass so arranged that the ends
of the blades overhung scantily by several inches
the sides of th« hole. As there was no sign of timber
to the N., we struck off to N W. by N. for a fine
line of timber that came up from the S.W., and
seemed to run parallel with thecreek wewereabout
to leave. At a distance of about three miles we
reached the bank of a fine creek, and containing a
sheet of water two chains broad, at least fifteen
feet deep in the middle The banks are shelving,
sandyj and lightly clothed with box trees and
various shrubs. On starting to cross the plains
towards this creek, we were surprised at the
oright green appearance of strips of land, which
look in the distance like swamps; on approach-
ing some of them we found that there had been
a considerable fall of rain in some places, which
had raised a finecropof grass and portulac {portu-
laca olerasca, L.), wherever the soil wasof a sandy
and light nature, but the amount of moisture
had been insufficient to affect the hard clayey
ground, which constitutes he main portion of
the plain. The sight of two native companions
feeding here added greatly to the encouraging
prospects; they are the only specimens of that
bird that I remember to have seen on that side
of the Darling.
Monday, Jan. 7.—We started at half-past four
a m without water, thinking that we might safely
rely on this creek for one day’s journey. We,
however, found the line of timber soon begin to
look small; at three miles the channel contained
only a few pools of surface water. We continued
across the plains on a due north course, fre-
quently crossing small watercourses, which had
been filled by the rain, but were fast drying
up. Here and there as we proceeded, dense lines
of timber on our right showed that the creek
came from the east of north. At a distance of
thirteen miles we turned to N.N E., towards a
fine line of timber We found a creek of con-
siderable demensions, that had only two or three
small waterholes; but as there was more than
sufficient for us, and very little feed for the beasts
anywhere else, we camped. I should i ave liked
this camp to have been in a more prominent
and easily recognized position, as it happens to
be. almost exactly on the tropic of Capricorn.
The ti emendous gale of wind that we had in the
evening and nigbt prevented me from taking a
latitude observation, whereas I had some good
ones at the last camp and at Camp 86 My
reckoning cannot be far out. I found on taking
out my instruments one of my spare thermo-
meters was broken, and the glass of my aneroid
barometer cracked—the latter, I believe, not
otherwise injured. This was done by the camel
having taken it into its head to roll while the
pack was on his back
Tuesday, January B.—Started at a quarter past
five, a.m., with a load of water, determined to be
independent of all creeks and watercourses. At
a mile and a-half found surface water in a small
creek, and at a mile further water in two or three
places on the open plains. The country weerossed for
the first ten miles, consists of fine open plains of
firm argillaceous soil, too stiff and hard to be


affected by the small quantity of fain that has
fallen as yet They are subject to inundations
from the overflow of a number of small creeks
which intersect hem in a direction E.N.E, to W.
tSW Nearly all the creeks are lined with box-
rees and shrubs, in a tolerably healthy state
Of the remains of dead trees, there is only a fair
proportion to the living ones. After traversing a
plain of greater extent than th rest. we. at ten
miles, reached a ere k. proportionately large and
important looking The channel, however, at
the point where we struck it was deep, level, and
dry, hut I believe there is water in it not far off;
for there were some red-breasted cockatoos in the
trees, and native parrots on each side On the
north side there is a nart bearing off to the N.N
W. The mirage on the plain to the south of the
•reek was stronger than I have before seen
it. There appear to be sheets of water within a
few yards of one, and it looks sufficiently smooth
and glassy to be used for an artificial horizon
To the westward of the plains some fine sand-hills
were visible nearlv in the direction in which the
creek flow'd. To the north of the creek the
country undergoes a great change. At first there
is a little earthy land subject to inundation.
The soil then becomes more sandy, the
stony pans in which water collects after
rain; the whole country is slightly undulating,
lightly timbered and splendidly grassed A
number of small disconnected creeks are scattered
about, many of which contained water protected
from the sun and wind by a luxuriant growth of
fine grasses and small bushes. We passed one
«r two litfle rises of sand and pebbles on which
were growing some trees quite new to me: but
for the seed pods. I should have taken them for
a species of crumanni, although the leaf stalks
have not the jointed peculiarities of those plants.
The trunks and branches are like the sheoak, the
leaves Tike those of a pine; they droop like a
willow, and the seed is small, flat, in a large flat
pod about six inches by three quarters of an inch
As we proceeded, the country improved at every
step. Flocks of pigeons rose and flew off to the
eastward, and fresh plants met our view on every
rise; evervth’ng green and luxuriant. The
horse licked his lips, and tried all he could to
break his nose-string in order to get at the food.
We camped at the foot of a sandy rise,
where there was a large stony pan with
plenty of water, and where the feed was
•qual in quality, and superior ’as to variety,
to any that I have seen in Australia,
excepting perhaps on some soils of volcanic
•rigin.
Wednesday, January 9. Started at five
minutes past five without water, trusting to get a
supply of water from the rain that fell during the
thunderstorm. Traversed six miles of undulating
plains covered with vegetation richer than ever.
Several ducks rose from the little creeks as we
passed, and flocks of pigeons were flying in all
directions. The richness of the vegetation is
•vidently not suddenly arising from chance thun-
derstorms. for the trees and bushes on the open
plain are everywhere healthy and fresh-looking;
very few dead ones are to be seen, besides which
the quantity of dead and rotten grass which, at
present, almost overgrows in some places the
young blades, shows that this is not the first
crop of the kind. The grasses are numerous, and
many of them unknown to me, but they only
constitute a moderate portion of the herbage;
several kinds of spurious vetches and portulac, as
well as salsolacese, add to the luxuriance of the
vegetation. At seven miles we found ourselves
in an open forest country, where the feed was
good, but not equal to what we had passed,
neither had it been visited bv yesterday’s rain.
We soon emerged again on open plains, but the
soil being of a more clayey nature, they were not
nearly so much advanced in vegetation as the
others. We found surface wafer in several
places, and at. one spot disturber) a fine bustard
which was feeding in the long grass. We did
not see him until he flew up. I should have
mentioned that one flew over our camp last
evening, in a northerly direction. This speaks
well for the country and climate. At noon we
came to a large creek, the course of which was
from E.N.E. to W.S.W, The sight of white
gum trees in the distance had raised hopes which
were not at all damped on a close inspection of
the channel. At the point where we struck it,
there was certainly no great q -antity of water;
the bed was broad and sandy, but its whole ap-
pearance was that of an important watercourse,
and the large gums which line it- banks, together
with the improved appearance of the soil and the
abundance of feed in the vicinity, satisfied us as
to the permanency of the water, and the value of
the discovery Although it was so early in the
day, and we were anxious to make a good march,
yet we camped here as it seemed to be almost a
sin to leave such good quarters. The bed of the
creek is loose sand, through which the water
freely permeates; it is, however, sufficiently
coarse not to be boggy, and animals can approach
the water without any difficulty.
Thursday, Jan. 10. — At twenty minutes past
five, a.m., we left our camp with a full supply
of water, determined to risk no reverses, and to
make a good march. 1 should mention that
last evening we had been nearly deafened by the
noise of the cicadas, and but for our large fires
should have been kept awake all night by the
mosquitoes. A walk of two mjles across a well-
grassed plain brought us to a belt of timber, and
we soon afterwards found ourselves pulled up by
a large creek, in which the water was broad and
deep. We had to follow up the bank of the
creek in a N.E. direction for nearlv a mile before
we could cross, when to our joy we found that it
was flowing, not a muddy stream from the effects
of recent floods, but a small rivulet of pure
water, as clear as crystal. The bed of the river
at this place is deep and rather narrow. The
water flows over sand and pebbles, winding
its way between clumps of melaleuca and
gum saplings. After leaving the river, we
kept our old course due north, crossing
in a distance of one mile three creeks with
gum trees on their banks. The soil of
the flats through which they flow is a red
loam of fair quality and well grassed. Beyond
the third creek is a large plain, parts of which
are very stony; and this is bounded towards the
east by a low stony rise, partly composed of de-
cayed and honey-combed quartz rock »« situ


and partly of water-worn pebbles and other allu-
vial deposits. At about two miles across this
plain, we reached the first of a series of small
creeks, with deep water-holes. These creeks and
holes have the characteristics peculiar to water-
courses which are found in flats formed from the
alluvial deposits of schistose rocks. The banks
are on a level with the surrounding ground, and
are irregularly marked by small trees or only
by tufts of long grass, which overhang the chan-
nel, and frequently hide it from one’s view,
even when within a few yards. At about five
miles from where we crossed the river, we came
to the main creek in these flats, Patten’s Creek.
It flows along at the foot of a stony range, and
we had to trace it up nearly a mile in a
N.N.E. direction before we could cross it. As
it happened, we might almost as well have fol-
lowed its course up the flat, for at a little more
than two miles we came to it again. We re-
crossed it at a stony place just below a very large
waterhole, and then continued our course over
extensive plains, not so well grassed as what we
had passed before, and very stony in some places.
At eight miles from Patten’s Creek we came to
another, running from S.W. to S.E, There was
plenty of water in it, but it was evidently the re-
sult of recent local rains. On the banks was an
abundance of good feed, but very little timber.
Friday, Jan 11. —Started at five a.m., and in
the e citement of exploring fine well-watered
country, forgot all about the eclipse of the sun,
until the reduced temperature and peculiarly
gloomy appearance of the sky drew our attention
to the matter. It was then too late to remedy the
deficiency, so we made a good day’s journey, the
moderation of the mid-day heat, which was only
about 8 6'deg., greatly assisting us. The country
traversed has the most verdant and cheerful
aspect; abundance of feed and water everywhere.
All the creeks seen to-day have a course more or
less to E. by S. The land improves in appear-
ance at every mile. A quantity of rain has
falle n here and to the south, and some of the flats
are suitable for cultivation if the regularity of
the seasons will admit.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO 5. CAMP 92 TO 98.
LAT, 22$DEG. TO 21|DE6. STANDISH RANGES.
Saturday, Jan. 12. —We started at five, a.m.,
and keeping as nearly as possible a due N. course,
traversed for about eight miles a splendid flat,
through which flow several fine wel 1-watered creeks,
lined with white gum trees. W e then entered a
series of slaty low sandstone ranges, amongst which
were some well-grassed flats, and plenty of water
in the main gullies. The more stony portions
are, however, covered with porcupine grass, and
here and there with mallee. Large ant-hills
are very numerous; they vary in height from
two feet and a half to four feet. There was a
continuous rise perceptible all the way in crossing
the ranges, and from the highest portion, which
we reached at a distance of about seven miles, we
had a pretty good view of the country towards
the north. As far as we could see in the dis-
tance, and bearing due north, was a large range,
having somewhat the outline of a granite moun-
tain, The east end of this range just comes
up to the magnetic north; the left of this, and
bearing N.N.W., is a single conical peak, the top
only of which is visible. Farther to the west
there were some broken ranges, apparently sand-
stone ; to the east of north the tops of very
distant and apparently higher ranges were seen,
the outline of which was so indistinct that I can
form no idea as to their character, The inter-
mediate country below us appeared alternations
of fine valleys and stony ranges, such as we had
just been crossing. From here a descent of two
miles brought us to a creek having a northern
course, but on tracing it down for about a
mile we found it turn to the south-east, and
join another from the north. We crossed over
to the latter on a N. by W. course, and camped
on the west bank. It has a broad sandy chan-
nel; the water-holes are large but not deep;
the banks are bordered with fine white gums,
and are in some places very scrubby. There is
abundance of rich green feed everywhere in
the vicinity. We found numerous indications
of blacks having been here, but saw nothing of
them. It seems remarkable that where theirtracks
are so plentiful we should (have seen) none since
we left King’s Creek. I observed that the natives
here climb trees like those on the Murray, &c., in
search of some animal corresponding in habits to
the opossum, which they get out of the hollow
branches in a similar manner. I have not y.,t
been able to ascertain what the animal is.
Sunday, Jan. 18. —We did not leave camp this
morning until half-past seven, having delayed for
the purpose of getting the camels’ shoes on -a
matter in which we were eminently unsuccessful.
We took our breakfast before starting, for almost
the first time since leaving the depot. Having
crossed the creek, our course was due north as
before, until at about six miles we came in sight
of the range a-head, when we took a north half
east direction, for the purpose of clearing the
eastern front of it. We found the ground more
sandy than what we had before crossed, and a
great deal of it even more richly grassed. Camp
93 is situated at the junction of three sandy
creeks, in which there is abundance of water.
The sand is loose, and the water permeates freely,
so that the latter may be obtained delightfully
cool and clear by sinking anywhere in the beds of
the creeks.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA,
FIELD BOOK NO. 6. LAT. 21JjDEG. TO 20£dEO.
STATIONS 98 TO 105. UPPER PART OF CLON-
CURRY.
Saturday, Jan. 19. —Started from Camp 98 at
half-past five o’clock a.m., and, passing to the
north-west of Mount Forbes, across a fine and well
grassed plain, kept at first a north by east direc-
tion. At a distance of three miles the plain
became everywhere stony, being scattered over
with quartz pebbles; and a little further on we
came tu low quartz ranges, the higher portions
of which are covered with porcupine grass, but
the valleys are well clothed with a variety of
coarse and rank herbage. At about five miles we
crossed a creek with a sandy bed, which has been
named Green’s Creek. There were blacks not
ar above where we crossed, but we did not dis-
turb them. After crossing the rceek we took a


due north course, over very rugged quartz ranges
of an auriferous character. Pieces of iron ore, very
rich, were scattered in great numbers over some
of the hills. On our being about to cross one of
the branch creeks in the low range, we surprised
some blacks—a man, who, with a young fellow,
apparently his son, was upon a tree cutting out
something, and a lubra with a picaninny. The
two former did not see me until I was nearly
close to them, and then they were dreadfully
frightened. Jumping down from the trees, they
started off, shouting what sounded to us very
like “Joe, Joe.” Thus disturbed, the lubra,
who was some distance from them, just then
caught sight of the camels and the remainder of
the party as they came over the hill into the
creek, and this tended to hasten their flight over
the stones and porcupine grass. Crossing the
range at the head of this creek, we came on a
gully running north, down which we proceeded,
and soon found it open out into a creek at two or
three points, in which we found water. On this
creek we found the first specimen of a eucalyptus,
which has a very different appearance from the
members of the gum-tree race. It grows as high
as a good-sized gum-tree, but with the branches
less spreading; in shape it much resembles the
elm; the foliage is dark, like that of the light-
wood ; the trunk and branches are covered with
a grey bark, resembling in outward appearance
that of the box-tree. Finding that the creek
was trending too much to the eastward, we struck
off to the north again, and at a short distance
came on a fine creek running about S.B.E. As it
was now about time to camp, we travelled it up
for about a mile and a half, and came to a fine
waterhole in a rocky basin, at which there were
lots of birds.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO. 7. LAT. 20J DEG. TO 19J DEQ„
CAMPS 105 TO 112. MIDDLE PART OF CLON-
CURRY.
Sunday, Jan. 27. —Started from Camp 105, five
minutes past two in the morning. We followed
along the bends of the creek by moonlight, and
found the creek wind about very much, taking
on the whole a N.E. course. At about five miles
it changed somewhat its features; from a broad
and sandy channel, winding about through gum-
tree flats, it assumes the unpropitious appearance
of a straight narrow creek, running in a N.N.E.
direction, between high perpendicular earthy
banks. After running between three or four
miles in this manner, it took a turn to the west,
at which point there is a fine waterhole, and then
assumed its original character. Below this we
found water at several places; but it all seemed
to be either from surface drainage or from springs
in the sand. The land in the vicinity of the
creek appears to have received plenty of rain, the
vegetation everywhere being green and fresh; but
there is no appearance of the creek having flowed
in this part of the channel for a considerable
period. Palm trees are numerous, and some
bear an abundance of small round dates (nuts),
just ripening. These palms give a most
picturesque and pleasant appearance to the
creek.
Wednesday, Jan. 30. —Started at half-past
seven, a.m., after several unsuccessful attempts
at getting Golah out of the bed of the creek. It
was determined to try bringing him down until
we could find a place for him to get out at ; but
after going in this way two or three miles, it was
found necessary to leave him behind, as it was
almost impossible to get him through some of the
waterholes, and had separated King from the
party, which was a matter for very serious consider-
ation, when we found blacks hiding in the box-trees
close to us.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 8. CAMPS 112 119. LAT.
19Jdeo. to 17deg. 53min. lower part
OF CLoNCURRY.
RETURNING FROM CARPENTARIA TO COOPER’S
CREEK.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 9, SUNDAY, FEBRUARY.
Finding the ground in such a state from the
heavy falls of rain, that the camels could scarcely
be got along, it was decided to leave them at Camp
119, and for Mr. Burke and I to proceed towards
the sea on foot. After breakfast we accordingly
started, taking with us the horse, and three days’
provisions. Our first difficulty was in crossing
Billy’s Creek, which we had to do where it enters
the river, a few hundred yards below the camp. In
getting the horse in here, he got bogged in a quick-
sand bank so deeply as to be unable to stir, and we
only succeeded in extricating him by undermining
him on the creek side and then lunging him into the
water. Having got all the things in safety, we con-
tinued down the river bank, which bent about from
east to west, but kept a general north course, A
great deal of the land was so soft and rotten, that
the horse, with only a saddle and about twenty-five
pounds on his back, could scarcely walk over it. At
a distance of about five miles we again had him
bogged in crossing a small creek, after which he
seemed so weak, that we had great doubts about
getting him on. We, however, found some better
ground close to the water’s edge, where the sand-
stone rock runs out, and we have stuck to it as far
as possible. Finding that the river was bending
about so much that we were making very little pro-
gress in a northerly direction, we struck off due
north, and soon came on some table-land where the
soil is shallow and gravelly, and clothed with box
and swamp gums. Patches of the land were very
boggy, but the main portion was sound enough. Be-
yond this we came on an open plain, covered with
water up to one’s ankles. The soil here was a stiff
clay, and the surface very uneven, so that between
the tufts of grass one was frequently knee-deep in
water. The bottom, however, was sound, and no
fear of bogging. After floundering through this
for several miles, we came to a path formed
by the blacks, and there were distinct signs of a re-
cent migration in a southerly direction. By making
use of this path, we got on much better, for the
ground was well trodden and hard. At rather more
than a mile, the path entered a forest, through
which flowed a nice water-course, and we had not
gone far before we found places where the blacks
had been camping. The forest was intersected by
little pebbly rises on which they had made their
fires, and in the sandy ground adjoining some of
the former had been digging yams*, which seemed
* The dioscorea of Carpentaria.


to be so numerous that they could afford to leave
lots of’ them about, probably having only selected
the very best. We were not so particular, but ate
many of those that they had rejected, and found
them very good. About half a mile further, we
came close on a blackfellow, who was coiling by a
camp fire, whilst his gin and picaninny were yab-
bering alongside. We stopped for a short time to
take out some of the pistols that were on the horse,
and that they might see us before we were so near
as to frighten them. Just after we stopped, the
black got up to stretch his limbs, and after a few
seconds looked in our direction. It was very
amusing to see the way in which he stared, stand-
ing for some time as if bethought he must be dream-
ing, and then having signalled to the others, they
dropped on their haunches and shuffled off in the
quietest manner possible. Near their fire was a fine
hut, the best I have ever seen, built on the same
principle as those at Cooper’s Creek, but much
larger and more complete. I should say a dozen
blacks might comfortably coil in it together. It is
situated at the end of the forest, towards the north,
and looks out on an extensive marsh, which is at
times flooded by the sea water. Hundreds of wild-
geese, plover, and pelicans, were enjoying them
selves in the watercourses on the marsh all the
water on which was too brackish to be drinkable,
except some holes that are filled by the stream that
flows through the forest. The neighbourhood of
this encampment is one of the prettiest we have
seen during the journey. Proceeding on our course
across the marsh, we came to a channel through
which the ea water enters. Here we passed three
blacks, who, as is universally their custom, pointed
out to us, unasked, the best part down. This as-
sisted us greatly, for the ground we were taking was
very boggy. We moved slowly down about three
miles, and then camped for the night. The horse,
Billy, being completely baked, next morning we
started at day-break, leaving the horse short hob-
bled.
Tuesday, Feb. 19, 1861.—Boocha’s Camp.
Wednesday, Feb. 2d. -Pleasant Camp, 5, R.
Thursday, Feb. 21.—Recovery Camp, 6, R.—Be-
tween four and five o’clock a heavy thunder-storm
broke over us, having given very little warning
of ifs approach. There had been lightning and
thunder towards S.E. and S. ever since noon
yesterday. The rain was incessant and very
heavy for an hour and a half, which made the
ground so boggy that the animals could scarcely
walk over it. We nevertheless started at ten
minutes to seven a.m., and after floundering
along for half an hour, halted for breakfast.
We then moved on again, but soon found that
the travelling was too heavy for the camels, so
camped for the remainder of the day. In the
afternoon the sky cleared a little, and the sun
soon dried the ground, considering. Shot a
pheasant, and much disappointed at finding him
all feathers and claws. This bird nearly resem-
bles a cock pheasant in plumage; but in other
respects it bears more the character of the magpie
or crow; the feathers are remarkably wiry and
coarse.
Friday, Feb. 22.—Camp 7, R.—A fearful
thunderstorm in the evening about eight p.m.,
E.S.E., moving gradually round to S. The
flashes of lightning were so vivid and incessant as
to keep up a continual light for short intervals,
overpowering even the moonlight. Heavy rain
and strong squalls continued for more than an
hour, when th j storm moved off W.N.W.; the
skv remained more or less overcast for the rest
of the night, and the following morning was both
sultry and oppressive, with the ground so boggj
as to be almost impassable.
Saturday, Feb. 23.—Camp 8, R. —In spite of
the difficulties thrown in our way bv last night’s
storm, we crossed the creek. We were shortly
afterwards compelled to halt for the day, on a
small patch cf comparatively dry ground near the
river. The day turned out very fine, so that the
soil dned rapidly; and we started in the
evening to try a trip by moonlight. We were
very fortunate in finding sound ground along
a billibong, which permitted of our travelling
for about five miles up the creek, when we
camped for the night. The evening was most
oppressively hot and sultry —so much so,
that the slighest exertion made one feel
as if be were in a state of suffocation. The
dampness of the atmosphere prevented any eva-
poration, and gave one a helpless feeling of lassi-
tude that 1 have never before experienced to such
an extent. All the party complained of the same
sensations, and the horses showed distinctly the
effect of the evening trip, short, as it was. We
had scarcely turned in half an hour when it began
to rain, some heavy clouds having come up from
the eastward, in place of the layer of small cirro
cumuli that before ornamented the greater por-
tion of the sky. These clouds soon moved on, and
we were relieved from the dread of additional
mud. After the sky cleared, the atmosphere
became rather cooler, and less sultry ; so that,
with the assistance of a little smoke to keep the
mosquitoes off, we managed to pass a tolerable
night.
Sunday, Feb, 24.—Camp 9, R.—Compara-
tively little rain has fallen above the branch
creek with the running water. The vegetation,
although tolerably fresh, is not so rank as that we
have left. The water in the creek is muddy but
good, and has been derived merely from the sur-
face drainage of the adjoining plains. The
Melaleneus continues in this branch creek,
which creeps along the foot of the ranges.
Monday, Feb. 25.—Camp IU, R.—There ha#
been very little rain on this portion of the creek
since we passed down. There was, however, no
water at all then at this point. At the lea-tree
Spring, a short distance up the creek, we found
plenty of water in the sand, but it had a disagree-
able taste, from the decomposition of leaves and
the presence of mineral matter—probably iron.
There seems to have been a fair share ot rain
along here, everything is ,o very fresh and green;
and there is water in many of the channels we
have [crossed].
Tuesday, Feb. 26.—Caple Tree Camp, 11, R.
Thursday, Feb, 28.—Reedy Gully Camp, 12,
R.-Came into the Reedy Gully Camp about
midnight on Tuesday, the 26th. Remained there
throughout the day on Wednesday, starting at
2 a.m. on Thursday.
Friday, March I.—Camp of the Three Crows,
13, K,
Saturday, March 2. —Saltbush Camp, 14, R. —


Found Golah. He looks thin and miserable,
Seems to have fretted a great deal, probably at
finding himself left behind, and he has been
walking up and down the tracks till he has made
a regular pathway. Could find no sign of his
having been far off it, although there is splendid
feed to which he could have gone. He began to
eat as soon as he saw the other camels.
Sunday, March 3, 1861. —Eureka Camp, 15,
—ln crossing a creek by moonlight Charley
rode over a large snake. He did not touch him,
and we thought it was a log until he struck it
with the stirrup-iron. We then saw that it was
an immense snake, larger than any that 1 have
ever before seen in a wild state. It measured
eight feel four inches in length, and seven inches
in girth round the belly. It was nearly the same
thickness from the head to within twenty inches
of the tail, it then tapered rapidly. The weight
was eleven pounds and a half. From the tip of
the nose to five inches back the neck was black,
both above and behind; throughout the rest of
the body the under part was yellow, and the sides
and back had irregular brown transverse bars on
a yellowish brown ground. I could detect no
poisonous fangs, but there were two distinct rows
of teeth 'n each jaw, and two small claws or nails,
about three-eighths of an inch long, one on each
side of the vent.
Monday, March 4.—Feasting Camp, 16, K.—
Shortly after arriving at Camp 16 we could fre-
»uently hear distant thunder towards the east,
om which quarter the wind was blowing. Dur -
ing the aft moon there were frequent heavy
showers, and towards evening it set into rain
steadily, but lightly. This lasted until about 8
p.m., when the rain ceased, and the wind got
round to W,; the sky, however, remained over-
cast until late in the night, and then cleared for
a short time; the clouds were soon succeeded by
a dense fog, or mist, which continued until
morning. The vapour having then risen occupied
the upper air in the form of a light cir-stratus and
cumuli clouds. ,
Tuesday, March 5. —Camp 17, R. — Started
at 2 a.m. on a S.S.W. course, but had soon to
turn in on the creek, as Mr. Burke felt very
unwell, having been attacked by dysentery since
eating the snake. He now felt giddy, and un-
able to keep his seat. At 6 a.m., Mr. Burke
feeling better, we started again, following along
the creek, in which there was considerably more
water than when we passed down. We camped
at 2.15 p.m. at a part of the creek where the date
trees* were very numerous, and found the fruit
nearly ripe, and very much improved on what it
was when we were here before. ,
Wednesday, March 6.—Camp 18, R.- Arrived
at the former camp, and find the feed richer than
ever, and the ants just as troublesome. Mr.
Burke is a little better, and Charley looks com-
paratively well. The dryness of the atmosphere
seems to have a beneficial effect on all. •* e
found, yesterday, that it was a hopeless matter
about Golah, a..d we were obliged to leave him
behind as he seemed to be completely done up,
and could not come on, even when the pack and
saddle were taken off.
I Thursday, March 7.—Big-Tree Camp IQ, R.
ilm-Tree Camp No 104, and 20 latitude ; by
iservation coming down, 20deg. 21min. 40sec.
here is less water here than there was when we
issed down, although there is evidence of the
eek having been visited by considerable floods
iring the interval. Feed is abundant, and the
fetation more fresh than before. Mr. Burke
most recovered, but Charley is a/ain very un-
ell, and unfit to do anything ; he caught cold
st night through carelessness in covering him-
ilf.
Friday, March B.—Camp 20, R.—Followed the
•eek more closely coming up than going down,
ound more water in it generally.
Saturday, March 9.—Camp 21, R.—Reached
ar former camp at 1.30 pm. Found the herbage
mch dried up, but still plenty of feed for the
Sunday, March 10.—Camp 22, R.—Camped at
ae junction of a small creek from the westward,
short distance below our former camp, there
eing plenty of good water here, whereas the
apply at Specimen Camp is very doubtful.
Mon ay, March 11.—Camp 23, R.—Halted for
reakfast at the Specimen Camp at 7.15 a,m.
'ound more water and feed there than before.
Then proceeded up the creek and got safely over
he most dangerous part of our journey. Camped
tear the head of the gap, in a flat about two
niles below our former camp at the gap.
Tuesday, March 12. —Camp 24, R.
Wednesday, March 13.—Camp 25, R.—Rained
ill day, so heavily that 1 was obliged to put my
vateh and field book in the pack, to keep them
Iry. In the afternoon the rain increased, and all
;he creeks became flooded. We took shelter
inder some fallen rocks, near which was some
feed for the camels, but the latter was of no value
for we had soon to remove them up amongst
the rocks out of the way of the flood, which
fortunately did not rise high enough to drive
us out of the cave ; but we were obliged to
shift our packs to the upper part. In the
evening the water fell as rapidly as it had
risen, leaving everything in a very boggy state.
There were frequent light showers during the night.
Thursday, March 14.—Camp 26, R. —Sandstone
Cave. —The water in the creek having fallen
sufficient y low, we crossed over from the cave,
and proceeded down the creek. Our progress
was slow, as it was necessary to keep on the
stony ridge instead of following the flats, the
latter being very boggy after the rain. Think-
ing that the creek must join Scratchley’s n. ar
our old camp, we followed it a long way : until,
finding it trend altogether too much eastward,
we tried to shape across for the other creek, but
were unable to do so from the boggy nature of
the intervening plain.
Friday, March 15. —Camp 27, R.
Saturday, March 16. —Camp 28, R.—Scratch,
ley’s Creek.
Sunday, March 17. —Camp 29, R.
Monday, March 18.—Camp 30, R.
Tuesday, March 19.—Camp 31, R.
Wednesday, March 20.—Camp 32, R.—Feast-
ing Camp —Last evening the sky was clouded
about nine p m., and a sliower came down
from the north. At ten o’clock it became
• Probably Livistoras.


so dark that we camped on the bank of
the oreek, in which was a nice current of
clear water, To-day we halted, intending to try
a night journey. The packs we overhauled,
and left nearly 601 b, weight of things behind
They were all suspended in a pack from the
branches of a shrub close to the creek. We
started at a quarter to six, but were continmally
pulled up billibongs and branch creeks, and
soon had to camp for the night. At the junction
of the two creeks just above [are] the three
cones, which are three remarkable small hills to
the eastward.
Thursday, March 21.—Humid Camp. 33, R.—
Unable to proceed on account of the slippery and
boggy state of the ground. The rain has fallen
very heavily here to day, and every little depres-
sion in the ground is either full of water or
covered with slimy mud. Another heavy storm
passed over during the night, almost [extinguishing]
the miserable fire we were able to get up
with our very limited quantity of water-
logged and green wood. Having been so unfor-
tunate last night, we took an early breakfast this
morning, at Camp 33, which I have named the
Humid Camp, from the state of dampness in
which we found everything there; and crossing
to the east bank of the main creek, proceeded in
a southerly direction nearly parallel with the
creek. Some of the flats near the creek contain
the richest alluvial soil, and are clothed with luxu-
riant vegetation. There is an immense extent of
plain, back, of the finest character for pa-toral
purposes, and the country bears every appear
ance of being permanently well watered. W
halted on a large billibong at noon, and wer
favoured during dinner by a thunderstorm, tho
heavier portion of which missed us, some pass
mg north and some south, which was fortunate
as it would otherwise have spoiled our bakins
process, a matter of some importance just now"
We started again at seven o’clock, but the effect
of the heavy rain prevented our making a good
journey.
Friday, March 22—Muddy Camp, 34, R. —
Had an early breakfast this morning, and started
before sunrise. Found that the wet swampy
ground that checked our progress last night was
only a narrow strip, and that had we gone
little further we might have made a fine journey.
4he country consisted of open, well-grassed
pebbly plains, intersected by numerous small
channels, all containing water. Abundance of
fine rich portulaca was just bursting into flower
along all these channels, as well as on the greater
portion of’ the plain. The creek that we camped
on last night ran nearly parallel with us through-
out this stage. We should have crossed it°to
avoid the stony plains, but were prevented by the
flood from doing so.
Saturday, March 23. —Mosquito Camp, 35, R.
—Started at a quarter to six, and followed
down the creek, which has much of the charac-
teristic appearance of the River Burke, where we
crossed it on our up journey. The land in the
vicinity greatly improves as one goes down, be-
coming less stony and better grassed. At eleven
o clock we crossed a small tributary from the
eastward, and there was a distant range of con-
siderable extent visible in that direction. Halted
for the afternoon in a bend, where there was
tolerable feed, for the banks are everywhere more
or less scrubby.
Sunday, March 24—Three-hour Camp, 36 R
Monday, March 25.—Native Dog Camp, 27' R
—Sta,rted at half-past five looking for a good place
to halt for the day. This we found at a short
distance down the creek, and immediately dis-
covered that it was close to Camp 89 of our up
journey. Had not expected that we wore so
much to the westward. After breakfast took
some time altitudes, and was about to go back to
last Camp for some things that had been left,
when I found Gray behind a tree eating skilli-
golee. He explained that he was suffering from
dysentery, and had taken the flour without leave
Sent him to report himself'to Mr. Burke, and
went on. He, having got Ring to tell Mr. Burke
tor him, was called up and received a good thrash-
ing. There is no knowing to what extent he has
been robbing us. Many things have been found
to run unaccountably short. Started at seven
o clock, the camels in first-rate spirits We fol-
lowed our old course back (S.) The first portion
of the plains had much the same appearance as
when we came up, but that near Camp 88, which
then looked so fresh and green, is now very much
dried up, and we saw no signs of water anywhere
In fact, there seems to have been little or no
ram about here since we passed. Soon after
three o clock w e struck the first of several small
creeks or billibongs, which must be portions of
the creek with the deep channel that we crossed
on going up, we being now rather to the west-
ward of our former course. From here, after
traversing about two miles of the barest clay-
plain, devoid of all vegetation, we reached a small
watercourse, most of the holes in which contained
some water of a milky or creamy description,
x ine saltbush and portulac being abundant in the
vicinity, we camped here at 4-30 a.m. When we
started in the evening, a strong breeze had
already sprung up in the south, which conveyed
much of the characteristic feeling of a hot wind.
It gradually to a force of five and six,
but by eleven o’clock had become decidedly cool,
and was so chilly towards morning that we found
it neccessary to throw on our ponchos. A few
cir. cum. clouds were coming up from the east
when we started, but we left them behind, and
nothing was visible during the night but a thin
, . le continued throughout the
-6th, becoming warmer as the day advanced. In
the afternoon it blew furiously, raising a good
deal of dust The temperature of the air at 4 p.m.
was 94 deg. in the shade. Wind trees all day
Tuesday, March 26—Saltbush Camp, 38, R.
Wednesday, March 27, Camp 39, R.
Thursday, March 28. —Camp 40. R.
Friday, March 29.—Camp 41, R.—Camels’ last
least. Fine green feed at this camp. Plenty of
vine and young polygonums on the small billibongs
Saturday, March 30.—Camp 42, R.—Boocha’s
Rest. Employed all day- in cutting up, jerking
and eating Boocha. The day turned out as
favourable for us as we could have wished, and
a considerable portion of the meat was completely
jerked before sunset.
Sunday, March 31.—Camp 43, R.—Mia Mia
Camp,—Plenty of good dry feed, various shrubs,


salt hushes, including cotton bushes and some
coarse kangaroo grass ; water in the hollows on
the stony pavement. The neighbouring country
chiefly composed of stony rivers and sand-ridges.
Monday, April I.—Camp 43, E.
Tuesday, April 2. —Camp 44, E. —Thermome-
ter broken.
Wednesday, April 3. —Camp 45. —Salt Meat
Camp.
Thursday, April 4. —Camp 46, E. —Plant Camp.
Friday, April 5, —Camp 47, E. —Oil Camp.—
Earthy and clayey plains, generally sound, and
tolerably grassed ; but in other places bare salt-
bush, withered.
Saturday, April 6. —Wild Duck Camp, 48, E. —
Earthy flats, cut into innumerable watercourse s
[succeeded by] fine open plains, generally very
Bare, but having in some places patches of fine
saltbush. The dead stalks of portulac and mal-
lows show that those plants are very plentiful in
some seasons. [Towards noon came upon] earthy
plains and numerous billibongs.
Sunday, April 7. —Camp 49, E. —Find the water
and feed much dried up. Nearly all the water
we have met with has a slightly brackish taste
of a peculiar kind, somewhat resembling in
flavour potassio tartrate of soda.
Monday, April 8. —Camp 50, E.—Camped a
short distance above Camp 7 5. The creek here
contains more water, and there is a considerable
quantity of green grass in its bed, but it is much
dried np since we passed before. Halted fifteen
minutes to send back for Gray who gammoned
he could not walk. Some good showers must have
fallen lately as we have passed surface water
on the plains every day. In the latter portion
of to-day’s journey, the young grass and por-
tulac are springing freshly in the flats, and on
the sides of the sand-ridges.
Tuesday, April 9. —Camp 51, E. —Camped on
the bank of the creek, where there is a regular
field of saltbush, as well as some grass in its bed,
very acceptable to the horse, who has not had a
proper feed for the last week until last night, and
is, consequently, nearly knocked up.
Wednesday, April 10.—Camp 52, E. —Re-
mained at Camp 52, E, all day to cut up and
jerk the meat of the horse Billy, who was so re-
duced and knocked up for want of food, that
there appeard little chance of his reaching the
other side of the desert ; and as we were running
short of food of every description ourselves, we
thought it best to secure his flesh at once. We
found it healthy and tender, but without the
slighest trace of fat in any portion of the body.
Thursday, April 11.—Plenty of water in creek
down to this point.
Friday, April 12. —Extensive earthy plains,
intersected by numerous watercourses.
Saturday, April 13. —Small watercourses lined
with lakes. Plenty of saltbush and chrysanthe-
mums on either side. Camped on Stony
Desert.
[Note by Transcriber. —Up to this point, as it
appears from Mr. Wills’ field-book, the expedi-
tion never passed a day in which they did not
traverse the banks of, or cross, a creek or other
watercourse.]
Sunday, April 14.
Monday, April 15.—1 t commenced to rain
lightly at five a. m. this morning, and continued
raining pretty steadily throughout the day.
Owing to the wet and the exertion of crossing the
numerous sand-ridges, Linda became knocked up
about four o’clock, and we had to halt at a clay-
pan amongst the sand-hills. [The party seems
to have crossed a creek near a native camp,
about 10. a.m.]
Tuesday, April 16.
Wednesday, April 17.—This morning, about
sunrise, Gray died. He had not spoken a word
distinctly since his first attack, which was just as
we were about to start.
Thursday, April 18.—Another creek and native
camp were passed.
Friday, April 19.—Camped again without water
on the sandy bed of the creek, having been fol-
lowed by a lot of natives who were desirous of
our company; but as we preferred camping alone,
we were compelled to move on until rather late,
in order to get away from them. The night was
very cold. A strong breeze was blowing from the
S., which made the fire so irregular that, as on
the two previous nights, it was impossible to keep
up a fair temperature. Our general course
throughout the day had been S.S.E.
Saturday, April 20.
Sunday, April 21.—Arrived at the depot this
evening, just in time to find it deserted. A note
left in the plant by Brahe communicates the
pleasing information that they have started to-
day for the Darling; their camels and horses all
well and in good condition. We and our camels
being just done up, and scarcely able to reach the
depot, have very little chance of overtaking
them. Brahe has fortunately left us ample pro-
visions to take us to the bounds of civilisation,
namely ; —Flour, 501 b.; rice, 201 b.; oatmeal,
601 b,; sugar, 601 b.; and dried meat, 151 b. These
provisions, together with a few horse-shoes and
nails and some odds and ends, constitute all the
articles left, and place us in a very awkward posi-
tion in respect to clothing. Our disappointment at
finding|thedepot deserted may easily beimagined;
—returning in an exhausted state, after four
months of the severest travelling and priva-
tion, our legs almost paralyzed, so that each
of us found it a most trying task only to
walk a few yards. Such a leg-bound feeling
I never before experienced, and hope I never
shall again. The exertion required to get up a
slight piece of rising ground, even without any
load, induces an indescribable sensation of pain
and helplessness, and the general lassitude
makes one unfit for anything. Poor Gray must
have suffered very much many times when we
thouhgt him shamming. It is most fortunate for
us that these symptoms, which so early affected
him, did not come on us until we were reduced to
an exclusively animal diet of such an inferior
description as that offered by the flesh of a worn
out and exhausted horse. We were not long in
getting out the grub that Brahe had left, and we
made a good supper of some oatmeal porridge
and sugar. This, together with the excitement
of finding ourselves in such a peculiar and almost
unexpected position, had a wonderful effect in re-
moving the stiffness from our legs. Whether it
is possible that the vegetables can so have affected
us I know not; but both Mr. Burke and I re-


marked a most decided relief and a strength in
tbo legs greater than we had had for several days.
1 am inclined to think that but for the abundance
ot portulac that we obtained on our journey, we
should scarcely have returned to Cooper’s Creek
at [all].
Memo.- Verbally transcribed from the field-
books of the late Mr. Wills. Very few words,
casually omitted in the author’s manuscript,
have been added in brackets. A few botanical
explanations have been appended. A few sepa-
rate general remarks referring to this portion of
the diary will be published, together with the
meteorological notes to which they are contiguous.
No other notes in reference to this portion of the
journey are extant.
Nov. 5, 18< 1. Feed. Mueller.
JOURNAL OP THE TRIP FROM COOPER’S
CREEK TOWARDS ADELAIDE.
April, 1861.
The advance party of the Victorian Exploring
Expedition, consisting of Burke, Wills, and
King (Gray being dead), having returned from
Carpentaria on the 21st April in an exhausted
and weak state, and finding that the depot party
left at Cooper’s Creek had started for the Darling,
with their horses and camels fresh and in good
condition, deemed it useless to attempt to over-
take them, having only two camels, both done
up, and being so weak themselves as to be unable
to walk more than four or five miles a day. Find-
ing also that the provisions left at the depot for
them would scarcely take them to Menindie,
started down Cooper’s Creek for Adelaide, via
Mount Hopeless, on the morning of the 23rd
April, intending to follow as nearly as possible
the route taken by Gregory; by so doing they
hope to be able to recruit themselves and the
camels, whilst sauntering slowly down the creek,
and to have sufficient provisions left to take them
comfortably, or at least without risk, to some
station in South Australia. Their equipment
consists of the following articles: —Flour, 501 b.;
sugar, 60ib.; rice, 20ib.; oatmeal, 6Uib.; jerked
meat, 251 b.; ginger, 21b.; salt, lib.
(Then follow some native words, with their
meanings).
Tuesday, April 23.—From Depot.—Having col-
lected together all the odds and ends that seemed
likely to be of use to us, in addition to provisions
left in the plant, we started at a quarter past nine
a.m., keeping down the southern bank of the
creek. We only went about five miles, and
camp 3d at half past eleven on a billibong, where
the lea d was pretty good. We find the change
ot diet already making a great improvement in
our so irits and strength. The weather is delight-
ful, flays agreeably warm, but the nights very
chilly. The latter is more noticeable from our
deficiency in clothing, the depot party having
taken all the reserve things back with them to
the Darling To Camp No. 1.
Wednesday, April 24.—From Camp No. I.—As
we were about to start this morning some blacks
came by, from whom we were fortunate enough
to get about twelve pounds of fish for a few
pieces of straps and some matches, &c. This is a
great treat for us, as well as a valuable addition
to our rations. We started at a quarter past
eight p.m. on our wav down the creek, the blacks
going in the opposite direction—little thinking
that in a few miles they would be able to get
lots of pieces for nothing, better than those they
had obtained from us. To Camp No. 2.
Thursday, April 25.—From Camp No. 2.
Awoke at five o’clock after a most refreshing
Height’s rest. The sky was beautifully clear and
the air rather chilly. The terrestrial radiation
seems to have been considerable, and a slight
dew had fallen. We had scarcely finished break-
fast when our friends the blacks, from whom we
obtained the fish, made their appearance with a
few more, and seemed inclined to go with us and
keep up the supply. We gave them some sugar,
with which they were greatly pleased. They are
by far the most well-behaved blacks we have seen
on Cooper’s Creek. We did not get away from
the camp until half past nine a.m, continuing
our course down the most southern branch of the
creek, which keeps a general S.W. course. We
passed across the stony point which abuts on one
of the largest waterholes in the creek, and
camped at half-past twelve about a mile below
the most dangerous part of the rocky path. At
this latter place we had an accident that might
have resulted badly for us. One of the camels
fell while crossing the worst part, but we for-
tunately got him out with only a few cuts and
bruises. The waterhole at this camp is a
very fine one, being (to Camp No. 3) several
miles long and on an average about chains
broad. The waterfowl are numerous, but rather
shy—not nearly so much so, however, as those
on the creeks between here and Carpentaria,
and I am convinced the shyness of the latter,
which was also remarked by Sturt on his trip to
Eyre’s Creek, arises entirely from the scarcity
o{ animals, both human and otherwise, and not
from any peculiar mode of catching them that
the blacks may have.
Friday, April 26.—From Camp No. 3.—Last
night was beautifully calm, and comparatively
warm, although the sky was very clear. Re-
loaded the camels by moonlight this morning, and
started at a quarter to six. Striking off to the
south of the creek, we soon got on a native path,
which leaves the creek just below the stony
ground, and takes a course nearly west across a
piece of open country, bounded on the south by
sand ridges and on the north by the scrubby
ground which flanks the bank of the creek at this
part of its course. Leaving the path on the right
at a distance of three miles, we turned up a
small creek which passes down between some
sand-hills; and finding a nice patch of feed
for the camels at a waterhole, we halted at
fifteen minutes past seven for breakfast. We
started again at fifty minutes past nine a.m.
Continuing our westerly course along the path,
we crossed to the S. of the watercourse above the
water, and proceeded over the most splendid
saltbush country that one could wish to see,
bounded on the left by sand-hills, whilst to the
right the peculiar-looking flat-topped sandstone
ranges form an extensive amphitheatre, through
the far side of the arena of which may be traced


the dark line of creek timber. At twelve o’clock
we camped in the bed of the creek, at Camp
No. our last camp on the road down from
the Gulf, having taken four days to do what we
then did in one. This comparative rest, and the
change in diet, have also worked wonders, how-
ever; the leg-tied feeling is now entirely gone,
and I believe that in less than a week we shall
be fit to undergo any fatigue whatever. The
camels are improving, and seem capable of doing
all that we are likely to require of them. To
Camp No. 4-
Saturday, April 27.—First part of night clear,
with a light breeze from 8. Temperature at
midnight lOdeg. (Reaumur); towards morning
there were a few cir. cum. clouds passing over N.E.
toS.W., but these disappeared before daylight;
at five a.m. the temperature was 76deg. (Reau-
mur). We started at six o’clock, and, following
the native path, which at about a mile from our
camp takes a southerly direction, we soon came
to the high sandy alluvial deposit, which separates
the creek at this point from the stony rises.
Here we struck off from the path, keeping well
to the S. of the creek, in order that we might
mess in a branch of it that took a southerly
direction. At twenty minutes past nine we came
in on the creek again where it runs due south,and
halted for breakfast at a fine waterhole, with fine
fresh feed for the camels Here we remained
until noon, when we moved on again and camped
at one o'clock on a general course; having been
throughout the morning S.W. eight miles. The
weather is most agreeable and pleasant; nothing
could be more favourable for us up to the pre-
sent time. The temperature in the shade at
half-past ten a.m. was 17*5 (Reaumur), with a
light breeze from S., and a few small cir. cum.
clouds towards the N. I greatly feel the want of
more instruments, the only things I have left
being my watch, prism compass, pocket-compass,
and one thermometer (Reaumur). To Camp
No. 5.
Sunday, April 28.—From Camp No. s.—Morn-
ing fine and calm, but rather chilly. Started at
a quarter to five a.m., following down the bed of
a creerf in a westerly direction, by moonlight.
Our stage was, however, very short, for about a
mile one of the camels (Linda) got bogged by the
side of a waterhole, and although we tried every
means in our power, we found it impossible to get
him out. All the ground beneath the surface
was a bottomless quicksand, through which the
beast sank too rapidly for us to get bushes or
timber fairly beneath him, and being of a very
sluggish stupid nature, he could never be got to
make sufficiently strenuous efforts towards ex-
tricating himself. In the evening, as a last
chance, we let the water in from the creek, so as
to buoy him up and at the same time soften the
ground about his legs, but it was of no avail.
The brute lay quietly in it as if he quite en-
joyed his position. To Camp No. 6.
Monday, April 29.—From Camp No. 6.—Find-
ing Linda still in the hole, we made a few
attempts at extricating him, and then shot him ;
and after breakfast commenced cutting off what
flesh we could get at, for jerking.
Tuesday, April 30.—Camp No. 6.—Remained
here to-day for the purpose of drying the meat,
for which process the weather is not very favour-
able. (Meteorological note follows.)
Wednesday, May I.—From Camp No. 6.
Started at twenty minutes to nine, having loaded
our only camel, Rajah with the most necessary
and useful articles, and packed up a small swag
each of bedding and clothing for our own
shoulders. We kept on the right bank of the
creek for about a mile, and then crossed over at
a native camp to the left, where we got on a path
running due west, the creek having turned to
the N. Following the path, we crossed an open
plain, and then sand-ridges, whence we saw the
creek straight ahead of us, running nearly S.
ao-ain. The path took us to the southernmost
point of the bend, in a distance of about two and
a-balf miles from where we had crossed the
creek, thereby saving us from three to four
miles, as it cannot be less than six miles round
by the creek. To Camp No. 7.
Thursday, May 2.—Camp No. 7.—Breakfasted
by moonlight, and started at half-past six. Fol-
lowing down the left bank of the creek in
a westerly direction, we came, at a distance
of six miles, on a lot of natives, who were
camped on the bed of a creek. They seemed
to have just breakfasted, and were most liberal in
the presentations of fish and cake. We could
only return the compliment by some fish-hooks
and sugar. About a mile further on, we came to
a separation of the creek, where what looked like
the main branch looked towards the south. This
channel we followed, not, however, without some
misgivings as to its character, which were soon
increased by the small and unfavourable appear-
ance that the creek assumed. On our continuing
along it a little further, it began to improve, and
widened out, with fine waterholes of considerable
depth. The banks were very steep, and a belt of
scrub lined it on either side. This made it very
inconvenient for travelling, especially as the bed
of the creek was full of water for considerable
distances. At eleven a.m., we halted until half-
past one p.m , and then moved on again, taking
a S S.W. course for about two miles, when, at
the end of a very long waterhole, it breaks into
billibong, which continue splitting into sandy
channels until they are all lost in the earthy soil
of a box forest. Seeing little chance of water
ahead, we turned back to the end ofthe long water-
hole and camped for the night. On our way
back, Rajah showed signs of being done up. He
had been trembling greatly all the morning. On
this account his load was further lightened to the
amount of a few pounds, by the doing away with
the sugar, ginger, tea, cocoa, and two or three
tin plates. To Camp No. 8.
Friday May 3.—Camp No B.—Started at seven
a.m,, striking off in a northerly direction for the
main creek. At a mile and a-half came to a
branch which (left unfinished.) To camp No. 9.
Saturday, May 4.—Junction from Camp No.
9. —Night and morning very cold. Sky clear,
almost calm ; oecasionly a light breath of air
from south. Rajah appears to feel the cold very
much. He was so stiff this morning as to be
scarcely able to get up with his load. Started to
return down the creek at 6.45, and halted for
breakfast at nine a.m., at the same spot as we
breakfasted at yesterday. Proceeding from there


down the creek, we soon found a repetition of
the features that were exhibited by the creek
examined on Thursday. At a mile and a-half
wo came to the last waterhole, and below
that the channel became more sandy and
shallow and continued to send off billibongs to
the south and west, slightly changing its course
each time until it disappeared altogether in a
north-westerly direction. Leaving King with the
camel, we went on a mile or two to see if we could
l y ater > an d being unsuccessful, we were
obliged to return to where we had breakfasted
as being the best place for feed and water.
Sunday May 6.—To Camp No. 10 —Started
by myself to reconnoitre the country in a
southerly direction, leaving Mr. Burke and
King with the camel at Camp No 10 Travelled
S. W. by S. for two hours, following the course of
the most southerly billibongs. Found the earthy
soil becoming more loose and cracked up, and
the box track gradually disappearing. Changed
course to west, for a high sand-ridge, which
reached in one hour and a half, and continuing in
the same direction to one still higher, obtained
from it a good view of the surrounding country.
To the north were the extensive box forests
bounding the creek on either side, To the east
earthy plains intersected by water-courses and
lines of timber, and bounded in the distance by
sand-ridges. To the south the projection of the
sand-ndge partially intercepted the view; the rest
was composed of earthy plains, apparently clothed
with chrysanthemums. To the westward, another
but smaller plain was bounded also by high sand-
ridges,running nearly parallel with the one on which
I was standing. This dreary prospect offering no
encouragement for me to proceed, I returned to
Camp 10 by a more direct and better route than
1 had come, passing over some good saltbush land,
whmh borders on the billibongs to the westward.
(Here follow some meteorological notes )
Monday, May 6.—From Camp No. 10 back to
Camp No. 9.—Moved up the creek again to
Camp No. 9, at the junction, to breakfast, and
remained the day there. The present state of
ttungs is not calculated to raise our spirits much.
The rations are rapidly diminishing ; our clothing,
especially the boots, are all going to pieces, and
we have not the materials for repairing them
properly; the camel is completely done up, and
can scarcely get along, although he has the best
of feed, and is resting half his time. I suppose
this will end in our having to live like the blacks
for a few months.
Tuesday, May 7. —Camp No. 9. —Breakfasted
at daylight, but when about to start, found that
the camel would not rise, even without any load
on his back. After making every attempt
to get him up, we were obliged to leave him
to himself. Mr. Burke and I started down the
creek to reconnoitre. At about eleven miles we
came to some blacks fishing. They gave us some
half-a-dozen fish each for luncheon, and intimated
that if we would go to their camp, we should
have some more, and some bread. 1 tore in two
a piece of macintosh stuff that I had, and Mr
Burke gave one piece and I the other. We then
went on to their camp, about three miles further.
They had caught a considerable quantity of fish
but most of them were small, I noticed three
different kinds —a small one that they call “ cupi,”
five to six inches long, and not broader than an
eel; the common one, with large coarse scales,
termed “pernand a delicious fish, some of which
run from a pound to two pounds weight. The
natives call them “ cawilchi. On our arrival at the
camp, they led us to a spot to camp on, and soon
afterwards brought a lot of fish and bread, which
thej call nardoo. The lighting a fire with matches
delights them, but they do not care about having
them. In the evening, various members of the
tribe came down with lumps of nardoo, and hand-
fuls of fish, until we were positively unable to eat
any more. They also gave us some stuff they call
bedgery, or pedgery. It has a highly in-
toxicating effect, when chewed even in small
quantities. It appears to be the dried stems and
leaves of some shrub.
Wednesday, May B.—Left the blacks’ camp at
half-past seven, Mr. Burke returning to the junc-
tion, whilst I proceeded to trace down the creek.
This I found a shorter task than I had expected, for
it soon showed signs of running out, and at the same
time kept considerably to the north of west.
There were several fine waterholes within about
four miles of the camp I had left, but not a drop
all the way beyond that, a distance of seven
miles. Finding that the creek turned greatly
towards the north, I returned to the blacks en-
campment ; but as I was about to pass, they in-
vited me to stay. So I did so, and was even
more hospitably entertained than before, being
on this occasion offered a share of a gunyah, and
supplied with plently of fish and nardoo, as well
as a couple of nice fat rats. The latter I found
most delicious. They were baked in the skins.
Last night was clear and calm, but unusually
warm. We slept by a fire, just in front of the
blacks’ camp. They were very attentive in
bringing us firewood, and keeping the fire up
during the night.
Thursday, May 9. —Parted from my friends
the blacks, at half-past seven, and started for
Camp No. 9.
Friday, May 10. —Camp No. 9.—Mr. Burke and
King employed in jerking the camel’s flesh whilst
I went out to look for the nardoo seed, for making
bread. In this I was unsuccessful, not being able
to find a single tree of it in the neighbourhood of
the camp. I however tried boiling the large kind
of bean which the blacks call padlu; they boil
easily, and when shelled are very sweet, much
resembling in taste the French chesnut. They
are to be found in large quantities nearly every-
where,
Saturday, May 11.—Camp No. 9. —To-day Mr.
Burke and King started down the creek for the
blacks’ camp, determined to ascertain all parti-
culars about the nardoo. I have now my turn
at the meat jerking, and must devise some means
for trapping the birds and rats, which is a plea-
sant prospect after our dashing trip to Carpen-
taria, having to hang about Cooper’s Creek,
living with the blacks.
Sunday, May 12.—Mr. Burke and King re-
turned this morning, having been unsuccessful
in their search for the blacks, who, it seems, have
moved over to the other branch of the creek.
Decided on moving out on the main creek to-


morrow, and then trying to find the natives of
the creek.
Monday, May 13.—Shifted some of the things
and brought them back again, Mr. Burke think-
ing it better for one to remain here with them
for a few days, so as to eat the remains of the
fresh meat, whilst the others went in search of the
blacks and nardoo.
Tuesday, May 14.—Mr. Burke and King gone
up the creek to look for blacks, with four days’
provisions. Seif employed in preparing for a
final start on their return. This evening Mr.
Burke and King returned, having been some con-
siderable distance up the creek and found no
blacks. It is now settled that we plant the things,
and all start together the day after to-morrow.
The weather continues very fine ; the nights calm,
clear, and cold, and the days clear, with a breeze
generally from S„ but to-day from E., for a change.
This makes the first part of the day rather cold.
When clouds appear they invariably move from
W. to E.
Wednesday, May 15. —Camp 9.—Planting the
things, and preparing to leave the creek for
Mount Hopeless.
Thursday, May 16.—Having completed our
planting, &c., started up the creek to the second
blacks’ camp, a distance of about eight miles.
Finding our loads rather too heavy, we made a
small plant here of such articles as could best be
spared. (Here follow a few meteorological note)
Friday, May 17.—Nardoo. —Started this morning
on a blacks' path, leaving the creek on our left,
our intention being to keep a south-easterly direc-
tion until we should cut some likely-looking creek,
and then to follow it down. On approaching the
foot of the first sand-hill. King caught sight in the
flat of some nardoo seeds, and we soon found that
the flat was covered with them. This discovery
caused somewhat of a revolution in our feelings,
for we considered that with the knowledge of this
plant we were in a position to support ourselves,
even if we were destined to remain on the creek,
and wait for assistance from town. Crossing some
sand-ridges running N. and S., we struck into a
creek which runs out of Cooper’s Creek,and followed
it down. At about five miles we came to a large
water-hole, beyond which the water-course runs
out on extensive flats and earthy plains. Calm
night; sky cleared towards morning, and it be-
came very cold. A slight easterly breeze sprang
up at sunrise, but soon died away again. The
sky again became overcast, and remained so
throughout the day. There was occasionally a
light breeze from south, but during the greater
portion of the day it was quite calm. Fine halo
around the sun in the afternoon,
Saturday, May 18,—Camp No 16. —(No entry
except the following meteorological entry on an
opposite page, which may probably refer to this
date.) Calm night, sky sometimes clear, and
sometimes partially overcast with veil clouds.
Sunday, May 19. —(No entry beyond this cita-
tion of date.)
Monday, May 20.—(N0 entry beyond this cita-
tion of date.)
Tuesday, May 21.—Creek. (No entry beyond
this citation of date,)
Wednesday, May 22, —Cooper’s Creek, (No
entry beyond citation of date,)
Thursday, May 23,—(N0 entry beyond this ci-
tation of date.)
Friday, May 24, —Started with King to cele-
brate the Queen’s birthday by fetching from
Nardoo Creek what is now to us the staff of life.
Returned at a little after two p.m,, with a fair
su PPly. hut find the collecting of the seed a
slower and more troublesome process than could
be desired. Whilst picking the seed, about
eleven o’clock a.m., both of us heard distinctly
the noise of an explosion, as if of a gun, at some
considerable distance. We suppose it to have
been a shot fired by Mr. Burke; but on returning
to the camp found he had not fired nor had
heard the noise. The sky was partially overcast
with high cum. str. clouds, and a light breeze
blew from the east, but nothing to indicate a
thunderstorm in any direction.
Saturday. May 26.—(N0 entry beyond this.)
Sunday, May 26.—(N0 entry beyond this.)
Monday, May 27 Started up the creek this
morning for the depot, in order to deposit
journals and a record of the state of affairs here.
On reaching the sand hills below where Linda
was bogged, I passed some blacks on a flat col-
lecting nardoo seed. Never saw such an abun-
dance of the seed before. The ground in some
parts was quite black with it. There were only
two or three gins and children, and they directed
me on, as if to their camp, in the direction I was
before going; but I had not gone far over the
first sand-hill when I was overtaken by about
twenty blacks, bent on taking me back to their
camp, and promising any quantity of nardoo and
fish. On my going with them, one carried the
shovel, and another insisted on taking my swag,
in such a friendly manner that I could not refuse
them. They were greatly amused with the
various little things I had with me. In the even-
ing they supplied me with abundance of nardoo
and fish; and one of the old men, Poko Tannamira,
shared his gunyah with me. . . . The night
was very cold, but, by the help of several fires—
[The entry suddenly stops, but in the margin of
the opposite page are written the names of several
natives, and certain native words, with their
meanings in English.]
Tuesday, May 28.—Left the blacks’ camp and
proceeded up the creek. Obtained some mussels
near where Linda died, and halted for breakfast.
Still feel very unwell from the effects of the con-
stipation of the bowels. The stools are exceed-
ingly painful. After breakfast, travelled on to
our third camp coming down. Puy to Blowr.
{sic)
Wednesday, May 29—Started at seven
o’clock, and went on to the duck-holes, where we
breakfasted coming down. Halted there
at thirty minutes past nine for a feed, and
then moved on. At the stones saw a lot of
crows quarrelling about something near the
water. Found it to be a large fish, of which they
had eaten a considerable portion. Finding it
quite fresh and good, I decided the quarrel by
taking it with me. It proved a most valuable
addition to my otherwise scanty supper of nardoo
porridge. This evening I camped very com-
fortably in a mia-mia, about eleven miles from the
depot. The night was very cold, although not
entirely cloudless. A brisk easterly breeze sprang


up in the morning, and blew freshly all day. In
the evening the sky clouded in, and there were
one or two slight showers, but nothing to wet the
ground.
Thursday, May 30.—Reached the depot this
morning, at eleven o’clock No traces of any one
except blacks having been here since we left.
Deposited some journals, and a notice of our
present condition Started back in the afternoon,
and camped at a fresh waterhole. Last night
being clouded, was unusually warm and pleasant.
Friday, May 31. Decamped at thirty minutes
past seven, having first breakfasted. Passed be-
tween the sand-hills at nine, and reached the
blanket mia-mias at twenty minutes to eleven:
from there proceeded on to the rocks, where I
arrived at half-past one, having delayed about
half-an-hour on the road in gathering some por-
tulac. It had been a fine morning, but the sky
now became overcast, and threatened to set in
for a steady rain; and as [ felt very weak and
tired, I only moved on about a mile further, and
eamped in a sheltered gully, under some bushes.
Night clear and very cold. No wind. Towards
morning sky became slightly overcast with eirro
str. clouds
Saturday, June 1. —Started at a quarter to
eight a.m. Passed the duck holes at ten a. m.
and my second camp up at two p m., having
rested in the meantime about forty-five minutes.
Thought to have reached the blacks’ camp, or at
least where Linda was bogged, but found myself
altogether too weak and exhausted ; in fact, had
extreme difficulty in getting across the numerous
little gullies, and was at last obliged to camp, from
sheer fatigue. Night ultimately clear and cloudy,
with occasional showers.
Sunday, June 2. —Started at half-past six,
thinking to breakfast at the blacks’ camp, below
Linda’s grave; found myself very much fagged,
and did not arrive at their camp until ten a.m.
and then found myself disappointed as to a good
breakfast, the camp being deserted. Having
rested awhile and eaten a few fish bones, I
moved down the creek, hoping by a late march
to be able to reach our own camp, but I soon
found from my extreme weakness, that that
would be out of the question. A certain amount
©f good luck, however, still stuck to me, for, on
going along by a large water hole, I was so fortu-
nate as to find a large fish, about a pound and
a-halfin weight, which was just being choked by
another which it had tried to swallow, but which
had stuck in its throat. I soon had a fire lit
and both of the fish cooked and eaten. The large
one was in good condition. Moving on again after
my late breakfast, I passed Camp 67 of the
journey to Carpentaria, and camped for the night
■nder some polygonum bushes.
Monday, June 3. —Started at seven o’clock
and keeping on the south bank of the creek,
was rather encouraged, at about three miles, by
the sound of numerous crows ahead; presently
fancied I could see smoke, and was shortly after-
wards set at my ease by hearing a cooey from
Pitchery, who stood on the opposite bank, and
directed me around the lower end of the water-
hole, continually repeating his assurance of
abundance of fish and bread. Having with some
•onsiderable difficulty managed to ascend the
sandy path that led to the camp, I was conducted
by the chief to a fire, where a large pile of fish
were just being cooked in the most approved
style. These 1 imagined to be for the general
consumption of the half-a-dozen natives gathered
around, but it turned out that they had already
had their breakfast. I was expected to dispose
of this lot—a task, which, to my own astonish-
ment, I soon accomplished, keeping two or three
blacks pretty steadily at work extracting the
bones for me. The fish being disposed of, next
came a supply of nardoo cake and water, until I
was so full as to be unable to eat any more,
when Pitchery allowing me a short time to re-
cover myself, fetched a large bowl of the raw
nardoo flour, mixed to a thin paste—a most in-
sinuating article, and one that they appear
to esteem a great delicacy. I was then invited
to stop the night there, but this I declined and
proceeded on my way home,
Tuesday, June 4. —Started for the blacks’
camp intending to test the practicability of
living with them, and to see what I could learn
as to their ways and manners.
Wednesday, June s.—Remained with the
blacks. Light rain during the greater part of
the night, and more or less throughout the day
in showers. Wind blowing in squalls from S.
Thursday, June 6. —Returned to our own
camp, found that Mr, Burke and King had been
well supplied with fish by the blacks. Made pre-
paration for shifting our camp nearer to their’»
on the morrow.
Friday. June 7. —Started in the afternoon for
the blacks’ camp with such things as we could
take. Found ourselves all very weak, in spite of
the abundant supply of fish that we have lately
had. I myself could scarcely get along, although
carrying the lightest swag—only about thirty
pounds. Found that the blacks had decamped,
so determined on proceeding to-morrow up to
the next camp, near the nardoo field.
Saturday, June B.—With the greatest fatigue
and difficulty we reached the nardoo camp. JS'o
blacks, greatly to our disappointment. Took
possession of their best mia-mia, and rested for
the remainder of the dav.
Sunday, June 9.—King and I proceeded to
collect nardoo, leaving Mr. Burke at home.
Monday. June 10. —Mr. Burke and King col-
lecting nardoo; self at home, too weak to go
out. Was fortunate enough to shoot a crow.
[Here follow some meteorological notes, which
appear to relate to another period.]
Tuesday, June 11.—King out for nardoo. Mr.
Burke up the creek to look for the blacks.
Wednesday, June l2.—King out collecting
nardoo. Mr. Burke and lat home, pounding
and cleaning. I still feel myself, if anything,
weaker in the legs, although the nardoo appears
to be more thoroughly (?) digested.
Thursday, June 13. —Last night the sky was
pretty clear, and the air rather cold, but nearly
calm ; a few cir.-st. hung about the N.E. horizon
during the first part of the night. Mr. Burke
and King out for nardoo. Self weaker than ever,
scarcely able to go to the water hole for water.
Towards afternoon cir.-cum. and cir.-st. began to
appear, moving northward, scarcely any wind all
day.


Friday, June 14. —Night alternately clear and
oloudy, cir.-cum. and cum.-at, moving north-
wards ; no wind, beautifully mild for the time of
year; in the morning some heavy clouds on
the horizon. King out for nardoo ; brought in a
good supply. Mr. Burke and I at home, pound-
ing and cleaning seed. I feel weaker than ever,
and both Mr. B. and King are beginning to feel
very unsteady in the legs.
Saturday, June 15.—Night clear, calm, and
•old; morning very fine, with a light breath of
air from N.E. King out for nardoo; brought in
a fine supply. Mr. Burke and I pounding and
cleaning. He finds himself getting very weak,
and I am not a bit stronger. I have determined
on beginning to chew tobacco and eat less nardoo,
in hopes that it may induce some change in the
system. I have never yet recovered from the
effects of the constipation, and the passage of the
stools is always exceedingly painful.
Sunday, June 16.—Wind shifted to N., clouds
moving from W. to E.; thunder audible two or
three times to the southward; sky becoming
densely overcast with an occasional shower about
nine a.m. We finished up the remains of the Rajah
for dinner yesterday. King was fortunate enough
to shoot a crow this morning. The rain kept all
hands in pounding and cleaning seed during the
morning. The weather cleared up towards the
middle of the day, and a brisk breeze sprang up
in the south, lasting till near sunset, but rather
irregular in its force. Distant thunder was
audible to westward and southward frequently
during the afternoon.
Monday, June 17. -Night very boisterous and
stormy. Northerly wind blowing in squalls, and
heavy showers of rain, with thunter in the north
and west. Heavy clouds moving rapidly from
north to south; gradually clearing up during the
raorniug. The weather continuing squally during
the day from W. and N. W. King out in the after-
noon for nardoo.
Tuesday, June 18.—Exceedingly cold night.
Sky clear, slight breeze, very chilly, and change,
able; very heavy dew. After sunrise, cir.-st,
clouds began to pass from west to east, gra-
dually becoming more dense, and assuming the
form of cum.-st. The sky cleared, and it became
warmer towards noon.
Wednesday, June 19. —Night calm; sky during
first part overcast with cir.-cum. clouds, most of
which cleared away towards morning, leaving the
air much colder, but the sky remained more or
less hazy all night, and it was not nearly as cold
as last night. About eight o’clock a strong
southerly wind sprung up, which enabled King
to blow the dust out of our nardoo seeds, but
made me too weak to render him any assist-
ance.
Thursday, June 20,—Night and morning very
sold, sky clear. I am completely reduced by the
effects of the cold and starvation. King gone out
for nardoo. Mr. Burke at home pounding seed;
he finds himself getting very weak in the legs.
King holds out by far the best; the food seems
to agree with him pretty well. Finding the sun
<ome out pretty warm towards noon, I took a
sponging all over, but it seemed to do little good
beyond the cleaning effects, for my weakness is so
great that I could not do it with proper expedi-
tion. I cannot understand this nardoo at all; it
certainly will not agree with me in any form.
We are now reduced to it alone, and we manage
to get from four to five pounds per day between
us. The stools it causes are enormous, and seem
greatly to exceed the quantity of bread consumed,
and is very slightly altered in appearance from
what it was when eaten,
Friday, June 21.—Last night was cold and
clear, winding up with a strong wind from N.E.
in the morning. I feel much weaker than ever,
and can scarcely crawl out of the mia-mia. Un-
less relief comes in some form or other, I cannot
possibly last more than a fortnight. It is a great
consolation, at least, in this position of ours, to
know that we have done all we could, and that
our deaths will rather be the result of the mis-
management of others than of any rash acts of
our own. Had we come to grief elsewhere, wo
could only have blamed ourselves; but here we
are, returned to Cooper’s Creek, where we had
every reason to look for provisions and clothing;
and yet we have to die ot starvation, in spite of
the explicit instructions given by Mr. Burke,
that the depot party should await our return,
and the strong recommendation to the com-
mittee that we should be followed up by a
party from Menindie. About noon a change of
wind took place, and it blew almost as hard from
the west as it did previously from the N.E. A few
cir. cum. continued to pass over towards east.
Saturday, June 22.—Night cloudy and warm.
Every appearance of rain. Thunder once or
twice during the night. Clouds moving in an
easterly direction. Lower atmosphere perfectly
calm. There were a few drops of rain during the
night, and in the morning, about nine a.m., there
was every prospect of more rain until toward*
noon, when the sky cleared up for a time. Mr.
Burke and King out for nardoo. The former re-
turned much fatigued. lam so weak to-day as
to be unable to get on my feet.
Sunday, June 23.—A1l hands at home. I am
so weak as to be incapable of crawling out of the
mia-mia. King holds out well, but Mr. Burke
finds himself weaker every day.
Monday, June 24.—A fearful night. At about
an hour before sunset, a southerly gale sprang
up and continued throughout the greater portion
of the night; the cold was intense, and it seemed
as if one would be shrivelled up. Towards morn-
ing, it fortunately lulled a little, but a strong
cold breeze continued till near sunset, after which
it became perfectly calm. King went out for
nardoo, in spite of the wind, and came in with a
good load, but he himself terribly cut up. He
says that he can no longer keep up the work, and
as he and Mr. Burke are both getting rapidly
weaker, we have but a slight chance of anything
but starvation, unless we can get hold of soma
blacks,
Tuesday, June 23 (sic). —Night calm, clear,
and intensely cold, especially towards morning.
N ear daybreak, King reported seeing a moon in
the E., with a haze of light stretching up from it,
he declared it to be quite as large as the moon,
and not dim at the edges. I am so weak
that any attempt to get a sight of it was out of
the qustion; but I think it must have been
Venus in the zodiacal light that he saw, with a


corona around her. Mr. Burke and King remain
at borne cleaning and pounding seed. They are
both getting weaker every day. The cold plays
the deuce with us, from the small amount of
clothing we have. My wardrobe consists of a
wide-a-awake, a merino shirt, a regatta shirt
without sleeves, the remains of a pair of flannel
trousers, two pairs of socks in rags, and a waist-
coat of which I have managed to keep the pockets
together. The others are no better off. Besides
these we have between us for bedding, two small
camel pads, some horsehair, two or three little bits
of a rag, and pieces of oilcloth saved from the fire.
The day turned out nice and warm.
Wednesday, June 24 (sic).— Calm night; sky
overcast with hazy cum. strat. clouds. An easterly
breeze sprang up towards morning, making the
air much colder After sunrise there were indica-
tions of a clearing up of the sky, but it soon clouded
in again, the upper current continuing to move
in an easterly direction, whilst a breeze from the
E. and N.E. blew pretty regularly throughout the
day. Mr. Burke and King are preparing to go
up the creek in search of the blacks. They will
leave me some nardoo, wood and water, with which
I must do the best I can until they return. I
think this is almost our only chance. I feel my-
self, if anything, rather better, but I cannot say
stronger. The nardoo is beginning to agree better
with me; but without some change I see little
chance for any of us. They have both shown great
hesitation and reluctance with regard to leaving
me, and have repeatedly desired my candid opinion
in the matter. I could only repeat, however, that
I considered it our only chance, for I could not
last long on the nardoo, even if a supply could be
kept up.
Thursday, June 25 (sic). —Cloudy, calm, and
comparatively warm night, clouds almost stationary.
In the morning a gentle breeze from east. Sky
partially cleared up during the day, making it
pleasantly warm and bright, it remained clear
during the afternoon and evening, offering every
prospect of a clear cold night.
Friday, June 26 (sic). —Clear cold night, slight
breeze from the E., day beautifully warm and
pleasant. Mr. Burke suffers greatly from the
cold, and is getting extremely weak; he and King
start to-morrow up the creek, to look for the
blacks—it is the only chance we have of being
saved from starvation. I am weaker than ever
although I have a good appetite, and relish the
nardoo much, but it seems to give us no nutriment,
and the birds here are so shy as not to be got at.
Even if we got a good supply of fish, I doubt
whether we could do much work on them and the
nardoo alone. Nothing now but the greatest good
luck can now save any of us; and as for myself,
1 may live four or five days if the weather con-
tinues warm. My pulse are at forty-eight, and
very weak, and my legs and arms are nearly skin
and bone. I can only look out, like Mr. Micawber,
“ tor something to turn up; ” but starvation on
nardoo is by no means very unpleasant, but for
the weakness one feels, and the utter inability to
move oneself, for as far as appetite is concerned,
it gives me the greatest satisfaction. Certainly,
fat and sugar would be more to one’s taste, in fact,
those seem to me to be the great stand by for one
in this extraordinary continent; not that I mean
to depreciate the farinaceous food, but the want of
sugar and fat in all substances obtainable here is
so great that they become almost valueless to us
as articles of food, without the addition of some-
thing else.
(Signed) W. J. Wilis.
MR. BURKE’S NOTES.
The following extracts are from the memo-
randum-hook of Mr. Burke :
Mr. Archer, to whom the task of transcribing
it was intrusted, writes the following preface:
—“ I went carefully through Burke’s note-
book last night. It is an ordinary memoran-
dum-book, with a clasp, and a side-pocket for
a pencil. It is much dilapidated, and several
of the leaves are torn out; some so torn had
been written on. I have numbered these con-
secutively throughout. The following is a
copy, letter for letter and word for word, of all
that remains of Burke’s pencillings. I have
queried all doubtful points
No. 69.—Line of cour i ing (?) on bags 1,4,
19, 20,11, 3. Think well before giving an an-
swer, and never speak except from strong con-
victions.
16th December. —Left depot 65; followed by
the creek.
17th. —The same. 66.
18th. —The same. 67.
19th.—We made a (?) small creek, supposed
to be Otta Era (?), or in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of it. Good water. Camp 69.
20th. —Made a creek, where we found a great
many natives. They presented us with fish,
and offered their women. Camp 70.
21st. —Made another creek, camp 71. Splen-
did water, fine feed for the camels; would be a
very good place for a station. Since we have
left Cooper’s Creek we have travelled over a
fine sheep grazing country, well watered, and
in every respect well suited for occupation.
22nd December, 1860. —Camp 72. Encamped
on the borders of the desert.
23rd. —Travelled day and night, and en-
camped in the night in the bed of a creek, as
we supposed we were near water.
24th.—Encamped on the morning of this
day on the banks of Gray’s Creek, called after
him because he was detached on horseback
from the party, and found it good water. The
third day without it. Now for a retrospective
glance: We started from Cooper’s Greek,
Camp 66, with the intention of going through
to Eyre’s Creek without water. Loaded with
800 pints of water; four riding camels carried
130 pints, each horse 150, two pack camels 60
each, and 5 pints each man.
25th, Christmas Day.—Started at four a.m.
from Gray’s Creek, and arrived at a creek which
appears to be quite as large as Cooper’s Creek.
At two p.m. Golab Sing gave some very decided
hints about stopping by lying down under the
trees. Splendid prospect.
26th Dec., 27th Dec., 28th Dec., 29th Dec. —
Followed up the creek until it took a turn to
the south-east, which I thought rather too
much to put up with, therefore left it on the
morning of the 30th December, 12.80, on the
road started at seven o’clock, travelled eleven


hours. 31st, started at 2.20 sixteen and a-half
hours on the road, travelled thirteen and a-
half hours.
Ist. January.—Water.
2nd January.—From King’s Creek, eleven
hours on the road. Started at seven, travelled
nine and a-half hours: desert.
3rd January.—Five started; travelled twelve
hours no minutes.
4th. —Twelve hours on the road.
6th. —Water at Wills’ or King’s Creek. It is
impossible to say the time we were up, for we
had to load the camels, to pack and feed them,
to Watch them and the horse, and to look for
water; but I am satisfied that the frame of
man never was more severely taxed. [Then
follows an entry for March 28th, commencing
thus, “ March 28th—At the conclusion of ”
Then some of the leaves appear to have been
torn out from pages 43 to 55.]
18th January, 1869. —As I find it impossible
to keep a regular diary, I shall jot down my
ideas when I have an opportunity and put the
date. Upon two occasions, at Cooper’s Creek
and at King’s Creek, on New Year’s day, when-
ever the natives tried to bully or bounce us
and were repulsed, although the leaders ap-
peared to be in earnest, the followers, and par-
ticularly the young ones, laughed heartily and
seemed to be amused at their leaders’ repulse.
The old fellow at King’s Creek who stuck his
spear into the ground and threw dust in the
air, when I fired off my pistol, ran off in the
most undignified manner. Names for places:
—Thackeray, Barry, Bindon, Lyons, Forbes,
Archer, Bennet, Colles, 0. S. Nicholson, Wood,
Wrixon, Cope, Turner, Scratchley, Ligar,
Griffith, Green, Roe, Hamilton, Archer, Colles.
18th January.—Still on the ranges; the
camels sweating profusely from fear.
20th January.—l determined to-day to
go straight at the ranges, and so far the experi-
ment has succeeded well. The poor camels
sweating and groaning but we gave them a
hot bath in Turner’s Greek, which seemed to
relieve them very much At last through—
the camels bleeding, sweating, and groaning.
[Leaves 35 to 39 torn out, and eight leaves
preceding torn out, no marks of writing visi-
ble on the remnants. Leaves 24 to 83, both
inclusive, blank on both sides.]
28th March. —At the conclusion of report, it
would be well to say that we reached the sea,
but we could not obtain a view of the open
ocean, although we made every endeavour to
do so.
Leaving Carpentaria.—Flour 831 b.; pork
31b.; D. meat, 351 b.: biscuits, 121 b.; rice, 121 b.
sugar 101 b. [Page 15 blank.] —Return party
from Carpentaria arrived here last night, and
found that the D. party had started on the same
day. We proceeded slowly down the creek
towards Adelaide by Mount Hopeless, and
shall endeavour to follow Gregory’s track; but
we are very weak, the camels are done up,
and we shall not be able to travel faster than
five miles a day at most. Gray died on the
road, from hunger and fatigue. We all suf-
fered much from hunger,, but the provisions
left here will, I think, restore our strength.
We have discovered a practicable route to
Carpentaria, the principal portion of which
lies in the 140th meridian of east longitude.
Between this and the Stony Desert there is
some good country from there to the tropic.
The country is dry and stony bet ween the tropic
and Carpentaria. A considerable portion is
rangy, but it is well watered and richly grassed.
[Pages 20 and 21 torn, no writing apparent,
Pages 22 and 23 contain a memorandum of
stores, but without any particular reference to
time and place.]
MEMORANDA IN MR. BURKE’S POCKET
BOOK.
BROUGHT DOWN BY KING, AND HANDED
TO SIR W. STAWELL.
At the meeting of the Exploration Com-
mittee on December sth, the Chairman (Sir
W. Stawell) produced a private memorandum
book belonging to Mr. Burke, which, he stated,
he intended to forward to Miss Burke at Malta.
The book contained principally instructions
to his sister, but on some of the leaves there
were memoranda for the committee evidently.
Those he would read to the committee. They
were as follows :
I hope we shall be done justice to. We ful-
filled our task, but were (aban —•*) not followed
up as I expected. The depot party abandoned
their post.
“R. O’Hara Burke.
“ For the Committee.
“ Cooper’s Creek, 26th June, 1861.”
“ King has behaved nobly; I hope he wiU be
taken care of. tie goes up the creek in ac-
cordance with my request—June 29th, 1861.”
“ King has behaved nobly, and I hope if he
lives he will be properly rewarded.—2Bth
June, 1861.”
“ King has stayed with me till the last. He
has left me, at my own request, unburied, and
with my pistol in hand.”
MR. WILLS’S LAST LETTER TO HIS
FATHER.
BROUGHT DOWN BY KING.
Cooper’s Creek, June 27,1861.
My dear Father, —These are probably the
last lines you will ever get from me. We are
on the point of starvation, not so much from
absolute want of food, but from the want of
nutriment in what we can get.
Our position, although more provoking, is
probably not near so disagreeable as that of
poor Harryf and his companions. - We have
had very good luck, and made a most success-
ful trip to Carpentaria and back, where we
had every right to consider ourselves safe,
having left a depot here consisting of four
men, twelve horses, and six camels. They had
provisions enough to have lasted them twelve
* This word was marked through,
t Harry, his cousin. Lieutenant Le Vescompte, who
perished with Sir John Franklin.


mofiths with proper economy; and we had
and every right to expect that we should have
been immdiately followed up from Menindie,
by another party with additional provisions
and every necessary for forming a permanent
depot at Cooper’s Creek. The party we left
here had special instructions not to leave
until our return, unless from absolute necessity.
We left the creek with nominally three
months’ supply, but they were reckoned at
little over the rate of half rations. We calcu-
lated on having to eat some of the camels.
By the greatest good luck at every turn, we
crossed to the Gulf through a good deal of
fine country, almost in a straight line from
here. On the other side, the camels suffered
considerably from wet; we had to kill and
jerk one soon after starting back. We had
now been out a little more than two months,
and found it necessary to reduce the rations
considerably, and this began to tell on all
hands, but I felt it by far less than any of
the others. The great scarcity and shyness
of game, and our forced marches, prevented
our supplying the deficiency from external
sources to any great extent; but we never
could have held out hut for the crows and
hawks, and the portulac. The latter is an
excellent vegetable, and I believe secured our
return to this place. W e got back here in
four months and four days, and found the
party had left the creek the same day; and
we were not in a fit state to follow them.
I find I must close this that it may be
planted, but I will write some more, although
it has not so good a chance of reaching you
as this. You have great claim on the com-
mittee for their neglect. I leave you in sole
charge of what is coming to me. The whole
of my money I desire to leave to my sisters:
other matters I will leave for the present.
Adieu, my dear father. Love to Torn.*
W. J. WILLS.
I think to live about four or five days. My
spirits are excellent.
[This letter was read by Wills to Burke in
King’s presence, before Mr. Burke left with
King.]
* Tom, his brother, in Melbourne.


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.
From the “Examiner."
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE.
One of our daily contemporaries has ob-
tained some slight particulars of the previous
career of the lamented gentlemen whose
names have become household words through-
out these colonies, which, in default of fuller
and more certain information, possess con-
siderable interest. From them we gather
that the leader of the expedition was born at
St. Clerans, Galway, Ireland, and was in his
fortieth year of age when he died. “He was
partly educated at home, and afterwards, for
the higher studies, in Belgium. Subsequently
he entered the Radetzky regiment of Hun-
garian Hussars in the Austrian service. Here
h? displayed great assiduity in military
studies, soon came to be regarded as a most
efficient cavalry officer, and at an early period
obtained a captaincy. The eventful political
changes of that year of continental dis-
quietude, 1848, led to Mr. Burke’s re-
linquishing the Austrian service. After-
wards we hear of him as holding a com-
mand in the Irish mounted constabulary,
when he was for some time stationed in
Dublin. On resigning this office to emigrate,
he received several very flattering testimo-
nials, demonstrating that at that time, as
continually since, he had the ability to se-
cure the respect and esteem of his com-
panions and fellow-officers. Mr. Burke ar-
rived at Hobart Town in 1853, but appears to
have soon proceeded to Melbourne, where he
at once obtained an appointment as acting-
inspector of police, under Mr. Mitchell. In
this capacity he remained till the close of
1853, when he was transferred to a command
at Carlsruhe. In 1854 he was advanced to
the Beechworth district, to relieve Mr. Price,
the police magistrate, and with a step in pro-
motion to the post of district inspector. Dur-
ing the progress of the Crimean war Mr. Burke
obtained leave of absence to enable him to
visit England, where he hoped, with the
interest he possessed, to have been enabled
to share the glory and the peril of the grand
struggle then existing between Russia and
the Allied Powers. In this hope he was
disappointed by the termination of the war,
upon which he returned to this colony and
re-assumed his command in our mounted
police force. In 1858 Mr. Burke was removed
to. Castlemaine,” where he was stationed
when he obtained the appointment of leader
of the Victorian Exploring Expedition.
From the moment it became probable that
he would be selected to fill this responsible
post Burke is said to have “ diligently pre-
pared himself for it. He at once commenced
an active examination of the records of pre-
vious explorers, so as to become thoroughly
acquainted with the personal experiences of
Australian pioneers of discovery, and well in-
formed as to the actual knowledge of the
interior and remote coasts already on record.
He likewise entered upon a course of regular
training, taking severe pedestrian exercise,
and accustoming himself to fatigue and priva-
tion of every possible kind that an attempt to
traverse the vast untrodden wilds of Aus-
tralia was likely to bring to his experience,”
\
\
WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.
Of Wills, the sharer df‘“Burke’s perils,
sufferings, and glory, we are informed that
“ his father was a physician at Totness, in
Devonshire, and Wills was designed to pur


sue the study of the same profession. With
this object in view, he sought with ardour,
as a pupil of his father, the attainment of
the various branches of knowledge required
in this profession, and for four years exhibited
the most unremitting application to such
studies. In chemistry and the experience of
the medical schools he became specially dis-
tinguished for proficiency. He had received
an excellent academical education at the
grammar school of Ashburton, —a public
school of note, as being endowed with scholar-
ships by the famous William Gifford, and
also by Dr. Ireland, Dean of Westminster.”
Wills arrived in this colony in 1853,
and at first obtained a situation at the Royal
Bank Station, Deniliquin. His father emi-
grated the succeeding year, and settled at
Ballarat, where Wills assisted him for a
time in his profession. Subsequently, he “ob-
tained employment in the service of the
Government as an officer in the Survey De-
partment, under Mr. Byerlet, and there dis-
played his characteristic assiduity and pro-
ficiency. Having acquired a knowledge of
and interest in astronomical and other
sciences to which the Observatory is devoted,
he obtained, through the recommendation of
Mr. Ligar, the Surveyor-General, a situation
as assistant in that establishment. Here he
remained for two years, when the opportunity
presented itself of offering to join the Ex-
ploring Expedition.”
Wills, it appears, had long entertained a
strong wish to be connected with such an
enterprise. “ long ago as 1855 he fre-
quently spoke, as many of his friends can
recollect, of a longing desire to explore the
interior of Australia. He also expressed at
this time a belief that he should be among
the first who ever should succeed in crossing
to the Gulf of Carpentaria. In 1856 there
was a proposal brought before the public by
a Dr. Catherwood to explore the interior of
this country. This project, however, was
abandoned; but Wills, who happened to be
then on the River Wannon, immediately on
chancing to hear of it walked to Ballarat, a
distance of ninety miles, in his anxiety to
join the proposed expedition.”
He was twenty-seven years of age at the
time of his melancholy yet glorious death.
WLLSON AND MACKINNON. PRINTERS,. COLLINS STREET EAST,




WORKS RECENTLY PUBLISHED
BY
WILSON & MACKINNON, 78, GOLLINS-ST. EAST.
Uniform with this Pamphlet, Price Is.
THE EVIDENCE
TAKEN BEFORE THE
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY
BEING A
SUPPLEMENTARY PAMPHLET
v TO TUB
BURKE AND WILLS EXPLORING EXPEDITION.
WITH PORTRAITS OF JOHN KING AND CHARLES GRAY,
rpHE EDUCATIONAL GAZETTE, Literary Companion, and
I General Review. Royal octavo. Price Is. Subscription 10s. per annum, including
Postage. Published every third Saturday. v
BRADSHAW’S SHEET ALMANAC for 1862. Royal folio, printed
in colors. Price 6d. ; by post Is,
COLE’S GARDENING IN VICTORIA; containing full Directions
for the Formation and General Management of a Good Garden ; together with a Comprehensive
Calendar for the Operations for each Month in the Year. By T. Cole, Richmond Nursery.
Bvo. Cloth. Price 7s. 6d.; by post 9s. 6d.
DISEASES OF CHILDREN IN VICTORIA. By J. William
Mackenna, Lie. in Mid. and Surgeon. Price Is. 6d.; by post 2s.
HANDBOOK TO AUSTRALASIA; a Brief Historical and Descrip-
tive Account of Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia, New South Wales, and New Zealand
With a Map. 12mo. Price 55.; by post 7s.
LAND ACT OF VICTORIA. Reprinted from the Authorized Edition.
18mo. Price 6d.; by post Is.
VICTORIAN HANSARD. Debates and Proceedings of Parliament
of Victoria. Session 1860-61. Vol. VII. Half-bound calf, 1300 pages. Price £4.
VICTORIA SUFFERING A RECOVERY, ALectureby Archibald
Miciue, Esq., M.L.A. Price 6d. ;by post Is,
THE VINE AND WINE MAKING. By “V.” and “Bebeerao.”
Price Is.; by post Is. 6d.
PUBLISHED MONTHLY. Jj
BRADSHAW’S RAILWAY AND GENERAL GUIDE TO Vic-
toria. The Colonial Monthly Directory. Price 6d. Subscription 6s, per a.mma; by
post 12s. Af/-
THE AUSTRALIAN EVANGELIST. A Baptist Period Sixteen
pages quarto. Price 6d.; subscription, second volume, 4s. 6d.; by post 6s. 9d.
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY.
AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL JOURNAL. On
April, July, and October. Edited under the Superintendence of the
Subscription £1 per annum.
the
ica!
•st of January,
' Society of Victoria.


