

The
BLACK STAR
ANDREW H. WALPOLE


. ■ >$ A i i : .
*






THE BLACK STAR




,
;
-
.* ,
■ ■ /
■


ROOM
> | 1
~~|*SL i * -4 ffgfffjjt L _ 4
• ■ ;j||jjy jF jP3|
L ft. f
y t ■ » KfRBBHPv
H I 1 B|V;^W^Kfa
i W Is «/ Jte
, j l « { z -* / »
■rra>.;HMg p* -"a
’’'” I
A I B
“I wasn’t trying to get out!”
(see page 1S8 )


A SCHOOL STORY FOR BOYS
ANDREW H. WALPOLE
AUSTRALIA
CORNSTALK PUBLISHING COMPANY
ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY


Wbully set up and printed tn Australia by
Eagle Preas, Ltd., Allen Street, Waterloo
Registered by the Postmaster-General for trans-
mission through the post as a book.
Obtainable In Great Britain at the British Australian Book-
store, 61 High Holborn, London, W.C.I, the Bookstall in the
Central Hall of Australia House, Strand, W. 0., and from
all other Booksellers; and (wholesale only) from the Australian
Book Company, 16 Farrlngdon Avenue. London. E.O A.
First Edition, September, 1925
Second Edition, November, 1925


CONTENTS
FARADAY’S BAG 1
DOCTOR DAW AGAIN 10
THIS BULLY-KILLER 21
THE BROKEN BOOTLACE 35
UNRAVELLING A CLUE 48
JACK IS ENLIGHTENED 61
THE CALAMITOUS CRIPPLES 73
FANE’S FATAL MISTAKE 86
ALIAS BILLY FARADAY 96
THE CHASE FOR THE STAR 108
THE STAR MISSING 126
BILLY WALKS IN HIS SLEEP 139
A MYSTERY UNRAVELLED 149
DOG-FACE 162
A JAPE GOES WRONG 173
BILLY VANISHES 187
HUE AND CRY 208
CONCLUSION .. 219


\


THE BLACK STAR


. \


CHAPTER I
FARADAY’S BAG
Jack Symonds’ regret at the holidays’ ending had
now definitely passed, and, strolling along the
wide departure platform, he looked forward with
considerable excitement to the reunion with his
pals. The train was already crowded with his
schoolfellows, who shouted at him many noisy
greetings.
“Hullo, Jack!”
“Hullo, yourself! Where did you get that
colour?”
“Surfing, old boy. Coming in here? No?
“Waiting for Billy Faraday,” said Jack, and
continued his stroll. The Melbourne train had
not yet arrived, and Billy consequently had not
put in his appearance.
Jack Symonds stood with his back to one of
the great station pillars, gazing upon the ani-
mated scene with interest. There were scores of
the Deepwater College boys, in their blue-and-
gold caps, drawn to the city from far and near,
to catch the school train.


New juniors, unnaturally silent, were hustled
into carriages under the care of Mr. Kemp, the
mathematics master; old friends, all smiles and
laughter, greeted one another boisterously. Por-
ters bustled to and fro with immense stacks of
luggage.
Jack’s eye fell idly upon a tall, rather sinister-
looking man standing with folded arms, pulling
occasionally at a heavy cherrywood pipe. The
man’s eyes were very deep-set and dark; the
mouth was thin-lipped. In all, hardly an at-
tractive, although certainly a striking, person-
ality.
As Jack’s glance held the fellow casually for
an instant, he was surprised to see him start and
pale perceptibly.
“Funny,” mused the boy, and turned his head
to see what had caused the change in the other’s
demeanour.
It was another man —and a man, in his own
way, quite as remarkable as the first. He was
short and very broad, with an immense neck; his
nose was twisted permanently to the right, as if
he had been struck at some time, a terrific blow
in the face.
Jack smiled to himself. “Retired pug,” he
thought, noting that the man also carried a cauli-
flower ear —the left, and that his eyes were the
narrow, quick eyes of the boxer.
“By Jove,” exclaimed the tall man, as the two


came together, with mutual expressions of sur-
prise, “what brings you here, Tiger? Thought
you were in America.”
“Business,” said the bent-nosed man, shortly.
“Business, my dear old Doctor Daw—do they
still call you that?”
“Hush,” said the tall man, abruptly; “
that name . . . .”
The rest was lost to Jack, for Doctor Daw
spoke in a low whisper. The man he had called
Tiger laughed in a short, sharp manner.
“Anyhow, whither away?” he asked.
“Deepwater—down the coast. You getting this
train?”
The other nodded, and they both strolled in
the direction of the smoking carriages. Jack
gazed after them curiously. It was peculiar that
the tall man should have said that he was going
to Deepwater, for the only sign of civilization
at Deepwater Bay was the College—and he could
hardly be going there.
“Anyhow,” said Jack out loud, “here’s Billy,
old Bill Faraday himself, and looking about as
cheerful as an exhausted codfish.”
He slapped the newcomer on the back; but
Billy did not brighten appreciably. He was a
tall, rather thin youth, with dark eyes and hair
that emphasized the present pallor of his face.
“How are things, Jack?”


“Top-hole, old bean—but, I say, what’s the
matter?”
“Do I look bad? Fact is, old chap, I’ve been
having a pretty rough passage these hols. The
pater died, and I’m feeling——”
“I say! I’m awfully sorry. That band on
your arm I didn’t notice.”
He gripped his pal’s arm in silent sympathy.
Billy understood- There were never many
words between the two, but their understanding
was perfect.
Billy’s father had been an eminent naturalist.
Beyond that, the boy knew very little of him.
That he had made explorations into Central
Australia, and had attained to considerable fame
in scientific circles, Jack was also aware. Billy,
however, was a quiet, reserved sor-t of chap, and
no one ever found out much about him or his
people. To most of the fellows at the school,
indeed, he was a bit of a mystery.
“Don’t let us get in with the crowd,” said
Billy, nodding to an uproariously-cheerful throng
at the train windows. “Try this smoker.”
Jack followed his chum into the smoking
compartment, and they had barely stowed their
bags in the rack when Symonds observed, that
sitting opposite were the two men he knew as
“Doctor Daw” and “Tiger.”
There was nothing remarkable in that, but
Jack noted with intense surprise that Tiger was


staring at Billy with an air of recognition. Jack
wondered. Did Billy, by any chance, happen to
know him? It did not seem likely, and yet
At that moment Billy turned from the rack
and sat down beside his pal. Tiger instantly
averted his gaze and looked out of the window.
He did not look at Billy again, although Jack
watched him closely; and, what was more sur-
prising, he did not seem to know the tall man
at his side —Doctor Daw, as he had called him.
Jack was puzzled more and more by this sin-
gularity as the train left Sydney and passed
down the coast, for it seemed as if the two men
knew nothing whatever of each other, and were
even deliberately ignoring each other. This,
despite the fact that Jack had overheard their
recognition on the station, and had seen them
enter the train in company.
Mystified as he was, the boy had for the pre-
sent, other things to think of. Soon he was
engrossed in conversation with Billy, and the
train had halted at a little station some miles
north of Deepwater, before anything occurred
to disturb the even run of their journey.
The train had commenced to steam out of
the station, when all at once the man Tiger, as
if he had suddenly remembered something, leapt
from his seat, grabbed a handbag from the rack,
opened the door, and sprang out.
Jack, though taken aback by the suddenness


of the move, was alert enough, mentally, to re-
call that the man had not had a bag at Sydney.
The bag, therefore, was not his own; it was
“Billy!” he yelled, “he’s got your bag!”
Never was there a more magical transform-
ation. Billy Faraday had been half dozing,
moodily leaning back at the window, answering
his chum mechanically. At Jack’s words, he
jumped as if a red-hot coal had been dropped
down his collar, kicked open the door, and in
a single bound gained the platform.
Jack was utterly amazed. Billy’s action had
been so quick, so marvellously prompt, that it
had left him barely time to gasp. But then,
Billy was always a fellow of impulse. Jack felt
bound to follow his pal; Billy would be sure to
get into some trouble or other.
And so Jack Symonds, prefect at Deepwater
College, brilliant three-quarter and athlete,
laughed his reckless laugh and followed suit.
He landed lightly, with perfect control of
himself, despite the fact that the train had
gathered speed, and was now moving quickly.
He wheeled round, caught sight of the hurrying
figure of Billy Faraday, and followed at a run.
The township into which Fate had thus
strangely deposited the chums was very much
a one-horse affair, and a few scattered houses
and rutted country roads represented the sketch-
iest outlines of civilization.


The little man had made a quick exit from the
station, but obviously he had not counted on the
rapid pursuit of Jack and Billy, His coup had
been planned to allow the train to get well under
way before the loss was discovered, and the
chase began. He ran swiftly along the road,
and for some minutes made very good going of
it. But the bag was a heavy handicap. In pur-
suit were two lithe, springy youngsters, prac-
tised athletes and runners, and they were gaining
upon him.
Just then Fate played another card. Around
the corner came the sound of a car, and then
the motor shot into view, with a professional-
looking man, clad in white dust-coat, at the
wheel. He was evidently the local doctor, but
he was probably a most astonished man in the
next few seconds.
For Tiger jumped upon the running-board
and flung the handbag into the tonneau. At the
same time he presented a wicked-looking little
pistol at the doctor’s head.
“Turn her,” he commanded, peremptorily.
“Quickly—or I’ll fire.”
The doctor was a sensible man, and the cold
contact of the steel at his temple quenched any
rash attempts at resistance that might have sug-
gested themselves. Obediently he turned the car
about.
“Full speed—hit her up,” added the man on


the running-board, curtly, and the doctor’s un-
steady hand reached for his levers.
Jack Symonds uttered a groan of despair and
chagrin.
“Done us, Billy!” he panted, as the car, res-
ponsive to her driver, shot forward at increased
speed. “It’s no good—we’re beaten.”
And he slackened his run. But just when it
seemed that the bag was finally lost, Billy Fara-
day sprang another surprise—a surprise even for
Jack, who imagined he knew his chum so well.
It was the most amazing, most preposterous
thing, and Jack was almost convinced that he
was dreaming. Faraday plunged his hand into
his hip-pocket, and produced an automatic re-
volver of the latest pattern!
Standing boldly in the middle of the road, he
commenced firing at the doctor’s back tyres.
At the third shot there was an audible effect,
and the car slowed up. Tiger turned about,
furious and desperate, and for a moment Jack
feared that the pistol would be directed upon
them. But no; Tiger was not anxious to run
the risk of murder, and seeing that there was
no chance of his escaping with the handbag,
there was nothing left now but to make good
his own departure.
While the boys were yet some distance off,
he leapt from the car and disappeared into the
scrub at the roadside.


“Suffering cats!” exclaimed Jack, as he and
Billy hurried up to the car. “Pinch me, some-
one —I’m dreaming. Or am I acting in a Wild
West movie drama? Please tell me, Billy! And,
dear old chap, what on earth are you doing with
that gun?”
“Let you know afterwards,” said Faraday
coolly, replacing the amazing weapon in his
hip-pocket.


CHAPTER II
DOCTOR DAW AGAIN
Unsatisfactory as was this postponement, Jack
was destined to meet with a further disappoint-
ment. The doctor had been pacified and given an
explanation of the affair, and Billy Faraday had
declared that he did not want to be worried
further with the man Tiger. He had recovered
the bag, and he was willing to let the matter
rest there. But when they got into a later train,
Jack’s curiosity prompted more questioning.
“By Jingo, Billy,” he said, “that was a great
sprint you made for the bag. Anyone would
have thought you had a purse of sovereigns in
it, or something.”
Billy sniffed. “Well, perhaps hardly a purse
of sovereigns, but something ”
“Well?” prompted Jack.
“I don’t know whether I ought to tell you,”
said Billy, enigmatically. He ran his fingers
through his thick, black hair, and stared out of
the window.
“Hang it all,” protested Jack, “you’re starting


DOCTOR DAW AGAIN
this term in a jolly mysterious way! What’s
the giddy joke? What have you got up your
sleeve —or in your bag?”
Billy shot a look of sharp inquiry at his
friend.
“You’re cute, Jack,” was all he said. “You’ve
dropped to it that there’s something.”
“Also that our friend Tiger is interested in
your bag. Perhaps he knows what’s in it.”
“Knows —or guesses,” said Billy, with a queer
smile.
“But this is a bit too thick. And there’s that
revolver, too, just to make a real, nice, soupy
mystery of it. I tell you, Billy, when you came
out with the canister I—•—”
He opened his mouth, spread his hands, and
indicated immense surprise.
“Perhaps I was a bit of a fool to bring it,”
Billy admitted. “But —it came in jolly handy!”
“Still, that doesn’t account for it all. What
is it, Billy? Can’t you tell me?”
Billy shook his head slowly, uncertainly. “No,
Jack —not yet. I promised I’d tell you, but—
I won’t. I don’t want to alarm you without
need, see? I may be wrong about this —all this
business. The bag, the revolver, all our little
adventure may be quite meaningless, and I don’t
want to be dragging you after any mares’ nests
■not yet awhile. But if anything happens ”
“Don’t mind me,” said Jack, weakly. “The


Sphinx is a sort of uncle of mine. I’m good at
riddles! No more explanations, Billy. I’m in
a knot with them already. Don’t overload my
young mind any further.” And he laughed, quite
falling in with his pal’s present reluctance to
divulge, and dismissed the subject.
All the same, he realized that there was in-
deed something behind Billy’s reticence. The
two were good friends; anything in the ordinary
way they shared as a matter of course. But
this —this was something important, something
serious. Strangely enough, he had an odd feel-
ing that this term was going to be a remarkable
one —and certainly it was opening well. Billy
had hinted at further events. What was he to
expect? Truly there might be adventures in the
near future.
Or yet, on the other hand, perhaps the whole
affair was nothing at all —a mere mare’s nest,
as Billy had said. Either way, there was no-
thing to be gained by thinking any more about
it.
When, finally, they reached the College, there
were lots of things to be done, and they spent
the afternoon in the study that they shared with
two other fellows. Last term the two study-
mates had left the College, and consequently
there would be two new boys this term.
“Nobody here,” said Billy Faraday, opening
the door and glancing round the room. “Place


looks bare, doesn’t it, with all their things gone?”
“Wonder who’s going to step into their shoes?”
queried Jack thoughtfully.
“No idea.” Billy was absorbed in unlocking
his cupboard, and Jack, glancing over his shoul-
der, saw the light fall on the blue barrel of that
mysterious revolver.
“Leaving it there, Billy?”
Billy nodded. “For the present. I’m not one
of those asses that’d go round swanking with a
thing like this. Don’t think I brought it for
that, old chap.”
“I don’t, Billy!”
Billy looked at his friend, and seemed on the
verge of giving away at last the real reason
why he had brought the revolver. But at that
moment there came a knock at the door, and
Billy quickly thrust a small black cash-box into
the far corner of the cupboard, and shut it hur-
riedly.
“Come in,” said Jack, sitting on the table
swinging his legs; and there promptly entered
a most amazing apparition.
A tall, very thin youth, with horn-rimmed
spectacles, stood at the door. He carried stacks
of luggage, baskets, odd bundles in paper, a
portmanteau or two, which, with an air of great
relief, he proceeded to distribute impartially over
the floor of the study.
“What—what ?” gasped Billy.


“Ah, comrade!” demanded the new arrival,
“how are you?” He fingered a red tie of extra-
ordinary brilliance of design. “I trust you have
spent your holidays in quiet enjoyment, and have
returned flowing over with vigour to ” At
this stage a cushion struck him in the face, and
he fell gracefully backwards over a suit-case.
He arose with the expression of a resigned
martyr, and dusted his trousers. “Comrades
both,” he declared, “that was unkind of you—
really it was. However, perhaps I was unduly
long in coming to the point. I should have
announced,” he beamed broadly, “that hence-
forward I am to be your study-mate.”
“Our what?” demanded Jack, incredulously.
“Why, your study-mate, comrade. Come, come,
where are your tongues? What, no congratula-
tions? Aren’t you overjoyed to have me? Think
how well we are sure to get on together—think
of the evenings of happy and profitable study,
self-help, also co-operation, everything pleasant
No, I implore you, no more cushions.”
“Well, cut out the oratory,” warned Jack,
lowering the missile. “Do you think we are a
bally political meeting? Aren’t you Patch,
though—weren’t you in Cooper’s House last
term ?”
“That is my poor name.” The newcomer exe-
cuted a profound bow. “Septimus Patch, so-


cialist, inventor, friend of the downtrodden and
oppressed ”
“Cheese it,” said Billy. “Why on earth did
they move you to this house?”
“Ah, why?” said Patch blandly, gazing at the
ceiling.
“And why, on top of that, did they pick upon
this study?”
“Who knows?” The inventor gazed dreamily
out of the window. “Fate, perhaps.”
“And, anyway,” Symonds took up the tale,
“what have you got in all these traps?”
“My chemicals —my models of invention —my
books —my goods generally,” said Septimus
Patch gloomily.
Horror deepened upon the faces of the two
chums.
“Do you mean to say ?” said Billy.
“ Rotten chemicals?” finished Jack.
“In this study?” Billy could scarcely believe
“Why not?” asked Patch, with his concilia-
tory smile, polishing his enormous spectacles.
“Is it not comforting to be companioned by a
man of science—l will not say genius? When
time drags, you may find infinite enjoyment in
mixing up things for me, and solace in wander-
ing through the dark forest of science under
my guidance.”
“Oh, help!” moaned Jack.


“Moses!” gasped Billy.
“ ‘Dark forest of science,’ ” quoted Jack,
throwing himself weakly into Billy’s easy chair.
“This place is going to be a little paradise, isn’t
it just?”
“More like a ward in a lunatic asylum,” cor-
rected Billy with bitterness.
“You are unduly severe on yourselves,” Patch
assured them blandly. He was unpacking an
enormous number of things, and distributing
them pell-mell over the floor. Jack and Billy
could only sit and stare, goggle-dyed, at the
spreading disorder on their one and only carpet.
“Pictures, too, comrades,” said Septimus en-
thusiastically, bringing to light a huge bundle
of frames wrapped in brown paper. He ex-
hibited the top one proudly.
“Good grief! What on earth’s that?” demand-
ed Jack in astonishment, “Side elevation of a
poached egg, or *'
“That,” said the owner, indignantly, dusting
it with his handkerchief, “is a diagram of the
anatomy of the common flea. Much magnified,
of course. Rather good, don’t you think? Where
shall I put it?”
“In the fireplace,” suggested Billy, cruelly.
“Do you think we want to be gazing all day at
that horror? And what’s this?”
“Butterflies.”


“Not so bad. Put them up there over that
shelf.”
Septimus hoisted the huge frame into place,
and got down, beaming broadly.
“Comrade,” he said, “we are getting on quite
well. Only one or two more; here’s a portrait of
Sir Isaac Newton.”
“It’s a good frame,” commented Jack. “I’ve
a photo of Trumper that’d just fit in. I’ll dig
it out. Here, we’ll put it up high for the pre-
sent.” So saying he balanced a big dictionary
on a chair, and climbed up with Sir Isaac New-
ton in his hands.
“Hope I can reach,” he said, while Septimus
Patch and Billy Faraday watched him anxiously.
It did not seem as if he could reach. He raised
himself cautiously on tiptoe, but the frame was
heavy and the risk great. The dictionary tot-
tered.
“Look out, Jack —you’ll be over,” said Billy.
“Whoa!” He made a frantic grab at his pal,
but missed by about a foot.
Jack came down with a tremendous crash,
scattering a pile of Patch’s bottles right and left.
There was a tinkle of broken glass and the
sound of a mild explosion; through the ensuing
cloud of smoke Septimus could be seen seated
on the floor, vainly endeavouring to release his
head from the photograph frame that Jack had
let fall.


It was fortunate that Sir Isaac had had no
glass in front of him, or the results might have
been serious. As it was, he was hopelessly
punctured now; the frame hung about Patch’s
neck like a grotesque collar.
“Ha, ha, ha!” The sight was so absurd that
Billy could not check a laugh at the comicality
of it all, but his laugh ended abruptly. At that
moment the door opened, and a stern voice
spoke.
“What is the meaning of this?”
Billy looked up in surprise. The voice was
a strange one, but it carried a ring of authority.
“Just a slight accident, comrade,” replied
Patch. “We were hanging this picture, and
regrettably it fell. Ah, off it comes at last! But
I am afraid Sir Isaac is disfigured,” he added
sadly. “Yes, he does look rather cut up.”
“I am your new history master,” said the
other, interrupting him. His rasping voice made
Jack swing round with a gasp of surprise. “Daw
is my name.”
“Doctor Daw!” murmured Jack, The words
were literally jerked out of him by surprise. He
regretted them instantly, but it was too late.
The amazing fact was that the man now stand-
ing in the doorway was actually the man who
had travelled with them in the train —the fellow
who had been so familiar with the bag-snatching
Tiger on the station, and who had completely


ignored him afterwards. Jack recalled now that
the man had said that he was going to Deep-
water. It was a somewhat startling coincidence,
and it was no wonder that he had been impelled
to whisper the name that Tiger had given the
new history master.
Slight as that whisper had been, it had not
escaped the ears of Doctor Daw, who gave a
violent start and took a step forward. His
mouth opened, as if he were about to say some-
thing, but no words followed. His eyes met
Jack’s in a troubled, questioning stare. He seemed
to say, “How much do you know? What hav<
you got hold of?” And then, on the verge of
an outburst, he recovered himself.
“I have a new study-mate for you,” said he
quietly, although his eyes still glittered angrily.
“A new boy to the college, and from New Zea-
land, who will be in your form. Fane is his
name—but no doubt he will introduce himself.”
With that he ushered in the boy Fane, and let
himself out. Only, before he closed the door,
he eyed Jack narrowly—and his glance seemed
to convey a threat, a warning. There was no
mistaking the malignant nature of the look. Jack
felt chilled, he knew not why. Then, the door
closed, and Mr. Daw was gone.
“Cheerful-looking chap,” commented Billy.
“How are you, Fane?”
“Well, thanks,” said Fane, who was a short


and rather nervous-looking boy. He came for-
ward and shook hands all round. “Hope we get
on well together.”
“My sentiments exactly, comrade,” said Sep-
timus Patch. “I’m new myself, but I’ll sort of
father you. What are your interests? Know
anything about Science? Or Socialism?”
Fane smiled nervously. “Neither, I’m afraid.
Where can I put my things?”
“Here you are,” said Billy. “What shall we
call you?”
“My first name’s Swinnerton,” he admitted.
“Silly name, of course —call me Swin, if you like,”
And while Billy and Patch were attempting
to make the newcomer feel at home, Jack was
looking idly out of the window. He did not
know the connection between Doctor Daw and
Tiger, but he felt vaguely that he had made an
enemy.


CHAPTER 111
THE BULLY-KILLER
Salmon's House, to which division of Deepwater
College Jack Symonds and his study-mates be-
longed, was famous for its exclusive set of
youngsters —a band who had clubbed together
for their own advancement, and the confusion
of everybody else, and had named themselves
the Crees. It amounted in the long run to a
sort of secret society; it had its president, but
no one outside its numbers knew who he was.
It was never known for certain who the mem-
bers were, either; and that gave a delightful
uncertainty to everything connected with it.
It so happened that both Jack and his friend
Billy Faraday were members. With the others,
they were notified that on a certain afternoon
a special meeting would be held. They knew
well enough the object of the meeting. Dick
Richard, the founder of the Crees, and the so-
ciety’s first president, had left at the end of
the previous term, and there would be some hot
contention for his position.


“Do you mean to go for the job, Jack?” asked
Billy, as they strolled across the fields to the
appointed spot —a secluded position in the rear
of a waste of scrub-land.
“Why not? It’d give me a bit of a pull, and
there’s no end of fun to be got out of it,” re-
turned Jack, in his practical manner. “I don’t
see anyone to give me much of a run for it.”
“Except Cummles.”
“Except Gummy, of course. And he can’t do
anything but bluster and kick up a dickens of
a row. What sort of a time would we have
under him?”
“No sort of a time at all. The man’s got no
initiative.”
“No—but any amount of push and brute
strength!” Jack laughed.
When they arrived at Three Skull Hollow —
an entirely fanciful name bestowed upon it by
the Crees —they discovered that most of the
Crees were already assembled, and the loud
voice of Les Cummles was dominating the as-
sembly.
“Of course,” he was saying, “there’s absolutely
no question—l’m putting in for the job, and if
anyone else thinks he’d like it, let him say so.”
He stared round with a somewhat truculent ex-
pression. “Here’s Symonds and Faraday—
they’ll bear me out in this, I know.”
It was a direct challenge.


“Bear you out in what?” asked Symonds
quietly.
“Why, my filling Dick’s place as president—
you’re agreeable, aren’t you?’’
“I don’t know so much about that, I was
thinking of taking it over myself.”
“Hear, hear!” said an invisible Cree, behind
Dummy’s back. He wheeled round and frowned
upon the party.
“Now, what are the laws of electing the pre-
sident?” he asked.
“Nominations first, and then a show of hands
—that’s all we’ve got to do. It’s quite simple.”
He took a seat and addressed the assembled
Crees. “I’m in the chair —any nominations for
Chief Cree?”
“I propose Les Cummles,” said one of the
bully’s toadies, with clockwork readiness.
“Good—seconded? Thank you. Now,
body else?”
He looked round fiercely, as if defying any-
body else to speak. But, finally, it was shown
that he could not carry off the bluff. Billy
Faraday spoke in his quiet voice.
“Jack Symonds—my nomination,” he said.
I second that,” another Cree spoke quickly,
and there was a murmur of approval.
“Anybody else?” Cummles’s tone was dis-
tinctly nasty by now, and he glared at Bill sav-
agely. “No—well, we’ll have a show of hands.”


This time he frowned round on the Crees with
real anger. He was not a bad general, and he
thought that by this show of force he would
intimidate any wavering members, and make
them feel that it was perhaps better to vote for
him and feel safe.
The upraised hands for Cummles were counted
slowly; there were twenty-one. And then the
Symonds vote was counted.
“Twenty-one also,” said the Cree deputed to
tell the votes.
“Dead heat!”
“Wait a moment,” said Cummles. “As chair-
man, I have right to a casting vote, and I ”
“Rot—it’s a swindle !”
“All right, Moore —I’ll settle with you after-
wards,” said Cummles wickedly. “I’ve every
right to settle ”
“You’re a big bluff!”
Feeling was certainly running very high. Lots
of the fellows who had timidly voted for Cum-
mles now regretted their action. Moore was an
excitable little fellow, and Cummles’s threats
had roused him to defiance.
“Enough said. I
“Yah! Who do we want?”
“Symonds!” There was no mistaking the
volume of the shout.
“Casting vote ” roared Cummles.


“Bluffer! Another counting! Another count-
ing!”
“ chairman’s right
“It’s a swindle!”
“ therefore declare that
“Symonds, Chief Cree!”
“ 1 am elected to the position
A tremendous hullaboloo arose from the Cree
meeting, and about a dozen free fights between
heated partisans were taking place. Upright on
a raised spot Cummles was endeavouring to state
that, giving his casting vote to himself, he was
elected Chief Cree. Jack and Billy were more
like amused spectators, than anything else. The
furious Crees were not anxious to be ruled by
the heavy hand of Cummles, but many sought
favour in his eyes by endeavouring to quell the
insurgents.
There is no saying what might not have fol-
lowed, but for the fact that a strange diversion
had been preparing itself, and now burst upon
the meeting of the Crees with no sort of warning.
There was not even any preliminary noise; but
even if there had been, the uproar in the meeting
would have sufficed to drown it. Something
darkened the sky with startling abruptness; then,
there was an immense crackling and crashing
in the scrub near by.
“Look out —coming over!’’ yelled a voice.
Only one or two heard the cry; Cummles, who


was raging like a bull, certainly did not. So
that, when some weighty object smashed into
his back and hurled him to the ground with
violence, he was taken completely by surprise.
He was precipitated into the waistcoats of a
couple of fellow-Crees who were seated upon
the ground.
“Here—help!” shouted the assaulted ones,
taking his action for one of personal violence.
“What have we ”
“Ouch!” bellowed Cummles, struggling in
vain to free himself from the tangle of arms and
legs into which he had been so rudely thrown.
“Ha, ha, ha!” When the amazed Crees had
collected their wits sufficiently to be able to take
in what was happening, the humour of the situ-
ation was apparent. The object that had collided
with Cummles tugged and clung on to a rope
—and at the other end of the rope was an im-
mense kite-like affair that flapped and ducked
in the air twenty feet above them. The plight
of the astounded Cummles and the dangling
and racing legs were farcical in the extreme.
“Help!” came the cry of the aviator. “Grab
the rope —she’s getting away. Catch hold,
quickly!”
Several of the Crees flung themselves on the
rope, and, hauling manfully, brought the big
kite to the ground. It was tugging with the
strength of several bulls, and it required all


their strength to bring it to earth. It was quite
a big affair, of weird construction, something
along the lines of a box-kite, and Septimus Patch
himself was seated in a light saddle in the centre
of it.
“Patch!” exclaimed Jack Symonds in aston-
ishment.
“That same, comrade! I fear I startled you
somewhat —eh? But the machine would not be-
have.”
His assistant, the boy who had been swinging
on the rope in an endeavour to hold the kite
down was discovered to be Fane, the shy New
Zealander. Evidently he and Patch had struck
up a friendship.
“Yes,” he said, mopping his forehead, “I had
my work cut out to keep her down —I’ve been
dragged over a mile and a half of scrub. The
blessed thing rises quicker than the price of
eggs. Old Septimus nearly had a wetting—
didn’t you, Patchie, old boy?”
“It looked like it for quite a while,” admitted
the inventor modestly. “I must allow that I’d
forgotten to provide for coming down again,
once I’d got up. In the future, I’ll have to have
about twenty juniors hanging on to the rope.
Or I might remedy that before the next as-
cent.”
The Crees had gathered around the big kite,
examining it with evident curiosity.


“I say,” said one of them, “she must be pretty
strong to lift you up like that.”
“Well, she’s not badly designed, comrade,”
said Patch, with lordly condescension. “This
is Flying Fox 111. Numbers I and 11, I regret
to state, would not fly. They absolutely refused.
Why, I don’t know. But they ”
He found himself gripped hard by the shoul-
der, and turned to front the crimson face of
Cummles, who, angered as he had been by the
opposition to his presidency, had been doubly
enraged by his ignominious fall. His dignity
had been injured, and as he had a certain pres-
tige among his fellows, he wanted redress.
“Look here,” he said, shaking Patch’s shoulder
till the inventor’s horn-rimmed spectacles shiver-
ed on his nose. “Look here, what the dickens
do you mean by it?”
“Mean by what?”
“Why, barging into my back like that, and
sending me flying? It was your wretched kite
thingummy, and like your cheek!”
“My dear fellow,” said Patch.
“Dear fellow, nothing! It’s an apology I want,
you glass-eyed goat! Down on your knees, too,
and repeat what I say.”
“I’m sure it wouldn’t be worth repeating,”
said Patch coldly. “Anyway, there was no need
to flare up like that over a simple accident. Re-


fleet, comrade, on the injustice you are doing
to yourself, and ”
“If you don’t apologize the way I say,” said
Cummles inflexibly, “then you’re going to be
put through it.”
“Meaning?”
“Meaning you’ll get bashed,” said Cummles,
who was obviously in a dangerous mood. His
dignity had been injured, and he meant to show
the Crees just how he could impose his will on
others. It should make an impression, he
thought. “If you think you can play your silly
fool tricks on me, then you’re making the mis-
take of your young life ! See? Now, what about
that apology?”
“No,” murmured Patch, with a worried air.
He had gone very white, for the idea of a phy-
sical encounter hardly appealed to him. “You
mean you’re going to fight me?”
“I don’t fight fools like you,” said Cummles
trenchantly, still bent on showing the Crees
what he was made of. “I don’t fight them —I
just whip them. Apologize?”
For answer, Patch gave one look round on
the circle of still, watching faces, and then sighed.
Then, with a deliberate movement, he began
to take off his coat. A gasp went up, for Cum-
mles was a big, bull-necked sort of fellow, and
a regular terror in a fight. Poor Patch, it
seemed, was in for a very torrid time; but the


spectators were forced to admire his courage.
What sort of a chance would he have, though,
with a smashing hitter like Cummles?
It was quite unfair, and Jack Symonds for
one was dead against it. Cummles would have
to learn to control his temper; it was too bad
that Patch should get whipped for a pure acci-
dent. Just as Jack was on the point of protest-
ing—just as, indeed, he had stepped forward to
check the fight preparations, a new voice cut
in before he could utter a word.
“Wait a moment.” It was Fane, the quiet
New Zealander, and he looked shyer than ever
as he introduced himself, blushing, into the
circle.
“Well?” Cummles demanded, with the trucu-
lence of a dog interrupted in worrying a bone.
“Patch mustn’t fight—can’t fight,” said Fane,
still in that uneasy, self-conscious manner. “You
see—it wasn’t his fault, really. I was the one
that actually barged into you, and so ”
“Are you ready to take his place then?” de-
manded Cummles, with brutal directness.
“If necessary,”
The Crees were even more disturbed at this,
for if Patch was a hopeless opponent for the
bully, Fane was even more so. He was half
a head shorter than the big fellow, and his ap-
pearance was altogether quiet and inoffensive,


He removed his coat and, with the air of a
veteran, rolled up his sleeves.
“I’ll see if I can’t justify my title of bully-
killer,” he said, without any appearance of boast-
ing. “Will one of you give me a knee?”
“But look here ” said Jack.
“Where?”
“It’s all absurd. You don’t know what you’re
up against. Cummles here is a fighter ”
“You wouldn’t have me back down, would
you?”
“No; but ”
“The fight will go on,” said Fane simply. “I
know how to take care of myself. Cummles
was anxious to pick a quarrel, and as Patch
can’t fight for sour apples ”
Patch was standing by, with a little criss-
cross mark of puzzlement showing between his
eyes.
“I ought really ” he began.
The sardonic voice of the bully interrupted
him. “When you fellows have finished gassing
to save time,” he said, “I’ll be ready to thrash
you. Both, if you like—it doesn’t matter to
me a bit. One after the other—who’s first? But
hurry up.”
He had not troubled to remove his coat, anti-
cipating an easy time with Patch; but now he
did so, and rolled up his sleeves, moved by some-
thing in the bearing of the quiet boy before him,


Without any further argument, without any
courtesies of combat, he and Fane flew at each
other, and there was the sound of a collision
and heavy blows. For a moment the spectators
looked on with dismay, fearing that Fane would
pay dearly for his temerity and get hopelessly
smashed about. But in a minute or two their
apprehension changed to excitement, and they
set up a volley of cheering.
Fane was a dark horse —everybody recognized
that at a glance. He quite obviously knew more
than a little about boxing—and fighting, too.
He had a good stance, and hit long and straight,
and with both hands, like a professional.
Cummles was vastly shocked when, at the
end of the first furious rush, he ran fairly upon
a stiff left jab that split his lip instantly. Again
and again he strove to get past that propped-out
fist, but try as he would he could not get his
head out of the way, and every time it was as
if he had jammed his face against a beam of
wood.
Then, too, Fane’s right hand, with heavy
body-swing behind it, followed up the left like
a piston and thudded upon every portion of
Cummles’s anatomy in solid drives, until he
began to feel acutely miserable, and, stung to
desperation like a tormented bear, he commenced
to hit with all his force, in wild swings that
pane dodged in good style. It was a magnificent


exhibition of pluck and skill of the first water,
opposed to brute force and doggedness. Fane
seemed to be able to land hits at will. A trickle
of blood from the bully’s split lip coursed down
that fellow’s chin, and added nothing to his ap-
pearance.
“Go on, the bully-killer!”
The name had caught on, and the Crees yelled
it in pure enjoyment, for they had all suffered
more, or less at Cummles’s hands, and they
appreciated to the full this repayment of his
own medicine.
“Look at him—he’s blowing like a grampus!”
Cummles was not in the best of training at
this early stage of the term, and he was feeling
the disadvantages of his condition. He was
puffing badly and perspiring profusely. His
movements slowed down and he seemed tired.
Fane could not hit hard enough to knock the
bigger boy over; but there was no doubt that
he was cutting him about badly.
“Hand it out,” yelled the bully’s enemies,
eager for the downfall of their tyrant. “You
know, Fane!”
The Crees went simply wild with delight, for
Cummles was getting the worst trouncing of
his life. They cheered the New Zealander on
with loud cries of encouragement, although it
would have been impossible to have added to
the sting and venom of his attack.


“Go on, Fane!”
“Give it to him —he’s been looking for this for
a long time!”
The bully-killer, as he had called himself,
propped off another of Cummles’s blind rushes,
with stinging hits.
“Had enough?” he gasped, lowering his hands
momentarily.
“No!” wheezed Cummles, lurching forward;
and with a tremendous swing he clouted his
opponent on the side of the head, sending him
flying head over heels to the ground, where
he lay outstretched.


CHAPTER IV
THE BROKEN BOOTLACE
Cummles stood back from his antagonist, a
twisted grin of triumph on his face, and, in the
tense silence that followed, the loud and fast
sound of his breathing could be distinctly heard.
And then, all the horror of the Crees found
voice, and they exclaimed together:
“Foul —it’s a foul!”
“Scrag the dirty fouler!”
The ring pressed round about Cummles with
angry cries, for the bully had offended all rules
of fair play by his action in striking Fane when
that youngster had lowered his hands. For a
moment Cummles thought that he was to be
mobbed, and he drew back on the defensive;
then Fane slowly rose from the ground.
“Stand back,” said Fane, “this is my job—
let me finish it!”
With the words he again attacked the bully
furiously. His blows were hard and fast, but
he did not lose his head. Grimly Cummles strove
to turn the tide, to repeat that one tremendous


blow; but always Fane was just a little too
quick for him.
Finally Cummles came to the end of his re-
sources, and bitterly bitter though the admission
was to him, he had to grant that he was beaten.
Thoroughly exhausted, and much damaged by
Fane’s blows, he dropped his hands.
“Good enough,” he mumbled through swollen
lips. “I’m done —hold off.”
Then for the first time Fane smiled; and like
a cloak, his old nervous manner fell about him
once more.
“You’ll shake hands?” he asked. “Yes?”
Cummles shook the proffered hand grumpily,
for he could not easily forgive the fellow who
had lowered his colours so decisively in the pre-
sence of his fellow-Crees. Then, pulling on his
coat, he left the circle without another word,
followed by two or three of his intimate cronies,
who even now would not desert him.
“Well done, Fane,” said Jack Symonds, patting
the New Zealander on the shoulder. “That’s
just what Cummles has been looking for for
months. Now, you fellows,” he went on, turn-
ing to the Crees, who stood round murmuring
congratulations, “I propose that Fane here and
his friend Patch be made members of the so-
ciety. For one thing, Fane is a jolly useful
member, and ”
“Hear, hearl” they interrupted him,


“And what about Symonds for Chief Cree?”
demanded another of them in a loud voice.
The reply was a burst of cheering, and Jack
was duly elected. Amid much excitement, he
was presented with the Eagle feather, the emblem
of office that the founder of the Crees had left
behind him when he had left Deepwater College.
Jack put it in his pocket, and then turned to
the business of getting the two new Crees
elected to the band.
They were unanimously elected, and the four
occupants of Study 9 that evening were fast
friends. Even Patch was allowed to hang one
or two more of his scientific diagrams on the
walls, and to place his bottles and apparatus
along the top of his cupboard.
In the middle of the night Fane awoke with
a slight groan, and felt his face with tender
touch. His right cheek-bone, where Cummles
had landed a hit during their fight, was painful;
the skin had been taken off, and now the wound
was a hot, throbbing graze that worried him.
He turned over and over again, but found
sleep impossible. The wound was worrying
him too much.
“I’ve got some ointment,” he murmured, “and
that might cool it off a bit. But the stuff’s down
in the study, worse luck.”
He bore the pain in silence for a few minutes
longer, and then determined to go down to the


study for the ointment. Silently he got out of
bed, and left the sleeping dormitory behind him.
The great corridors were cold and deserted, but,
hurrying downstairs in his bare feet, he quickly
arrived at Study 9. Then he threw open the
door.
“Jinliny! ,, he gasped, involuntarily.
The study was in darkness but for a flood of
light that streamed in a definite band from the
end of what was evidently an electric torch. And
the cupboards were open, and their contents
partly emptied on the floor.
“What—who are you?” he demanded, as the
glow of the torch fell upon a big figure in a
pulled-down cap and a scarf that hid the lower
part of the face. The bright eyes above the scarf
challenged his, and for a moment they stood
face to face, both held immovable in surprise.
Fane realized at once that the man he had sur-
prised was a burglar.
He flung himself without the slightest warn-
ing upon the intruder. No fellow at Deepwater
College ever had more lion-like courage than
Fane. The man bulked much bigger than him-
self, but the bully-killer sprang forward with all
the vim of an attacking bulldog.
Swift and unexpected as was his move, the
burglar was a fraction swifter. The torch went
out silently, and it was as if a velvet curtain
had fallen before Fane’s eyes. The man must


have twisted aside with lightning celerity, for
Fane could not touch him. For a moment there
was silence, each listening for the other. Then
a large black shape blotted out the pale square
of the window, and the boy realized that the
burglar was escaping.
He ran forward, but fell over some invisible
object on the floor. When he had picked him-
self up, he heard the thud of the intruder’s
feet alighting on the garden-beds outside, and
the quick following sound of rapid footsteps.
The man had got away!
Fane knew that pursuit was out of the ques-
tion, He had no hope of following with success;
and he wondered now whether the next step
would be to inform the masters of what had
occurred. On second thoughts he determined
to consult with his pals, and returning to the
dormitory he awoke Jack and Patch, and to-
gether they went to the bed where Billy Fara-
day lay asleep.
“Billy!” said Jack, shaking his chum by the
shoulder.
“Look out—the Black Star!” said Billy. “The
Black Star—take care of it!”
“What on earth?” said Jack. “The beggar’s
talking in his sleep. Black star? What does he
mean?” He shook the sleeping Billy again.
“Here, you old sleeping beauty, arise! Come
up!”


“Hullo!” There was surprise and alarm in
Billy’s tone. “What ? Oh, I remember —
I’ve been dreaming. I thought you were ”
He stopped and rubbed his eyes. “What’s the
matter, anyway?”
“Come out here, old chap.”
When they got out in the corridor, Jack Sy-
monds explained. “Fane here was going down
for a rub of ointment for his eye, and when he
got in the study there was a burglar. Here,
where are you going?”
Billy Faraday did not answer. He had gasped
with alarm at Jack’s words, and set off at a rapid
pace down the corridor. The others followed
him at a run, and when they entered the study
found him on his knees in front of his cupboard
examining a small black cash-box, which he
clicked open, peered inside, and then, with a
sigh of relief, closed it again.
“Nothing gone?” demanded Jack. “Not even
the Black Star?”
“Black star!” Billy whispered, looking at
Jack as if he had seen a ghost. “What—what do
you know about ”
“It’s all right, Billy—only a joke of mine.”
“But —a joke?”
“Yes. When we went to wake you up just
now you were having a nightmare, or something,
and you were jabbering about a black star.
Something about taking care of it.”


Billy was silent. Then he turned to his study-
mates earnestly. “See here, you fellows,” he
said quietly, “we’re all pals now, and I think
we can keep a secret together. You heard me
talking in my sleep about the Black Star, and
perhaps you thought that it was only a night-
mare, or something I’d read in a book. It isn’t.
It’s something real —there is a Black Star, and
here it is.”
He opened the cash-box, and held out a small
bundle wrapped in tissue-paper. Jack removed
the wrappings, and held the object so revealed
in the palm of his hand. There were exclama-
tions of surprise from all three.
“By Jove!” said Patch in admiration.
In Jack’s hand lay a black stone as big as the
top of a tea-cup. It was beautifully smooth,
polished to the last degree, and had a sort of
opalescent fire that made it wonderfully beauti-
ful in the lamp-light. It was shaped as a six-
cornered star, and as the light played on it it
seemed veritably alive, almost appearing to
wriggle in Jack’s palm.
“That’s the Black Star,” said Billy Faraday.
“And that,” said Septimus Patch thoughtfully,
“is, I suppose, what the burglar was after. Am
I right?”
“Perfectly right. Only that Fane here ar-
rived in time to interrupt his search, the fellow
must have collared the Black Star.”


“But the Black Star —what is it?” asked Fane.
“Something very valuable? Why should the
fellow be so anxious to get it?”
“And that’s another thing,” put in Jack Sy-
monds excitedly. “When that man on the train
tried to collar your bag, was he after the Black
Star?”
Billy frowned thoughtfully. “I don’t know
that,” he replied. “Perhaps he knew what was
in my bag—or perhaps he was just a casual
thief. Anyway, I made sure of getting the thing
back, didn’t I?”
“You did! You couldn’t have run faster from
a man-eating lion. Still, old chap, what is the
giddy mystery about this Black Star? There’s
more in it than meets the eye.”
“I was just coming to that. It’s rather a long
story, but I’ll cut it as short as I can. You
know, my father, who just died, was a great
naturalist, and he was deeply interested in Cen-
tral Australia. He had made a special study of
the natural history of those parts, and was con-
sidered the expert on all matters belonging to
them.
“On one of his trips into the interior he dis-
covered a little-known tribe of blacks. It seems
that these niggers were of quite a superior brand,
and they had a sort of civilization of their own,
quite different from the low-down natives that
travellers run across. They keep much to them-


selves, and it was only by the purest accident
that the pater ran into them.
“He stayed with them for a long time. There
were plenty of things to be inquired into, and
with their assistance he added to his scientific
knowledge. For their part, they got to like him
very much; in fact, they wanted him to stay
with them and be their chief. They even went
so far as giving him the sacred emblem of the
tribe, which is, of course, this Black Star. The
possessor of this Star is all-powerful among the
natives of the Boonadilla tribe. He can have
his slightest wishes obeyed, and they handed
my father a very great compliment when they
gave him this. Of course, he accepted it, and
brought it back to Melbourne with him, but he
had no intention of going back and lording it
over the tribe. All that he intended doing was
to show it round among his scientific friends,
partly as proof that the Boonadilla tribe existed.
That was all that was in his head at the time;
and he meant to send it back, or take it back
himself on his next trip into the interior.
“But, as you know, there was to be no ‘next
trip.’ The pater died, but before he went he told
me certain things about the Black Star. It seems
that one of his men on the trip got to know about
it. and, being a cunning sort of fellow, got the
idea of taking the Star and getting back to the
Boonadilla people with it. The reason was, of


course, that he was going to get something out
of it; and my pater told me that the tribe had
lots of alluvial gold that they’d collected around
the spot where they lived. They’d no idea of
the value of the gold, and a clever man would
be able to influence them with the Black Star,
so that it would not be difficult to get away with
the metal.
“This man Lazare —some sort of a foreigner,
I believe —had been at the pater for a loan of the
Black Star; but the pater knew too much of
him for that. He knew that if he lent it to Lazare,
the probability was that he would not see the
thing again. So he refused. He told me that I
was to be careful not to let Lazare get hold of
it, for he handed it over to my keeping just before
he—died. His instructions were that I should
take it to his old friend Mason, the geologist,
who lives in Sydney.
“Before I left Melbourne to come back to
school I wrote to Mason, but I got an answer
back to say that he was away on a trip, and would
not be back for four or five months. What was
I to do? The only thing was to take it back to
school with me. This I decided to do; and I also
brought back a revolver of the pater’s, which
came in very handy, as Jack can tell you. You
don’t want to let a word of this out, for there’d
be no end of a row if I was found out. Before I
left, Lazare himself came to see me, and asked


me directly for the Black Star. He said that there
had been an understanding between the pater and
himself that he should take it back to the tribe.
He was plausible, too, I can tell you. Only that
I’d been warned against the fellow, I’d have
fallen for his game like a shot. As it was, he
didn’t get it, and I believe that he’s been watch-
ing me like a cat watching a mouse ever since I
refused. Mind, he didn’t threaten anything—he’s
too clever for that. He was very polite, and said
that it was a pity that I was so obstinate, and
that he would not worry any more about it. He
remarked that he had been merely carrying out
the pater’s orders, and that, since I opposed him,
he considered himself free of any obligation. He
said good-bye, and went away—implying that I
was a silly young fool, of course. Now, I’m
pretty certain that this was Lazare here this
evening. He must have watched me closely,
and possibly that was one of his men who
snatched my bag on the train.”
“By Jingo!” said Jack Symonds, “but we’re
going to have a lively term this time or I’m a
Dutchman! What?”
“Comrade,” said Patch, in his grand manner,
extending his hand, “I appreciate your confidence
in me —believe me, I shall do all that I can to
help. You have heard, no doubt, that I am by
way of being an amateur detective? No? You
surprise me. I want everything left here just as


it is. I may be able to find out something of the
identity of the burglar. This is no joke. Wait
until the morning and then I’ll get to work.”
“Well,” said Fane practically, “we can’t do
anything by waiting here —besides, there’s a
chance that we’ll be caught out of our dormy.
Are you going to report the affair to the Head?”
“I think not. I don’t want to have to explain
everything, and, besides, no harm’s been done.
I’ll take the Star up with me —I’ll put it under my
pillow for to-night. I had no idea that the at-
tempt would be made so soon —else I wouldn’t
have left it in the cupboard. You never know
your luck.”
As they went back to the dormitory Fane and
Septimus Patch could be heard planning to get
down to the study early in the morning—before
call-bell—and to make an investigation. Jack
smiled, for he thought that the amateur detec-
tive was a bit of a joke.
“It’s a biscuit to a fiver that you’ll both be fast
asleep when call-bell goes,” he observed, with a
yawn. “I’m feeling that way myself.”
However, when morning came and Jack
Symonds and Billy Faraday awoke, they found
that the two beds occupied by Fane and Patch
were empty.
“Here, Billy,” said Jack, “we’ve time to run
down before call-over and see what that beggar
Patch’s found out.”


“Right!” The two of them hurried downstairs,
and discovered Patch and Fane busily examining
the turf outside the window of Study 9. Patch,
with excited eyes, was pointing out various things
on the ground; as the two pals came along he
glanced smilingly up.
“Hullo!” said Billy. “Looking for the early
worm ?”
“Found it,” said Patch confidently.
“What do you mean?”
“I’ve found that the burglar is really somebody
belonging to the school!”
“Get out! How do you know that?”
“Deduction,” said Patch. “The clue of the
broken bootlace,”
“Broken bootlace,” repeated Billy Faraday in
bewilderment. “What on earth do you mean by
that?”
“I refer to a clue, corhrade —and a valuable
one at that. It means just this. You see these
two footprints here, just where the burglar
landed out of the window? And those further
along, which are also his, for a certainty?”
“Yes —go on.”
“Well, I—hang it, there goes the second bell,
and we’ll have to scoot. I’ll explain it all after
morning-school.”
And with that promise the mystified pals had
to be content. Had Patch actually found out
something worth while, or was the whole thing
merely a false alarm?


CHAPTER V
UNRAVELLING A CLUE
Mr. Salmon, who was the house-master over
that section of Deepwater College in which the
chums led a more or less care-free existence,
was the best of good sorts, but hopeless as a
disciplinarian. To begin with, he was partly
deaf, and disrespectful juniors took advantage
of the weakness in season and out of season.
His own form, the sixth, to which all four of the
Study 9 boys belonged, also contrived to have
an easy time of it while he was in charge. So
that if he observed a certain uneasiness on the
part of the sharers of the Black Star secret, he
might have ascribed it to post-holiday skittish-
ness —at any rate, he said nothing about it, and
the four of them hastened into conference im-
mediately studies were over, and lent ear to
the wise sayings of the eccentric genius, Septi-
mus Patch.
“To begin with,” said Patch, in his best Dear-
Watson manner, “there’s precious little beyond
these footprints, in the shape of clues, but to


a trained eye like mine those slight, almost
meaningless marks have a story to tell. They
are to me as an open book, and ”
“Cut out the cackle,” said Jack Symonds
brusquely, “and return to the washing. Get
on with it.”
“Examine this footprint closely,” invited
Patch, “and tell me what you see.”
“A footprint, of course,” said Jack. “In other
words, a depression in the earth, caused by the
yielding of the soil under a boot, which causes
it to assume the shape ”
“Ass!” said Septimus cuttingly. “I mean, do
you observe anything peculiar about it?”
“No. Why?”
“You see that snake-like mark across the place
where the sole has rested?”
“We’re not blind, professor. What of it?”
“Well, that’s where the bootlace was stamped
into the earth under the foot. You see that!
Now, that means that the fellow had his boot
unlaced.”
“Marvellous!” exclaimed Jack. “How do you
do it?” he added, peering anxiously at Patch.
“Are you quite sure that you have come to no
harm? The severe mental effort ”
“Cut the joking a moment. The man’s boots
were unlaced. What was the reason for that?
Is it likely that a man who was planning a
burglary would come in with unlaced boots?


The thing is absurd. There are no houses within
miles of this place, and if the fellow had been
hiding in the bush, he would scarcely have had
his boots unlaced. No; the deduction from that
lace is that the chap belonged to the school.”
“Yes, that sounds pretty right. You mean,
he put on his boots to give the impression that
he’d come from outside, but as he’d just slipped
them on, he didn’t lace them up, meaning to
take them off again shortly afterwards.”
“That’s just it, comrade. Also, he was pro-
bably carrying them in his hand and getting
around the corridors in stockinged feet. I think
we’ve just about narrowed the search down to
the school.”
“Yes;” broke in Billy Faraday, who had been
listening to the discussion with deep interest,
“that’s all right, but it’s absurd to imagine that
anyone from the Coll, had a hand in this affair.
Fane says that the chap was a big fellow ”
“There wasn’t much light,” said Fane, “and
I didn’t see him for more than half a minute.
All the same, he looked big. There was a scarf
over the bottom of his face, of course, so I
couldn’t tell him that way.”
“We’ve got no chance of finding out who he
is, then,” said Billy. “Even if it was one of the
chaps, which is hard to believe. I had an idea
that it was the bag-snatcher in the train, but he
was quite short.”


“Wait just a minute,” interrupted Patch,
“You want to hear all the detective’s got to say,
and then you can back-chat each other all day
if you want to. I say we can find out who that
chap was, and merely by this footprint again.”
“Spit it out,” invited Jack.
“Well, you can see the mark of the metal tag
of that lace, can’t you? And you will observe
that it’s broken in half. The jagged edge has
left an unmistakable impression—see it? Just
a minute.”
He bent down, took a knife from his pocket,
and detached a tiny square of the mud with the
impression of the broken tag in it. This he held
in the palm of his hand, and continued. “All
we’ve got to do now is to find who owns the
pair of boots that’d make an impression like
this. There can’t be any mistake, and it shouldn’t
take us long to run through all the boots in the
school.”
“When?”
“To-night, when they’re downstairs for clean-
ing. They are brought back by the boy about
half-past five —if we get down to-night we’d
be able to examine them safely.”
“Good on you,” said Jack, slapping Septimus
on the back with heartiness. “I didn’t think
you could do it, but it’s a good notion all the
same. By George, we ought to be able to find
out who it is!”


“But—who could it be?” asked Billy, a furrow
of puzzlement showing itself on his forehead.
“That’s what gets me! I can’t imagine ”
“The bootlace will show —don’t worry,” said
Septimus. “We can’t do anything until we find
that.”
The four of them were wondering, as they sat
in class that afternoon, who the intruder could
be, and they looked at their class-mates with
suspicious eyes. Big Martin, on account of his
size, came in for furtive glances, but it was
manifestly absurd that he could have been the
culprit.
At this early stage of the term, nobody felt
much like work, particularly Septimus Patch,
who always contrived to be doing as much of
his own private business as possible, and never
paid much attention to the lesson in hand. Just
at this moment he had arranged a big barrier
of books all along the front of his desk, and,
concealed behind the screen, he was tinkering
with a weir-looking model of many springs,
screws, and cogwheels.
Consequently he did not notice that the boy
in front of him had been surreptitiously unlacing
his boots. His first intimation that something
was amiss was when he felt a sharp tug at his
feet, and both his boots came off. He gasped
with horror, and, peering over his barricade,
observed that his two boots were travelling the


round of the class, in different directions. His
loud socks, of purplish and yellow colour-scheme,
brought a snigger from the class. He wriggled,
protesting.
“Patch!” It was the voice of Mr. Salmon,
who was all unconscious of the diversion, but
who saw Patch’s movement. “Are you paying
attention?”
“Yes, sir,” mumbled Patch, reddening, and
glaring, through his great horn-rimmed glasses,
at his companions. “Back here with the giddy
old boots, you asses!” he whispered, in a furious
aside.
“Well, then,” said Mr. Salmon, arranging his
spectacles so that he could get a good view of
the boy, “we were talking about Charles XII.
Patch, tell me why he was unsuccessful against
Peter in this campaign.”
“You said, sir?” replied Patch.
“Why was he unsuccessful?”
“Ah, why?” said Patch, innocently.
“I don’t believe you’ve been paying any atten-
tion whatever.” The master ran round the class
with a rapid cross-fire of questions, but the
answers were unsatisfactory. He frowned, and
coughed. “Here, Patch, you come out and read
the account aloud,” he commanded.
“Here, back with those boots,” said Patch,
frantically. But the boots had arrived at the


other end of the room, and seemed likely to re-
main there.
“Do you hear me, boy?” demanded Mr. Salmon.
“Come out at once. I never saw such indolence!”
With a groan Patch got up, and, amid the
chuckles of the class, stepped forward to the dais
where Mr. Salmon stood. But he had barely set
foot on the stage, when he began a series of extra-
ordinary antics.
“Ouch!” he howled, leaping four feet in the air,
and bouncing with a thud. He danced about the
dais on one foot, upsetting globes and maps,
and tipping over one of the front desks upon its
unfortunate occupant. “Take it out —take it
out!”
“Ha, ha, ha!” roared the class, both at the
wild leaps of Patch and the astounded horror of
Mr. Salmon.
“Boy, boy!” cried the latter, “have you gone
mad? Stop this at once —stop it, I say! Really
I !”
“Yow! It’s sticking into me —quick! My foot
■it’s sharp!”
“His foot’s sharp?” queried Mr, Salmon.
“Patch —calm yourself, my poor fellow,” he went
on, imagining that, if Patch had really gone off
his head, it would be safer to keep him calm.
“You are quite all right—you really are. Just
keep calm, and the effects will ”
“Ha, ha, ha!” The class was convulsed, and


rocked with merriment as Septimus Patch was
seen to sit down on the floor and painfully extract
a drawing-tack from his stockinged foot. The
tack had been lying harmlessly on the dais, and
Patch had planted his foot fairly upon it. Mr.
Salmon adjusted his spectacles, and took in the
amazing sight. The vivid colours of Patch’s hose
met his eye, and he gasped.
“Boy! What do you mean by this? Where
are your boots?”
“Ah, where?” said Patch dreamily.
Mr. Salmon coloured deeply. “You are insolent
—you will be punished,” he affirmed. “Explain
at once. Where have you put your boots?”
Squinting over the tops of his goggles, Patch
descried his boots in place underneath his desk,
standing demurely side by side as if nothing had
ever been amiss with them.
“You will forgive me, comrade,” he said, in his
most buttery tones, “but I had to take them off.
My feet got very hot.”
“Your feet got hot?”
“Yes —just a physical weakness of mine. When-
ever it occurs I simply have to take my boots
off. I can’t bear them.”
“So you are hot-footed as well as hot-headed!”
said Mr, Salmon.
The class simply roared. They kicked their
feet, and rattled rulers on the desk. They always
made a stupendous row whenever Mr. Salmon


cracked one of his very mild jokes, and the genial
house-master was so very deaf that the din came
to his ears in the form of a loud titter, which had
always pleased him greatly. The noise they
made now could be heard a couple of corridors
away, but Mr. Salmon nodded and smiled, satis-
fied with the reception of his sally.
“Go back to your seat, boy,” he said, restored
to good humour once more. “If your feet feel
warm, it is doubtless because you wear such very
hot socks.”
At this remark there was a repetition of the
hideous row; and Patch strolled back to his seat
and his model-making without the slightest con-
cern.
After “lights out” that night the four pals got
out of their dormitory, and in slippers made their
way down to the boot-room, where they tumbled
around among boots and blacking and brushes,
before Patch applied a light to a fragment of
candle that shed a flickering illumination over
the rows of neatly cleaned boots.
“Now for it,” said Billy Faraday, and without
any more ado they set to work to examine the
great stack of boots. It was fully half an hour
before they had run through the pile, and then
they had drawn a blank.
“It’s no go,” said Jack Symonds. “How now,
professor?”
“The other House,” said Patch calmly.


“What—Cooper’s ?”
“Of course,” said Septimus. “Forward, com-
rades all!”
They crossed the quadrangle and the playing-
fields to the other house of Deepwater College—
Cooper’s House.
“You were here last term, of course,” said
Jack Symonds to Patch. “You know your way
about?”
“Rather, comrade; like the palm of my hand.
Give us a leg up through this window.”
Jack obliged him with a shove that nearly sent
the investigator on to his head in the passage-
way beydnd. In a little while the four had gained
the boot-room, and there a much more cautious
examination took place—more cautious because,
if Cooper’s masters or boys discovered them by
any chance, then things would go hard with the
intruders.
Inside of an hour the detectives had satisfied
themselves that the boots had not been worn by
any of the boys of Deepwater College.
“You’ve drawn another blank, Patchy,” said
Billy Faraday. “How do you account for this?”
“Account for it?” asked Patch, in wonderment.
“What do you mean? This only brings us closer
to our solution, as the great Holmes said ”
“Which Holmes? Oliver Wendell?” inquired
Jack, with an air of acute interest.
“Sherlock Holmes, of course,” returned Patch,


with scorn. “I forgot that you are unfamiliar
with the classics. Well, he laid it down as an
axiom, once, that when you have disproved all
but one of a number of solutions, that solution
must be the correct one, no matter how absurd it
seems.”
“I get you. But how does it apply?”
“Why, if it wasn’t one of the boys here, it must
have been one of the masters that made the
footprint.”
“But what master would come at that game?”
asked Billy incredulously. “Think it was old
Salmon ?”
“By the Great Moa!” exclaimed Jack in a loud
tone, which called rebukes from his companions.
“Cut the shindy,” advised Patch tersely, “or
you’ll have the whole House down on us. What’s
stung you?”
“Doctor Daw!” whispered Jack. “What about
him?”
“Is he in his right mind?” asked Patch
anxiously. “And who may Doctor Daw be?
I’ve heard of his daughter, Marjory, but that was
in my nursery-rhyme days. Expound.”
In low tones, and as briefly as possible, Jack
explained the strange connection which he sus-
pected between Doctor Daw, the new master,
and Tiger, the man who had run off with Billy’s
bag.
“What could be more likely,” he said, “but that


the two are in league with one another, and asso-
ciates of old Lazare what’s-his-name? Why didn’t
I think of it before?”
“This is important,” said Patch, seriously.
“Daw is a big man, and it might well have been
him. Now, the only thing to do is to compare
his bootlaces with that impression we’ve got.
And how are we to do that?”
“Sneak up into his room and take a look at
them,” said Jack,
“Who’s going, though? Four of us can’t do
it.”
“Draw lots, then. Here, wait a minute till I
collect some pieces of grass.”
Outside, in the shadow of the school buildings,
they drew for the honour of investigating the
room of Mr. Daw, and the shortest straw fell to
the lot of Jack.
“You can go up now,” said Fane, suddenly. “I
remember that Daw went out this evening, and
he hasn’t come back yet, for he’d have to pass
the boot-room to do so. If you’re slippy you can
get up there, examine the boots and get away
again in about a minute.”
“I’ll do it,” said Jack, as they came through
once more to the corridors of Salmon’s House.
He rubbed his chin with his forefinger. “Let me
see,” he asked, “isn’t there an electric torch of
yours in the study?”
“Of mine?” said Billy doubtfully. “We’ll see.”


They proceeded to the study, and there Billy un-
earthed an old, but still serviceable, torch. Armed
with this, Jack went upstairs to the upper floor,
where the masters’ rooms were.
“Tit for tat,” he murmured, turning the handle
of Daw’s door and opening it quietly. He let
himself inside, and closed the door noiselessly.
For half a minute he stood still, to assure him-
self that Doctor Daw had not returned, and then,
flashing his torch, made a hurried search for the
master’s boots. He found a few pairs, all show-
ing signs of recent use, but none with the dis-
tinctive tag.
“Ten to one he’s wearing them,” murmured
Jack. At that moment his heart beat furiously.
Steps were coming along the corridor, and they
stopped outside the door. For a second he was
paralysed; then he acted swiftly. He had barely
time to roll under the bed before Doctor Daw
himself entered the room—and with him his
strange friend Tiger!


CHAPTER VI
JACK IS ENLIGHTENED
Jack Symonds had barely time to make certain
that his hurried dive under the bed had not been
observed, when Doctor Daw and Tiger were
well within the room.
“A bit late for a call,” said Daw grimly, “but
there’s no one to notice, luckily. Different last
night, though.”
“How so?” said Tiger. There came the sound
of a match being struck, and Jack couid presently
smell the distinctive odour of tobacco. “How
do you make that out?”
“Why, I had a cut for the Star,” said Daw
quickly. “And do you know what happened?
I’d searched through about half the cupboards
down there in the study where he’s pretty sure
to have it thus early. All at once, the door
opened, and in walks one of the kids ”
“Not young Faraday?”
“No; a new chap from New Zealand; and
instead of being scared, he jumped at me like
a terrier on a rat. I got away, but only just.
I tell you, Tiger, I ”


“See here,” interrupted the other, “don’t call
me that name. It —well, you never know who
might hear it, and —anyway, my name’s Hum-
bolt. Well, how did you get on with this kid?
Scared you some, I’ll bet!”
“I won’t say he didn’t,” confessed Daw. “The
lucky thing was, I had a scarf over my face,
and he can’t say who did it. Probably thinks
it was some outsider. But the Star won’t be
in that study now, you can gamble on that.
I’ve one of the kids a bit under my thumb,
through knowing him down in Victoria, and
he’s keeping a fairly close watch on what this
Faraday does, and where he goes, and all that
sort of thing.”
Jack, beneath the bed, opened his eyes wide
at this piece of news, and wondered who the
boy could be. Nobody, he decided, in his im-
mediate circle; but the fact that the youngster
came from Victoria was a clue that would per-
haps come in handy.
“I’ll put Patch on to that,” he thought, and
gave himself over to listening to what the two
plotters were saying.
“Ah, well,” Humbolt was heard to murmur,
with a sigh of relief, “I’m real glad you didn’t
give away the box of tricks last night. We’d
have been pretty well diddled if they suspected
that you—you know.”
“That’s safe enough,” said Doctor Daw con-


fidently; and Jack felt like chuckling at the
thought that Daw was quite mistaken.
“You didn’t reckon on Patch being a ’tec,” he
murmured, smiling to himself.
“I guess it’s lucky that I met you,” said Daw
suddenly. “Do you know, I never liked playing
a lone hand, and with you close by I feel a lot
safer. And Lazare’s the man to pay well, be-
lieve me, if only we can collar that Star. Hang
me, it ought to be simple enough! Don’t forget
those instructions for Friday night, will you?”
“Trust me, Doc. And now, what about those
goods—and the money?”
“They’re in my leather handbag, somewhere.”
Doctor Daw stifled an immense yawn. “I’m
feeling like sleep—you wouldn’t credit how it
knocks you up trying to teach these blockheads
here.”
“Of course, you always were a good teacher,”
sneered Humbolt.
“I used to be, once,” returned Doctor Daw.
“Until you carelessly stole that money and
left clues that a blind man could follow, and,
of course, got what you were looking for.
Twelve months, wasn’t it —or was it two years?
I’ve forgotten.”
“You’d better forget the whole lot,” answered
Daw, with a threatening note in his voice. “You
leave my past history alone, and I won’t rake


up yours. That stands, doesn’t it? After this
business I’m going straight.”
“Straight?” Humbolt laughed. “Never in
your life, Doctor. You got in here on forged
references, and do you mean to say ”
“That I’m going to stay here? Certainly.
Supposing we get the Star —no suspicion at-
taches to me. I’ll just stay on; there’ll be no
question as to my honesty.”
“Oh, won’t there?” thought Jack. “Just you
wait and see, that’s all. There’ll be quite a lot
of question, if I know anything!”
“Well, don’t let me keep you up any longer,”
said Humbolt in his usual cynical tone. “Where’s
this handbag?”
“Somewhere about. Have a look, will you?
Probably under the bed, or somewhere. Never
can remember where I put my things!”
Jack felt his blood run cold at the words.
Under the bed! He glanced about him, and
saw that the handbag was certainly not there.
All the same, if they were to look, the fat would
be in the fire with a vengeance! What the two
would do to one who had obviously overheard
their very compromising conversation, Jack did
not dare to imagine. He wriggled back against
the wall, praying that he would not be seen;
but he realized that the chances of escaping
notice were very slender indeed. For what
seemed an age he heard the two of them walk-


ing about, and heard the noise of furniture
moved; and still they did not come near the
bed.
What if they knew, and were merely making
a mockery of his suspense and dread? The
thought was a disconcerting one. Jack felt like
scrambling from under the bed, and facing them,
consequences or no consequences. He felt cer-
tain that they had seen him, had heard him—
knew in some way, and were just tormenting
him. Just at the moment when the strain seemed
too great to be borne, a leg appeared at the side
of the bed, and the counterpane was lifted. In
another second the person would stoop and peer
under the bed. With bulging eyes, Jack Symonds
awaited his exposure.
“It’s all right—l’ve got it.” It was Doctor
Daw’s voice, from across the room, and Hum-
bolt let fall the counterpane once more. Jack
almost fainted with relief.
Shortly afterwards, to his joy, both left the
room, Daw intimating that he would see his
companion safely off the premises; and Jack
crawled out of his hiding-place, feeling stiff and
cramped, but glad indeed that he had been per-
mitted to take a glance at the plot that was
preparing itself against his chum.
He hurried through the dark corridors, and
slipped into the dormitory without being noticed
by the monitor in charge. His pals were all


eagerness to be told what had happened to him;
but he was in no mood for explanations.
‘Til tell you in the morning,” he said. “I’m
jolly sleepy.”
And that was all that they could get out of
him. The next morning, however, he had a lot
to say, and especially to Billy Faraday.
“Look here, Billy,” he said, “you really must
take care of that Star, because Lazare and these
others have some scheme going for Friday night.
What it was, or what was proposed, I’ve got no
idea; but Daw told the other chap to be ready,
or words to that effect. Can’t we hide the thing
somewhere?”
“Yes, but where?”
“And there’s another thing, too. Daw men-
tioned a kid—one of the fellows here —that’s
under his thumb, and who’s going to keep an
eye on what we do.”
“Jingo!” said Billy. “The dickens he is!
Wonder who it is?”
“Here’s Patch, and perhaps he can find out
for us. How are you, my giddy old sleuth-
hound? I may as well tell you that you scored
a bull with that bootlace clue.”
“Comrades, I’m delighted. You compared the
laces?”
“No. You see, Daw had the boots on. But
I heard all about it, and I don’t doubt that your
clue would have worked out to the last bend in


the tag on the lace. There’s something else,
though ” And Jack told him the strange
conversation that he had overheard, particularly
with reference to the spy that Daw controlled
among the ranks of the college boys.
“Interesting, comrade, deeply interesting,”
said the schoolboy detective, rubbing his chin in
the approved Sherlock Holmes manner. “It
seems to me that the field is not too large, either.
I mean, the boy must be in this house to keep
any sort of watch over Faraday here, and as he
comes from Victoria, that narrows the field still
further. You twig? There are only a limited
number of chaps in Salmon’s House hailing
from Victoria. And we can whittle them down
one by one. I’ll get a list of them, and we’ll
eliminate those above suspicion. That will leave
under a dozen, I should say, to be watched.”
“Patch, you old genius!” Jack Symonds
smote him heartily between the shoulders, and
the old genius was projected into the fireplace,
whence he recovered himself with injured dig-
nity.
“It’s only attention to detail, that’s all,” mur-
mured Septimus deprecatingly. “I picked that
up from Dupin ”
“From whom?” demanded Jack.
“Dupin—that’s Edgar Allan Poe’s detective,
and a real snorting detective at that. Ever read
any of it?”


“Dunno. Didn’t old Edgar write somethin’
about the Bells —Bells —Bells, yells, shells, or
some rot like that? My giddy sister recites some
yards of rubbish to that effect.”
“That’s the fellow. Any rate, he wrote ‘The
Murders in the Rue Morgue.’ ”
“Gur-r-r!” said Jack, frowning heavily. “Sort
of sequel to ‘The Bloodstained Putty-knife, or
the Bricklayer’s Revenge.’ ”
Septimus smiled as one who indulges the
caprices of a child. “Comrade, you will never
make a detective,” he said. “I’ve got the book
here, with the yarns in it, if you’d care to read
them. Meanwhile ”
“Look here,” interrupted Billy Faraday, a
shade impatiently. “There’s not much time be-
fore morning school, and I’d like to hide the
Star before we go any further. Of course, I
might stick it in the pouch of my belt and carry
it about wdth me, but don’t you think that’s
just the scheme that’d strike Lazare and his
crowd as being most natural. I might be
knocked down and searched; anything might
happen.”
“One of the boards in this floor is loose,” said
Jack thoughtfully. “How would it be to prise
it up and drop the Star down there? We could
replace the carpet, and nobody would be any
the wiser.”
But Septimus Patch had what he considered


JACK IS ENLIGHTENED
a better idea. “We were just now talking,” he
observed, “of Dupin, the first scientific detective
in fiction. There is a story about him, called
‘The Purloined Letter.’ The strength of it is
that a fellow is known to have a letter which
he has stolen, but it baffles the detectives to
find it. They go all over his room, rip up the
boards, sound the cabinets for secret drawers,
take accurate measurements of the tables, probe
everything, but the merry old letter is still miss-
ing, although they know for a fact that it’s
somewhere about the fellow’s house. They call
old Dupin in, and he finds it right away.”
“How?”
“By using his brains, comrade; by simple
reasoning. Here, hand me that book of Poe’s,
and I’ll read some of his reasoning.”
A day or two before, Jack and Billy would
have laughed at Patch’s request, and refused his
help; but they had to admit that he had used his
brains in regard to the footprint clue, and they
were willing to give him a chance to safeguard
the Black Star on the strength of that first
triumph.
“Here you are,” said Billy a little sceptically,
throwing over the desired volume. “Show us
what you can do.”
Patch whipped over the pages with accustomed
fingers, and began to read. “Says Dupin, ‘There
is a game of puzzles which is played upon a map.


One party playing requires another to find a given
word —the name of a town, river, State, or em-
pire—any word, in short, upon the motley and
perplexed surface of the chart. A novice in the
game generally seeks to embarrass his opponents
by giving them the most minutely lettered names;
but the adept selects such words as stretch, in
large characters, from one end of the chart to
the other. These escape observation by dint of
being excessively obvious.”
“That’s all right,” agreed Jack, “I’ve noticed
that myself. But what happened?”
“That’s the whole point of the yarn,” returned
Patch. “Dupin came to the conclusion that the
thief had not concealed the letter at all. He
pratted along to the chap’s house, and saw that
he had several cards in a letter-rack, and a soli-
tary letter. The appearance of the letter was
quite different to the missing one. But Dupin
says, Tn scrutinizing the edges of the paper I
observed them to be more chafed than necessary.
They presented the broken appearance which is
manifested when a stiff paper, having been folded
and pressed with a folder, is refolded in a re-
versed direction, in the same creases or edges
which had formed the original fold. This dis-
covery was sufficient. It was clear to me that
the letter had been turned, as a glove, inside out,
re-directed and re-sealed.’ Well, after that,” pur-
sued Patch, shutting the book, “he came next


JACK IS ENLIGHTENED
day with another letter done up in the same way.
He got a fellow to fire off a pistol and raise a
shindy in the street below, and while the thief
was looking to see what was up he got the stolen
letter and put his own in its place. In the letter
he’d put a stinging quotation to the effect that
there was no copyright on that particular trick.”
“I’ll bet the thief got a surprise when he came
to open it up,” chuckled Jack, who had been fol-
lowing the story with interest. “But I see what
you are driving at —you don’t want to conceal
the Star at all?”
“Not as open as all that,” said Patch. “But let
us get hold of some place that’s so obvious that
nobody would ever dream of looking there.’'
“Billy can wear it as a tie-pin,” suggested Jack,
with a laugh. “Or we could put it up over the
mantelpiece.”
“No, comrade; a little subtlety is necessary.
What about that old jacket of yours, Billy? That
one hanging up in the corner? We could sew
the Star up in the lining, and leave the jacket
there. We’d notice in a moment if the jacket
were gone. But nobody would think of that as
a hiding-place, and that’s why it is the safest
place in the world. Savvy?”
“Sure thing. Do you think it’s the best place?”
“Of course I do, comrade. Now, I’ve got a
needle and cotton somewhere, I think, and if you
like I’ll do the job now.”


Somewhat reluctantly Billy passed over the
Black Star, and with deft hands Patch ripped
up the lining under the shoulder-padding of the
coat. Then, while Jack looked to see that they
were not overheard at the door, and while Billy
kept watch at the window, Septimus embedded
the Star in the padding, and closed the seam again
as neatly as a tailor.
“There,” he commented, hanging the coat up
again in its accustomed position. “The fellow
who finds that we’ve left the Star in such an easy
position will be cuter than most people. Now
we’ll have to cut —it’s nearly form-time.”
And with their preparation in the most hazy
and uncertain state, the three occupants of Study
No. 9 hurried down to class. That afternoon the
Star was still in place, and Billy breathed freely.
“I suppose it’s as safe there as anywhere,” he
thought. “I say, Jack, what’s that hideous din?”


CHAPTER VII
THE CALAMITOUS CRIPPLES
Jack looked out of the window. Then he gurgled.
“By the Brass-eyed bull!” he exclaimed. “Look
here, just cast your optic in this direction, old
fellow. That’s all, old man —just a look!”
From the quadrangle below them came the
blare of bugles, and the gaps were filled up by a
miscellaneous din emanating from tins, whistles,
combs and paper. Billy hurried over, and the
two chums leaned from their window in astonish-
ment.
“A giddy procession,” murmured Billy.
It was; but a procession of the kind rarely seen
outside of a circus. There were about forty boys
in the show; and every one of them was attired
as a cripple of the most dilapidated kind. They
all looked as if they had been rolled upon by a
steam-roller, and then passed through a chaff-
cutter. Bandages enwrapped their heads, and
their arms and legs appeared to be broken in
numerous places. Many carried crutches, and
an odd effect was given by one humorist who


elected to appear on stilts, which were liberally
bandaged. Two buglers headed the procession;
and most of the others had instruments of some
sort or other. At arranged intervals they gave
vent to sepulchral groans. In the van was a tat-
tered banner, bearing the words, “The Calamitous
Cripples. Break your leg and join.”
“What is it?” asked the mystified Jack. “What’s
the giddy wheeze?”
Billy Faraday was far too absorbed in watch-
ing the amazing spectacle to answer him, and
Jack’s question lapsed. The procession drew
nearer and nearer, and the noise was ear-split-
ting. The Cripples drew themselves up before
the window of Study 9, and Jack was moved to
call out, “Lovely! Is it the National Anthem or
Alexander’s Ragtime Band? I never could tell
the difference.”
His shaft of wit, however, went almost un-
noticed in the general uproar, and Billy Fara-
day grasped a more cutting form of witticism;
he got ar handful of pennies and half-pennies, and
threw them one at a time to the serenading party
below.
Cummles, hammering at a tin drum with zest,
received one of the coins full on the bridge of
the nose, and it broke short his performance.
He held up his hand, and with a final crash of
sound the Cripples completed their selection.
“Know,” roared Cummles at the top of his


voice, “that a new Society has been formed,
called the Calamitous Cripples! We let every-
body join—the more the merrier! And our ob-
ject is—” He turned to his supporters for the
rest.
“ —death to the Crees!” roared the crowd, in
disconcerting chorus.
So this was the strength of the new society—
it was a rival show to the Crees! Jack realized
that Cummles was getting his own back for his
rejection and disgrace at the last Cree meeting,
and he whistled softly. But Cummles was speak-
ing again.
“We therefore begin on the Chief Cree!” he
yelled, and as at a given signal all the Cripples
raised their hands, and sent a volley of hard,
tightly-rolled paper balls at Jack and Billy as
they stood open-mouthed at the window.
The fusillade took the two Crees by surprise,
and Jack for the moment did not know what
to do; but he soon settled that question, and with
Billy jumped out of the window, and rushed the
banner of the Calamitous Cripples. It was flag-
rantly against rules to jump out of the window
at all, and soon a free fight was taking place
around the banner of the Cripples.
“To it, Crees!” yelled Jack, wrestling furiously
with one of the banner supporters. Someone had
grasped his leg, and he could not keep upright


much longer; sooner or later he would have to
go down.
“Ouch!” Down he went, and down went
half a dozen others in a panting, scrambling,
tossing mass.
There was wild disorder for lively minutes, but
force of numbers gave victory to the Cripples,
who rescued their tattered banner and scampered
away with it. Jack stood looking after them with
fire in his eye.
“Jingo,” he observed to Billy Faraday, “but I
can see some immense japes this term, with the
Crees and the Cripples. What do you think?”
“We’ve got to score on them,” said Billy em-
phatically, “and score right away. Watch us
notch ahead.”
Jack nodded meaningly; then, as someone
touched him on the arm, he wheeled round. It
was Septimus Patch, and the schoolboy detec-
tive’s eyes were shining. He was plainly full of
some scheme or other.
“Comrades!” he said. “Don’t waste your time
here —I’ve got the best idea out for the discovery
of the fellow that’s giving Daw a hand.”
“What are you going to do—advertise?”
Patch smiled tolerantly. “Daw—Doctor Daw,
as you call him —said that this chap, whoever he
is, is keeping an eye on Billy here?”
“That’s so.”
“Well, why shouldn’t we ” he looked


around to make certain that they were not over-
heard, “ —why shouldn’t we lead the fellow out
on a false scent?”
“Meaning?”
“Sort of red herring business, you know. The
three of us could sneak out before call-over and
make it appear as if we were going to hide the
Star somewhere out in the bush. If there is any-
one on the watch, it’s the Commonwealth Bank
to a peanut that he’ll slink out after us.”
“Good word —slink,” said Jack approvingly.
“Yes, Patchie, the idea’s not so dusty. We’ve
got time. We could lie in ambush for the beggar
and catch him red-handed.”
“Better leave him alone —just make certain who
he is,” warned Septimus, polishing his great horn-
rimmed glasses. “You see, if we just lie low and
say nuffin, like Brer Rabbit, the spy won’t know
that we’re fly to his little game,”
“Good for you, Picklock Holmes,” said Jack.
“You mean, he’ll think that he’s working quite
safely, unknown to anyone, and all the time we
know, and are pulling his leg so much that he’ll
need a boat-hook to take his boots off.”
“Prezactly, comrade,” returned Septimus,
chafflngly. “Your brain is bucking up lately,
isn’t it? We never know what we can do till
we try, do we? However, to the bright, brisk
business! You” —turning to Billy Faraday—


“you slip up into the study and pretend to bring
something out with you—we’ll watch here.”
“We’re the giddy conspirators, old boy,” said
Jack. “Get a move on—we haven’t any too much
time?”
In a few minutes the three boys had set out
from the school, striking into the thick belt of
scrub-lands that lay towards the north. They
pressed forward for a good ten minutes, and at
the end of that time Billy strode on alone, making
as much noise as he could, while Jack and the
amateur detective crouched behind the under-
growth, to watch closely for any follower.
Billy’s footsteps died away, and there came
only the faint sound of his passage through the
scrub; then that in turn faded till it was almost
inaudible.
“ ’Fraid we’ve drawn blank, old boy,” said
Jack in a low whisper. “Can’t hear anything,
can you?”
“Wait,” was all that Patch had for answer;
he had his head cocked to one side in a listening
attitude, and all at once he raised a finger for
silence.
During a tense ten seconds he listened, Jack
scarcely taking breath, and then the detective
nodded as one who had satisfied himself.
“Get down,” he whispered; “somebody com-
ing.”
Sure enough, almost at once came the sound


of footsteps; and Jack, peering through the inter-
stices of a wall of greenery, could barely restrain
a gasp as he saw a tall, pasty-faced, weedy youth
strolling negligently along the faint path that
Billy Faraday had followed, and, although he
wore the college cap of blue and gold, he was
smoking an expensive brand of cigarette.
In dead silence the two watched him pass their
field of vision, and then he, too, was swallowed
up in the bush.
Jack turned to Patch with a criss-cross mark
of puzzlement creasing his eyebrows. “Now,
what do you make of that?” he asked softly.
“That’s Redisham, and the dirty slacker’s smok-
ing at that. But is he following Billy or not?”
“Or is it only coincidence that he comes from
Victoria?” asked Septimus in the same discreet
voice. “Very funny, isn’t it?”
“Now, you know what sort of a fellow Redis-
ham is,” went on Jack. “Pie’s just the sort that’d
have gambling debts, and all that, although his
father’s got piles of cash, they say. Question is,
is he clever enough to be used as a tool?”
“Comrade, I don’t know,” admitted Septimus,
slowly shaking his head. “It’s often these fool-
ish-looking fellows that turn out pretty cunning
in the long run. All the same, Redisham—the
man’s an ass, a weak-minded ass with an eye for
‘loud’ dress, and ”
“ and no eye for catching a cricket ball,


or any sort of sport, except betting—if you can
call that sport,” Jack snorted. “Little Mon-
tague Redisham isn’t the sneak in this case, I
fancy.”
“Well, then, what’s he doing?” countered the
amateur detective, with index finger marking his
point. “It looks jolly fishy, doesn’t it?”
“Might have come out to smoke that rotten
cigarette of his.”
“I thought of that, but the coincidence of the
time, and the direction of his outing, is hard to
get over. Anyhow, we’ll find out, we’ll find out—
don’t worry.”
They got out of their cramping positions be-
hind the undergrowth and stepped out into the
little glade. Barely had they done so when there
came a loud cry from some distance ahead—and
Jack knew the voice as well as his own.
It was Billy’s voice.
“Help—help!”
Jack jumped about a foot in the air, and shot
a sharp glance at Septimus Patch. “Jiminy!” he
said, quickly, “that’s old Billy—wonder what’s
up? Here —after him.”
Symonds and Patch put their heads down and
ran. Heedless of the undergrowth that set traps
for their feet and that tore at them in the shape
of thorn-bushes, they charged madly forward,
and all at once Jack stopped and picked some-
thing up from the ground.


“Here—look at this!” It was Billy’s cap, with
the Deepwater College badge in the front of it;
and Patch pulled up and glanced keenly at the
ground with sharp eyes.
“A struggle—see?” he panted, pointing to the
way the bracken had been tossed about and the
turf trampled by heavy heels. “A struggle, and
then —then —what happened ?”
“Don’t say he’s been knocked on the head and
dragged off,” groaned Jack, looking about him
helplessly. “Here, Patchie, have a look at these
marks —what are they?”
“Good —good,” observed Patch, scanning them
closely. “See, Billy got away and ran for it—
the other chap after him. See how the big, heavy
print is stamped over that other? They were
running, the both of them —and ”
“Come on,” said Jack curtly; and the two of
them tore off once more, stopping to pick up the
trail every now and then until they were startled
by a loud, frenzied crashing through the brushes.”
“Hullo!” exclaimed Patch, stopping; and into
their arms, almost, Billy Faraday staggered,
hatless and dishevelled. He was panting heavily,
and seemed almost done; a sharp twig had
scratched his cheek badly, for it was bleeding.
“Billy—you’re all right?” demanded his chum,
seizing him by the arm.
Before Billy could pant out an answer, another
fellow came up at a run, and halted, half-hidden


in the scrub, at the sight of the two who now
reinforced the fugitive. His cap, pulled down
over his eyes, hid his face pretty well; but Jack
knew at once that it was Tiger Humbolt who
stood staring at them.
It was Septimus Patch who decided the next
move.
“After him —I’ve got a gun!” he yelled at the
top of his voice; and Humbolt started and then,
wheeling about, vanished into the thick bush
at a run. He knew that Billy had fired a revolver
at him during his attempted escape with the
handbag, and he was disposed to take Patch’s
cry at its face value. As Patch had intended, of
course; for he did not attempt to give chase.
Instead, he glanced at his watch.
“Ten minutes to call-over,” he said; “we’d
better get back.”
On the way back to the college Billy explained
that he had been standing in a thicket when Hum-
bolt had jumped on him from behind and carried
him to the ground. After a struggle he had
broken free and run for his life.
“I doubled on my tracks,” he concluded, “and
came back again, when I ran into you. That’s
all—lucky it wasn’t worse.”
“And did you see Monty Redisham?” asked
Patch.
“Redisham —that rich blighter in the Sixth?
The prefect?”


“The slacker,” said Jack trenchantly. He went
on to explain how Redisham had come into the
mystery, and Billy said that the plot was now
thicker than ever.
“I can’t make it out,” he said, thoughtfully,
dabbing his scratched cheek with his handker-
chief. “No, I didn’t see the brute at all. He was
following me, you say?”
“Looked like it, comrade,” said Patch, “but
then we can’t say for certain. I’ll have to give
the matter some thought,” he went on, with a
resumption of his light-hearted manner.
“Another thing requiring some thought,” put
in Jack, “is, how are we going to score off those
Cripple lunatics? We want to shake them up
pretty suddenly, you know. I think we’ll call a
special meeting of the Crees in our study to-
night, and we’ll think up something really smart.”
When the Crees had assembled, managing in
some inexplicable manner to cram themselves
into Study 9, Jack was delighted to learn that one
of the fellows was ready with a plan.
“Chief Black Feather,” he said, in the approved
style of address, “may I suggest a scheme for the
downfall of those scoundrel palefaces—l mean
Cripples?”
“Of course,” said Jack at once. “In fact, I was
going to ask you fellows to come to light with
some such idea. Spring the giddy wheeze, mon


brave French,” he explained grandly, “very
hard.”
“Well,” said the Cree, “the bright idea is this.
I happen to have heard that the Cripples are
holding a meeting to-morrow afternoon —they’ve
got one of the classrooms on the north wing for
the purpose. Now, I happen to know that up in
the ceiling over that wing there are several bags
of sawdust —been stored there for ages, and I
think the Head’s forgotten all about them. Now,
it's a shame to waste them, and there’s a nice big
man-hole in the classroom, and ”
“I think we see the rest!” said Jack with
laugh. “Which classroom are they in?”
“The end one —the drawing-room, next to the
extra French set.”
“Good —nominations for four fellows to carry
out the scheme? I’ll make one myself.”
Three others were accordingly chosen to de-
luge the Cripples’ meeting with sawdust, and on
the following afternoon the conspirators gained
access to the space between the ceiling and roof.
A busy meeting of the Cripples, with closed doors
and windows, was in progress; and there was
going to be no mistake whatever about the dis-
order and surprise that would follow the aval-
anche of sawdust.
“The jape of the century!” averred Jack
Symonds in a low whisper. “What about the
cover for the man-hole? Have you got it?”
“Yes, she lifts pretty easily, but I won’t pull


her right out, or they’ll be ready for us. Now,
how are we going to open fire?”
“Wait a second.” Jack took a swift look round
at his assistants, flashing the electric torch that
he had brought with him. “I’ve got it. We’ll
each take a bag, and as soon as Martin whips the
cover off the trap, I’ll let fly—then you, and you
next, and Martin last. See? That’ll give him
time to grab his bag after taking the cover off.
All ready?”
“Let her go, Gallagher,” murmured the Crees,
lifting the big, open-mouthed bags; and at a
word from Jack, Big Martin whisked the cover
off the man-hole. A square of light opened in the
dark floor beneath them, and there came the
murmur of voices from the aperture.
That was all that the Crees had time to take
in, for the next moment Jack had tipped the great
bag forward, and the sawdust gushed out in a
stream. The two other bags followed, and Mar-
tin finished the good work with his contribution,
to the dismay obtaining in the room below.
Jack leaned forward, convulsed with laughter,
and cast a glance down into the room; then his
face lost its smile, and his jaw dropped.
“Hokey!” he said. “Now we’ve done it!”
“Why? What?” asked the others, pressing for-
ward.
“We lifted the wrong trap,” murmured Jack in
a voice of horror. “That’s Monsieur Anastasie
and the extra French set!”


CHAPTER VIII
FANE’S FATAL MISTAKE
Strange as it may seem, the coolest person who
looked on the appalling scene in the classroom
presided over by the French master was Jack
Symonds himself. Recovering from his surprise,
he could gaze down and enjoy the havoc even
as he knew that, unless something intervened to
save them, he and his companions were booked
for a severe spasm of trouble—and trouble of
the direst order.
But the classroom scene was irresistibly funny
—too funny for words. Monsieur Anastasie stood
like a sawdust statue, his comical moustache
powdered with sawdust, too amazed, too dumb-
founded, to utter a word of protest or surprise.
Before him the sawdust was spread in an irre-
gular layer, almost knee-deep, and it was piled
on tables and chairs, and the boys of the extra
French set in generous fashion.
All at once, the French master found his voice
—with a vengeance. “What is ze meaning of
zis?” he cried, dusting at his coat, and sending


the sawdust flying in clouds. “Pah! I am
smother —I am choke! Abominable!”
He raved and danced on the platform, scoop-
ing the sawdust in handfuls from his person, and
then shaking indignant fists at the open man-
hole.
“Peste! I will not have ze tomfool antic! Ah,
but you shall answer for him before quickly,” he
choked. “Sacrebleu! It is an outrage —it is vat
you call indignation! Ze ear of ze headmaster
shall be apprised of zis!”
The extra French set, half-guessing what had
happened, commenced to roar with laughter at
those who had received the contents of the bags
upon their heads, and the furious Anastasie be-
came more wild and incoherent than ever.
“Ah, you laugh?” he cried. “You identify me
comical? But you shall not entertain ze ribald
laughter for longer! Remember ze proverb—he
laughs loudest who gathers no moss!”
There was a perfect yell at this brilliant effort
on the part of Monsieur Anastasie, who was al-
ways tangling his proverbs in the most ludicrous
manner.
But the laughter was cut short when Jack
Symonds began to appear in instalments through
the open man-hole. His feet showed first; then
his legs dangled; in a moment he was hanging by
his hands. Then, he let go, and came to the floor
as lightly as a feather.


“I must explain—” he commenced.
But Monsieur Anastasie literally overwhelmed
him with a torrent of French and English phrases,
and he could not get a word in on any account.
“Ah, you are ze misdemeanour!” said the ex-
citable Frenchman bitingly. “You play at Pere
Santa Claus, hein? Explain yourself without ze
hesitate! You shall disport yourself before ze
headmaster, quoi!”
“I’m really sorry for what’s happened,” said
Jack, seeking to cool the master’s wrath by ap-
pearing calm himself. “It was all an accident ”
“Ah, an accident!”
“Yes, that’s so ”
“Ze sawdust has tipped himself over?”
“I don’t mean that. You see, sir, we were
going to play a joke on those cads —I mean those
fellows next door. We did not mean to harm
you in any way. Only thing was, though, we
mistook the giddy—that is, the man-hole up
there. The two of them are close together, and
in the dark we opened the wrong one.”
He stood awaiting the verdict of Monsieur
Anastasie, who took the frank confession in
silence. Then he dusted a little sawdust off his
sleeve.
“I rejoice myself you have owned up, Symonds.
Ze business was very foolish, and you are too
big to intermeddle yourself with ze foolish
tricks of little boys. I was going to inform ze


headmaster of your prank, entendez-vous ? But
no —you are not a bad boy. You must disperse
ze sawdust.”
And the hot-tempered little French master
actually smiled. It was his way. He flew into a
furious rage in a second or two; but it never
lasted long. And in this case Jack’s open confes-
sion had somehow subtly pleased him. He turned
to his class.
“It is wise, is it not,” he observed, “to be cer-
tain always? Think what our friend would have
saved had he ze forethought to look into ze room.
Remember ze proverb: a look before you leap
saves nine!”
“Ha, ha, ha!” The class chuckled its appre-
ciation of this portmanteaued proverb, while Jack
and others of the Crees who had nothing to do,
hastily collected the sawdust and shamefacedly
put it into the sacks that they had emptied with
such gusto. Monsieur Anastasie, deep in the
mysteries of French grammar, permitted him-
self an occasional broad smile, quite restored to
his native good-humour.
Just as Jack was about to leave the room, how-
ever, the French master walked over to him and
spoke quietly.
“Two hundred lines,” he said, “will repair ze
mistake. From Corneille —Le Cid. And put in
all ze accents.”
He smiled and nodded as if he had just


handed Jack a five-pound note, and Jack got out
into the corridor, feeling that he had made a
fool of himself.
“Jingo, though!” he exclaimed, “I was jolly
lucky not to be carpeted before the Head. What
a dickens of a mess I would have landed myself
into! Hullo, Patchie!”
“How fares it, comrade?” asked Patch, in his
usual grand manner, saluting Jack with an
elaborate salaam. “What is this rumour that
comes to my ears that you have met with a set-
back in the course of that jape intended for the
Cripples? Untrue, of course?”
“No such luck. We made an awful bloomer,
and we’ll have it in for those Cripple blighters
worse than ever now. Instead of letting the
Cripples have the sawdust, we made a slight mis-
calculation, and tipped it all over old ‘Annie’ and
his class.”
“‘Annie,’ I take it, is Monsieur Anastasie? I
suppose he was sore?*'
“Oh, he cut up a bit at first, but he soon cooled
down. In fact, he was rather decent about it.
Handed me two hundred lines, that’s all.”
“Bad luck, comrade. But it might have been
worse, mightn’t it?”
“Oh, easily 1 I might have dropped on Annie’s
head, and killed him, or perhaps the sawdust
might have choked one of those grinning beg-
gars in the extra French set. Or there might


have been a tribe of death-adders hidden in the
sawdust. Oh, yes; I came off pretty well con-
sidering.” He laughed his usual happy, careless
laugh. “Why, I’ve gone and forgotten that trial
swim for this afternoon —down at the baths.
Coming along?”
“Er —no thanks. In fact, comrade, I may con-
fide that I—well, I can’t swim.”
“Oh, get out —you must. On a hot afternoon
like this, too. Come along, I’ll give you a few
pointers about the game. What on earth would
you do if you were left on a sinking ship with no
lifebelts and unable to swim?”
Patch seemed to ponder the situation. “I ex-
pect I should sink,” he announced brightly.
“Come, I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” said Jack.
“I’ll defy an indignant world, and teach you the
noble art of supporting yourself in the aqueous
elephant—l mean element. That is, after the
trial swim.”
“What is this trial swim, comrade? For that
matter, any sort of a swim would be a trial —
for me.”
“Joke?” asked Jack, carelessly. “Fact is, old
fellow, this is a preliminary canter, so to speak,
for a hundred-yards championship of the Coll.
Friend Billy is in for the event and he’s a hot
favourite too. You’ll see. It’s a pound to a pea-
nut that the Cup goes to Salmon’s House this


year. I’m just going to give Billy a bit of a
sprint over the length.”
“I’m sure it will be most exciting, comrade. I
never did like baths, though. The sight of all
that water —ugh! Tell you what, I’ve just re-
membered that I’d made an appointment. Beastly
forgetful of me, but ”
“No, you don’t,” laughed Jack, grabbing the
Socialist’s arm and dragging him towards the
entrance to the baths. “You must learn swimming
some time—why not now. Hop into a costume —
wait till my swim’s over.”
In a few minutes Patch stood shivering upon
the edge in a costume several sizes too large
for him, while Jack took a ten seconds’ start on
Billy in a hundred-yards sprint. Septimus looked
on with an eye of cold disfavour as the two
chums swept the length of the baths in a cloud
of foam and bubbles. Billy had perfected a very
neat trudgeon-crawl, and he beat Jack, who
was no mean hand at the game, by a matter of
three seconds, despite the start that the latter had
had.
Later on when Billy ran off to change, Jack
caught sight of the miserable Septimus Patch
and recalled his intention of giving the inventor
a few lessons.
“Here,” said Jack, “come along to the shallow
end —look slippy.”
Septimus paced gingerly after him along the
wet boards, and all at once he executed a most


astounding manoeuvre. His feet went from under
him, and he landed head-first in the water.
“Good gracious. What’s the beggar up to?”
asked Jack, who had imagined that Patch had
dived into the deeper part of the bath. “I say,”
he went on, as Patch’s head appeared, “you can
swim—after all ?”
“Swim —glug!” said Patch, as a wavelet curved
into his conveniently-opened mouth. “No —
help! I’m drowning—glug!”
He paddled his way frantically to a ladder
near by, and hauled himself out.
“You asked me to look slippy, and I slipped!”
he said. “Believe me, it’s no joke. How far did
the water fall when I swallowed that little lot—
ugh! I had a young Niagara trickling down my
throat! Comrade, does it all taste like that?”
Jack choked with laughter. “Mind your step,”
he warned. “Here, this is the shallow end. Hop
in—it’s only up to your waist.”
He prepared to demonstrate the art of kicking
while holding to a step on the level of the water,
and Septimus appeared to manage that part of
the business well enough. Jack then showed his
study-mate a few simple arm movements, and
invited Septimus to try while being supported in
the water by his middle.
After a few minutes of this sport, Patch
wriggled out of his mentor’s grasp and splut-
tered indignantly.
“Do you want to drown me?” he asked. “I'll


buy a gun and let you shoot me —it’d be quicker.”
“Why, what’s up?”
“Up, do you say? Down more fits it —at least
that’s where my head was, under water, while
you were watching my feet! I don’t want to die
a lingering death, thanks. I’ve had enough for
the first lesson —and I’d like to take the others
by post.”
As he clambered out of the bath, his loose cos-
tume hanging about him in ridiculous folds, a
roar of laughter went up from the fellows bath-
ing there.
When they got back to the study they met
Billy Faraday. He was grinning broadly. “I
hear you’ve been teaching the inventor how to
swim!” he laughed. “I believe he found the
water quite wet?”
“Yes, comrade,” answered Patch genially,
“and so would you if only you were more familiar
with that unknown quantity.”
“Well, you ought—” began Billy; but he broke
off with a sharp, “I say!”
“What’s the matter?”
“The coat —it’s gone! And the Star’s in it,
too!”
Jack and Septimus looked up in surprise, and
were startled to observe that it was even as Billy
had said —the coat was gone. They jumped up
and made a hurried search.


“Jingo, this is serious!” murmured Jack. “It’s
gone, right enough. Wonder whether that beast
Redisham ?”
“It’s got misplaced, perhaps,” said Patch, who
had put down his book and joined in the hunt.
“Mislaid somewhere or other ”
“But I never wear it!” said Billy. “How could
it?”
“Fane —Fane’s the solution, I think,” jerked
out the amateur detective, rubbing his chin hard.
“We didn’t tell him, I remember, that we’d hid-
den the Star, and perhaps he’s —but here he is.”
“Yes, here I am,” said Fane, closing the door.
“You fellows look excited —what’s up?”
“Look here—did you move a coat of Billy’s?
It was hanging up in this corner.”
“Billy’s coat!” exclaimed Fane, turning a trifle
pale. “What’s the matter with Billy’s coat?”
“Matter enough, comrade,” said Patch grimly.
“We didn’t tell you—we forgot, as a matter of
fact —we didn’t tell you that we’d sewn the Black
Star up in one of the seams of that coat, to hide
it. And now the coat’s gone.”
“My only aunt!” gasped Fane, falling into a
chair. “Is that right? Was the Star in that
coat ?”
“Yes. Why?”
“Why?” echoed Fane. “I sold that coat for
five bob to an Indian hawker yesterday afternoon!
And I expect he’s miles off by this time!”


CHAPTER IX
ALIAS BILLY FARADAY
For almost a minute the three chums stared in
hypnotized fashion at the bent head of Fane, as
the bully-killer sat disspiritedly in his chair.
“You mean you—” gurgled Billy at length.
“I’m awfully sorry, old pal, but there it is,”
said Fane, with the stolid calmness of despair.
“I’d give anything to be able to say I’m mis-
taken, but it’s no go. I see my mistake now.
The coat’s just the dead ringer of one I’ve got
myself, and like an ass, I mistook them. Only
just now, when you mentioned Billy’s coat being
missing, I remembered that my own coat hasn’t
been unpacked.”
The four boys were silent for several seconds.
The sharp, sudden blow, the renewed assurance
from Fane that the coat had actually gone, left
the three pals dumbfounded.
“Well,” said Jack gloomily, “it’s gone, right
enough. We’ve lost it.”
“Billy, Billy!” cried Fane, “it was my fault
absolutely. I don’t know what made me so ter-


ribly careless. I'm no end cut up about it —isn’t
there anything I can do?”
“Nothing suggests itself at the moment,” said
Patch, with a recovery of his calm manner. “The
thing would be, of course, to get hold of the
hawker and buy the coat back. But —” He
shook his head, with pursed lips. Then, all at
once, he smacked Jack heavily upon the back—
so heavily that Jack indignantly jumped a foot
in the air. - •
“Great Caesar!” he gasped, “What did you do
that for, you giddy lunatic? You’ve dislocated
my neck!”
“Bother your neck!” cried Septimus. “I’ve got
the plan to get back the spiffing old Star—we’re
in luck! It’s brother Egbert!”
“Brother Egbert?” echoed Jack, staring at the
inventor open-mouthed. “Has he gone off his
rocker?” he inquired anxiously of the other two.
“Poor fellow —brains all addled. Or perhaps
poached. I knew he would do it. My advice
is, Patchie, wear an ice-pack on your fevered
brow.”
“It’s all right, comrade,” Septimus assured
him. “Here’s another occasion to thank your
uncle Patch! Brother Egbert, I may explain, is
my brother, and he’ll be down here to-night.
He’s making a trip down the coast on his motor-
bike, and he intended to call in at the school on
the 14th, which is to-day.”


“Well, what about it?”
“My good baboon,” said Patch pityingly,
“don’t you see? Egbert will be only too pleased
to take Billy, or myself, in pursuit of the jacket
and —the Black Star. I think I should go, be-
cause it was really my fault that the coat went.
Edgar A. Poe didn’t mention anything about
stray accidents that might happen in any good,
well-regulated family, or their bearing on his no-
concealment wheeze. I confess I begin to lose my
respect for Edgar. The next hiding-place for the
Star will be a most abstruse one, when we get
the thing back ”
“If we do,” supplemented Billy. “Look here,
Patch, that was a very defective plan of yours,
I agree, but I think I’ll make the trip with brother
Egbert, all the same.”
There came a rapping at the door, and Jack
invited the rapper to come in. A singular-looking
young man entered, took a comprehensive glance
over its occupants, and then spoke in a drawling,
bored voice.
“Permit me to introduce myself,” he said. “I
am Egbert, fifth Baron Patch. Sounds good,
doesn’t it, that phrase, ‘barren patch’? Rumour
hath it that one Septimus, a juvenile relative of
mine, is to be found in the precincts of this study.
Ah, I see I am right—how are you, brother?”
“Bursting with robust health and goodwill,”
declared Septimus modestly. “See here, though,


you’ve just arrived at the right moment. A rather
interesting business has been going on here, and
—can I tell him everything, Billy?”
Billy Faraday nodded, and Septimus explained
the whole matter of the Star and its disappear-
ance to his attentive brother, who resembled a
collection of walking-sticks as he half-lay, half-
sat in one of the chairs, his big head resting in
his open palm.
“Quite a decent little mystery,” he commented,
when his brother’s account had finished. “I twig
what you want me to do—give chase, and all that
sort of rot, what? Well, if any of you would
care for a rough, bumpy, perilous journey on the
back of a big 7-9, then I shall be happy to oblige.
As I said to the Duke last week, when he asked
me for a fiver, “Dee-lighted, old bean!”
“That’s that, then,” said Septimus. “The only
question is, who’s going? Billy wants to go, and
I’m not anxious to stand in his way, see? But
though we can arrange that Billy shall not be
missed to-night, it might prove dashed awkward
to-morrow, when he does not show up in class.”
“Who’s taking us in the morning?” thought-
fully asked Billy. “Old Salmon, isn’t it? How on
earth ”
“Don’t worry, comrade!” interrupted Patch
suddenly. “I’ve got the most ripping suggestion,
and you’d better be off right now. Your absence
will never be noticed —I’ll fix that much for you,


But try and be back by to-morrow night—l’ll
not guarantee to have the beaks hoodwinked much
after that time. Now, Fane said that the hawker
was going south ”
“That's right,” said Fane eagerly, anxious to
be of assistance to redeem something of his error.
“He was just outside the gate, and lots of the
fellows gave him old clothes, and I heard Big
Martin ask him where he was bound for—he
said Moruya. He only had a covered cart and a
scraggy-looking old mare, and you ought to be
able to catch up ”
“Just what the Marquis said, when I lost my
hat out of his car, and ran back for it.” It was
Egbert Patch who had spoken. “We’ve got a lot
to do, and I think we’ll vamoose. Good-bye for
the present, and sweet dreams!”
With these words, the eccentric-looking young
fellow, suddenly animated, jumped to his feet
and, grabbing Faraday by the arm, left the room.
Inside a few minutes the chattering roar of his
motor-bike was heard, and he had left the Col-
lege, racing southward with Billy Faraday
clinging perilously behind him.
“Doesn’t believe in losing time,” murmured
Jack. “But, I say, aren’t we going to have a bit
of trouble in accounting for Billy’s being away,
to-morrow ?”
“My dear old Angora,” returned Patch, “aren’t
vou aware that Salmon is as near blind and deaf


as makes no difference? What’s to prevent us
from making a dummy of Billy, and putting him
in Billy’s seat? You know he sits right at the
back of the class.”
“Good grief!” said Jack. “Is that the bright
and brainy idea? Patchie, old boy, the sooner
you go to sea the better for you—and all of us.
Who ever heard of a dummy—and in school at
that? Why, Salmon’s sure to smell a rat, and
once he asks Billy a question, the game’s bust.”
“Not so, comrade! Among my other accom-
plishments, I am no mean hand at ventriloquism,
and ”
“Well, you’ve got a pretty tall nerve, Patchie!
I’ll confess that I’d never have thought of such
a dodge.”
“Its boldness,” averred Septimus, “is its
strength. To-morrow I shall prove that. Mean-
while, there is a most irritating chunk of Sallust
to be prepared for the morn. Leave me to it.”
And, opening his books, the extraordinary fel-
low calmly set to work. After a moment or two
of silence, Jack picked up the volume from which
Patch had been taking swimming instruction,
and began to turn its leaves idly. , . ,
On the following morning, Mr, Salmon entered
the classroom with his usual salutation, and the
whole form eyed him apprehensively. Would he
surprise them in their deception? Was an awful
row impending?


For, in the back row of the class, reclining
gracefully on Billy Faraday’s seat, was a dummy
figure. Attired in an old suit of Billy’s, it looked
very lifelike, its arms supporting a book on the
desk before it, and its head apparently none the
less attentive for being stufifed with straw.
As the lesson proceeded, and as the master
still failed to smell a rat, the class’s fears sub-
sided, and they began to enjoy the joke. Sub-
dued chuckles sounded at intervals, the presence
of the dummy schoolboy striking his companions
as distinctly grotesque; but, as Patch had said,
Mr. Salmon was almost deaf and very dim of
sight, and unless anything out of the ordinary
occurred, Billy’s absence would pass unnoticed.
“Bathgate,” said Mr. Salmon suddenly, “com-
mence the translation. Line 25.”
Bathgate, a big, sleepy youth at the back
corner of the class, awoke suddenly from his
dreams of better things, and began translating
the Latin in a loud, clear, albeit, a trifle hesitant,
voice.
“Speak up,” commanded Mr. Salmon.
“Ought to yell in your ear,” observed Bath-
gate, with a humorous glance at his mates.
“What did you say?” asked the master.
“I—thought—you—could—hear,” said the
shameless Bathgate. “Shall I proceed?”
“Proceed —yes! No, one moment. You’ve
done pretty well. Go on, next boy.”


There was a dead, stunned silence. The next
boy was no boy at all, but the effigy of Bill Fara-
day, and the effigy simply sat still and stared at
the master with the most guileless stare in the
world.
“Faraday—you heard me?”
“Yes —sir,” squeaked Patch, diving down under
his desk, and attempting to throw his voice in
the direction of the quiescent Billy. But the at-
tempt met with poor success. The squeak did
not come to the ears of the master at all, and he
repeated his reminder, with a trace if irritation
at the delay.
“Faraday—l believe you’ve gone to sleep.”
The ingenious Patch was now brought up
against a poser, but his resourcefulness met the
obstacle. He got down on the floor and attempted
to cross over to a position behind Billy’s seat,
which would enable him to deputize for the thick-
headed effigy.
Unfortunately he was observed, and Mr. Sal-
mon demanded at once to know what he was
doing.
“Dropped my pen, sir,” he explained loudly,
and then frantically whispered to Jack, “Get be-
hind Bill’s chair and speak up.”
To cover Jack’s move across the aisle between
the desks, Patch stood up, and showed his pen
to Mr. Salmon, as ocular evidence of the truth
of his explanation.


“I’ve got it now, sir,” he observed brightly.
“It had rolled right under my seat.”
“Yes, yes,” said Mr. Salmon testily. “Sit down.”
But Septimus was sparring for time until Jack
was ready to take up Billy’s translation. So he
added, in his most foolish manner, “It’s curious,
sir, where these things get to, isn’t it! Once I
lost a pencil, and found it in the bottom of my
trousers. Philosophers call it ”
“Sit down, sir!”
“ call it the perversity of inanimate
“Will you sit down?”
“ objects, like a collar-stud, or ”
“Patch!”
“Very well, sir,” said Patch, sitting down with
the aggrieved air of one who has been casting
his pearls before swine. He glanced sharply to-
wards Billy’s chair, and sighed with relief.
“Perhaps we can get on with our work now,”
said Mr. Salmon sarcastically. “Faraday, are you
properly awake?” .
“Yes, sir!” yelled the supposed Faraday in
such a loud voice that it came to Mr. Salmon’s
ears in the form of a smart answer. The master
nodded. “Go on, then,” he said.
Jack went on as fast as he was able, and for
five minutes the class held its breath. At the
end of that time the possibility that Billy’s decep-
tion would be discovered seemed to have passed.
The master went on through the class, and the


boys were presently deep in their work; so deep,
in fact, that Bathgate felt impelled to relieve the
tedium by a little horse-play.
Propping his book up before him, he proceeded
to annoy his neighbour in front, one MacAlister,
in sundry well-thought-out ways that ended in
Mac’s turning round and firing a book at Bath-
gate’s head.
Bathgate, who had, of course, been expecting
retaliation, ducked smartly, and the book hit the
wall with a bang. Mr. Salmon looked up, for the
book happened to have been a dictionary, and the
sound of its arrival rather loud.
“Bathgate,” said the master, “don’t tap.”
The class chuckled afresh, and Bathgate in-
serted a pin in the toe of his boot, winking across
at Jack Symonds in unmistakable “you-watch-
me” manner. Then, sitting back innocently, he
let the pin sink into MacAlister’s calf.
“Ow!” gasped MacAlister, jumping up in a
rage and aiming another book at his tormentor’s
grinning face. “Take that!”
Bathgate, however, had no intention of taking
it, and he slid sidewise on his chair to avoid the
missile. His move was too sudden for his equili-
brium. The chair went over, and he went over
with it, pitching head-first into the stomach of
the bogus Billy Faraday. The effigy did not pro-
test, but slid gracefully to the floor, where it lay


in the attitude of a gentleman looking under the
sofa for his collar-stud.
“Jimjams!” gasped Septimus Patch, “That’s
done it !”
Done it, it had. Mr. Salmon demanded to know
why Bathgate and Faraday were crawling
around on the floor, and Bathgate, looking sheep-
ish, said something about falling off his chair.
“My chair overbalanced, sir,” he said. “I
knocked Faraday over.”
The class was on tenterhooks. Would Mr.
Salmon come up and investigate for himself?
Faraday, at any rate, lay there absolutely still.
“Faraday,” said the master, grimly, “evidently
desires to emulate Dore, the artist, who drew his
pictures while lying down on his stomach. Or
is he just asleep?”
“I think he’s hurt,” said the indomitable Patch,
getting up again. He meant to pull the fat out
of the fire if it were humanly possible. He grab-
bed the effigy and savagely hauled it into place,
keeping between it and the master all the time.
He got back to his seat, but barely had he
reached it when the dummy boy doubled up at
the waist like a jack-knife, and banged its head
on the floor. To Patch’s horror, the head, which
was loosely attached, came off and rolled a full
yard down the passage.
Jumping up once more, Patch grabbed the head,
and, amid the laughter of his companions, re-


stored it to its position. The effigy of Faraday
grinned impudently at the master, its head on
one side, as Patch got back to his seat.
“There is too much disorder,” said Mr. Salmon
petulantly. “Far too much of it. Patch, and you
too, Faraday, and Bathgate, take one hundred
lines.”
Just at that moment came the bell announcing
the end of the period, and Mr. Salmon, gather-
ing his gown about him, stalked out indignantly.
“Phew!” breathed Patch. “I don’t want to
have a strain like that again for a few years.
Talk about nerves! You’d want nerves of phos-
phor-bronze, or something, with an obstreperous
dummy like this on your hands.”
He landed a kick into the effigy’s waistcoat,
and it fell on to the floor. The class simply
roared.
“Anyhow,” went on Patch, “you’ve got to do
a hundred lines, you grinning idiot. Thank good-
ness I haven’t got to look after you this after-
noon.”


CHAPTER X
THE CHASE FOR THE STAR
Meanwhile, how had it been faring with Billy
Faraday and Egbert Patch. It will be remem-
bered that they left by bike on the afternoon fol-
lowing the departure of the hawker, so that that
person had a twenty-four hours’ start on them.
Not that that mattered very much. The big
machine could cut down that discrepancy with
ease. The only problem left unsettled was the
question of whether or not they would be able
to find the purchaser of the precious coat.
Through the night they sped for two or three
hours, and at length came storming into Rim-
vale, a small town of some importance in the
coastal district.
Here they put up for the night; and, early next
morning searched for news of the hawker. For-
tunately, they had not far to seek. An old man,
who had purchased some articles from the itiner-
ant vendor, informed them that the person they
sought had left the town on the previous night.
“This is alarmingly easy!” grinned Patch, leap-


ing into the saddle as the big machine moved off.
Billy followed suit, landing on the carrier; and
they were off once more.
Through the long, dusty miles Egbert set his
machine positively roaring, and the distances
were eaten up in fine style. To such good effect
did they travel that inside three hours they came
up with the hawker’s covered cart, and asked him
to pull up.
“What the matter?’’ he asked, leaning down on
them from his perch like a strange bird.
“You must excuse us, Mucilage,” said Egbert
Patch. “That is your name, isn’t it? But the fact
is, old coffee-bean, you bought a coat back at
Deepwater College in error, and we want it
back?”
“What do you mean? I paid for it.”
“Quite so, my dear Tupentine; quite so. You
see, a chap sold you a coat belonging to this
fellow here, in mistake for one of his own, and
we want to buy it back. See!” And as a token
of good faith, he showed a hand filled with silver.
The Indian wrinkled up his brows in a puzzled
fashion, and then began to rummage in his goods
without another word. At length he turned to
the expectant pair and eyed them keenly.
“You mean a brown jacket?” he asked.
“Yes, yes,” said Billy, impatiently. “You’ve
got it there, have you? Bring it out, and I’ll
give you ten bob for it.”


The Indian shook his head gravely, and calmly
repacked his bundles.
“I can’t do anything, sir,” he said at length
“The coat is sold.”
“Sold r
The other nodded, and went on to explain in
his slow, but intelligible English. It appeared
that a man had bought the coat in Rimvale for
six shillings. The Indian made a small song
about the fact that he had been unable to get
six-and-six for it. At all events, he did not know
who the man was. That he was young, and that
he was evidently a native of Rimvale, he was
able to state. Beyond that, he knew nothing.
“Thanks,” said Billy in a low voice, turning
away. It seemed that he was pursued by the
worst of bad luck. How on earth were they to
discover the owner of the coat, now? It might
be that the Indian was not telling the truth.
Billy was ready to imagine that he had observed
a gleam of avarice in the fellow’s eye. Of course
he had not been deceived; he knew that there
must be something unusual about the coat. And
perhaps he had lied. . . .
Billy groaned. “Rimvale’s the only place,” he
said, and, mounting behind Egbert Patch, he
sped off back along the path to the little fishing
town.
Arrived there, they stowed their machine in
the local garage, and set out on a feverish errand


of investigation. But they knew that it was pretty
hopeless.
“How on earth can we be successful?” Billy
repeated to himself again and again, and as the
morning wore away his hopes sank lower and
lower.
All at once he gave a great cry, caught Patch
by the arm, and pointed.
“Look there!” he said hoarsely. “That fel-
low’s wearing the jacket!”
“The Dickens he is!” replied Patch, staring at
a tall, rather bullying youngster who looked as if
he might be a butcher’s boy. In another moment
the inventor’s brother had started forward and
called out to the wearer of the missing coat.
“Wait a moment! Hi!” he said.
The red-faced youngster turned and eyed them
with obvious disfavour. “What do you want?”
he demanded. “Who are you?”
“I’m the man who put the salt in the sea,” said
Patch gravely, “and my friend here’s the man
who’s going to take it out. Twig? Look here,
old man, that’s a nice coat you’re wearing.”
“Oh. go and play!” grunted the other, turning
away sullenly, “What’s the game, anyhow?”
“I’ve taken a fancy to that coat, that’s all. It
used to belong to my mate here, the man who
rode the bull through Wagga. But another chap-
pie mistook it for one of his, and sold it to a


nigger named Mucilage, who in turn sold it to
you—for six bob.”
“I see—and you want it back, hey? Well, it
happens I’ve got to like this coat, and I don’t
want to part with it, see?”
Billy not only did see this particular point, but
saw also that he was up against a pretty shrewd
bargainer, who was ready to turn their own
eagerness for the jacket into ready cash. He was
too anxious, however, to bluff.
“Look here,” he broke in, “I’ll give you ten bob
for the coat, and fix everything up. No fuss—
give me the coat, and this half-note will be
yours.”
The red-faced boy’s little eyes gleamed. “Ten
bob—ten bob for a coat I’ve taken a fancy to,”
he murmured. “Look here, mate, I can’t part
with the coat —not under a quid, It’s a good
coat.”
“It’s certainly a good coat, but —” Patch was
dubious.
“Well, then,” said Billy desperately, “I’ll make
it a quid, just to please you. There you are —a
pound note —and now, the coat.”
“Hold hard, hold hard.” The country boy’s
interest had been roused by this reckless bidding
for the old jacket, which was scarcely worth a
third of the money Billy Faraday now flashed
before his eyes. What was wrong with the coat,
he asked himself; or, rather, what was right with


it? “No, I don’t think I’ll sell,” went on the
yokel shrewdly, “until I’ve had a good look over
it.”
“Until you’ve what?” asked the horrified Billy.
The other noted his emotion and slowly winked
one eye. “Until I’ve looked over it,” he repeated
cunningly. “You never know. What if there’s a
five-pound note sewn up in the lining?”
“A five-pound note?” gasped Billy weakly.
“I’m going to have a look,” said the rustic,
taking off the jacket and fumbling it between his
fingers. “Why,” he yelled, suddenly, “what’s
this here?”
Billy’s heart sank into his boots as the red-
faced country youth, with a grin of the most
horrible triumph, rubbed between his fingers the
slight lump under the coat-cloth that indicated
where the Black Star had been so carefully hid-
den.
“There’s something here, right enough,” he
said, cheerfully, “and we’ll have it out in a jiffey.
When I’ve seen what it is, then you can buy the
coat —perhaps.”
And he began to open a very efficient-looking
clasp-knife. But at that, all Billy had gone
through to recover the coat came up in his mind,
and a wave of fury swept over him that he should
be thus baulked at the last moment.
Uttering an inarticulate cry, he dashed for-
ward, snatched the jacket out of the other’s


hands, and took to his heels, with Egbert merely
a pace or two in his rear. The yokel stood dumb-
founded for an instant, and then roared out at
the top pitch of his voice, “Stop thief! Stop
thief!”
The quiet, respectable little town of Rimvale
witnessed the most astounding of chases along
its sleepy main street. First came Billy and
Patch, running their hardest for the garage and
the big cycle, and after them tore the outraged
country lad, yelling in a voice that would have
roused the envy of any Indian chief of the prairies.
The country boy continued to yell, “Thi—
eeves!” lustily as he rushed after the two boys.
The solitary policeman that the town boasted,
aroused by the uproar, left the veranda of the
country hotel, and stepped into the glare of the
noonday sun.
“Hey! What’s the trouble?” he asked, in the
voice of one bent on smoothing troubled waters.
“Sto-00-op thi-eef!” came the stentorian shout
of that amazing vocalist, the robbed boy. “Stop
them two thieves!”
Billy Faraday took a swift survey of the situa-
tion. It would not do, he decided, to run into the
arms of the policeman, who did not look for-
midable, but who might cause a deal of bother.
“This way!” he yelled, breaking off at right
angles, and darting down a narrow laneway,
between two paling fences. But Billy had made,


for once, an error of judgment. The fences
abutted on a brick wall of some height, and the
lane was, consequently, a blind alley.
“We’re diddled —dished,” gasped Egbert Patch,
“Not a bit,” said Billy, pausing for six pre-
cious seconds, while, with his knife, he ripped the
Star from its place of concealment, and slipped it
into the pocket of his waistcoat. “Not a bit,” he
repeated, throwing the coat towards the pursuers,
who were already at the mouth of the alley.
“Come on!”
With an agile spring he vaulted over the pal-
ing fence and landed in the garden beyond. Patch
followed, and the cries of the pursuers changed
abruptly from triumph to chagrin. Billy found
himself confronting an enormous man in a blue
shirt, who seemed annoyed that the boy had
landed full in the centre of a bed of prize cauli-
flowers.
“’Ere!” this worthy bellowed. “Oo are you?”
“The King of Sweden 1” answered Patch
grandly. “My card!” He made a move as if to
hand the astonished fellow something, and be-
fore that person could realize what was happen-
ing, he had received a hard dig in what boxers
call the “mark.” He gasped, and sat down with
the giant collapse of a pricked balloon.
Laughing, the two fugitives fled on, for the
red-faced youth was leading the pursuit over the


fence, and it was risky to linger. Over two more
fences they hurried, and then found themselves
confronted with an impasse.
This was a stone wall over which it was impos-
sible to scramble. They therefore cut away to-
wards the right again, making back towards the
street. They were in the yard of a baker, as it
happened, and they went full speed for the street
that meant liberty. Rounding the corner, with
pursuit perilously close, Patch had a sudden in-
spiration. He pulled open a wide door, had a
swift glimpse of a bakery and a couple of white-
clad forms, and then slammed it as hard as he
could.
He and Billy remained outside, of course, and
ducked into the friendly shelter of a pile of tim-
ber, just as the robbed boy, doubly red-faced now
with his exertions, and the policeman, and a
couple of others dashed up with the impetus of
a fleet of fire-engines.
“In here —heard them slam the door!” gasped
the rustic triumphantly.
“We’ve got ’em,” said the constable, breathing
hard. He flung open the door, and an angry white
figure darted out fairly into his arms. It was the
baker himself, who had been hurrying to catch
the “impudent rascal” who had slammed the
door; and, as it happened, his exit had coincided
with the constable’s entrance.
For a moment they struggled blindly, the baker


dabbling his floury hands over the other’s tunic
with a fine eye for effect.
“Leggo!” panted the angry constable. “No use
strug —whup!”
“Scoundrel!” roared the baker, who was enor-
mously fat and red, and who was no mean hand
at wrestling. “Whaddeyer mean by this —ur.”
They fell over on the ground, rolling, gasping,
and wheezing, like two great porpoises entangled
with seaweed. Billy and Patch were helpless
with suppressed laughter, as the two big men
ramped and roared on the ground ludicrously.
But in time their excitement cooled sufficiently
to permit of recognition, and they fell back, seated
on the ground, staring at one another amazedly.
“Why, it’s old Jim !” said the baker.
“Course it is, you fathead! What the dickens
do you mean?”
“Mean?” repeated the baker. “I like that! It’s
you that ought to say what you mean! Are you
drunk?”
“Drunk? Me? Why?”
“Why, coming and playing fool tricks on my
door ”
“Who’s doing that? All I was after was two
fellows funning—no, two fellows rulling!” The
constable’s tongue had become a trifle twisted,
and he sought to make amends by shouting at
the top of his voice.
“I mean,” he roared, “you’ve got two hokes


bliding—no, no ! —they cinched a poat, 1 mean !
Dash it, they dot in this gore !”
“You are drunk,” said the baker, judicially.
“Very drunk,” he added, as an afterthought.
“Never dinn before drinker —I mean, dink be-
fore drinner —no!” yelled the constable at the
loudest tone he could raise, becoming more and
more excited and inarticulate as he went on. “No,
I don’t mean that! What I mean is, two geeves
thot away —they—hurry up ! —colted with a
boat!”
“A boat?” the baker asked. “Are you mad,
Jim, or only ”
“Quick!” yelled the constable, threshing the
air with his arms, and dancing first on one foot
and then on the other. “Two fung yellows !”
This was as far as he could get, and he remained
speechless, his eyes protruding from his head, his
tongue tied in a furious knot.
“Oh, my only grandfather!” murmured Billy
weakly, almost helpless from his restrained
laughter.
There is no saying what might not have hap-
pened but for the intervention of the red-faced
boy, who blurted out his story, and demanded
the opening of the door.
“Oh!” said the baker, comprehension dawning
on him at last. “But they didn’t come in here,
mate —they just slammed the door, and then


bolted. That’s why I thought it was Bill, here,
playing jokes on me, and ”
But the red-faced youngster had turned and
gazed about him, and the concealment afforded
by the wood-pile proved inadequate, for he ut-
tered a yell and his sharp little eyes gleamed.
“Here!” he roared, “I see ’em. Come on!”
Billy and Patch had profited by their rest, and
were away with the speed of the wind. The
others gave instant chase, even the baker joining
in. The fugitives realized that it would be a bad
move to rush out into the open street, and they
doubled on their tracks again, and darted into a
grocery store, where they were met at the door
by the grocer, in grimy white apron, who had not
been favourably impressed by the manner of their
entry.
“Ha!” he said. “What do you want?”
“A pound of hoo-jah!” said Patch promptly.
“What?” demanded the grocer in astonishment.
“Some gubbins,” added Patch.
“Some —some ”
“Don’t you sell it? A pound of doo-hickey.”
“Here ” began the grocer.
“What I really want,” said Patch calmly, “is
an egg. Have you one? I’d like one called Perci-
val, please, about fourteen hands high, and not
too frisky. Ah, the very thing!”
He selected a couple of eggs from an open


box on the counter, while the grocer looked on
open-mouthed. He was quite convinced that he
was being visited by a couple of lunatics, and he
was doubly sure when he saw Patch turn to the
doorway and let the red-faced youth have an egg
fairly in the eye.
The pursuit had been somewhat tardy in dis-
covering where the escapees had gone, and it was
now arrested by the bombardment that Patch
opened with the eggs. The baker, panting with
open mouth, received a missile directly upon the
teeth. The egg burst, and he found himself
swallowing a mass of yolk and shattered shell.
The constable had to wipe away a sticky mess
before he could see; and the red-faced boy,
blinded by the first egg, had collided with a pile
of jam-tins, which descended joyfully upon his
head as he lay sprawling.
“Thanks for the eggs,” murmured Patch, press-
ing two florins into the grocer’s palm. “Is there
a back exit? Lead on, Macduffer.”
And he bolted for the rear of the shop, closely
followed by Billy. They had been working their
way towards the garage, and it was only a stone’s
throw to the bicycle.
Hastily throwing his levers into position, Patch
trundled the big Indian a few yards; and, as the
engine began to fire, leapt on board, followed in
a moment by the ever-ready Billy. They stormed
out of the little village of Rimvale, leaving a trail


of blue exhaust-smoke and more than one angry
person.
“Quick work, quick work !” said Patch. “That’s
the life, isn’t it? As I said, when I gave up the
job of carrying the red flag in front of a steam
roller, ‘The excitement's killing me.’ But we got
the merry old Star, and that’s the main thing!’’
“Jingo, but I’m obliged to you,” said Billy
gratefully. “I don’t know what I should have
done without you and the old bike! And that’s a
fact.”
“Don’t apologize,” returned Patch cheerily.
“We’ll be back about five —that is, if the idiot
policeman doesn’t take it into his head to ring
up and send a posse of constabulary on our track.
I wonder how your mates have been doing back
at Deepwater? Trust that brainy young brother
of mine to concoct something ingenious to ac-
count for your absence ! Wonder how he did it?”
That question was soon to be answered, when
they arrived back at the College, and Billy was
able to question the others as to what had trans-
pired during his absence. He was vastly amused
at the account of how he had been impersonated
in the classroom.
He roared with laughter over the events nar-
rated, and appeared a different fellow altogether
now that the Black Star was once again in his
keeping.


“What about hiding the Star this time?” said
Jack.
“No Edgar Allan What’s-this stunts,” said
Billy, grimly. “I’m going to put it under that
loose flooring-board in the study. When the
carpet’s back in place no one could ever find it.”
And that evening the Star was duly interred
in its new hiding-place, the three study-mates
standing round Billy Faraday as he replaced the
board and the carpet, and left everything intact.
“Let’s hope it’s safe this time,” he breathed.
As the three boys returned from lunch next
day, Jack opened the study door and fell back
with an exclamation.
“Redisham!” he said.
“Yes, Redisham,” said the owner of the name,
in an obviously forced attempt to appear at ease.
“What about it?”
The intruder was standing in the middle of the
study, and it was evident that their entry had
surprised him. But there was nothing to show
that he had been up to any shady games. Jack
closed the door. He had remembered that they had
their suspicions of Monty Redisham, already—
and it was not usual, at Deepwater, for visits to
be paid to studies during the occupants’ absence.
“What about it?” repeated Redisham, with a
shade of defiance that showed that he knew he
was suspected.


“Oh, nothing,” said Jack carelessly. “What are
you after?”
Redisham met his gaze squarely, and then
glanced at Billy Faraday and Patch, who also
were staring at him meaningly. He shifted from
one foot to the other.
“I just came in to borrow a dicker,” he ex-
plained.
“And that, I suppose,” said Jack, “is why you
shut the door?”
Redisham’s lip curled. “I don't know what you
are getting at, Symonds,” he said. “It’s true that
the door blew to, in a gust of wind just now,
but ”
The three pals looked at him queerly, and he
resolved on a bold stroke. “Why, hang it,” he
said, taking the bull by the horns, “you look as
if you thought —thought I was trying to pinch
some of your mouldy traps!”
It was well done of Redisham. He met the
charge before it was thrown at him. He experi-
enced a distinct ascendancy.
“Oh, not at all,” said Jack politely. “It looked
queer for a moment that was all —the door shut,
and all that. Of course,” he went on, with elabor-
ate irony, “if it had been somebody else,
then !”
Redisham flushed under the sarcasm, and sat
down with an affectation of carelessness, show-


ing his violent green socks as he pulled up his
immaculate trouser-legs.
“I’m glad to hear it,” he observed, his little
eyes flashing. “How did the race go this after-
noon?”
For a moment Jack did not reply, but eyed
their visitor narrowly. He would have given a
good deal to be in a position to search the pockets
of the greasy, smiling senior. But there was
nothing to go on—nothing at all. Politeness had
to be preserved. He too, sat down. Billy and
Septimus Patch did not move from the door.
“And how’s your friend, Mr. Daw, progress-
ing?” asked Jack casually.
Either Redisham was a good actor, or he was
genuinely surprised by the question. “My aunt!”
he exclaimed. “Who told you that he was a friend
of mine?”
“I thought it was general knowledge,” re-
plied Jack. “We all heard that you considered
him a little tin god, or something like that. I
confess I could never have much respect for him
—unless perhaps I was in his debt, or some-
thing ”
He paused, and shot a glance at Redisham to
watch the effect of this loaded remark. But the
senior took it very well indeed.
“General knowledge is wrong, then,” he said
blandly. “Daw may be all right—to those who


know him, but I’m not one, or even likely to be.
You don’t mind if I go now?”
“Wouldn’t you like to try a cup of brew?”
“Not this time, thanks. I’ll bring this dicker
back directly I’ve used it. Ta-ta.” And he closed
the door behind him. Billy spoke impulsively.
“Well, that’s fishy if you like! Wonder whe-
ther the brute found anything? Perhaps it’s bet-
ter to have a look.”
He rolled back the carpet, and lifted the loose
board. For a moment he lay face down with his
arm fumbling in the cavity. Then he rolled over
and sat up, his face gone suddenly white.
“Jiminy!” he gasped. “The thing’s not there!”


CHAPTER XI
THE STAR MISSING
Jack Symonds uttered a cry of amazement, and
even Septimus was stirred out of his usual calm.
“Not there!” repeated Jack. “Old fellow, are
you certain? Surely it’s not gone already!”
Billy rose to his feet with a gesture of deep
despair. “Look for yourself, then,” he said.
It’s no go, Jack —I made certain before I spoke.
She’s gone this time —and I expect gone for
good.”
“Don’t say that, comrade!” urged Septimus,
striking him on the shoulder. “We got it back
once, so why not again? Look here, there’s ”
“Wait!” Jack interrupted him. “Ten to one
it’s that oily brute Redisham! He had the thing
in his pocket all the time we were speaking
to him. Oh, he’s cool and all that, but I’m
going along to ask him right out what he’s done
with it! There!”
Septimus Patch pulled him back from the
door. “No, no, Jack!” he pleaded. “We’ve got
no evidence that he’s taken it, and if you went


along that way he’d just laugh in your face,
that’s what he’d do. It looks to me as if he
did pinch the Star, but—well, we can’t do any-
thing to him; he’s got the whip hand over us.
We’ll find another way, never fear.”
“But what way is there?” objected Jack.
Patch did not reply, but stared out of the
window in deep thought. His eyes were nar-
rowed to mere slits behind his great tortoise-
shell glasses. He rubbed his hands together
nervously.
“Give me time—give me time,” he asked.
“There must be a better way —let me think.”
“And we’re giving the beggar more time to
lide it,” said Billy Faraday.
“If he took it,” said Septimus
“What do you mean?”
“Why, just this. He must have been tremen-
dously slick to have found the hiding-place, se-
cured the Star, and replaced everything as be-
fore ! How long could he have been in the
room? Not long. Yet he had the nerve to do
all that, knowing that we might be back any
minute. Besides, why hadn’t he gone when we
arrived?”
“Why?”
“Seems to me he was just spying round. You
remember he was standing in front of our lock-
ers. Supposing that he had found the Star where
we hid it. Would he be likely to hang round


until we came? You can bet your life he’d be
off in a moment! Again, why replace the carpet
and the board? It only took longer, and delay
was most dangerous for Redisham. Put your-
self in his place. If you’d found the Star, wouldn’t
you have bolted right away? There’d be no
sense in fixing up the carpet —your big idea would
be to make yourself scarce, see?”
“So you think the Star went before Redisham
came here?”
“I think so, comrade. Perhaps it went last
night, and, if so, we know who took it!”
“Doctor Daw,” murmured Jack,
“Of course, Monty Redisham is up to some
dirty game or other. Quite likely he’s in Daw’s
debt, and Daw is using him as a tool. But if
we go to Redisham, and let him know we’ve
suspected him to that extent, and that we’ve
been robbed, then he’ll tell Daw everything.”
“But what are we going to do about it?”
“Lie low. Redisham can wait —I’ve got a
scheme for fixing him later, getting him into a
trap. But Daw’s got to be watched —and watch-
ed closely.”
“Well?”
The schoolboy detective looked thoughtful.
Then he spoke with assurance. “Look here,
comrades Hullo, here’s Fane!”
“What’s the matter?” asked Fane irrtmediately.
Patch explained, and then went on: “I was


just going to suggest a scheme. Jack heard
Daw say that he wanted to stay on here at Deep-
water. Therefore, he’s not likely to bolt with
the Star, if he’s got it. We’ll watch him, see
where he goes, and while he’s out one of us
can ransack his room. Probably, though, he has
the Star on his person, and he’ll be anxious to
get it across to Lazare or Humbolt. As soon as
he does that, we can have either of them arrested
quietly, before they have time to get far!”
“Otherwise?” queried Jack.
“Otherwise,” said Patch quietly, “we’ll have
to go to the Head, tell all we know, and trust
to luck that we’ll be able to outwit the brutes!
But you know how clumsy that notion is—the
Head would almost want written confessions
and affidavits before he’d venture to arrest a
master! And Daw would swear black, blue and
all colours that he’d never seen the Star, and
didn’t want to. You see how hard it would be
for us to do anything?”
Accordingly a close watch was kept by one
of the four pals on Doctor Daw; but they had
to admit that the man was a wonderfully good
actor, for he showed no signs of confusion or
excitement, and remained indoors for the greater
part of the time. For two nights he did not go
out.
One of these nights, however uneventful for
Doctor Daw, was certainly crammed with inci-


dent for Redisham. Patch had promised that he
would catch the greasy senior in a trap, and he
held good his word. The society of the Crees
proved to be the instrument of his downfall.
During preparation one evening, Redisham
was surprised by a knock on his study door.
Hastily extinguishing his cigarette, which, in
flagrant defiance of all rules, he was smoking,
he called out, “Come in!”
A very small and innocent junior entered.
“Please, Redisham,” he said, “Mr. Daw said
he wants to see you outside the Chemistry class-
room door at once.”
“What’s that? Doctor —I mean Mr. Daw
wants to see me now. Isn’t he taking prep, in
Big School?”
“Well, he is, but he stepped outside for a
few minutes, and sent me up to find you. I think
he only wants you for a moment.”
“Confound him!” muttered Redisham, putting
on his cap. “All right, youngster —cut away.”
The senior lumbered down the stairs, a big,
awkward figure that moved clumsily. It was
nearly dark outside, but he distinguished the
form of Mr. Daw outside the chemistry room.
As he approached, the master slipped into the
porch, and beckoned Redisham to follow.
“Come in here,” he whispered. Inside, it was
darker than ever. “Well,” the master pursued,
“and did you find it?”


Redisham shook his head. “No luck,” he
grumbled.
“Did you look?” said Daw cuttingly.
“Yes, I did! Honestly, I didn’t have much
time, but I looked hard enough. The young
blighters came back and found me in the room
at that!”
“All right. But see me behind the gymnasium
after lights-out, to-night. I’ve found something
—I want you.”
Redisham uttered a grumbling protest. “I
say, it’s confoundedly risky to be strolling round
after lights-out. You’ve always got me doing
it now, and I’ll be getting into trouble.”
The master uttered a short laugh. “You’ll
be there, anyhow! And now I’ve got to get
back to preparation.”
They parted; but Redisham would have been
considerably startled to have watched the master,
who did not go back to Big School, but who
joined Symonds and Patch at the side of the
chemistry-room, and shook with laughter. Also,
as all the juniors of Salmon’s house could have
informed Redisham, Mr. Daw had undoubtedly
been in Big School all the evening, in charge of
preparation. Two facts that might have caused
him some perturbation, had he been aware of
them.
As it was, he walked into the trap laid for him
as guilelessly as a snared chicken. He strolled


round after lights-out to the side of the gym-
nasium, as directed by the bogus Doctor Daw,
and waited, kicking his heels for a good five
minutes.
“The man’s a thundering nuisance!” groaned
the unfortunate senior, looking round him. “Gee!
What’s that?”
His ejaculation had been drawn forth by the
sight of a couple of men who, dimly visible in the
half-light, had appeared round the end of the
gymnasium.
Redisham wheeled round with a dismayed gasp,
and prepared for flight. But he remained where
he was, rooted to the ground with horror. About
five similar dark forms had appeared quite silently
behind him, and now confronted him evilly. With
a shock of dismay he perceived that they wore
black masks, and had their collars turned up
about their ears.
“What —what d-do you w-want?” he said in a
remarkably husky voice that somehow would not
obey him. Redisham was a bit of a diplomat at
times, but he had no physical courage. All his
strength seemed to have left his legs, and he
shook like a leaf in a gale.
“Shurrup!” came the low retort in ruffianly
tones, from the foremost of the ugly-looking band.
“Stow the lingo, or we’ll throttle you! You one
of the school kids, hey?”
“Y-yes”


The miserable Redisham heard footsteps be-
hind him, and knew that the other two were
close. He wished with all his heart that Daw
would arrive. He would have been a good deal
less hopeful had he known that Daw was, at that
moment, asleep in bed. Suddenly he was bowled
over by his cowardly assailants, and gagged
In approved bandit style he was trussed hand
and foot, and a bandage was finally tied over his
eyes, completely excluding everything from his
sight. He groaned. What on earth had hap-
pened? He was being carried by two of the men
over rough country, and presently he lost count
of their steps. They went miles and miles, as
it seemed; his heart descended into his boots.
He could already see himself tied up in a sack
and thrown into a lonely part of the river.
Suddenly the journey ended. As a matter of
fact, he had been carried five times round the
playing-fields, with suitable changes of ground,
and the Crees had taken it in turns to lug him
about, for he was of no mean weight. They now
entered Salmon’s and on tiptoe brought their
prisoner into the boot-room.
Flat on the floor Redisham was laid, and the
bandage was removed from his eyes. An oil
lamp guttered above his head, throwing a faint,
uncertain light that wavered to and fro, making
everything indistinct. Before him sat the most
fearsome figure of the lot—a short, thick man in


a sweater and wearing a beard, who held a revol-
ver in his hand —a wicked-looking thing that sent
a frightened shiver down the senior’s back. In
point of fact, this was Billy’s weapon, which he
had brought out of its concealment for the pur-
pose; undeniably it gave a touch of colour to the
scene.
It was, as a matter of cold fact, unloaded; but
Redisham in the depths of his funk could not
know that. He lay and stared up at it goggle-
eyed.
‘‘Now,” said the leader of the gang of roughs,
“you’re miles away from anyone here, so it’s no
use yelling. Get me? Take his mufflers off,
Snyder.”
The man addressed as Snyder elevated himself
out of the gloom and came slowly forward. He
undid the bandages that held Redisham in dur-
ance, and the fear-stricken senior sat up, chafing
his legs.
“See here, younker!” It was the awesome chief
speaking again. “Are your people worth much?”
“I —what do you mean?” spluttered Redisham.
“I means what I says!” said the fellow, in a
low voice of concentrated fury. “Answer up, an’
look slippy, or perhaps my finger’ll slip on this
’ere trigger, and ”
“Please d-don’t shoot!” quavered Redisham.
“Do you mean have my people got much money?”
“Yes—have they?”


THE STAR MISSING
“Not very much —really.”
“Crab apples!” cried the ferocious leader, an-
grily. “How much would they hand out to get
you back, you miserable worm?”
“To g-get me back?”
“To buy you back! Shiver my timbers, but
you’ve got more talk than a Madras monkey.
How much ransom, hey? Five hundred?”
“I don’t think so. Why, are you g-going ”
“Yes, my hearty, we’re going to hold you to
ransom!” came the disconcerting answer. “Is
the figure five hundred?”
“But that’s to-too much,” shivered Redisham,
squirming on the floor beneath the menace of the
revolver, which the chief held in almost playful
fashion four inches from his left eye.
“Too much! I should say it was too much!”
rejoined the other, with promptness. “Five hun-
dred for a bit of a puppy like you! Why, I'd not
give five hundred pence ! I’d throw the main deck
overboard before I’d think of it! Wouldn’t I?”
he asked.
“I’m sure you would,” said Redisham hurriedly.
“I expect your parents’ll be downright glad to
get rid of you, hey?”
“I—l suppose so.”
“Well, belay my scuppers, if they don’t part
up with the boodle you’ll be shipped to South
America, that’s all!”
“S —south America?”


“South America I said! They buy men for
ten pounds apiece, to work ’em in the copper-
mines. Think of it, hey! Workin’ there year in,
year out, and never see this place any more!
Lovely prospect, ain’t it? Like the idea?’’
“N—no,’’ said Redisham, to whom the idea
did not appeal in the remotest way.
“Gr-r-rr! Of course you don’t! But if your
old man don’t pay up, well—we ll have to get our
tenner from you. Won’t we, Snyder?’’
“Sure,” said Snyder. “But we’d only get eight
for this goat —he’s all flabby, no muscle, no chest,
no nothink! Jest skin an’ bone, that’s all he is!
Feel him!”
He did so, with his boot.
“That’s so,” agreed the chief. “He’s just the
spit of that bloke we shipped last summer—the
bloke that pegged out on the voyage. Remem-
ber?”
“You bet,” answered Snyder tersely. “They
had to sling him overboard, and the sharks got
the captain’s tenner-worth! Just as well we got
the money first, hey, mates?”
The mates all responded with a low, sinister
laugh that made Redisham’s blood run cold.
“See here,” he pleaded. “Let me g-go!”
“Gr-r-rr!” snarled the chief. “Let you go!
Likely, ain’t it? Now, you stay here while we go
upstairs and write a little note to your old man.


You can add something that’ll make them hurry
up with the tin !”
“Or it’s the South American mines for you!”
grated Snyder, approaching his face closely to
Redisham’s.
“And no funny business,’’ added the chief warn-
ingly, taking the lamp and looking back as he
closed the door. “You stay here like a good kid,
an’ remember it’s no use singing out. Mind you’re
here when we come back or ’’
He touched the butt of his revolver signific-
antly, and closed the door. Dense darkness shut
down on the miserable Redisham.
When he had waited twenty minutes in the
same position, he was under the impression that
he had waited several hours. He had never ex-
perienced anything like the dead, changeless
silence that now reigned. For what seemed an
age there was no sound—not even the smallest
sound. And then, feeling that he would scream
out if he did not do something, he commenced to
explore his surroundings. He collided with an
immense table, on which were piled boots—in
incredible quantities. He could make nothing of
this mystery. At every stage it became more and
more weird. Boots! What could that mean? He
was still wondering when he barged into some-
thing solid, and it went over with an ear-splitting
crash. For some seconds there was silence. Then
came footsteps; the door opened.


“I wasn’t trying to get out!” he protested
feebly; and then his jaw fell. The figure before
him was Mr. Glenister, of Salmon’s, and the
young master was carrying a candle!


CHAPTER XII
BILLY WALKS IN HIS SLEEP
Redisham did not pause a moment. He flung
himself forward, grasped the amazed master
round the waist, and held on with all his
strength.
“Oh, save me!” he gasped. “Hurry up, sir!
Take me away—before they come back!”
“What—what?” muttered the master, fully
convinced that Redisham had gone off his head.
“What do you mean?”
“The bandits, the bandits!” babbled Redisham.
“They said they’d come back ”
“Come back?” queried the dazed master. “The
bandits? Let me go! I don’t understand ”
“Oh, hurry up, hurry up,” murmured Monty,
in an agony of apprehension. “They’ve got
pistols, and everything, and they’ll get ten
pounds for you if they catch you. It’s awful!
Come back to the school, sir—hurry!”
“Back to the school? Redisham, wake up!
You must be dreaming—we’re at the school


now, and I want to know what you’re doing
in the boot-room at this time of night.”
“You—what?” asked Monty Redisham, put-
ting his hand to his head and staring round
wildly. “Are we at the College?”
“Of course we are! Where else did you think
you were?”
“But I thought—l thought,” gasped Redisham,
still failing to understand. “Then they didn’t
kidnap me?”
“No, no; of course they didn’t.”
“And they won’t write for a ransom?”
“No—you’ve been having a nightmare, boy.
Overeating, and reading novels! Come, get back
to bed at once.”
Hardly knowing whether he was standing on
his head or his heels, Redisham was conducted
back to his dormitory, where he undressed and
got into bed. There, for the first time, it began
to dawn upon him that he had been the victim
of a practical joke. Hot waves of anger swept
over him at the recollection. He had made a
complete fool of himself.
“Dash it all,” he muttered savagely, “what an
ass I was! Ten to one it was those confounded
Crees —got me outside the gym, carted me about,
and took me into the boot-room. Well, this
beats the band!”
He nearly choked with fury at the thought
of his ignominious treatment.


“Wonder how they knew?” he went on.
“Must have heard Daw —or perhaps it wasn’t
Daw at all! I see it all now! Thought at the
time Daw was speaking rather strangely. . . .
Jove!” he muttered, as another aspect of the
case struck him, “some beggars must know . . .
about Daw and me! Symonds and Faraday and,
and—oh, what a night!”
He pulled the sheets over his head with a
groan, and tried to sleep.
As for Jack, he was in immense feather over
the business. Not only had they satisfied them-
selves that Redisham knew nothing about the
missing Star, but the four pals had also had
the time of their lives. Those of the Crees who
had had a hand in the tormenting of Redisham
were all agreed that the jape was the boldest on
record, and the tale, as passed on in an elabor-
ated form, brought a chain of chuckles from
everybody in Salmon’s. And even at that
Redisham was lucky; they knew nothing of his
discovery by Mr. Glenister, All things con-
sidered, it was wiser to keep silence.
“I say, Jack,” said Fane the next afternoon,
“do you see by the paper that Harry Nelson is
coming down to Windsor?”
“Nelson, the light-weight champion?”
“Yes. He’s going to box an exhibition with
some fellow or other at the opening of the new


Sports Club up there. Look here —it’s all in
this,” he added, throwing the paper across.
Jack read in silence for a few minutes. Nel-
son, the Australian champion, was going to pay
a visit to Windsor, a large mining centre some
ten miles north of Deepwater Bay. The exhibi-
tion was timed to come off that night.
“Nelson’s real first-class, I’ve heard,” said
Jack.
“Yes, that’s what they say about him,” agreed
Fane. “I say, how would it be to slip out to-
night and see him?”
“If we ”
“The roads are pretty decent, and we could
get on our grids all right—it shouldn’t take
more than an hour to reach there, at the out-
side.”
Jack was silent. The proposition appealed to
him greatly. “I’ve a good mind to come,” he
said at last. “Of course, there’s the risk ”
“I know; but there’s not much risk, after all
—and it’s worth it.”
“Yes; it’s worth while seeing Nelson.
All right, then, count me in. How about Billy
or Patchie?”
Fane shook his head. “I doubt whether they’d
want to come. In any case four fellows missing
from the dormitory would be a bit over the
odds —it wouldn’t take much to get us pinched.”
“You’re right. Well, don’t forget.”


And they might have been seen speeding over
the dark road to Windsor, later on, on their
bicycles. They arrived in the town just before
the performance was due to start, and got seats
close up, near the stage, which had been con-
verted into a ring.
All around them there was the noise of the
crowded audience. Jack and Fane sat down
guiltily, wearing plain tweed caps in the place
of their college caps, but full of excitement.
There was not long to wait.
“GenTmen!” shouted the announcer hoarsely;
“Harry Nelson, light-weight champeen of Ors-
tralyer!”
Nelson smiled and bowed. He had a square,
alert-looking face and bright eyes.
The champion had brought his own sparring-
partner, and shortly his robe was slung off, and
he got to work. Jack and Fane whistled with
admiration at the man’s magnificent physique.
It seemed incredible that such strength could
be packed away in so small a parcel, for he was
no more than five inches over the five-foot mark.
The spar was a brilliant one, as Nelson had
opportunities for display that a serious contest
would not have afforded him. Jack and Fane
sat entranced at the show, watching the fast
little fellow dancing about the ring as lightly
as a feather. They were sorry when the bout
came to an end. Nelson remained in his corner,


and presently the announcer came forward with
a surprise to spring on the house.
“I have much pleasure in stating,” he said,
“that Nelson will box four rounds with any man
under eleven stone in the audience. If anyone
can last the full four rounds, the management
will present him with five pounds!”
“Hold me back!” said Jack, pretending to
struggle towards the aisle, but taking care not
to be successful.
“Hullo!” said Fane, suddenly. “Somebody
giving it a flutter!”
Jack looked across the crowded house, and
as the challenger gained the stage he let out
a gasp of astonishment. For the man was none
other than Humbolt, the intimate of Doctor Daw,
and the colleague of the mysterious Lazare!
Jack remembered, now, that when he had first
seen the fellow he had marked him down as an
ex-pugilist. What sort of a showing would he
make? Humbolt bent and whispered mysteri-
ously in the announcer’s ear.
“GenTmen!” cried the announcer, placing his
hand upon the head of the grinning Tiger,
“Doctor Daw—Doctor Daw!”
“Go on, Doc!” yelled some irrepressible from
the back of the hall.
Jack was choking with laughter. The dour
Humbolt must have a sense of humour after
all. he thought, thus to assume the name of his


colleague as a nom-de-guerre. The mental pic-
ture of the oily, shifty Daw in a boxing-ring
caused Jack inward convulsions, which he had
only just overcome when the gong went for the
first round.
“Doctor Daw,” in trousers and singlet, met
a very different Nelson from the pretty sparrer
of a few minutes ago. The light-weight cham-
pion went for his man in deadly earnest, and the
sound of blows filled the hall. But Humbolt
was no fool —far from it. He saw that Nelson
was taking him cheaply, and waited his chance.
He was badly knocked about for two rounds,
or so it seemed from the audience. In reality
he was taking any amount of punches on gloves
or forearms.
In the third round a startling diversion oc-
curred. Nelson was hammering his man in
fine style, when suddenly “Doctor Daw” stepped
forward with his right foot and slid his left
back, thus reversing his feet. Then his left glove
shot into the champion’s unguarded body, and
his right shoulder seemed to jerk back with the
venom and force of the blow.
Down went Nelson amid a startled roar—and
stayed down. Humbolt grinned widely, and
strolled back to his corner. The champion was
palpably knocked out, and with one of the neat-
est “plexus” hits that any man present had seen.
As soon as the light-weight champion had re-


covered his wind, he made a hurried exit. He
was not staying to tackle any more dark horses
of this stamp. And Humbolt was presented with
the five-pound note in full view of the audience.
“By jove, that was neat!” said Fane. “Nelson
took the fellow far too cheaply—and, of course,
‘Doctor Daw’ was heavier. All the same ”
“You’re right, laddie,” said a venerable-look-
ing old man sitting on Jack’s left. “Nelson took
that fellow too cheaply and I’ll bet he didn’t
know who he was, or ”
“Why? Who was it?”
“Nobody here knows, seemingly,” returned
the white-bearded man, “but that was Jim Camp,
who used to be light-weight champion about
twenty years ago. That hit was his famous
‘shift’ —he knocked out scores of opponents with
it, and then left the game suddenly—l don’t
know why. At any rate, it was believed that
he’d gone to America. I’ve been puzzling ever
since he started who he was —and I’m sure now,
after seeing that old ‘shift’ again.”
“Jove, that’s interesting,” said Jack. “Do you
know whether ‘Jim Camp’ was his real name?”
“No, it wasn’t his right name. I’ve forgotten
what his right name was—something foreign,
or foreign-sounding ”
“Not Humbolt?” suggested Jack gently.
“Humbolt! Bless my soul, I believe you’re
right! A funny fellow he was, too —not alto-


gether straight out of the ring, they used to
say. Of course, I don’t know . . . And he
was always terribly afraid of snakes. One time
he had a contest with a fellow who knew all
about this snake business, and the cunning
dodger actually came in with a belt made out
of snake-skin —one of these big cobras, you
know, with large markings that you could see
a mile off.
“The buckle of the belt was a snake’s-head
design with the tail in its mouth, and it fairly
gave Jim Camp the shivers. He fought about
three rounds, and then his towel came in. He
couldn’t get near the thing, you see. Funny,
isn’t it, how we’re all scared of some silly thing
like that? Jim, they said, always made it an
article in his agreements after that that the belt
should be of plain design, with no snaky fancy-
work on it, and so the trick wasn’t tried again.”
The veteran smiled at his memories, and the
boys, finding it was rather late, decided to go.
They did not care to stop for the rest of the
programme, which was a twenty-round contest;
and, getting their bicycles back from the shop,
made off towards Deepwater.
They arrived safely, and without detection.
“What a term this has been,” murmured Jack,
“all flittings out and in, night and day. Rummy,
isn’t it?”
They entered the school by an accessible win-


dow, and made their way along the silent corri-
dors. As they passed through, Fane gripped
Jack’s arm tightly.
“Jack I” he said. “What’s that?”
In a moment his question had answered it-
self. “That” was the shadowy figure of a boy
in his pyjamas; and as he passed a moonlit win-
dow they saw that it was Billy Faraday. They
saw also, that he was sleep-walking, and that
he carried the Black Star in his hand . . . then
out of the shadows a dark figure leapt upon the
sleeping boy and flung him to the ground.


CHAPTER XIII
A MYSTERY UNRAVELLED
Such was the rapid succession of events that
Fane and Jack Symonds remained for a few
seconds rooted to the spot, by sheer stupefaction
and surprise. That Billy should thus be walking
in his sleep, and bearing the lost Star in his hands,
was strange enough, but that he should be at-
tacked before their very eyes was quite astound-
ing. They might well have been pardoned for a
moment of inaction. Then the tension snapped.
“Come on!” said Jack quietly. “It’s that beast
Daw!”
In their stockinged feet the two boys darted
along the corridor. Billy Faraday had come
back to the waking world with a startled cry,
and seemed quite incapable of movement, while
Doctor Daw, in his black suit, bent over him
like a carrion crow, and struggled to wrest the
Star from the boy’s grasp.
He succeeded at last, and with a low cry of
triumph, turned to escape. At that moment he
was tackled madly by a bunched-up body that he
might, given the requisite time, have recognized


as Fane’s. His legs were whisked from beneath
him, and he sat down with an agonizing thump,
while Jack Symonds collapsed upon him with
all his heavy weight. The Black Star escaped
from his fingers, and slithered along the tiled
floor, where the now awakened Billy secured it
eagerly.
“Give it up, give it up,” ground out Jack,
apparently endeavouring to fracture the tiles
with Daw’s head. “Come on —you’re caught this
time!”
“Gr-rr-r!’’ gurgled Daw. “Clug—gump !”
“All right,” panted Billy in Jack’s ear. “I’ve
got it!”
Slowly the two boys allowed the infuriated
master to regain his feet. He did so, and stood
there, panting and scowling at them.
“You brats —you brats!” he gritted, between
his teeth. “You infernal brats !”
“I fancy,” said Jack quietly, “that we’ve put a
finger in your pie—what?”
Mr. Daw took a step forward, and his eyes
blazed with intense anger. It looked very much
as if he would strike the cool youngster before
him, but his hand fell to his side again.
“Yes,” went on Jack, “we’ve just about spoked
your wheel!”
Daw seemed to make an immense effort for
self-control. He swallowed several times. Then,
“I don’t know what you mean, you insolent


puppy!” he burst out. “And I’d like to know
just what you mean by attacking your master
in this disgraceful manner —and also what you
are doing out of your dormitory at this time of
night!”
“Well, I like that!” exclaimed Jack. “After
you jumped on poor Billy here, and ”
“That was my mistake,” said Daw, who had
recovered a great measure of his composure. “I
took him for a burglar, as was quite natural. No
boy should be out of his dormitory at this hour.
I was bent on capturing what I imagined to be
an intruder. But your offence demands explana-
tion—and I must have it, at once.”
“What about the Black Star?” asked Jack
boldly.
Daw’s self-control was excellent. “Black
Star?” he repeated. “You are trying to be im-
pudent, I suppose! Well, you’ll suffer for it,
upon my word. Go back to your dormitory at
once—l’ll send for you in the morning.”
He turned and stalked away, a tall, black figure
passing the floods of moonlight that entered the
row of windows. The three chums watched him
out of sight with mingled feelings.
“Well,” said Jack grimly, “that was quick work,
with a vengeance! I don’t know what really hap-
pened now, if you ask me. Billy, old chap, what
on earth were you doing with the Star? Where
did you find it?”


“That’s what beats me,” said Billy, scratch-
ing his tousled hair. “I was asleep, wasn’t I?”
“You were, until that brute Daw bolted at
you. Didn’t know you were a sleep-walker,
all the same.”
“Nor did I, old fellow. I thought I was safe
in my little bunk, and I woke up to find my-
self on the floor and Daw falling all over me.
I tell you, it shook me up a bit! I didn’t know
whether I was asleep or awake.”
“That’s all right,” broke in Fane, “but, you
mysterious blighter, where did the Star come
from? Seems to me this beats Conan Doyle
and his spooks into a cocked hat. I suppose
a bally spirit guided you to the spot, or some-
thing—ten to one it was Daw’s room, and the
blinking old thief bolted after you and tried
to get the Star back. Does that fit?”
“My only aunt!” exclaimed Jack. “My
head’s fairly spinning with the business. Old
Billy must have supernatural powers—any of
your ancestors witches, or anything like that,
old man? Come on, don’t let us worry about
the rotten affair any more to-night. I’ve bit-
ten off more mystery than I can chew! Off to
bed, and be jolly thankful that we’ve got the
Star back again. It is the real Star, by the
way, and not a fake?”
“Oh, it’s the real Star all right,” returned
Billy. “It’s not going out of my pocket until


we can find an absolutely safe hiding-place.
Twice lost and twice found! Bit of a record,
don’t you think?”
“Bit of whacking great luck,” said Jack.
Billy grinned happily, overjoyed at the recov-
ery of the Star, and the three of them trooped
off to their^dormitory.
The next morning Septimus Patch listened to
a full account of the events of that memorable
night, and regretted that he had been absent,
“snoring,” as he expressed it, “in a manner more
worthy of a pig than an investigator.”
“What do you make of Billy’s find?” Jack
asked him, and the inventor wrinkled his brows
in perplexity.
“Well, for one thing,” he said, “I don’t believe
that Daw had the Star. It seems incredible that
Billy could have walked in his sleep and just col-
lared the thing calmly! Look at it—the idea’s
piffle, plain piffle. No, the solution is something
different, but I’m blessed if I can find—wait a
moment!”
He held his head in both hands, and walked
rapidly up and down the carpet of the study.
Then he turned and looked out on the quad-
rangle for a few minutes. When he again faced
his pals, they observed that his face was alight
with what might prove the solution of the mys-
tery.
“I believe I’ve got it, comrades,” he said. “I


believe I know what happened. Billy took the
Star out of the hollow under the loose board,
and hid it elsewhere. Last night he returned in
his sleep and got it back again.”
“My poor fellow!” exclaimed Jack. “It is so
very painful.”
“What’s painful?”
“That rush of brains to the head! Doesn’t
your cranium feel tight—almost bursting?”
“Seriously, comrade.” Patch’s idea rode
superior to Jack’s frivolity. “Just cast your mind
back over what happened. Billy had concealed
the Star, but, of course, he didn’t know that it
was safe, even under the boards. The business
preyed on his mind. It worked on him to such an
extent that in his sleep one night he came and
took the Star away—to put it in some safer place,
goodness knows where.
“Then, we find, that the Star is missing—how
long after Billy shifted it, we don’t know. But
it was gone, we all know that, Billy here knew
nothing about his sleep-walking—didn’t even
know that he was addicted to sleep-walking. And
so he remembered nothing of having moved the
Star. Of course, he worried some more about the
thing, and did the same thing again—went out,
got the Star from where he had hidden it, and
was bringing it to another place, when Daw
happened to spot him, and, of course, pounced
on it.”


“By Jingo!” said Fane, regarding Patch with
an admiring eye.
“Yes, that’s what happened, comrades. And
goodness knows where Billy would have put it
if he hadn’t been pulled up —perhaps in the
Head’s waistcoat, or else up the fireplace. Lucky
things panned out as they did, eh?”
“I keep telling Billy he ought to go on the
Stock Exchange,” said Jack. “His luck’s blown
in the bottle, all wool and a yard wide!”
“Of course, we’ll have to guard against this
sort of thing in the future, however good his
luck is. Next time coincidences might fail to —
to ”
“ to coincide,” finished Jack brightly,
“Exactly. The best thing for us to do is to
let me hide the Star, and then Billy can’t get
at it without my telling him, sleep-walking or
otherwise.”
“That’s the ticket! You take the thing and
hide it in some secure place or other —be sure
we don’t make a miss of it, this time—and then
you can tell Fane and me, but not Billy. I don’t
think I walk in my sleep, and, as for Fane, he
walks often enough when he should be asleep,
but that’s a different matter.”
And so it was arranged. Jack concealed the
Star that afternoon, in the most unlikely of
places. He got an old rubber-grip from a bat,
and inserted the Star in this, while he tied both


ends securely with twine. The whole thing he
attached to a fine fishing-line. Walking along
to the river, he flung the Star into the water,
and fixed the end of the line to the root of a tree
some six inches under water. The line would
never be seen; and unless something very like
a miracle occurred, the package could hardly be
recovered from the thick mud at the bottom of
the river. He breathed a sigh of relief.
“Well, it’s safe enough there,” he murmured,
looking round him. He had been only a few
minutes at work, and there was no one in sight.
“And nobody’s noticed,” he added, strolling off
in the direction of the school.
Still pondering the matter of the Black Star
and all the trouble and excitement it had brought
in its train, he was passing a clump of thorn-
bushes, called by the College “Willy-Whiskers,”
when the hum of voices was borne to his ears
by the breeze.
“Hullo!” said Jack, and pulled up. The place
Willy-Whiskers was used, nowadays, only as
a fighting-ground, when some particularly im-
portant encounter was mooted. Here the spec-
tators could yell to their hearts’ content, without
fear of being “dropped on” by a passing master.
Jack wondered. Was a fight in progress?
Irresolutely he moved forward; the sounds
were totally unlike those usually accompanying
schoolboy battles. Instead, it looked much as if


there was a meeting of some sort being held in
the heart of the thick tangle of thorn, the quaint
shape of which had given it its name.
nPVi Acn rnff on (~* rPAc
. . . . Those rotten Crees .... we’ll be
able .... shock of their lives . . . .” came
the words, with significant gaps; and Jack imme-
diately considered it his business to investigate.
He thought that this was a meeting of the
Calamitous Cripples, the rival society to the
Crees —and he was not mistaken.
Approaching silently in the long grass, Jack
Symonds peered curiously through the inter-
stices of the jungle-like mass of thorn. There
was Cummles, the renegade Cree, holding the
floor, as usual; his fellows were asking him ques-
tions, to which he was replying confidently.
“We’ll reel off as many copies of the notice as
we’ll want,” he was saying. “The Crees will all
fall for the wheeze, and everything should go
well, with ordinary luck.”
“How about the notice?” asked one of the
Cripples.
“I’ve got a copy of it here,” said Cummles;
“we’ve got a jelly thingummy in our study that’ll
print off as many sheets as you like. I’ll read it:
‘Dear brother Cree, This is to let you know that
a special banquet is being given by the under-
signed in honour of Jack Symonds, Chief Cree,
in the old Science room on Friday night next, at
half-past nine. As it is intended as a surprise to


the Chief, the matter must be kept a secret from
him and his immediate friends. All Crees to be
present. Signed, S. Fane.’ ”
“That’s all right!” agreed the Cripples, readily.
“But how does it go on then?”
“Why, it’s just like falling off a log—they all
crowd into the old Science room, and then one of
us will slip out and lock the door. Then the fun
starts. We’ve saved up lots of bottles of that
sulphuretted hydrogen stuff —you know, that rot-
ten-egg smell—and we’re just going to let them
loose on the poor beggars. And other things
that I’ve thought of. When they’re just about
done, old Simpole here will light a flashlight
affair and take their photo—all sneezing and
wrinkling up their noses with snuff and the awful
smells —and we’ll circulate that photo, or copies
of it, all over the House. We’ll call it, ‘A Meet-
ing of the Crees,’ or something like that. The
Crees will just about buck up when they see it,
and it’ll be the most spiffing score this term.
Think of them—all dancing and prancing there,
looking as scared as a lot of boxed-up rabbits!”
“I vote it a bonzer scheme!” came the admir-
ing voice of one of Cummles’s friends. “The only
thing is, will it work all right?”
“Will it work?” demanded Cummles indign-
antly. “I should just say it will! How on earth
can it go wrong?”


His questioner subsided into silence, and then
Jack deemed it prudent to move quietly away.
“Will it work?” repeated the Chief Cree to
himself. “Well, rather! Only in a different way
from the one these Cripples intend . . .
He chuckled to himself as he threw open the
door of Study No. 9. Billy Faraday and Patch
were there, and they had a queer-looking con-
traption on the table that Jack did not remem-
ber to have seen before. Patch’s fingers were
liberally stained with black ink, and as Jack
entered he scratched his forehead in a worried
manner, leaving sundry streaks and blotches on
his face.
“Hullo, Patchie!” exclaimed Jack. “What a
dandy you are—always titivating yourself up. If
it’s not rouge or face-powder, then it’s ink. A
nice thick coating of tar would improve the ap-
pearance of your face wonderfully.”
“Well, comrade, I do not grudge you your
meed of humour. I know it’s a bright spot in
an otherwise gloomy life. But you might put it
to better use —what about writing a funny
column for our paper?”
“For your what?”
“Paper, comrade,” explained Patch pityingly.
“In the big cities they print the news on big
sheets of paper, which people buy and often read.
Ours will not stop at news, though. Critical
comment on curious members of the school—


frightful libels on all and sundry—all that sort
of thing.”
Jack’s interest was now thoroughly aroused.
“What,” he said, “you’re not going to run
rival show to the Gazette ?”
The Deepwater Gazette was the somewhat
staid official journal of the College, which issued
twice a year, and was religiously bought by the
collegers, who read nothing of it excepting the
sporting records. Patch showed, by a shake of
his head, that he did not mean to push the official
paper out of business.
“No, comrade,” he said; “our paper will be
brighter, full of snappy snips, and nifty news,
quips and jests. This is a small printing-press”
—he indicated the machine on the table—“and
we’ll turn out any number of copies, and ”
“Hold hard,” said Jack suddenly, interrupting
him, “I’ve just remembered. ...”
He went on to tell the tale of the plot that the
Cripples were preparing against them. When he
had come to the end of his recital his companions
whistled concernedly. But he went on—speak-
ing in a low voice to them as they sat attentively
listening to him —to outline a scheme for the re-
versal of the proposed jape. When he had
finished they were both grinning broadly.
“Comrade,” said Patch, “you have some of the
elements of the practical joker in you.”


“It’ll be a tremendous thud for Cummles and
his bright boys, at any rate,” Jack assured him.
“And Simpole isn’t the only one who can take
photographs!”


CHAPTER XIV
DOG-FACE
On the following Thursday afternoon there was
a half-holiday, and Jack Symonds found himself
suddenly without occupation. He had intended
to go for a ramble into the bush behind the col-
lege, but at the last moment his proposed com-
panion had been unable to accompany him. He
was therefore at a loose end, but it was not in
him to remain idle for long.
“What are you going to do with your useless
self?” he demanded of Billy jocularly.
“Didn’t you know ? Some of us are going for
a sail on the bay.”
“Are you? What ripping luck! Any room for
a bad sailor who doesn’t know a mainbrace from
a companion hatchway?”
“I think we can find room,” said Billy. “Don’t
you think so, Patchie?”
“I do, comrade. That is, provided he doesn’t
get his feet in the scuppers or start dancing a
jig on the keel,”


“Good-oh!” said Jack. “Are you coming now?
Yes? Half a mo’, till I run down into the Gym.
and change. I’ll meet you at the landing stage.”
A spanking breeze was blowing as the little
party of five put off from the jetty and slid out
carefully into the blue expanse of the bay. The
steering and management of the little craft, which
was merely an undecked skiff, was undertaken
by Billy Faraday. The boat was fitted with a
single balance lug sail, but it was fairly large,
and soon they were running before the wind at a
smart clip.
“By Jingo!” said Jack, smacking Patchie upon
the back, “this is exhilarating, isn’t it?”
“Yes, comrade, it’s not bad. When we get a
little farther out you may paddle your feet in the
water,” said Patch, kindly. “This, my lad, is
the sea, the abode of the finny tribe —it is mainly
composed of water, but there is a proportion of
salt added, as you will observe if you drink about
a quart of it.”
“Get out,” laughed Jack. “You’re kidding me
aren’t you? You’re taking advantage of my
youth and ignorance. And is it all wet?”
“Every drop,” Patch assured him solemnly.
“Think of it —all that immense mass, and not a
dry spot anywhere throughout it. Doesn’t the
thought stagger you?”
“Now you put it in that way, it does,” agreed
Jack. “Beginning to blow a bit, isn’t it?”


“Yes, comrade. If it keeps on blowing like
this you’ll have to hold on to your hat."
The playful wind caught Patch’s words and
tossed them away.
“You what?” yelled Jack.
“Your hat, comrade. You know what a hat is,
don’t you ?”
“Yes —a thing the chap passes round after the
cornet solo. I know. A cousin of mine had one
once.”
Jack’s spirits, in fact, were becoming more and
more volatile; this lively fooling only served to
render him more buoyant than ever.
He now jumped up, making the boat rock
perilously, and drawing a howl of protest from
his fellow-mariners. Throwing out an arm he
began to issue orders in traditional sea-dog style.
“Now then, my hearties!” he bellowed. “Lay
on there, you pack of land-lubbers! Hoist the
keel to the capstan-head—throw the main deck
overboard ! Step lively, now !”
“Oh, my only aunt!” groaned Patch, who felt
distinctly unsafe in his position right underneath
the straddling, swaying figure of Symonds. “You
burbling lunatic !”
“Belay there!” sang out Jack, unheeding. “Reel
in the scuppers—make fast the poop!”
“Sit down, you’re rocking the boat!” implored
Patch in anguished accents.
“Unship the propeller-shaft— get a head of


steam in the bowsprit!” came the amazing orders.
“Sit down!” wailed Patch. “You colossal idiot,
sit—ouch! Gerroff!”
Jack had obeyed the order—quite involuntar-
ily, as it happened. The bows of the boat had
encountered a short, choppy sea, and Jack was
sent flying into Patch’s lap as a result.
“Wow!” gasped the inventor. “You’re crush-
ing—life out of —gerrup ! Help!”
“Ha, ha, ha!” gurgled the three unfeeling spec-
tators.
When the slight disturbance thus occasioned
had quietened somewhat, the amateur sailors
had leisure to observe that the sea had risen—had,
in fact, developed a distinct chop. The breeze,
also, had become appreciably harder.
“Jiminy, what do you call this?” asked Jack,
as a lash of spray cut inboard, driven by the
wind. “A giddy old gale, that’s what it is!”
“Gale?” asked Patch superbly. “When you’ve
been to sea as long as I have, my lad, you’ll know
better than to call a bit of a blow like this a
gale.”
“Well,” sneered Jack, poking him in the ribs,
“what’s your name for it, then, my good ad-
miral ?”
“We sailors call this a stiff calm,” said Patch,
and the others yelled with laughter. “Yes, that’s
all it is to the man who knows the sea. You
should just see a real gale, my boy! Why, I re-
member that in the Bay of Biscay I ”


He waved an arm grandly to emphasize the
brilliant lie that he was evolving, but, at that
moment, to a lurch of the boat, he slipped from
his seat into the bottom-boards, where he lay
floundering like a landed fish, in two or three
inches of dirty water.
“Dear me!” said Jack, bending over him with
a look of kindly concern. “Is that what you did
in the Bay of Biscay? Poor fellow, what a time
you must have gone through! And alive to tell
the tale—alive and kicking,” he added, as Patch’s
wildly-waving legs described in the air most of
the problems of Euclid, together with some that
Euclid never thought of.
“Ump! Ur!” said Patch, regaining his equili
brium with an effort.
“Don’t say you’ve finished!” said Jack, clasp-
ing his hands in mock dismay. “You will do it
again, won’t you? I just loved that part where
you stood on one ear —I thought that so clever!”
“It was quite unintentional,”' said Patch, wring-
ing the water out of his trousers.
“You are too modest!” returned the irrepres-
sible Jack. “Why, do you know how long it’d
take me to learn all that? The best part of a year,
and even then I’d have to ”
Amid the mocking laughter of Septimus Patch
and the others, Jack found himself in the same
plight as the unfortunate inventor had just
quitted. A lift and twist of the boat upon a wave-


crest, a slippery seat canted at an angle, had
been the elements of his downfall. He lay upon
his back, struggling.
“Well, comrade,” grinned Patch, “that’s very
good for an amateur!” He stood over Jack’s pros-
trate form, and began to recite, “Here, a sheer
hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling! The darling of
his crew! No more he’ll hear ”
At this moment the sail indulged in that whim-
sical operation termed by sailors a “gybe all
standing”—it wriggled violently from side to
side, and the boom struck Patch on the head as
he endeavoured to dodge it.
“Help!” he howled, pitching head-first into
Jack’s lap as the latter sat at the tiller. “The
giddy thing’s run amok, or something—it just
jumped at me and thumped me on the head. I
tell you ”
“Let’s hope you haven’t hurt it,” said Jack
anxiously, “You ought to be careful with a head
like yours—it's liable to break something! Don’t
sling it about in that wild way; you’ll do some
damage with it one of these days, and then you’ll
be sorry you didn’t listen to the wise words of
your uncle Jack.”
“My boy,” said Patch, “I begin to have a hor-
rible suspicion of you. I think you’ve been try-
ing to be funny! I thought you’d been looking
queer all this trip ”


“Beloved One,” Jack told him, “I haven’t got
to try to be funny. It comes sort of natural.”
“Quite so, comrade, quite so. It’s your face
that does it. You happen to have been born with
one of those faces that cause horrible merriment.
A face that provokes ribald laughter. A face
that ”
“I can’t help my face,” said Jack sorrowfully.
“It is cruel of you to mention it, but I must tell
the truth. Listen. When I was a child a careless
servant let a tree fall on me and ”
“Ha, ha, ha!” roared the others, in chorus, but
Billy’s voice cut in with:
“Drop fooling, you chaps. We ran into a bit
of a squall just then, and I don’t think we’ll go
any farther. A bit of a sea working up. Wind
against us. We’d better slip back while our luck’s
in.”
Accordingly the boat was worked around, and
plugged into the choppy sea that stretched be-
tween the vessel and the college jetty.
A good four miles of water had to be traversed
before they would arrive at their destination, and
Billy, although he did not mention his qualms to
his companions, felt more than a trifle nervous
about the return journey.
The aspect of the sea had changed wonderfully
since they had set out on their trip. Banks of
cloud piled angrily up in the south, grey and
threatening; and the wind was now undeniably


vigorous. Moreover, the sea had risen; the waves
were swift and vicious, jumping at the boat in
just that manner that the expert boatman dis-
likes. Added to that was the fact that the boat
was small and heavily-laden.
“Jimmy” said Jack, “we’re in for a blow on the
way back.” As he spoke the wind whipped the
crest off a wave ahead of them and sheeted it
over the occupants of the boat. The sail jumped
and the mast groaned, and as Billy tacked ex-
pertly the boat heeled over dangerously, and
unquestionably, without the drop-keel, the whole
concern would have capsized.
Gust after gust now smote the vessel, and it
required all of Billy’s admirable coolness and
splendid skill to keep them on their course.
“I don’t like the look of the sky,” said Jack
suddenly to his friend.
“Neither do I, old man,” returned Billy seri-
ously. “It’s getting very dark, and there’s rain
in those clouds, or I’m no judge.”
Presently the hands were at work bailing out
the water, for, despite all of Billy’s management,
some seas were shipped, and the boat was hardly
of the kind to afford to become much flooded.
And, most dismaying sign of all, the going be-
came worse as time went on. Beyond question,
the gale was growing.
The minatory rumbling of thunder now became
audible, and the sky was rapidly overcast. In the
K


consequent gloom, the boys lost sight of the far
shore, which had previously been visible as a
dark mass.
Crash! A tremendous peal of thunder seemed
to split the heavens; it was directly overhead,
which made it appear that the fury of the com-
ing storm was directed particularly against the
temeritous yachtsmen. Instantly down came the
rain, sweeping over the sea in an enormous, sus-
tained shower. The boys were wet through in an
instant; and when, in a furious gust, the sail
flapped against the mast, it was in wet folds.
Blinding as a close veil, the rain effectually
sheeted out any sign of land whatever, and Billy
Faraday felt a momentary qualm. He thought
that it was now impossible to steer for shore, and
he knew full well that there were only one or
two places in the bay where a decent landing was
possible.
“Look here,’ he shouted, above the roaring of
the rain and the continuous smashing of waves
on the bows. “Look here, you chaps—l think
we’d better cut before the wind, and miss call-
over. I’m not in love with our chances of pulling
through this welter.”
“But where will you make for?”
“Dog-face,” replied Billy. Dog-face was the
name of a small island in Deepwater Bay, and
its name was the result of a fanciful resemblance
of the place, on certain days, to the face of a


bulldog. It was out of bounds, and rarely visited
by the boys, who had to get special permits to
do so. However, there were no attractions on
Dog-face, and the permits were seldom called for.
“Dog-face,” repeated Billy Faraday, “that’s
our chance! We’re not going to barge into the
rocks on the other side of the bay, by jingo!
But Dog-face sports a bit of a beach, and I think
I can make it. . . .”
His companions nodded in silent agreement.
After all, Billy knew best, and the boat was ship-
ping more and more water as she went forward.
The captain of the little craft, therefore, put her
about with the skill of a veteran, and they were
instantly running before the wind with the utmost
speed and momentum.
“Gee!” gasped Jack. “If we miss Dog-face
and slam into the rocks at this rate, then we’ll
just about go up in smoke!”
“Keep your eyes skinned, then!” said Billy be-
tween his teeth. “Hop down the stern, you chaps
—we don’t want to run our nose under water.”
They tore through the boiling sea at a tre-
mendous pace. Huge waves pursued them, but
never seemed to catch up. The sail was as tight
as a drum; a wave of foam curled away from the
bows of the boat.
“If this goes on,” said Billy, all at once, cast-
ing a glance behind him, “we’ll have to lower


sail. Wonder it doesn’t pull the stick out of the
boat!”
In a few minutes he cast an anxious look
ahead of him and called on his companions to say
whether they discerned any signs of the tiny
island. It was a small place, and in the rain and
the gloom they might easily run past it. But
then Patch gave a yell, and pointed.
“There it is, right ahead!” he cried.
“Good business!” said Billy Faraday. “We’re
safe!”
As if in mockery of his words, a colossal gust
pounced on the boat and shook it as a terrier
shakes a rat —and the thing Billy had feared came
to pass. With a crack like a pistol-shot the mast
snapped off short, and the sail and cords, in a
tangled mass, collapsed over the bows.
Jack Symonds, impulsive as ever, leaped up
to secure the wreckage; but the obstruction had
brought the boat side on to the waves. That and
his sudden movement were too much for the
stability of the frail craft. As a following gust
shrieked overhead the whole thing canted terribly
over —and in a moment turned turtle.


CHAPTER XV
A JAPE GOES WRONG
Sudden as had been the accident, unexpectedly as
it had swooped upon them, Billy Faraday had
time to yell, at the top of his voice, a direction to
the four others with him.
“Get ashore!” he cried; and had no time for
more. He soused under the chilling flood; he
went down and down, and finally, struggling,
fighting for the surface, his head emerged, and
he saw four other dark spots bobbing on the
white, wind-whipped seas.
His advice had been sound. The island was
comparatively close, and although the boat might
be still afloat, if upside down, the shore offered
the better chance of security. He struck out, and
had the satisfaction of seeing the others do the
same.
In point of fact, Patch could not swim more
than a few strokes, and Jack was well aware of
it. The two pals, who were always quarrelling
in friendly fashion, were thrown out together,
and Jack saw Septimus, after one or two wild


strokes, vanish beneath the seas. He turned, and,
rolling over on the surface, dived as cleanly as
any Arab boy who plunges for pennies. He had
been so quick that his hand caught at Patch’s
clothing, and in a moment he was hauling his
chum to the surface. Arrived there, he made
ready to swim ashore.
It was heavy going, for they were both in their
clothes, and Jack was intensely grateful when a
dark form slid over the waters and he recognized
the overturned boat. With great difficulty he
hauled Patch across the keel, where the young
inventor hung on limply.
Shortly afterwards they felt the crunch of
sand beneath the substance of the boat, and Jack
knew that they were safe at last. Three drenched
forms darted up and dragged the boat and its
occupants ashore.
“I’d forgotten Patch was no swimmer,” said
Billy; “but we’re safe enough now, thank good-
ness—this is Dog-face.”
“Look here—there’s an oar in the boat,” said
Jack. “We’ll be able to scull back, at any rate,
when the sea goes down.”
“Better—one washed ashore before you came.”
said Billy. “We’ll be able to row! But I’m
thinking of how they’ll be worrying about us
back at Coll.”
“Can’t be helped, old fellow. Jingo, this wind’s


cutting!” He shivered. “I’m wet through—isn’t
there a place where we can shelter a bit?”
“We can look,” returned Billy; and presently
they set off to explore the island. All at once
Jack stooped and picked up a jam-tin.
“Hullo!” he said. “Here’s a jam-tin—wonder
who was the tripper? Fairly recent, too —the
jam’s still fresh in the bottom.”
“Show me, comrade,” said Patch, taking the
tin and peering into it, his detective instincts
aroused. He glanced round him. “It’s a funny
thing,” he went on, “but I can smell something
burning—the smell of smoke. Any of you notice
it?”
“No,” answered Billy slowly. “Where’s it
coming from, then? Surely not from shore.”
“Unless the old Coil’s on fire,” suggested Jack
with a grin.
“No—l thought ... I say, comrade, look at
this—there’s a giddy old cave here!”
“Where?” asked Jack, pushing forward.
“There —underneath that clump of bush, I can
see the opening quite plainly, and if the smoke’s
not coming out of there I’ll eat my hat.”
Leaping up, the schoolboy detective pushed
aside the screen of bushes, and the opening to a
cave lay disclosed. Patch ducked his head and
made as if to enter, but Jack’s voice arrested
him in the cave’s mouth.
“Hold hard, Patchie!”


“What’s the matter?”
“If the smoke’s coming - out of there, then it’s
odds on that somebody’s living in there. And
they mightn’t like you to butt in.”
“Well, comrade, I’m cold and wet —surely they
wouldn’t refuse to let me come in and dry myself
a bit?” He bent forward and yelled down into
the opening. “Hullo, there ! Anyone at home?”
There was no answer; he repeated the call.
“You see,” he said to Jack, “there’s nobody
there. I’m going in, anyway. Coming?”
The five of them made their way through the
narrow orifice which gave access to a cave of
larger dimensions than they had expected. It was
so dark that very little of the interior could be
distinguished; the place smelt of tobacco, and
there was a dying, smoky fire, which they could
not fan into a blaze. Jack stumbled over a pile
of bracken and a blanket.
“It seems to me that somebody’s been here re-
cently,” he said. “In fact, they may get back at
any moment.”
“Not in this sea,” returned Billy Faraday.
“All the same, it’s probably a dirty old tramp,
who’ll hit the roof if he finds us here. I vote we
get out —it’s not very salubrious.”
They returned to the beach, and sat down to
watch the gradual subsidence of the storm. When
Billy judged that the sea had gone down suffi-
ciently, they put off and rowed for the College,


which they reached about ten o’clock, under the
fitful light of a moon that the clouds obscured
from time to time. There was, they found, a good
deal of high excitement at the school. During
the storm, which had been quite exceptionally
severe, the boys in the boat had been lost sight
of, as it was impossible to see where they had
gone; one moment, the telescope held them in
plain view from the College—then, briefly after-
wards, the blinding rain had sheeted down to
conceal them entirely.
And, as their absence grew more and more
protracted, the anxiety of boys and masters both
had been very considerable.
Great was their satisfaction and relief when
the storm-tossed boat came up to the jetty; Silver
and a number of other seniors, who had been
scouring the troubled waters in a launch, gave a
cheer and helped them ashore.
Even old Salmon showed that there was a
human being behind the dry pedagogic mask that
he wore. “I’m glad you’re safe, boys,” he said,
shaking them by the hand.
“Thank you, sir,” answered Billy Faraday.
“The storm came down very suddenly—we’d
simply no chance of getting back. We were
swamped, as it was. I’m afraid we broke bounds
for once —we landed on Dog-face. Luckily, the
boat and a couple of oars came ashore with us.”
They were hurried up to the school, where they


changed and imbibed generously of hot coffee,
while a few privileged seniors and masters lis-
tened to the tale of their perilous trip. After which
they went to their dormitory and to bed.
Jack Symonds lay awake long after the regular
breathing of his companions indicated sleep. He
was staring intently at an invisible ceiling, and
remained so for quite a long time. He was
ruminating over the various excitements of the
day, and his mind seemed to dwell, for no appar-
ent reason, on one detached incident —the dis-
covery of that dark, smelly cave on Dog-face.
Somehow, his fancy was intrigued by the
thought of that cave. He could not help feeling
that there was some significance attached to it;
he was aware that there was something
“Jiminy!” The exclamation came so loudly,
so sharply, that he feared he might have roused
some of his pals. But they slumbered on. Two
fellows were snoring on different notes, and
their snores quarrelled comically; somebody
groaned and turned over in his sleep; no other
sounds could be heard.
Jack resumed his thoughts; that exclamation
had betokened a discovery—light, in fact, was
dawning on his mind. Now he could see what he
had been thinking of. Ah ! Of course .... Hum-
bolt.
Was it a fact, he wondered, that “Tiger” was
the occupant of the cave? The man, he knew,


was lurking in the vicinity somewhere —what was
more natural than that he should have selected
the unknown hole, hidden away on deserted Dog-
face, as his place of concealment?
“I wonder!” said Jack to himself. The idea
seemed to hold water. Humbolt hiding on Dog-
face! A little startling, but quite likely. Jack
smiled grimly at the thought that, if his suspicions
were correct, it was fortunate that Tiger had not
found the intruders in possession of the lair.
“Might have turned nasty,” he murmured.
“Or, perhaps, it is only an old tramp . , .
reflected the boy, turning over, and yielding him-
self to sleep.
In the morning Jack awoke, conscious of hav-
ing forgotten something. Not the Humbolt sus-
picion—that could wait. Then he remembered.
To-day was Friday—the great day fixed by the
Cripples for the downfall of the Crees.
“Jingo,” said Jack, “I’d nearly forgotten.
Patchie, you old impostor, what about the bean-
feast to-night?”
“Bean-feast, comrade?”
“Certainly. Aren’t you going to the great ban-
quet, spread or luncheon, that the Crees are giv-
ing in the old Science room?”
Comrade, it had escaped my mind for the
moment. However, I believe I am right in say-
ing that all is in readiness for knocking the stuf-
fing out of the despicable Cripples?”


“That’s so, my genial old lunatic! And how
progresses the Busy Bee —that organ of wit and
learning?”
Patch smiled, and indicated a pile of printed
sheets that lay on the study table. “Those,” he
said, “are the inside pages—we’re having eight
pages in all. The remaining four pages will not
go to press until ”
“Exactly,” chimed in Jack. “Until —what?”
And, winking at his pal, he laughed heartily.
“It occurs to me, comrade, that we could make
a bit of capital out of the adventure of yesterday
—what? Written up in terse, vivid style by our
friend Billy, it should form a regular scoop for
the Busy Bee. ,y
“Of course —write it up as mpch as you like,
but don’t get too personal. I refer to our youth-
ful pranks in the boat. Won’t do to have Lower
School getting a false notion of their seniors!”
And Jack, who cared nothing at all for his
dignity as a member of the Fifth, grinned widely.
Nothing of particular importance happened
during the day. Perhaps that was because all
minds, Cripples and Crees alike, were looking
forward to the night. The Cripples were looking
forward to the downfall and abasement of the
Crees. But the Crees, curiously enough, were
expecting the same thing about the Cripples.
And with more reason.
Cummles and his gang concealed themselves


in the shadow of an ivy-clad wall in close proxim-
ity to the old Science classroom, which, for some
reason or other, was at the present time quite
unused.
They had not long to wait. In twos and threes
the Crees came slinking through the darkness, to
avoid possible detection at the hand of any master
who might happen to be passing. The little par-
ties vanished into the old Science room, whence
arose, in the course of a few minutes, the murmur
of talk.
“Got them beautifully,” whispered Cummles,
overjoyed at the success of his plan. “They’re
waiting for Symonds and the other heads, but
they’ll wait a long time.”
Jack, who with Billy Faraday and Patch, was
hidden on the other side of the wall, could not
help smiling at the misplaced confidence of the
fellow. But the three of them remained quiet,
and awaited further developments.
These came, but only after an uneasy quarter
of an hour. One of the Cripples had locked the
door, and the sulphuretted hydrogen had been
duly released, but no wails or lamentations issued
from the old Science room.
On the contrary, the place was as still as the
grave.
“They’re keeping jolly quiet,” whispered one
of Cummles’s lieutenants to his leader.
"Y-e-s,” agreed Cummles, inwardly a bit


chagrined to think that the Crees were taking
their medicine so quietly. Then suspicion smote
him. “I say,” he murmured, “we’ll just open the
door and see what’s happened. Seems to me that
gas might have laid them all out, or something.
Be funny if ”
Moving silently forward, the Cripples ap-
proached the door, and stood there in perfect
silence —a silence matched only by that on the
other side of the door.
“Well!” said Cummles, unable to contain his
curiosity any longer, and whipping open the
door. The disagreeable smell from the bottles
came to their noses, and one or two drew back.
It was just at that moment that one of the
fellows at the rear sang out, in a loud, yet guarded
voice: “Look out, you chaps—here’s old Sal-
mon.”
A dark figure was certainly approaching from
the direction of the school buildings, and it looked
as if the Cripples were cornered. But necessity
drove them; and, led by Cummles himself, they
all bolted into the classroom and closed the
door.
It would have caused them a trifle of concern
had they known that the figure was merely that
of Jack Symonds; and that the supposed Cripple
who had given the alarm was none other than
Faraday himself. Billy had, as a matter of fact,
joined the band in the shadows, and the rest had


been easy. In the darkness he had escaped re-
cognition ; and the trick played by the Crees
worked with smooth certainty.
Now, indeed, the tables were turned with a
vengeance. The Crees, forewarned, had merely
passed through the room and had made their
exit by a window, which they were careful to
close and shutter up behind them.
During the time of their supposed tortures,
they had been quietly awaiting events elsewhere;
and now the Cripples were securely captured.
Billy Faraday sprang forward and turned the
key that Cummles had carelessly left in the door;
and he laughed quietly in the darkness.
“We’ve got them by their giddy wool, what?”
he chuckled. “Ever see anything so neat?”
“We’ve done them brown,” was Jack’s opinion.
Bending forward, he yelled through the keyhole:
“Cripples ahoy! This is our dirty r-revenge!”
Cummles had realized as much when he found
the room void of its supposed inmates.
“Let us out, you scugs!” he spluttered, half-
choking with the abominable odours of which the
room now fairly reeked.
“Nice and comfy in there?” demanded Jack.
“Air a little close, perhaps!”
“Wait till next time, you Hottentot!” was the
ungentlemanly retort.
The Crees had gathered round, and were en-


joying the joke immensely. “Do you like snuff?”
inquired Jack pleasantly.
“You—you ” choked Cummles, horrified.
He knew that large bags of snuff were fixed in
the rafters, and that a twitch cord that led out-
side would tip them up. He was unaware how
Jack had come to know of the existence of the
snuff, but it was evident that Jack did know—
and, what was more, intended to use it.
“Easy on, Symonds!”
“Snuff said!” joked Jack in reply, and gave a
pull to the cord that retained the snuff in posi-
tion.
“I say, this is—arrh ! atchoo ! This is—hum-
hum-atchoo ! atchoo ! —a bit thick —at-choo!
at-choo!”
“Symonds, you beas —’-choo !”
A volley of sneezes threatened to lift the roof
off. The Cripples were ready to die with
sneezing and breathing the foul gases that per-
vaded the place, but Jack had not finished yet.
“I say—want to come out?” he inquired.
“Yes —shoo! Arr-rum! At-choo! Quickly, let
us —at-choo!—out!”
“Well, listen,” dictated the calm voice. “You
must all go down on your knees and humbly
beg to be let out —get that?”
“Yeshoo! Yes! Hurry up! Atchoo! Hishoo!”
“If I open the door and find you another way,”


insisted Jack, “I*ll keep you here for another ten
minutes!”
“All right! Hishoo ! At-choo !”
“Right! All down on your knees?”
“Yes”
“Look up and look pretty,” urged Jack, flinging
open the door. The Cripples were heartily sick of
their confinement in that room of terrors. They
were all kneeling, to a man, with running eyes
and moist noses and contorted faces, begging for
deliverance.
“Now, that flare —sharp !” rapped out Jack; and
as he said the words an immense flare of light,
blindingly white, threw the whole room and its
suffering occupants into being. The Cripples,
too surprised to move, remained in their atti-
tudes of meek supplication, and Jack Symonds
laughed outright at the mere sight of them.
Patch, though, was directing the lens of a big
stand-camera on the scene, while Billy Faraday
held aloft the flare.
‘Thank you, gentlemen!” said Jack crisply, as
the flare faded. The surprise of the Cripples
gave place to anger—they were furious, realizing
that they had meekly sat —or rather kneeled—
for their photographs.
“Get ’em—hishoo!” cried Cummles; but as he
dashed forward Jack and the others whipped up
the camera and made off. They did not care about


standing there and listening to the polite con-
versation of the Cripples.
As for the latter, they were a sadly disgruntled
lot as they sneaked back to their dormitories,
muttering threats of murder and sudden death
against the victorious Crees.


CHAPTER XVI
BILLY VANISHES
One of the cricket features of the Deepwater
College year, although it was no part of the
school competitions, was the traditional match
against Windsor, which was held in the mining
town about the end of the season.
The cricketers of Windsor were keen, and
generally managed to make a decent struggle.
Last year, in fact, they had beaten Deepwater;
and the collegers were burning to avenge that
defeat this time. But, as sometimes happens,
there was a dearth of good cricketers at the Col-
lege—their team was lacking the one or two
brilliant players that pull a side out of the ruck.
“All mediocrities, every man Jack of ’em,” said
Martin, the captain of cricket at Deepwater. “If
they all played on their top form, we’d scratch
up an average score. But the worst of the beg-
gars is, they’re so jolly unreliable. Might make
a good hatful of runs one day, and a blob the
next.”
Silver, who was a fair bat when he got really


black star
set, nodded in gloomy sympathy. “And this year
we want a Trumper so badly,” he replied. “Re-
member the way the townies jeered at us last
time? And they didn’t beat us by much. This
year, it seems to me, matters will be worse. Why,
if London, or Scott, or any of our green men
get the barracking really warmly, then they’ll just
crumple up. Almost puts me off my play, and
I’m an old bird. Martin, old chap, it looks bad.”
“Well, better luck next time,” said Martin.
Screw, the third selector of the team, a player
from Cooper’s House, sighed and cast his eye
over the team-list, which, scribbled hastily in
pencil lay on the study table before them. “This
is an inclusive team —not an exclusive,” he re-
marked, tapping his teeth with his pencil. “What
about Faraday—is he worth his place?”
Silver considered. “Well,” he answered, at
length, “that fellow’s a bit of a puzzle. One
match he’s a rattling good player, and the next
he’s a hopeless duffer. I suppose, though, he’d
better go in. He’s a good sort.”
“Not that we want them because they’re good
sorts,” said Screw sharply. “I’ve more than one
decent bat over in Cooper’s, and only I happen
to have seen Faraday ”
“Oh, there’s no question, when he’s in top
form,” said Martin. “Look here, we’ve got the
thing practically settled. What about drafting
that notice out and getting it on the board? Turn


the blighters out for practice—we’ve simply got
to make some sort of a show.”
When the Saturday appointed for the match
came round, the show that the Deepwater fel-
lows made was, as Silver said, “rather contempt-
ible.”
The Windsor team, electing to go to the
wickets, knocked up a breezy 276 —then came
the great debacle. The School, despite its
strenuous efforts, scraped together a mere 95,
“If only we’d topped the century!” groaned
Billy Faraday, at the end of the first day’s play,
as it was a two days’ match. “It mightn’t have
looked so bad, then. But now !”
“We’ve got to pull up—that’s the only thing,”
came the answer of Martin, across the luncheon-
table. “Slog for all we’re worth when we get in
next time—and chance it. But, first of all, we’ll
have to shake up our dreadfully crook bowling.
Of all the feeble lobs, those of Screw’s were the
feeblest and the lobbiest I ever saw.”
“Here,” protested Screw. “Here, I say ”
“Don’t argue, Screwdriver, old boy! You know
you were just absolutely off ”
“Well, you needn’t ”
“No, but I choose to. I want to wake you up
to rouse you into something remotely resemb-
ling form! Mind, you’re not the only one. I
was worse myself. Only it’s never any good
relying on me,”


“Rats,” said Screw politely. He knew very
well that when Martin assumed this flippant
mood he was liable to do damage to someone or
something. When Martin declared that it was
no use to rely on him he meant that he was out
to perform wonders. But as he led his team out
into the field next day and gave the ball to Screw
for the opening over of the second innings, his
dogged chin was stuck out defiantly.
“Now, Screwdriver! This is a ball—for bowl-
ing with, not for serving up to the batsmen in
suitable form for boundary hits. See whether
you can hit the wicket. The wicket’s the three
little sticks with bits of wood called bails ”
“Gimme the ball,” said Screw sharply; and
Martin looked to see how the first ball of the
innings would turn out.
Screw, with his mettle roused by Martin’s
chaff, took a short run and fired down a perfectly
horrible delivery, that whizzed off the pitch and
went a foot over the batsman’s head. The next
ball the batsman fumbled, and jerked out to cover.
Martin watched for the next ball. . . .
Then he gasped, and uttered a short exclama-
tion of delight. The third ball had flicked the
middle stump clean out of the ground!
“That’s the stuff, Screwdriver! Up guards,
and at ’em.”
The next batsman took his stand with respect-
ful attitude. The man who had just been dis-


missed was one of their star players, and the man-
ner of his downfall was not altogether encourag-
ing. Still
He played his first couple of strokes very
cautiously, then, when the last ball of the over
was delivered, jumped out and smashed it to the
boundary, four feet over the head of long-on. It
was a great drive, and the town supporters yelled
with pleasure.
Soon the home team were playing steadily, and
had almost forgotten their inauspicious start.
Confidence grew; there came out one Swan, a
mighty thumper, who treated the bowling with
arrogance. He was a big fellow, with the muscles
of a giant, and the way he banged the unfortun-
ate leather in the first over he received was hor-
rible to behold.
The comments, audibly hurled from the on-
lookers, were not calculated to set the School
team at their ease. When Screw went on to bowl
there were alarming groans, for the luckless
Cooper’s House fellow, since his initial success,
had descended rapidly from good bowling to
mediocre, and from mediocre to shocking.
Martin’s jaw projected more than ever, and he
persisted with his bowling changes, but it was
evident that he was getting no good out of them.
About the only man in the team who hadn’t
bowled was Faraday, and when the skipper called


him over he accepted the ball with no small
qualms.
“I’m no Gregory, you know,” said Billy depre-
catingly.
“No matter —surely you’re as good as any of
the other chumps!” said Martin.
“A desperate move,” commented Billy, walking
back to begin his run.
He sent his first few balls so disgracefully wide
as to evoke a storm of jeers from the town sup-
porters, who, it must be confessed, had no
scruples of sportsmanship to hold them in check.
With Billy, this sort of treatment meant that
he would really wake up and show what he was
made of. He raged inwardly, but he seemed per-
fectly calm as he strolled back from the crease,
his leisurely gait drawing more comment from
the crowd.
“What price Algernon?”
“Look out —he’s going to bowl!”
“Don’t hurry—all day yet!”
Billy was one of those fellows who are seldom
disconcerted by chaff such as that. But he was
stung; and showed it by the deadly intent he put
into his next ball, which hissed furiously for the
wicket in dismaying fashion. But the leviathan
of the Windsor team whirled his bat and smote
the ball generously.
Mid-on was in two minds about the ball. It
was coming to him very fast, and would prob-


ably hurt severely if he stopped it. On the other
hand, it was a catch —of a sort. He had not
decided whether to try for it or leave it—which
is a detestable state of mind for any fieldsman—
when it was upon him. He made a belated,
miserable attempt —and missed by feet.
Instantly the scorn of the townsmen was poured
out upon him.
“Butter-fingers!”
“Get a bag!”
“Mind you don’t get hurt, Percy!” piped an
impudent treble, and mid-on blushed to the roots
of his hair.
“The scugs!” muttered Billy savagely. He was
feeling just about fed-up with the whole busi-
ness, and the total lack of sportsmanship on the
part of the crowd annoyed him intensely. At the
same time, he showed no signs, but merely put
all he knew into his bowling.
He sent along a fine delivery with his very next
ball —and almost fainted with astonishment. The
slogger, Swan, had almost missed the ball—and
it was tipped fairly into the hands of Screw at
short-leg. Screw held the ball and remained star-
ing at it as if hypnotized. Swan opened his
mouth, shut it abruptly, and stalked ofif the field.
“Good man!” yelled Martin. The crowd was
silent, for they had been enjoying the slogging
of Swan, and this fluke catch was not a satisfying
way of getting a man out,


As for Billy, his determination was doubled.
He got the next man, to his own intense surprise,
before he was really set; and the score was be-
ginning to assume a reasonable aspect —four men
for thirty-nine runs.
Martin’s hopes of victory began to soar, and
the amazing Billy, in successive overs, whipped
over two wickets for eight runs.
“Where on earth have you been living, all this
time” demanded Martin of Billy, during a change-
over. “Talk about hiding your giddy light under
a bushel! Demon bowler, eh? Why, you’d give
Spofforth fits! Keep it up, old chap, and I’ll
stand you the best feed you ever clapped eyes
on.”
Billy grinned. “This is my day out,” he said in
reply. As a matter of fact, he had become worked
up by the treatment of the School by the on-
lookers, and the desperate state of the match. It
was his way, in matters of pressing importance,
to rise to the occasion; and no one could gain-
say that he was doing so now. Martin put him
on again.
When Windsor went out, in their second in-
nings, for a mere fifty-two runs, the spectators
could hardly credit their eyes. Why, they had
expected a rattling fine innings from the first
five men, and then a “declaration.” This was
most unusual! After all, there might be some-


thing left in the School side yet —it would all
depend upon how they would bat.
It was early evident that the school were out
to win the match by dogged run-getting. Martin
and Silver played a careful partnership, taking
no chances, until Silver obtained the confidence
which he had so disastrously lacked in the first
innings.
Once there, really “set,” Silver looked round
and began to play a faster and more open game.
The Windsor team were sent scurrying all over
the field, chasing the leather; and the score of
Deepwater College rose notch by notch.
All the same, there was a considerable discrep-
ancy still between the scores, and both sides
were now striving with all their skill for a win.
Doggedly as the School batted, sneaking every
run that could possibly be sneaked, the Windsor
team battered with an equal doggedness at their
defences.
No longer, now, did the derisive comments
come from the crowd. The finish had the ap-
pearance of being exciting—very much so; and
flippancy was forgotten. Instead, roars of cheer-
ing greeted especially adroit moves from either
side; any partisanship previously allowed to
show was now lost in the expectation of a hard-
fought finish.
Martin went out, with a useful score, and
Screw came in. Screw was, generally speaking a


rather weak sort of bowler, but as a batsman,
the only word that aptly describes him is “furi-
ous. ” There was method in his dashing, wild-
seeming attack, though; and his lively innings
for thirty runs tickled the crowd immensely. He
received an ovation from the town’s supporters,
and grinned happily.
“They didn’t care for my bowling,” he re-
marked to Billy Faraday, “but my innings seemed
to please them.”
“Rather! I say, isn’t old Silver knocking up a
score? He’s sixty-four now, and once he’s set
he’s liable to stay there for ever.”
“That’s Silver’s way. It wouldn’t surprise me
to see him rake in a century. Now he’s in the
mood, and has his eye in, the bowlers can’t shift
him!”
“And if we’ve any sort of luck ”
“ we ought to win,” completed Screw, with
a twinkle of pleasure in his eye. “Jove —there’s
another boundary; go on, Silver! Silver!”
When Billy’s turn came to bat. he felt dis-
tinctly nervous. He had had such incredible luck
with his bowling that it was far too much to
expect that his batting would be of the same
fortunate brand.
He was second-last man, and a dozen runs
were yet required to win. Martin could hardly
contain himself as he watched the bowler’s run
up to the crease. By luck, or skill, or both, the


School had almost pulled the fat out of the fire
—and it would be tantalizing if they were to fail
now —within sight of victory.
Martin held his breath as the ball was de-
livered. None knew better than he that Faraday
was nervous —he could see it in the batsman’s
stand, his whole attitude. Martin stood and
looked .... and then executed a wild leap of
excitement.
“Oh, good man ! Good man !”
“Hit like a Trumper, sir!”
It was a splendid carpet-drive to the boundary,
and it clicked against the railings with a sound
that could be heard all over the field. Martin
simply gasped. If only those two men could
knock up a dozen between them, then !
“Then,” he yelled, slapping Screw on the back,
“then we win—we win!”
Screw was equally excited, and the two of them
could scarcely wait for the ball to be bowled.
That first drive had done Faraday good—im-
mense good. It had cooled him and steadied him.
He set out in earnest to notch those few runs
necessary for victory. He played with judgment
that sent Martin into ecstasies —played with
judgment that baffled the fieldsmen, eager as
they were, and ready as they were to make him
pay for the slightest mistake.
“Oh, boy! That’s done it!” roared the School
team, as Billy lifted the ball into the outfield,


and the score of Windsor was overtaken. The
two scores stood level —dead level. The bowler
looked grim, and compressed his lips. Couldn’t
he somehow flatten this batsman with his next
ball; Wasn’t it possible to make it a drawn game,
even at this stage?
It wasn’t. Billy snicked the ball past square-
leg, and ran it for two.
“Good-oh, the Billy-boy!”
“Oh, you little pearl!” burbled Screw, almost
speechless with joy.
The match was won —and by more than a mar-
gin. Billy and the last man knocked up twenty-
eight runs between them, and of which Billy made
twenty. Windsor found themselves up agaipst a
most unlooked-for defeat.
It was almost dark when the youngsters had „
changed and were ready for the char-a-banc
which would carry them back to Deepwater.
“Well, we did it!’’ said Martin to Silver, as
they sat in the vehicle. We did it, old boy!”
“And young Faraday’s come on wonderfully,”
returned Silver. “Where is he, by the way?
Seem t s to me all the others are here now. What’s
keeping him?”
But Billy would have found a good deal of
trouble in returning to the char-a-banc. After
he had dressed, he was met at the door by a
grimy-looking youngster, who, however, said
that a friend of Billy’s wished to see him.


“He’s an old bloke,” said the youth, and Billy
wondered who the dickens it could be. Some
obscure acquaintance, he imagined, who would
talk rot about how finely he had played. . . .
A motor-car was waiting in the gloom at the
back of the pavilion, and after the glare of her
headlights Billy found it difficult to recognize the
man in the tonneau. He came forward question-
ing^
“My dear boy, how are you?” said a strange
voice.
“I’m afraid —” began Billy, and then gasped.
For the the man bent suddenly forward and grip-
ped him fiercely by the throat!
Billy had no time to cry out, no time to call
for help, even if the surprise of the moment had
permitted. The clutch on his throat was the
tightest and the strongest he had ever experi-
enced ; he was dragged ruthlessly forward till his
chin met the side of the car, and at the same time
a rag that smelt of some strange chemical was
forced against his nostrils. He tried hard not
to breathe, but the breath came, and with it gid-
diness—and darkness.
It had been chloroform —that was the word
that his whole brain shouted, and it accom-
panied his nightmarish swoop into insensibility.
Back in the char-a-banc his companions were
becoming a trifle impatient.


“Did any of yon see where Billy got to?” asked
Silver.
One of them knew —said that he had seen Billy
speaking to the grimy youth at the door, but
had thought no more about it.
“It’s a funny thing—cut back and see whether
he’s in the dressing-room,” said Silver.
But no; Faraday was not there—nor, indeed,
anywhere in the neighbourhood. The team spent
a fruitless half-hour in the search, and concluded
that Billy must, for some strange reason or other,
have gone back to Deepwater alone.
“Perhaps he met a friend who gave him a
lift,” suggested Martin. “But it’s funny he didn’t
let us know.”
“I believe Billy comes from Victoria, though,”
said Silver thoughtfully. “Would a friend of his
be hanging around this place? Perhaps .. . .
anyhow, we’ll wait for a bit.”
They waited, but as Billy did not show up
within another quarter of an hour, they con-
cluded that he had unaccountably gone on his
own ; and they set out for the College with some
misgivings, but hoping that there was nothing
wrong. . . .
But before we follow them back to Deep-
water it will be well if we turn back the hands
of the clock a matter of some twelve hours, and
glance at what had been taking place there.
In the first place, there had been a consider-


able sensation early in the morning, when a
notice went up on the Salmon’s House board; a
notice that attracted a noisy, mystified, question-
ing crowd of juniors and seniors alike.
OYEZ! OYEZ! OYEZ !
Be it known that a new publication entitled
the “BUSY BEE,” will be published this day,
SATURDAY, and will be on Sale at Study No.
9, Salmon’s House—Price ONE PENNY. Nego-
tiable VALUE in the shape of stamps, cricket-
bats, chewing gum, suspension-bridges, etc., etc.,
will NOT be accepted.
IMPORTANT!—No Free List.
The “BUSY BEE” is a real live -wire, top-
notch, rip-roaring, and snorting good paper—you
simply cannot afford to miss it!
HOP IN NOW FOR YOUR CUT!
Magnificent Illustrations—
Astounding Articles—
Criticism that Stings—
Red-hot Revelations—
Libel by the Armful—
Look for the Pink Label!
SEP. PATCH,
Printer and Publisher.
This was the flaring notice, executed in giant
capitals, and with lavish expenditure of red and
green inks, and the comment it provoked was


considerable. Curious seniors and excited fags
marched in a body to Study No. 9, and found the
genial Patch, his sleeves rolled up, standing
behind an improvised counter —he had moved
the study table into the doorway. On the table
stood a stack of printed papers.
“What’s this rot about a paper?” demanded
one of the fellows.
“Pay your penny, comrade,” urged Patch
blandly, “and see for yourself! I thank you.”
Once started, the demand for papers was ex-
tensive, especially as the purchasers evinced
great interest in the contents of the Busy Bee.
Within a few minutes the stack on the table had
diminished by half. In all parts of the House
fellows were studying the papers with amused
expressions.
All at once there was a sound as of an enraged
dinosaurus, and Cummles strode angrily along
the corridor.
“Where’s Patch?” he yelled.
“Here, comrade! What do you require? Have
you a spare penny? Then I would suggest ”
“Suggest be jiggered! This is what I’ve come
about.” He lugged a copy of the Busy Bee out
of his pocket, and held it about two inches from
Patch’s nose. “See that —that!”
He pointed with his finger. “That” was a
reproduced photograph, covering half a page of
the paper; and it depicted that humiliating scene


on the night—now a week back —when the
Cripples had been photographed in the old Science
room.
The thing was horrible in its deadly distinct-
ness. Against a dark background the white,
piteous faces of the Cripples, distorted with
sneezings, dipping into handkerchiefs, in every
phase of distress, showed as plainly as a lantern-
picture.
Patch looked at it and laughed with immense
heartiness.
“Ha, ha, ha!” he chuckled. “Yes, very funny
indeed! Screamingly funny! I’m so glad you
noticed it —one of the features of the issue!”
“Funny, you goggle-eyed idiot!” roared
Cummles. “Funny! You call that—” he choked,
“funny?”
“Why, of course! Don’t you think
“Look here,” interrupted Cummles, “it’s like
your thundering cheek to print that photo, and
you’re not going to sell any more of your burbling
papers!”
“No?” queried Patch politely. “Well, well!
It’s a lovely day, isn’t it?”
“Bother the day! Look here—look here ”
He was quite speechless by now, and he made
a sudden dart at the pile of papers, with the
evident intention of seizing the lot.
“What are you up to now, Cummles?” asked
a quiet voice. It was the voice of Fane; and the


bully-killer himself stepped from the interior of
Study 9 across to the counter.
“I’ll soon show you what I’m up to!” said
Cummles, too heated to avoid a possible row with
the youngster who had thrashed him early in the
term.
“Well, I’m sorry to interfere in your amusing
little games,” returned Fane evenly. “But it
happens, old tomato, that we don’t want you in
here. Hook it!”
“Hook it?” repeated Cummles furiously.
“Yes —hook it, scoot, buzz off, vamoose!”
“And mind the step,” added Patch thought-
fully.
Cummles gave a sort of howl. He dived for-
ward, seeking to upset the counter by lifting a
table-leg; but Fane, vaulting over the obstruc-
tion, landed heavily on his back and bowled him
over with no ceremony at all.
“Ow! Oof!” howled the bully. “Gerroff!
Lemme get up!”
“Dear me —I didn’t notice you there,” said
Fane sweetly. “Dropped something?”
Cummles, his face as black as thunder, jumped
up and faced his tormentor in a furious rage.
He drew back his right arm, as if to swing for
the other’s face .... . Fane eyed him calmly.
At last, “All right—we’ll see!” fumed the bully
with sharp realization that he did not care to
come to blows with the bully-killer. Those small,


hard, knuckly fists of Fane’s were too damaging
to be rashly invited. “We’ll see!”
And Cummles made the best of a bad scene by
striding off without another glance at anyone.
The Busy Bee had made a sensation, there
was no doubt. The reproduced photograph of
the Cripples, labelled “The Martyrs’ Meeting;
Cummles and Co., and their Ju-Ju,” together
with the satirical article that accompanied it, was
a journalistic “boom” of the first water. And
Cummles and Co. raged impotently. They could
not prevent the sale of the Busy Bee, and the
whole school was presently laughing at them.
Having sold all the copies that had been
printed, Patch and the others set about their
amusement for the day, which the cheerful Sep-
timus intended to celebrate in a way all his own.
He had persuaded Jack to give him a hand with
one of his inventions, and Jack, having nothing-
in particular to do, had consented.
All that afternoon Jack slaved in the work-
shop, surrounded by levers and wheels, steel bars
and cranks. On his glumly remarking that they
were the two biggest cranks, Septimus cheerfully
replied, “Speak for yourself, old Sport. And
when I’ve sold this invention for a million. I’ll
remember that the ox was worthy of his hire.”
Jack groaned.
It was not until the cricketing team had re-
turned that they came back to the house. Arrived


there, Jack learned that Billy Faraday had not
come back with the others.
“No,” he told Silver, “he’s not been back, I'm
pretty sure. I wonder ”
He bit his lip and frowned. Was it altogether
possible that Billy had fallen foul of Lazare and
his gang? It seemed a trifle ridiculous, but
Just then a fag entered the room, carrying a
letter in his hand.
“For you, Symonds,” he said.
“Ha!” said Jack. “This is probably from Billy,
and will explain. How did you come by it,
youngster?”
“A fellow on a bicycle was passing the gate,
and he gave it to me. Said it was for you, and I
brought it along.”
“Oh, thanks. You can cut now.” He looked
at the address —his name, in pencil. Then he
ripped the envelope open. He pulled out a thin
sheet of paper, like a leaf from a pocket-book.
He looked on it with growling amazement, that
was replaced by an expression of horror.
“Jove —they’ve got him!” he said, hoarsely.
“Got him?” repeated Silver. “What do you
mean?”
For answer, Jack passed over the sheet of
paper.
“Faraday is held a prisoner,” it ran, “and says
the Black Star is with you. Keep this to your-
self, and meet me, with the Star to-morrow night,


nine o’clock, at Day’s Corner. Attempt no
treachery, or it will be the worse for your friend
—and yourself. It is the only way. Your failure
to turn up as stated or any trickery will be the
end of Faraday.— Lazare.”
“Whew! Is this a joke?” asked Silver. “And
who the dickens is Lazare?”
But Jack did not answer him. He stared at
Silver as if he were not there, and his face had
gone perfectly white.


CHAPTER XVII
HUE AND CRY
“Old fellow!” burst out Silver, clutching Jack
by the arm; “you look as if you’d seen a ghost!
What in the world’s all this rot? You don’t mean
to say ”
“Mean to say!” cried Jack, suddenly coming
to life. “Look here, Silver —I’ll tell you the truth.
This letter’s from a couple of low-down crooks
who’ve got hold of Billy some way or other,
and if we don’t look out he’ll be ”
“You mean he’s been kidnapped?”
“Kidnapped—yes. Come along to our study,
old chap, and we’ll see what we can think out. I
tell you, it’s an ugly hole, and I’m a good bit
scared!”
Silver followed Jack to Study No. 9, where
Fane and Patch were already ensconced. The
ominous note from Lazare was passed around,
and the four sat down together to consider what
would be their course of action. Silver, of course,
wanted to know a great many things all at once,
but he got, at least, an inkling of the ill-fated


Black Star and what had already happened dur-
ing that memorable term.
“Well, comrades,” said Patch, “we’ve just got
to do something! I’ve been thinking. First of
all, we go to the Head, and make a confession of
everything we know. Then, we’ll have to get
Doctor Daw arrested—he thinks we haven’t got
anything against him, but we know enough to
get him hooked for conspiracy! That should put
him out of the road. Then ”
He paused and considered.
Jack remembered something. “Oh, I’ve got
another stunt that may be of use! You know that
cave on Dog-face? I’ve always thought that
that’s where Humbolt was hiding—and probably
Lazare as well. Now, if that’s so, then we ought
to find Billy there.”
“Good for you. Jack!” cried Patch. “It should
be worth trying, at any rate. We could sneak
over and hold the beggars up—nab them. That
would just settle things handsomely, but I don’t
know whether we’d be able ”
“Wouldn’t we?” demanded Fane, fiercely. “If
Billy’s there, on Dog-face, I don’t see any reason
why we shouldn’t row over and get him back!”
“Humbolt’s got a gun, and he might use it.”
“No matter. There’s Billy’s pistol here, and
we’d have everything in our favour. We could
creep in on the beggars late at night, when they’re
asleep !”


“Well, if boldness counts for anything, the
scheme ought to be a good one. But ”
“Another thing is, if we don’t do that, what
on earth are we going to do? If Jack calmly
hands over the Star, we’ve no guarantee that
Billy’s going to be let go free again! With giddy
criminals like Lazare and that other fellow, good-
ness knows what might happen. Why, they might
even shut Billy’s mouth by—well, throwing him
into the bay—anything.
“If we try to nab the chap when he meets
Jack, he’d probably smell a rat, and do what he
says! Or put a bullet into Jack —I wouldn’t
trust the beggars a foot, and that’s a fact! The
only way is to hop into them when they’re not
looking; and the trip to Dog-face looks good to
me.
Patch considered, rubbing his chin with his
forefinger. He took off his spectacles and pol-
ished them.
Then, “It’s a risk,’’ he said. “But, now you
put it that way, I reckon we can’t do anything
else! If we collar Billy and get away with him,
then the other fellows could wait till afterwards,
see? The police could be put on their track, and,
depend upon it, they’d be grabbed sooner or
later. But once we’ve got Billy safe, we can
tell them to go and eat coke!’’
“Of course we could; we’d have the whip hand
over them. My opinion is—make the trip to Dog-


face now—or very soon —and tell the Head
nothing about it.”
“Why not?”
“Well, simply because, if we tell the Head, he
won’t let us go.”
Patch seemed to ponder this statement for a
minute. “Yes,” he said at last, “that’s true
enough. The Head would forbid it, and get
some blundering bobby to take the job on. Look
here —who will go?”
“The lot of us,” said Jack decisively. “I sup-
pose Silver’s on, aren’t you?”
“Sure thing,” said Silver quietly. “We can
get a skiff out of the sheds. I have the key—and
sneak out along the edge of the bay. It wouldn’t
do if we were to strike out boldly for Dog-face!
We’d be spotted pretty quickly. But what are
our plans?”
“We’ll see, comrade. First of all, we’ll have
to reconnoitre. Then we’ll make sure of our
attack. I’ve got an idea —we won’t go until about
two o’clock in the morning. If they’ve got a
watch out at that time, then all I can say is,
they’re pretty cautious!”
And so, finally, it was arranged. The con-
spirators went to bed early that night—and they
awoke early the next morning. At five minutes
past one, to be precise, the little band of four
cautiously left the school grounds and presently


came to the river, where they launched a skiff
on the softly-lapping water.
It was an adventure that was as wine to the
spirit of Jack Symonds and his pals. They were
strung to a high pitch of keenness, by the thought
of Billy Faraday and what was happening to
him; and if there was a trace of nervousness, the
darkness of the night and the danger of the ven-
ture might have excused it.
Out they rowed into the bay, hugging the
shore closely, as they turned in the direction of
Dog-face. The skiff crept along almost without
sound; there was the ruffle of parted waters, and
the subdued grumbling of the oars in the row-
locks. Despite this, they made progress; and
soon the black bulk of Dog-face lay blotted
against the stars.
“Softly now,” said Jack Symonds. “Quit row-
ing—we’ll drift there. The tide is just right,
fortunately. Easy.”
In breathless silence the skiff drifted down on
Dog-face. There was much starlight, and there
was no knowing whether they were being ob-
served or not. At any moment there might ring
out a challenge, or perhaps they might be fired
upon, and no questions asked. It was a nerve-
testing time.
Finally, the keel grated on shingle; the slight
sound was swallowed up in the wash of tiny
waves on Dog-face. Patch leapt out, and after


a minute or so of Whispering it was decided to
leave Silver in the boat, ready to push her out
and pull for the College. The boat was backed
into the beach again so that her stern rested
lightly on the shingle; Silver, paddling softly,
kept her nose pointed away from the shore.
Then, the three others stole quietly away.
Nothing was left to chance; they took ten
minutes to approach the entrance to the cave,
using the utmost caution, striving to make only
the most infinitesimal sounds.
At the mouth they listened for a long, long
time; but they could hear nothing.
“We’ll just have to chance it,” Patch whis-
pered in Jack’s ear. “We’ll have to go right in.
You’ve got the pistol—let me take the torch and
go first. You be ready to let fly if anything hap-
pens.” Fane gripping a cricket-stump in the
manner of a club, brought up the rear.
It needed a fine nerve to enter that noisome
cave, at dead of night, and not knowing what
dangers attended the act. But the three pals did
not hesitate at all. They slipped inside; all was
perfectly quiet.
It suddenly occurred to Patch that perhaps
they had been wrong from the outset —perhaps
their whole supposition was at fault. That would
account for the silence —there was nobody here.
“Soon settle that,” he murmured. “Ready,
Jack?”


“You bet.” Jack’s voice came back in an un-
faltering whisper. He gripped the revolver
tightly; he could not deny that it lent him con-
fidence.
Patch pressed over the switch of the electric
torch, and swept the cave with light. The place
was bare of any occupant. Only, in one corner,
what looked like a bundle of rags lay humped up;
and Patch tiptoed across.
“Billy!” he said softly. And it was indeed
Billy himself. They shook him by the shoulder,
heartily glad that he was alive and soon to be at
liberty.
He opened his eyes, and stared for a moment
without comprehension. Then, “You chaps!” he
said. “This is great! I never thought—here, cut
off these things.”
They snicked the cords that bound, and he
stood up, rubbing his cramped limbs, and shaking
them all by the hand.
“Jingo, but you’re dinkum pals,” he said. “I
thought they had us beaten, but ”
“Who is it?” asked Patch. “Lazare and Hum-
bolt?”
Billy nodded. “Yes, the brutes! They tried
torturing me, and they got the information they
wanted —I said that Jack had the Star. I had
to—they made me.”
Billy smiled a wry sort of smile. “They’ve got
little motor-launch, too, and I suppose they


thought I was safe enough here. But they may
be back at any moment. We’d better clear.”
“True for you,” said Jack; and the four of them
got out of the cave into the faint starlight.
“Phew! I can’t say that the merry old cave is
exactly ”
There was a sudden blaze of light, and he
stopped short.
“You will put your hands up, and drop that
gun,” said a strange voice. “Look sharp!”
Under the menace of a heavy revolver Jack
had to drop his own weapon. He almost groaned
with despair. Just at the moment of their triumph,
Humbolt had returned, and, what was worse, he
had already got the upper hand.
Helpless, the little quartette of schoolboys
faced the grinning Tiger, who was clearly en-
joying his victory to the full.
“Thought you were clever, eh?” asked Tiger,
in a sneering voice. “You’re a lot of fools, that’s
all, and you’ve put your foot in it this time, let
me tell you.” He turned to Billy. “Well, my
young spark, is the chap that hid the Star among
this lot?”
“He is,” returned Jack quietly. “Look here,
my good fellow, we’re sick and tried of hanging
on to the rotten old Star. You’ve got us beaten
now, haven’t you? If I promise to bring the
Star right back with me, you won’t harm me or
my friends here?”


“No,” said Tiger, shortly. “Provided you stick
to your part of the bargain.”
Jack was very much at his ease by now, but
he was thinking with lightning rapidity, and try-
ing to remember something that the old gentle-
man had told him on the night of the boxing in
Windsor about this very Humbolt. Ah, he had
“Yes,” he pursued, shivering, “this place gives
me the creeps, and I wish we’d never had any-
thing to do with the Star. Why, we nearly got
bitten by a snake coming up here ”
“What!” said Humbolt, sharply.
“Yes, a great big black snake, and it ran into
that crack you’re standing on now. A whopper,
it was ”
Jack had staked everything on that throw. He
had remembered in time what he had been told
about “Jim Camp’s peculiar horror of snakes,”
and desperately he brought the subject into the
conversation.
It was amazingly successful. At the first
mention of snakes, Humbolt had looked distinctly
uneasy. But when Jack added that the reptile
had sought refuge in the ground at his feet, the
outwitted man could not resist a long, searching
glance at the fissure referred to.
It was his undoing. Jack Symonds was ready;
and, like some splendid machine, touched off in


an instant, he sprang through the air and crashed
heavily upon Humbolt.
Taken by surprise, Tiger’s grip upon his wea-
pon naturally relaxed, and the impact sent it
flying a dozen feet away. But he was too strong,
too solid, to go to the earth. He stood and
wrestled furiously. Jack grabbed the man’s arms
and tried to prevent him from getting in a blow,
for he had seen the effect of Humbolt’s hitting,
and had no desire to be hit himself.
The man was very strong, a very pocket Her-
cules. And Jack, athletic as he was, felt himself
gradually being overmastered. The thick, short
arms struggled in his hold; one got free, and
Jack felt it drawn back, and waited, heart in
mouth, for the sickening thump--but it never
came.
Instead, Humbolt staggered, gave a groan, and
Jack saw that he was falling. Hastily he glanced
up and saw Fane surveying his cricket-stump
ruefully.
“I’m sorry I hit from behind,” the latter said,
“but the beggar was out to spifflicate you. I
banged him on the head.”
“Good man —don’t apologize,” said Jack, with
immense cheerfulness. “Come on —cut!”
Even as Jack jumped away, Humbolt, dazed
as he was, made a blind grab at his legs. The
man’s tenacity was admirable; he was possessed
of the instincts of a bulldog-ant. And, seeing his


late captives, escaping, he roared out at the full
pitch of his lungs.
“Lazare! Quick! Help! Lazare!”
So Lazare was somewhere handy, then! Or
was it only a bluff? Bluff or not, they raced
madly for the skiff, calling out to Silver as they
ran; and after a brief, rocky journey, came upon
the shingle-beach and the boat.
Everything worked with silken smoothness.
The four boys packed into the boat, taking an
oar each, while Patch made ready to steer.
“Six good ones,” said Silver; and Jack, with
the best oar in Deepwater College beside him,
was strangely thrilled. He put lots of weight and
pull into those six strokes, and the skiff shot out
from under the black shadow of Dog-face across
the smooth, tinkling water, A breath of sea-
breeze fanned their faces.
“We’ve done them!” said Jack, delightedly.
“After all —and I thought we’d regularly slipped
when Humbolt caught us!”
“Don’t be so sure,” said Patch. “Listen.”
“What?”
The next moment his question was answered.
There came the muffled pop-pop-popping of a
motor-boat exhaust, and a white speck suddenly
shot into view, around one of the capes of Dog-
face Island!


CHAPTER XVIII
CONCLUSION
“Jingo!” said Jack, excitedly; “they’re after us —
I can hear them! Buck up, you fellows—we’ll
spurt and beat ’em yet.”
In Jack and Silver the escaping skiff carried
perhaps the best oarsmen at Deepwater Col-
lege ; and they now bent to their task with a will,
and Fane and Billy Faraday, who were rowing
in the bows, took example from their pals.
The skiff shot ahead; the ripple of water from
the bow changed into a rushing, steady note. The
sea was calm as a millpond, and now that they
were out into the bay, the sound of the pursuing
motor-boat came staccato and clear.
There was no pretence now of hugging the
shore; they were making a bee-line for the Col-
lege jetty. But they were visible to the men on
board the motor-boat; and, fast though they were
going, there was no question as to which craft
showed the superior speed. The white speck of
the power launch grew in size until it was almost
distinct in the starlight.


Lazare, or Humbolt, or perhaps both of them,
were shouting—but the grimly-determined
schoolboys paid no heed. As if they intended to
pull up! But the miscreants in the launch had
another argument—and a more forcible one.
There came the clear report of a revolver, sur-
prisingly minute in the enormous space of the
bay, and a bullet ricochetted from the surface not
eight feet from the skiff.
“I say ” began Billy.
“Don’t say anything,” said Patch tersely. “Two
can play at that game, Humbolt! Give me that
pistol, Jack.”
“What are you going to do?” asked Billy,
straining at his oar.
Patch did not reply. He turned round, and
waited until a red flash and a delayed explosion
advertised another shot. Then he lifted his pistol
carefully, and fired two shots in rapid succession
at the pursuing craft.
Some sort of a result was instantly perceptible.
There came a distinct thump! and a snarling sort
of noise that ended rather abruptly. Followed
three shots from Humbolt in quick time, all of
which were without effect, although they
whistled unpleasantly close.
“Pull!” sang out Patch. “Pull like the dickens!
I believe I’ve stonkered their engine. Listen—
she’s misfiring like anything!”
Indeed, the explosions of the petrol launch were


now decidedly irregular—and after a while they
ceased altogether.
“Done them!” panted Jack. “Diddled the beg-
gars again! Patch, you ought to get a King’s
Prize for that shot!”
Triumphantly the Deepwater College fellows
pulled at their oars, and there was still no sound
from the rival boat. After an interval the engine
took up its beat again—but slowly and uncer-
tainly, as if it were likely to break down at any
moment.
“They’re going slow!” announced Patch. “We
can dish them at this rate. Isn’t that the Coll,
jetty across there? By jove, there’s a light—it
must be the Head! Pull up, my giddy buc-
caneers !”
Falling to the oars with a will, the boat’s crew
soon arrived at the jetty. They listened there for
any sound of the petrol launch’s engine; but the
immense bay was quite still.
“They’ve broken down,” said Fane, “or else
they’ve turned back, and we can’t hear them.
What price capturing the beggars! Get hold of
Mr. Glenister, and a few hefty fellows out of the
Sixth, and we could grab them.
“If so, we mustn’t lose any time,” said Patch.
“Come along, you fellows!”
They raced back to the College, and hurried in
through a window that they had conveniently
left open.


There they had the greatest surprise of the
night. They were moving along the masters’
corridor, on their way to the Head’s study, when
Doctor Daw’s door opened, and the accomplice
of Lazare himself appeared. He was carrying a
handbag, and wore an overcoat —his other attire
was all for travelling.
Lightning comprehension burst on Jack’s
brain.
“You third-rate scoundrel!” he said. “So you’re
getting out of it, are you ?”
“Getting out of what?” snarled Daw, obviously
affrighted by the coincidence of the boy’s arrival
and his departure.
“You know,” returned Jack grimly. “You’d
better stay, though, because the game’s up.”
“I don’t know what you mean!” ground out
Daw savagely. “Let me pass, you young cubs,
or I’ll find a way to make you!”
And he lifted his arm threateningly. It was a
fatal move. Young Fane, the bully-killer, had a
habit of jumping through the air and collaring
people who thus threatened him. He jumped
now, and his healthy weight, slung around in
the vicinity of Daw’s neck, hurled the master to
the floor with a resounding crash. Jack, only a
whit slower than his pal, jumped too, and the
both of them held the fellow pinned to the floor.
But Daw was really desperate. What had given
him the alarm —had sent him out of his room, in


escape, at this hour —was not obvious. But what
was obvious was that he was madly anxious to
get away. He fought like two men, and the two
powerful boys had their work cut out to secure
him. Once he planted a fist in Jack’s face with
tremendous force, and Fane alone kept up the
struggle.
But Billy and Silver were at hand, and, recover-
ing from their indecision, they too hurled them-
selves upon the villain.
Suddenly the Head’s room was opened, and
the Head, in dressing-gown and carrying a light,
appeared on the scene. He saw five persons
struggling in an inextricable knot upon his floor,
and for the moment he did not know what to
think. His first thought was that these were
burglars; then he recognized his own boys.
“Patch! Silver!” he ejaculated. “What is this
disgraceful conduct? What do you mean by
being out of ”
At that moment Fane secured an expert wrest-
ling hold upon the struggling Daw, and that per-
son, recognizing defeat, burst into a torment of
quite unprintable profanity.
“My goodness!” exclaimed the Head, his cars
assaulted by the outburst. “Daw —is that you?
And what is the meaning of this?”
“I’ll tell you what it means,” said Jack trench-
antly. “This man here is in league with a couple
of kidnappers and thieves, and we’re holding him


for inspection. You’d better telephone to the
police, sir. His friends are out on the bay with
a couple of revolvers and a damaged motor-boat.”
“It’s a lie,” roared Daw, accompanying the
words with a few vile adjectives.
“That will do, Daw,” said the Head coldly.
“There is no need to swear like that —even if this
charge is a false one. Surely you can make some
explanation. I cannot believe that you are ”
“Sir,” said Jack boldly, “I make no charge I
cannot support some way or other. This man
is dangerous, and I give you my word of honour
that he should be tied up pending explanation.
He must not be allowed to escape.”
There was something in the earnestness of the
boy’s tone that had an effect upon the Head.
Daw, writhing and cursing ineffectually, was not
a sight calculated to inspire one with a sense of
his innocence. Patch settled the question by
producing the revolver and holding it to Daw’s
head, while the others bound his hands and feet.
“This must be explained,” said the Head
grimly. His eyebrows had gone up at the sight
of the revolver, but its effect had been to lend
colour to a somewhat fantastic story. “I was
seeking a little relaxation,” he explained, “by a
quiet hour of reading, being unable to sleep. I
am interrupted—but come into my study.”
In the study, accordingly, the full story was
told, and the Head was vastly surprised. Jack


withheld nothing—even describing the various
nocturnal excursions that the Star had neces-
sitated. The adventure of the Indian hawker
and the substitution of a dummy for Billy in the
Upper Fifth class, however, he deemed it advis-
able to suppress.
“You have been very frank, my boy,” said the
Head approvingly, “and I quite believe your
story. It is a thing that I never imagined would
happen at Deepwater—it seems, you must admit,
utterly far-fetched. No doubt you would have
been well advised to have made a confidant of
myself or one of your masters at an earlier stage,
but I am glad that everything has turned out for
the best. The only thing that remains is the
apprehension of those two criminals on the boat.”
“It is nearly daylight, sir,” said Patch. “If
you were to ring up the police-station at Wind-
sor, no doubt the police could prevent the escape
of the men!”
“I shall do so, and at once,” said the Head.
“It is highly necessary that they should be taken.
And as for Redisham of the Sixth, I must find
occasion to speak severely to him. In my opinion
he is more misguided than depraved, and a word
at this stage will mean all the difference for
him.”
“I think he could be let off lightly, sir,” said
Billy. “He’s not a bad fellow at heart, but I fancy
Daw had some hold over him.”


“Whatever that hold may have been,” said the
Head gravely, “I imagine that it will be value-
less in the near future. The authorities will be
able to see to that. And now I must ring the
police-station.”
He did so, and with the result that, promptly
advised of the facts, the police secured their men
the next day, and were greatly pleased to have
caught Lazare in particular. The man had been
wanted for years, but had always had just that
skill to keep clear of their meshes.
Billy put his case in the hands of a lawyer,
and the three associates were convicted —and in
one of His Majesty’s prisons were kept from mis-
chief for a period of many years.
The four friends in Study 9 were not displeased
that the exciting events of the term had now come
to a definite stop. As Billy remarked, holding
the flashing, sparkling Star in his hand, “It was
pretty fierce while it lasted, but the pace was a
killer! I’m glad it’s all over, real glad. Although
it’s served to give me three of the best pals a
fellow ever had . . . .Yes, chaps, it’s all over —
the excitement’s done. And the Black Star will
be in Mason’s hands before we return for next
term.”


>
The Eagle Press, Ltd., Allan Street, Waterloo.


• ; g*
'
ip


.


t* OrL
r ■■ ”■ m
'
/V
\jcPJfb j-,3
Mp •**
i -


1508
00134065


'■■ Mm liiil iiiiii ■H
;i ■ Mi Ml ikil leMilliHilß
mbJhW nil
,; ; WMWfm B®Pllfiliji m
I JfSti ! '
