

OF THE STEAMSHIP,
On her Passage from London to Melbourne.
CONTAINING A
FULL ACCOUNT OF THE EVENTS AND INCIDENTS
Which occurred on board, from her leaving Gravesend to her foundering in
the Bay of Biscay, on the 11th January, 1866, with a List
of the Passengers, Engineers, &c.
COMPILED FROM VARIOUS SOURCES, ; £\'[\ l£ ft! ft ftSft
WITH ' ~ " i
PORTRAITS AND BIOGRAPHICAL
OF - - iU'' "T Sft'
0 V. BROOKE, REV. J. DRAPER, &c.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
4 cr j ’ RhTluium: ■. ■ v ,
'Q>. CHARLWOOD *&, SON, 7, BOURKE STREET, EAST,
>arr) c fTf* three doors ‘from the tost office,
■' / V - ---- ■■ ■ - [
jo r* J w> H. WILLIAMS, PRINTER, 23 LITTLE BOURKE STREET EAST.




lB5O.
C|eattixal aub (Smral printing
BOURKE STREET, EAST,
THREE BOORS FROM THE POST OFFICE.
PRINTERS,
Bmmmmmu & mmmmmm
Beg to return their sincere thanks for the large amount of patronage con-
ferred upon them during the last sixteen years; and to respectfully inform
their friends and the public that they still continue to execute every variety
of Printing, in the very best style, and at the Lowest Eemunerative Eates.
IPIMWIIETOmS M)®ll3
AND OTHER PLACES OF AMUSEMENT,
"Will find it to their advantage to favor the above with their orders, as, from
the long and well-known experience of C. & Son in this description of
Printing, they can confidently ensure a style that must give satisfaction,
combined with reasonable charges. They would also call attention to
their LIST OF WOODCUTS (of which a copy can be had on applica-
tion) suitable for every branch of the profession, more especially adapted
for Theatres, Circuses and Concert Halls.
Bills for recovery of Lost or Stolen Property at an hour's notice.
Posting Bills, Hand Bills, Bill Heads, Circulars, Show
Cards, Address Cards, Cheque Books, Labels, &c.


ESTABLISHED 185 0.
CHARLWOOD & SON,
7, BOURKB STREET, EAST,
THREE DOORS FROM THE POST OFFICE,
Have always on hand a Large Stock of
STATOQNSRT.
CONSISTING OF
LEDGERS I CASH BOOKS I METALLIC BOOKS
JOURNALS DAY BOOKS | MEM. BOOKS
Papers of every description, comprising—Foolscap, Bank Post, Octavo,
Quarto and Folio, plain and ruled; Cream laid and Blue-wove Adhesive,
Envelopes, every size and quality; Morocco and Russian Merchants’ Wallets
(agoodasssortment); Copy Books, Slips, Cypherings, India-rubber, Rulers,
Steel Pens and Holders, Black-lead Pencils, Slates and Slate Pencils,
Wafers, Sealing Wax, Office Files, Letter Clips, Inkstands, and every
other article in the Trade. Also, a Choice Selection of all the
NEW AND MOST POPULAR WORKS OF THE DAY
INCLUDING THOSE OF
BULWER, MISS BRADDON, DICKENS, KINGSLEY,
THACKERAY, TROLLOPE, WILKIE COLLINS,
MRS. WOOD, &c.
Cheap Editions oe Ainsworth, Cooper, Disraeli, Hawthorne,
James, Marryatt, Scott, and other popular authors, at
OHSTE SHILLING- PER VOLUME.
ALL THE ENGLISH MAGAZINES, PERIODICALS, &c.
Received by Mail, and supplied at the
C. & SOX have been appointed SOLE AGENTS in the AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES for those Invaluable Medicines
MORISON S PILLS, POWDERS & OINTMENT
LACEY’S, & OTHER EDITIONS OP ACTING PLAYS
Received by every Mail,
UPWARDS OF 30,000 IN STOCK TO SELECT FROM.
{JJ'AII orders declined unless a remittance is made. Postage
Stamps taken lor cash.
AGENTS FOE ARGUS, AUSTRALASIAN OTHER NEWSPAPERS,






THE LOSS
THE “LOND ON,”
%tx IPasgagc from llontion to IHeltiourne:
CONTAINING A
FULL ACCOUNT OF THE EVENTS AND INCIDENTS
WHICH OCCURRED ON BOARD,
From her leaving Gravesend to her foundering in the Bay of Biscay , on
January 11 th, 1866, and a List of the Names of the
Passengers, Engineers, etc. ;
PORTRAITS AND BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
G. V. BROOKE, REV. D. J. DRAPER, &u.
ONE SHILLING.
||UlKcrum:
CHARLWOOD & SON, 7. BOTJRKE STREET, EAST
three boors from the post office.




INTRODUCTORY.
“ Oh ! I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer !—a brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creatures in her,
Dash’d all to pieces. Oh 1 the cry did knock
Against my very heart! Poor souls ! they perished.”— Tempest.
“ Next, 0, unhappy chief ! the eternal doom
Of Heaven decreed thee to the briny tomb :
What scenes of misery torment thy view !
What painful struggles of thy dying crew ! '
Thy perished hopes all buried in the flood
O’erspread with corses.” — Falconer's Shipwreck.
On the 11th of January, 1866, the stormy waters of the Bay
of Biscay were the agents of Providence in producing one of
those terrible catastrophes, which not only confound individuals,
but dismay whole communities. A magnificent steam-ship,
only recently built, constructed after the latest and most
approved models, fitted with powerful machinery, having the
prestige of proved speed and endurance, owned by one of the
most important of English ship-building firms, that for
nearly a century previously had enjoyed almost an immunity
from disaster, and navigated by a commander of acknowledged
skill and experience in the management of vessels of her class,
sank, like a stone, beneath the billows of the tempestuous sea,
carrying with her, to its dreadful depths, two hundred and
twenty human beings. Although but one of a long list of
marine casualties which occurred almost simultaneously with
the loss of the London, causing an aggregate waste of life
probably more extensive than that involved in the destruction
of the Australian steamer, the circumstances connected with
the lamentable event which it is the purpose of this publication
to record were so peculiar as to invest it with a decided though
shocking supremacy. In the first place, it was almost incre-
dible that a magnificent ocean steamer, which, only a few days
previous to the news arriving of her total annihilation, had
left port in all the pride of her stately beauty, carrying convic-
tion to the eye of the spectator of her capacity to fulfil her
mission speedily and safely, should succumb to the force of
winds and waves which spared and left unharmed the humblest
craft. In the next, the details of the catastrophe, supplied with
a fearful minuteness by the survivors, formed, collectively, a
historical picture unsurpassed, probably unequalled, in point of
human interest. So it was that the horror inspired by the
first intelligence of the calamity, succeeded by an intense curi-
osity to discover the cause of so unexpected a disaster, with
the mixture of pity, admiration, and even exultation, that
supervened when the story of that awful Thursday was fully


told, combined to give a prominence to this unhappy event
that will distinguish it to future generations as a great national
calamity.
Modern achievements in science have bred and encouraged a
vanity and self-complacency which almost seem to necessitate
some stupendous catastrophe, that humanity may be reminded
how frail and helpless it really is. Of late nothing has jseemed
impossible for man to compass. The storm might at will be
avoided or braved, the raging ocean might batter the strong
ship with all its violence, but its fury would be vainly spent
against her well riveted armour. The mountain waves and
the fiercest blasts might dash themselves against her prow, but
could not drive her back, for man’s invention had impressed
the giant aid of steam on her side. Science, indeed, had con-
quered sky and sea, and divested them of their terrors. Of a
sudden, every calculation is upset by some terrific proof that
human intellect, after all the boasting and exaltation of which
it has been the subject, is still incapable of providing against
contingencies which are even not of an extraordinary kind.
Such causes as those which eventuated in the foundering of
the London have always existed, and, indeed, when reading
the particulars of the occurrence, one cannot avoid being im-
pressed with the idea that science, so far from having effected
everything to protect and defend the vessel in such an emer-
gency as overtook it, had actually left her helpless. Her iron
masts cracked like reeds, and her iron rigging prevented her
being cleared of the wreck, the result being that the masses of
metal hung about the doomed ship in deadly embrace, pressing
her down into the water with a terrible pertinacity. Her iron
hatchway, built with the express object of protecting her
engines, instead of fulfilling such design, really seems to have
invited disaster. Either its frailty, improper construction, or
both combined, precipitated certainly, if they did not actually
cause, the frightful catastrophe which followed. Again, the
boats, although of the best kind, were unavailable when the
crisis arrived. One lifeboat is washed from the davits, another
cracks in two like a lath, and the iron pinnace goes to the
bottom of the sea the moment she is launched. The least sea-
worthy of the boats, according to modern calculation, is the
only one that answers the purpose for which it was placed on
board. Finally, the peculiar construction of the ship forbids
all hope of escape. The old “ tubs,” at which we sneer now-a-
days, would at least have furnished some material for rafts.
The London had none. Her fires out, her sails were useless,
and she was but an iron coffin!
And then that terrible picture, with its marvellous variety of
incident; each particular thoroughly fraught with the most


intense interest. The heroic commander calmly regardingthe
groups of men, women, and children, who, had man’s proposal
been the law by which the perils of the sea should be overcome,
would be now in the land to which they were speeding, but
who, while he gazed upon their pale faces and yielding limbs,
he knew were, under Providence, doomed to certain and
sudden destruction —he, that gallant Captain Martin, who
preferred to go down into the deep with his ship, to escaping
in the boat as he might and could have done—he shall be the
most prominent figure. And boldly in the foreground you
shall discover the statuesque form and manly lineaments of the
great actor, more grandly picturesque in the noble character
which he has here improvised than in the proudest of his
histrionic triumphs. And then, near by, the reverend divine
and profound scholar, encouraging with his cheery voice, and
animating by his example, weary and despairing men to make
further—alas ! that they should have been fruitless —efforts to
save the fated ship. And there, too, exhorting to resignation and
Christian reliance that fear-stricken group, ranged along the
wall of the cabin, mark the homely figure of the Wesleyan
minister; his eye brightening as it seems to recognise the
wondrous beatitude to which his spirit, soon to be released
from its fleshly thrall, aspires. And the twenty-one Dutch
sailors, huddled together forward, whose national characteristic
—a phlegmatic temperament —as now displayed, is strangely at
variance with another national characteristic —that of dauntless
bravery on the sea. And see, too, the bright and comely face
of Mrs. Logan the stewardess, mutely teaching hope and
resignation to all who look upon it. And there, opposite where
the boat is lying, the horror-smitten countenance of one from
whom the solace of resignation has been withheld, and who, in
that awful hour, remembers how gold can tempt. And further
on, the shockingly grotesque outline of a man with a carpet-
bag, which, as all but he knows, will never more be wanted by
him. And the two old people going below to die in their
bunks. Each of these has its own sadly pathetic history ; such
a history, indeed, as now transcends, and ever will, any effort
of human imagination. The most sublime of pictures were but
vapid and pointless, if compared with the least important
incident of that thrilling scene in the Bay of Biscay.
The investigation which the Board of Trade has entered
upon will, no doubt, elicit much information respecting the
state of the London when she put to sea, and her ability to
fight against such a storm as the barometer warned Captain
Martin against before leaving Plymouth. For three days
previously there had been a decided fall of the mercury, and on
the day following that on which the London quitted her last


harbour, the barometer dropped from 801 to 29'5, and, in
twelve hours later, to 29 - 2. The Telegraph, in its article of the
18th January, asks why Captain Martin did not then turn
back, and answers its own question by stating that he did not
trust his barometers, but went on in spite of them, like a
gallant but rash sailor, and got too far to return. The Daily
News answers this, to some extent pertinently, by showing,
that if captains of ships were not to put to sea, or when at sea
were to put back, in consequence of indications in the baro-
meter of atmospherical disturbances to come, there would cer-
tainly be no quick transmarine mail delivery. That Captain
Martin did not turn back until too late seems certain, but
given, his admitted experience and skill as a navigator of those
seas, in that very ship the London, and the fact that his critics
know little if anything of the exact circumstances of the case
except on second-hand information, the argument of the Tele-
graph is not worth much, whereas that of the Daily News did
not actually touch the question, the London being merely a
passenger ship, carrying no regular mail. Her time was her
own, or might have been, and, in the face of a known coming
danger, certainly should have been. It was at first assumed
that the ship was overloaded, particularly with deck freight,
but this has been contradicted point blank by Messrs. Money
Wigram and Co., who assert that she was not so heavily laden
as on her previous voyage. In Melbourne great diversity of
opinion existed, at the time the ship was in these waters last
year, as to her qualifications, and the writer of these lines well
remembers being disgusted with the perverseness of a nautical
friend, who, in the teeth of a burst of general approval of the
appearance and assumed capacity of the London, declared that
no money would tempt him to go to sea in such a craft. It is
much to be feared it will eventually be found that this noble
steamer, and the two hundred and twenty souls who went
down in her, have been sacrificed to the fetish competition
which, by necessitating low passenger rates and quick passages,
has, in more instances than that of the London, called from its
votaries such frightful immolations as that of the fatal 11th of
January. According to some of the English journals, the
manner in which the preliminary official surveys are conducted
is anything but satisfactory, and gives no real assurance that
the vessels are not too heavily laden. In Australia, Captain
Martin bore the character of a smart and extremely bold com-
mander, and one who, give him the slightest excuse, would
“ crack on” to the fullest extent. If, unfortunately, his judg-
ment misled him into pushing on his ship beyond the power of
her endurance, he paid for his mistake with his life.


PARTICTJLAES
or THE
LOSS OF THE “LONDON."
The noble vessel whose loss involved the fearful catastrophe, referred
to in our introductory remarks, was built by Messrs. Money, Wigram,
and Sons, in 1864, at Blackwall, and, according to the opinion of
many competent authorities on naval architecture, was one of the
strongest passenger ships afloat. She was of nearly 3000 tons burden,
1752 register, and was fitted with an auxiliary screw, and engines of
200-horse power. The length of her main deck was 272 ft. 2in.;
beam, 35ft. Sin.; depth of hold, 24ft. Her classification appeared on
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping as that of a first class steamer for ten
years, Al. She had made two voyages to Melbourne and back, and had
realised by her performances the great expectations entertained respect-
ing her. Indeed she was constructed specially for steaming to Austra-
lia round the southern capes; and had five watertight bulkheads.
Her masts, three in number, were of iron, and her rigging and gear
were also metallic. She carried a full complement of boats, including
an iron pinnace capable of holding fifty persons, and two lifeboats.
THE VOYAGE DOWN CHANNEL.
On the 28th of December, 1865, the s.s. London , Captain J. Bohun
Martin, left the East India Docks with passengers and a general cargo,
bound for Melbourne, Victoria, and dropped down the river to Graves-
end. Anchor was weighed on the following Saturday (the 30th), and,
under the charge of Mr. Thompson, a Thames pilot, she was sailed to
the Nore, where, as the weather was threatening and the wind dead
ahead, she brought-to for the night. She remained at her anchorage
all Sunday, and again got under weigh at daybreak on Monday, the Ist
January, 1866. The ship steamed down Channel, still against a head
wind, but making fair way. While passing outside the Isle of Wight
the wind increased to half a gale, and Captain Martin deemed it pru-
dent to put back and lay-to in St. Helen’s Roads. On the morning of
the 2nd, the London proceeded out through the Needles into the open
Channel, the wind being still ahead, but light. As the ship ran down
Channel the wind rose and the sea increased, and a couple of hours


after passing the Needles the wind blew a gale right ahead, with a
heavy sea rolling, which continued all the way to Plymouth, where the
ship arrived about noon on Thursday, the 4th. A terrible disaster
occurred here, by which a valuable life was lost. A pilot cutter put off
a small boat, having on board the pilot and his assistant, to bring the
London inside the breakwater. When the boat was about 100 yards
from the London a sea capsized her, and both the pilot and his assistant
were thrown into the water. Captain Martin instantly ordered one of
his lifeboats to be lowered, and with great difficulty the assistant pilot
was rescued, but his unfortunate superior was drowned. The London
came to an anchorage inside the breakwater at 1 p.m. on the 4th inst.,
and during the afternoon took on board those of her first and second
class passengers who had arranged to join the ship at Plymouth. At
midnight on Friday she proceeded on her voyage, the weather being at
this time calm, with a light wind ahead. At this time the London had
on board 239 souls, all told. Her passenger list showed a total of 153
of all ages, thus classified :
CHIEF CABIN.—Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Draper, Mrs. Owen and child, Mr.
and Mrs. G. F. P. Urquhart, Mr. J. Patrick, Mr. and Miss Vaughan (G. Y.
Brooke), Mr. J. Alderson, Mr. B. Benson, Mr. and Mrs. J. Fenton and two
children, Mr. G. M. Smith, Mr. and Mrs. Chapman and two children, Mr.
and Airs. Clarke and son, Mr. F. Lewis, Mr. and Mrs. J. Bevan, Dr. J.
Woolley, Mr. and Mrs. Debenham, Miss L. Maunder, Mr. J. Robertson, Mr.
T. M. Tennant, Mrs. Trail and child, Mr. G. Palmer, Mr. T. Brown, Mr.
and Mrs. Amos, Mr. E. Brooks, Mr. J. R. Richardson, Rev. Mr. and Mrs.
Kerr, Mrs. and Miss King, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas and two children, Mr. A.
Sandilands, Mr. E. Youngman, Mr. 11. ,1. Dennis, Mr. E. A. Marks, Mr. D.
F. De Pass, Master W. D. Burrell, Dr. J. Hunter, Miss D’Ovoy, Miss C.
M‘Lachlan, Miss Cutting, Mr. M‘Millan.
SECOND CABIN.—Mr. Kate Eastwood, Mr. F. Stone, Mr. and Mrs.
White, Miss 11. Price, Mr. J. L. Williams, Mr. and Mrs. Graham, Mr. B.
G. Rowe, Mr. J. E. Wilson, Mrs. Morland, Miss G. Graham, Mr. J. Dothie,
Mr. C. Gough, Mr. A. Bruce, Mr. J. Woodhouse, Mr. G. Cross, Mr. W.
Day, Mr. D. W. Lemon, Mr. and Mrs. Giffett, Mr. G. Chennells, Mr. and
Mrs. Wood, Master and Miss Clayson, Mr. Thomas Wood, Mr. Godfrey
Wood, Miss E. Wood, Mr. B. Bevan, Miss S. Brooker, Mr. Davis, Mr. T.
o‘Hagen, Mr. 11. W. Harding, Mr. F. Freyer, Mr. J. Munro, Mr. D. C.
Main, Mr. C. Johnstone, Mr. P. Fenwick, Mrs. and Miss Aleggs, Mr. G. H.
Campbell, Miss E. Marks, Mr. E. G. Trevenen, Mr. and Mrs. Hickman, two
sons and two daughters, Mr. A. M‘Lean, and Mr. Davis.
THIRD CABIN.—Mr. W. Passmore, Mr. 11. Miller, Mr. C. P. Chandler,
Mr. B. Hay, Miss E. Jones, Mrs. and Miss Simpson, Mr. and Mrs. Hanson,
Mr. and Airs. Graham and three children, Mr. and Mrs. G. Flick and four
children, Mr. R. Trevurrow, Mr. D. Block, Mr. J. Gerkem, Messrs. Zulec
Morris and Zulec Barnett, Mr. S. Bolton, Mr. T. Skeggs, Mr. and Mrs. D.
Smith, Mr. A. Umphray, Master Spring, Mr. A. Hoyeim, Mr. J. Walls,
Mr. W. Barron, Mrs. Lampes and two children, Mr. Algernon L. Otter, Mr.
John Little, Air. 11. M‘Covey, Miss F. Batchelor, Mr. J. Kirkwood, Air.
W. Clifton, Air. R. Reynolds, Air. David Graham, Air. APYittie, Air. G,
Rolwegan, Air. and Mrs. Sercombe and three children.


We now add a list of the officers and ship’s company —86 in num-
ber :
OFFICERS.—Captain John Bohun Martin, 48, commander and part
owner; Mr. Robert Harris, 39, chief officer ; Mr. Arthur W. Ticehurst, 27,
second officer (son of Mr. Ticehurst, late mayor of Hastings) ; Mr. Arthur
E. Angel, 20, third officer; Mr. I. Vivian Faull, 37, surgeon; W. G. Bates,
39, carpenter; Robert Morley, 28, sailmaker ; I. Hutchstepp, 28, captain’s
steward; T. Hutchstepp, 27, steward ; Mrs. Grace Logan, 22, stewardess;
W. Mackenzie, 22, chief cuddy servant; John Lyall, 25, second-class steward;
William Fowler, 27, second cuddy servant; James Bennett, 23, third cuddy
servant; Thomas Ham, 40, captain’s cook; Henry Appleton, 25, passengers’
cook ; James Murphy, 20, ship’s baker ; Robert Gannon, 36, butcher ; John
Jones, 36, second engineer (saved) ; John Greenhill, 25, chief engineer
(saved) ; John Armour, 26, third engineer (saved) ; John Staden, 34, boat-
swain ; Daniel F. Smith, 28, boatswain’s mate (saved).
ABLE SEAMEN.—William Hoskings, aged 29; William Daniels, 23
(saved) ; A. Campbell, 35 ; J. Butcher, 35 ; J. Butcher, 35 ; R. J. Momel,
19 ; John King, 28 (saved) ; Joseph Spurgeon, 23; Carl Scoval, 21; Robert
Thompson, 30; Johannes Barmiska, 23; Julius Mattheson, 24; Herman, 24;
Carl Drawn, 21 ; John Brawn, 25 ; Samuel Drown, 22 ; Benjamin Shields,
23 (saved); Samuel Ellingham, 26; Hans Hansen, 24; Ed. Quin, 22 (saved) ;
Ed. Allen, 23; Reuben Trowbridge, 29 ; Martin Arnold, 25 ; August Ditt-
mers, 27 ; Otto Olsen, 21 ; Andrew Wilson, 29 ; James Gough, 19 (saved) ;
Hein Butscher, 26 ; Richard Lewis, 27 (saved) ; H. Lazberg, 27 ; Andrew
Anderson, 41; Henry Jones, 36, winchdriver; George Cane, 18, assistant do.
ORDINARY SEAMEN. —Richard Littlepage,aged 20; Patrick Short, 19;
William Crines, 18, boy (saved) ; Alfred White, 14, boy (saved) ; Edward
Logan, 16, leading fireman; Henry Jenkins, 23, storekeeper; Thomas
Purkiss, 20, fireman ; Frederick Halford, 22, fireman ; Thomas Brown, 40,
fireman; James Bramble, 34, fireman; George Graycraft, 21, fireman;
George O. Holmes, 22, fireman ; Charles Fairbrother, 20, trimmer; George
Robson, 20, trimmer; J. T. Hall, 18, fourth cuddy servant; Alfred W.
Smith, 17, fifth cuddy servant; Morris MJvenzie, 21, sixth cuddy servant;
William Funnell, 25, servant; James Craddock, 31, sculleryman; William
Airst, 24, assistant second-class steward ; Walter Edwards, 15, midshipman
(saved) ; Robert W. Clough, 14, midshipman ; Edward Thomas, seaman ;
Charles Ansell, seaman; John Mullouey, seaman; Robert G. Stephens,
seaman ; William Clark, 23, trimmer.
GENERAL SUMMARY. —First-class passengers, 54; second-class pass-
engers, 53 ; third-class passengers, 46 ; officers and crew, 86—239.
FIRST NEWS OF THE DISASTER.
The next intelligence received of the London was the startling
announcement that she had foundered in the Bay of Biscay, and that
220 out of the 239 souls on board had gone down in her. This
fearful news appeared in the metropolitan morning journals of the
17th, in the following form :
Plymouth, Jan. 16 (Evening).
Messrs. Money Wigram and Sons’ steamship London , Captain Mar-
tin, from London for Melbourne, has foundered at sea with 239 souls


on board. The survivors—sixteen of the crew and three passengers—
were landed at Falmouth to-day by the Italian barque Marianople.
Mr. John Greenhili, the engineer, reports as follows:
“We left Plymouth on Jan. 6. On the 7th we experienced heavy
weather, with rain. Bth. The same. 9th. Lost jibboom and foretop-
mast, topgallant mast and royal mast. About 9 a.m. we lost the port
lifeboat, a heavy gale prevailing at the time. On the 1 Oth, at 3 a.m,
the ship put about, intending to run back to Plymouth. About the
same time the starboard lifeboat was washed overboard by a heavy
sea, which also stove the starboard cutter. At noon, lat. 46.8 N.,
long. o'B7 W., we were shipping heavy seas, which carried away the
engine room hatch. The water going down and putting the fires out.
The passengers were baling the water out of the ship with buckets.
“Jan. 11. —The gale was still increasing, with heavy cross seas,
nearly all coming over the ship. During the morning all that could
were trying to stop the leak in the engine-room hatch, but to no pur-
pose. About 4 a.m. four of the stern-ports were stove in. Efforts
were made to stop them, but it was found to be impossible. At 10
a.m. lowered the starboard pinnace, which foundered. At 1 p.m. we
could see the ship gradually sinking, it being then as low in the water
as the main chain. At 2 p.m. the following persons left in the port
cutter:—D. G. Wain, John Munro, and J. E. Wilson, passengers;
John Greenhili, engineer; John Jones, second engineer; John Armour,
third engineer; Thomas Brown, fireman ; W. M. Edwards, midship-
man ; D. T. Smith, boatswain’s mate ; William Daniels, quartermaster;
Jonn King, Benjamin Shield, Richard Lewis, James Gough, Edward
Quin, able seamen; William Crimes, ordinary seaman ; A. G. White,
boatswain’s boy ; William Hart, carpenter’s mate ; and Edward Gard-
ner, second-class steward.
“ About five minutes after leaving the vessel we saw her go down
stern foremost, with about 220 persons on board, all of whom are sup-
posed to have perished. There were two other boats getting ready
when we left, but they were too late.
“ The above-named persons who were saved were picked up by the
Marianople , and treated with the greatest kindness by her captain,
Curasa.
(Signed) “ John Greenhill, Engineer.”
So awful a calamity could not fail to cause a most profound and
painful sensation throughout the kingdom. Heavy gales occurring
synchronously with that which swept the London from the sea, had, in
some measure, prepared the British public for news of marine disasters.
But it was hard to realise the fact that a steamship of the size, strength,
and proved capacity of the lost vessel had been overwhelmed and swal-
lowed up by the same waves which had spared a tiny and over-freighted
boat. A metropolitan newspaper thus refers to the reception of the first
news of the catastrophe : —“ The curt and bitter intelligence which car-
ried desolation to many a home, now that fuller information has been


gleaned from the few who have survived of all on board the stricken
ship, may be tempered by the knowledge of how those many encoun-
tered their fate—of a rich heroism, and grave, patient, religious sub-
mission supervening on the failure of their brave efforts, when all
human power was broken down, that will take its place beside other
like stories of which the nation is proud. When the inhabitants of Lon-
don rose on Thursday morning last (11th Jan.), to find the snow deep
over every road and building, as it had fallen or been blown by the
storm which broke down the telegraph posts in many parts of the
country, and strewed the coasts with wreck, the London was beating
about almost a dismantled hulk in the Bay of Biscay, about two miles
west of Land’s-end ; the officers, crew, and passengers had been labour-
ing at the pumps all night, and striving to cope, every hand that could
help, with the furious cross sea which swept over the ship, and mocked
their efforts with increasing force, breaking up the strong vessel bit by
bit.”
Allusion is made, in the accompanying extract from an English
weekly journal, to contemporaneous disasters which, dreadful as they
were, sink into insignificance by the side of the great casualty :
“ Each morning’s news as it came has brought the mournful intelli-
gence of good ships wrecked and brave lives lost in increasing num-
bers, till mournfulness and awe came to their full climax in the foun-
dering of the London , with all her passengers on board. The tale of
nearly forty vessels wrecked in a single night in Torbay, and of a hundred
men perishing with them, seems, terrible as it is, to dwindle and lose
interest beside the sorrowful narrative which brings so plainly before
us the danger, the unhoping energy, and the brave resignation, not un-
given from above, of the passengers and crew of that ill-fated ship.
We do not think well of the man who could read that, or hear it read,
without some swelling in the throat or some moisture about the eyes,
because we are used to courage and defiance of danger on the part of
our seamen. But those who perish in the steam-ship London —less for-
tunate than the Amalia , which was wrecked in the same cyclone, but
saved her passengers and crew—were passengers, emigrants many of
them, not only men, but women and little children. These last, we
are told, ‘ wondered and asked why their fathers and mothers looked
so sad,’ when all that skill and resolve could do had been done without
effect, and hope had to be given up.”
THE CATASTROPHE.
It is now time to take up the thread of the narrative from the day
of the departure of the London from Plymouth on her voyage. The
particulars now given were supplied to the Cornwall papers by the
survivors on their arrival at Falmouth :
“ After leaving Plymouth, the London had full steam on during the
whole of Saturday, 6th January, and the voyage promised to progress


very satisfactorily until the following morning, when the wind increased
and a head sea gradually rose. During the day the London passed
several ships, and nothing occurred to create the smallest uneasiness in
the minds of any of the officers of the steamer. On Sunday night the
wind increased to a gale, and the sea rose considerably. On the
morning of Monday, the Bth, the ship was well clear of the land, and
Captain Martin, having ordered the engines to be stopped, set his top-
sails, and so endeavoured to keep the ship moving slowly ahead. At
noon on this day, the wind having somewhat lulled, the engines were
again set in motion, and kept steaming slowly ahead through the night.
At 8 a.m. on Tuesday, the 9th, while the captain was still endeavouring
to keep the ship in her course by means of the screw, the violence of
the gale carried away at one sweep the jibboom, the fore-top-mast, the
gallant-mast, and the royal-mast. These large spars were not wholly
detached from the ship, but, hanging just by the stays, swung to and
fro with such violence that the crew were wholly unable to secure
them. About two hours later the main royal-mast was blown com-
pletely out of its socket, and added to the general wreck. Captain
Martin—who had not been in bed since the previous Sunday night—
was not at all disheartened up to this moment; but as the gale con-
tinued to increase during the morning, with a sea already running
mountains high, the position of the ship was undoubtedly felt to be
one of some peril. Still, as the wind had somewhat veered round, the
engines were kept steaming easily ahead, and it is believed that at
this moment no person on board felt any anxiety for the ultimate
safety of the ship. About 3 p.m. on Tuesday a tremendous sea
struck the ship and carried the port life-boat clean away from the
davits. All that evening and. through the succeeding night the wind
blew a very heavy gale, and the sea ran very high ; but the screw was
still kept steaming easy ahead. At 3 a.m. on Wednesday, the 10th,
Captain Martin sent for Mr, Greenhill, the chief engineer, and informed
him of his intention to put the ship about and run for Plymouth, and
he desired that full speed should be got up directly. This was imme-
diately done.
This determination of Captain Martin has provoked considerable con-
troversy on the part of several naval men, some of whom condemned
the alteration of the ship’s course as not only unnecessary, but under
the circumstances absolutely disastrous. Their argument was, that,
crippled as the ship was by the loss of some of her principal spars,
and encumbered also with the wreck, it was impossible for her to get
ahead of the waves, and that such being the case it was easy to account
for the subsequent disasters.
In half-an hour after the ship’s course had been altered she was
again struck by a tremendous sea, which carried away the starboard
life-boat, and also stove in the starboard cutter. At noon on
this day the ship’s position was in lat. 46’48 N., B’7 W. A very
heavy cross sea was running, with the wind now dead astern of the
ship, which caused her to roll heavily, and much impeded her progress.


But no danger was even now anticipated, and all through the evening of
Wednesday and long after nightfall, the ship continued to steam slowly
ahead, the captain and his officers remaining steadily at their posts, and
the passengers appearing to have full reliance upon the skill of Captain
Martin to bring them safely to port. At 10.30 p.ra. on Wednesday,
the ship still rolling deeply in a heavy cross sea, and the wind blowing
a whole gale from the south-west, a mountain of water fell heavily over
the waist of the ship, and spent its destructive force upon the main
hatchway over the engine-room, completely demolishing this massive
structure, measuring 12ft. by Bft., and flooding with tons of water this
portion of the ship. Instant endeavours to repair the hatchway were
made with a promptitude and vigor commensurable with the imminent
crisis. Every spare sail that could be got at, and even blankets and
mattrasses from all parts of the ship, were thrown over the aperture,
but each succeeding sea shipped by the vessel tore away the frail resource
of the moment, and not more than ten minutes after the hatchway had
been destroyed the water had risen above the furnaces and up to the
waists of the engineers and firemen employed in this part of the ship.
The lower decks were also now flooded with the rush of water the ship
was continually taking in. The chief engineer remained at his post until
the water had risen above his waist, when he went on deck and
reported that his fires were out and his engines rendered useless. Capt.
Martin, with calm conviction, remarked that he was not surprised ;
on the contrary, he had expected such a result. Finding his noble ship
at length a little more than a log on the water, Capt. Martin immedi-
ately ordered his main topsail to be set, in the hope of keeping her
before the wind. The difficult work had hardly been accomplished when
the force of the wind tore the sail into ribbands, with the exception of
one corner, under which she ship lay-to throughout the remainder of the
night. The donkey-engine, supplied with steam by a boiler upon deck,
and all the deckpumps, were kept going throughout the night, and the
passengers of all classes, now aroused to a sense of their imminent
danger, shared with the crew their arduous labours. Notwithstanding
every effort the water still gained upon the pumps, and the gale con-
tinuing at its height, cross seas with tremendous force were constantly
breaking over the vessel, which at length succumbed to the unequal
conflict. From this moment the motion of the ship was low and heavy,
and she refused to rise to the action of the waves. At a quarter after
four o’clock on Thursday morning she was struck by a stern sea, which
carried away four of her stern posts, and admitted a flood of water
through the breach. From this time all efforts were useless ; and at
day-break Captain Martin, whose cool intrepidity had never for a moment
forsaken him, entered the cuddy, where all classes of the passengers had
now taken refuge, and, responding to the universal appeal, calmly
announced the cessation of all human hopes. It is a remarkable fact
that this solemn admission was as solemnly received, a resigned silence
prevailing throughout the assembly, broken only at brief intervals by
the well-timed and appropriate exhortations of the Rev. Mr Draper,


whose spiritual services had been necessary during the previous twenty-
four hours. The women sat around him reading Bibles with the child-
ren, and occasionally some man or woman would step up to him and
say, “ Pray with me, Mr Draper,” a request that was always complied
with. Up to the time the ship went down the reverend gentleman
ministered to those amongst whom he moved constantly. He was
heard to say repeatedly, “ 0 God, may those who are not converted be
converted now—hundreds of them.”
At ten o’clock on the morning of Thursday (the 11th), Captain Mar-
tin had the terrible task of making known to all those in his charge on
board that the ship was sinking, and that they must prepare for the
worst. She was then as low in the water as the main chains. An
effort was now made to lower the boats, and the starboard iron pinnace
was got down, with five men in her. In the terrific sea she was quickly
swamped and went down, but the five men were got on board the ship
again. This catastrophe had the effect of intimidating the crew from
attempting to launch the three remaining boats, and all the persons on
board began to realize the dreadful fate which impended. The whole
of the passengers and crew gathered as with one consent in the chief
saloon, and having been calmly told by Captain Martin that there was
no hope left, a remarkable and unanimous spirit of resignation seemed
to come over them at once. There were neither cries nor shrieking by
women or men, no rushing on deck or franctic behaviour. Mothers
were weeping sadly over the little ones about them to be engulphed,
and the children, ignorant of their coming death, were pitifully inquiring
the cause of so much woe. Friends were taking leave of friends as if
preparing for a long journey ; others w T ere crouched down with Bibles in
their hands, endeavoring to snatch consolation from passages long
known, or perhaps long neglected. Incredible, say the survivors, was
the composure which, under such circumstances, reigned around.
Captain Martin stationed himself in the poop, going occasionally forward
or into the saloon, but to none could he offer a word of comfort by say-
ing that their safety was even probable. He joined now and then for
a few moments in the public devotions, but his place to the last was on
the deck.
About one o’clock in the afternoon, the water having reached the
main chains and the ship evidently settling down, the port pinnace
was got over the ship’s side. Even at this moment the sea was so
heavy that those of the passengers who were within reach of the boat
appeared to prefer the frail shelter of the sinking vessel to the obvious
dangers of a small boat in a raging sea. At this crisis Captain Martin,
always at hand, addressing Mr. Greenhill, his chief engineer, under
whose command this particular boat was rated, said, “ There is not
much chance for the boat; there is none for the ship. Your duty is
done; mine is to remain here. Get in and take command of the few'
it wdll hold.” Thus prompted, Mr, Greenhill, with his fellow engineers
and some few others, numbering nineteen souls, among whom were
only three second-class passengers, quitted the ship, with only a few


biscuits in the shape of provisions, and not a drop of water. The
pinnace had scarcely cleared the wake of the vessel, upon the poop of
which upwards of fifty of the passengers were seen grouped, when a
tremendous sea was seen to break over the doomed circle, who, when
the ship rose slowly again, were discovered to have been swept into the
surging waters. Another moment and the vessel herself, settling down
stern foremost, threw up her bows into the air and sank beneath the
waves.
THE SURVIVORS.
Leaving the sad circumstances connected with those who perished,
there is much to narrate concerning the adventures of the small rem-
nant of the crew and passengers who were saved. The ship was being
washed over to the boat, towards which it lunged heavily. The captain,
who was walking calmly up and down the poop, had refused to leave
his ship, but just before the boat put off he had the consideration and
presence of mind to give those in the boat their “course.” He told
them that it lay E.N.E. to Brest, which was correct. Before.the boat
could be got off it was in great danger of being sucked down with the
.ship, which was rapidly settling beneath the water. The swirl of water
round the stern that preceded the foundering had already begun to be
excessive, and the boat was, therefore, hastily cut away. A compass
had been given them by the captain, and under the directions of King
the men agreed that whatever might happen they would sit immovable
except when pulling at the oars. One of the seamen has stated that
when the boat was pushed off, and the captain had wished those in her
“ God speed,” the men resolved that no danger must be allowed to ac-
crue to them from further crowding, and that some of them drew their
knives with a determination of cutting off the hands of those who
might leap from the ship and endeavour to cling to the boat’s gunwales.
Two men worked at each oar, and they ran before the sea. Every
nerve was exerted to make the boat withstand the fearful tossings
and the strain as she mounted the waves, and became surrounded
by the surge. Before daylight, and as the moon rose, the men were
everjoyed at descrying a vessel close alongside. They hailed the ship,
and were heard, but, as they could present no light, they were not
seen, although they could see the ship tacking about for an hour trying
to find them. The search was fruitless, and the ship was lost sight of.
The boat had not been rowed during the time the ship was sighted,
but simply kept away before the wind until daylight, when no vessel
was visible. The men adhered to their course, and at nine o’clock
sighted two vessels, but were prevented from making for them by the
cross seas. They rowed for one of them, however, for five hours.
When at last they came up to her, they found her to be an Italian
barque, the Marianople, Captain Cavassa. Just as they were ap-
proaching the vessel they were struck by a heavy squall and shipped a


sea, so that all in the boat gave themselves up for lost, but by only
one of the men moving in the boat to bail her out, and no fresh seas
striking her, they were enabled to bail her clear, and bring up alongside
the barque. A line was thrown to them, and they were drawn up to
the deck, where they found themselves completely benumbed by the
exposure to which they had been subjected. Captain Cavassa, who
could speak little English, to whom the men feel grateful to the
extremest extent, used more means for their recovery and for their
comfort than simple humanity would dictate. He had the men
stripped, rubbed, clad in fresh warm garments, and killed for them a
turkey, besides providing tea and soup, and setting apart for them
warm beds. At that time the ship was in 4648 N. latitude, and 743
W. longitude, and was bound for Cork or Falmouth. They were
landed at the latter port.
The pinnace would only keep afloat before the wind and was repeatedly
in danger of being swamped. According to the statement of Mr.
Greenhill, the chief engineer of the London, and one of the survivors,
“ They had not been afloat two hours before they saw a full-rigged ship
sail past them, but at too great a distance to hail. At three a.m. on
the 12th, they sighted the sails of a brig, the crew of which overheard
their shouts and bore down towards them, but, failing to get into the
track of the boat, after making several fruitless tacks, she bore away.
At daybreak, a full-rigged cutter was observed at some distance, and
hoisting a shirt upon an oar they endeavoured, but in vain, to attract
attention. Shortly afterwards the Italian barque Mariano pie, Captain
Cavassa, bound, with a cargo of Avheat, from Constantinople to Cork,
hove in sight, and the captain, having observed the pinnace, immediately
shortened sail and lay-to, preparing to take them on board. On reach-
ing the ship, notwithstanding the stress of weather and straitened
means for the support of so large an increase to his crew, Captain
Cavassa received the Englishmen with unbounded kindness and hospi-
tality, supplying them with all that was needful in their destitute con-
dition. The exigencies of the gale had obliged Captain Cavassa to
sacrifice more than half his cargo, and during the four days’ run into
Falmouth the weather carried away his rudder, and brought into useful
requisition the services of his English passengers.” The safety of the
boat was due to the admirable steering of King, who laboured under
the disadvantage of having received a severe injury during the gale.
On leaving the ship the boat had a small supply of water, which was
soon spoiled by the sea, a bottle of champagne, and two or three of
brandy, which were almost immediately consumed, and a few bunches
of carrots, so that the crew must speedily have perished had they not
been picked up, especially as the boat, which was constructed for twelve
persons only, held nineteen. From statements made by others of the
survivors, it seems that at a little before two o’clock, the hour at which
the vessel went down, the ladies, in an insensible state, were floating
about on the poop of the ship, and at this time both Mr. Munro and
Mr. Main, looking out upon the little boat that was being tossed like a


cockleshell—now close to, and anon twenty yards from the vessel’s
side—remarked that if they had a chance they would not get into her,
believing it impossible for her to live. But suddenly they felt the big
ship leave as it were their feet, and then it was that they resolved to
take chance in the small craft. As soon as Mr. Munro got into the
boat the doctor’s assistant offered him £SOO if they would take him in.
To this offer one of the sailors replied, “ Keep your money and look
after yourself.” To this the assistant answered, “I am your doctor,
and you are bound to take me with you.” All this time they were
pulling away from the ship, which five minutes afterwards sank beneath
the waves; and although at this awful moment the small craft was
some considerable distance off, still it is the opinion of the sailors that
had they been one minute later in leaving the ship’s side the boat
would have been sucked down in the vortex. It is a matter of great
surprise, to those who fortunately took refuge in the boat, that she
should live in such a sea, and that too with seven persons more than
she was built to carry. They had not started long upon their dreary
journey before their fresh water was destroyed by the constant seas
that broke over them. They consumed the bottle of champagne and
two bottles of the brandy during the Thursday night, and the third
they could not find, so that they were left almost at the outset with but
a few carrots for sustenance.
Mr. Walter M. Edwards, midshipman of the London , states : —“The
chance of the boat being saved was considered so utterly hopeless by
the captain, officers, and passengers, that all held aloof, and, instead of
a rush being made to the boat, as has been stated, there were only two
men, the doctor’s mate and a Dutch seaman, who tried in vain to
enter. Some of the ladies were invited by the men to come with us,
and would have done so, but I myself heard Captain Martin dissuade
them from entering, for he said it would be only a more lingering
death, as ‘ the boat could not possibly live in such a sea.’ This was
the only occasion on which his feelings overcame him, for through all
dangers and difficulties his coolness and composure were remarkable.”


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES
MB, G. V. BROOKE.
A public loss of no ordinary magnitude was experienced when this
great actor perished in the London. The name of Gustavus Vaughan
Brooke had been, for nearly twenty years previously, associated inti-
mately with the highest developments of dramatic art; and it was im-
possible that it could be erased from the roll of living actors without the
world being painfully conscious of the void. Few of his profession—
none, indeed, of equal eminence—have been so cosmopolitan in its prac-
tice as he, and probably none was so well known “off the stage.” His
genius was as patent to the Australian public as to that of the mother-
country and of America : his personal characteristics were equally well
understood ; and when the tidings reached this country of the awful
catastrophe of the 11th of January, it is not incorrect to say that indi-
vidual deprivations by that great calamity occupied only a secondary
position in the general lamentation.
When Mr. George Coppin was in England in the latter part of 1865
he arranged with Mr. Brooke to revisit Australia, and it was while on
his way out to fulfil this engagement that this tragedian lost his life.
Concerning the negotiations between the actor and the Australian
manager, particularly with respect to the vessel in which the former
should take his passage, Mr. Edward P. Kingston, who visited these
colonies with the Wizard Anderson in the capacity of agent, has com-
municated, through his brother, the accompanying interesting particu-
lars : —“ There was much discussion as to which ship Mr. Brooke
should go in. Mr. Coppin wished him to go in a vessel just about to
sail. Mr. Brooke declared his preference for the Great Britain ; but
no definite arrangement was come to. Had Mr. Coppin’s wishes been
complied with, Mr. Brooke would have sailed before Mr. Coppin left
by the overland mail of November. There were reasons, however, why
he should not do so, and among them were that he wished to play a
farewell engagement at Dublin and another at Belfast. So Mr. Coppin
returned to London, and Mr, Brooke to the Potteries. In the follow-
ing week I called upon Mr. Coppin at the Craven Hotel, in London,
and we read over The Times together to discover the best vessel in
which Mr. Brooke could sail. I believe the Red Jacket was then our
selection. A few days passed on, and we all met again at Leeds, in
Yorkshire, and there, on the 15th of November, it was finally arranged
that Mr. Brooke should go, and there and then, I believe, the un-


fortunate London was the vessel selected. In the course of the even-
ing Mr. Brooke was at the theatre, in front of the house. When the
play was over he went with me into the Elephant and Castle, next
door, to take a parting glass. Elated with the thought of returning to
Australia, and meeting with two or three of his old Yorkshire friends,
he informed them of his intention. One of them remarked to him, ‘ I
am glad of it, Brooke ; tragedy has had its day in England, but I be-
lieve it will still go down in Australia.’ Brooke smiled, and pleasantly
replied, ‘ Tragedy will go down : the question is—will the tragedian 1
He may not go down as well as he did when he gets there, and he
might go down before he got there.’ Uttered jocularly, was this re-
mark merely an impromptu meaningless pun, or was it suggested by
some vague prevision of fate impending ? It was a very few days after
this that Mr. Coppin secured cabin passages in the London for ‘ Mr.
G. Vaughan and Miss Vaughan,’ such being the names under which,
for various reasons, poor Gustavus and his sister Fanny had determined
to make the voyage.”
From a very carefully written memoir of this eminent actor, written
by Mr. E. L. Blanchard, and published in a London weekly
journal of the 21st January, 18G5, the following biographical infor-
mation is derived :—“Gustavus Vaughan Brooke was born on the 25th
of April, 1819, at Hardwick place, Dublin. His father was a gentle-
man of property, but he died before Gustavus reached the age of seven.
He, therefore, scarcely knew a father’s care ; but the affection of a tender
mother lightened the bereavement. The first rudiments of education
were instilled into him by his remaining parent, who for many years
after lived in Dublin, in the house of her son—that son having, with a
due recollection of a mother’s love, conveyed to her a life-interest in the
whole of his father’s estate. While a mere child, Master Brooke was
sent by his mother to Edgeworth’s town-school, then conducted by a
brother of Miss Edgeworth, the distinguished novelist. Maria herself
(the novelist) took a great interest in the welfare of the little student, and
frequently admitted him to dine with her—an honorable notice, which he
regarded with a childish but natural pride. His progress in the school
was very rapid, for his precocity was remarkable. Under the care of Lovell
Edgeworth he was grounded in the knowledge of the ancient classics, and
trained in all those exercises which promote a healthy development of
body as well as of mind. In running, wrestling, fencing, leaping, he
soon became distinguished for his lightness and elasticity of limb, and
he retained his proficiency in these manly arts to his latest hour. In fenc-
ing he was the school hero, and on one occasion the victor in a contest at
single-stick among four hundred and ninety scholars. He left the school
of the Edgeworths to be placed under the direction of the Rev.
William Jones, to whom was confided the task of preparing him for
college, as his mother intended to have him educated for the Irish Bar.
The young student already felt the promptings of latent genius, and
was delighted with the plan of debating and declaiming carried on at
this school, During the holidays he was made the “ bright particular


star ” of family parties, where his precocious talent elicited much surprise
and commendation ; many friends, indeed, suggested that he should
follow the histrionic art as a profession, but his mother entertained a
very natural aversion to this course. Master Brooke, however, burned
in secret to enter that seemingly enchanted arena of display—that de-
lusive fairyland of tinsel glories and painted delights—which has
captivated so many a youthful fancy, but, like the ruddy and tempting
apples of Sodom, has turned to bitterness and ashes on the lips. At
the time we speak of, Mr. Macready was fulfilling a brief engagement in
Dublin. Gustavus, then fourteen years of age, requested permission to
go to the theatre. His desire was granted, and that night proved an
era in his existence : it was the first time he had ever entered a theatre.
He left the theatre in a state of excitement bordering upon ecstacy ; his
mind was made up, and from that hour he resolved to be an actor. The
next morning he boldly called upon Mr. Macready, and found that
gentleman just about to proceed to the theatre to rehearse Rob Roy.
The distinguished tragedian received him very courteously, and, with a
fatherly care, admonished him of the perils, dangers, and hardships of
the theatrical profession. Gustavus listened with respectful attention,
and retired ; but his resolution was unchanged by the warning he had
received. He had another counsellor within, and, in his case, it proved
no delusive one. As nothing resulted from his interview with Mr
Macready, our young hero, sustained by a confident feeling that he
possessed more than ordinary talent, called upon Mr. J. W. Calcraft, the
respected manager, who for so many years held the reins at the Theatre
Royal, Dublin. That gentlemen received him politely, but was
was actually startled by young Brooke coolly requesting to be allowed
to appear at his theatre in the character of William Tell! A tall youth
of fourteen, without any experience in the dramatic art, desiring to make
his appearance in a principal character in the first theatre of the Irish
metropolis, had in it at first an air of absurdity ; and th 6 probability
was, that the ambitious young aspirant would have been dismissed with
sarcastic smile at his presumption. Gustavus was not easily repulsed ;
and, with boyish impetuosity and confidence, he exclaimed, “ Please to
hear me, sir, and then judge ! It was for something that I have
taken a dozen prizes.” Then, without waiting for a reply, he
burst into his favourite recitation of “Ye crags and peaks.’
Mr. Calcraft soon saw that the manly, handsome lad before him
had indeed not obtained his dozen prizes for nothing. He ultimately
gave Master Brooke hopes of a distant engagement, but said he could
do nothing for him at present. But the opportunity of the young
Roscius was nearer than either he or the manager anticipated. Mr.
Calcraft had made an engagement with the great Edmund Kean, who
was to have appeared at the Dublin Theatre only a few days after the
interview we have just described. A severe illness, however, prevented
that surprising delineator of the passions from keeping his engagement.
What was to be done 1 Suddenly the manager thought of his recent
visitor; an Irish audience are easily taken by novelty—still it was a


dangerous experiment. He resolved, however, to put it in practice,
and, having sent for young Brooke, engaged him for one night as a
trial. The delighted youth accordingly made his appearance on Easter
Tuesday, 1833, in his coveted character of William Tell. An engage-
ment was the result of the success he achieved on this occasion, and he
subsequently appeared as Yirginius, Frederic in Lovers Vows, Douglas,
and Holla. He next performed at Limerick, then at Londonderry,
and, after that, he was engaged at Glasgow for a period of twelve
nights. So great was his success that he was immediately re-engaged
there on very favourable terms. From Glasgow he proceeded to Edin-
burgh, where, after playing for one night as a trial, he was engaged for
the rest of the season. By this time the fame of the “ Hibernian
Roscius,” as he was called, had reached London, and the young tra-
gedian was engaged to appear at the Victoria Theatre, where he per-
formed Yirginius three times a week for a month, greatly to the satis-
faction of his audiences. He was then engaged for the Kent circuit,
and advanced in his professional career with remarkable rapidity.
While still a mere youth he became a member of the company perform-
ing at the Birmingham Theatre, where he was concerned in an incident
which is worth relating. On the last night of his engagement he was
cast for the comparatively trifling part of Tressel in Richard the Third,
Mr. Charles Kean having to play the bloodthirsty and crafty Glo’ster.
During the afternoon Master Brooke addressed a note of complaint and
remonstrance to the manager on the subject of his financial claims, and
intimated that he should expect the payment of arrears. The manager
either would not or could not pay, and in the evening the young actor
perceived another person dressed for Tressel, and every wing guarded
by the stage carpenters and friends of the manager. Determined not
to be baffled in this manner, Master Brooke, as soon as he heard the
cue given for the entrance of Tressel, vaulted over the head of one of
the carpenters at the upper entrance, and made his appearance on the
stage, greatly to the astonishment of the King and the audience, who
each beheld two Tressels in the field. Great confusion ensued, and
Brooke, advancing to the footlights, explained the circumstance, and
threw himself on the indulgence of his audience. The sympathy of
the spectators was enlisted on behalf of the lad, and he was greeted
with thunders of applause, and with —what was equally acceptable —a
little shower of money. To the repeated demands made from the
wings that he should instantly leave the stage, young Brooke replied
by holding out his hand to the side for his arrears of salary. At
length the money was given to him, and he came down to the footlights
and leisurely counted it. Finding it was not correct, he again stretched
out his hand to the wing, and would not withdraw it until he suc-
ceeded in obtaining the full amount due to him. The play then pro-
ceeded, but the next night the theatre remained unopened. Master
Brooke had ruined the treasury, and the season w r as closed. Mr.
Brooke, though he seldom played any but leading characters, was
frequently engaged, on handsome terms, to support the great theatrical


(S. grooke, (JBsq.


stars who were making their transits through England and Ireland.
On one of these occasions he met Mr. Edwin Forrest, who assured him
that he had only to visit the United States to create a great sensation.
But Mr. Brooke had no wish to leave his own country until he had
reached the highest position in it, in theatrical circles, by the conquest
of the dramatic crown in London. He took this step cautiously,
refusing no less than thirteen promising engagements from time to time.
At length, on the 2nd of January, 1848, he made his appearance at
the Olympic Theatre in the character of Othello. It was a brilliant
triumph. The whole audience rose and greeted him with loud and
repeated cheers ; he had fired them with enthusiastic excitement; and,
from that moment, was acknowledged as one of the greatest tragedians
of the day. He repeated the character for thirty successive nights to
the most brilliant audiences. Fortune now seemed disposed to strew
his path with roses; a brilliant opportunity was before him; and he
even declined the liberal offer of £ls per night, for one hundred nights
certain, from Mr. Webster, then manager of the Haymarket. He
returned to the provinces, and, after a brilliant tour, accepted an invi-
tation to visit the United States of America. On his arrival at New
York, almost the first person he met was his old friend, Mr. Edwin
Forrest, That gentleman, at the time, was almost overwhelmed with
troubles ; but he no sooner recognised Mr. Brooke than he hastened to
welcome him to the shores of Columbia, and congratulate him on his
certainty of success. That success Mr. Forrest did his utmost to pro-
mote. He attended nightly at the theatre to witness the performances
of his illustrious compeer, and expressed his unqualified approbation of
them by most enthusiastic plaudits. Mr. Brooke’s dehut in America
was at the Broadway Theatre, New York, on the 15th of December,
1851, as Othello, and his success was brilliant and unqualified. No
audience ever received an actor with more favour, or were excited to
greater enthusiasm. He was sometimes called before the curtain to
receive their congratulations even three or four times during a single
performance. Mr. Brooke then visited Philadelphia, Boston, Washing-
ton, and Baltimore, to the delight of the lovers of the intellectual
drama in those cities. His first appearance at Philadelphia was at the
Walnut-street Theatre, as Sir Giles Overreach, January sth, 1852.
Having acquired a large sum of money in America, he was persuaded
to invest it in a theatrical speculation, and turn manager. In an evil
hour he took the Astor-place Opera house, in New York, and opened
it in May, 1852. The result may be anticipated; in a few weeks he
was compelled to close the house, being wrecked in pocket and spirits,
having lost all his vast earnings, and become deeply involved in debt.
On the 6th of September, 1852, he commenced a new campaign upon
an entirely new plan. Devoting his attention solely to his art, he
associated himself with a person who undertook the entire control of
his engagements and finances. From that day the tide of fortune
turned. Ee-commencing his tour through the States, he visited Phila-
delphia, Albany, Buffalo, Cincinnati, and St. Louis. To record the


particulars of liis progress would be merely a monotonous chronicle of
triumphs. Mr. Brooke’s reappearance in his native land was within
the venerable walls of Old Drury, then under Mr. E. T. Smith’s
management, on the sth of September, 1853. Its walls were filled,
night after night, with such breathing seas of life —such masses of
expectant auditors as had not been seen there for many years. Having
accomplished the little less than miracle of filling our vast National
Theatre every evening for nearly seven weeks, Mr. Brooke, on the 3rd
of October, left London for the provinces. In 1854 he took his fare-
well of the London public, and sailed for Australia.
Mr. Brooke, accompanied by Miss Fanny Cathcart, since become Mrs.
Robt, Heir, and Mr. Richard Younge, arrived in Melbourne
in 1854, under engagement to Mr. Geo. Coppin, and made his
debut before an Australian audience at the Queen’s Theatre, then under
the management of Messrs. Young and Hydes, during the same week of
his arrival. His opening part was “ Othello the house was crowded
from base to roof, and the reception which the tragedian experienced
was enthusiastic in the extreme. Mr. Brooke played subsequently in
succession the leading characters of the poetic drama with unvarying
success ; and added to his triumphs in the legitimate roles others
equally unqualified, by a glorious series of impersonations of Irish
characters. Indeed, Australians did not know which most to admire,
the picturesque and massive grandeur of Brooke’s “ Othello,” the deep
pathos of his “ Yirginius,” or the rich, whimsical humour of his “ Felix
O’Callaghan,” and the boisterons prodigality of fun which distinguished
his “ Pierce O’Hara.” In 1855 Mr. Brooke laid the first stone of
Coppin’s Olympic Theatre ; and on his return from Sydney, in which
city his success had been been as unqualified as in the Victorian
metropolis, he inaugurated the drama in its new temple. He afterwards
entered into partnership with Mr. Coppin, and with that gentleman
came into the proprietary of the Theatres Royal and Olympic, and
Cremorne Gardens. The successes of the “firm” were prodigious,
and on the dissolution of partnership some three or four years after-
wards, when the property was divided, Mr. Brooke chose the Theatre
Royal as his share. But unfortunately the tragedian was entirely
destitute of the commercial faculty ; and although he associated with
himself in the management, Messrs. H. Edwards and Geo. Fawcett,
the experience of those gentlemen was not equal to the necessities of
the case. Eventually, Mr. Brooke’s interest in the theatre fell into the
hands of Mr, Ambrose Kyte, and the tragedian having previously to
this played a farewell engagement quitted Australia in 1860,
returned to England, reappearing, after an absence of seven years, at
Drury Lane, October, 28th, 1861, in his best impersonation,
“Othello,” In October, 1862, he commenced a very successful
engagement at the City of London Theatre, and from that time
fulfilled a series of starring engagements in the provinces.
Mr. E. P. Kingston supplies the final particulars of Mr. Brooke’s pro-
fessional career: —“ Mr. Coppin left England by the November mail.


and Mr. Brooke went to Dublin to play a very successful engagement
at the Queen’s Theatre. From Dublin he proceeded to Belfast, and,
under the management of Messrs. Warden and Mills, played the last
engagement he was destined to play in this world. For his benefit —
the last he ever took—he appeared as Edgar of Bavenswood, and as
Captain Murphy Maguire. On the following evening, December 23,
he enacted Richard 111. It is the expressed opinion of more than one
whom I know, that he had not for years played with so much vigour
and so much fire. Among the histrionic recollections of the people of
Belfast, not the least treasured nor the least mournful will be that G.
V. Brooke spoke his last words on the stage in the little theatre of
that pleasant Ulster town.” Mr. Brooke and his sister, as has been
already stated, joined the London at Plymouth, and the account given
by the survivors of the conduct of the great actor in the awful predi-
cament in which he was placed is thus graphic : —“ The Dutch portion
of the crew, twenty-one in number, had refused to work, and, accoi’d-
ing to the English sailors who were saved, these men went to their
berths, and remained there, so that the passengers had to work at the
pumps for many hours with the English seamen. Attired only in a
red Crimean shirt and trousers, bare-headed and bare-footed, Mr. G.
V. Brooke exerted himself incessantly. He went backwards and for-
wards at the pumps until working at them was found to be useless,
and when last seen, about four hours before the steamer went down,
he was leaning with grave composure upon one of the half-doors of
the companion. His chin was resting upon both hands, and his arms
were on the top of the door, which he gently swayed to and fro whilst
he calmly watched the scene.” One of the passengers who saw him has
said, “He had worked wonderfully, and in fact more bravely than any
other man on board the ship.” To the steward, who made himself
known, Mr. Brooke said, “If you succeed in saving yourself, give my
farewell to the people at Melbourne.” These were his last words.
According to Mr. Kingston, when Gardner, the second steward of the
London , saw Mr. Brooke working at the pumps shortly before the boat
put off, he offered the tragedian a drink from a bottle of the captain s
brandy, which he (Gardner) had found floating about. These are Mr.
Kingston’s words ; — u He could tell us little more of Gustavus Brooke
than we had already learned ; except assuring us that Brooke had
worked at the pumps and buckets as hard as any passenger on board ;
that his dress was a red Crimean shirt and a pair of trousers, no shoes
on, and no cap; that he, Gardner, finding a bottle of the captain s
brandy floating about, knocked off the neck, and handing the bottle to
Mr. Brooke, said, ‘ Will you take one drink to cheer you, old friend ?’
That Brooke took that drink, and that it was the last he ever took in
this world.” Poor Brooke, although in some respects weakness itself,
was a Hercules in most of the manly virtues. He was the least selfish
of men, and his extraordinary simplicity in matters of every day con-
cern was surprising. He literally knew nothing of business, and was
constantly exposed to imposition. As an actor his genius is unques-


tionable. He has stated that he founded his style upon that of Van-
denhoff, but those of his audience who were acquainted with both,
could recognise no such affinity. In his Irish characters, and particu-
larly O'Callaghan and Pierce O’Hara, he had no rival. An English
critic of repute, writing soon after the news of the wreck had been
received, said of Mr. Brooke: —“ In person, Mr. G. Y. Brooke was
tall, dignified, and graceful, his features eminently handsome and ex-
pressive ; and, on the stage, his walk and presence were majestic. As
a tragic artist he stood at one time in the highest rank. His
style was perfectly original—derived from no school, but fresh
from the liberal hand of nature. Mr. Brooke possessed
a voice of great power, and he effectively used it, Rem-
brandt-like, in producing sunny lights and deep gloomy shadows.”
In Australia Mr. Brooke was an immense favourite. A Melbourne
journalist contributed the following graceful sentences to the many
literary eulogies of the lost tragedian : —“ Remembering what he was
—how gifted, how unconscious of his own genius, how prompt to
acknowledge and honour it in others, how modest, how free from envy,
how child-like in his amenableness to good influences, how large-hearted
and how easily swayed by kindly impulses, it is impossible to write
of him otherwise than tenderly, or to refer to his faults in any other
than a lenient and gentle spirit. For these were those of Burns, and were
attributable to the same healthy animalism, the same sensibility to social
pleasures, and the same keen relish for convivial enjoyment. Who are his
censors 1 Are they immaculate 1 Are they irreproachable 1 Have they no
frailties, less patent perhaps, but more obnoxious to reproof I In truth,
there is nothing that sober dullness and demurre ignorance enjoy so
much as detecting flaws in diamonds —as discovering blemishes in the
character, and errors in the lives, of men of genius. Respectable
mediocrity feels some sort of compensation for its own insignificance
when it is enabled to proclaim that Lord Byron was over-much addicted
to gin-and-water, that Raffaelle was infatuated with a baker’s wife,
that Milton was a morose husband, that Moliere was henpecked, and
that Edmund Kean’s conduct had a taint of insanity in it. It seems
to humiliate the great, and to exalt the little. It is only a Shakspere
whose estimate of human nature is so perfect, and whose charity is so
large as to qualify him to perceive the divine wisdom exercised in
creating us fallible, and the consequent duty of a tolerant consideration
for each other’s infirmities, “the web of our life,” being, as he says,
“of a mingled yarn, good and ill together,” so that “our virtues
would be proud if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes would
despair if they were not cherished by our virtues.”
Another local critic penned the accompanying eloquent panegyric :
“ We have lost the greatest actor, and one of the manliest of men, that
ever trod these shores. There is a shadow over us all, and the shadow
is deeper where it indicates the absence of those whom we knew
intimately and loved deeply. I thank God I had no relative in that
vast calamity that has cruelly robbed so many of us ; but I mourn as


if he had been my best and dearest relation him whom we have been
so long and eagerly expecting. For he loved ns all as we loved him.
He was coming back to his home; and he would most likely never
have left us again. His last words have forced bitter sobs from strong
hearts. We do not need to blush in that we cannot help but weep
at a loss so irreparable. For we know his fellow does not live upon
the earth, and we cherish his memory ; albeit, being human like our-
selves, he was not without fault. But his faults were all on the sur-
face, and he suffered most because of them. The triumphs of his art
are now only sad though beautiful memories to us, and they mingle
mournfully with the recollections of his good and kindly disposition.
He died grandly and bravely, as became him; and as he sleep*
peacefully in the deep-down caverns of the stormy Atlantic, we art
proud to think he sank to his watery death like one of the heroes of
old. This generation of Victorians will never forget him, and the next
will look upon the marble that we shall raise L in his memory, and be
the better for thinking their forefathers honoured the worth of genius
and the excellence of a kindly heart.” Mr. G. V. Brooke was married
to Miss Avonia Jones some time during 1865.
In London several of the principal members of the theatrical pro-
fession have determined upon perpetuating by some substantial token
their respect for the memory of Mr. Brooke. A proposal has been
considered to establish a lifeboat on some part of the coast hereafter
to be decided upon, and to build a house in connection with the Royal
Dramatic College, at Maybury, both to bear Mr. Brooke’s name. A,
movement of a similar nature has been initiated in Melbourne under
the auspices of Mr. George Coppin.
THE REV. D. J. DRAPER.
One of the most prominent figures in the appalling scene presented on
board the London on that fatal Thursday morning was the Rev. Daniel
James Draper. It was he who, during that awful period intervening
between the announcement by Captain Martin of the cessation of all
human hope and the foundering of the vessel, untiringly administered
Christian exhortation and consolation to the helpless creatures around
him. The thrilling appeal of this truly Christian hero seems to ring
in the ears of the present writer as he inscribes the memorable words
upon his sheet :—“ Oh God ! may those that are not converted be con-
verted now —hundreds of them.”
For the biographical details which follow, the compiler is indebted to
the Wesleyan Chronicle , of which religious connection Mr. Draper was a
prominent member. The Rev. Daniel James Draper was a native of
Hampshire, England. He entered the ministry in 1834. He was recom-
mended as a candidate for the ministry from a circuit in Wales, in


which some of his earlier years were spent; and at the district meeting
held in Swansea, in May, 1834, he—in company with the late Rev. F.
Lewis-—was recommended to the Conference, by whom he was received
as a probationer in the Wesleyan ministry. He was appointed to
Chateris, in which he spent one year, when, having expressed his
willingness to proceed as a missionary, he was appointed to Hew South
Wales. In company with Messrs. M'Kenny, Spinney, Lewis, and two
others, Mr. and Mrs. Draper embarked in the Bencoolen, in Oct., 1835, for
Hobart Town. He laboured successively in Parramatta, Bathurst and Syd-
ney, and in those places endeared himself, as a minister and a man, to all
who came within the sphere of his influence. In 1846 Mr. Draper
removed to Adelaide, where he remained until 1855. His wise plans
and earnest labour, cheerfully seconded by his brother ministers and the
devoted laymen of Adelaide, under God, placed Methodism in the fore-
most position of the churches of South Australia.
During the year 1851 Mr. Draper projected a scheme of Church
extension, which embraced the erection! of a number of chapels,
ministers’ residences, &c. The people entered most heartily and liberally
into this work. Of those erections the noble edifice in Pirie street was
the chief as well as the last. It was a great undertaking, but was
conducted to a successful issue. Just, however, as this scheme was com-
pleted, news of the gold discoveries of Victoria reached Adelaide. The
people flocked from South Australia by thousands. In less than three
months more than 15,000 men left out of a population of 60,000 per-
sons. Hone could tell what the issue would be, and universal ruin stared
all in the face.
But the darkness was not of long duration. The people began to
return ; they entered heartily into plans for the removal of the debts
from their holy and beautiful houses ; soon mourning was turned into
joy, and Mr. Draper was permitted to witness the fruit of his long,
earnest, and wise labours.
In 1855 Mr. Draper was appointed to Victoria. He has laboured in
the principal churches of Melbourne up to the time of his visit to England,
which has ended so fatally. From 1855 until 1865, he occupied the
position of “ Head of the Wesleyan Denomination,” or “ Chairman of
the District,” but his office was really that of a bishop. In this impor-
tant position he devoted himself most earnestly to the duties of his office.
How he succeeded may be known by the present position of the Wes-
leyan church in this colony, and which is greatly due to Mr. Draper’s
efforts. At a valedictory service, held in Wesley church, on the 14th
March, 1865, on the eve of Mr. Draper’s departure for England, an
address was presented to him, in which the following testimony is
borne to his character and ability:—“W r e rejoice that, under God,
and aided by the zealous and able services of your brethren, you have
been instrumental in building up our beloved Methodism, and extend-
ing her influence and usefulness in no ordinary degree. Your eminent fit
ness for office, and the skill, ability, and uniform courtesy with which you
have conducted the affairs of our church during the ten years of your


residence amongst us, have elicited our highest approval and admiration.
Your ministrations as a pastor and preacher have been in a high degree
useful, while, as a Christian and a gentleman, your example has been
influential for good.” Mr. Draper, in the course of his reply to the
address, said, “ During his thirty years of service in Australasia he had
been preserved in health ; he did not now, he was thankful to say, go
to England in search of health. He hoped by relaxation for a year to
be better able to perform his various duties ; he expected, by his asso-
ciation with the good and great in the old coantry, to be benefitted and
instructed. As representing Australian Methodism, he should seek to
do so faithfully and w 7 ell. Some persons had said to him that, when
he got to England, he would not return ; but, if God spared him, he
he should certainly come back. All his sympathies and interests were
with Australia.” An inscrutable Providence, as mysterious as it is
painful, has prevented the accomplishment of these intentions.
In a letter dated Dec. 18th, 1865, the lamented gentleman writes ;
“ The time of our leaving is now definitely fixed. We intend joining
the London at Plymouth on Monday {New Year’s Day). Putting our
trust in God, who has very kindly and mercifully dealt with us
throughout our visit, we shall go on board a good ship, and hope to
reach the land whither we go in safety. . . Nothing I can now
write will affect my appointment, as it will be fixed before this can
possibly reach you. So we shall consider our lot to be providentially
fixed wherever we may be. I was at the missionary committee last
week, and heard many kind things said to myself. We have been
about among the principal friends, and have no occasion to complain of
the attentions we have received. Mrs. Draper is quite well, so am I,
never better or stronger. I think the trip has done us good. Our
kind, united regards to , and others who may inquire for us.”
All Mr. Draper’s letters during his visit were full of the buoyancy
which so eminently characterised him ; indeed, his visit had been one
of unmixed pleasure. And upon his return to Australia he looked
forward to many years of increased usefulness —an expectation which
was entertained by all his friends. These hopes are now quenched in
death.
Mr. Draper was widely known and highly esteemed beyond the bounds
of his own church as a man of catholic spirit, a good citizen, and a kind
and firm friend. Australia can ill afford to spare such men as he was.
Mrs. Draper, who has perished with her husband, was a native of New
South Wales. She was the daughter of one of the first missionaries of
the London Missionary Society’s missionaries who proceeded to
Tahiti in the ship Duff, in 1797, and who were soon after compelled to
return to Sydney. She was a lady of rare gifts and virtues, and her
loss will be mourned only less than that of her husband. Her aged
mother still survives, together with one brother and one sister. We
understand that Mr. Draper was only about fifty-five years of age. Mr.
and Mrs. Draper leave behind them an only son, who is at present in
the Bank of New Zealand, Dunedin, with whom the deepest sympathy


Cljc |Ub, g, |. draper


will be felt; and for whom, in this terrible affliction, we solicit the
prayers of our readers.
The following extracts from letters relative to the late Mr. and
Mrs. Draper, furnish additional information respecting them and their
last hours on board the London :
“ Being anxious to obtain all the information I could about London , I
made it my business to see two of the passengers, who were saved in
the small boat, and I had a long conversation with them. They both
spoke in the very highest terms of Mr. Draper’s conduct, and stated that
he had exhorted and prayed almost without intermission for twelve or
fourteen hours before the vessel went down. One of them said he saw
him about an hour before the small boat left. He was then in the
saloon, and men and women in distress were frequently going up to him
and saying, “ Oh, Mr. Draper, pray for me, or pray with me.” The last
words he heard him say were ; “ Well, my friends, the captain informs
us that our ship is doomed, and that there is no hope of getting into
port, but the great Captain above tells us there is hope, and that we
may all get safe to heaven,” &c., &c. Another said he saw him a few
minutes before the boat pushed off, that hewas then speaking with deep
emotion, but in a strong, clear, and distinct voice, and that the last
words he recollected to hear him (Mr. D.) say w T ere, “Those of you who
are not converted, now is the time, not a moment to be lost, for in a
few minutes we shall all be in the presence of our Judgeand thus he,
doubtless, continued until the sinking of the vessel stopped his utter-
ance, and “ he ceased at once to work and live.”
Of Mrs. Draper I have been able to learn nothing. It is very evident,
however, that she retained her composure and self-possession, for it does
not appear that she ever attempted to direct her husband’s attention to
herself; and all who knew her will readily believe that she was, in her
own quiet and unobtrusive manner, endeavoring to impart religious
instruction and spiritual comfort and consolation to those by whom she
was surrounded.
The Rev. W. B. Boyce, one of the General Missionary Secretaries,
thus writes :
“ One of the survivors told us, that at the very last (a few minutes
before the vessel went down) he saw Mr. Draper, in his earnestness,
his eyes filled with tears, which were streaming down his face; and
heard him, with the dear distinct voice of a man calm and collected ,
exhorting all to come to Christ.”
The Rev. T. T. H. Hull writes ;
* * * “I have been associated with Mr. Draper in
Adelaide for four years in the work of the ministry. I vividly
remember those peculiar years in the history of the colonies —years of
sorrows and joys, of fears and triumphs. I knew Mr. Draper under
all these vicissitudes , and I can testify to his sterling worth, his
admirable fitness for the position in which Providence placed him, and
his large-hearted efforts to place Methodism on deep and broad founda-
tions, and to give it the position among Colonial Churches to which he


believed it entitled from its Scriptural principles and godly discipline.
It afforded me no small gratification, after my connection with Aus-
tralia had ceased for ten years, to have the pleasure of receiving Mr.
and Mrs. Draper as my guests in this city, and to hear from him of
former scenes and friends. Referring to their leaving for Australia, he
wrote : —‘ The steamer (the London) is a fine new vessel, having gone
out but twice. Last time she did the voyage in sixty days. We join
her (D.Y.) at Plymouth, on the 2nd of January, and she will leave
that port at six p.m. on that day. We trust in God our Heavenly
Father for protection on our way, and delight in the thought that we
shall be remembered by kind friends when they bow at the throne of
grace.’ ” * * *
The English papers record that “at twelve o’clock at night Mr.
Draper held a prayer-meeting in the saloon also, that “ The women
sat round him reading Bibles, with the children ; and occasionally
some man or woman would step up to him, and say, ‘ Pray with me,
Mr. Draper’—a request that was always complied with. Up to the
time the ship went down the reverend gentleman ministered to those
amongst whom he moved constantly. He was heard to say repeatedly,
‘ Oh, God, may those that are not converted be converted now —
hundreds of them.’ ”
From a letter from W. Powell, Esq., we extract the following :
“ One of the survivors tells, that when the announcement was
made by the captain that the ship was rapidly sinking, Mr, Draper
stood up, and with a firm, clear voice, tears streaming down his face,
he said, ‘ The captain tells us there is no hope—that we must all
perish. But I tell you there is hope—there is hope for all. Although
we must all die, and shall never again see land, we may make the port
of Heaven ,’ The steward, who was among the saved, told me that, a
few minutes before the ship went down, he saw Mr. Draper praying
with those by whom he was surrounded, and exhorting them to come
to Jesus. One of his expressions was —‘In a few moments we must
all appear before our great Judge. Let us prepare to meet Him!’
There is every reason to believe that Mr. Draper was drowned while
in the very act of preaching Christ. From the steward, whose name
is ‘ Gardner,’ and whom some of you may perhaps meet in Melbourne,
I also learn that as one of the crew was leaving the vessel, Mrs.
Draper, with characteristic kindness, passed him a rug in which to
wrap himself. I understand the sailor has it still in his possession. If
I can secure that relic, I shall do so, for the satisfaction of Mrs.
Draper’s friends, but I have not seen the man who is said to
have it.”
Mr. Flint, formerly of Melbourne, writes to a friend as follows :
“ I have just had an interview with a gentleman who has just
seen the sailor who was the last to leave the ship London. He said as
follows :— ‘ I was standing on the poop, by the side of Captain
Martin, and said to him, captain, what shall I do—stay by the ship, or
jump into the boat (just then pushing off) 1 His reply was —my


man, if you'stay here"yoUjWill perish" with the rest; if you take ,7 the
boat, you have a chance. He then! said—good-bye, captain, and
jumped for the boat, but missing itTfell into the sea. They threw
him a rope from the boat, which he managed to grasp with his
teeth, and held on until he could get hold with his hands, was taken
into the boat and saved. Two minutes after the ill-fated ship went
down. The question was put to the man—what was the last you
heard or saw them doing on board 1 His reply was —the last I heard
was this : they were singing, ‘ Hock of ages, cleft for me.’ ”
On the Sunday following the arrival of the mail which brought the
news of the loss of the London the Wesleyan Churches in and around
Melbourne were draped in black, and in Wesley Church nearly all the
congregation appeared in mourning. Reference was made to the terri-
ble calamity by the ministers of the connexion in their sermons, and
also by clergymen of other denominations. In appearance Mr. Draper
was rather below the middle height, and slightly inclined to corpu-
lence. The expression of his countenance was cheerful and homely.
Although perhaps not exactly an eloquent preacher his discourses were
stamped with the genuine impress of a strong sagacity. It is proposed
to provide some suitable memorial of the respect in which Mr. Draper
was held by the Wesleyan body.
THE REY. DR. WOOLLEY.
The Rev. Dr. Woolley was Principal of Sydney University for the last
twelve years, and took a first class in classics just thirty years since at
Exeter College, Oxford. The loss of Dr. Woolley, says the Sydney
Herald, “ will deprive the University of a ripe scholar, and a large
circle of a very kind man. His nature was open and his spirit free,
and, if we may say so, too indefinite in its views on some great interests
of life to form the minds of men, wavering in the eddies of modern
disputes ; save this, which some will deem an excellence, he had no
serious defect, and many noble qualities. All seems elevated by the
dignity and distinctness of his last hours, when the Refuge of the Child
became the trust of the philospher.” The Empire says, “ There are
some names that have prominence because of their general recognition.
It seems but a few days ago that Dr. Woolley left Sydney ; everybody
remembers him, and many a tear will be shed for his sad fate.” Dr.
Woolley leaves a family of grown-up daughters in Sydney. The rescued
men remember with gratitude and respect the efforts put forth by him
and Mr. Draper on board the London. Dr. Woolley encouraged the
passengers to work at the pumps.


MISS JULIANA KING.
This promising young vocalist also lost her life in the London. Miss
King was the daughter of Mr. Edward King, a musician of reputation
in Melbourne. With her mother, Miss King visited Europe about two
years ago, and she was for some time a pupil of the Conservatoire de
Musique, at Paris. The young artist had a voice of excellent quality,
and as a musician had been “ born in the purple.” In the present dearth
of good concert singers, Miss King would have been a decided acquisi-
tion, and her return to Australia was anxiously awaited. At the time
of her death she was in her nineteenth year.
CAPTAIN MARTIN.
The following, in reference to the heroism of the ill-fated commander,
is from English sources ; —About an hour before the vessel sunk Mr.
Wilson met Captain Martin under the main deck aft, and asked him if
it would be of use to help in carrying out the water to the second deck.
He replied, “ I will see,” and walked to the engine-room, into which he
looked down, when he turned about, came back, and said, “You may
do it, but I think it is of no use.” He then walked on to the poop,
and having declared that he would stay and sink with the passengers,
he walked about and silently looked down upon what was going on.
Another of the survivors relates that on the boat pushing off from the
ship, the master, Captain Martin, was invited to save himself, but he
refused, saying, “No, I will go down with the passengers, but I wish
you God speed, and safe to land.” Nothing could be finer and nobler
than the example set by him to all on board—an example, we may add,
that seems not to have been without due effect.
The eloquent passages given below occur in a leading article of the
Daily Telegraph of the 19th January;—“ Who cannot call up a sigh
of pity for the passengers grouped in the saloon, worn out by the storm,
and feeling by the lifeless wallow of the ship and the manner of the
sailors that the end is coming 1 And then the captain enters, as help-
less now as the little ones who wonder why their mothers are so pale
and their fathers so silent; and be sure he bared his brave head before
the ladies, and spoke to all in a tender and quiet tone, as he told them
that there was no more hope, except from God, and that very soon they
would all be before Him. What followed then 1 We could guess if
we did not know ; but it is better to know. There was a great silence,
broken only by the waves finishing their work ; and then crew and
passengers mingled together to die; no ranks —no servant or master
any more ; and some knelt with the clergyman and prayed, some opened


the Bible which tells how “ the winds and the waves obey Him,” and
others, just as patiently, held hands with their loved ones, and waited
meekly for the pang and the change. No screams or fainting, they tell
us, among the women, no disgraceful rush after brandy to drug death
withal among the men. Very nobly our brothers and sisters took the
message of their doom from the,good captain; how should they not,
being, as many were, stout-hearted squatters, or wives and sons of
squatters, accustomed to master their blood, and all of them English 1
Still it is pleasant to know that this prosperous age has not killed the
calm manhood of Englishmen, nor taken from Englishwomen their
sweet patience in peril and death. Quietly they gave their souls to
God, and when His savage sea had done its mission, we think it did
but send them by a brief anguish to a better port than that which the
good ship London foundered in striving to reach.
CONTEMPORARY OPINION.
Several of the leading organs of public opinion in England have com-
mented at considerable length upon the great tragedy of January. The
remarks which succeed are extracted from the London journals, which
most prominently discussed the sad event.
The Daily Telegraph of the 18th, after summarising the incidents
of the catastrophe, proceeds to discuss the probable causes in this
wise Other details are to come; those, however, now before the
public are sufficient to paint a terrible scene of agony and despair, of
cruel, cold deaths in the winter sea. Nor is it unknown men and
women who have been cut off, but a picked merchant crew, and colonists
and emigrants of gentle breeding and position, whose awful fate will
make tears flow fast on both sides of the globe. And those tears need
never have floived. The valuable lives lost with the London might have
been in safety this very day. These are grave and responsible words to
utter, but they are warranted. If a vessel went to sea without a com-
pass, and ran on a rock wide of her course, could not that disaster
have been avoided 1 If she took no tables of the stars and tides, no
chronometer, no quadrant, and lost her reckoning, and was cast away,
should we wonder at her fate ? Similarly, it is not for a maritime
people like us to attribute this shocking loss of precious life to any
cause but the neglect of the safeguards which we already possess.
Here was a ship, not engaged in the mail service, not pressed for time
by contracts, carrying a great many passengers, anA bound on a voyage
too long to make twenty-four hours’ delay a matter to outweigh any con-
siderations of safety. She ‘starts from Plymouth on the 6th of
January,’—on which day the London papers could of course be ob-


tained. We turn to the issues of the sth inst., and there we find, from
the usual meteorological notice, that almost all over western Europe the
barometer was lower than 30 deg.; that at Valentia and Holyhead it was
lower than 29J deg.; and at Plymouth itself 29 deg. 72 min. Not
only was this intelligence under the eyes of the officers of the London ,
but the storm-signal was hoisted that day on ‘ all the coasts,’ indicating
the approach of a gale from the south-west. We anticipate the im-
patient ejaculation with which skippers will meet the idea that they
are to dance attendance on drum and cone before they start upon a
voyage. ‘Well, start then,’ we say, ‘against a heavy winter gale
coming dead in your teeth—a gale on which you may reckon all but as
surely as if it had come already.’ But when the barometer dropped
on the 7th from 30d to 29 5, and then in twelve hours later to 29‘2,
why didn’t Captain Martin turn back directly, instead of waiting till
the 10th to do it ] We will tell the public why he didn’t —without
waiting for further particulars, and without fear of contradiction from
seafaring men who have read this horrible story. He didn’t trust his bar-
ometers —aneroids and tubular—which told him that the farther he
went the worse he would find it. He went on in spite of them, like a
gallant but rash sailor • and he got too far to come back. Now take
the case of the barque Susan Pardeio, Captain John Davis, which was
caught in the same place in the same gale. Captain Davis is a man
who believes in good barometers, and that belief saved his ship. He
never would have left Plymouth on that 6th of January ; but being at
sea, and noting that, with a fall of from 30 in. to 28 54, his dumb
instruments warned him of what was approaching, he made his ship as
tight as a bottle, and brought his own news home to Plymouth, where
we believe the London could and should have been on the night of the
Bth or the morning of the 9th—had her captain acted with such cir-
cumspection as that which we find recorded in Captain Davis’s log :
‘ Having carefully noted the barometer during all its changes, I was
quite prepared for everything, being convinced by the movement of the
instrument and the unsteadiness of the weather that a fearful storm
was raging to the N. of lat. 47 0 N., long. 14 48.’ That is a sea-man-
like entry. The fact is this —captains care nothing, as a rule, for
barometers and scientific meteorology. They don’t believe in them ;
and the reason is plain to anybody who walks the East-end. Those
worthless things hung up for sale in the shops of pawnbrokers, ship-
chandlers, and slop ■ sellers, are the accursed shams that cost life at sea.
Captains buy them and find them worthless ; then they give the thing
up altogether, except in the way of a general ‘glance at the glass.’
They take good chronometers and good sextants to sea, because these
instruments can be tested, but with barometers they too often decline
to trouble themselves.”
To this the Dailp Xeivs replies with arguments which would have
possessed a greater degree of cogency if the fact were not patent that
Captain Martin did put back, although unfortunately not until too late
to save his ship : —“ One of our contemporaries insists that the com-


mander of the London should never have proceeded tq sea with a falling
weather-glass, a remark which also seems'obvious enough. Now, in the
first place, it is by no means evident that the weather-glass was falling
when the London left Plymouth Sound. A gale from the W. and S.W.
had been blowing for three days when the London entered the Sound ;
but when she left Plymouth the wind, though blowing from the same
quarter, had lulled almost to a calm. No doubt the weather was dis-
turbed ; it has been so with scarcely a day’s intermission since the
year began. But does our contemporary mean that a packet or passen-
ger ship, of the size and rate of the London, with her passengers and
cargo on board, bound to Australia, is to wait weather-bound until her
barometers mark set fair, and her wind-glass certifies a calm 1 What
would become of our trade with America and the West Indies if the
captains of the Cunard and the Eoyal Mail line never ventured to pro-
ceed to sea except in fine weather ? Why, for three months out of the
twelve they would never proceed to sea at all. If the Cunard boats
never left their moorings in the Mersey when the weather looked
threatening, or the barometers marked change, what would become, we
should be glad to hear, of their contract with the Post-office, and how
would the merchants of London and New York like the arrangement ?
It would be just as rational to propose at once to go back to the good
old days and ways when a six months’voyage to Calcutta or a six
weeks’ voyage to Quebec was prefaced by a month’s anchor in the
Downs. Conceive a line of passenger ships of which the arrivals are
calculated and the departures advertised to a day, waiting twice a year
for the equinoctial gales to blow over, or declining to go to sea as long
as the weather is unsettled ! There is not a shadow of reason to accuse
the lamented commander of the London of sacrificing every considera-
tion of prudence and safety to the reputation his ship had acquired for
making quick passages. Unquestionably it was part, and a principle
part, of his duty to proceed to sea with as little delay as possible, and
to make as short and quick a passage as he could. If such is not the
duty of every shipmaster, we should be glad to hear from some one of
the passengers and consignee class, or from some mail agent, how long
they can afford to wait for a passage 1 Without denying that if the
ship had not left Plymouth she would not have gone down in the
Bay of Biscay, we may venture to remark that, according to the report
of the surviving passengers, however severe may have been the storm in
which the London foundered, it was one in which a ship’s boat could
live. Vessels of much less power than the London managed to make
tolerable weather of it. The survivors were made very comfortable on
board of an Italian barque ; they sighted a brig, and even a cutter
under canvass, after the London had gone down. There must be every
disposition on the part of the public and of the coui’t of inquiry to be-
lieve that such a ship as the London, owned by a firm ot the highest
repute, was found and fitted in the completest manner for the Austrail.in
voyage. At the same time, it would be affectation to assume that a
steamer, with a mixed crew of eighty men, can be so well prepared for


all emergencies as a ship of war of the same tonnage, but with a crew of
some three or four hundred men, every one of whom has his station in
the ship or the ship’s boats. There is one impression, however, or pre-
judice, under which we have long laboured, and which we must confess
the fate of the London has only confirmed, and that is in favour of wood,
and against iron. There appears to be almost as great a distinction
between the loss of a wooden ship and the loss of an iron ship, as
between a railway and a coach accident; and we are always reminded
of that terse and simple formula by which a passenger who had suffered
the distinction. In the one case, he said, “ There you arein the
other, “Where are you?” No one would grant to iron ships over
wooden ships the superiority, in other respects, of rail over coach. But
for sudden and overwhelming catastrophes commend us to iron.”
The Times favours a suggestion by a correspondent that passenger
steamships should be invariably constructed with a spar deck, or at
least that all openings communicating with the engine room should be
carried much higher and far more efficiently guarded than is usually the
case. The same journal proceeds : —lt is in vain that we build invulne-
rable hulls if we leave unprotected openings on deck immediately above
the vital parts of a steamer, which not only depends on her machinery
for keeping out of the dreaded “ trough of the sea,” but should also
be able to employ it for pumping. Still less excusable is the infatua-
tion of shipbuilders in constructing the sterns of large vessels with less
regard to strength than the bows, and that of the officers of passenger
ships in allowing the stern-ports to be kept open or imperfectly
closed during rough weather. It is true that a ship’s stern is not so
incessantly buffeted by the waves as her stem, but the shape of the
former is far less adapted to bear a shock, and the danger of being
“pooped” is notoriously one of those most formidable to a sailor.
It may be incurred but once in a voyage, but that once proved
too much for the ill-fated London. She had survived for some hours
the breach made by the sea over her waist, when the furnaces were ex-
tinguished, but no sooner was she “ struck by a stern sea than it car-
ried away four of her stern-ports.” Then “ all efforts were useless,”
and Captain Martin had to warn his passengers that no hope remained.
*******
Nor should we be doing justice to the truth or to the public if, out of
respect for the memory of Captain Martin, who behaved so heroically in
the hour of trial, we refrained from adverting to his apparent impru-
dence in putting to sea at all—still more with royal masts up—
when the readings of the barometer at Plymouth were omi-
nous of a coming hurricane, and most navigators would have
sent down even their topgallant masts. No wonder such fair
weather gear was soon blown away, swinging to and fro,
however, with such violence as to defy all efforts to secure it.
Unless it should should prove that he acted under strict orders from his
owners, or had some unexplained motive for sailing, it seems hardly
possible to acquit him of some indiscretion at the outset of the voyage


Beyond this we cannot venture to criticise his conduct. There are
those who think that he should have turned back sooner ; forgetting,
perhaps, that a ship is safer with her head to the wind than in any
other position. It may, on the contrary, be open to doubt whether
Captain Martin, having steamed for so many days in the teeth of a
storm, did not act unwisely in running back when he might nearly have
reached its outer edge. But these are at best vague conjectures. The
same remark applies, though with somewhat less force, to the moral
enforced by one of our nautical correspondents, that it is too much the
custom in steam vessels to put undue confidence in steam power,
and to neglect the use of sails. This may be very true, but we
have really no means of knowing whether Captain Martin thus erred.
We only know that he stopped his engines, and set his topsails on the
Monday, and we cannot fairly “ presume,” with Captain Marrayat, that
when the engines were started again soon afterwards the topsails were
furled. They must, however, have been furled before Wednesday night,
for it was then, on the final stoppage of the engines, that a futile attempt
was made to set the maintopsail, which was instantly blown to shreds,
except one corner, under which the ship lay-to for the rest of the night.
Possibly it would have been safer to heave-to from the first, and
possibly “ storm canvass” may, under such circumstances, be a valua-
ble auxiliary to steam power, but it is equally possible that Captain
Martin, if he were alive to tell his own story, could fully satisfy his
critics on points like these.


APPENDIX
FOUNDERING OP THE IRON PINNACE.
Soon after ten o’clock on the morning of the 11th the iron pinnace,
capable of carrying fifty persons, was raised and hung over the lee-
ward rail. When let go, however, she foundered, one man, a Dutch-
man, being drowned, and three others, who were rescued, being cast
into the surf to leeward. Two of the men who were overboard were
John King, the able seaman to whose marvellous skill as steersman the
survivors all entirely and with gratitude attributed their preservation,
and Mr. Munro, a passenger, who hung in the davit until brought in
by Edward Gardner, the steward. King had one of his sides bruised
and his thigh dislocated* by being beaten against the steamer, and
Gardner received injuries in his back. Nothing then remained on
board the ship but an ordinary six-oared captain’s gig and a still
smaller boat on the top of the cuddy or cookhouse. After consider-
able hesitation it was agreed that a boat should be launched for the
second time, and an opportunity was presented for passengers to em-
bark in her, but only three passengers and sixteen of the crew availed
themselves of it, and if they had delayed three minutes longer than
they did they would have perished in the ship. The precaution was
taken that only three or four of the sixteen of the crew who com-
mitted themselves to the boat should be allowed to jump into her
while she was being lowered, and by this means she reached the water
without mishap, and the rest were enabled to follow. The crowd on
board were afraid to leave the ship, having naturally been frightened
by the sinking of the iron boat, and those who put off in the second
boat were shouted at not to make the attempt, as their chance was
hopeless.
GALLANTRY OF A SURVIVOR.
Some heroic sacrifices were made. One of the passengers in the
boat, Mr. John Wilson, a native of Montrose, went down into the
cabin and endeavoured to persuade a friend, Mr. John Hickman, from
Ballaarat, and brother to Mr. Hickman, solicitor, of Southampton, to
attempt to save his life by going into the boat, but, after being en-
treated, he said, “No, I promised my wife and children to stay by
them, and I will do so.” The water was then a considerable depth on
the lee side of the saloon, indeed over the top of the berths, and he
asked Mr. Wilson to help him in removing his four children to the
windward side, out of the water. This was done, and then he shook
hands with Mr. Wilson, with “ Good-bye, Jack,” and parted from his
friend for ever. When last seen Mr. Hickman was standing in a row
* Another account, and which is probably correct, is, that King’s thigh was cut.


with his wife and children. This occurred about an hour before the
boat put off, but probably they had perished by that time, as the
water had before then poured into the steamer through her cabin
windows, and when the boat left the sea was flush with the top of the
poop deck, and the corpses of drowned women and children were
floating over the deck. When the men were all in the boat, one of
the seamen cried, “ There may still be room; fetch a lady.” Mr.
Wilson then sprang over a portion of the deck in search of a lady he
knew, but not seeing her, and knowing that every instant was pre-
cious, he said to a young girl, “Will you go?” She did not refuse,
therefore Mr. Wilson seized her and took her to the bulwarks, but
when she looked over the rails and saw the distance which she must
spring, she said in despair, “ Oh, I cannot do that.” There was no
time for persuasion or parley, and Mr. Wilson was obliged to drop the
girl and jump from the steamer to the boat, which he fell into
safely.
SHOCKING INCIDENT.
Just as the boat containing the nineteen had pushed off from the
wreck, the men in her were piteously called upon by a lady about
twenty-three years of age, who, with a face which was, it is stated,
livid with horror, shrieked out an offer of “ a thousand guineas if
you’ll take me in.” But in that solemn hour millions of money would
have been accounted valueless, and to return must have resulted in
destruction to all.
EXTRAORDINARY INSTANCE OF CUPIDITY.
When it was first made known that the vessel must go down, a
passenger brought on deck a carpet bag, and on his doing so the
captain gave a short melancholy laugh, and then smiled, as one of the
passengers expressed it, “ at the preposterous idea of the man’s think-
ing at such a time of his property.”
CHEERING THE BOAT’S CREW.
When the boat put off with the three passengers, fourteen men, and
two boys, one being the youngest midshipman on his first voyage,
many of the passengers who, although expecting death, little knew
how very, very soon it was to come upon them, waved their handker-
chiefs and cheered when the boat got about a dozen yards from the
ship, being apparently anxious that some should live to tell their
hapless tale. By the time the men had rowed the gig about eighty
yards the wind came down upon them from all quarters so boisterously
that they could not hear each other when shouting, and at this time
they looked eagerly back, and saw their noble new vessel sinking
rapidly by the stern.
TOO LATE.
The stem rose so high that the keel was observed for a moment to
be completely out of the water as far as the foremast. The boatswain,
Stedding, of Blackwall, who left a wife and five children, the butcher,


from Blackball, who left a wife and family, Ham, the cook, a mar-
ried man, and a very old servant of the owners, the baker, and the
purser’s mate, William Riley, had made up their minds to leave the
steamer in the remaining small boat over the cuddy, and had pro-
visioned and launched her ; but no sooner were they ready to put off
than the foundered ship quickly slid below the waves, and left a
moment an awful gulf, within whose walls of dark whirling water
they fell with every human being and every article around, and were
soon swallowed up. Two passengers were seen with lifebelts, but
probably none were alive when they came to the surface. The
spectacle was only to be seen, for in the din of thb tempest no cry
from the sinking multitude could be heard, and soon not a vestige was
visible. As the ship sunk it was seen that all on deck were driven
forward, not by water, but by a tremendous and overpowering rush of
air from below, which, as it escaped through the deck as well as the
hatches, impelled all on deck forward with violence, and the dreadful
struggle must have been soon ended.
A FORTUNATE COMMUNICATION.
Mr. Munro stated that a passenger named Eastwood, with whom he
had been acquainted prior to the voyage, said to him, “ Well, Jack, I
think we are going to go.” The answer was, “I think we are, East-
wood.” The reply was, “We cannot help it. There’s only one thing
I regret about it. Of a draft for £5OO on the Bank of Victoria,
Ballaarat, I only received £2O, which I gave to the captain in the
office of Money Wigram and Co. I should have liked my poor
father to have got the balance.” The speaker was amongst those who
perished, but fortunately and singularly enough his communication was
made to one of the three surviving passengers.
TOUCHING RESIGNATION OF THE PASSENGERS.
In the annals of shipwreck seldom has a more affecting passage
occurred than the following from the published narrative of the sur-
vivors :—“ The agony of suspense had been so long maintained that on
the day the London foundered the passengers were perfectly quiet and
unexcited, and a surprising degree of resignation was exhibited
throughout. Miss Marks, of Old Kent-road, London, was at first
almost frantic; yet when the boat left she stood calmly on deck bare-
headed, and waived an adieu to Mr. Wilson. Mr. Grant, one of the
officers, was lively throughout, and encouraged many to toil at the
pumps—a work rendered by the wind highly dangerous and difficult.
Miss Brooker, from Pimlico, was heard to say, as she wrung her
hands, ‘Well, I have done all that I could, and can do no more.’
She then became outwardly calm. On Tuesday night, after the pas-
sengers had been alarmed by the shipping of water, Mrs, Price, Mrs.
Wood (who had with her her husband and five children), Miss
Brooker, and Miss Marks, read the Bible by turns in the second cabin.
It was on that night that after the sea had poured down the hatch the
captain said, ‘ Boys, you may say your prayers.’ At twelve o’clock on


the following night Mr. Draper held a general prayer meeting in the
saloon. An extraordinary fact deserves to be recorded. A poor old
couple, who had three children with them, had tried in vain three
times to go upon their voyage. First in a vessel unknown, and which
was wrecked ; next in the Duncan Dunbar , which also was recently
wrecked ; and lastly Gardner, the steward, saw the poor wife washed
overboard from the London , to leeward, her husband following her
presently beneath the billows. Among the passengers were two stout
old people, who had become favourites on board, and who had been
sent for by their only son. The poor creatures, on learning that they
must drown, took a small quantity of brandy and went below, to die
together in their cabin.”
DESPAIR.
Several revolvers were seen in the hands of passengers, who did not
conceal their intention of shooting themselves when the last moment
came, preferring to meet their death, when inevitable, by a bullet
rather than drowning. The steward, indeed, overheard an offer by the
owner of a pistol to a friend, that he would shoot him if he desired.
The well-meant offer was at that time declined ; and whether these in-
tentions were carried into execution is not known, but no reports of
firearms were heard as the steamer foundered.
WHY RAFTS WERE NOT MADE.
Very considerable astonishment has been expressed that no effort
was made, during the two days that the ship was in imminent danger
of going down, to prepare rafts and use similar means to give an
additional chance for the safety of 239 souls on board. The testimony,
however, of both the passengers and the rescued crew goes to show
that Captain J. B. Martain —of whose skill, as manifested during the
storm, they speak in terms of the highest commendation—did not
order the construction of rafts because the wind blew with such severity,
and the waves leaped over the steamer in such quick succession and
tremendous force that no man could have worked on the deck, and
even if they had succeeded in building a raft there could be no hope
of any of the unfortunate people being enabled to cling to it alive for
many minutes in such a sea. The masts of the ship were of iron, and
therefore could not be used for rafts.
SUICIDE OF A PASSENGER’S SISTER.
A lady named Sarah Marks, the sister of the Miss Marks who was
lost in the London , committed suicide by poisoning herself when she
heard of the loss, the fact that she had advised her sister to go to Mel-
bourne in the London so preying upon her mind that she considered
herself her sister’s murderer.
A STERN COMPARISON.
The Churchman sums up an article upon the loss of the London
as follows: —“ Men of science will tell us that we are conquering
nature, and that we can do now without God’s love and care. But
put these ‘ wizards that peep and mutter,’ the setting up of science


against God, on the deck of the London, in the presence of the hurricane
roaring like a wild beast, and the relentless, merciless sea, and the ship
dismasted and rolling helplessly, with her fires put out and her engines
useless, and a throng of helpless men and women with the agony of
death before their eyes, and the little children puzzled and not able to
comprehend what the danger was, —let science stand there and be
tried, and it will be found that the Wesleyan preacher who so. bravely
did his best to lead those who were about to perish with himself to
prayer and to their God, was a wiser man and a truer hero than any
unbelieving man of science who has ever breathed. He understood
better too the facts of human nature and of the universe, and the
awfulness of both. These awful things, ‘ the wind and storm fulfil-
ling His word,’ and those other judgments too under which our country
is suffering, or is likely to suffer, say to the sceptical, the unbeliev-
ing, and the materialist, very plainly, as plainly as to the care-
less and profane, ‘Be still, and know that lam God. ’ Let restless
men place themselves by an act of the mind on the deck of the London
before she went down, and deny the existence of a Personal God if
they can.”
CONDUCT OP THE SURVIVORS CRITICISED.
Certain comments of an invidious, if not altogether of an unjust,
nature having appeared on the conduct of the survivors, The Times of
January 22nd thus replied : “ Where many perish and few escape,
there is always a temptation to suspect the latter of basely deserting
their comrades. Such suspicions hardly admit of a conclusive refuta-
tion, but for that very reason they should not be circulated at random.
It would be preposterous to expect strong men to forego the means of
saving their own lives because women or weaker men cannot be saved
with them. The very utmost self devotion of which ordinary natures
are capable is to abstain from taking advantage of superior strength
to insure their own safety at the expense of others. Such magna-
nimity as Captain Martin showed on the brink of eternity is given to
few, and short of this Mr. Greenhill and the rest of the boat’s crew
appear to have done nothing unworthy of brave men. The fate of
the starboard pinnace would naturally deter many from venturing into
the port pinnace, wildly dashing, as it doubtless was, against the broad-
side of the London, and only to be reached by a perilous leap from
above. Bold and active men would alone be likely to prefer such an
alternative to that of taking their chance with the ship, and, what is
still more important, none but experienced boatmen could, in all pro-
bability, have kept the pinnace afloat in so fearful a sea. The salva-
tion of the party is mainly attributed by all to the marvellous skill
and courage of King, their coxswain. Had this man, on whose prowess
nineteen lives depended, chivalrously made way for a lady, or had the
boat returned to be engulphed in the same abyss with the doomed ship,
who would have been the gainer 1 That some of those left on board,
encouraged by the success of the pinnace, should have afterwards
rushed, but too late, to man the other two boats, proves nothing at all


against their more fortunate shipmates. There is no proof or presump-
tion, or shadow of either, against them; and if we pity the cruel fate
of the dead, let us at least forbear to make unfounded imputations
upon the living.”
A DIFFERENCE OF OPINION.
Mr. E. P. Kingston, in his interesting letter already quoted from, gives
the following as the view of three of those who escaped, of the effect of
the pious ministrations upon the passengers : —“ Now, when Gardner
reaches Melbourne I want you to seek him out, and I want you to
give him the deepest and the costliest drink you can, as the man who
did the last act of kindness on earth to poor Brooke, and as a really
fine fellow in himself. His opinion, and that of Main and Munro,
seems to be, that if the passengers had exerted themselves more for
their own safety, and attended less to the pious exhortations of the
good clergymen, more would have been saved. They might have tried
earlier to get the long-boat out, which would have held fifty. To quote
Gardner’s words, ‘The praying paralyzed them.’”
mr. g. v. brooke’s widow and sister.
In Mr. Kingston’s letter to his brother the accompanying interesting
particulars occur : —“ The London was to sail from the Thames and
touch at Plymouth. Mr. Brooke determined to go on board at the
latter place. Accordingly he, Miss Fanny Brooke, and Miss Avonia
Jones, left Dublin for Plymouth by the direct steamer which plies
between the two ports. Miss Fanny Brooke had long been the resident *
of a quiet parsonage in Kilkenny, and dreaded going to sea. Nothing
but persuasion on the part of her friends, and her love for her brother,
could have induced her to undertake the voyage. There is not the
least doubt that presentiments of coming evil had possession of her
mind. The trip from Dublin to Plymouth was singularly unpropitious.
Not only had the steamer to put back at its very start, but to go into
Falmouth, and stop there until the tempest had abated. Then, in
getting into Plymouth, the passengers were horrified by seeing a vessel
driven against the pier, broken up, and submerged in the course of a
few minutes. Auguries of the greater grief to come were by no means
wanting in the preliminary voyage. The voyage of the London from
Gravesend had been anything but prophetic of a pleasant time to the
antipodes. Some of her crew had deserted her whilst she was in the
river, and the inclemency of the weather had sadly delayed her arrrival.
Miss Avonia Jones dined with Mr. Brooke on board the doomed vessel,
and parted from him just as the steamer bade farewell to England.
Everybody knew that the weather was fearful; that wrecks around the
coast were numerous, almost beyond precedent, and that stormy seas
were to be expected; but lam not aware that anyone had fears for
the safety of the London. On the morning of the 17th I was reading
the Daily Telegraph at breakfast when the telegraphic report of the
catastrophe caught my eye. I hastened to Miss Jones’s, and waited
for some time before I knocked, hoping that she would have seen the


intelligence and recovered from the first shock. Though the papers
were on the table before her, she had not noticed the paragraph. You
will understand the position I was in, and how nervous I felt in having
to break the news. Told it had to be, and told it was. The hope
which I tried to inspire was, that the telegraph had exaggerated facts,
and that all were not lost who were stated to have perished. So we
took a coach and went off to Money Wigram and Co.’s, in Leadenhall
street—Avonia not speaking a word during the drive. ‘lt is quite
true. Don’t have any doubt about it—we have none—they are all
lost,’ said an old man from behind the desk ; the office being filled with
weeping women and tearful-eyed men. We found that if we went to
the yard at Blackwall we might possibly learn further. On arriving
there, no one could inform us of more than had appeared in the papers.
The chance was that if we could see Greenhiil, the engineer who had escaped,
we might be further informed, so we drove away to his residence, in a
dreary street of mean houses, in the middle of the Isle of Dogs. He
had been taken out by some anxious inquirer, and we were forced to
return without further news. On the next day came more accurate
reports, depriving us of the faintest gleam of hope, and too sadly cor-
roborating the story of the day before.”
THE LAST THREE DAYS.
Messrs. Muuro and Main say that on the Tuesday a kind of gloom
prevailed amongst the passengers. That was the day on which the
masts were torn away. Some said from this time that they would
never see Australia again. As matters became worse they all grew more
resigned. Early on Thursday morning, husbands and wives and chil-
dren assembled in the saloon, listening to the Rev. Mr. Draper, and
praying devoutly. A complaint was made that the married men were
prevented by their wives and children clinging to them from working at
the pumps ; but the answer was, “ How can I leave them f ’ Mr.
Munro says it would be impossible to describe that harrowing scene.
Money, watches, chains, and valuables of all kinds were lying about.
All was dust now.
THE BOARD OF TRADE INQUIRY.
The inquiry directed by the Board of Trade to be instituted into the
circumstances attending the terrible loss of the steamer London, in the
Bay of Biscay, was fixed to take place on 29th January, at the Green-
wich Police Court. Mr. Traill, the magistrate of the district, would
preside, Captains H. Harris and Baker acting as nautical assessors.
Mr. O’Dowd was to attend to conduct the case on behalf of the Board
of Trade, The surviving passengers and most of the crew, who suc-
ceeded in saving themselves in the boat, had been summoned to give
evidence, and other facts would be gone into as to the equipment of the
steamer, the character and number of her boats, and the nature and
extent of her cargo.
W. H. Williams, Printer, 23 Little Bourke street east, Melbourne.


THE DEFENDER OP MEDICAL LIBERTY AND
RIGHT OP PRIVATE JUDGMENT.
JAMES MORISON, THE HYGEIST,
FOUNDER OF THE BRITISH COLLEGE OF HEALTH,
EUSTON ROAD, LONDON, A.D.182a,
JAMES MORISON, the youngest son of Alexander Morison, Esq.,
of Bognie, in the county of Aberdeen, was bom in the year 1770. 'Pa?
family has been long known as one of great affluence and respectability; and
the late Member for Banffshire, John Morison, was the second brother of
the subject of this brief sketch. In early life he studied at the University
of Aberdeen, and afterwards at Hanau, in Germany, being intended for the
mercantile profession. After finishing his studies, he resided at Riga, as a
merchant, and subsequently in the West Indies, where he acquired consider-
able West India property. Having suffered much from ill-health, he was
obliged to leave that country and proceed to Europe, seeking from change of
clime a restoration to health. About the year 1814, he settled at Bordeaux,
where he resided in great respectability.—See Mr. Morison’s Case reported in
the “ Morisoniana,” to be had of all the Hygeian Agents throughout
the world.
General Agents for the Sale of Morison’s Pills, Powders, and
Ointment, in AUSTRALIA: —■
Messrs. M. A. WOEMS & Co., Sydney.
Mr. CHAEI WOOD, Great Bourke Street, Melbourne.


DESCRIPTION OE THE
MOEISONIAN TESTIMONIAL
ERECTED IN FRONT OE THE
BEITISH COLLEGE OE HEALTH,
EUSTON ROAD, LONDON.
ON A PIECE OE ABERDEEN GEANITE IS SEES
THE LION OF ENGLAND,
WITH THE FOLLOWING INSCRIPTION :
“THIS MEMORIAL
RAISED BY A PENNY SUBSCRIPTION,
HAS BEEN ERECTED A.D. 1856.
To JAMES MOEISON, The Hygeist.
The Morisonlan System of Medicine.
1. The vital principle is in the blood.
2. Everything in the body is derived from
the blood.
3. All constitutions are radically the same.
4. All diseases arise from impurity of the
blvod.
5. Pain and disease have the same origin.
6. From the intimate connection subsisting
between mind and body, the health of tiie
one must conduce to the serenity of the other.
7. Proper vegetable purgation is the only-
medicinal mode for effectually eradicating
disease.
8. Tlic discovery of a Vegetable medi
cine was a desideratum. »
9. This discovery was made by JAMES
MORIsON, the Hygeist, who also proclaimed
“the medical liberty of the subject.”
On the Light side of the (fhranite is engraved the following important notice :
‘MORISON WAS THE FIRST TO PROTEST AGAINST BLEEDING AND’
THE USE OF POISONS AS MEDICINES.’
And on the Left side —
PETITIONS PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT BY THE BRITISH
COLLEGE OF HEALTH, NEW ROAD, LONDON:
1847. AGAINST PHARMACEUTICAL POISONS, Signed by 19,950 PERSONS.
1851. AGAINST LATIN PRESCRIPTIONS, Signed by 3,331 PERSONS.
And at the, lacJc —
The Family Arms oe JAMES MORISON, the Hygeist.
At the base of the Monument is engraved, on one side, the name of the immortal
HARVEY,
The Discoverer oe the Circulation oe the Blood, with the date
OE HIS BIRTH, 1578,
And on the other side—
SHAKESPEARE—ON POISONS.
“ The leperous distilment; whose effect
Holds such an enmity with BLOOD of man,
That, swift as quicksilver, it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body
And with a sudden vigour, it doth posset, (a)
And curd, like eager (h) droppings into milk.
The thin and wholesome blood.”
Hamlet, Act I, s. 5:
a Thicken. h Sour—acid.
And in front of the Monument
“THE BLOOD IS THE LIE E.”—Deut. xii. 23.
MOEISON’S VEGETABLE UNIVERSAL MEDICINES
May be had of all Hygeian Agents throughout the world.
Prices—ls. l-|d., 2s, 9d., and 4s. 6d. per Box, and Family Packets, 11s.


JK / J
1508
02235774


and find it answers very well. The Wool comes up equal in colour to that washed with
the ordinary hard soap, and I find it more economical. I intend to use no other sort.—
Yours truly,
Church street, Collingwood, Dec. 6th, 1864. JAMES H. TURNER.
SOFT ;
We beg to draw attention to the fact that we* are manufacturers of V
SOFT SOAP. The advantages of washing sheep before shearing in " •
soap and warm water have been so fully recognised, particularly iii
Tasmania, that it is quite unnecessary for us to say one word on the
subject. It may not, however, be so well known as it ought to* be
that hard soap —common household soap—should not be used for
that purpose. The yolk of the fleece has been analysed by some of. * ( •
the most eminent chemists in Europe, and it is found to be neither
more nor less than a pure potash soap, that is, soft soap. Hence it
follows that wool washed with our soap, which is prepared in strict
conformity with the composition of the yolk, if any of the yolk is
displaced, an exact equivalent is left, the wool thereby retaining all
that softness which clean wool not freed from the yolk always has;
besides, the loss in weight is much less than when hard soap is used.
We are happy to say that the experience of all those who have used
our soap fully confirms the above.
This soap received a first prize at the Geelong and Western '•
District Agricultural Society’s Exhibition, 1864 ; and •
A First-Class PEIZE MEDAL at the Dublin Exhibition, 1865.
Messrs. Hood and Co. —Gentlemen—l have tried your Soft Soap for Wool Washing, •
Messrs. Hood and Co. —Dear Sirs— l have the pleasure to hand you the honorary
certificate of the Northern Pastoral Association for your samples of Soft Soap, which
were very much admired. They were considered superior to any sample of the kind
before seen.—l am, dear Sirs, yours truly,
Echuca, sth Dec., 1864. FRED. PAYNE.
V \
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne.—Dear Sirs— l have tried the sample of your
Soft Soap ; ray overseer is highly in favour of it. I have a small stock of bar soap yet
on hand, but as soon as it is used I shall send you an order.
Ballarat, Nov. 29th, 1864. E. J. STRICKLAND.
The following has been receive'' ' Sydney:—
Dear Sirs—l mentioned in my eof your
Soft Soap to a country customer. lam giau iniorm you uui ~j a gidy in its
favour. He says that it makes the wool softer than when washed with hard soap, and
that the parcel washed with it brought Id. per pound more than the same clip did washed
with the other soap.
178 Pitt street, Sydney, Jan. 30, 1866. (Signed) E. H. O’NEILL.
i, ‘ .
Price One Ton and upwards, 4d. per pound (packages free); under
that quantity, according to arrangement.
V •
THE TRADE SUPPLIED IN ANY QUANTITIES.
HOOD & Co., Manufacturing Chemists,
160 ELIZABETH ST. MELBOURNE.
HOOD & CO.’S SOLUBLE SHEEP-DIPPING COMPOSITION.
Since Ist January, 1864, we have sold upwards of 120 tons, sufficient to dip once five millions
of Sheep 11 1 We commend this fact to the notice of the Flockowners of Australia. Evidently
the above quantity could not have been sold if it diet not answer the purpose.
HOOD & Co,, 160 Elizabeth street,
PORT PHILLIP CHEMICAL WORK 59 LITTLE BOURKE STREET WEST.
