

THESIS FOR PRESENTATION TO THE
EXAMINERS FOR THE DEGREE OF
M.D. AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
SYDNEY , MARCH , 1895.
THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY
OF THE
CEREBRUM OF PLATYPUS.
BY
G. ELLIOT SMITH, M.B., et CIi.M.
GORNALL, PRINTER, “TIMES” OFFICE,
REDFERN AND BOTANY STREETS.
1896.


A/.
_ did
• .£■ 3 , S /
/
t
t • ‘‘"L-O
\ x a.<U rljXt t
\
l s-td-c „V»
I'd, d ,


THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF THE
CEREBRUM OF PLATYPUS
BY
G. ELLIOTT SMITH, M. B., et Ch.M .
THE brain of the Ornithorhynchus closely resembles in its
internal structure that of a foetal placental mammal, at
a stage before the corpus callosum appears, although in
external appearance it presents a considerable degree of
resemblance to the avian brain It presents features which are
directly related to the habits of the animal, “ individual
features,” as well as other fundamental structural arrange-
ments, which are clearly indicative of the position of the indi-
vidual in the animal series. In the production of the former
class of characters, the influence of the relative development of
the special senses, especially the olfactory, is very marked, as it
is in all except the very highest mammals. The early vertebrate
brain, such as is found in the bony fishes lacks any structure at
all comparable to the cortex cerebri of higher forms. When a
oortet is “added” (Edinger}, in the amphibia and lower
sauropsida, to the simple teleostean cerebrum, it is found to be
diretly associated wi h the olfactory sense In all lower
vertebrates possessing any cortex cerebri, the development of the
latter varies with the development of the organs of special
sense, provided, of course, that the latter are connected with the
cerebrum. The olfactory sense, both from the fact that it is the


first—both, in phylogeny and ontogeny—to be represented in the
eerebrum, as well as for physiological reasons (Broca IV.), has a
much greater modifying influence upon the cerebral morphology
than any other of the special senses. In the mammalian brain,
and possibly in that of the higher sauropsida, fresh cortex areas
arc acl tie 4 in the form of pallium, which hare not any direct
relationship to the special senses like the more ancestral parts.
In higher mammals these newer, added, parts completely
ovvisliadow the older “ sensory ’’ areas, and form the great
bulb ■£ the cerebrum. As a consequence of this, the cerebrum
of tii e higher mammal is not modified by the relative develop-
ment of its sense organa or by its mode of life, to anything like
the extent that it is in the lower mammal or reptile These
latter factors come prominently into play, and their influence is
readily seen in the cerebrum of platipus.
Thus, owing to its aquatic mode of life, the olfactory sense
organs are relatively poorly developed—although not sufficiently
to deserve the title of microsmatic , which Symington (xlvi. li),
and Wiedersheim (xlviii.) following him, would apply not only
to platypus, but even to Echidna with its large olfactory lobe
Associated with this fact the pyriform lobe is correspondingly
smell These are individual features, whose meaning is
apparent. The olfactory lobe, however, presents features,
in which it differs from that of all other mammals and resembles
the sub-mammalian organ. Thus the olfactory nerves, instead
of entering the cranium as a number of discrete bundles through
a cribriform plate, as occurs in all other mammals, including
Echidna, reach the cranium as a compact rounded bundle, which
is apparently attached to the anterior extremity of the olfactory
lobe, just as in any sauropsidan or amphibian
The slight degree of bending of the lateral ventricle in both
monctremcs, and more especially in platypus, is an important
transitional feature from the “ straight” brain of the reptile to
the curved brain of the mammal This feature is all the more
noteworthy in the monotremata, since in certain marsupials, e g.,


Perameles, whoso pallial development is greatly inferior to that
of platypus, and hence the necessity for bending less, the degree
of flexion is much more marked, thereby indicating the lower
type of the Prototherian cerebrum.
The absence of a corpus callosum (as distinct from a
hippocampal commissure) is another feature, in which the Proto
—in common with the Meta—theria differ from the Eutheria,
and in all probability resemble the submammalia. In the absence
of the disturbing influence of the corpus callosum, the hippo-
camp s occupies its true morphological position as the upper
margin of the choroidal fissure in its whole extent —a position
which it occupies in all submammalia possessing any cortex,and
from which it has been deposed in the placental mammal by the
appearance of a supraventricular mantle commissure in the form
of a corpus callosum.
The imperfect condition of the internal capsule, which consists
of a number of discrete bundles imperfectly dividing the corpus
striatum into lenticular and caudate nuclei, is a feature in
platypus, which may be considered as a transitional stage
between the compact internal capsule of Eutheria and the
diffusely scattered peduncular fibres of submammalia.
There are certain individual features which call for special
note. The trigeminal nerve reaches in platypus an enormous
development, and is connected peripherally with very numerous
specialized sense organs (xlix ) in the snout. The brain
presents a number of features, which can be more or less
directly associated with this large size of the fifth nerve, such as
the enormous development of substantia gelatinosa Eolandi in
medulla and pons, a huge fillet, a large and precocious develop -
ment ef the optic thalamus, and an unusually large number of
fibres proceeding from the latter to the cortex
The lamina terminalis retains into adult life in both
monotremes much of the simplicity which is only found in the
foetal state of the placental mammal or marsupial, so that there
is no “ septum pellucidum,” although its homologue is found in
3


the shape of a lamina terminal!*.
The arteries confoim to the ordinary mammalian type, aialio
do the veins in the early foetus But in the adult, owing to the
development of a hony falx cerebri, the superior longitudinal
sinus disappears, the cerebral veins enlarging to make up the
deficiency. The close approximation of the anterior extremity
of the hippocampus to the olfactory lobe in both Proto-and-
Metatheria enables one to establish the histological relations of
these two parts with a degree of accuracy to which it is im-
possible to attain in the case of the Eutheria. Considering all
the important morphological questions thus opened up, quite
apart from the deep interest which attaches to the study from
the zoological position of the animal, it seems strange that so
little is known to-day of the anatomy of the brain of
OmUhorhynthm. Although Meckel figured and described the
brain in 1827 (xxxn), the first account which can bo considered
serionsly is contained in the papers of the late Sir Richard
Owen (xxxix), where he describes with characteristic accuracy
the macroscopic features of the brain in question. When we
take into consideration the clear and decided way in which
Owen has decided the fundamental features of the cerebrum of
pi at y pus, more especially as regards the absence of a corpus
callosum which has been confirmed by all subsequent
observers except Zuckerkandl (l), who evidently had very bad
material with which to work. It seems strange that such
erroneous ideas about the most fundamental points in the
anatomy should stiil be current, and accepted almost universally
as fact. This is probably owing to the generalisation of Flower
(.xii a), who, however, did not examine platypus. In 1865
Qarner again pointed out the absence of the corpus callosum in
all marsupials and monotremes (xv), confirming the work of
Owen and M. M. Eydoux and Laurent (ix). In 1891 Sir
William Turner (xlvii. 8) described the surface anatomy of the
brain, but he did not examine the internal structure, accepting
Flower's statements regarding the nature of the com missures.
4


In 1892 Dr. Johnson Symington again pointed out that there
was no corpus callosum (xlvi b ) ti the Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Eoyal Society, which were published quite
recently, there is a remarkable paper (xxn. a) on this subject
by Dr. Alexander Hill, to which frequent reference will b e
made in the description of the brain in this paper. Hill’s paper
•ontains a discussion of the bibliography ; but he does not refer
to the explicit paper by Garner (xv) nor to the paper by Knox
on the nervous aystem of platypus (Edin. Philosophical Journ.
1828, Yol. ix).
METHOD AND MATERIAL.
The study of the brain of platypus was only undertaken after
a fairly exhaustive examination of a series of marsupial brains,
which were compared with such lowly Eutherian cerebra as those
of the rabbit and guinea pig. The lowly brain of Perameles nasuta
was principally used, and was compared with those of Macropvs,
Phalangisla, Koala, Dasyurus, and the Kangaroo Eat. In the
light of a knowledge so gained the structure of the platypus
brain is readily understood, and the investigator is thereby
guarded against the many pitfalls into which a direct compari-
son with the Eutherian brain is liable to lead him. Eor the
work which is embodied in this paper I was fortunate enough to
obtain the brains of ten adult Ornithorhynchi. Three of these,
which had been carefully hardened, were very kindly placed at
my disposal by Professor Wilson. For the fresh brain with
which the Golgi-impregnations were made I am deeply indebted
to Dr. C. J, Martin, A general knowledge of the gross anatomy
was obtained by dissecting several of these brains both in the
fresh and in the hardened states. Others were carefully
hardened in Muller’s fluid and embedded in celloidin. From
these, serial sections were made in the sagittal, coronal and
horizontal planes, the majority of these sections being stained
either by the Weigert-Pal or by the following modification of
Weigert’s method. After being soaked in 3 per cent chromic


acid solution for three hours, the sections are gently rinsed in
water and left over night in Kultschitzky’s acetic haemotoxylin
and decolorized with Weigert’s ferricyanide solution. This
stain gives admirable results with platypus tissue, which shows
far more detail than is brought out by the Weigert-Pal method.
A brain which had been hardened in alcohol was cut coronally
into two pieces, each of which was stained in bulk by a weak
aqueous solution of anilin blue-black for about three days,
decolorized with alcohol and embedded in paraffin. These
blocks were cut coronally in complete series, and the sections
proved very useful, for in addition to being a good nuclear stain
the nerve fibres stain a deep blue. By dissolving out the
paraffin and soaking the sections in a chromic solution, they may
bo stained by the Weigort-Pal method with admirable results
Even for the nuclear stain alone this latter method is very
valuable, the nucleoli being jet black, the fibres a dark blue, and
the field clear and translucent. For the silver impregnations the
following modification of Golgi’s method was used. After care-
fully dissecting out the brain after killing the platypus with
chloroform, small pieces from various parts of the brain
were put into Marchi’s solution. In this solution the tissue
was left for about five days. It was then washed in
distilled water for three minutes and placed in a mixture of
equal parts of one per cent, solution of silver nitrate and one
per cent solution of mercuric nitrate. The mercuric • nitrate
elution is made by dissolving the salt in distilled water, to
which a drop of nitric acid has been added, and then boiling. It
contains mercurous as well as mercuric nitrate, as well as other
salts resulting from a decomposition of the aqueous solution of
the mercuric nitrate. In this solution the tissue is left for about
two weeks, and after washing in distilled water is embedded in
paraffin and cut. For this method, as well as for much valuable
assistance in the histological and photographic work, I am
deeply indebted to Mr. Kobert Grant. By means of this method
most admirable preparations of the platypus brain were


obtained, showing a uniformity of staining which is very rare
with the capricious silver method, but which is not altogether an
unmixed good.
trofessor Wilson very generously placed at my disposal a
unique and very valuable series of sections of a foetal platypus
(a description of whose external appearance he presented to the
Linnaen Society of N.B.W. in October last.) The brain, whose
detail was clearly shown by the double staining of haematoxylin
and picrie acid, had reached the interesting stage just before the
development of the hippocampal commissure, the anterior
commissure being well formed This brain was compared with
those of foetal Phalangista and Macropus of different stages In
this paper the simple brain of Perameles, which has not hitherto
been described, has been mainly used for comparative purposes.
This brain presents an enormous development of rhinencepha'o ■,
and an extremely low pallial development—probably relatively
smaller than in any other mammal. It therefore forms a
marked contrast to the brain of platypus, but since its external
features are not unlike those of certain lowly Eutherians,
especially the mole, whose structure is well-known from the
admirable work of Ganser (xiv.), it serves to throw into relief
the peculiar characters of the cerebtum of the OrnithorLynchus.
NOTES ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BRAIN OF
PLATYPUS.
The primitive forebrain vesicle shows a division into dorsal
and ventral zones of His by the appearance of a longitudinal
groove in the lateral wall which was distinguished by i.eicheit in
1869 as the Suleus of Monro (8 M., figs. 50, 46, 47), although
its important morphological significance was not appreciated
until more recently. At the anterior extremity of this sulcus the
lateral wall of the vesicle becomes bulged out on either side, at
the junction of the alar and basal laminae to form the
prosencephalic vesicles Anteriorly these vesicles are connected
across the mesial line by the lamina terminalis, which from its


histological structure in the adult, as well as for developmental
reasons, must he considered as part of the prosencephalon,
although it forms the anterior wall of the third ventricle. The
cerebral hemisphere then, in platypus, does not spring from the
entire width of the dorsal zone (alar lamina, Fliigelplatte of
His) as it is supposed to do in the other mammals, only the
j unction between the ventral and dorsal zones being involved in
the outgrowth, so that dorsal to the foramen of Monro, the alar
lamina exists 'Fig. 19 al Fig. -15) in a practically undisturbed
condition. In fig. 49, which represents a transverse section
through a foetal platypus brain at the anterior extremity of the
foramen of Monro (the section in fact passing on the left side in
front of the foramen), the superior wall of the foramen, which
is here a thin epithelial layer, is not continued across the median
line as a velum transversum, as is usually described, and which
actually exists in macropus (fig. 44), but is directly continuous
with the anterior extremity of the alar lamina ( al), which thus
separates the hemisphere vesicle from the roof of the forebrain
(r 3) in its whole extent. These alar laminae are connected
across the middle line dorsally by a layer of cubical epithelium,
which constitutes the roof (r,3.) or Deckplatte This roof is
deeply invaginated in its whole length to produce a deep and
complicated double fold or curtain [ck. 3) which hangs down in
the mesial plane into the cavity of the third ventricle between
the alar laminae. When later on blood vessels extend between
these two folds, the curtain becomes the choroid plexus of the
3rd ventricle.
In this region the alar laminae are composed of deep columnar
epithelium on the lateral aspect of whicn is placed a mass of
nucleated ceils—principally neuroblasts As the lamina is
traced backwards these neuroblasts increase in number until
at the posterior margin of -the foramen of Manvo (fig 50) they
form a large swelling on either side of the 3rd ventricle. In
this section the sulcus of Mairo [s m) indicates the division
between the alar and basal laminae and therefore the point


from which ti e hemisphere springs. This large mass of
neuroblasts which forms the alar lamina is the rudiment of the
optic thalamus, <r at least, part of it. Its relation to the
prosencephalon will he considered later.* The anterior wall of
the dorsal part of the third ventricle, which may he considered to
be formed by a junction of the two alar lamina, is bulged
forwards to produce a pouched evaginatian of the third ventricle
on either side of the middle line in front {par. figs. 44, 48;.
Each of these evaginations extends forward for |m.m in front of
the foramen of Monro and is formed of a thick lateral wall of
columnar epithelium, which is the forward continuation of the
alar lamina (the neuroblasts, which were present further back,
having now disappeared) ; and a thin highly convoluted mesial
wall, which, like the roof and floor, consists of low cubical
epithelium and forms, in fact, part of the choroid invagination
of the third ventricle This evagination evidently corresponds
to the paraphysis of Selenka {Das Sitrnorgau der Wirbelthxere
Biol; Centr : X. 323), whose opening into the cavity of the
forebrain has been considered to mark the boundary between
the thalam—and pros-encephalan (XIII. p 155; and whichlater
in development becomes divided in reptiles, according to
Herrick, into two parts (a pre and post —paraphysis) by the
hippocampal commissure. This diverticulum is certainly not
formed, either in Ontithorhynchus or Macropus wholly from the
roof; the thick lateral walls being, as already mentioned, the
anterior extremities of the alar laminae.
The primitive prosencephalic vesicle is at first a uniformly
rounded sac, whose dorsal wall is directly continuous with the
alar laminae (fig. 45 & 49) who ventral wall is directly
continuous with the basal lamina v fig. 50, 46, 45), whose
anterior wall is continued across the middle line as the lamica
terminalis and whose posterior wall joins the lateral wall of the
primitive forebrain at the junction of the alar and basal laminae.
The part of this vesicle which forms the upper margin of the
foramen of Monro remains thin, and early in development
9


becomes invaginated into the lateral ventricle as the anlage of
the choroid plexus (fig. 49). It is evident from these facts that
in platypus the choroid plexus of the 3rd ventricle is quite
independent of the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle, the
latter being separated from the roof in its whole extent by the
alar lamina. Minot’s description of the development of the
choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle from the deck-plate of
the forebrain (XXXY. p 681) is quite inapplicable to platypus
and instead of the “fold owing its origin solely to the growth
of the deck-plate****and merging into the median part
tela ehoroidea—of the deck-plate" it is quite independent of
and disconnected with both structures, being formed strictly
from the walls of the prosaneephalie vesicle. In Macropus ,
however, the extreme anterior end of the choroidal fold of the
lateral ventricle is continuous merially into what looks like a
“ velum transversum ” (fig 44,) hut is really part of the thin
dorsal part of th* lamina termimalis, t e deck-plate being seen
above it forming the roof of the so-called ‘paraphysis.” The
prosencephalic bud, at fires uniformly rounded, soon becomes
elongated and the cephalic extremity is marked as an olfactory
lobe by the attachment of the ingrowing olfactory nerves to
it, although at this time there is no distinction between the
lobe and the cerebral hemisphere. While the roof of the
vesicle is still thin, the walls of the olfactory pole, which is now
partially surrounded by the olfactory ganglion, become
thickened, (fig. 42), the thickening extends backwards along
the floor of the vesicle on either side of the ventricle (fig. 48).
The thickening of the mesial hemisphere-wall (pa. figs. 48 & 43)
extends back as far as the lamina terminalis, with which it
becomes continuous. This mass is the rudiment in the adult
brain of a part of the cortex, which shall bo distinguished as
the ‘ ‘ precommissural area ” for reasons to bo given later. The
basal part of the same mass is the anlage of the “ post-rhinal
lobe’’(Herrick) or “ quadrilateral space ’’ (Broca), which extends
back to the lamina einerca or floor of the third ventricle. This mass
10


is directly continuous below the ventricle with a large thick mass,
which lies upon the outer side of the ventricle, and from which
part of the ‘‘post rhinal lobe,” as well as the pyriform lobe
and corpus striatum, are formed {c.s. figs. 43, 44, 50 >. This
rudiment of the corpus striatum and pyriform lobes extends the
whole length of the ventricle, lying in its whole extent upon the
outer side of the ventricular cavity, so that there are no grounds
for Hill’s statement that the corpus striatum is formed from
the mesial hemisphere wall (XXII a).
The choroidal fissure, which corresponds to the choroidal
invagination lies at first immediately above the foramen of
Monro (fig 45) but as the posterior all of the foramen
increases in thickness and the hemisphere vesicle extends back-
wards the fissura choroidea comes to be a horizontally directed
fissure extending almost to the posterior pole of the hemisphere.
When the latter bends down posteriorly to form the small
vertical descending horn, the fissura choroidea takes a «orres-
ponding bend. The mesial hemisphere-wall above the choroi al
fissure becomes indented i,Bf. figs. 43, 50) to form a shallow
trough—the Bogmfurche (Arnold) (fissura arcuata or Ammons-
furche [Mihalkovics XXXIY] ) This extends further forwards
than the fissura arcuata and is co-extensive with the lateral
ventricle, It rapidly deepens, thereby producing a well marked
projection into the ventricle in its whole extent. This is the
anlage of the hippocampus. In front thefissure arches downwards
to the base of the brain, and separates the precommissural area
and post-rhinal lobe from the olfactory lobe, which lies in front
of them. This division corresponds to the division of the
olfactory “ lobe ” of man into anterior and posterior olfactory
lobules by the “ vordere Bogenfurche ” (fissura prima) as
described by His (XXI).
At first the dorsal wall of the olfactory lobe is continued
directly backwards into the dorsal wall of the cerebrum without
any distinction between them. But early in development the
wall of the olfactory lobe becomes considerably thickened at
11


a time when the superior part of the mantle of Beichert is
still ‘hin As the latter grows and its surface extent increases,
it bulges forwards as an outgrowth of the cerebrum, which
partly overlaps the olfactory lobe, so that in a transverse section
through this region in the adult (fig. 17), above the olfactory
ventricle, whch here forms the anterior extremity of the
lateral ventricle, is seen a transverse section of this pouch of the
cerebrum, whose greatly thickened walls now constitute part of
the mantle.
The lamina terminalis, in the part corresponding to the
proseneephalic vesicles becomes greatly thickened and in the
lower part of the thickening the fibres of the anterior
commissure make their appearauee early. At a somewhat later
date the fibres of the hippocampal commissure make their
appearance higher the lamina terminalis ; the part of the
thickened lamina terminalis which lies between the two
commissures being the representative of the septum pellucidum
of higher mammuale. To the student, who is only acquainted
with the arrangement of these parts in the placental
mammal, it may seem paradoxical to describe the “septum
pellucidum ” as lying below, i.e. ventral to, the hippocampal
commissure, since he is accustomed to regard the “ septum” as
a structure placed upon the dorsal aspect of the psalterium
(hippocampal commissure). But as I have shown elsewhere
(XLIY), when the hemisphere becomes bent in the Motatheria,
the hippocampus and its commissure (fig. 9) becomes cones,
pondingly bent, so that the latter comes to consist of two limbs
—a dorsal and a ventral, which enclose the septum pellucidum
between them, so that the “septum” lies on the dorsal aspec
of the ventral limb of the hippocampal commissure. Now, in
the Eutheria in order to allow a corpus callosum to develope
\_m exactly the same morphological position as the dorsal limb of the
hippocampal commissure, which alone is present in platypus ] the
upper or dorsal part of the hippocampus disappears, the only
remains of it being probably the Striae Lancisii. As a


consequence only the ventral limb of the hippocampal
commissure is left in Eutheria and the septum pellucidum lies
dorsal to it, i.e. between it and the corpus collosum, which
occupies in Eutheria the exact situation occupied in Metatheria
by the dorsal limb, and in platypus by the whole of, the
hippocampal commissure. Ignorance of the marsupial condition
(which in this matter at anyrate, forms the key to unlock the
seemingly paradoxical monotreme brain) renders Hill’s account
(XXII a) of this region in platypus very vague and uncertain.
The simple form of the thickened lamina terminali* is
retained into adult life in platypus as the homologue of the
septum pellucidum of Eutheria.
The large rounded mass of neuroblasts which forms the alar
lamina (figs. 50, 49, 45, 46, a. 1.) is the rudiment of the optic
thalamus and lies entirely above i.e. dorsal to (as well as behind)
the prosencephalic vesicle. That it occupies an analagous
position in Eutheria is evident from the admirable figures of
Mihalkovics (XXXIY. fig. 59.) Marchand (XXIX) Kiilliker
and Lowe (XXYII).
The latter writer calls this mass the inner nucleus of the
thalamus or central nucleus of Luys. Since the corpus striatum
is formed in the floor of the prosencephalic vesicle it is evident
that it must be on the side of the foramen of Monro opposite to
the thalamic rudiment. It is moreover directly continuous in
its mesial aspect with the basal lamina of the forebrain, which
is known further back as the subthalamic tegmental region,
whilst ventrally there is no distinction between the corpus
striatum and the rudiments of the pyriform lobe and nucleus
amygdalae, the only structure yet differentiated being the
external olfactory tract. In front of and behind the region of
the thalamus the corpus striatum is seen to lie well on the
lateral aspect of the vesicle, as it does in other mammualian
facial brain so that Hill’s statement that it is formed for the
mesial hemisphere wall is quite gratuitous. Immediately
behind the foramen of Monro the optic thalamus becomes
13


continuous with the corpus striatum and subthalamic region
and the three structures form a large somewhat f— shaped
mass which is well seen in figures 50 and 47, and in a rabbit
in fig. 57 of Lowes work (XXVII). It is very interesting to
compare these sections with fig. 11 which represents the same
region in the adult. In fig. 50 the large mass of neuroblasts
will be seen forming the great bulk of the alar lamina, and
separated from the third ventricle by a layer of ependyma
dorsally, in the angle between this mass of cells and the roof
is the ganglion habenulae g.k. Below and externally this
mass becomes continuous with the corpus striatum and passing
downwards of the optic thalamus to the corpus striatum is
large bundle of nerve fibres (R. s.t) which arise from the
cells in the alar lamina and extend into the corpus striatum
later into the cortex. They form the Radiatio strio-thalamica of
Edinger (VIII d). They are called tb 1 pedunculus cerebri by
Lowe in his figure 57 and in fig. 67, the same fibres are
called the inferior stalk of the thalamus. From an examination
of the serial sections of platypus compared with the adult
it appears very probable that part of the optic thalamus
develops from the basal lamina and that it is not wholly formed
for the alar lamina. At first the corpus striatum is placed
entirely on the ventral (and lateral aspect of the optic thalamus
but as the hemisphere grows the corpus s riatum rises with it
until in the adult it reaches as high or a higher level than the
thalamus. Although the thalamus does not grow in vertical
extent as rapidly as the hemisphere it grows out laterally and
posteriorly to an enormous extent, (fig. 16) so as to form a very
broad mass whose rounded extremity is pushed backwards and
outwards into the hemisphere so as to reduce the corpus
striatum to a very narrow strip of grey matter not a millimetre
wide.
THE LATERAL VENTRICLE.
The lateral venticle in the adult brain consists of an irregular
14


cavity, which may, lor descriptive purposes, be divided into a
body, a descending horn and an anterior horn, ol which the olfac-
tory ventricle is a diverticulum. The body ol the ventricle pre-
sents in transverse section in all Proto-and-Meta-theria a C-
shape (figs 11 12 i 3 14 31 32) the concavity ol the C, which is
directed inwards, being occupied by the hippocampus. This
feature is quite characteristic of these two orders, since in the
Eutherian brain, the hippocampus has disappeared in the region
of the body ol the ventricle; and in submammalia the “ hippo-
campus ” has not assumed the characteristic folding, by which
the mammalian brain is distinguished. The outer wall ol the
body of the ventricle is formed in its lower part by the corpus
striatum o.s. (nucleus caudatus » c.) and the corona radiata c.r,
(mainly anterior commissure a.c.) forms the upper part o the
outer wall and roof in the whole extent of the ventricle. The
ventricle is shut off from the exterior on its mesial aspect, below
the hippocampus, by a thin ependymal fold, whicu extends fro a
the rudimentary fimbria above *o the mesial border of the nucleus
caudatus below. It is this fold, which is invaginate 1t > 1 iroi
the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle. Posteriorly the ven-
tricle takes a sudden bend vertically downwards to form a descend-
ing horn, which forms a small pocket, whose extent is shown in
the sagittal section fig. 23 ( d.v .) The presence of a descending
horn was denied by Hill (xxii. a). The descending horn as seen
in a horizontal section (fig. 29) is bounded medially by the hip-
pocampus (its descending horn) and in front of th - latter by the
choroidal fold of ependyma. Posteriorly and laterally it is
bounded by the corona radiata and corpus striatum respectively.
The anterior horn of the ventricle is more extensive than the poste-
rior It forms a somewhat hook-shaped slit in transverse section
(fig 14), the mesial wall being formed by the hippocampal
projection above and the “ precommissural area” of the mesia'
hemisphere wall below. Its roof is formed by the corona radiata
and its outer wall by the corpus striatum. Below it extends
downwards into the substance of the “ post-rhinal lobe ” In
front the superior and inferior angles extend further forwards
ban the rest of the ventricle (fig 17). Tho superior pocket
15


corresponds to the outgrowth, of mantle which grows over the
olfactory lobe. . The inferior angle opens into the olfactory
ventricle, which extends forwards in the axis of the olfactory
peduncle to open into the ventricle of the olfactory lobe, which
takes the form of a cup-shaped slit.
THE EXTERNAL CONFIGURATION OE THE CEREBRUM.
The smooth cerebrum of platypus in its general appear-
ance is not unlike that of a bird, such as that of the duck,
being broad, deep, and rounded posteriorly ; rapidly tapering to
form the anterior rounded extremity, which slightly overlaps
the projecting olfactory lobe. The surface of the mantle is
q aiteiree from fissures and convolutions and exhibits no indication
of any division into lobes To divide the hinder part of the
hemisphere into a posterior (occipital) and an inferior (temporo-
sphenoidal ’ lobe as Hill does Joe cii ) is quite inconsistent with
his statement that the ventricle is not flexed, since the temporo-
aphenoidal lobe i« the part of the brain, which surrounds the
morphological posterior extremity of the ventricle, i.e.,
the descending horn, so that, if the ventricle is not flexed, the
posterior part of the hemisphere ought to be “ temporo sphenoi-
dal.” But in any case any such artificial division must in the
case of the smooth brain of platypus be purely arbitrary and
valueless. The otherwise smooth surface of the mantle is
deeply grooved by the laige cerebral veins, which lie in the
snbarchnoid space. The arteries also groove the surface but to
a much smaller extent by reason of their smaller size. In front
the anterior extremity of the hemisphere is separated from
the olfactory by a deep furrow in the depths of which the great
cerebral vein (the anterior cerebral “ artery” of Hill) is placed.
At the point where the middle cerebral artery crosses the pyri-
form lobe to reach the surface of the pallium the margin of the
latter presents a shallow notch which possibly is homologous to
the fma Sylvit of the early human foetus. The posterior
rounded extremity of the hemisphere presents a well-marked
16


depression on its basal aspect labelled “ fioccular fossa” in fig 3
This no*ch is due to the bony basket-like arrangement, which
surrounds the flocculus cerebelli, and is not produced by the
lateral hemisphere of the cerebellum as Hill states. Behind the
‘ fossa Sylvii’ the hemisphere extends downwards to form a promi-
nent rounded mass (fig 1). Unlike all other lowly mammalian
brains, this dependent mass is not formed by the pyriform lobe,
i.e., it is not the “ natiform eminence,” but is part of the pallium
proper, the small pyriform lobe lying well up on the mesial aspect
of the brain behind the ‘ fossa Sylvii.”
THE BASE OF THE BRAIN
On either side of the middle line in front there is placed the
elliptical olfactory lobe, whose ventral surface, unlike that
of all other mammals, is smooth from the fact that the olfactory
nerves do not enter the lobe upon this aspect The lobe is
bounded posteriorly by a transverse furrow in the depths which of
is situated the olfactory peduncle. This peduncle almost imme-
diately divides into two parts, a lateral—the pyriform lobe and a
mesial, the post rhinal lobe of Herrick. The post-rhinal lobe is
an elliptical projection of grey matter of peculiar
which commences in front almost immediately behind the olfac-
tory lobe and extends backwards as far as the optic chiasma,
beneath which it becomes continuous with the lamina cinerea.
Laterally it is separated from the pyriform lobe by a well-marked
fissure —the endorhinal of Turner (xlvii. a). It is separated by
the falx cerebri from its fellow of the opposite sidt. Dorsally it
its continuous with the grey matter of the corpus striatum and
has for this reason been called ‘ 1 the cortex of the head of the
corpus striatum” in the mole brain by Ganser (xiv) Upon its
surface it presents a thin white coat, thickest in front and gra-
dually thinning as it is traced backwards. This will be distin-
guished as the superficial medullary lamina of the post-rhinal lobe.
In platypus it is mainly derived directly from the olfactory
peduncle, but in Perameles mainly from the external olfactory root.
Whatever the function of this body, it is intimately associated
17


both anatomically and physiologically with tho olfactory lobe and
is developed from the ‘posterior olfactory lobule’ of His (xxi.).
Moreover in the series of monotremes and marsupials examined
and probably also in placental mammals its size and prominence
vary directly with the degree of development of the olfactory
lehe. Thus in platypus it is relatively small; in the macrosmatic
mole, Gansei says that it is larger than in any other animal that
he knows. In the Peraneles , with its huge olfactory, it is even
much bigger both absolutely and relatively than in the mole,
standing out as a very prominent hemispherical grey mass on
tie ventral aspect of the brain. As to the exact homology of
this mass there seems to be a cer ain amount of confusion. It
corresponds to the grey or middle olfactory root of Broca (Bulletins
de la societe d’ anatamie 42 serie (iv. 1879 p 5961 which corres.
ponds to the quadrilateral space of the same author. But this
space is considered by Turner (J. Anat xxv) to correspond to the
anterior perforated spot of Vicq-d-Azyr and the two terms are
used by Turner and Broca as synonymous. But in platypus the
lenticulo-striate branches of the anterior cerebral artery enter
the base of the brain quite external to the lobe in question, so
that if the term “quadrilateral area” be considered as synony-
mous with the “ anterior perforated spot,” it cannot be strictly
applied to the area in question. Although there are obvious
objections to the term “ post-rhinal lobe,” which Herrick has
used in describing the reptilian brain (xx) yet of all the terms
which have been used it is the least objectionable anatomically,
and besides, being purely descriptive, it is equally applicable to
the reptilian as well as the mammalian brain. Seeing that this
“lobe” is more intimately connected with the olfactory than
even the pyriform lobe it is quite unjustifiable to exclude it
from the rhinencepbalan as Hill does (xxn a). Without any
explanation the latter author takes the liberty of restricting the
term rhinencepbalan to the pyriform lobe giving quite a new
meaning to a term, which already has quite a confusing variety of
meanings. Among others Sir William Turner (xlvii a) Schafer
[Quain’s anatomy, Burt Wilder, (“ Woods reference Hand-
book t,- the Medical Sciences ”), each use the term with a differ
18


ent meaning, not to mention the fact that the Germans use the
term “lobus olfaetorius” in much the same sense as tharhineu-
cephaluu of Bur. Whi. ler. In this paper, the term rhinencepha-
lon will therefore be avoided as far as possible, but as the
term is very handy for use in a general sense for parts of the
brain undoubtedly associated with the olfactory sense, it will
be convenient to use it with that restriction, but without intro-
ducing the confusion of a strictly anatomical limitation.
The Pyriform lobe is a long narrow strip of cortex of fairly
uniform breadth in its whole extent. In front it is directly con-
tinous with the olfactory crus or peduncle and through the latter
with the grey matter immediately surrounding the olfactory
ventricle. Laterally the lobe is limited by a deep and well-
marked rhinal {ectorhinal —Turner) fissure and mesially it is
separated in its anterior part from the post-rhinal lobe by the
deep endorhinalfissure (Turner) or fissura radicis (Herrick.) Pos-
teriorly the pyriform lobe turns upwards upon the mesial aspect
of the hemisphere and is placed directly behind the descending
horn of the hippocampus, with which it forms the posterior boun-
dary of the descending horn of the latera ventricle. In the
middle portion of its extend, i.c., from-the posterior margin of
the post-rhinal lobe in front as far back as the point where it
bends upwards—it is directly continuous (figs. 11 and 20).
superiorly around the inferior margin of the corona radiata
(anterior commissure) with the corpus seriatum. In this part of
its course the lebe is overlapped to some extent by the pallium
(fig. 11). By comparison with other lowly brains such as that
of Perameles, the connecting bridge of grey matter between the
pyriform lobe and the corpus striatum is recognised as the
homologue of the nucleus amygdala of higher mammals. Upon
the surface of the pyriform lobe the external olfactory root ex-
tends backwards as a white medullary covering for its whole
surface. As it is traced backwards it gradually becomes thin-
ner (in other words the lobe becomes greyer) from the termina-
tion of the fibres in the lobe, until at its posterior extremity,
where it comes into relationship with the hippocampus, no white
19


fibroa can bo soon upon its surface. No trace can be found of
tbo fxtonKinn of the external root into the, hippocampus as
Herrick and Edinger state. In all marsupials and most lower
Enthorians the external olfactory root is collected into a compact
bundle, which lies alongside the outer margin of the post-rhinal
lobe in the fissura endorhinalis of Turner, which has for this
rca ou boon called fissura radieis by American writers. F*om
this cx f ernal root, in the animals named, white fibres radiate over
the pyriform lobe, which is the case of Perameles forms the
greater part of the lateral aspect of the hemisphere (fig. 2) so
that fKo greater part of the cerebrum of Peramdes is white In
platypus, and, apparently, also in Echidna, the external olfac-
tory root is not collected into any compact bundle in this way,
but is fairly uniformly scattered over the surface of the lobe
It is, therefore, not appropriate to call the fissura endorhinalis
“ radieis ” in the case of the monotremits Compared wi‘h
Peramehs as a specimen of a macrosmatic mammal, platypus
presents a marked contrast as regards the size and appearance
of the pyriform lobe. In the former the enormous lobe forms
the greater part not only of the base, but also of the lateral
aspect of the cerebrum, constituting an enormous natifonn
eminence. In platypus the lobe in question does not by 7 any
means merit the name of “ natiform,” there being only a slight
and very insignificant swelling behind the point where the
middle cerebral artery crosses the lobe. There is, therefore
practically no vallecula Sylvii, in the sense in which Turner
(xlvii. a) used that term, as the depression between the natiform
eminence and the peduncle (olfactory) The latter writer, in
fact, takes tue vallecula Sylvii as the line of demarcation between
the olfactory crus and the pyriform lobe It will be noted in the
description in this paper that the greater part of the crus of
Turner has been included in the pyriform lobe, for not only is
the structure of the two regions identical in their whole extent,
but even the size and appearance of the two parts is so alike
that to separate them would mean the introduction of purely
artificial and arbitra y boundaries with no other result than to
unnecessarily confuse the subject. The meaning of a natiform
20


prominence is plain if we compare the brain of Perameles with
that of platypus, in the one there is no eminence and therefore
no vallecula Sylvii, because the hemisphere is practically
unbent; in the other there is a well-marked eminence and also a
vallecula present, because the hemisphere is bent. In Echidna,
in which, as already mentioned, the degree of bending is inter-
mediate between these two forms, the condition of the pyriform
is also intermediate, thereby giving a further demonstration of
the causal relationship between the bending of the hemisphere
and the production of the natiform eminence. Thus Turner
(xlvii. a, p. 108) says In Echidna . . lobus [hippocampi]
and crus look like a continuous convolution.” The production
of a natiform eminence cannot, therefore, be attributed to the
relative development of the pyriform lobe, as Turner would
imply, but almost solely to the bending of the hemisphere, by
means of which all the basal parts of the hemisphere, especially
in its posterior part, are crowded into a small space Of course,
if the pyriform lobe is poorly developed as it is in miurosmatic
brains, the concavity of the flexure will not be filled in to the
extent that it is in macrosmatic brains, and therefore the valle-
cula Sylvii will be more marked This explanation of the causa-
tion of the vallecular Sylvii also explains the constant relation-
ship of the vallecula to the fossa (later fissures, Sylvii].
In this deseription the term “ pyriform ” has been used as the
least objectionable of the many terms applied to this region of
the brain. The term “hippocampal lobule ” has been carefully
avoided seeing that the use of this expression has given risn to
much confusion, especially among certain American writers, who
have spoken of the “ hippocampus ” when, from the context,
they evidently mean the pyriform lobe.
With reference to the rhinal fissure, Hill’s statement that “ its
origin is not due to the same mechanical causes as the other fissures
of the brain ■ • but that it falls into the same class as the great
longitudinal fissure ' ’ is not only unsupported by any facte, but
is utterly opposed to the facts of its ontogeny. Eor just as ihe
rhinencephalon is the earliest part of the brain to appear in
21


phytogeny, so in ontogeny it is the earliest part to develope and
to attain the perfection which it does at a stage when the pallium
is still rudimentary. Owing to this precocious development of
the rhinenoephalon and the rapid growth toward attainment of
its adult proportions, when the pallium is still rudimentary and
growing hut slowly, there* appear two fissures, the rhinal and
hippocamphal , which are of constant occurrence in the mammalia
That such unequal growth occurs in t e development
of tho hrain we have the testimony of Edinger (VIII. 6).
It is not strange that the appearance of these fissures and their
associated parts should be so constant in the mammalia if we
remember the facts of their development. The hippocampus,
liko tho pyriform lobe, developeslong before the pallium proper,
just as in the animal series it appears before the pallium
(Edinger), and in the Prototheria it attains quite as high a
differentiation and quite as intricate a structure as in the highest
mammalian brain. Thus, in the hippocampus of platypus, tho
“collaterals” are as numerous and as highly branched, and
the protoplasmic processes of the cells quite as extensive and
abundant as in the higher Eutherian, thereby forming a marked
contrast to the pallium, which shows a comparatively simple
structure, with a paucity and simplicity of collaterals. From
the simple pallium of platypus there is a gradual increase in
S'zo and complexity until the highest development of the cortex is
reached in the human pallium. At the early stage in all mammalian
foeta brains there is therefore a precocious and une ;uai growth
of the walls of the prosencephalic vesicle, resulting in the early
perfection of the rhinenoephalon associated with the development
of an olfactory lobe, and the same factors come into play equally
in the microsmatic as in the macrosmatic brain, in the small
mantled Perameles and platypus, as well as in the large-mantled
human cerebrum. As a consequence of’this uniformity in the
early conditions, there is a uniformity in the resulting morphology
of the region, which is already indelibly marked out, while the
pallium is yet smooth. So that there is no justification in attri-
buting the formation of the rhinal and hippocamphal fissures to
any extraordinary factors as Hill would have us (xxn. a, b),
22


simply from the fact that th y are relatively constant, while the
pallial fissures are inconstant, because the fissures and the
arrangement of the related cortex areas are constant simply
from a constancy and uniformity in the conditions which give
rise to them in all mammals at an early stage. A comparative
examination of the monotreme and marsupial with the lower
Eutherian cerebrum shows that the hippocamphal and rhinal
fissures are produced by the action of the same principles which
later on produce the foldings of the mantle.
Before leaving the base of the brain, the peculiar inaccuracy
of Hill’s description (xxn. a 375) of the region cannot be over-
looked. He says, “to the outer side of the [olfactory] bulb lies
the optic nerve, and to the inner side of this again the immense
fifth nerve.” A glance at a macerated skull is quite sufficient
to show that both of the structures mentioned are far removed
from the olfactory lobe. Thus the optic nerve lies at the posterior
margin of the post-rhinal lobe and internal to the pyriform lobe,
and the only branch of the fifth nerve, which is placed anywhere
near the olfactory lobe, is the nasal branch of the ophthalmic
division, which lies outside the cranium immediately below the
bony floor of the olfactory compartment of the cranium.
[The description of the blood vessels will be deferred until the
internal structure of the brain has been described.]
Mesial Aspect of the Hemisphere. —In the greater part of its
extent the pallium is limited below upon the mesial hemisphere
wall by the hippocampal fissure and its surface is grooved by
several (from three to five) branches of the anterior cerebral
artery (the “ posterior ” cerebral artery of Hill), which run
obliquely upwards and backwards from the main trunk which
lies in the hippocamphal fissure. A short distance in front of the
commissures and lamina terminalis the hippocampal fissure
curves downwards and from its anterior extremity, from about
the same horizontal plane as the anterior commissure, a shallow
furrow extends almost vertically downwards to the base of the
brain, where it forms the anterior boundary of the post rhinal
lobe. This fissure, which corresponds to the anterior ex-
23


tremity of the 1 ' vordoro Bogenf urche” of His, lodges the anterior
cerebral artery as well as the large mesial branch of the great cere*
bral vein. This position of the anterior cerebral artery and the
appearance of the mesial hemisphere wall generally in the adult
platypus present a close resemblance to the condition present in
the foetal rabhit of 4 c.m. (Mihalkovics xxyiv. Taf. 7, fig. 52).
Immediately in front of the foramen of Monro is situated the
thickened lamina terminalis, which persists into adult life in
platypus, retaining much of the simplicity of form which it
presents in the early Eutherian embryo. From its relations as
well as from its developmental history, it is recognised as the
lomelogue of the septum pellueidnm of higher mammals. This
fact affords phylogenetic evidence, which tends to support the
fa ts of the ontogenetic history which have been elucidated by
Mihalkovics (xxxrv.), His, and more especially Marchand
(xxix.) and Paul Martin (xxx.), and which go to show,
according to Minot (xxxv.), that the septum pellucidum is
formed, not by a fusion of the mesial hemisphere walls, as is
currently held, but by a thickening of the lamina terminalis.
About the middle of the lamina terminalis is situated the
anterior commissure, which appears early in development. A
short distance above it—a m m or leas—is placed the smaller
hippocampal commissure, which on superficial examination
appears round in saggital section. In reality (fig. 19 h.c.) it
consists of a horizontal har, thick and plump posteriorly, but
gradually tapering forward in the lamina terminalis. Between
the two commissures is a thick mass of grey matter —the homo"
logue of the septum lucidum. Hill, from an imperfect recog
oition of these relationships, regarded the septum lucidum a 0
absent, and stated that between the hippocampal eommissur
and the anterior commissure was situated the thin edge of the
corpus striatum. The cerebral commissure in platypus is, there-
fore actually placed in the lamina terminalis, as it is in the
festal Eutherian, but only in the wider morphological sense in
the adult —Meta- and Eu- therian brain. As has been already
mentioned, the hippocampus forms the upper margin of the
24


choroidal fi sure in the whole of its extent, even extending
beyond it in front to curve downwards in front of the com-
missures. Although in the embryonic platypus, and even in
the adult Petame/es, with its lowly pallial development the
hippocampus, or rather the fascia dentata, which is developed
from the arcus marginalia, actually forms part of the mesial
wall of the hemisphere ; in the adult platypus (fig. 11) and
in most adult marsupial brains (fig. 38) the fascia dentata ia
hidden from view, in the greater p rt of its extent, by the down-
ward growth of the pallium, which forms an operculum, com-
pletely hiding the fascia dentata in the greater part of its extent
In platypus, however the fascia dentata, as may he seen in a
view of the mesial hemisphere wall, comes to the surface just
above the hippocamphal commissure, where it is seen as a some-
what fusiform grey mass (fig, 8), limited above by the hippo-
campal fissure. The hippocampal fissure is formed from the
fissura arcuata of the foetus, which invagiuates the
hemisphere wall to produce the hippocampus in the lateral
ventricle. In front it arches downwards to the level of the
anterior commissure. Above the hippocampal commissure,
from which it is separated by the fascia dentata, it extends
backwards and then curves downwards to become hidden under
the pallial operculum under which it extends backward as far
as the posterior extremity of the choroidal fissure. When the
latter bends downwards with the descending horn of the lateral
ventricle, the hippocampal fissure also bends vertically down-
wards and terminates at about the same horizontal level as the
situation of the anterior commissure From the anterior extre-
mity of the fissura arcuata a vertical furrow extends downwards
to the base of the brain, which has been already mentioned as
lodging the anterior cerebral artery This fissure forms the an-
terior limit of a peculiarly constituted grey mass, which has
been the subject of much divergence of opinion among different
writers upon other lowly brains. This grey mass forms the
mefinl wall of the anterior thorn of the lateral venticle, it is
directly continuous behind with the lamma terminates, above
with the facia dentata and below with the post-rhinal lobe, It


is developed from the posterior olfactory lobule of His, appearing
oarly ia development as a relatively very large thickening of
the mesial hemisphere wall (fig. 48 p.a.) directly continuous in
front with the thickened mesial wall of the olfactory. This part
of the cortex will be distinguished as the “ precommissural area”
of the mesial cortex for reasons to be stated immediately. Con-
cerning this region Hill says (xxn a p 378); “As there is no
septum pelluoidum and the lateral venticle extends for some
distance in front of the commissure the inner wall of the hemis-
phere includes a triangular region, bounded by the hippocam-
pus above, the ventre mesial edge below and the commissures
behind, which is very difficult to homologise with parts of the
human brain. Perhaps it is not possible to homologise it, for the
smooth surface of the cortex, which in the human brain, lies in
front of the rostrum, the “ terrain desert,” belongs to the
pallium, and constitutes the common starting ground of the
gyrus fornicatus and the gyr genicnlatus (Zuckerkaudl)
which latter dies away into the nerve of Laneisi ; while the
region which lies in front of the commissure in the brain of
Orinthorhynckits is completely separated from the gyrus fornica-
tus by the hippocampus. It appears to be the part, which, in
higher mammals, atrophies ia becoming the septum lucidum, as
well as the anterior perforated substance.” Flower (xn. a) in
a series of Marsupial and placental mammals distinguished it as
part ofthe u septal area ” Herrick (xx. a p. 88) calls this region
in reptiles and Oidelphia— the “ intraventricular lobe,” and says
that he is “ not prepared to use the term septum pellucidum for
this structure,” although elsewhere ho calls it “ septal.” Meyer
(xxxni) calls it septum pellucidum, and Edinger (vin b) distin-
guishes it as “ Fornix Leiste.” It seems to be included by Broca
in the area which he has distinguished as carrefour de I' hemis-
phere(rv. 6.) Since the septum pellucidum is formed from
the thickened mass of the lanmia terminalis (Minot xxxv ) the
cortex area in question must be homologised with that structure,
To call it “ septal area” is likely to cause unnecessary confusion.
It is undoubtedly part of tke rhinencephalon not only from its
relations in the adult brain, hut also from tbs fact that it is de-
26


veloped from the posterior olfactory lobule of His. I* may be
traced throughout the whole sauropsidan and mammalian series
and can be definitely homologised, not only from its topographi-
cal relations, but also from its developmental history, with the
gyms subcallosus of Zuckerkandl (L) —the peduncle of the corpus
callosum of human anatomy. Although unwilling to add to
the already too numerous terms, which have been applied to this
region, yet the inapplicability of any of these terms to the
monotreme and marsupial condition, and the loose way in which
many of the terms have been used, call for some erplicit distin-
guishing name It is manifestly inappropriate to call it either
gyrus subcallosus or peduncle of the corpus callosum, since no
corpus callosum exists in either the Proto or Meta theria. I
therefore propose to distinguish this part by the cortex as the
‘ precommissural area.” This term is purely descriptive and is
hardly new, since the fibres which run in this area are well
known as the precommissural fibres of Huxley. Moreover it is
as equally applicable to the highest mammal as it is to the low-
est sauropsidan or the intermediate Prothotherian. It is both
anatomically and functionally intimately connected with the
post-rhinal lobe and like the latter varies with the development
of the olfactory apparatus. Towards the lower part of the pos-
terior part of the mesial surface of the hemisphere will be seen
the floccular fossa and a short distance in front of it the rhinal
fissure will be seen extending up from the basal on to the mesial
aspect of the hemisphere, to end j ust behind the termination of
the hippooampnl fissure, which it slightly overlaps. In front of
the fissure is the pyriform lobe, which at its upper extremity lies
directly behind the descending limb of the hippocampus, be-
tween the hippocampal fissure and the rhinal fissure
The gross anatomy of the olfactory lobe as well as of the
basal ganglia will be more conveniently described when their
histology is under consideration.
27


THE MINUTE STRUCTURE OF THE CEREBRUM
It will be convenient to discuss the histology under the fol-
lowing headings:
1. The pallium with the corona radiata.
2. The olfactory lobe and. peduncle.
3. Ihe pyriform lobe.
4. The poet-rhinal lobe, precommissural area and lamina
ter min alia.
5 The hippocampus and its commissure
(>. The ha.sal ganglia, i eluding the projection fibre sys-
tems.
The pallium varies considerably in thickness in its various
parts being thinnest on the mesial surface just above the
hippocampal fissure, where it is about from IT to 2 m.m. thick,
but near the base of the brain it may reach a thickness of 4
m.m. Relatively to the size of the brain it must be considered as
very thick. To the naked eye its structure appears to be
remarkably uniform and presents no sign of stratification, the
thin layer of white mednllay matter shading imperceptibly into
the grey matter of the surface. "When stained with anilin
blue-black it will be noticed that the nerve cells are scattered
fairly uniformly over the entire field from the lateral ventricle
o the surface. When stained hy the chrome-silver method,
it presents the typical mammalian structure although it appears
to be of a relatively very simple type. Although several
regions of the cortex were stained by the dolgi method, sufficient
material was net prepared to enable one to establish any
reliable comparisons between the different regions. The
description given here is based upon some exceptionally
successful silver impregnations of the frontal region of the
brain, The recent description of Ramon y Cajal (vn. a.), in
which he divides the cortex proper into three instead of four or
more layers is admirably adapted for an account of tho platypus
cortex, in which any division of the layer of pyramids would
be purely arbitrary. In accordance with this description the
pallium of platypus may bo conveniently divided into lour
28


layers ; a superficial or molecular layer, a layer of pyramids, a
layer of polymorphous cells and the corona radiata, which is
placed in immediate relationship to the ependyma of the lateral
ventricle. The molecular or superficial layer seems to shade
into the subjacent pyramidal layer more gradually than seems
to be the case in the Eutherian and Metatheriau cortex It
contains the usual characteristic fusiform cells (fig. 58) as well
as numbers of polymorphous cells and small somewhat irregular
and scattered pyramidal cells -with centripetal axis cylinder
processes. Into this layer also extend the branching terminations
of protoplasmic processes of the cells of the second layer.
Close to the surface are situated a number of fine, tangentially
directed, medullated nerve fibres, which form a very delicate
superficial medullary lamina. In the mesial cortex j ust above
the hippocampal fissure, this layer is much better developed
than elsewhere, giving to the fresh brain a whitish appearance
in this region. This layer is directly continuous with the
superficial meduallary lamina of the hippocampus.
Layer of pyramids. It has been usual todividethis layer into two
or more zones in the higher Eutherian cortex. Although in the
latter there is a certain amount of lamellation and therefore
some slight ground for such distinctions ; in the case of
platypus any such divisions would be arbitrary and unnatural.
For not only is the region fairly uniform and any changes in
character very gradual but the layer shades off imperceptibly
into the pyramidal and polymorphous cells in the molecular
layer. The layer is composed of cells, the majority of which
are of a distinctly pyramidal shape. They vary greatly in sizei
as a general rule increasing in size the further away from the
surface although small pyramids are found at all levels (fig. 51)-
Although irregular and fusiform cells are found scattered
throughout the cortex, yet the peculiar characters, which Hill
has noted in these cells are found to no greater extent in platypus
than in any mammalian cortex.
Layer of polymorphous cells is a thin zone of sparsely scattered
cells of irregular shape and various sizes. In Weigert stained
29


specimens this layer is radially striated by the very numerous
fibres connecting the corona radiata -with, the more superficial
cortex regions. Among these fibres are a large number which
are the axis cylinder processes of the cortical cells, especially
the pyramidal cells. But apart from these there are numerous
fibres, which extend into the cortex from the corona radiata,
without establishing any anatomical connection with the cells
in question The great majority of these fibres, after giving
collaterals to the pyramidal layer and in terminal arborzation
in the molecular layer. These fibres consists ol three classes
(I) association (2) commissural and (3) projection fibres. The
latter are mainly axis cj linder processes of cells situated in the
optic thalamus and form the last stage of the fillet. Others
came up directly from the tegmentum without entering the optic
thalamus. A considerable number—also partly fillet fibres—
seem to come directly from the anterior corpora quadrigenmia,
These will be further considered later on.
Taken as a whole the cortex is of a simpler type than that of
other mannuals It is more diffuse and there is oven less attempt
at stratification than in the ordinary mammalian cortex. The
protoplasmic processes of the cells in the adult platypus are no
more highly developed, if as much, as those of the new born
rat and the axis cylinder process gives off fewer collaterals,
which are also characterised by a simplicity of form and a
freedom from branching In all of these features the cortex
approaches nearer to the reptilian form of cortex than does that of
any other mammal.
The Corona Raiiaia. —The ax’s cylinder processes of the
pyramidal colls and of many of the irregular cells of
the polymorphous layer extend centrally towards the
ventricle. Just outside the ependyma, t.e., just beneath
the layer of the polymorphous cells, the vast majority of
those axis cylinder processes take a sudden bend laterally, i.e.,
away from the middle line Some few of the fibres bifurcate,
the two processes extending in opposite directions. The fact
that most of the fibres turn away from the middle line is charac-
30


teristic of the Proto and Meta- as distinguished from Eu-
theria, and is associated with the fact that there is no corpus
callosum in these orders, all the fibres which in placentalia would
pass across in the corpus callosum passing in the anterior com-
missure in non-plaoental mammals. Some of these axis cylinder
processes pass across the middle line in the anterior commissure
as commissural fibres, others pass through the corpus striatum
as internal capsule fibres, others are association fibres.
In addition to these fibres there are numerous other
fibres which have no cell connection in the related
cortex area. A large number of these come from the optic;
thalamus and will be considered later ; others come from the
opposite side of the brain through the commissure ; others are
association fibres.
The coronia radiata really constitutes the deepest layer of the
pallium. In the early stage the cortex extends through th e
whole thickness of the hemisphere wall from the surface to th 0
ventricle, but as the axis cylinders develope from the cells of the
r egion, and fibres from elsewhere extend towards the
region, a definite white layer is formed, which gradually
increases in thickness with the increased cell de-
velopment. Later on its bulk is increased by the develop-
ment of “collaterals”; and the higher the animal in the
scale the greater the increase from this source Erom the
corona radiata towards the surface in Weigert-stained specimen g
there is a well-marked radiation of nerve fibres, which gradually
shades off towards the surface. In the region just above the
hippocampus the medullary matter is extremely thin, but as it is
gradually traced round the ventricle it rapidly increases in thick-
ness, reaching its maximum at the base This is quite charac-
teristic of the non-placental mammalian brain, and is associated
with the absence of a corpus callosum. The corona
radiata forms a large “shell” or cup whose concavity
is directed inwards, and whose convexity is turned
towards and corresponds to the cortex. This “ shell ”
is elongated autero-posteriorly, and its posterior and outer
31


part is prolonged 'backwards and outwards to form a deep
concavity. The lower margin ol the shell is thick and rounded,
and near its anterior extremity it passes into a mesially-directed
thick stalk, which is the anterior commissure. The concavity of
the shell ia filled in its lower part by the corpus striatum, which
is continuous round the front ol the stalk, with the post-
rhinal lohe and behind the stalk, with the pyriform lobe. The
upiper part of the concavity of the “ shell ” forms the lateral
and roof of the lateral ventricle. At the superior angle of the
corpus striatum the internal capsule joins the corona radiata, and
throughout the whole extent ol the lenticular nucleus fibres pass
in and out ol the corona. From the whole external aspect ol the
corona, which may practically be considered as anterior commis-
sure, fibres radiate into all parts ol the pallium, pyriform lobe,
post-rhinal lobe, olfactory bulb and tract. There is, therefore,
no distinction of these fibres into pars olfactoria, pars temporalis,
and pars frontalis as separate bundles. In Perameles, as in all
marsupials, the pars olfactoria forms a distinct bundle, which is
quite distinct from the rest ol the commissure. In no monotreme
or marsupial is there any distinction between a pars frontalis and
p. temporalis. Such a division i purely artificial, and is of no
value. A more rational division would be to separate the com-
missure fibres into a rhinencephalic part (including the pars
ollactoria) and a pallial part; but there is no need for even such
a division as this. In most marsupials some of the fibres ol the
anterior commissure pass through the corpus striatum with the
internal capsule and thereby effect a division into dorsal and
ventral parts. This arrangement does not obtain either in
platypus or Peravules, and probably is associated with a higher
pallial development than obtains in either of these animals The
further significance ol this arrangement I have discussed else_
where (xlit). In the fresh brain the anterior commissure is
divided up into a number ol segments, which vary slightly is
colour, the pars olfactoria being notably whiter than the rest.
These different parts also stain with different degrees of intensity,
out what the exact significance of these facts may be I have
32


been unable so far to determine. The pan olfnctoria is phylo.
genetically thA oldest part of the commissure, the rest of the
rhinencophftlio part appearing soon afterwards, and the pallial
part the last to develops. The rhinencophalio part of the com-
missure varies directly with the development of the olfactory
lobe and the pallial part directly with the development of the
pallium In Pe.ramcln the pars olfactoxin, therefore, forms more
than half the commissure, whereas in platypus and macropns
tho pallial part greatly exceeds the rhinoncephalic in size. It is
equally inaccurate both in the non-placental and placental mammal
to say that the anterior commissure vorios in size with the deve-
lopment of the olfactory lobe or rhinoncephalon, as Hill has done
(xxn b . The pars olfactoria and tho rhinoncephalic part of
the anterior commissure (which includes it) of course vary
directly with the development of olfactory lobe or rbinenoohha-
Jon, but the pallial part of the commissure has no relation what-
ever, either in the placental or nonplacental mammal, to the re- -
lative development of tho olfactory. In the Euthoria it seams
that some of the fibres, which belong to the pallial division of
the anterior commissure pass across the middle line as a separate
bundle in the lamina tonninalis under the name of corpus callosum.
In no brain does the corpus callosum connect qny part of the
rhinoncephalon. So that to call tho fibres which connect the
precommissural area (‘ intraventricular lobe’ of Herrick) by the
name of corpus callosum, as Herrick does (xx. c), is a gratui
tons assumpiion, considering that the fibres in question pass in
the hippocampal commissure and connect parts of the rhinen-
cophalon. The anterior oommissure is composed of axis cylinder
processes and collaterals of the pyramidal and multipolar cells of
all parts of the pallium, of axis cylinder processes of cells of the
pyriform, port-rhinal lobes and olfactory peduncle. 1 have been
unable to definitely trace any connection with the olfactory-
bulb itself. Those fibres become collected into a rounded bundle
and cross the middle line in tho lamina terminalis. As regards
the destination of these fibroo, the facts elucidated by tho Golgi
method show that any single commissural fibre becomes associn-
33


tod by moans of its numerous collaterals and its terminal abori-
sations with a very wide cortex area. The fibres therefore must
connect mainly heterologous parts of the two hemispheres. Apart
from these facts, which apply equally to all cerebral commissures,
it can be shown by grosser methods, e.g., the Weigert stain, that
the anterior commissure connects heterologous as well as homo-
logous parts. Thus the olfactory peduncle and pyriform lobe
are connected with the opposite olfactory bulb by fibres which
can be traced into the lobe, although so far I have
been unable to find any commissural fibres arising in
the lobe itself These results tend to confirm that statement
of Sherrington that the corpus callosum connects heterolo-
gous parts. And I have endeavoured to show elsewhere (xliv )
that the corpus callosum is really a part of (or rather is serially
homologous witn) the anterior commissure, having adopted a
shorter supraventricular course owing to the exigencies of a
huge development of the mantle.
THE OLFACTORY LOBE.
The olfactory bulb (figs. 1 & 3) is of a some-
what ovate form and is placed somewhat obliquely
in front of the cerebral hemisphere, by which it is overlapped
to a slight extent. It is directed upwards and forwards and is
placed in a special fossa of the cranium with smooth evenly
rounded walls. It is completely separated from its fellow of
the opposite side by a thick bony wall. In length the olfactory
lobe averages between 5 and 6 millimetres, and its 4 posterior
extremity is from 4to 6 m.m. deep and about 4 m.m. wide. The
olfactory ventricle, in the adult, is reduced to a mere cup-shaped
slit, which communicates with the anterior horn of the lateral
ventricle by means of a narrow canal, lined by columnar
opiheluim, which tunnels the short olfactory peduncle. Early
in development the evenly rounded olfactory lobe become
very deeply invaginated from above and in front to form a very
deep cup, whoso walls are composed of a double layer of
olfactory cortex. lu consequence of this deep infolding the
olfactory ventricle is reduced to a mere slit-like cavity, whose
34


walls m soma cases may even fuse so as to partially obliterate
tho ventricle, But m ail cases examined an olfactory ventricle
lined with, ependyma was found to exist- The opening of tire
olfactory cup was directed upwards and forwards (fig. 7 and 20).
Hill describes the lobe as slightly cupped on its inferior aspect.
He evidently had the misfortune to mutilate his specimen in
extracting it from the skull. Herrick (xx. a) has described)
under the name of “ mosal olfactory fossa," a deep invagination
of the mesial aspect of the olfactory lobe in certain reptiles,
notably in tho black snake. He associates this cupping with
the attachment of the nerves from Jacobson's organ which is
largely developed in those reptiles possessing the “ fossa.” In
reptiles, since the nerves of Jacobson’s organ run their course
quite independently of the olfactory nerves proper, it is easy to
establish the relationship mentioned- But in platypus the
nerves from Jacobson’s organ in their intracranial course are
intimately mixed with the olfactory nerves proper so that it is
impossible to establish such a relationship in platypus; although
it is noteworthy that the fibres from Jacobson’s organ tie in
tho upper and outer part of the bundle, i. 0., in the situation
corresponding to the opening of the olfactory cup. This deep
cupping of the olfactory lobe is quite unique in a mammalian
brain ; tho very alight cupping on the inferior surface of the
lobo of certain marsupials not being comparable to the extensive
fossa in platypus. It is moreover far deeper and more extensive
than tho cupping in any reptile with which I am acquainted.
This may possibly be associated with the fact noted by Syming-
ton b) that the organ of Jacobson probably reaches its
highest development in platypus. Against this may be urged
tho fact, that no such fossa exists in Echidna , although it also
possesses a large organ of Jacobson. It may bo that the
morphology of tho olfactory lobe of platypus is to bo explained
solely or principally upon phylogenetic grounds, as a persistence
of tho smiropsidau condition.
35


THE HISTOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE
OLFACTORY LOBE.
Tlio olfactory nerves arise as axis cylinder processes from tho
bipolar cells situated in the upper part of the mucous membran 0
of the nose, just in front of the cranium. They ascend in the
subepithelial tissues as a number of discrete bundles of non-
niiduliatud fibres, which unite just in front of the cranium to form
with tho fibres, which arise in a similar manner further
forwards, from the epithelium lining Jacobson’s organ, a compact
rounded bundle which enters the cranium through a rounded
foramen at its extreme anterior and upper angle. In this arrange,
ment of the olfactory nerves, and in tho absence of a cribriform
plate, platypus differs from all other mammals, including
Echidna (in spite of the assertion of Wiedersheim (xLvni) that
the latter lacks a cribiform plate) and resembles tho aub-mam-
malia, more especially the sauropsida.
From a superficial examination the olfactory nerves seem to
be attached to the anterior and upper pole of tho olfactory lobe;
whereas, iu reality they spread over the whole surface of tho,
lobe in the form of a network of fibres which forms tho outer
zone of tho lobe. Moreover they extend into the olfactory eup
(fig. 20) which, together with a quantity of vascular connective
tissue, they completely fill, so that in section tho lobe appears
to tho naked eye to be solid. This layer of nerve fibres is
covered by a complete investment of pia mater, which above
sends a {recess into the olfactory “ cup” and iu front is pro-
longed into the fibrous sheath surrounding the compact bundle of
oerxs. In the whole of their course these fibres from tho olfactory
mucous membrane and Jacobsons ergon are non-modullated and
do not giro off any collateral branches, so that each fibre maintains
it * individuality. On reaching the olfactory lobe they form the out
eraaoet zone—the zone of nervo fibres from which the individual
fibres extend inwards to terminate in a perfectly free and short
abo.ißation of varicose fibrils, which help to form the
which are the characteristic structures of tho second layer of the
iobe—the glomerular sone. Scattered between the glomeruli
36


are smell multipolar cells, whose fine axis cylinder process is
directed centripotaliy, nnd which probably belong to the third
layer, the rone of mitral cells The cells composing thin layer
are irregular in shape and not of uniform suo; and ara moreover
scattered somewhat irregularly. The most characteristic cell* of
the layer we large somewhat triangular c.e Is which giv* very
strong and thick protoplasmic processes, which run parallsl to
the surface, giving off think branches, which extend into the
glomeruli where they branch into a number of short thick pro-
cesses which are associated with the terminal arborisations of tha
olfactory cells, These thick protoplasmic processes are the ‘ recep*
tire’ or csllutipotal processes. The oollulifugal or axis cylimder
pronww arises from the deep aspect of she cell and is directed
inwards towards the next layer—thegranularzone, where it takes
a midden bond eaudally and after giving collateral branches to
terminate in other parte of the sorts of initial cells, it enter
fcho olfactory peduncle to enter either the external or
internal olfactory roots Placed deeper than tha tame of mitral
cells ia a layer which presents a granular appearance, when
stained by anilm blue black, from the donao aggregation of
deeply stained nuclei. When etui nod by Golgi’s method these
granules are found to consist of the bodies of somewhat pyriform
ceils with long protoplasmic processes extending into the zone of
mitral cells. When stained by the Weigort method this layer
is seen to bo occupied by a dense network of fine modullated
nerves (well soon in Perameles) which at the inner margin of the
granular zone become collected into a dense mass of nervo fibres,
which are in immediate relationship with the ependyma of the
olfactory ventricle This layer on the cuter aide of the ventricle
is directly continuous posteriorly with the gxtl olfactory root.
On the mesial side of the ventricle the same layer is directly
continuous with the internal olfactory root. On the outer side
of the ventricle the meduliated fibres of the par#
elfactoria extend into the medullary layer which simound*
Die olfactory ventricle and thence into the olfactory cortex to
end in terminal aborisations. These anterior commissure fibres
ar* not connected with any cells in the olfactory lobe ns for as
37


can be made out In its histological features therefore the ol-
factory lobe conforms to the now well-known type as elucidated
by Koollicker Van Oohuchten (ivi) and Ramon y Oajal (vn c)-
But concerning the arrangement and connections of the internal
root and the fibres of the corona radiata, I am
unable to find any explicit account. The further detail of this
region wil bo deferred until the associated parts of the cortex
have been ascribed Although Dr. Hill, in hie description, does
not specifically refer to his remarkable views upon the connec-
tions of the olfactory lobe, which he has advanced in his highly
speculative hypothesis of the rotation of the great brain (xxu c)
his account of the connections of the olfactory lobe in platypus is
still plainly dominated by these views. In no other way is any
explanation afforded his statements that “ the olfactory crus re-
mains for some distance distinct from the hemisphere that the
olfactory bulb is “ absolu ely free from the hemisphere " ; a id
that the rhinencephalon (including the hippocampus) forms a
loop open in front—quite ignoring the middle and internal
olfactory roots, the superior root of Broca, the post-rhinal lobe
and the precommissural area.
THE OLFACTORY PEDUNCLE
The olfactory crut or peduncle (used in the restricted sense to
which reference has already been made in speaking of the pyri
form lobe, is a short somewhat flattened cord which connects
the olfactory lobe with the anterior extremity of the cerebral
hemisphere In transverse section it is of an elliptical shape,
the major axis being horizontal. In the centre is placed a canal,
whoso shape corresponds to that of the peduncle and is lined by
a well-developed ependyma In front this canal opens into the
olfactory ventricle and behind into the lower recess of the ante-
rior horn of the lateral ventricle Surrounding the ependyma
there is a thick granular mass of cells, which when stained by
the Golgi method are found to consist of fairly small irregular
pyramids whoso branched protoplasmic processes extend towards
the surface and whoso axis cylinders are directed towards the
38


corebrum. The inferior and mesial aspects of the crus are
covered by a dense layer of modullated nerve fibres which arise
in the olfactory lobe from the mitral cells. Posteriorly the
ventral part of the crus becomes directly continuous with the
pyriform and post-rhinal lobes the surface layer of fibres being
the external olfactory root and superficial medullary layer of the
post-rhinal lobe respectively. The mesial surface of the crus is
continuous behind with the precommissural area, the medullary
surface layer becoming the internal olfactory root. The dorsal
part of the crus (» e. the part which lies above the ventricle or canal
of the stalk) is directly continuous with the pallium, the medul-
lary layer which lies its inferior surface becoming con-
tinuous with the corona radiata and constituting tho “ superior
olfactory root” of Broca (iv fi). Tho olfactory crus is formed,
like the prosoncephalic part of tho olfactory bulb, from tho
‘ anterior olfactory lobule’ of His.
THE PYRIFORM LOBE
The pyriform lobe is the direct continuation backwards of tho
outer part of the ventral segment of the olfactory tract and con -
stitutes part of tho posterior olfactory lobule In the greater
part of its extent tho pyriform lobe presents a somewhat trian-
gular outl no in transverse section, the apex of the triangle being
placed dorsally. This appearance is due to the fact that the
lobe is bounded by very deep fissures, which converge towards
one another so as to almost separate the lobe from the hemis-
phere (Figs 10 and 11). The surface of this lobe is covered by
a layer of modullated nerve fibres which constitute the external
root of tho olfactory nerve. In Weigert preparations very fine
medullatod nerves may be seen extending a short distance into
the substance of tho pyriform lobe, although Golgi (xvm. a)
says (speaking of lower placental mammals) that the nerve fibres
lose their medullated sheaths before they dip into the grey sub-
stance. Stained by the silver method (fig 62) numerous branches
consisting mainly of collaterals, but also of terminal arborisations
of axis cylinder processes will bo seen to extend for a short dis-
39


tancu into the grey matter, whore tkoy come into relationship
with tho protoplasmic processes of the 00110 of tho region. Since
fibres are thus continually leaving the external tract to hutor the
pyriform lobe, the tract becomes gradually smaller as it is traced
backwards. No fibres can bo traced beyond the pyriform lobe’
and there Is no sign of the external olfactory root entering the
hippocampus as Herrick so frequently affirms in his numorou*
papers (xx). In minute structure the pyriform lobe consists of
scattered somewhat irregular medium-sized pyramids, which
vary in sizs within slight limits and are scattered throughout the
substance of the lobe. A. short distance from the surface how-
ever the cells become arranged into a well marked zone of pyra-
mids several desp. In anilin blue-black specimens the appear-
ance of the lobe is not unlike that of the uyrus uncinatus of
human anatomy as figured by Bevon Lewis. This resemblance
is interesting, when wo remember that the pyriform lobe is
probably tho homologue of the uncus. The protoplasmic pro-
cesses of the sells of this region extend towards the surface and
from, the deep aspect of the coll, the centrally directed axis cylin-
der process arises and extends up towards the corona radiata, by
means of which it either extends into th pallium or to tho ante,
rior commissure. In its course it gives collaterals some of which
aro association fibres to other parts of the pyriform lobe and
others become commissural fibres in the anterior commissure
Tho collaterals and tho terminal filaments of the external olfactory
root come into relationship with the protoplasmic processus of tho
more superficial cells of this region as has been demonstrated in
Eutberia by Eamon y Cajal (via, c) and M Calleja. Since the
fibres of the external olfactory root aro axis cylinders of “mitral”
cells—tho olfactory ‘receptive colls—it is evident that the colls
of the pyriform lobe must be a higher receptive station which is
intermediate between the olfactory lobe and tho pallium.
THE POST-RHINAL LOBE, PRECOMMISSURAL AREA
AND "SEPTUM PELLUCIDUM.”
These three cortex areas are beet cons'derod together, because
40


they form a Continuous tract, presenting fairly uniform histologies
features and constituting physiologically an intermediate station
between the olfact ry lobe and the hippocampus of both sides.
The pre-commissural area and post-rhinal lobe are developed
from the posterior olfactory lobule; and the thickened lamina
t erminalis, which forms the septum lucidum (oven if one does not
go as far as Kupffer and regard it as a ivbus elfatiotius impar) )
must ho -considered histologically and a con-
stituent part of the rhinencephalon. The whole region under
discussion consists of a, mass of grey matter, whose histological
elements consist of polymorphous, irregular, pyriform and pyra-,
midal cells, which are scattered irregularly throughout, and are
not arranged in any regular manner as in the pyriform lobe or
cortex cerebri. The individual element* closely resemble those
found in the pyriform lobe, whoso structure is represented in fig.
63. The most important elements are medium-sized pyramidal
colls, with h ghly-branched protoplasmic processes extending both
towards the surface and laterally. .Their axis cylinder processes
are generally directed centrally, and their further course will bo
considered later on. Lying on the surface of the post-rhinal lobe
and pro-commissural area are a number of fine medullated
nerve fibres the superficial medullary lamina of the post ~
rhinal lobe and the internal olfactory root respectively-
The numerous collateral branches, as well as the terminal
arborisations of the fibres themselves, end, in relation to the
protoplasmic processes of the cells of the region, in much the
same way as the fibres of tho external olfactory root terminate in
the pyriform loho (fig. 62).
Placed in tho substance of the regions under discussion are a
largo number of nerve fibres of very varied origin. The con-
sideration of most of these will he deferred until tho hippocampus
has been described. A number of scattered bundles, however, in
the deeper part of the post-rhinal lobe will ha briefly considered
hero. They are soon cut transversely in platypus in fig. 14, and
in FerameUs in fig. 31 and 9i as u number of bundles in series
with tho internal capsule fibres. They are seen abo in sagittal
41


section in Perameks in fig. 30 and 40, and in horizontal section in
fig. 37 Posteriorly this bundle of fibres passes into the pes
pedunculi, whereas anteriorly they terminate in the post-rhinal
and possibly the olfactory lobe and peduncle, but their exacf
connections are uncertain. They constitute the middle root ot
Broca (iv. b), whose function he supposed to be motor. They
consist of projection fibres connecting the olfactory lobe and tract
with lower regions of tho neural axis and possibly reflex in
function.
THE HIPPOCAMPUS.
This peculiarly-folded portion of the wall of the prosencephalon
has been tho subject of a vast amount of attention within recent
years, both from histologists and morphologists; but, although
its histological detail has been now very clearly demonstrated by
the employment of the method of Golgi principally by Bala (xli.),
Schaffer (xlii.), and especially Ramon y Cajal (vn. c), the
question of its morphology and morphogenesis is still a matter
of dispute and great divergence of opinion. This is largely owing
to the fact that in almost all the work that has been done the
Eutherian hippocampus has boon employed. The study of the
sauropsidan “ hippocampus ” by Edingor (vm. b) does not shed
much light upon many of tho points under discus don. In
Eutheria, however, tho morphology of the brain has boon greatly
disturbed in the revolution which the appearance of a corpus
callosum creates. In this revolution the hippocampus is tho part
of the cerebrum which suffers most, the whole of the “ Rand-
bogen” which corresponds to the body and anterior horn of tho
ventricle, and which in Meta- and Proto- theria developes into
part of the hippocampus, disappearing in the placental mammal.
There is probably, as I have shown elsewhere fxLiv), a causal
relationship between this disappearance of hippocampus and the
appearance of tho corpus callosum. The hippocampus is, there-
fore, greatly disturbed in its anterior part in tho placental
mammal, so that the most interesting and instructive region is
lost to the investigator. In tho reptile, in which tho hippocampus
42


is not disturbed by a corpus callosum, the extreme simplicity of
the region forbids any exact comparison with the complex mam-
malian structure. The brain of a monotremo or a marsupial is
par excellence the subject in which to study the morphology of
the hippocampus, for, whilst the structure in question presents
as high a differentiation and quite as much histological detail as
in the placental mammal, yet it retains its true morphological
position, as in the sauropsida, free from the disturbing influence
of a corpus callosum. Moreover, from the close topographical
relation of its anterior extremity to the olfactory lobe it is pos-
sible to establish the histological relationships of the two struc-
tures with a degree of certainty not to be hopod for in the
examination of the cerebrum of the placental mammal The
gross anatomy of the region has already been described. The
variations which it presents in its different parts may be made
out from Dr. Hill’s figures. The histological detail will now bo
considered.
Histology of the hippocampus —ln a section taken through the
middle of the hippocampal commissure, the hippocampus \fig. 12
and 13) presents the typical features such as Kamon y Oajal
describes (yn. c). The fascia dentata forma part of the mesial
hemisphere wall lying above the hippocampal commissure (h.c.) t
and extending up as high as the hippocampal fissure (hf).
The latter extends outwards, with a slight inclination upwards,
and then curves downwards in a hook-like extremity. The
fascia dentata corresponds to the inferior aspect of the fissure and
to the concavity of the hook, whereas the hippocampus (in the
restricted sense) corresponds to the convexity of the hook and the
upper aspect of the fissure. The fissure is occupied by branches
of the anterior cerebral artery and cerebral vein.
As the pallium bonds inwards above the fissura hippocampi to
become subiculum the scattered cells of the pallium (fig. 12)
become collected mainly into a very regular column of closely-
packed large cells (fig. 12 and 13), which lie rather nearer to the
ventricular aspect of the hippocampus than to the hippocampal
fissure. These cells are arranged two or three deep (fig. 13) and
43


uro known as the layer of pyramidal cells. Their body (fig. AC)
is roughly pyramidal, giving off a thick, strong, highly-branched
protoplasmic process, which extends through the substance a*
the hippocampus [stratum rodiatum {s.r.) and stratum
laounosum] to the surface at the hippocampal fissure. The body
the cell also gives off two or three smaller protoplasmic processes,
which are directed towards the ventricular aspect of the hippo'
campus. The axis cylinder process (fig. SC and 12) is also directed
towards tho ventricular surface, and after giving off numerous
collateral branches in the layer of polymorphous cells (fig. 13) it
enters the alveus (fig 12 and 13). Here a considerable propor-
tion of the axis cylinders bends upwards, ie., away from tho
fimbria and after giving numerous collaterals, which enter tho
hippocampus elsewhere (fig. 13), finally themselves bend in
towards the stratum lacunosum, where they terminate in relation
to the protoplasmic processes of the pyramidal cells. A largo
bundle of these fibres is seen in the upper part of the hippo-
campus in fig. 13 These fibres ore purely association fibres*
Other axis cylinder processes of pyramidal cells bifurcate, tho
two branches running in opposite direc ions in alveus. Others
again turn towards the fimbria. Between the layer of pyramids
and the alveus are scattered a number of irregular cells, some-
what smaller than the pyramidal cells—the layer of poly-
morphous cells (fig. 12 and IS). Some of the axis sylindors of
these colls extend towards the stratum radiatum; others enter
the alveus. As the hippocampus is traced round towards the
fimbria, or towards the hippocampal commissure, tho poly-
morphous and pyramidal cells become rearranged, together
become serially continuous with a mass of cells, which shows
a distinct division into two series the nucleus fascia*
dentate and tho granular layer of the fascia dentate (fig 13).
* f
The cells of tho nucleus fasciae dentafcai (fig 13 c) are irregular
colls, smaller than the pyramidal cells, but resembling some of
tho latter in that thoir axis cylinder extend towards the fimbria.
Host of the axis cylinder processes of the pyramidal cells in this
region also go to tho fimbria; and the majority if not all, give
off collaterals, before doing so, which proceed upwards and form
44


a distinct bundle (fig 13 and 18) in the stratum lacunosam,
which is reinforced by similar fibres from other parts of the hip-
pocampus. Although most of these fibres terminate in relation
to the protoplasmic processes of tho pyramidal cells, yet a dis-
tinct bundle extends around the subiculum on to tho mesial
hemisphere wall, as the superficial medullary lamina (fig 13).
The granular layer of the fascia dentate is composed of the cha-
racteristic small Purkinge-b'ke colls, closely packed in a layer 5
or 6 deop. In the highly macroematic Peramtles this layer is
fully twice as thick end numerous as it is in platypus. The fine
beaded axis cylinder proo sees of these colls are directed through
the nucleus fascia dontatao and giving off numerous fine colla-
terals, end by surrounding the bodies and the trunks of tho pro-
toplasmic processes of the pyramidal colls of tho region (6g 12
and 18). They therefore act as association fibe-s between tho
* granular* and pyramidal cells. The highly branched proto-
plasmic processes of the ‘ granule colls* are directed towards the
surface where they come into relationship with tho end branch-
ings of a number of fine medullated nerves (fig i 3 a b'y, which
proceed from tho fimbria. These fibres shall be considered
later under tho name of tho olfactory bundle tf the fascia dentata
At the mesial border of the hippocampus lbs fibres of the
alveus become collected into a bundle, which runs more or less
longitudinally and which constitutes tho fimbria. In Mota-and"
En-theria the descending limb of the hippocampus is largely de-
veloped, but in platypus and Echidna the descending limb is
small and tapering, markedly contrasting with tho enlarged and
swollen descending limb in Perameles. As a consequence of this,
in both monotremea the fimbria is very small and insignificant as
compared with the prominent projecting ridge of the marsupial
hippocampus. This is well shown in Hill’s figures of platypus.
Tho fimbria is composed of all those fibres of the alveus which
do not terminate in tho adjacent parts of the hippocampus, ie.,
local association fibres, us well as the fibres of the hiium of the
fascia dentata which are derived from the irregular cells of the
nucleus fasciae dontatae (fig 13). Since the hippocampus extends
beyond the foramen of Monro in front, no part oi the fimbria ever
45


becomes free of the hippocampus to form a posterior pillar pi
body of the fornix as met with in the placental mammal. The
structure of the hippocampus in its posterior or descending horn,
together with its relation to the pyriform lobe (uncinate convolu,
' tion) must now be considered.
When the hippocampus bends down posteriorly it gradually
diminishes in size but to its termination it maintains the typical
structure unchanged (fig 30). As traced backwards the subicu-
lum becomes directly continued into the pyriform lobe The
cells of the hippocampus are continued into a scattered irregular
mass of cells which almost immediately rearrange themselves to
form the typical structure of the pyriform lobe, the regular row
of pyramidal colls which characterise the lobe being placed much
nearer the surface than the pyramidal cells of the hippocampus
(fig 30).
As the hippocampus is traced forward in a series of sections ia
front of the lamina terminalis it will be found to gradually un-
ravel and ultimately shade off into the precommissural area and
pallium in a way that is highly instructive from a morphologist’s
point of view. It is strange that Dr. Hill, who was working at
the cerebrum of platypus at the very time that he was writing
upon the morphology of the hippocampus (xxn. 6), should have
practically neglected this region of the brain, which sheds so
clear a light upon the matter in dispute. If ho had done so, I
feel sure that he * ould never have advanced the bita rre views,
especially regarding the fascia dentata, which are to be found in
his papor.
Before Golgi investigated the hippocampal region it was gene,
rally believed that a half, one or two convolutions took part in
its formation. Thus Duval (v.) believed that the fascia dentata
was a convolution quite independent of the hippocampus propt r
and that the granular layer was the homologue of all the layers
of the general cortex. By demonstrating that the margin of the
fimbria had attached to it the ependymal fold which envelopes the
choroid plexus, ho showed that the fimbria with the fascia den-
tutu must form the free margin of the medullary matter and cor •
46


tax respectively. A number of loading neurologists (more espe-
cially Henle, Krause, Huguenin, Schwalbe, Moyuert and Ob'
ersteiner) believed the nucleus fascia deutata toge-
ther with the fascia dentata forms a single con-
volution, whose small pyramid is formed by th ■
stratum granulosum. Then there is the view of Q-iacomini
that the pes hippocampi does not represent any convolutions but
is a specially modified portion, of the brain cortex This view is
based upon the fact that the pes may reach a considerable deve-
lopment in animals in which no trace of convolution exists
Golgi and his pupil dala (xu ) look up the collective hippocam-
pal formation as a peculiarly folded part of the forebrain, which
microscipically consists of two distinct types of cells —one rop o-
sented in the grey convoluted area and the other in the fasci.
dentata. They believe that the fascia dentata is an inverted
convolution quite independent of the nucleus fa ciae dontatae.
Kamon y Oajal \Vn c) regards the Ammon’s horn as a simple
inrolling of two convolutions, so that they adhere to one ano-
ther, with the molecular layer of one (fascia dentata) standing
upon that of the other (Ammon s horn). Lugaro (Neurol: Cen-
tralblatt, 1894; regards the whole hippocampal formation as
consisting of five layers. Dr. Hill in a recent memoir on the hip-
pocampus (xxn. 6) has advanced some very peculiar hypotheses
which will be stated in more detail, since ho arrived at these con-
clusions after a study of the cerebrum of Orinthorhynchm. He
says: “1 am absolutely opposed, however, to the writers just
named, and, indeed, to all anatomists with whose works lam
acquainted, in their attempt to homologise the elements found in
the fascia dentata with those found in other parts of th cortex :
or in other words to prove that the fascia dentata is a convolu-
tion comparable wfth other convolutions of the general cortex.
Firstly, because it does not appear to me to resemble the gene-
ral cortex, and secondly because it does not behave like a convo-
lution, For example, it does not vary in its development with
the convolutions of the general surface. In perfectly smooth
brains the fascia deutata is as largo or proportionately larger
47


than in convoluted brain* * * * * The lascia dentate ia a
band of gray matter added to tba cortex around a portion of its
margin. * * * It in far bettor to limit the name cortex to
all part* of the grey matter of the surface of the cerebral homif-
pheree as have a certain typical structure. * * • Portions of
the wall of the ferebrain remain as “ ependyma,” other parts ac-
quire the typical cortex structure, while still another part be-
comes the fascia dentate.” Why Dr. Hill should single out
the fascia dentate for this distinction as a primary division of
the forebrain to be classed with the “ epedyma” and cortex is
not evident, especially when we consider that the precommissural
area, the post-rhinal and pyriform lobes, the olfactory lobe and
cventhehippocampuß itself, all parteof theprosencephalon, equally
lack the typical cortical structure and therefore, according to
Hill's argument, ought not to bo considered as cortex. More,
over from ontogenetic and phylsogenetic considerations, we must
regard the fascia dentate as a part of the cortex cerebri—a part,
however, which, as shall be demonstrated later on, ia modified
in development to meet certain demands, which its functions
necessitate. To place any arbitrary limits to one’s conception of a
cortex, such ns are suggested above, will not tend to elucidate
the subject under consideration but rather to introduce an unde-
sirable confusion. For a gradual transition may be readily made
ont in histological detail as the cortex is traced through pyri-
form lobe, post-rhinal lobe, precommissural area into the fascia
dentata in any Proto—or Metharian cerebrum and there is no
dear indication where one could say that cortex stopped, and
“ the parts of the wall of the forobraia which are not cortex”
began. The minute structure of the cortex cerebri as elucidated
by the method of Oorgi present certain structural elements,
which are recognised as characteristic of the * cortical ’ structure,
being found no where else in the nervous system. A notable
example of this is the pyramidal cell. By mean* of such ele-
ments parts of the forebrain of the lowly ventehrates such as
amphibia and lowly sauropsida have been recognised as cortex
by Edinger (viii c) quite apart from morphological consider*-


tions Tet the cortex of these lowly animals, whose general
homologies no one di- putes, are as unlike (if not more so) the
pal iu 11 of higher mamma ■as the fascia nentata. In fact the
structure of the cortex in amphibia is not unlike the fasuio den-
tata. In the fascia dentata, as Eamon y Oajol (vii c) or even
Hi/1 himse f (xxii 6) has shown, are to be found typica' cortical
histo ogical elements, which quite apart from morphological con-
siderations stamp the fascia dentata as cortex cerebri.
The anatomy of the interior extremity of the hippocampu g
still remains for consideration, as well as the morphological
questions which such a study involves.
As the hippocampus is traced forwards in a series of transverse
sections from the region of the hippocampal commissure either is
platypus (fig. 1b) or Ferameles (fig. 32) it will be found to
gradually unravel itself, so that in its anterior part it presents a
simplicity of arrangement (fig. 14 and 31) which is not unlike
the foetal condition of the parts around the Ammonsfurche (fig.
49). In fig 14 the irregularly-scattered cells of the pre-corn,
missural area {pa. fig. 59) will be found (as the median wall is
traced dorsally) to become arranged more regularly, so that by
the time the lower lip of the hippocampal fissure is reached the
cells have arranged themselves in two distinct groups—a closely
packed layer of cells which constitute the stratum, granulosum of
the fascia dentata (fig. 14 and fig. 59 p.a.) and a deeper, scattered
layer of irregular cells—the nucleus fascia dentata. As the wall
is traced round the lower margin of the hippocampal fissure,
these two layers become serially continuous with the elements of
the pes hippocampi, but the division into two layers of the
fascia dentata cannot be c nsidered as homologous with the two
layers of the hippocampus; because, although the layer of
polymorphous cells of the hippocampus passes wholly into the
nucleus fascia dentata, the latter layer is also in part formed by
cells, which are serially homologous with the pyramidal cells of
the hippocampus, which is also continued into the stratum granu.
losum (fig 59). Even in fig 13 this relationship may be appre-
ciated. In Golgi-stained specimens of the transition region the
49


change from the small pyramids of the pre-commissural area into
Purkinge-like cells of the stratum granulosum of the fascia
dentata can be readily made out. As the hippocampal region is
traced forwards the hippocampal fissure becomes gradually
shallower, and the pes hippocampi gradually shades off above
and in front into the general cortex or pallium Below, the fasci a
dentata shades into the pre-commissural area, which, as shall be
seen later on, it resembles functionally. The whole hippocampal
region in front, therefore, gradually shades off into the sur.
rounding cortex areas, thereby forming a marked contrast to the
abrupt edges which the region presents in the greater part of its
extent and at its posterior extremity. It is evident, therefore,
that these facte support neither the view of Duval that
the fascia dentata is a convolution independent of the nucleus
fascia dentatse, nor the view of Golgi and Sala, for the sam e
reason, although supporting the latter to some extent in
regarding the fascia dentata as an inverted convolution, though
not to the extent demanded by their theory. From what ha 8
been already said, the view advanced here is absolutely opposed
to Hill’s hypothesis, as well as to the view of Giacomiui. The
reasons for this have been stated above in discussing the signi-
ficance of the rhinal and hippocampal fissures. The older and
more generally accepted theory that the nucleus faiJoiao dentatse,
together with the stratum granulosum, forms a single convolu-
tion is supported y the facts above stated, but there is no ground
for definitely homologising the stratum granulosum with the
layer of small pyramids, as Henle and most writers following
him have done.
It does not seem justifiable to attempt to compare
the elements of the regions under discussion, or attempt
to homologise them with the different layers of
the pallium, although it seems probable (from the study
of the fascia dentata especially) that function has some
influence in modifying the form of different cells, yet it must be
admitted with Golgi (xvm. a) that difference in shape is largely
secondary, t.e., dependent upon local conditions 6f development.
50


In the development of the brain (at the stage represented in the
figures) the walls of the prosencephalon are already divided into
two distinct types—a part that develops into pallium and pos
sibly pyriform lobe, and a part which developos into the res of
the cerebrum, ie., hippocampus, pre-commissural area, post,
rhinal and olfactory lobes. The latter parts develope earlier
than the former. They are the more ancient parts of the cere,
brum phylogenetically, and accordingly they develope earlier and
reach their state of perfection much earlier than the rest of the
brain. Their relative development has little to do with intelligence,
being purely “sensory '’ areas constituting the olfactory centra.
The hippocampus has therefore no relation to the size of the
size of the pallium and may, in Giacomini’s words, reach a con-
siderab e degree of deve opment in anima s with smooth brains
and “ does not behave like a convolution.” The hippocampus
presents an early and great development because it is immedi-
ately associated with the o factory, which is the predominent
sense in the lower mammas; as we 1 as for the phy.ogenetic
reasons. Because the conica centre shou d reach a high degree
of deve opmeut in macrosmatic animals whi e the rest of the
cortex does not show a proportionate increase, one is not justi-
fied in sayiug that it does not behave tike a oouvo ution. Its
conditions of deve opment differ from those of the pa'.him and
accordingly its structure is different. If any comparis n were
to be instituted, the granular layer of the fascia dentata must be
considered to represent the molecu ar layer—for physio ogica
as we 1 as anatomica reasons—poasib.y as well as part of the
layer of pyramids. Bamon y Oajal has shown (vn. a and c)
that the mo ecular layer is characterised everywhere by its ‘ re
ceptive” functions, a role, which, as wi 1 shown later, is played
almost exclusive y by the stratu u granulosum of the fascia den-
tata. The nucleus fascim dentatse would then represent the
layer of pyramidal cells (in part), as well as the layer
of polymorphous cells But the local conditions
of development have modified, the e'ements so much as
to render any definite homologies very uncertain.
51


Moreover, since the full meaning of the stratification of the cor*
ten's not understood and the tendency is in recent times to re-
duce the number of layers, little if anything would be gained by
attempting to establish definitely which ce Is are homo’ogous in
different cortex areas.
The whole hippocampal region is to be regarded as a peculi-
arly folded part of the cortex cerebri, formed by the pes hippo-
campi which is continuous with the pallium above and below
with the fascia dentata (including the nucleus fasciae dentatae)
and that the medullary matter is represented by the alveus, cor-
responding to the hippocampus proper and the stalk of white
matter forming the nilum fasciae dentatae (corresponding to the
fascia dentata) The bordering gyrus (Randwindung) of the Zucker-
kandl consists in platypus and all non-placental mamma s of the
hippocampus, the precommissural area and the thickened lamina
terminalis. In the placental mammal, when the supra-vontri-
cular mantle commissure appears in the form of a corpus callo-
sum—the upper and anterior part of the hippocampus disappears,
the only remnant being the supracallosal gyrus and possibly the
gyrus geniculi of Zuckerkandl The remnants of the lamina ter-
minalis in the Eutheria > re to be seen in the lamina septipellucidi
as well as, probably, the gyrus infracallosus and the gyrus fornicis.
The striae Lancisii, which form part of Zueker-
kauill’s gyrus tupracallosalis consist of fibres connecting
the fascia dentata posteriorly with the pre-commissural area and
olfactory lobe anteriorly and probably including the fibres
called olfactory bundle of the fascia dentata in this paper. With
the disappearance of the hippocampus above the choroidal fissure
of course the hippocampal (arcurate) fissure disappears, so that
Cunninghams’s statement (vi) that with the appearance of the
corpus callosum the anterior part of the fissura arcurata die p-
pears may be taken as strictly correct, although the situation of
this fissure (between the supracallosal and callosal gyri) cor-
responds to the position of the callosal fissure in the placental
mammal, although one could hardly say with Krause, Hertwig,
and Mihalkovics, that the “ vordere Bogenfurche” of His be-
comes the callosal fissure.
52


THE FIBRE-TRACTS OF THE RHINENOEPHALON.
In describing the complicated fibre systems which connect the
olfactory, pre-commissural, and hippocampal regions, the limita-
tions of space, as well as the uncertainty of detail in some cases,
render it preferable to confine our attention to the more import-
ant fibres. In a subsequent paper I hope to discuss in greater
detail, after further examination of fresh material, the compli
cated fibre systems of this region.
The anatomy of this part of the brain, more especially in the
non-placentalia has been the subject of extreme confusion and mis-
representation. The absence of any satisfactory account of the
olfactory tracts is a witness to the prevailing ignorance of this
locality. And upon the subject of the commissures the extreme
confusion and divergence of opinion must be well known to all
students.
THE OLFACTORY RADIATIONS.
The olfactory lobe, in addition to the continuty of grey matter,
is also connected with the cerebrum by meant of a number of
tracts of medullated fibres, whi'h were at one time considered as
“ association fibres.” His (xxi.J compared them to the so-called
ascending roots of the cranial nerves. But since the reseawhe B
of Cajal (vn.), Gehuchten (xvi.), and Eetzius have show* that
they arise, not in a part of the prosencephalon, but in the
olfactory gangiin, Edinger (vni. b) has pointed out that they
ought to be considered projection fibres and calls them the
olfactory radiations.
The most important of these systems is the external olfactory
root, which we have traced to its termination in relation to the
protoplasmic processes of the cells of the pyriform lobe, which
in turn send axis cylinder processes to the corona radiata, thence
to the pallium and the opposite hemisphere by the anterior com-
missure. Herrick, without adducing any evidence to support
the view, traces this root Into the hippocampus —“ It seems
scarcely to be doubted from the course of the radix lateralis that
its fibres reach the surface of the hippocampus and connect either
53


directly or indirectly with the ectal layer of this region. . .
Thus, according to our view, the lamina nuclearis and superficial
bundle of the fascia dentata are parts of the tract of the radix
lateralis” (xx) and quotes Edinger in support of this view.
Bawden (I. p. 134) says: “The fibres of the radix lateralis
dip into the hippocampus. They connect here with
the ectal layer of the hippocampal region ” The extreme con.
.fusion introduced here by the term “ hippocampal region ” when
the “ pyriform lobe is meant, has been already referred to, but
Herrick uses the term as synonymous with the pes hippocampi t
and as such there is nothing in the monotreme or marsupial
brain, as far as my work goes, to support his contention Con-
cerning the other roots of the olfactory, the so-called “ superior
root ” of Broca (rv. b) consisted in the platypus specimens
mainly of collaterals from the other fibre systems to the olfactory
lobe.
Meyer says (xxxui) “ doubtless other roots exist; (1) the thin
layer of fine fibres which form the dorsal remnant of the coronal
fibres, and (2) the ventral remnant of the same system (“ T?and-
faserkranz ”) placed upon the surface of the post-rhinal and
pre-cemmissural areas. Speaking of the hippocampus, the same
author says that “ ho is convinced that there are no connections
with the olfactory tract (quoted by Herrick, xx. e). Huguenin
(Anat. des Centres Nerveux, p. 131) states that ‘the medulla of
the olfactory lobe is united through its internal root to the
medulla of the gyrus fornicatus. Beevor says (II.) that the
anterior p .rt of the cingulum passes into the mesial olfactory
root Foville (among others) long ago observed fibres streaming
from the anterior pillars of the fornix towards the olfactory lobe.
Zuckerkandl in 1888 described (L b) his “ Riechbundcl des
Cornu Ammonis,” which courses in the body of the fornix to the
back of the septum pellucidum, where it bends down in front of
the anterior commissure as the pre-commissural fibres of Huxley
to “ stream into the temporal and olfactory lobe-,.” The connec-
tion with the temporal lobe does not exist in platypus, and it is
doubtful if it really exists in any animal. Herrick f. p.


179) states that “ some of the fibres, which lie in the intraven-
tricular lobe [the pre-commissural area of this paper] certainly
continue forwards into the olfactory bulb, as shown by Bellonci,
and hence should be homologised with the striae Lanoisii.”
Bawdon (I. p. 124) states that “the radix mesahs . . . has
been traced into the indusium—the so-called striae Lancisii
[Fish (x)]. . . This bundle is small compared with the ex-
ternal root and is not so compact, being dispersed over the inner
and ventral aspects. It has been found to pass to the gyrus
fornicatus [this writer, as well as Herrick, calls the fascia dentata
“ gyrus fornicatus ”] in the opossum, which is the cephalic part
of the hippocampus. Beyond this its fibres have not been traced
with any degree of certainty. According to Blumenau (Etl.) the
cephalic extremity of the striae Lancisii ends in two ways, viz.: (1)
the deeper layer passes indirectly to the olfactory lobe via the
gyrus cinguli, and (2) the superficial fibres are directly connected
with the mesial olfactory root. The conflicting statements con-
tained i these extracts represent the present knowledge of this
subject. In this paper only a few of these fibres will be traced,
and only the bare results will be given; the fuller discussion of
the complicated fibre systems of the precommissural area will be
deferred till a later paper.
In platypus a thin scattered layer of medullated fibres lies near
the surface of the precommissural area and post rhinal lobe (fig
19 ba c prf). In marsupials the latter are derived from the
external olfactory root but in platypus they come directly from
the olfactory lobe, where they arise as axis cylinder processes
of the mitral cells (fig 60 ab) The uppermost of these fibres
(fig 19 ca fig 60 a) run upwards and backwards through the
precommissural area, and the upper scattered fibres (fig 19 r j
pass directly into the fascia dentata whose anterior extremity
is represented in fig 19 fd. The lower thicker bundle (a) passes
into the fimbria, probably to end in the fascia dentata further
back like c. These fibres— the olfactory bundle of the fascia den-
tata —terminate in the fascia dentata between the stratum granu-
losum (fig 13 a b). In this region they run somewhat obliquely.
55


These fibres were demonstrated very clearly hy the Weigert-
stained specimens, but not so successfully by the Golgi-prepara-
tions. I hope to be able to further investigate them by the silver
method as soon as fresh material is available, but in the mean-
time there can be little doubt that they end in relation to the
terminal aborizations of the cells of the stratum granulosum
(fig. 60 dy From the investigations of Cajal, the protoplasmic
processes of nerve cells have been shown to fulfil in most, if not
all, cases, a “ receptive” or cellulipetal function. If this bo so, the
highly branched protoplasmic processes of the Purkinge-like
cells of the fas ia dentata are clearly specialized for receiving im-
pulses. Hitherto there has been no clear indication as to the
source of such efferent impulses But if the facts, which have
just been stated, be true (see fig 60) then the fascia dentata is
set apart as a highly specialised “ receptive” station for olfac-
tory impulses, which are thence conducted by the fine axis
cylinder processes (fig 60 e ) of these granular cells to the pyra-
midal cells (f; of the hippocampus. The other fibres of this
region (fig 19 m.p.r. pr.f ) which are derived from the olfactory
lobe (fig 60 b) terminate by means of their collaterals and end
branchings in relation to the cells of the olfactory peduncle (fig-
-52), post-rhinal lobe, and pre-commissural area (fig 60 c) The axis
cylinder processes of these cells pass in great numbers to enter the
alveus directly in its anterior part or to enter the fimbria, thence
to the alveus further back (fig 15 a fig 60 g fig 14, descending
hippocampal fibres). These areas therefore constitute —like the
fascia dentata—a " switch station” between the olfactory lobe
and the hippocampus. The fibres (fig 60 g) from the cells of the
areas in question, pass into the alveus and, after giving off
numerous collaterals, end in relation with the pyramidal cells of
the hippocampus; so that they reach, by another route the same
destination as the fibres of the olfactory bundle of the fascia den-
tala,
The cells of the olfactory peduncle and post-rhinal lobe are
intimately associated with the pallium of both sides by means of
axis cylinder processes, which arise from cells in the regions
56


and other* then and there (figs 52, 15, 31, 32) both series pass-
ing into the corona radiata and some of the fibres, as well as
collaterals of othei s crossing in the anterior commissure The
lamina terminalis (septum pellucidum) like the pre-commissural
area (gyrus subcallosus) is evidently closely associated anatomi-
cally and physiologically with the olfactory centres, although there
is no evidence in this work, to support Kupffer’s contention that
the lamina is a lobus olfactorius impar.
THE DESTINATION OF THE ALVEUS FIBRES
In describing the hippocampus a number of fibres have been
noticed, which do not leave the hippocampus, but which, arising
as axis cylinders from the pyramidal cells, pass through the
alveus to another region of the hippocampus without entering
the fimbria. Of these local association fibres, nothing more
needs to be said here, nor of the system of association fibres
which pass through the fimbria and connect different parts of
the same hippocampus. Only such fibres as leave the hippo-
campus to enter some other cortex area will be considered here.
The alveus fibres of that part of the hippocampus lying be-
hind the foramen of Monro—the greater part of the hippocam-
pus —become collected into a bundle of longitudinally running
fibrts —the fimbria. In marsupials and placental mammals, the
descending limb of the hippocampus is large and well devel-
oped so that there is a well marked fimbria. But in the mono-
tremes and especially platypus, where the descending limb of the
hippocampus is not only short but small and tapering, there is
a very small and insignificant fimbria. The fibres from the
anterior part of the hippocampus—the part lying ia front of the
lamina terminalis —proceed directly to their destination, without
entering the fimbria. Jenco, among the scattered fibres of
this region one can trace with accuracy the different systems,
such as cannot be done with fibres which pass through a*
fimbria. The descriptions of the fornix system in this paper has
been worked out mainly in this anterior part of the hippocam-
pus.
57


The fornix consists of association, projection and commissural
fibres. The majority of the fibres belong to the latter conte-
gory. Fibres collect from all regions of the hippocampus towards
the region of the foramen of Monro. From the posterior part
they run forward and from the extreme anterior end they are
directed backwards in the precommissural area to the lamina
f-.nrmirm.liH, in which they cross the middle line to terminate in
the hippocampus, septum pellucidum and precommissural area
of the opposite side. They connect both heterologous and ho-
mologous parts, like the other cerebral commissures and consis
of collaterals as well as axis cylinder processes. Beevor (n) denied
the existence of a hippocampal commissure in the Marmoset
monkey, but the critical paper of Honegger (xxm) and the
facts hero demonstrated prove its existence. The nature of the
commissure has been described in greater detail elsewhere
(xlty), so that the question will not be discussed here. It will
suffice to say that the result of the examination of a large series
of nonplacental mammals is to corroborate the statements of
Owen (xxxrx) Gamer (xv), Symington (xlti', Eydoux and
Laurent (ix) and Edinger (viii a) to the effect that there no
corpus callosum in any monotreme and marsupial. There is no
ground for the statements of Meckel (xxxii), Flower (xn), Os-
born (xxxvni), Pappenheim (xl), Zuckerkandl (l), Beevor and
Herrick (xx) among many others, that a corpus callosum exists
in any marsupial or monotreme. Hill’s statement that all the
fornix fibres cross the middle line is equally erroneous All
the other fibres of the fornix system may be classed as descend-
ing fibres and contrary to the statements of Hill they do not
cross to the other side. They may be divided into, those which
pass (a) in front and (b) behind the anterior commissure.
(a) Descending fomix fibres, which pass in front of the anterior
commissure. These fibres (pr. f. fig 19) come from all parts of
the hippocampus, the posterior coursing in the fimbria, the
anterior fibres running directly into the pre-commissural area.
They all run downwards in the pro-commissural area in front of
the anterior commissure, and are in all probability homologous


with the pre-commtssural fibies of Huxley and the sit ice Lancisu of
the Eutherian brain. They also include the “ Riechbundel" of
Zuckerkandl (L) and the bundle of fibres which I have dis-
tinguished as the olfatiory bundle of the fascia dentata. In figs.
14, 31, >8 and 19 the anterior of these fibres may be seen passing
either directly into the alveus or into the fascia dentata.
Ventrally a large number of these fibres curve round the
anterior commissure to enter the thalamencephalon. A large
number of the rest may bo traced into connection with cells of
the pre-commissural and post-rhinal areas, and probably others
terminate in the same regions; others again pass into the
olfactory lobe, where they are connected with the mitral cells.
(i) Descending fornix fibres which pass behind the anterior
commissure. The appearance of these fibres is very different
from those which have just been considered, for while the latter
consist of a very diffusely scattered system, the fibres under con-
sideration form a very compact bundle, which constitutes the
anterior pillar of the fornix. This.is directed downwards and
slightly backwards immediately behind the anterior commissure
to reach the thalamencephalon—(the term thalamencephalon is
used here in preference to optic thalamus, because if the latter
is regarded as a development of the lamina of His, the floor,
including the corpora mammillaria, cannot be considered part of
where it curves backwards towards the lateral nucleus of
the corpus mammillare. Hill says that part of this pillar turns
up to form the tsenia thalami. This is certainly not the case,
because a tenia thalami exists in the ordinary situation and
with the ordinary connections. It is true that a few fibres pass
into the “ septum lucidum ” from the optic thalamus, but their
connection with either the fornix system or with the taenia is
very doubtful. The fornix may be defined as a complicated
system of commissural, association, and projection fibres, by
means of which the different parts of the hippocampus are
intimately united with one another (association), with parts of
the opposite hippocampus (commissural), with the olfactory lobe,
either directly (projection, Edinger) or indirectly through the
59


pre-commissural, post-rhinal and “ septal ” areas (association),
and with the thalamencephalon (projection).
THE BASAL GANGLIA.
The corpus striatum of platypus presents a marked contrast
to the corresponding structure of all other mammals for two
principal reasons: ( a ) the very slight degree of bending of the
hemisphere, and (3) the enormous development of the optic
thalamus, which pushes out and reduces to a thin layer the
posterior part of the corpus striatum.
It lies inside the lower part of the “shell” formed by the
corona radiata, which constitutes an external capsule (figs. 10,
24, 25, and 30), and in front (fig 14) and behind (fig. 11) the
commissure, the grey matter of the corpus striatum is continuous
with that of the rhinencephalon (figs. 20 and 21). At its anterior
extremity (fig 15) the corpus striatum forms a large, somewhat
oblong mass in transverse section, and constitutes the whole
outer wall of the lateral ventricle. Below it is continuous with
the olfactory peduncle. Further back (fig. 14) the corpus
striatum forms a broader, more elliptical, mass, continuous
below with the post-rhinal lobe, and lying quite to the mesial
side of the pyriform lobe. Hence Hill (xxn. a), restricting the
term rhinencephalon to the pyriform lobe, describes the corpus
striatum as lying “on the axial side of the rhinencephalon.” In
the region of the anterior commissure or “ stalk ” (fig. 10) the
corpus striatum forms a plump ovoid mass lying in the concavity
of the external capsule. Mesially it is continuous with the
extreme anterior pole of the optic thalamus, and, since the latter
is here continuous with the lamina terminalis the two corpora stri-
ata appear to be united across the middle line (fig. 30) and were
even believed to be so by Hill. Behind the anterior commissure
(figs. 11 and 16) the corpus striatum is continuous around the
margin of the corona radiata with the thalamencephalon, but is
much more intimately connected with the pyriform lobe by a
band of grey matter {n a.), which is in all probability the homo-
60


logue of the nucleus amygdalae. In its posterior part the corpus
striatum becomes reduced to a very thin layer of grey matter
(fig. 17) lying between the corona radiata and the external
medullary lamina of the optic thalamus.
In minute structure the corpus striatum consists of scattered
irregular polygonal cells, with highly-branched radiating proto-
plasmic processes (fig. 54). These cells are more irregular in
shape and size and are considerably smaller than the cells of the
optic thalamus. From the majority of the cells an axis cylinder
may be distinguished, proceeding caudally (towards the crusta)
in the great majority of cases. Some few, however (fig. 54', on
reaching the internal capsule bifurcate, one process extending
towards the mesencephalon, the othe towards the cortex. The
latter must be regarded as an association fibre Most of these
axis-cylinder processes give off collaterals to the surrounding
parts and possibly to the anterior commissure
THE INTERNAL CAPSULE.
The internal capsule does not form, in any part of its extent in
platypus, a compact layer, as it does in most mammals. It
consists rather of a number of discrete but stout bundles of
fibres, which pass through and imperfectly divide the corpus
striatum into two parts—a ventricular (nucleus candatus) and an
extraventricular (the nucleus lenticularis). This condition of the
internal capsule is intermediate between the diffusely-scattered
peduncular system of the sub-mammalian brain and the compact
fibre system of mammalia. Unlike the condition found in most
marsupials, no fibres of the anterior commissure pass through
the internal capsule to reach the cortex. The anterior fibres of
the internal capsule run almost sagittally (figs. 26 and 28) to
reach the corona radiata, an appearance which deceived Hill,
who stated (xxn. a p. 381) that “ the majority of the peduncular
fibres which enter the corpus striatum from behind are lost in its
substance.” In addition to the fibres of the internal capsule
proper, the nucleus lentricularis is everywhere streaked by
smaller buedles of fibres In addition to the fibres, which arise as
cylinder processes from the cortical cells, the internal capsule axis
61


in all parts of its course contains large numbers of fibres, which
stream out of the optic thalamus (fig. 26 x). These fibres appear
early in development (fig. 50 Jt.s./.) and although they probably
consist largely of fibres arising in the cortex and corpus striatum
and ending in the optic thalamus —the Radiatio strio-ihalamica of
Edinger (vin. d) —others are undoubtedly connected with the
cells in the optic thalamus.
Owing to the large size of the fifth cranial nerve the lemniscus
(or fillet) is very large. A large number of its fibres (fig 26 Z)
arch upwards on the lateral aspect of the Sylvian aqueduct to
cross in the stiatum Umnisci of the anterior corpora quadri-
gemina. From this region as well as from the posterior corpora
quadrigemina, a largo bundles of fibres(fig 26 yw) passes forwards
through the thalamencephalon to pass directly to the cortex via
the internal capsule. Another very large bundle of fillet fibres
(fig. 26 Z) proceeds forwards to end in the optic thalamus, pro-
bably (in the manner represented in fig. 54) in relation to the
protoplasmic processes Of the largely multipolar cells of this
region, from each of which a very fine and delicate axis cylinder
process passes up through the internal capsule to the cortex (fig.
26 x.). A third but smaller group of fibres seem to pass up
directly from the fillet into the internal capsule. The further fibre
connections in this interesting region have not yet been studied.
The facts stated above show that a large number of fillet
fibres find their end-station around cells in the optic thalamus,
from which fibres pass to all regions of the cortex via t*e inter,
nal capsule. This affords a confirmation to the views of Flchsig
(xi), Mahaim (xxxi), von Monakow (xxxvi) Singer and
Munzer as well as to the belief of Mott (xxxvii) as
the results of embryological, experimental (von Gudden’s
method) and pathological research. The fact that some
fibres seem to pass direcfly from the pillet into the
internal capsule agrees, to some extent, with the views of
Hosel (xxiv).
In their course through the corpus striatum, many fibres of the
internal capsule give off collaterals.
62


Hill’s statements concerning the formation of the corpus
striatum are purely hypothetical and quite unsupported by fact.
His belief in “its formation by reduplication in front of the pe-
duncular fibres” (xxn) a p 382) is quite incomprehensible in the
light of the above facts.
THE BLOOD VESSELS OE THE CEREBRUM.
The arteries of the brain of platypus conform to the ordinary
mammalian type. At the outer side of the optic nerve the inter-
nal carotid divides into two almost equal-sized branches—the
anterior and middle cerebral. The anter or cerebral runs for-
wards between the post-rhinal and pyriform lobes, turns up
on to the mesial aspect in front of the precommissural area to
run backwards in the hippocampal fissure. It gives branches
which supply the olfactory lobe and enter the olfactory fossa and
it gives off several large branches which run upwards and back-
wards to cross the superior border and reach the cranial aspect
of the brain of which they supply the greater part of the sur-
face in its anterior part. These branches correspond to the
“posterior cerebral artery’ of Hill. The middle cerebral
crosses the pyriform lobe and then turns backwards and up-
wards. Between the post-rhinal and pyriform lobes, a series of
large anterior perforating (lenticulo-striate) vessels enter the
corpus striatum in which they cross between the inner margin
of the corpus striatum and optic thalamus aud supply branches
to the corona radiata, into whose outer surface cortical branches
also extent.
Veins. Early in foetal life, owing to the development of a
bony falx cerebri, the superior longitudinal sinus becomes
greatly reduced or even entirely disappears. The cerebral veins
greatly enlarge to take its place. The great cerebral vein
arises as two trunks near the posterior margin of the cerebrum,
which run forwards and unite near the anterior pole of the hemi-
sphere. The large trunk thus formed leaves the outer aspect of
the brain by passing between the olfactory lobe and the anterior
extremity of the hemisphere. On the mesial aspect it is joined
63


by a large vessel which lies deep in the hippocampal fissure and
drains the mesial aspect of the cerebrum. It is also joined by a
branch which passes below the olfactory peduncle and drains the
pyriform lobe and adjacent parts. The large trunk thus formed
leaves the cranium through the same foramen as the superior
maxillary division of the fifth cranial nerve. Why Hill should
have called these veins the “ anterior cerebral artery” is hard
to say, since, apart from the fact that the so-called artery is a
vein in structure and connections, it would be very strange to
find the anterior cerebral artery lying in the situation of this
vessel. Having so named this vessel, he calls the true “ ante-
rior cerebral artery” by the name of ‘ posterior.”
The further arrangement of the blood vessels is sufficiently
indicated in the figures.
The large field of practically untrodden ground, which has
been covered in this paper and the attempt to rectify some of
the errors, which have crept into the literature of the subject f
have necessarily involved a briefer and less complete account of
parts of the brain, which deserve a more thorough treat-
ment. The paper therefore in great part consists merely of dis-
jointed notes, which I hope soon to be able to supplement. The
part of the subject whose study is likely to lead to valuable re-
sults, is the intimate relations of the hippocampus. For in its
undisturbed condition, the hippocampal region of the non-pla-
cental mammals, offers a favourable field in which to settle
many of the perplexing problems of the fornix system, our igno-
rance of which has been so clearly shown by the critical and ex-
haustive summary of Honneger (xxm).
Sydney, December, 1894.
NOTE.
In this paper the term "post-rhinal lobe ” (Herrick) has been
used for a part of the cerebrum, which corresponds to Breca’s
quadrilateral space. At the time I was unaware that Burckhard
(nervous system of Protopterus annectaus Journal of Compara-
tive Neurology, 1892) had applied to this area the term
64


‘‘ lolus postolfactonus," which, for philological reasons, is less
objectionable than Herrick’s term.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
I. H. H. Bawden ‘ A r ose end Jacobson's organ, &c." —Journal of
Comp, Neurology, Vol iv., 1894, p 117
II C. E. Beevor, '• On the course of the fibres of the ( Unguium,
&c.’’ Phil; Trans 1891
111. L. Blumenau, “ Zur Enlwick/, u feinaen Anatomie des Him-
balkens ” —Archiv : f; Mikr : Anatomie Bd xxxvxr.
1891.
TV. Paul Broca (a) “Le grande lobe limbique, &c.” —Eevue d’
anthropology, 'B7B
6. “ “ Recherches sur les centres olfactifs" —ibid 1879.
V. Duval, “La come d’ Ammon ” —Arch. f. Neurolgie, 1881-2.
VI. D. J. Cunningham, “The surfac anatomy of the Primal
Cerebrum.'' — Cunningham Memoirs, Royal Irish
Acadamy, No. vn., 1892.
V I. S. Eamon y Cajal. (a) “La fine structure des Centres Ner
veux."— Croonian Lecture. Proc; Eoyal Society,
London Vol. lv. No 334.
if) “ Sur la structure de I' ecorce cerebrals de quelques
mammi/ercs” —La Cellule, tomvn, lt-91.
(c) “ Neue Darslellung vom his/ologlschen Bate des
Central nervensyifems." —Arch. f. Anat v. Physi-
ologic, 1893. vi. Heft., p 319.
YIH. L. Edinger. (a) “ Vorlesungen iiber den Bau der Nervesen
Centralorgane.''
( b ) “ Virg/eichend Entwick: und anatomische
studien im Bereiche der Hirnanatomie. 3. Riech-
apparal und Ammonshorn' Anat: Anzeiger,
yiii. 10 11.
(c) “ Unlersuchungen u. d. Vergl. Anatomie des
Gehitus,'' 2, 1892.
(d) “ Die Faserung aus dem Strammganglien corpus
striatum'' —Verdhl. Anat. Gesellschaft, 1894.
Abstract d in Jour. Comp. Neurology, Vol it
(<r) “ The Significance of the cortex, <S fc' —Journ-


Comp. Neurology, Vol m, p 69.
iX. Eydoux et Laurent”— Sur /’encephale de I'Echidna compare d e
I' Orinthorhynche ”
X. P. Fish, “ The indusium of the callosum —Journal of Comp
Neurology, Vol m, p 61.
XI. P. Flechsig, “ Ueber die Verbindungen der //inters/range, &c"
—Neurolog: Centralblatt, v. 1885.
XII. W. H. Flower (a) ‘ On the commissuies of the cerebral hemi-
spheres of the Marsupialia and Monttemata, eye.'' —
Phil. Trans. 1865.
{b) Reply to Professor Owen, “ On Zoological
Names. &c.” —Proc Royal Society, 1865
XIII. S. Gage, “ Brain of Diemyctylus, &c" —quoted by Soren-
son J.C.N., 1894 p 155.
XIV S. Ganser, “ Vergleichend-anatom. Siudien u d.Gehirndes
Maulwurfs" —Morph: Jahrbuch Bd vii. 1882
XV. I. obert Garner, “Anatomy of the Brain of some small quadru-
peds”—British Association Reports, 1858, p 123
XVI Van Qehuchten et Martin, “Le buble olfact if, &c," —Le
Cellule tom vii, 1892.
XVII. C. Giacomini, “ Benderella dell ‘ uncus dell' hippocampo, &c'
Giorn. d. R. accad. d. Torino, 1882. In French in
Arch. ital. de biolog. t n 1882.
XVIII. C. Golgi (a) “ Origins du tractus olfactorius, &c”—Arch-
ital de biolog ti
(b) “ Sulla fina analomia degli organi centrali del
sistema nervoso ” —Eivista sperim di fremia-
tria, 1883.
XIX. Ernst Haeckel, “ Zur Phylogenic der Austral: Fauna" —
Jena, 1893
XX. C. L. Herrick, (a) “ Topography of the Brain of certain rep-
tiles"— Jomn Comp Neurology, June, ’93
(5) ibid. Sept, 1893
(c) Cerebrum and Olfactories of Opossum. Bull. Sei
Lab Denison Univy, Vol vi pt 4
(d) “ The Hippocampus ” —Jour. Comp. Neur. f
Vol in.
(2) “ Callosum and Hippocampus in Marsupial


and lower brains" —Jour. Comp. Neur., Vol.
in , p 129.
XXI. W. His, “ Ueber die Enhvukelung des Riechlappen, &-'c’ —
Veik. Anat. Gts. 3 vers Berlin.
XXII. Alex. Hill, (a) “ The Cerebrum of Orinthorhynchusp" —
Phil. 1 rans B. 1893.
(bj “ The Hippocampus.” Phil. Trans. B , 1893,
(c) “ Plan of Central Nercous System," iBB5.
XXIII. J. Honegger, “ Vergleichend anatomise he Untersuchungcn
ueber den Fornix," &c. —Kecueil Zool: buisse Tom V.
1 890
XXIV. Hiisel, “ Rindemchkif" —Arch f. Psych, und Nerven-
krauk: Bd xxiv, xxv.
XXV. 0. D Humphrey, “ Brain of the Snapping Turtle
Journ. Comp. Neur Vol iv.
XXVII. Ludwig Lowe, Beilriige zur Anatomte und zur Enlwick •
des Neromsystems , &c., 1 Band 1880, Berlin.
XXIX. Marchand “ Ue d. Enlwick d. Balkens im Menschlichen
Gehirus"- Arch f Mikr. Anat. xxxvn. 1891, p 298.
XXX. Paul Martin, “ Zur Entioick: des Gehirnbalkens bei der
Kalze"— Anat Anzeiger, 1894.
XXXI. Mahaim Arch, fiir Psychiat, Vol xxv, quoted by Hiisel
and Mott.
XXXII. Meckel, “ Descr. anat. ornithor. p ” 1827.
XXXIII. A. Meyer, “ Ueber das Voiderhirn einiger Rep alien ”
Zeit f. wise. Zoolog. vi, 1892.
XXIV. Mihalkovies, “ Eniwicklungsgeschichte des Gehirns ,” 1887-
X£XV. Minot, “ Human Embryology lB92.
XXXVI. von Mouakow, Zur Kentniss der Psych, und Schleife ’
—Neur. Central, m, 1880.
XXXVII. F. W. Mott, “ The Sensorj -motorfunctions of the cerebral
cortex ’’—Journ. of Physiology, Vol xv, 6, 1891.
XXXVIII. Osborn, “ The origin of the corpus callosum ,
Morph. Jahrb. Vol xii.
XXXIX. Richard Owen.
{a) “ Structure of the brain in Marsupial Animals ’
—Phil. Trans., 1837.
(5) Todd’s Cyclopedia, art “ Monotremataf “ Mar-
supialia.”


(c) “ Comparative Anatomy .”
(d) “ On Zoological Names, &c ” —Proc. Rjy. Soc..
Loud., 1865
XL. Pappenheim, “ Notice preliminaire stir I'anatomic du Saringue
femelle,&c” —Co 'p. Eendus, Yol xxrv, p 186,1847
XL! L. Sala, “ Zur feineren Anatomic des grossen Seepferdefusses ’’
—Zeit. f. wissensch. Zool, 1891.
XT,IT K. Schaffer, “ Beilrag zur Histologic A m monshot n/»rota-
tion " —Arch: f: Mikr: Aaatomie, Bd xxxrx, 1892.
XT.TTT Julius Sander, “ Ueher das Quercommissuremystem des
Gekirus hei den Beutelthieren ’' —Arch. f. Anat , 1868.
XLIY. Q. Elliot Smith, “ A preliminary communication upon the
cerebral commissures of the Mammalia, &c " —Commu.
□icated to the Linn so an Society of N.S W., October,
1894.
XLY. A. D. Sorenson, “ Comparative Study of the Epiphysis and
root of the Diencephalon ” Journal of
Neurology, Yol it.
XLYI. Johnson Symington, ( a) “ The cerebral commissures in the
Marsupialia and Monotremata ” —Journ. of Anatomy
Yol xxvii. p 69.
(b) “ On the Nose, Otgan of Jacobson, &c, in th e
Ornithorhynchus ’ —Proc. Zool. Socy, 1891, No
xxxix. p 69.
XLVII. W. Turner.
{a) “ The Convolutions of the brain ’ —Journal of
Anatomy, Yol xxv, 1890.
(5) “ The cerebrum of Ornithorhynchus ” —J. Anat.
Yol xxvi.
XLVIII. Robert Weidersheim, “ Grundiiss der vergleichende n
Anatomic dcr WirbelthiereP
XLIX. J. T. Wilson and C. J. Martin, “ Ths peculiar red-like
tactile organs, &c, in the snout of Ornithorhynchuz ”
Macleay Memorial Yol Linnean Society N.S.W., also
forthcoming number of Trans. L.S.N.B.W.
L. Zuckerkandl.
(a) Ueber das Reicheentrunf'— Stuttgart, 1887.
(J>) “ Ueber de Kiechbundel des cornu Ammonisf —
Anatomischer Anzeiger, in, 1888.


