

f/09'f!
' /
m A JAUNT Wifi A MILKMAN 1
p m
[LJ]] DURING MORNING HOURS; [flU
P ll]
MT Being some Interesting Particulars Concerning the |J=
f=jj Livelihood of a Milkman, [W
m pi
frTL and What Little is Known about Him. LTn
pt BROWN & SHAW, GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS, —1
Mr 271 & 273 Pitt Street.. fjlL!
P Hi
Mil * 1882. P


Ti_
A work of an extraordinary character, revealing the use and
and abuse of one of our daily necessaries of life :
Milk; its Purity aid Adulteration,
And the reason why so mach mortality exists in families
both in the City and Suburbs.
The whole subject is freely and boldly exposed to the public, the
contents of this remarkable book containing: —
1 Preliminary
2 A Jaunt through the City and
Suburbs with the Milk-cart
Man
3 Statistics concerning Milk
4 The Great Milk Consumers
5 Getting Heady for the Start
6 A Wild Drive
7 Trouble with a Dog
8 Taken for a Burglar
9 A “ Down ’ ’ on the Milkman
10 A Collision
11 Incipient Love in the Milk-shed
12 Tongue Pie
13 A Yam after Breakfast
14 A Fight in a Cow-shed
15 The Milkman’s Sabbath
16 In a Fix
17 The Milkman in Love
it book of useful and curious infor-
delight of every member of the
18 Fog versus Mogul; Great Su-
preme Court Case concerning
Milk
19 The Milkman’s Picnic
20 Homeward Bound
21 The Pump
22 The Fitness of Things
23 The Dairymaid’s Wedding
24 The Eden of Dairy Farmers
25 Kitty t of Coleraine
26 Antiquities of the Milk Trade
27 The Dairy woman and the Pot
of Milk
28 Satirical Poetry
29 The Ladies’ Judges of Milk
30 Mrs. Grundy’s Tea Party
31 The Milkmaid’s Garland on
May Day
32 Plough Monday
33 Cow Mass
The whole forming a neat
mation for the benefit and d
community.
By EOVING ROBIN.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Published by W, J, WALTON, for the Proorietor, 21 Sydney Arcade,
(COPYRIGHT,)
ERRATA.— Read page 6, second paragraph, fortunate for unfortunate. Page 21, Milk-
man’s Picnic, after milk fever, were present. Page 26, read Lac mihi non (estate novum, non
frigore desit, instead of Lac mihi non oestale novum, non frigone desit.


BROWN & SHAW,
General
Lithographic & LettM-ptess
PRINTERS,
Paper Bag Manufacturers ,
BOOKBINDERS,
Electrotypers, Stereotypers, &c.
Our Annual Consignment of
Illuminated Calendars for 1883,
ARE NOW TO HAND,
The Designs of which, treating of local life and scenery generally
having been prepared for us by special artists.
Will lie found to meet tlie taste and requfrement#
of the Public generally.
Our Address is
Z’Tt n»4 373 TtTT
Next to School of Arts , Sydney •


ft h. mmmmm,
CIL & W ©* 3E**
Funerals furnislied in tlie most respectable manner, and on
liberal terms.
Cabinetmaker, French Polisher, and ttpholsterer.
All kinds of Fittings and Polishing done in private houses.
Broken Furniture repaired equal to new.
NIISTGr STJEIBET, Newtown.
Opposite Church Street, near Whately’s Coach Factory.
SCOWEN’S
Immediately under tlie Cloolc,
SYDNEY.
Dining Rooms, Billiard Rooms, Spacious
Single Sleeping Apartments,


I J. MASSEY & SON.
ROBERTS, HARRIS, I WESTON,
LICENSED
and 2’aml
Him Maps Compiled to Latest Date.
Office—T o**7* a o&emfcef%
86 KING STREET, SYDNEY.


Court K o tel,
KIJ26 gTREEJF, JVEWTOWN.
Ales, Wines, Spirits, &e., of the best quality only in stock.
_A.II Brands of Bottled Ales and. Porter.
First-class Accommodation for Visitors.
JAMES COOK, Proprietor.
KEH, A. M. C ASTLE „
SOLICITOR,*^
No. 10 MWY’S CHAMBERS,
WMIMM mWM]EIEW 9 STMST.
COLONIAL OINTMENT
CURES
Eruptions, Sore Heads, Inflamed Eyelids, Blight, Ulcerated
Legs, Tender Nipples, Bad Breasts, &c.
Prepared by the Proprietor,
J. HENRY, Chemist,
750 Ceerge Street South, 35yS»ey»
&s.
w m WINCH.
HORSE CLIPPER AND SINGER,
livery and bait stables,
ADJOINING FROST’S EXHIBITION HOTEL,
CASTLEREAGH AND DEVONSHIRE STREETS,
SYDNEY.
Sadr l Horses and Buggies on Hire. Charges Moderate.


OLD WHITE HORSE HOTEL,
George Street, Sydney,
Conducted, for upwards of Half-a-Century by
JAMES RIOHARSS.
Has been Remoued to King Street, ,
NEAR THE T3LLBAR.
Friends and Visitors from Windsor, Richmond, Camphelltown. &c., will find First-class
Accommodation. Good Stabling and Secure Faddocks.
George and Engine Streets,
Opposite A. Hordern & Sons’.
PROPRIETOR.
Xothins but the Best Brands of Ales, Wines, and
Spirits kept in Stock.
First-class Accommodation for "Visitors
GOOD STABLING.
University Hall and Milford School,
NEWTOWN ROAD.
Mr. SHERIDAN MOORE, the Principal, receives pupils on the evenings
of Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday for all University examinations. Day
pupils and weekly boarders are prepared for business or the superior classes.
cgT Address as above.
m. G, u m w mw i**
kate George Hewett,
WA£ CANDLE MAKLH AND OILMAN,
Has remoued from Pitt Street to 103 Liverpool Street,
Wax Altar Candles all sizes. Neatsfoot, Colza, Sperm, Cocoanut and
other Oils of the best quality.
Orders left by post punctually attended to.


THE NEWTOWN Oil. AND COLOR STORE.
CHARLES OT. I*AJSTE,
PAINTER, PAPERHANGER, & GENERAL CONTRACTOR.
A large and well-assorted stock of Paints, Oils, Varnishes, Colours, Paper hangings
Borders, Centres, Window Glass, Brushware, Lamps, Nails, &c., &c.
635” Paperhangings from per roll.
The Cheapest House int Newtowi,
Note the Address
CHARLES J. LANE,
KING STREET, NEWTOWN.
ESTABLISHED 30 YEARS.
601 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
(Near G-oulburn Street.)
m* HOD ©BO2l.
WHIP MANUFACTURER, 'See.
Every description of Kangaroo and Green Hade Thongs made to order. Buggy, Carriage
and Cab Whips ; Lamp and Whip Sockets ; Harness Oil, Composition,
Dandy Brushes, &c., &c.
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
J. P. TA.BKETT,
ZBTJIIDDKR, <Scc
■MtSTEAM JOINERY WORKS,^
VICTORIA & HORDERN STREETS, NEWTOWN.
Estimates given in all the Branches of the Bnilding Trade.
x- m,
(Late D. DAVIS),
TAILOR AND GENERAL OUTFITTER,
KING STREET, NEAR HORDERN STREET,
NEWTOWN.
-Hie HC . T ZEHE O live.A. S 3
BOOTMAKER,
Opposite AUSTIN’S ARCADE,
KING STREET NEWTOWN.
All kinds of Sewn or Peg Boots made to order. Good Workmanship Guaranteed.


J. DALYELL.
Hay and Corn Merchant,
King & Church Streets,
NEWTOWN.
WILLIAM HYNAED,
$ U ES PE A B E
IBC I 3ST 0- STREET?,
NEWTOWN,
MEND YOUR WAYS I I
IMPORTANT TO BOROUGH COUNCILS AND OTHERS.
H. PICKERING & SONS
(Contractors for Jar-paving to the Borough of Petersham) Beg to announce
that they are prepared to contract for all kinds of
Xar-paviugr at Strictly moderate Charges,
Guaranteeing flrst-class work and strict punctuality in the execution of orders*
OFFICES;
SYDNEY—Corner of Bathurst and Sussex-streets.
ASHFlELD—Liverpool-road and Bruce-street.
BUR WOOD—Bubb-street.
PETERSHAM—Parramatta-road, opposite Elswick Estate.


Nearly OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH,
For Musical
Instruments
THE BLUE HOUSE,
751 GEORGE STREET SOUTH,
SYDNEY.
OAMaPAscsjff aotisa,
CHAS. BOVIS,
Boot Manufacturer & Importer,
62 MARKET STREET EAST,
SYDNEY.
Riding, Shooting , Fishing, Cricketing, Walking, & Dress Boots.
Ladies’ Boots of every description made to order.
WILLIAM: ADAMS,
SADDLE AND HARNESS MAKER,
718 GEORGE STREET, HAYMARKET,
ONE DOOR FROM THE MERCANTILE BANK.
Special.— W. A. is acknowledged by ’Bus Proprietors and others as being
the Best Collar Maker in Sydney.


PUREST SCOTCH WHISKY.
THE OLD AND MATURED BRAND OF
TJA.TML VAE,
SECURED GOLD MEDAL & HIGHEST AWARDS
SYDNEY EXHIBITION.
THIS Brand is GUARANTEED carefully MATURED and thoroughly
PURE. See Label and Capsule Makers, Innes and Grieve, Edinburgh.
Agent, W. H. FLETCHER,
i 52 Clarence Street, Sydney.
On account of the popular fact being realised that Trams are the most com-
fortable modes of travelling, and that at last Waterloo derives this advantage,
G-. BEALE
is determined to beat Sydney Prices, and he is now selling Groceries,
Crockery, &C.. at rates which will defy competition.
Housewives say, go to BEALE’S for a good article, and save your money,
you will be able to take a trip in the Tram, and never miss the fare, because
he is selling, at such low prices, the most superior Goods.
Specialities in TEA#. — India, (’llilia, and all other brands of
superior quality only, kept in stock.
Don’t pass this Noted Grocery Establishment, renowned for superiority in all its branches.
CALL AND JUDGE FOR YOURSELVES.
By and bye Waterloo will become a portion of Sydney proper, and although
the Tram perhaps offers inducements at the present to visit the city, we are
determined to hold our position and await future results.
The best brands of Pickles, Flour, Jams, Sperms, Soda, Salt, Kerosene,
Cheese, Butter, Bacon, Salad Oil, Salmon, &c., and a large and well-selected
assortment of General Groceries, always on hand. Dishes, Plates, Cups and
Saucers, Lamps, Mugs, Pie Dishes, and all other domestic articles from a
Kettle to a Pannikin always in stock.
figy* New Season Teas will shortly arrive.
Cr,
RAGLAN & COOPER STREETS, WATERLOO.
COLONNADE BUILDINGS,
KING STREET, NEWTOWN.
C. HILL'I BOOT & SHOE WAREHOUSE.
A. well-selected Stock of Ladies’ and Gent’s Boots always on hand, under Sydney Prices.
Boots and Shoes made to order on the shortest notice. Repairs Neatly Executed.


H. E. WHITAKER,
3£ 11ST Gr STEEE T,
NEWTOWN,
Opposite Congregational Clmrcli.
L. ASPINALL,
AUCTMNRSBB Al® IAMAT®!,
KING STREET, NEWTOWN.
OUT-DOOK lALES ATTENDED TO.
Loans Effected.
GREAT BARGAINS AT HIS MART,
Every Saturday at half-past 2.
Average number of attendants, 300.
Unreserved Sales of Furniture and Cash are the principles
on which this Establishment is conducted.


J. WALTON"
Eeminds his old friends and the public generally that he still
carries on the Business of
Mosrax*x«Bß, mA.Tmmma,
And FANCY GOODS DEALER,
SI SYDNEY ARCADE,
Where they can purchase anything, from a Shilling Doll to a
Four-roomed House.
N.B.—DON’T FOEGET TO GIVE A LOOK IN.
Publishing Office of the u Milky Way ” —2l Arcade.
THOS. COKBETT,
PRAUTIG A- "L
308 CASTLEREAGH-ST,,
Opposite St. G-eorge’s Church.
Country Orders by Post, Rail, or Steamer
promptly attended to.


| |
l&eplm&i
FLOU E,
BAKING POWDER,
An 4 TSAST POWWS,
ARE THE BEST,
U»I\EHSAI, I.Y ADMITTED.
SOLD EVERYWHERE.
Manufactory:
GEORGE STREET WEST, SYDNEY
Mprte iff Bfapry-
Noted for Fhst-dass Millinery, Hosiery, &c.
Try Tye’s ttJCEKS Eid Glcvesllgi
e »-•—a
In Black, White, & Colours,
Two Buttons, 2s. lid. Four Buttons, 3s. lid. Six Button, 4s. lid.
JAMES TYE,
Sole Importer of the “Duchess Glove,”
Opposite Post Office, Newtown.
CASH HOUSE.


T. WHITTLE,
S&M€MITE®T 0
3E IST 3VT OR E MO /k JfEWTtIWN
Plans and Specifications prepared. Charges Moderate.
SMITH & SINGLETON,
«OUSS f*|»TW WS> BEOOWTOP6,
Watkin Street, Newtown.
GROCERIES ! GROCERIES !! GROCERIES !!!
For the RICH and for the BOOR,
ALL TREATED ALIKE
■ft ark zsaaos.
Of the Corporation Stores, Haymarket,
Defies competition. He buys and sells for CASH.
TEAS world-renowned for flavor and quality. Every article in the trade
supplied fresh and good at reasonable prices.
UCENSED WINE & SPIRIT MERCHANT.
Call and sample the excellent brands he has on sale.
Orders delivered in all parts of the City and Suburbs. Housewives, save
your money,
Mark Isaacs Is your Friend.
W. HIBBLE,
MOOSE PAiMTEH AM® BEOOHATOi,
KING STREET, NEWTOWN.
Dealer in Watches and Clocks.
If you want a Good Watch, go to HARRIS’, KING-ST., ]
where you will get satisfaction.


No. 1© SYDNEY AKOADB.
M. THOMA
Begs to inform the residents of the CITY and SUBURBS tha
he has opened in the
ARCADE,
Where he is exhibiting WORKS OF ART, and a variety of
other interesting articles.
nS* The Selections of Wood Carvings and Photographs
ARE OF A VERY SUPERIOR CLASS.
An Inspection is kindly invited.
Curios from 1/6 to £lO.
TOB Wlfisao© PiSfilf,
PAUL,
MANUFACTURER OF
Earthenware, Brain Pipes, Chimney Pots, Flower
Vases, Bricks, Tiles, &c.,
206 ELIZABETH STREET,
SYDISHBYT.
Town and Country Orders promptly
attended to.


SBIi MB CHINA
>
b
w
i—i
S
OD
u o
p I
e fi
o <3
W >
w w
H g
P° §
I
Q
g
S
m
H
cc
705 DEV SI DIIHMEI,
SYDNEY.
Opposite -A.. Hordern cfe Sons’
GREAT PALACE DEAPERY STORES.


R. T. BELLEMEY,
Pharmaceutical Chemist,
Corner of KING and EGAN STREETS,
NEWTOWN.
Registered by the of Queensland, and Registered by the Pharmacy Boards of
Victoria and New South Wales. Member of the Pharmaceutical Societies of Queensland and
N. S. Wales. Late Resident Apothecary at the Maitland Hospital, N.S.W.
A choice and carefully selected stock of Drugs, Chemicals, Patent Medicines,
Perfumery, Toilet Requisites, Sponges, Ladies’ Abdominal Belts, Silk Plastic
Stockings, Knee Caps, Trusses, Enemas, sc., always on hand.
the dispensing department
Is entirely separated from the other Branches of the Business, and is replete with all the
requisites of a first-class Dispensing Establishme .it, and being under the personal supervision
of the Proprietor, the greatest possible accuracy and care may be relied upon in the com-
pounding of Physicians’ Prescriptions and Family Recipes, at any hour of the day or night ,
R. T. BELLEMEY, Family & Dispensing Chemist,
Importer of Drugs, Chemicals, Patent Medicines, Perfumery, &c
Corner of King & Egan Streets, Newtown.
i
*
I
2 851
h MR. JAMES LUGG-, |
5 MKTSST* I
£ o
£ BLIGHT STREET, off Hunter Btreet, 0*
S'VXm'T.
Teeth Extracted without pain by a new process.


THE MILKY WAY:
A JAUNT WITH A MILKMAN
DURING MORNING HOURS.
Being some Intesestino Paetiodlaes Conceding the Livelihood of a
Milkman, and What Little is Known about Him.
£gimep:
BROWN & SHAW. GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS, 271 & 273 PITT STREET*


NEW SOUTH WALES
-Me
Pill 111 111 iispif,
LIMITED.
PUEE
Transparent
CREAM,
Country Mi lb,
Fresh Butter ;
ICE,
POIJLTET,
COLD
100 to 2 00
GAME,
Storage Rooms
TONS
etc..
AND
Meat Freezing
ALWAYS IN
ALWAYS IN
DEPOT.
STOCK.
STOCK.
N.B. —The
Cows are all fed upon Corn
and natural grasses
21 HARBOUR STREET,


THE MILKY WAY.
JPreliminary.
Sunt nobis * * * Pres si copia lactis. —Viegil.
The Galaxy—The Via Lactea.
fHE MILKY WAY is astronomically, a luminous zone, which encom-
passes the heavens, forming almost a complete circle of the celestial
sphere. It is not, however, with this magnificent section of Nature
that we are now interested. Our consideration is turned from the Milky
Way to milk itself, and the numerous associations it has in history, poetry,
and art. Probably the oldest national melody of the Bxitish Isles is ‘ ‘ The
Coleen dhas milking the cow,” although it has its counterpart in an equally
tender Scotch ditty. We do not know half as much as we ought to know
about milk, its varied properties, and the important position it should occupy
in our domestic economy and sanitory institutions.
Milk —to get at the word, etymologically is probably derived from the
Anglo-Saxon melcan , or the Latin mulgere. The suffix to the former word
has nothing to do with milk-mn, or with the maid, who mourned so sorrow-
fully over her spilt milk. To get out of derivation, and go in a little for
science, we find that milk is a secretion peculiar to female mammals. It
differs in different animals—that is to say, it has its peculiarities ; but its
general properties are the s ime in all. When the fluid is allowed to stand
for a time, it undergoes spontaneous changes, and is resolved into its com-
ponent parts. A yellowish substance called cream is thrown on the surface ;
but this will hardly occur if the family cat is allowed the entree to the dairy.
When you shake—no allusion to stealing—this cream, you obtain two
substances inste id of one—butter and buttermilk. It is very easy to say
that butter is an animal oil, solid at a natural heat, and when fresh has £
fine aromatic flavor, and sells sometimes at three shillings per pound. If
kept in a damp room, it becomes rancid, and is only fit to grease dray-
wheels, instead of being used to butter parsnips. Our present “ worry” is,


however, with milk andnot buitßr, or rather what remains when the latter
is taken from former. It then becomes sour, and congeals into a
jelly-like mass. Acids and spirits-of-wine curdle it rapidly. The most
powerful coagulator, however, is the substance called rennet , which is a
decoction in the stomach of animals—particularly in that of the calf.
“When the milk is previously heated and rennet added,” writes an
ingenious savant , “it is almost instantly coagulated. If after this it is cut,
a thinnish fluid oozes from it, and if it be put into a bag and squeezed, the
whole of this is forced out, and a whitish tough matter is left; the former
is whexj and the latter curd. On this depends the process of making cheese,
which varies in richness according to the mode followed in preparing it.”
Whey is an exceedingly pleasant drink for invalids, or rather convalescents,
and should be used more extensively than it is in Australia ; but the truth
is, native-born boys and girls are not milksops, and don’t like the lacteal
fluid very much. We know one remarkably smart son of the soil who is
fond of it —that is to say of ass’s milk, because it has a wild flavor, and is
supposed to stimulate cerebral activity. But we are getting altogether too
serious on the subject, and will therefore endeavor to ramble on a trifle
more pleasantly.


A MILKMAN’S LIFE.
That a milkman’s life is not a happy one will be readily admitted
by those who are at all acquainted with the business, and who know how
to give this avocation their thoughtful consideration. But, as a general
rule, no one ever does think of the milkman except to grumble at the
measure, growl at his receipt for making the chalky fluid, or, take
exception to his bills, or anathematise him for being a noisy disturber of early
morning slumbers. All this, however, and much more, as will be seen in the
sequel, he takes with a sardonic philosophy bom of conscious superiority; for
does he not know that as blood is the life of man, so also is milk the soul of
tea with the fair sex; and has he not, as the representative on earth o£
Jupiter Pluvius, the means at hand for a terrible revenge ? Is not the pump
Nemesis ?
But, levity aside, —this night preambulating sleep-destroyer,—this gay
dispenser of lacteal fluids,
In breeze, or gale, or storm,
is, in the main, a good sort of fellow, a martyr to the ordinary wants of
humanity. Few people realize the amount of intelligent labour, the per-
fection of detail, and the speed of delivery necessary to supply a great city
with its morning’s milk. Only fancy this :—the population of Sydney and
suburbs is about one hundred and sixty thousand. Assuming each person—
man, woman, or child—to drink a quarter of a pint. This makes twenty
thousand quarts, which, at sixpence per quart, is equal to £5OO daily;
£3,500 weekly; £14,000 monthly, or, in round numbers, £168,000 annually.
The milk company alone supplies one thousand gallons of milk daily, even
during drought; and this milk all comes from the country by train. No
fewer than fifteen hundred cows are required to produce this quantity of
milk. About eighty hands are employed by this company in Sydney alone.
Take this as a basis, and consider how many are employed in the country,
how many in Sydney and suburbs, how many horses and carts are needed to
carry on the milk-trade in the city.
All these things occurred to me as, in the sma’ wee hours of the morning,
when residing in the suburbs, I have with wonderment observed the fronts
of some of the milk depots, and the busy milkman employed. Between the
hours of twelve and four, while the city slumbers, —this is to the milkman
one of the busiest intervals of driving trade.
THE MILK TRADE OF SYDNEY
Has, within the last twenty years, developed int;o a thriving industry’
employing a heavy capital and furnishing employment for more than one
thousand men, women, and boys in the city and suburbs, another thousand
in the country, not to reckon wheelwrights, blacksmiths, harness-makerg
tinsmiths, painters, horse-breeders and tamers, to keep the carts in clean
and fashionable condition. In some countries the milk business is all in th e


hands of corporations, just as our tramways are in the hands of the Govern-
ment here. These corporations control the trade, and supply an article
much adulterated, without fear of losing customers; for the consumers must
purchase the miserable apology for milk, or go without it. This state of
things may occur in Sydney on a wholesale scale before the world comes to
an end, as, so far as the spurious article is concerned, a little practice of
this kind is going on now in the retail way. There’s an old saying—“ One
quart of milk from the cow makes two for the customer.” There is a good
deal of truth in this statement, as will be seen presently. Now, the milk-
producers, that is the dairymen, or farmers, sell their milk to “ middle men,”
or to a milk company. How far the milk has been doctored by the dairymen
cannot exactly be ascertained without Slycoon’s lactometer, for most of such
t work being of a private and professional nature, one will have to look sharp
before he can catch the dairyman at his manipulations. (This remark
applies to publicans as well as to colonial tobacco manufacturers, &c.)
Well, the middlemen send the milk on to the city, or town, where it is again
sold to the distributors, who supply a few small shops, who, together, pay
due attention, one to the ordinary run of customers, including hotels,
restaurants, and the upper ten ; the other to the casual poor in back slums
at any hour of the day. Each must make a profit, and with this end in
view, each deals out the milk with a liberal admixture of aqua pur a, or, in
plain English, water. Of course, everybody knows that pure water is just
as wholesome as pure milk, for that matter. Small wonder, then, that the
Londoner, New Yorker, and native Australian growl at the insipid blue fluid
doled out to him at so much per scant quart.
But Sydney is unfortunate above most cities. Surrounding the metro-
polis, and within easy access, are grazing lands. The small, though
beautiful undulating slopes, the shining and shady hills, —I am not talking
as an auctioneer—the picturesque scenery in all directions, whose land is
covered with abundance of grass and still more abundance of sand, with
shining tips and glittering waterholes, or puddleholes in the minds of the
vulgar,—these hills and valleys so fertile in seasons of drought, so rankly
luxurious in fair, ordinary weather, where dairy cows browse in hundreds.
Oh, this is pleasant to behold ! The dairies, great and small and scattered
in every direction, some clean and wholesome to look upon, others delapi-
dated and fast falling’ into ruins add additional beauty to the landscape,
relieved to an extent, by innumerable wells. The philosophic thinker
contemplates with inward peace of mind the natural affinity there is
between milch cows and spring water. All these dairies are under
independent management, by private owners ; and they vie with each other
for rapid fortunes in a strong though friendly spirit of competition. Let me
say that grazing is good during four months of the year, and feed cheap
during the ordinary summer months.
The dairyman enjoys a great advantage, inasmuch that he distributes his
milk himself, and divides his profits with no factor who, as aforesaid, must
allow a margin to the distributor. The Sydneyites, females from the
mother country especially, are


GREAT MILK CONSUMERS
as can be seen by their general complexions, though, to be candid, the trn*
royal blood as indicated by the veins is more of the Derby-ribbon colour
than the faint tint observed in veins of our most pretentious of aristocrats
of the sweeter gender. Only fancy, twenty thousand, say fifty thousand
quarts of milk consumed daily in Sydney and suburbs would be nearer the
truth. The number of cows required to produce this quantity of milk of
course cannot be seen unless one dive into the various wells in search of
truth, for we have no milk and cream manufactories hqre as they have in
London and other large cities. Slomberg, Franz and Co.’s machine for
converting rice water into pure ’milk from the cow has not yet been
popularized here ; the milkmaids and milkmen being averse to any
deviation “ from the same old game.” To distribute these fifty thousand
quarts of milk through the city will require about a thousand big cans, and
at least four hundred carts and horses. A customer is found in every street.
Each milkman knows his own. To effect the speedy delivery of each
morning’s milk qiiick work and intelligence are necessary. Each milkman
knows his beat, and carries a book to put down any extra milk received by
any customer over the regularly ordered allowance. Towards midnight the
dairies nearest the city begin to take on an air of life. The milkers quickly
make the rounds of the stalls, robbing each cow in turn of its milk, working
with incredible speed, for each must milk from twelve to sixteen cows, and
all within a couple of hours. Not only must the work be done with the
utmost dispatch, but it must be done thoroughly; for unless each cow is
milked dry the cows will cease to be profitable milkers.
This midnight milking is a revelation to most people who have imbibed
poetic ideas about pretty milkmaids milking the cows just at eventide, after
the coos have cam hame, and all that sort of thing. Now, as a matter of fact,
the dairymaid does not usually dote much on poetry ; it has no romance for
her whatever it might have to boarding-school young ladies who fondly
yet stupidly think that there is more happiness, more poetry, more of soul
in milking a cow with a crumply horn than in learning to strum the
detested piano. So thought Raselas, prince of Abysinnia and his royal
sister, when confined in that paradise upon earth, the Happy Valley.
Neither does the dairyman himself see much poetry in milking cows above
the ankles in soft cow dung during a cold wintry night. The poetry of his
reasoning stands thus, —milk taken from the cow at twelve midnight will be
six hours fresher than taken at sundown. Poetry ! Gentle shepherd ! The
dear little milkmaid! The poetry which the pretty (fat) milkmaid here
developes in practice to a powerful-looking young fellow in the next bail,
who can do neither more nor better work, is worthy of the modem poet’s
calm reflection. Things want revolutionising in poetry as well as in the
prosaic character of milk and milking machines generally. To talk of
tripping it on the dewy mead is simply nonsense, destitute of even a farthing
rushlight’s worth of poetic fire. And to see the
The fair maid tripping o’er the dewy lawn
in muslin. What a draggle the tips of the skirt and train would be in!
Mere poetic moonshine. As all is not gold that glitters, so all is not milV
that goes to the customer. Although the milkmaid may not be now a
charming picture in a landscape, except as she trips along a whitethorn


hedge in old England, singing her artless lay, she still holds her own in
the lyrical drama and in lyrical poetry, and often hears Daphnis address
her in this strain: —
“ Then finish dear Chloe, this pastoral war,
And let xxs like Horace and Lydia agree ;
For thou art a girl much brighter than she,
As he was a poet sublimer than I.”
Sometimes the strain takes a more prosaic turn of thought although ex-
pressed in Dr. Arne’s fine musical language :
‘ ‘ How happy were my days till now,
I ne’er did sorrow feel,
With joy I rose to milk my cow,
Or take my spinning wheel;
My heart was fighter than a fiy,
Like any bird I sung,
Till he pretended love, and I
Believed his flattering tongue.”
And so it runs through a considerable portion of the literature of every
nation. Lord Augustus Loftus, or his amiable Lady may think so,
but I don’t, notwithstanding their vice-regal patronage. However,
I’ve made arrangements with a milkman to have a jaunt with him, after his
cans are full. It is very early morn, and we are both getting
IN READINESS FOR THE START.
During this brief lull the character of the busy drivers can be studied
in part. They are all young men, rough, hearty, and intelligent. Some,
of course, are a little fast and larry touched. On the whole, however, they
are the hardiest-working mortals in the great city. Rising at midnight,
their labours are incessant until eight o’clock. Again, at noon, after a
brief respite of five hours or so, they are on the treadmill again, hurrying
again over a new route until six p.m. Thus it is, year in and year out,
they work incessantly with little rest, and that broken. With the hardest
work the milkman is the poorest paid, receiving but a pittance of eight
pounds sterling per month for his services. An intellect of no ordinary
calibre must be possessed by the man who would remember the streets, the
customers in each street, lane or avenue, the quantity to be served, each
route having perhaps two hundred customers, one taking a pint, another a
quart, a penn’orth, or from a gallon upwards, as do some of the hotels,
coffee palaces, and restaurants. He refers to no book; after a trip or two
he trusts all to memory, and but seldom omits to serve one customer.
I was thinking of these things while he was harnessing up, after his
three big cans had been filled with pure milk and —cream, of course, when he
accosted me slyly by saying—
“ Maybe, you newspaper chaps, think you have a tough job of it. I
feel a little sleepy even yet. I could sleep a week right off. However,
jump up on the box there and take a spin round with me, the sleepy feeling
will soon wear off.”


FURNITURE! FURNITURE!
FURNITURE!
Pwraunui to Ifiteaiigli
SHOULD PAY A VISIT TO
COOK
BROS.,
HARRIS
STREET,
ULTIMO,
Where every Household Requisite can be obtained
On the most improued Time-Payment System,
Froisi Jgl worth to £lOOO worth.
No Bills of Sale nor anything complicated in
Cook Bros. Em System of Purchase.
Terms given to suit every person in
every circumstance.
HARRIS STREET, ULTIMO.


C. E. WINSTON,
DRAUGHTSMAN
AND
JEMQMsI WJEM mw
99 ELIZABETH
SYDNEY,
Next to Train "Waiting Office.
C. E. MURRAY,
-H|C ilflif, D}H-
126 ELIZABETH STREET,
SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE TRAMWAY OFFICE
Wood Engraving and Lithography ,
Estimates Furnished.


Accepting the hearty invitation of this Man of Cares, I clambered up
to the seat, and was soon rattling along at a great pace, up and down hills ;
first we went up, up, and then we went d:wn, down, downy,—over cobbles,
bumping against obstructions, driving into ruts and turning sharp comers, —
all calculated to shake the nerves of anyone but a milkman who has no
nerves to speak of; leastways if he has it would seem that the eternal
bumping, rattling, clashing, and changing of the cans, full and empty,
would drive him insane.
A WILD DRIVE.
“ Don’t like it?” at lensrth inquired the merry driver, as your humble
servant jammed his four-and-nine over his eyes and grasped the seat with
both hands, vainly striving to anchor himself.
“ Oh, yes; tlxis is first-class,” said I, as the wind blew down my neck
and the chill night damp froze the very marrow in my bones. “ Oh, yes, I
like this ; its kind of exhilarating like.”
“Joking aside, sir, responded the driver, its a hard life we poor devils
lead, and small thanks it is we get from bosses and from customers. Here
am I, up and down, off and on this blessed rattle-trap two or three hundred
times of an evening, and as many times in the day. I’ve got to keep in my
noddle no end of names and numbers, and the quantity each one takes, and all
that sort of thing. Then, in the day time every other house almost wants an
extra drop more, and all that has to be remembered to tell the boss when he
reads off the list. Well, we get used to it and get along somehow. Whoop!
Here we are at our first.”
Saying which the horse drew in, as if by instinct, to the side of the
road, and stopped in front of a dwelling hidden among the trees. In a
moment the milkman’s form was lost amid the foliage. Soon he emerged,
and, seating himself, drove on to the next customer.
TROUBLE WITH A DOG.
“See that house?” continued the driver. “I used to have lots of
trouble with a big dog there. It was a great big brute, and the women folks
were set on having him ran aroimd the house loose at night, because the
old man generally stayed out late at night with the boys. The brute
wouldn’t have anything to do with me except he tried to eat me regularly
every night; and blamed if I didn’t think he would do it some time or other.
I used to have to carry a big club, and when I had left the milk, I used to
have to back out like, to save mv coat-tails. Had to hire a small boy to
poison the brute. That’s the way it goes.”
We drove on, when the driver said—“ It’s a mean cur here, a black-
looking brute,—always there, and a breakneck staircase there too.” After
serving the milk he resumed his story. “Then sometimes uv the big
lodging-houses the women take a fellow for a burglar, or something or
other, and set up a screech. Then the landlord comes out, andt you have
to stop and explain.—Wait till I come out,” said the milkman who
disappeared within a gateway, banging the gate after him, stamping up
the steps, slamming the milk can down, and making all the noise imaginable.
But milkmen enjoy a special prerogative to make a din. *


TAKEN FOR A BURGLAR.
“Well,” continued the driver, “as I was a-raying, they take us for
burglars sometimes, especially by those poor folks who have little to be
robbed of. About six months ago a fellow was going to shoot me for
making a mistake and getting into the wrong house. He acted awfully.
You see, sir, a good many of our customers who live in neighbourhoods
where there are lots of larrikins, don’t like to have their milk stand out half
the night, fora larry, or hoodlum cub, is mighty liable to tip up his ugly
mug into the pitcher before the morning far advances. So these folks who
don’t like to treat the park bunkers and such like, give me the keys of their
back doors. Look, there is more than a dozen on this string. Well, as I
was a-telling you, it was a pitch dark night, or before daylight, when I went
in to deliver milk at a house in the centre of a block of houses all alike.
Under these circumstances it wasn’t hard to make a mistake, so I got into
the next house to the one I belonged to. As it happened, the same key
fitted both back doors. The' houses were laid out alike, and I didn’t
discover the difference, only the pitcher hadn’t been set out. That often
happens, however, so I thought I would just go over to where I knew the
closet was and hunt up something. I hadn’t made a step before I upset a
chair, knocked over some crockery, and kicked up a most infernal row that
brought the whole family downstairs in their night clothes. The old man
had a big musket, and as he saw I was unarmed he was awful brave, and
wanted to show his wife and kids and mother-in-law how he wasn’t scared.
So he kept aiming at my head and telling me to go out, and when 1 stirred,
telling me he would blow my brains out if I moved. He was a fearfully
unreasonable old bully, and kept me there fifteen minutes after he found out
who I was. That’s one of the scrapes a fellow gets into. Then sometimes
you’ll step on a cad or loafer asleep in a halfway, and he’ll want to fight
you. Besides all this, we have to get around in the rain, and the wind, in
all seasons. Everybody is
DOWN ON A MILKMAN.
The madame swears the milk’s half water, when she knows she skims
the cream off it for her coffee; and she couldn’t do that, sir, with
watered milk. Then the servant girls,—they drink up lots of the milk, and
declare to the mistress that I don’t give full measure. Yes, it’s a tough
business, this.”
Of course, there were many interruptions in the narrative, as the
milkman had to keep jumping down, first at one house and then another,
and other milkcarts were swarming about us.
How long does it take to learn a new route ? I inquired.
“ Oh, it depends, about ten days to two weeks. You see we get used to
the business. It is not so hard to fix the localities as to remember the
measures.”
A COLLISION.
We nearly h&d a spill on turning out of Oxford-street into College-
street, A doctor’s brougham was just starting at a devil of a pace from


SCOTTISH
Imperial Insurance Company.
Capital
£1,000,000.
This Company is now prepared to accept FIRE RISKS at
Lowest Rates.
Losses promptly and liberally settled in Sydney.
J. GRAHAM NIXON,
Cliief Agent for N.S.W.,
17 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Country Agents 'Wanted.
Mr. J. GRAHAM NIXON, (for many 3*ears in the service of the
Australian Mutual Fire Society, and other similar institutions),
has much pleasure in informing his friends and the public
generally that he has started business as
mSUEANC]£ AHD GGKKHAL AGJSHT,
17 Bridge Street, Sydney,
and hopes by strict attention to the instructions of his clients to
merit their support.
Houses, Land, or General Merchandise, Bought and Sold either
by Public Auction or Private Contract.
Insurance efiected without trouble or expense to Proponents.




one of the residences when we collided before either we or the doctor’s
coachman could pull up. Of course the man of physic, who was off pell-
mell for a ten guinea case, at once threw the blame on the milkman.
The doctor’s buggy got the worst of it. When, however, he saw no one
was hurt he was very wrathful, and said for two pins he would make his
coachman punch the milkman’s head.
“ He’s aint able, or you neither,” retorted the milkman. “ Why didn’t
he look where he was a-going to ?”
“ That’ll do,” said the doctor waving his hand. “I’ll make a comatose
lacteal example of you in the police court to-morrow, you fellow! Drive
on, Buddy, quick, or the lady’s case will be all over, and my fee blown to
the winds.”
And thus we parted amid some encouraging approbations from a few
cabbies who happened to be in the vicinity.
INCIPIENT LOVE.
The next place we stopped at was a fine house in this same College-
street, and I was somewhat amazed to find a buxom servant girl so early in
the morning with a broom in one hand and a jug in the other, waiting for
the milk. It took him ten minutes, at least, to pour the quart of milk into
that jug.
“ That’s a pretty girl,” said Milky, as he remounted, “ and as true as
she is beautiful. I have four of these on my route, and I’m puzzled which
to take. And then I’ve got Polly at the dairy, leastwise I fancy I have, but
she’s so fickle. One day I’m all right, the next day all wrong. The deuce
take the women. This is a curious place to serve—always growling.”
Jumping down and getting his milk from the cans knocked at the door,
and promptly appeared the servant. It was a fashionable boarding-house.
TONGUE PIE.
No sooner had the milk been left, and milky on his seat, when an
elderly lady with night cap on, and hair in paper, threw open an upstair
front window, and exclaimed —
“ Stop! I just wants a word with you. I’ve been watching you
several times. Why do you mix me up three kinds of milk every morning—
why don’t you draw it all from one can ?”
“The milk is all of one quality, mum. I only draw!!it that way to
make the cans even.”
“Oh, you abominable, wretched, story-teller. One is pure milk, one
milk and water, and the other skim-milk. I know all about it—l under-
stand all about it. I’ve been in a cow-shed before to-day.”
“ I can assure you, mum, that the milk—”
“It’s not milk,” interrupted the irate lady, “and I’ll change you very
soon if you don’t alter. No more words; off you go !”
We drove away to the next customer,
“I’m served worse than that at some places, but it’s only like throwing
water on a duck’s back.”


Thus, with scenes and conversations like this, the milkman enlivened the
route. It was a long cold ride, away over Surry Hills, in one part where
the wind blew hard, dashing the rain in the face. At length the horse’s
head was turned homeward after a dreary ride ; head-quarters were again
reached. Warm drinks and generous warmth have a wonderous effect on
the spirits, and soon the new-comers were as jolly as the remainder of those
seated around enjoying the few moments rest before again sallying forth
upon another trip.
A YARN AFTER BREAKFAST.
“It's rather hard on the milkmaids,” I remarked, after partaking of
breakfast, which consisted of hot milk, strong tea, and thickly buttered
bread. I added a little Jamaica to my milk, and helped my cicerone to a
similar dose. It went down fine, I can tell you. The milk we had was
pure, and no mistake.
“Milkmaids,” exclaimed my companion. “They don’t look like milk-
maids, do they, those grown-up women and them big buxom girls you
saw at breakfast ? They’re all married except one, and she don’t fancy it
after what she’s seen, and perhaps felt in her heart. The husbands of the
others have all gone to the diggings; that is, after a few months married
life the fellows ‘sloped’ and left their dear duckies on their beam ends.
They are grass-widows, unable to do anything out of a dairy or a cow-shed.
They live like fighting cocks, and think no more about their husbands than
a dog does of his mother. ’ ’
“ One would think a plump, fat milkmaid would like to get married,” I
said inquiringly.
“Don’t seem like it,” he replied sadly. “I’ve tried her. She’s senti-
mental. She’d rather be somewhere else, though, than in a cow-shed or
paddock, or feeding horses, or sluicing carts —she could do that —or scalding
milk-cans and dishes, cleaning up cow-muck, cleaning up heaven knows
what, and always smelling milky.”
“ Well, the females certainly all look remarkably healthy. Milk must
be nutricious P” I said.
“ Healthy I” he exclaimed, “they’re as healthy and as fat as mullets,
but not on milk. They’ll eat two pounds of steak at a morning meal. They
don’t care much for milk.”
“ How’s that, anything queer with it?” I asked.
“ Not in the least,” he said. “We sell two sorts. You might have
noticed me at that woman’s private boarding-house this morning drawing
from different cans. I draw off first from the diluted, and top up with the
pure to give it a durable froth.”
‘‘ I used to think in so taking the milk from the cans it was because one
was a little older than the other.’ ’
“ No, that ain’t it. Now, look here, in case of drought. Good saleable
milk can be made from a pound of rice boiled in four gallons of water, the
yolks of four eggs, very little white sugar, a quart of pure milk, and four
black snails to give the compound a froth. This goes down with the poor,
and is served to customers who don’t stump up regular. Then there’s a
child sick and delicate and the doctor orders it to have new milk from the


cow. Well, we know that the do3tor’s an ass, for anyone knows a cow’s
milk is stronger than a mother’s milk, so we have a gallon can of milk
specially prepared for such cases, and the child gets well. But pure cow’s
milk would kill the child stone dead.”
‘ ‘ I notice everything must be kept very clean about a dairy V ’
“It just depends as to what hurry you’re in. Perhaps there’s no time
to wash even your hands except in the milk your going to sell. And the
cans are only rinsed in hotVater sometimes ; but a good boss won’t stand it
I once saw a
EIGHT IN A COW SHED
between a strapping girl named Mary Jenkins and her lover, over this very
thing. Mary was a spirited and very romantic girl of seventeen, and she
was washing her fingers in the milk bucket one morning when Joe, her
lover, called her a dirty thing. Mary at once jumped up and asked Joe
coolly what he meant by calling her a thing ? Me a thing, eh ? Take that!
Away went a gallon of milk, pail and all, in Joe’s face. I never drink a
quart of milk from the pail as you do, and then put water in it to make up the
quantity, you wretch. Joe rushed at her. There was a scuffle and Mary
began to scream, when the cows kicked them both over, and they had to be
parted by the older milkers in the shed. They hated one another eve
afterwards, and I fancied she took to me.”
‘ ‘ I suppose you have to work on Sunday as well as on other day ?’
“ Yes, I’ll give you a few words,” said he, “ on
THE MILKMAN’S SABBATH.
You may have read a little book called the ‘ Dairyman’s Daughter,’ and
admired the sentiment and poetical touches which it contains. If you were
to see the dairymen’s daughters in New South Wales you would find little
poetry about them; they have to work, barefooted. The same with the
milkman. No Sunday ever comes to either. Catch a dairymaid or milkman
in church ! No class of society, bishop or parson, or doctor, or artizan, not
even the Governor, will go without his milk merely for the sake of keeping
holy the sabbath day. The milkman has, actually, more to do on a
Sunday to put on a little finery, and to exercise more patience in serving bis
customers who like to snooze it out, especially the servant girls who most
decidedly will not go without milk even if master and mistress have to
perish for it. I was serving milk one Sunday morning early in Crown-
street when I got
IN A FIX.
The people in this street had always given me trouble on Sunday morning
and as I had seven customers living nearly together who kept me waiting
always, I determined to rouse them all at once. So I jumped off my cart
and gave six thundering knocks at each door as fast as I could. Only one
door opened almost immediately when a man in his night shirt rushed out
at me and asked what the devil I meant by disturbing a whole neigh-
bourhood at seven o’clock on a Sunday morning. ‘ D—n the milk, said he


Take it to blazes.’ No sooner bad he slammed the door in my face than a
dozen bedroom windows flew open and heads bald, some grizzly, some men,
others women in night dress, yelled out “What’s up, milkman—who’s killed,
who’s murthered, was it the shock of an earthquake, for God’s sake tell
where the murder is.” I simply said it was only a man and his wife
quarrelling. They withdrew their heads in disgust at hearing of such a
common affair, but I managed to serve my milk without much delay. The
beauty of it was as I was driving away the wife of the man who told me to
take my milk to blazes, put her head out of the window and called me back.
“ Never you take any notice of what my husband says ; he’s an ass. Give me
two penn’orth extra this morning ” she said emphatically.
THE MILKMAN IN LOVE.
I listened with some degree of pleasure to the milkman’s gossip. He
told me that though he was fond of several servant girls whom he had on a
string for picnic purposes, he really loved Mary Jenkins the milkmaid better
than all, only Joe had been in his road, and he hated Joe, and Joe hated
him. When they had the row in the shed he thought Mary would turn up
Joe altogether and take to him, and so she led him to believe for awhile.
He could scarcely rely on her one day after another, she was so fickle. Now,
and then she’d slip out somewhere at night, and though he tried to dodge
her he could never find her track. He couldn’t make it out. He gave her
oranges, bought her ribbons, bought her even savaloys and black-puddings
but it was no go. She used to say of late that she must ‘ expire’ to something
nobler, and that music had ‘ barms’ to smooth the savage beast. He couldn’t
make anything of her.
Though he detested Joe, he disliked a man more named John Thomas,
who was milkman-in-chief to an opposition dairyman, and who courted
Mary Jenkins on the sly. He often watched this John Thomas’s movements
at night, but never found Mary with him. There must be somebody else in
the wind. John Thomas and Joe when they happened to meet in town on
the respective carts serving milk, always tried to run down the quality of
one another’s commodity. Joe and I were having a private conversation
together, at this very time, when it was unluckly overheard by this eaves-
dropper Thomas, who caused much trouble as well as joy as will be seen
presently. Some days after the jaunt above alluded to I saw Joe, and he
appeared to be bewildered. His story may show my readers what influence
has.
FOGG V. MOGUL.
This was an action in which the plaintiff, Duncan Fog- sought to recover
£SOOO damages against Daniel Mogul for slander.
Mr. Snubber, Q.C., instructed by Messrs. Fox and Seccom appeared for
the plaintiff; Mr. Snarle, instructed by Mr. Quips for the defendant.
It appears that in March last a gentleman belonging to a metropolitan
journal was anxious to glean information as to the city milk supply, and aa


the city corporation could only enlighten this gentleman as to the quantity
of water consumed, he placed himself in communication with an employee
of the plaintiff’s who promised to supply the required want in consideration
of receiving such a trifle as a £lO note. This sum having been duly handed
over, the milkcartman agreed to drive the zealous pressman through his
“ beat,” and to give him afterwards such particulars as would enable him to
astonish New South Wales as to the mysteries of the milk supply. In
short, the pressman was bent on assuming the functions of a Lancet to
expose fraud and adulteration, if any existed; and to work up a plea in
behalf of the oppressed dairymen, milkmaids, and milkmen. Jealousy,
however, interposed, and a servant of Mogul’s having overheard something,
-cautioned the shrewd pressman as to accepting facts from a man reputed
to be a perverter of truth. The gossip of servants on both sides made
matters worse, and the acrimony being intense, brought on this melancholy
action. The first witness called was
Duncan Fog, who deposed that he was a dairyman residing at Waverley ;
that he had 749 cows, thirty-nine of which were always in milk, and the
remainder always in the other thing ; that he had 2642 customers to whom
he supplied on an average 600 gallons of milk per diem. Some of those
■customers belonged to the aristocracy, others kept large hotels and restau-
rants ; always supplied pure milk; there was no rubbish about it, as
alleged; employed seventy-one men, and nineteen dairymaids. Would
swear they were all honest to a man, woman, and child ; never complained
of the quality of the defendant’s milk ; was certain the defendant’s remarks
had caused him a falling off in business of at least £IOOO a-year annually.
Cross-examined by Mr. Snarle: Of course I mean what I say. Yes,
eertainly, all my servants are honest to either man, woman, or child. I
won’t prevaricate.
By the Judge : How do you know they could be honest to man, woman,
or child? Because, your Honor, they couldn’t be dishonest without my
knowing it.
Cross-examination continued: Yes, Ido know what milk is. It is a
lacteal fluid obtained from the teats of a cow. Certainly, there is asses*
goats’ milk, human milk, the milk of human kindness, and calves drink
milk. Will not swear that pigeons give milk. Am confident milk can be
obtained from a pump, if milk is in the tank, O yes, milk is put in freezing
tanks to keep it fresh for days, as spuds are buried in pits to keep them
serviceable. Have been fifty-nine years a dairyman. Come from the
Grampian hills, and for all that know Kerry cow milk by the taste and
smell.
To the Judge : Yes, your honor, just as well as I can tell the difference
between Irish and Scotch whiskey.
Alfred Martin, next witness, in reply to Mr. Snubber, said he had been
a, milkman and driver to Mr. Fog for ten years. Know Mr. Guffin the paper
man. Took him my rouuds one morning. Told him the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help me
Mr. Snubber : Stop, sir ! Simply answer my questions.
Mr. Snarle : I submit, your Honor, the witness has a right to conclude
his sentence.
His Honor : Inadmissable. He might have said—So help him, Milky
White.
Mr. Snubber: Just so, or Batty Martin. I won’t suffer these inter-
ruptions.


Witness continues: I know John Thomas; he’s Mr. Mogul’s flunkey.
He wanted a fiver from me. He has caused all this squabble.
Cross-examined : Thomas pretended he was courting one of our dairy-
maids named Polly. Yes, I was making love to her also. True, all was
arranged for the wedding, the time, the place, dresses and all that, but she
didn’t come up to the scratch ; said she preferred the milking business
to being the hoyti-toyti of a common milkman. Will swear I never made
love to more than seven other milkmaids. Did not one evening sing
‘ ‘ Where are you going my sweet pretty maid ’ ’
when she was sloping away with John Thomas. I refuse to state her reply.
The Judge : Come sir, you must answer my question—explain afterwards.
Witness : She said go to —, and other unparliamentary words,
Mr. Snarle (scratching his wig) : That will do. You can leave the box,
sir.
Mr. Snubber (hastily) : Wait a moment. What kind of milk did your
master sell ?
Witness : The best and purest in the Australasian Colonies.
Mr. Snarle : Can you produce any ?
Witness : I’ve got a square bottleful here (produces the bottle).
The Judge : Are there any experts in Court ?
Mr. Snubber: I have a gentleman from Lithgow, and another from
Cooper’s Creek, both experts.
Mr. Snarle: I also have two, your Honor, one from Bodalla, the other
from Switzerland, both experts.
The Judge : Let them give their opinion on this milk.
(A tumbler is filled with this milk, and the four experts examine it
microscopically, and then sip).
The Judge : Well, gentlemen, what are your opinions?
Lithgow : It’s had a bath your Honor.
Cooper’s Creek : It tastes more like gin and milk.
Bodalla : There’s either been chalk or a touch of soda put in it.
Switzerland : It am ze most dibollickleshest rubbest zat go by ze names
you call im milk.
The Judge: Let me taste it (tastes, and his eyes blink), It’s gin and
goat’s milk, or I’m not a saint.
Mr. Snubber: Hand it to me, (tastes, and smacks his lips), purer milk
never came from a coo ! _
Mr. Snarle : Pass it this way, (sips, spits, hiccoughs), nastier rubbish
never came from a bullock;
The Judge : Perhaps the jury might like a taste ?
The Foreman : No blamed fear, we get quite enough beyond the precincts
or within the hearing of this Court.
Mr. Snubber ; Call Mary Jenkins !
Court Crier: Mary Jinkins ! Mary Jinkins, three times! (Mary appears).
Mary Jenkins, being duly sworn, deposed that she knew what sweet milk
was, as well as buttermilk. Fog’s milk was fine. Knew John Thomas,
he’s full of deceit. Knew Alf Martin, he was a gentleman and could milk
ten cows to Jack’s five. Did’nt care a twopence for either of them. Had a
linen draper in her mind’s eye. _
To Mr. Snarle: Never tried to get married to the butcher s man. Do
not care a fig for bakers. Liked the linen-drapers.
Other witnesses for the plaintiff were of less import than the preceding.


Mr. Daniel Mogul positively denied having injured the plaintiff by
thought, word, or deed, and as for his milk it was no better than that sold
from the mountains.
The Judge summed up, giving a scientific as well as a legal definition as
to what milk was. In the noble science of astronomy it had a special
reference to the milky way discemable in the cerulean sky on a frosty night.
In law it applied more to tea of various qualities, and to rum and sulphur.
The jury took this view of the matter, and awarded a verdict for the
plaintiff with sixteen thousand gallons of pure milk as damages, to be paid
by weekly instalments.
This unhappy quarrel led, however, to
THE MILKMEN’S PICNIC.
which took place a fortnight afterwards at Skim-milk Meadow, Marrickville,
This affair was got up by the plaintiff in the above action, who was so elated
with the verdict that he not only invited a few neighbors but even the
talented Mr. Guffin who promised to give a notice of the event in at least a
dozen newspapers. Among the distinguished guests invited it may be
mentioned two undertakers and a grave digger who had reaped some benefit
from deaths produced by lactic or milk fever. The weather was fine, and
about two hundred persons all told were present on the festive occasion.
The most singular part of the affair was that about ninety cows were driven
out of the meadow after being milked in the morning, and it was an amusing
sight between the intervals of dancing and feasting to witness the zest with
which old men and fat women, young men and plump girls vied with ench
other in milking the tame, unbailed cows in the afternoon. There were only
nine dairy carts with their big cans present, but any deficiency could easily
be rectified at the orthodox milking sheds. Mrs. Fog was a lady of about
twenty-three stone weight, and was certainly more graceful and agile in
tripping to the measure of “ Pop-goes-the-weasel” beautifully rendered by
the cheesemongers’ brass band than those of younger growth. Mr. G-uffin,
who, in his moment of exhiliration, did the speechifying and among other
complimentary things said he had often seen bears dance in the arctic
regions, but he never before saw either bulls or cows dance so true to music
as he had observed that day. He had seen elephants keeping step when
drawing twenty-four pounder guns in the jungles of India, and had seen
wonderful things in Wombwell’s menagerie, but the idea of one thousand
cows dancing to sacred music, played on one of Cook Bros.’ time-
payment pianos, knocked him completely into Jack Brag’s famous
cock’d hat. He was glad to notice there were so many pretty rosy
cheeked, fat, all round damsels present, and such a number of young fellows
who for size, symmetry, and “front” would put to shame any number of
clodpa tes of similar position in life, no matter whether they were collected
from Shropshire, Hampshire, or Chowbent. (Cheers.) He held in his
hands letters of apology for non-attendance, from Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Members of Good Templars, Good Tipplers, Total Abstinence Associa-
tion, all good judges of good milk; from Garry Owen’s lineal descendant.
Garry having been one of the first milkmen in Sydney, from Supreme and
Central Court judges who are fond of country milk. These gentlemen are
no flats ; they know the difference between a pint and a quart to a t;
apology from Tom Garrett, from Ninny Melville, and last, though not least,


Mr. Holdsworth, Dan O’Connor, M.L.A., John Davies. C.M.G., Mark
Isaacs, of the Corporation Stores, In short, one distinguished gourmaid
says—Domestic affliction prevents me from accepting your friendly
invitation, hut he assured both myself and lady knew devilish well all your
milk is pure to the pure-minded, but you cannot always get the pure
merinos as slaveys. (Cheers and shouts.)
HOMEWARD BOUND.
The party returned to their respective dairies before sunset, thoroughly
wearied. The Germans do the grand at picnics on the Prince of Wales
Birthday, but these wholesale purveyors of milk, like Frank Senior with hi&
physic, by special appointment to His Excellency, accomplished this first
bout on a scale superb. Only imagine a procession headed by a band with a
big cheesemonger as drum-major, followed by the cows aforenamed, driven
by milkmen, some flash, others sedate on horseback; and by buxom wenches
all fat in their milkcarts, with cream-colored flags flying, and a few calves
by the road side bleating for their mothers who, like many human mothers,
leave their calves at home whilst they go out gadding, or slip off to Clontarf.
Clontarf ! 0 Clontarf! how is thy flesh fishyfied, or goat-smelling, when
association of ideas links thee with persecution of those who had the courage
to expose harbor debaucheries with such a truthful pen! This cavalcade
reminded one of a foraging party returning with boot, and in some respects
it had the resemblance to a Lord Mayor’s pageant. The complaisant Mr.
Gufifin, from whose report we quote, in putting the finishing stroke to his
lurid description, says that there never was seen conglomerated together,
on a merely special occasion, so much beef and mutton alive and kicking,
blasted with huge cauldrons of pure mountain milk, nor such royal or
imperial stuffing of the internal organisation as was observable at this ever
memorable picnic. It was pure milk from the jump to the finish.
THE FITNESS OF THINGS.
Strange that the picnic, above described so graphically by Mr. Gfifiun,
should alter a fickle lover’s intention. But it did. The rival suitors for
Mary Jenken’s heart, Alfred Martin and John Thomas, both found out by
Mary’s evidence at the trial that a linen draper was in the road, and both,
from a similar motive, though intended to warp the fair Polly, the milkmaid,
in his favour, went in pursuit of the calico fellow, who had been trying to
elevate her taste by lessons given at the opera. There was not a draper’s
between Woollahra and King-street West, from Dawes’ Point to Petersham
that was not peered into to find Mary’s lover. John Thomas was the first
to find him, but not in a draper’s shop : he was safe in the arms of Mary.
In other words, he was billing and cooing with Mary behind an old disused
cowshed partly in ruins. John lost no time in giving the surprised dabbler
in tape and gingham such a hiding as to make him foreswear his love for
Mary for ever afterwards. The more so as Mary kept on encouraging


Thomas by saying “ Give it to him Jack ; he’s got neither friends nor tin .
Polly allowed John Thomas to escort her home but while he was trying to
make things right Alf Martin popped out. By way of excusing herself for
her duplicity she pretended she was only just going to a certain place when a
nasty young linen draper intercepted her at the old cowshed O yes, of bourse
—and she couldn’t tell what would have happened hadn’t John Thomas just
come up and given the impudent young fellow a good thrashing, “yet,’
said Polly, “he was such a nice, gentlemanly young man.”
All this was listened to very gloomily by Alfred Martin, who at length
said to Thomas “You know you’ve no business here, and the sooner you
clear off the better.”
“He only escorted me home” interposed Mary.
“ Don’t care, clear out,” said Alf menacingly. But John Thomas was
not to be frightened or bullied. He peeled off, the fickle Mary in this
instance; as in the other when she saw the linen draper getting the worst,
encouraged Alf to give Mr. John Thomas a good sound thrashing. Mr.
and Mrs. Fog, and others would have interfered to stop the fight almost
before it commenced, but John Thomas was desperate. With him it was
a struggle for liberty or love, or both ; but he had to succumb after fighting
seventy-four rounds in twenty minutes.
THE DAIRYMAID’S WEDDING.
The termination of this battle brought peace, and if it did not alter the
map of Europe it decided the direction and force of Mary’s heart in favour
of Alfred Martin.
A few months afterwards there was a grand wedding celebrated at
Waverly between Alfred Martin, of the one part, and Mary Jenkins, of the
other part, both natives of Australia, There were sixteen bridesmaids.
Old Fog and his wife were there to give Polly away, a duty which her
brother refused because he was in the Foorce. There was a splendid
wedding breakfast, and any amount of cheese and bacon, roast beef, plum
pudding, Irish stew, Norfolk dumplings, and any amount of strawberries
(preserved) and cream, and galores of grog. A more jovial wedding party
never assembled together. Mr. Guffin was there, but not John Thomas,
nor old Mogul. When the guests were in a comfortably exhilerated state
and Alf with his bride were about to retire, he sang the following song to a
tune akin to a “Life on the Ocean Wave” :
MY DAIRYMAID.
0 give me the Waverly milk !
More precious to me than to some,
As rich as your dairymaid’s silk,
As healthy as pure Indian rum.
Young Polly’s the queen of the lot,
And a jolly good wife she’ll be,
My struggles are all forgot,
For PoSy’s the darling for me.


No more shall the milkmaid shy,
Nr coy steel from me a thought;
No more shall her leering eye
Lead on till it ends in naught.
My wife her own dairy shall own,
The Super of that she shall be,
I’ll work for it even alone,
Because its all honey to me.
For what is a dairymaid,s life,
If for ever she is glued to the stool,
That she ne’er can be any man’s wife,
Unless she go marry a fool!
Hip ! hip ! hip ! hooray !
THE EDEN OF DAIRY FARMERS.
But let us take a more serious view of the milk and butter industry.
The Romantic region known as the Illawarra district, with its three bright
and picturesque towns, Woollongong, Dapto, and Kiama, is, par excellence ,
the paradise of Dairy-farmers in New South Wales. Its rich soil, well-
sheltered because well-timbered slopes, and its abundance of the purest water
render it thoroughly adapted for the production of milk, butter and cheese,
and those engaged in the industry have recently shown their common sense
by forming themselves into a Co-operative Society, which has already
proved a success. “ There can be little doubt,” says a contemporary, “ that
is to the principle of co-operation philanthropist has to look for the most
effective solvent of the unassimilative crudities that irritate and fester in the
social system ; for it is clear that so long as Capital and Labor are looked on
as having divided and antogonistie interests so long will there be strikes
among workmen, and ruin among employers of labor. The butter-growers
and milk-producers of the Illawarra district were getting dissatisfied, and
not unreasonably so, with the account sales rendered by their Sydney agents,
but instead of “ grinning and bearing it,” they set themselves to discover a
remedy, and they have found a most effectual one in co-operation. They
knew the cost of producing the commodity they had to sell ; they knew by
experience how much of the wares the consumption of the capital demanded,
and they knew that if they overstocked the market, however abundant the
yield of their cattle, the value of their returns, instead of being improved in
proportion to the quantity sent, would actually be lessened, inasmuch as
freight and cartage would be heavier and commission, at least, the same.
The objects of the company were the laudable ones of finding the best
market for the goods they had to dspose of, to prevent the glutting of the
home market, and thus make a ruinous fall in the prices an impossibility.
These they have effected by shipping their surplus produce to England,
and although, as was to be expected in the initiation of the scheme, mistakes
were made, the success of their efforts has been most encouraging. The
company has only been in existence eleven months, and yet by their
operations members have not only secured higher rates for their produce


sold for home consumption, but have been able to declare a dividend of 10
per cent, on the capital invested, and to carry £IOOO to the reserve fund.
That the members of the company are grateful to those who have so ably
conducted their affairs during the past year is but natural, and it is pleasing
to find that they have shown their gratitude and good sense by re-electing
them to the positions they previously held on the board.” This is good
news.
KITTY OF COLERAINE.
In the ballad-poetry of Ireland, milkmaids are represented as being
extremely susceptible of the sweet influences of love. In a general resume,
like this literary Milky Way of ours, we cannot resist the temptation of
reproducing the sweet song that bears the above title. Anyone who is the
fortunate possessor of the music and one of Cook Brother’s (Harris-street)
fine-toned pianos, even with a very moderate knowledge of the instrument,
can make a company merry with this charming song. The words run as
follows :
As beautiful Kitty one morning was tripping
With a pitcher of milk to the fair of Coleraine ;
When she saw me she stumbled, the pitcher it tumbled,
And all the sweet buttermilk watered the plain.
Oh ! what shall I do now ? ’twas looking at you now
Sure, sure, such a pitcher I’ll ne’er meet again,
’Twas the pride of my dairy, O, Barney McCleary,
You’re sent as a plague to the girls of Coleraine.
I sat down beside her and gently did chide her,
That such a misfortune should give her such pain ;
A kiss I then gave her, and before I did leave her,
She vow’d for such pleasure she’d break it again.
’Twas hay-making season, I can’t tell the reason,
Misfortune will never come single, ’ tis plain ;
For very soon after poor Kitty’s disaster,
The devil a pitcher wss whole in Coleraine.
ANTIQUITIES OF THE MILK TRADE.
Under this heading a most interesting array of facts could be brought
together, and although, even in the dawn of the historic period, the dis-
tribution of the lacteal fluid could hardly be called a trade , particularly when
the heads of the dairy were patriarchs or tribal chiefs, not men and maid
servants, still the whole of the evidence goes to prove that milk was from the
remotest antiquity held to be one of the most natural kinds of human food.


Supposing 1 the nurture of primative man was fruit, advanced to the
cultivation of cereals from seeds found in the state of nature, passed through
the stage when the chase formed the principal portion of his supply, then we
come to the domestication of cattle and birds—to milk and eggs. At a more
advanced period we get to another fact. We find another important con-
stituent, namely, honey. The “little busy bee” was improving “each
shining hour” for its own sustenance long before the Tower of Babel began
to be built, or people to babble in many tongues.
The most authentic historical record in existence —the Old Testament —
gives us a glimpse of the state of prosperity which fell to the lot of Abram,
and the elements which constituted that prosperity. Let us reproduce the
picture it presents, as exquisitely word-painted in Genesis xiii, 1-6. It is
as follows:
And Abram went up out of Egypt, be, and his wife, and all that he had;
and'Lot with him, unto the south.
And Abram was very rich in catt'e, in silver, and in gold.
And he went on his journeys from the sou h, Beth-el, unto the place where
his tent had been ar the beginning, between Beth-el and Hai ;
Unto the place of the altar, ■which he had made there at the first, and there
Abram called on the name of the Lord.
And Lot, also, which went with Abram, had flocks and herds and tents.
And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together,
for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
After Lot had free-selected the valley of the Jordan, Abram continued
to increase his flocks and herds, and was chief of a land “ overflowing with
milk and honey.”
The mythological ‘ ‘ yams ’ ’ of the ancient Greeks and Romans are
equally conclusive as to the old world appreciation of milk. The greatest
boast of the Roman Fathers was (according to Virgil) —
Lac mihi non cestale novum, non frig one desit,
which has been humorously translated —
I have lots of new milk all the year round,
In summer too much, in winter enough ;
While Pan looks after good grazing ground,
Be sure on his godship I shall not be rough
The legend of Jason’s Golden Fleece, the cause of the Argonautic
Expedition, as well as that of the White Bull, which swam over the
Hellespont, carrying the Princess Europa (and a name for a continent) on his
back, is another simple illustration of the argument. The Scandinavians
from time immemorial regulate their standards of wealth and luxury by the
number and quality of their reindeer. The milk of the female of that species
contains fine tonic properties, and is said to be a febrifuge. The same is
asserted of the camel and elephant. That of the whale has a pungent fishy
flavour, but according to Captain Scoresby it contains some valuable properties.
It is, however, almost impossible to obtain it for analysis except from the
dead body of a whale-cow. One cast on shore, somewhere in New Zealand,
enabled a medical man to obtain a sample immediately after death, and
reported favourably of its qualities. It would take a large volume to
embody the interesting facts that could be easily collected on this subject.
It is not difficult to learn some of them from scientific treatises.


Many poets have cleverly hit off the vanity of Milk Maids and Dairy*
women; but probably the smartest of them all is La Fontaine, of whose
“ fable” on the subject the following is a free but spirited paraphrase :
THE D AIRYWOMAN AND THE POT OF MILK.
A pot of milk upon her cushion’d crown,
Good Peggy hasten’d to the market town ;
Short clad and light, with speed she went.
Not fearing any accident:
Indeed, to be the nimbler tripper,
Her dress that day,
The truth to say,
Was simple petticoat and slipper.
And thus, bedight,
Good Peggy, light,—
Her gains already counted, —
Laid out the cash
At single dash,
Which to a hundred eggs amounted.
Three nests she made,
Which, by the aid
Of diligence and care were hatch’d.
To raise the chicks,
I’ll easy fix,
Said she,"beside our cottage thatch’d.
The fox must get
More cunning yet,
Or leave enough to buy a pig.
With little care
And any fare,
He’ll grow quite fat and big ;
And then the price
Will be so nice,
For which the pork will sell!
’Twill go quite hard,
But in ouryard
I’ll bring a cow and calf to dwell—
A calf to frisk among the flock !
The thought made Peggy do the same ;
And down at once the milk-pot came,
And perish’d .with the shock.
Calf, cow, and pig, and chicks, adieu !
Your mistress’ face is sad to view ;
She gives a tear to fortune spilt:
Then with the downcast look of guilt.
Home to her husband empty goes,
Somewhat in danger of his blows.


Who buildeth not, sometimes, in air,
His cots, or seats, or castles fair ?
From kings to dairy women, —all—
The wise, the foolish, great and small—
Each thinks his waking dream the best.
Some flattering error Mis the breast;
The world with all its wealth is ours,
Its honors, dames, and loveliest bowers.
Instinct with valour, when alone,
I hurl the monarch from his throne ;
The people, glad to see him dead,
Elect me monarch in his stead,
And diadems rain on my head.
Some accident then calls me back,
And I’m no more than simple Jack.
SATIRICAL POETRY.
Of all the English imitations of this kind of satirical treatment, that of
Lloyd, author of “ The Hare and Tortoise, ” is perhaps the best. It is worthy
of perusal; and, as it is rare, we treat our readers to a copy.
THE MILK-MAID.
Whoe’er for pleasure plans a scheme,
Will find it vanish like a dream,
Affording nothing sound or real,
Where happiness is all ideal;
In grief, in joy, or either state,
Fancy will always antedate,
And when the thoughts on evil pore,
Anticipation makes it more.
Thus while the mind the future sees,
It cancels all its present ease.
Is pleasure's scheme the point in view ;
How eagerly we all pursue !
Well—Tuesday is the appointed day ;
How slowly wears the time away !
How dull the interval between,
How darken’d o’er with clouds of spleen,
Did not the mind unlock her treasure,
And fancy feed on promis’d pleasure.
Delia surveys, with curious eyes,
The clouds collected in the skies ;


Wishes no storm may rend the air,
That Tuesday may be dry and fair;
And I look round, my boys, and pray,
That Tuesday may be holiday.
Things duely settled —what remains ?
Lo! Tuesday comes—alas ! it rains ;
And all our visionary schemes
Have died away, like golden dreams.
Once on a time, a rustic dame,
(No matter for the lady’s name)
Wrapt up in deep imagination,
Indulg’d her pleasing contemplation ;
While on a bench she took her seat,
Aad plac’d the milk-pail at her feet,
Oft in her hand she chink’d the pence,
The profits which arose from thence •
While fond ideas fill’d her brain,
Of layings up, and monstrou? gain,
Till every penny which she told, |
Creative fancy turn’d to gold ;
And reasoning thus from computation,
She spoke aloud her meditation.
“ Please heav’n but to preserve my health,
“No doubt I shall have store of wealth;
“ It must of consequence ensue
“ I shall have store of lovers too.
“ Oh ! how I’ll break their stubborn hearts,
“ With all the pride of female arts.
“ What Suitors then will kneel before me.
“Lords, Earls, and Viscounts shall adore me.
“ When in my gilded coach I ride,
“My Lady at his Lordship's side,
“ How will I laugh at all I meet
“ Clatt’ring in pattens down the street]!
“ And Bobbin then I’ll mind no more,
“ Howe’er I lov’d him heretofore;
“ Or, if he talks of plighted truth,
“ I 'will not hear the simple youth,
“ But rise indignant from my seat,
“ And spurn the lubber from my feet.”
Action, alas ! the speaker’s grace,
Ne’er came in more improper place,
For in the tossing forth her shoe,
What fancied bliss the maid o’erthrew !
While down at once, with hideous fall,
Came lovers, wealth, and milk, and all.
Thus fancy ever loves to roam,
To bring the gay materials home;
Imagination forms the dream,
And accident destroys the scheme.


THE LADIES, JUDGES OF MILK.
The ladies, however, are the only true judges of pure milk, whether
*uch milk be supplied by a Company, or by an independent dairyman, and
this can easily be seen by attending as I did
MRS. GRUNDY’S TEA PARTY.
This event'took place last May, at No. 3, Brixton Terrace, Chippendale
in honour of young master Grundy, who had just cut his wisdom tooth'
There were present, seated in an elegantly furnished drawing-room,
procured from Cook Bros., of Harris-street, Ultimo, three beautiful young
spinster ladies, named respectively Rosanah Hardbottom, Theresa Winter-
bottom, and old Mrs. Hardbottom of Summer-hill. It was a sweet company,
little Tooky Pooky who had cut his wisdom tooth, sat on his mamma’s lap,
whilst Rosanah attended to serve up the tea, made from a sample procured
from “ The Star of India and China Tea Company, George-street west.”
“For goodness sake, Rosanah,” cried Mrs. H., “ don’t put any milk in
my^tea —that’s too bluish and spoils it.”
“O dear!” exclaimed Rosanah, “and can you drink tea without
milk ?” why its poison, as bitter as gaul. Try some cream then.”
“No odds about it being poison,” replied Mrs. H., adjusting her spec-
tacles, “ and as for the cream—don’t talk to me about cream. Ido believe
there’s more poison in both the milk and the tea than there is in the tea, and
gracious knows that’s bad enough, unless you know where you get it.”
“ Oh my poison,” chimed in Miss Ellen, as she screwed up her lips like
an astonished physician saying “ Oh !”
“ Bless’d if I didn’t think there was something in the milk; for
Tooty won’t drink it unless it’s warmed up with plenty of sugar in it,
will um, Tooky dear, poor little Tooky —ain’t it a darling child, Mrs.
Hardbottom?” said Mrs. Grundy.
“Yes,” answered Mrs. H., indifferently, “it’s a nice child enough,
only it’s poor little nose is grubby, from your stuffing it with too much
milk.”
‘/La, Mrs. Hardbottom, you are severe,” said Theresa, poutingly.
“ Never mind ducky, pucky, diddle, doodle darling dear,” added Mrs.
Grundy, tossing the child up and down.” Old women don’t like other
people’s children, do they, sweetest of pets (kissing it), and have aridy pidy,
in a conchy pouchy to see it’s uncle, punckle, and it’s aunty panty, sweet
little cherub. Mix some tea and cream, Rosanah, for the darling, don t
Id my petty—put plenty of sugar in. Ring the bel, Ellen.”
Ellen rang the bell, and Bridget the maid-of-all-work, put in an
appearance.
“ What’s the matter wid yey now ?” inquired Bridget.
“Bring some more hot water, please,” said Mrs. G., the tea’s too
strong and Mrs. Hardbottom won’t take milk.”
“ Arrah bedad, and no wonder for her,” said Bridget, as she was leaving
the room, “devil such milk, I ever saw in any country in the world save
this, but then upstarts who pretend to call themselves ladies, would dhrink
.anything for milk, if it war only white. O my poor country !”


DR. B, FAWCETT,
Ho&oopatUo Physician & Acconcheu,
630 HARRIS STREET, ULTIMO.
Near the Sydney Railway Terminus.
Author of “ Practice of Homoeopathy Simplified and Common Treatment
also, “Childbirth Without Danger and Nearly Painless.”
Formerly H.M.D. to Hill End District Hospital, and for six years Resident
Physician to the City of Bathurst Homoeopathic Lying-in Hospital,
&c., &c., &c.
Now Medical Officer to the Advance of Freedom Lodge, G-.U.0.0.F., Ultimo.
Childbirth Without Danger, and
Nearly Painless.
From various sources we learn that many women in this colony die
annually during the direful agonies of child-bearing—such has been the
practical result of chloroform, ergot of rye, or drastic doses of some irritant
drug, or instrument of torture. Prior to the year 1847 there were no means
known of assuaging the paint of child-bearing. Sir James Simpson having
found anaesthetics useful in such cases, extended his investigations into the
regions of anaesthetics, and in November, 1874, discovered chloroform,
which has since been used with such profitable advantage to the undertakers,
sextons, &c. What a boon is now offered, and within the command of all
anticipating mothers, by using the tasteless anodynes or anesthetics pre-
pared only by Dr. Fawcett, for ladies in their hours of nature’s suffering
and sorrow, thus enabling them to bear, almost without a murmur, the
direful agonies of childbirth. I know some have a theological objection to
the use of these remedies, as they consider it a violation of the primeval
curse, as it is called—“ In sorrow thou shalt bring forth childrenbut I
would ask wqat are the sorrows connected with child-bearing ? Are they
not those attending upon the whole term of pregnancy, and not merely
those few hours of sorrow and writhing pains in the act of childbirth ? and
as women have to endure more or less sorrow and pain for nine months, can
it be wrong to assuage their agonies in the hour of Nature’s sorrow, as even
this doos not violate the primeval curse—were such an argument tenable.
The primeval curse on man was “ he shall earn his bread by the sweat of
his brow ; but who thinks it a violation of this curse to employ the railroads
to convey our grain or merchandise to and from Sydney, instead of trudging
side by side with the old bullock teams ? Who can or will raise their voice
now against steam power, telegraphs, or the various kinds of machinery to


render man’s labour as easy as possible; and by a parity of reasoning may
we not, on behalf of woman, the weaker vessel, thankfully use a scientific
discovery to render child-bearing as free from pain as possible. No dele-
terious drug of any description is resorted to ; as a proof of which ladies
delicate or asthmatical are delivered by these means of fine healthy children,
Western Independent , August 3rd, 1881.
Pamphlets. Testimonials, and Indis-
putable Proofs supplied free on applica-
tion.
Apply personally or by letter.
To Dr, Fawcett, Ultimo.
Sie, —I am glad to report that I was confined on the 11th of November,
1881, of a fine, strong girl, and was not bad more than twenty minutes,
which I feel certain was owing to your valuable and tasteless medicine,
used only two months prior to being laid up. This is my eighth child, and
every other time I have suffered very much for many hours, and sometimes
days. I have much pleasure in letting my married friends know of this
great and grand remedy for them in Nature’s trying hour ; and if you refer
anyone to me I shall only be too glad to bear testimony as to the value of
your medicine. — I am, dear Sir, respectfully yours, Mrs. Morris.
To Dr. Fawcett, Ultimo.
I am glad to inform you that your wonderful tasteless medicine has
done its work well in my case, as on a former occasion. I had a very easy
time, labour lasting only twenty minutes. Herewith I send you a P. 0.0.
for 215., amount of your fee, payable at the General Post Office, Sydney. I
can bear good testimony of the efficacy of your medicine, if you wish at any
time to refer any lady to me. — I am, respectfully yours, Mrs. C. R. B.
Mrs. C. J. W. writes as follows :—“ The attention and skill shown in
my case of accouchment at the residence of Dr. Fawcett I can never repay.
My labour was painless as compared with my former confinement; my
recovery so rapid that I can scarcely think it possible that I am able to
return home in a little over a week. —January 7, 1878.
Waindample, Victoria,
May, 1882.
Dear Doctor, —I write to let you know how well I got over my
confinement. I was better this time than in any previous occasions ; no
after pains, baby strong and healthy. I think so highly of your medicine
that I will certainly recommend it with confidence to my lady friends, the
small tasteless powders you sent removed the swelling and pains from the
veins in my legs.—l am, respectfully, yours, Mrs. C. A.


Bridget returned with the milk and filled the tea- pot up.
It was amusing to notice how Mrs. Hardbottom kept turning up her
nose disdainfully, as she saw the young ladies putting milk in their tea,
and then sipping it, and looking fondly on the poor dear squalling topsy
popsy, as his mother tried to pour the liquid down his throat, and cram a
piece of soft toast and butter into his mouth.
“ Ha, Mrs. Grundy,” at last said Mrs. Hardbottom,” you’re killing
that child by inches. You see the child doesn’t like the milk nor the cream,
either in any shape. Why don’t you get a goat, same as I do, and get
proper milk. A goat will cost you nothing, but it fossicks about in the
streets and gardens as I do.”
“0, but Mrs. Hardbottom,” interrupted Miss Ellen, I couldn’t bear
the smell of ttiose billy-goats—they’re disgusting.”
“ Who’s talking about billy-goats.” I mean a she goat.” Whoever
heard of getting milk from a billy-goat,” asked Mrs. Hardbottom,
indignantly.
“ I don’t know about getting milk,” retorted Miss Ellen, “ I only know
that where the females are the males are not generally far away.”
“ You talk foolishly, Ellen,” said Mrs. H., you’ll know very different
when you get married. You won’t be drinking this rubbish of milk then,
you’ll get yoir own.”
“ Well, but you see Mrs. Hardbottom” said Rosannah, “it looks so
homely to have the milkman calling on you every morning, and it wakens
your husband up to work.”
“Get out you silly thing; do you think husbands want milkmen to
waken them up ? you stupid,” continued Mrs. H., if my husband warn’tout
of bed and have the fire lit long before the milkman came, I’d make the bed
hot for him, believe me.”
“ But, perhaps, he wouldn’t stand it? interposed Ellen, inquiringly,
“ Wouldn’t stand it,” reiterated Mrs. H. “Then he should be down
to it. It just depends how you use your husband at first, I don’t give way
—see him to glory first, and tell him so, if you want coffee and goats’ milk
brought in bed to you every morning.
But if I didn’t take, as I intend doing, milk from the Hew South Wales
Fresh Food and Ice Comnany, noted for the pure milk supplied by them to
customers, I should have to get up to milk the goat,” said Ellen.
“ Milk the goat; get up to milk the goat! you shock me, Ellen. The
idea of a young married woman getting up to milk the goat just to please
her lazy hulk of a husband; I never did it, and won’t do it, And what’s
more, I wouldn’t drink the milk that comes round half churned in the carts
if you were to give me the milk for nothing. I’ve seen how things are done
in a cowshed before to-day ; and mark, sipping her tea.
“Be quiet, my dear little Tooty, while Mrs. Hardbottom is speaking,”
said Mrs. Grundy, to attract attentioa to the baby who had dropped off to
sleep. I’ll get a goat, Mrs. Hardbottom, if my Joe will milk her.”
“If Joe will milk her!” repeated Mrs. Hardbottom. “If there’d be
no “if” about it. If he didn’t milk the goat he shouldn’t sleep, for I’d
keep the baby crying all the blessed night long, that’d tickle him. That’d
bring him to his senses.”
“ You try it, Mrs. Grundy,” said three girls advisedly, this milk is only
so in name.


“By Juno, I’ll try it,” said* Mrs. G-. “I’ll make him buy a goat
to-morrow, and milk it too. And then we shall have tea without being
spoiled.”
“Do dear,” said Mrs. H., “and you’ll soon find the difference. That
sweet little child of yours is only eight months old, and yet there are at
least fourteen ounces of solid chalk in the poor little dear’s system, in the
stomach, in the blood and between the joints. No wonder the dear little
thing is always crying. And so would you if you had the rheumatics as
that poor child has. I’ll settle it to-morrow, believe me, and if the
experiment does not turn out satisfactorily, I’ll most certainly try the New
South Wales Fresh Food and Ice Company. I have tried nearly every dairy
in Sydney and this will be the last resource. Thus saying, the conversation
took a different turn, and after a pleasant evening, Mrs. Grundy’s tea-party
came to an agreeable close.
THE MILKMAID'S GARLAND ON M iY DAY.
Feom the days of Queen Anne to the American War of Independence, at the
close of which many good old English customs died out, the milkmaids
formed a distinguished and, doubtless, very pretty feature in the London
festivities of May Day. So far b;ick as May 2nd, 1825, a venerable
orhymester breathes his sorrow at their disappearance from the gay scenes
of former years. His stanzas are headed as above, and run as follows:
In London, thirty years ago,
When pretty milkmaids went about,
It was a goodly sight to see
Their May-day Pageant all drawn out
Themselves in comely colours drest.
Their shining garland in the middle,
A pipe and tabor on before,
Or else the foot-inspiring fiddle.
They stopt at houses, where it was
Their custom to cry “ milk below !’’
And, while the music play’d, with smiles
Join’d hands, and pointed toe to toe.
Thus they tripp’d on, till —from the door
The hop’d-for annual present sent—
A signal came, to curtsy low,
And at that door cease merriment


Such scenes and sounds once blest my eyes,
And charm’d ray ears—but all hive vanish’d !
On May-day, now, no garlands go,
For milk-maids, and their dance, are'banish’d.
My recollections of these sights
“ Annihilate both l iras and space];”
I’m boy enough to wish them back,
And think their absence —out of place.
On these lines, Mr. William Hone, a genial old antiquarian chatterer, writes
as follows:
From the preceding lines somewhat may be learned of a lately disused
custom in London. The milkmaids’ garland was a pyramidical frame,
covered with damask, glittering on ea h side with polished silver plate, and
adorned with knots of gay-coloured ribbons, and posies of fresh flowers, sur-
mounted by a silver urn, or tankard. The garland being placed on a wooden
horse, was carried by two men, sometimes preceded by a pipe and tabor, but
more frequently by a fiddle; the gayest milkmaids followed the music,
others followed the garland, and they stopped at their customers’ doors, and
danced. The plate, in some of these garlands, was very costly. It was
usually borrowed of the pawnbrokers, for the occasion, upon security.
One person in that trade was particularly resorted to for this accommodation.
He furnished out the entire garland, and let it at so much per hour, under
bond from responsible housek epers for its safe return. In this way, one
set of milkmaids wou'd hire the garland from ten o'clock till one, and
another set would have the garland from one o’clock till six ; and so on
during the first three days of May.
It was customary with milk-people of less profitable walks to make a
display of another kind, less gaudy in appearance, but better bespeaking
their occupation, and more appropriate to the festival. This was an exhi-
bition of themselves, in their best apparel, and of the useful animal which
produced the fluid they retailed. One of these is thus described to the editor
of the Every-Bay Book , by an intelligent eye-witness, and admirer of the
pleasant sight. A beautiful country girl “ drest all in her best,” and more
gaily attired than on any other day, with floral ornaments in her neat little
hat, and on her bosom, led her cow, by a rope depending from its horns,
garlanded with flowers and knots of ribbons ; the horns, neck, and head of
the cow were decorated in like manner : a fine net, like those upon ladies’
palfreys, tastefully stuck with flowers, covered Bess’s back, and even her
tail was ornamented, with products of the spring, and silken knots. The
proprietress of the cow, a neat, brisk, little, matronly body, followed on one
side, in holiday-array, with a sprig in her c »untry bonnet, a blooming posy
in her handkerchief, and ribbons on her stomacher. This scene was in
Westminster, near the old abbey. Ah ! those were the days.
The milkmaids’ earlier plate-garland was a pyramid" of piled utensils,
canied on a stout damsel’s head, under which she danced to tho violin.


PLOUGH MONDAY,
There is another quaint picture of an English revel in which the dairymaid 9
took prominent part:—
The first Monday after Twelfth-day is called Plough Monday, and
appears to have received that name because it was the first day after Christ-
mas that husbandmen resumed the plough. In some parts of the country,
and especially in the north, they draw the plough in procession to the doors
of the villagers and townspeople. Long ropes are attached to it, and thirty
or forty men, stripped to their clean white shirts, hut protected from the
weather by waistcoats beneath, drag it along. Their arms and shoulders
are decorated with gay-coloured ribbons, tied in large knots and bows, and
their hats are smartened in the same way. They are usually accompanied
by an old woman, or a boy dressed up to represent one; she is gaily
bedizened, and called the Bessy. Sometimes the sport is assisted by a
humorous countryman to represent a fool. He is covered with ribbons, and
attired in skins, with a depending tail, and carries a box to collect money
from the spectators. They are attended by music, and Morris-dancers when
they can be got; but there is always a sportive dance with a few lasses in
all their finery, and a superabundance of ribbons. When this merriment is
well managed, it is very pleasing. The money collected is spent at night in
conviviality. It must not be supposed, however, that in these times, the
twelve days of Christmas are devoted to pastime, although the custom
remains. Formerly, indeed, little was done in the field at this season, and
according to “ Tusser Eedivivus,” during the Christmas holidays, gentlemen
feasted the farmers, and every farmer feasted his servants and taskmen.
Then Plough Monday reminded them of their business, and on the morning of
that day, the men and maids strove who should show their readiness to com-
mence the labours of the year, by rising the earliest. If the ploughman
cjuld get his whip, his plough-staff, hatchet, or any field implement by the
fireside before the imdd could get her kettle on, she lost her Bhrove-tide
cock to the men. Thus did our forefathers strive to allure youth to their
duty, and provided them innocent mirth as well as labour. On Plough
Monday night the farmer gave them a good supper and strong ale. In some
places, where the ploughman went to work on Plough Monday, if, on his
return at night, he came with his whip to the kitchen-hatch, and cried
“ Cock in pot,” before the maid could cry “ Cock on the dunghill,” he gained
a cock for throve Tuesday.
We have in the Every Lay Book a fuller illustration of the “Milkmaid’s
Garland ” :—■
After I, says the writer, had sailed up the river Wye, and arrived at
Chepstow-castle, my attention was arrested by one of the prettiest processions
1 remember to have enjoyed. It consisted of milkmaids dancing and sere-
nading round an old man, whose few gray hairs were crowned by a wreath
of wild flowers ; he held a blossomy hawthorn in his right hand, and bore a
staff, with cowslips and bluebells, in his left. A cow’s horn hung across his
shoulders, wh ch he blew on arriving at a house. The youths and lasses
were more than thirty in number. Their arms, and heads, and necks were
surrounded by clusters of lilies of the valley and wild roses. Then came an
apple-cheeked dame with a low-crowned, broad-brim hat; she wore spec-
tacles, mittens were drawm up to her elbows, her waist trim, a woollen apron


hound it, her petticoat short, blue worsted stockings, a high-heeled pair of
shoes with silver buckles, and a broad tongue reposing on each instep. In
one hand she held a brass kettle, newly scoured, it was full of cream; in the
other, a basket of wood strawberries. To whoever came up to her with a
saucer or basin, she gave a portion of her cream and fruit, with the trimmest
curtsey I ever saw made by a dainty milkwoman betwixt earth and sky.
She was “ Aunt Nelly,” and her “Bough Bearer,” called “ Uncle Ambrose,”
was known for singing a song, “’Twas on one moonshinr night,” which
his defective pronunciation lisped “meaun sheeiney.” Ambrose strummed an
instrument in his turn, partly harp, and partly hirdy-girdy. Six goats har-
nessed in flowers, carried utensils in milking and butter making, and the farmer
of the party rode on a bull, also tastily dressed with the produce of the fields
and hedges. A cheese and a hatchett were suspended behind him, and he
looked proudly as he guided the docile animal to the public-house, into which
the milkmaids and their sweethearts went, quickened in their motions by the
cat-gut which made stirring sounds up stairs. The flowery flag was thrust
upwardly into the street, facing the iron bridge; and, getting again into
the fisherman s boat, I sailed and loitered down the banks of the river
charmed with what I had seen, felt, and understood. Of the
Miss Thomas, of Landcote, was the darkest, the neatest, and the tallest—she
stood only five feet ten inches high.
THE COW MASS.
The following, from the Town and Country Magazine (1825), is certainly in
its way a curiosity : J
• v T * ie em P eror Charles V. found it expedient to exhibit to the
inhabitants of Dunkirk, a show called the Cow- mass, on St. John’s Day
Whether it has been resumed is uncertain, but in 1789 it was described to
have been represented at that time in the following manner:
The morning is ushered in by the merry peals of the carillons , or bell-
playing. The streets are very early lined with sfidiers; and, by
o clock, every house-top and window is filled with specta os, at least forty
thousand exclusive of inhabitants.
, Ab ° ut en 0 after high mass at the great church, the show begins,
by the townsmen being classed according to the different trades, walking wo
and two, each holding a burning wax c indie, anl at least a yard lono-® and
each dressed not in their best apparel, but in the oldest and oddest fashion cf
tneir ancestors.
After the several companies is a pageant containing an emblematica ]
representation of its trade, and this pageant is followed by patron saints,
most of which are of solid silver adorned with jewels. Bands of music, vocal
and instrumental, attend the companies, the chorusses of which are very


Then followed the friars and regular clergy, two and two, in the habits of
their different orders, slow in their motion, and with the appearance of
solemn piety.
Then came the abbot in a most magnificent dress, richly adorned
silver and gold, his train supported by two men in the dress of cardinals-
Ti e host was home before him by an old white-bearded man of a most
venerable aspect, surrounded by a great number of boys in white surplices,
who strewed frankincense and myrrh under his feet; and four men supported
a large canopy of wrought silver over his head, while four others sustained a
large silver lantern, with a light in it at the end of a pole.
They then proceeded to the bottom of the street, where there was
elevated a grand altar, ascended by a flight of steps; there the procession
stopped, while the abbot came from under his canopy, and took the host from
the old man: ascending the altar, he held up the host in his elevated hands,
and the vast multitude instantly fell on their knees, from the housetops down
to the dirt in the streets below.
After this solemnity, gaiety in the face of every one appeared, and the
procession recommenced.
Other pageants came forth, from the great church, followed by a vast
moving machine, consisting of several circular stages to represent Heaven ;
on the bottom stages appeartd many friars and nuns, each holding w r bito
lilies in their hands, and on the uppermost stage but one were tw'o figures,
representing Adam and Eve, and several winged angels, in white flowing
garments. On the uppermost stage w r as one figure only, to represent God,
on whom all the eyes of the lower figures were directed, with looks of ado-
ration and humility ; this machine was drawn by horses.
Next followed an enormous figure to represent Hell. It w r as something
like an. ehphant, with a large head and eyes, and a pair of horns, on which
several little devils, or rather boys dressed like devils, were sitting; the
monster was hollow within, and the lower jaw was movable, by moving of
which it frequently exhibited the inward contents, which was filled with full-
grown devils, who poured out liquid fire from the “jaws of hell.” At the
same time, the figure w T as surrounded by a great number of external devils
dressed in crape, with hideous masks and curled tails.
Between the figures which represented “ Heaven ” and “ Hell,” several
young ladies passed with w reaths of flowers on their heads, and palms in
their hands, riding in elegant carriages. After El ell followed old Lucifer
himself, ai med with a pitchfork, and leading'St. Michael the archangel in
chains. Michael and Lucifer were followed by a person dressed in a kind of
harlequin’s coat hung round with bells, holding a hoop in his hands, through
which he frequently jumped, and showed many other feats of activity ; but
what or w ho he represented I cannot say (except it were a fool).
Then came a grand carriage, fevered with a superb canopy, from the
middle of which hung a little dove ; under the dove was a table covered with
a carpet, at which were sitting two women dressed in white, with wings,
pointing upwards to the dove. They represented the salutation of the
Virgin Mary.


Next followed a group of dancing boys surrounding a stable, in which
was seen the Virgin Mary again, and the child m the manger. This machine
was followed by another fool, like the former, with a hoop of bells.
The next machine was a fish, fifteen feet long, moved by men, on
wheels, concealed within: upon its back sat a boy, richly dressed, and
playing upon a harp ; The gold, silver, and jewels, which decorated this
fish, were valued at ten thousand pounds and were furnished by the city
merchants, whose sons and daughters were the principal actors in the show ;
After the fish came another fool, with a hoop, as before.
Then appea"ed Joseph as flying from Egypt; a woman representing
a virgin with a young child upon her lap, mounted on as ass, which was
led by Joseph, who had a basket of tools on his back, and a long staff in his
hand. Joseph and his spouse were attended by several devils, who beat
o ! f the people that crowded too close upon the procession ; these two were
followed by a fourth fool or hoop dancer.
Then came a large and magnificent carriage, on which sat a person
representing the grand monarque sitting on a throne dressed in his robes, with
a < rown, ball, and sceptre, lying before him on a table covered with
embroidered velvet. His most Christian Majesty was attended by several
devils, hoop-dancers, and banner-bearers.
Then followed another machine bearing the queen in her royal robes,
attended by a jrreat many ladies and maids of honour; the jewels of her
crown were said of be of vast value ; on this stage there was a grand band
of music, and many dancers richly attired.
Then followed Bacchus, a large fat figure, dressed in coloured silk,
attended by a great number of bacchanals holding goblets up to their mouths
as i i the act of drinking, with a few more devils and hoop-dancers.
Then followed a kind of a sea triumph, in the front of which appeared
Neptune with his trident and crown, in a large shell, surrounded by boys
dressed in white, who were throwing out and drawing in a deep sea-lead, as
s muding for land.
Six men followed in white shirts, with poles twenty-five feet longs
decorated with bells and flowers; frequently shaking their poles, or endea-
vouring to break them ; for he who could break one was exempted a whole
year from all parish duty.
The pole-bearers were followed by a large ship, representing a ship of
war drawn on wheels by horses, with sails spread, colours flying, and brass
guns on board fired off very briskly : on the quarter-deck stood the admiral,
captain and boatswain, who, when he whistled, brought forth the sadors,
some dancing, others heaving the log, and the tops filled with boys.
The ship was followed by the representation of a large wood, with men
in it dressed in green ; a green scaly skin was drawn over their own, and
their faces were masked to appear as savages, each squirting water at the
people from large pewter syringes. This piece of macliinery, which was
very noble, was the production of the jesuii’s college, and caused great jollity
amour the common people.


The wood was followed by a very tall man, dresstd like an infant in
body-coat, and walking- in a go-cart, with a rattle in his hand.
This infant was followed by a man forty-five feet high, with a boy
looking out of his pocket, shaking a rattle and calling out—“grandpapa l
grandpapa r” He was clothed in blue and gold, which reached quite to the
ground, and concealed a body of men who moved it and made it dance.
After him followed a figure nearly of the same stature, mounted on a
horse of suitable size for the enormous rider, which made a most striking
and elegant appearance, both man and horse being executed in a masterly
manner. It was made in a moving posture, two of the feet being raised
from the ground.
Then followed a woman of equal stature, and not inferior in elegance to
those which preceded ; she had a watch at her side as large as a warming-
pan, and her head and breast richly decorated with jewels; her eyes and
head turced very naturally ; and as she moved along she frequently danced,
a nd not inelegantly.
“Thus,” says its describer, “ended the Cow-mass, a show scarce
exceeded by any in the known world.”*


DB. SAMUEL HOOD,
No. 2 Bourke Street, Redfern.
CANCERS, TUMORS, DIPTHERIA, CROOP, CONSUMPTION,
NEPHRITIC, NEPHRIA, or BRIGHT’S DISEASE of the KIDNEVS,
HEPATITES, HEMORRHOIDS (piles), SCROFULA, STRICTURE
g f the UTHERA, NON-OPERATION of the EVES, SEEING and
DEAFNESS, HEART DISEASE, HEROPHILUS, CONGES-
TION OF AN? PART, ST. VITUS’ DANCE,
RHEUMATISM, ARTHRITIS, HCEMATURIA, &c., &c.
The “Lancet,” of the 7th August, 1880, has the following
article, by Robert Biggs, M.R.G S.E., L.S.A., Green Rark, Bath,
England:—“ln so horrible a disease as cancer of the female
genital organs, and one which we are compelled to admit we are
powerless to more thin palliate suffering; also he shows that
Dr. Clay’s etherial solution of turpentine, with sulphur, proved
ineffective to cure cancer. —p. 861; November 27, 1880.” At
the meeting of the Medical Committee, of the Middlesex Hospital,
on November 20th, 1880, it was resolved that no more chian
turpentine should be ordered for the treatment of cancer; as
after a long and careful trial it had been found that its results
were perfectly negative.
Diphtheria in Russia. —The “ Lancet,” of August 14th,
1880, p. 273, says : —“ Reports from the Government of Koursk,
states that from the Ist (13th) January to the Ist (13th) May of
the present year, 4107 cases of Diphtheria had occurred in the
Government. In December, 18/9, there had been 77 cases,
making a total of 4696 cases since the outbreak, of which 1307
had been fatal. From the Ist (13th) May to the Ist (13th)
July of the present year, 247 villages of the Government of
Poltava had been infected with Diphtheria, and in the course of
the month 859 cases occurred, of which 301 ended fatally. No
specific being discovered by that n ition.
Da. Hood professes to give immediate relief; which will
result in a perfect cure.
DR. SAMUEL HOOD,
No. 2 Bthree Street. Redfern.


ELECTRICITY i
300,000 MILES PER SECOND I !
Electricity travels at ti e above speed through any length of
wire—it thus proves itself most useful for Telegraphic and Tele-
phonic communications. ELECTRICITY has not cnly speed,
but is also endowed with great power, which may be regulated
from a gentle current, suitable for the weakest nervous person,
to the most powerful shock, that would kill an elephant. So
many purposes has electricity been applied to of late that it
would take up all the space in the “ Milky Way ” to enumerate
them ; but the following will give a brief idea of some of the
most important inventions:—
Electric Hells for communications in Houses, Stores,
Offices, Shops, &c.
Eire and Hiirglar Alarms to secure ourselves against
destruction by lire, and loss of property by theft.
Electro Motors for driving sewing machines.
Electric Lamps for domestic purposes, Medical Ap-
paratus, Shocking Coils, Magnetic Machines. Gras Lighting
Apparatus, Gilding and Plating Material, Lightning Con-
ductors, Batteries, Indicators, Electric Signs, &c. All the
above, and every variety of Electrical Apparatus can he
purchased of
J. W. WILLOUGHBY,
nui men i ms un mi,
95 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY,
And at LONE OX,
Manufacturer, Importer, and Fitter
OF EYIRY DESCRIPTION OF
ELECTRICAL APPARATUS.
LIBER VL 1 ISCOUNT TO TRADE.


M4CDOE4LD TOWH PUBLIC SCHOOL,
The Teacher prepared and passed 16 Candidates for University
Examination in November last, viz. : —1 senior, 4 juniors, and 11
for the Civil Service. Master E. W. Cooper passed 6th March,
1882.
Candidates Prepared for all Examinations.
MR. A. GODFREY,
SOLICITOR, CONVEYANCER, k PROCTOR,
Newtown ffioe —Corner of Enmore Road,
Adjoining' the Premises of Mr. Watson, Chemist.
Sydney Offices —53 Elizabeth Street.
N.P. —Mr. GODFREY attends the Newtown Police Court regularly.
Residence—l Camden Terrace, Cook's River Road.
MMo mmw Mo
(of Sydney University),
ivtsskville i-iaiTSE.”
31 DAPoLINGHTJBST road.
Candidates tutored for Matriculation, Law, Civil Service, and other Public
Examinations. Schools visited. Classes at Residence.
COOK BROTHERS,
FURNITURE], FURNITURE.
Harris Street, Ultimo.
Time Payment System.
Cancer, LTcer, Fistula, Tumour, Piles, Rheumatism, Dropsy,
Consumption, and all diseas3s.
MEDICINE, 2S. 6d.
Poor attended, with Medicines till Caved, GRATIS.
-m: if , w. b o , 5N-
308 PITT STREET.
Groceries ! Groceries I Groceries I
G- BEALE,
The Rich and Poor Man’s Friend,
Has removed from Raglan Street to Botany Road,
nearly opposite Mr. HinchcliftVs News Agency.


tJT® (Do
TOBACCONIST,
TOO MAEKET-ST., Sydney.
Who was the author of * - Beautiful Snow,”
Sydney people seem anxious to know,
When any day if they try, they may see very plain,
A more practical poet —J. C. Ross by name.
As pure as the snow, are the goods that he sells,
His tobacco all other tobacco excells ;
Such lovely cigars, too, so mild and nutricious,
When in Sydney, the Princes pronounced them delicious.
And on leaving sent to Ross, for just one cigar
To take as a present to Wales, their papa.
His meerschaums are models from bowl to stems,
His nick-nacks and walking sticks each and aligems.
In short, all requisites a smoker will find,
Excellent in quality, with cheapness combined,
One man with such tastes ’tis more profit to know
Than forty dead authors of “ Beautiful Snow.”
NOTE THE ADDRESS
100 Market Street, between Pitt & Castlereagh Streets
BROOK’S
Specially adapted
for
Hand and Machine
SEWING
COTTONS.
TRADE MARK—“Goat’s Head.”
WATKIN & WATKIN,
.Amctioneers and ICstate Agents,
SALES AT THE ROOMS EVERY TUESDAY.
[Property Sale Rooms:
281 PITT STREET Two Doors from School of Arts,


o_ bsnt 3
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
f#l4€€#Wif s
368 late 388 GEORGE STREET , SYDNEY ,
(NEXT THE GENERAL TOST OFFICE),
Importer of Tobacco, Cigars, and every
description of Tobacconists’ Goods
Orders from the Country promptly & carefully executed
ESTABLISHED IN SYDNEY, 1864.
Caution.— All Packets of Cut Tobacco bear C. BENT’S
Trade Mark, without which none are Genuine.


TASTELESS VEGETABLE
Aatibilioss and Live? Pills,
THE BEST REMEDY FOR THE CURE OF
Constipation, Bilious and Liver Complaints, Neuralgia, Rheuma-
tism, Sick Headache, Giddiness, Flatulence, Heartburn, Acidity
•of the Stomach, Hiarhoea, Dysentry, Piles, Skin Complaints,
Pimples, and all complaints arising from a disordered state of the
■Stomach and Bowels.
PREPARED & SOLD ONLY IN BOXES AT Is., 25., & 3s. 6d. EACH
R. T. BELLEMEY,
Corner of King and Egan Streets, Newtown.
These Pills have been proven by more than twenty years experience in the
various Australian Colonies to be the best medicine for purifying the blood,
and assisting Nature in her various operations. Being purely vegetable and
tasteless, they form a mild, agreeable, and superior Family Medicine, which
may be taken at all times without confinement or change of diet.
For Female Complaints they are invaluable. Many eminent medical
men have admitted that they are the safest and best Pills for any constitution.
As these Pills are pleasant to take, and warranted free from mercury or
calomel, or anything injurious to the most delicate constitution of either sex,
the Proprietor can confidently recommend them to the public.
Confectioner and Caterer.
W. BENNETT
Begs to tender his sincere thanks to the Public for past support, and begs to
intimate that he is now in a position to give estimates for Catering for School
Feasts, Wedding Breakfasts, and Banquets. Shops Supplied.
Note the Address—W. BENNETT, Caterer, Wholesale and Retail Past y Cook and
Confectioner, 81 Goulburn Street, Sydney.
W. CARTm Zt.aK.S.,
INDIA,
HOMtEOPATHIC PHYSICIAN.
•Consultation : Bto 10 and 4to 10. Visiting only from 10 to 3.
Res dence: 3 CONCUR STREET, WOOLLAHRA.


THE CELEBRATED
TEA WAREHOUSE
IS AT
705 GEORGE-ST. SOUTH,
HAYMAHKKT,
Please Xote that these Teas are packed Fresh every
day and sold in -lb. and lib. packets, also in Gib tins.
Our New Season Teas are to hand and are
offered at very low prices. Samples free of charge.
Note our Address—7os GEORGE STREET.
REUBIN OLIVER, Manager.
HALLO! I SAY, STRANGER,
Do you know where I can find a good Painter?
YES THAT I DO, TEY HIM,
Wo So Mo MiU)TIE 9
Of 116 Oxford Street is one of the Best in Sydney.
He keeps a varied stock of Wall Papers, Varnishes, Mixed
Paints, Sheet Glass, Kalsomin p Rubber Paint, &e.
A Fine Collection of Cut Stencil Patterns.
Agent for Winsor A Xewton’s Artists’ Materials.
NOTE TilE ADDRESS
W. I. 33. MOTE
PAIHT & PAPERI-3CANGIHG WAREHOUSE
HO OAI'OIIU NTllli£T.


BALMAIN INDEPENDENT,
LEICHHARDT OBSERVER,
City and Suburban Advertiser.
Price—ONE PENNY. Published every Saturday-
Sydney Office:
KENT-STREET, ONE DOOR FROM! ERSKINE-STREET.
Few things afford stronger evidence of the progress of Sydney than the
establishment of suburban newspapers. The extension of tramways, and
the reduction of the rates charged by ferry boats have induced thousands to
reside away from the city. Manufactures, too, which cannot be conveniently
carried on in the heart of a populous town, may be conducted a few miles
distant; and several important industries already exist. Thus the suburban
population has become very considerable, and is rapidly increasing. In these
outlying districts there arise many subjects of local interest, foremost
amongst which are the meetings of the municipal bodies, which determine
matters of importance. The suburban municipalities are in fact separate
townships, some of them being amongst the largest, most populous, and
most intelligent of the colony. The Sydney journals are too much occupied
with weightier que-tions to be able to devote much time or space to what
tabes place in the suburbs ; and many matters, often affecting the welfare
of thousands, would either pass unrecorded, or with briefest mention, but for
the facilities offered by suburban papers. The Independent has hitherto had
a most successful career; and great improvements have lately been made in
it with the view of extending its operations and increasing its usefulness.
Impartial and unsectarian, it aims after the general welfare of the suburbs.
Its reports will be found full; its local intelligence complete ; and its com-
ments, clear, crisp, and pointed ; no effort being spared to make it an honest
and reliable guide on all suburban affairs. The Independe t circulates
throughout the south-western districts, and is published at ONE PENNY.
Its reduction in price has secured it a large and influential circulation. Its
present form is a matter of great importance to advertisers, since it permits
every announcement to be placed in a conspicuous position ; and the adver-
tisements are, moreover, classified, so that reference is easy, and anything
sought aft ;r is readily found. The Independent indeed offers special
advantages to advertisers. It is admitted to be the cheapest, most popular,
and most widely circulated suburban paper.
Gr m WTSs
Sydney —o. L. G-rattan, Press Agency, George-street; Clarke, Market
Buildings, George-street; Wallace, King-street.
Balmain—J. Small, Darling-street; W. Richmond. Evans-street.
Sydney Office. —Kent-street, one door from Erskine-street.


J Mr?
fliiuo
N cad
3 1508 01973625 0


PREPARING FOR PUBLICATION,
UNIFORM IN TREATMENT AND PLAN
WITH
TEE "MILKY WAY,”
A graphic, humorous and exhaustive treatise on the Abuse,
Social Developments and Social Miseries, caused by GROG in
every age. The Essay will contain a Memorial on Historic
Hostelries and Taverns, and be published under the title of
“013 ms COLE."
Ik Predecessors, Successors,
Orders for Advertisements and Copies received at
J. WALTON, 21, Sydney Arcade.
