

“ ORMUZ OPTIC.”
VOL. I. No. 1.
* . v ,\ ' ' J '
Published in the Indian Ocean, Lat. 7.J+Jf. S. Long. 90. E.
VOL. I. No. 2.
Published in the Red Sea, Lai. 13.00 HI. Long. J/J/..00 E.
>
VOL. I. No. 3.
Published in the Mediterranean, Lat. 36.26 N. Long. 19.Jf6 E.
EDITED BY-
FRANK COLE MADDEN & GILLMORE GOODLAND
BRISTOL, ENGLAND.
H. R. CLARKE, Printer k Lithographer, 65, Milk Street.
1895.
I _ _
" J
“ORMUZ OPTIC.”
VOL. I. No. 1.
Published in the Indian Ocean, Lat. 7.44 S. Long. 90.24- E.
VOL. I. No. 2.
Published in the Red Sea, Lot. 13.00 A". Long. 44.00 E.
X
VOL. I. No. 3.
Published in the Mediterranean, Lat. 36.26 N. Long. 19.J/6 E.
EDITED BY—
FRANK COLE MADDEN & GILLMORE GOODLAND




THE
“ORMUZ optic;
VOL. I. No. 1.
Published in the Indian Ocean, Lat. 7.44 S. Long. 90.24- E
VOL. I. No. 2.
Published in the Red Sea, Lat. 13.00 A". Long. J/.J/..00 E.
VOL. I. No. 3.
Published in the Mediterranean, Lat. 56.26 N. Long. 19.J/6 E.
EDITED BY-
FRANK COLE MADDEN & GILLMORE GOODLAND
BRISTOL, ENGLAND.
H. R. CLARKE, printer A Lithographer, 65, Milk' Street.
1895.


O yez!!! PROCLAMATION. Oyezll!
To all to whom these presents may come, Greeting.
IT has been decided to start a Neivspaper for the amusement
and edification of the Passengers of the Second Saloon; such
Paper to be called,
“THE ORMUZ OPTIC.”
We therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in us by the
Committee, respectfully request, not to say demand , from all and
sundry, contributions of original papers, poems, or articles of general
interest, in fact anything, to make our “ Optic," “flash.”
Contributions signed by the authors, (and a nom-de-plume for
publication enclosed), may be posted in the Editor's Box, in the
Saloon.
As the first issue has soon to be in the press, intending
contributors are requested to forward their Articles as soon as possible
Anyone not assisting with their spontaneous co-operation is reminded
that “ We've got our 1 Optic' on ’em”
T . . vv . /FRANK C. MADDEN,
Joint Editors [ G ILLMORE GOODLAND.
Dated this 4th day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1895.


"THE ORMUZ OPTIC."
Vol. I. No. 1. Saturday, June Bth, 1895.
Published in the Indian Ocean, Lat. 7.44 S., Long. 90.24 E.
Edited by FRANK COLE MADDEN and GILLMORE GOODLAND.
OOHSTTEUNTTS,
Hatched, Matched and Despatched.
Advertisements.
Poetry : —On the “ Ormuz Ship,” by “ Beta.”
Leader.
Report of First Concert, by “Ivanhoe.”
Parnellism and Crime, by “Royal Navy.”
Short Pars.
Humourous Sketch :—“ Sweet Chiming Bells,” by “ Ex-carly-riser.”
Our Inaugural Concert, by “ Our Special Reporter.”
Notices and Fixtures for the Week.




ADVERTISEMENT.
ODEIRO, (Oh dear Oh).
\ N invaluable and unfailing remedy for sea-sickness. Used by all
l\ the uncrowned heads of Europe.
Sold in bottles at 10/6 and 21/- each, at the Barber’s shop on all
the respectable mail boats. If the medicine fails miserably make your
mind easy, you have purchased some worthless imitation.
TESTIMONIALS RECEIVED.
Mil-Cura-Mudborough,
England.
Sir,
I received your sample bottle of Odeiro and distributed it freely among
my children. lam pleased to testify that they have never been sea-sick in their
lives. True they have never been from home yet, but they have to cross a
bridge every day going to school.
I am, yours gratefully,
JOHN SMITH.
u HATCHED, MATCHED & DESPATCHED" COLUMN.
Hatched: —On the 4th hist., under most favourable auspices,
like Venus, born of the foam of the Indian Ocean, “ the Ormuz Optic.”
Home papers please copy.
Matched: —Wedded to Literature during the week, the unfortunate
Editors of the above named mighty Journal. No cards. Contributors
“ take the cake.”
Despatched: —ln great agony, and with beads of perspiration
rolling from his marbled brow, the last of the noble band of seasick
globetrotters has passed away, and the place thereof knows him no
longer. Enquiring friends please accept this intimation.
Now the day is over, when everything did use,
Including all our dinners and the waves besides,
Let us not remember, now we are at ease,
What, perforce, we gave up to the stormy seas,
Do not let us linger on our suffering great,
For what really happened, in full, we must’not state.
In Memoriam :—Sacred to the memory of the time we spent
between Adelaide and Albany. “ Never shall that memory fade.”


TESTIMONIALS—Continued.
Kilbally Whack,
Ireland,
Mr. Patrick Green presents Ids compliments and sends this unsolicited testi-
monial as requested. Mr. Patrick tasted the Odeiro and it made him so sick that by
the rules of Logic and Euclid what makes a man very sick on terra cotta, (i.e. dry
land) ought to make one very well on terra in cotta (i.e. wet water). Hoping you
may benefit others as you benefited Patrick Green.
N. B. ( Private ) —Writers of effective testimonials will receive a sample bottle,
gratis, at half price.
Owing to the unprecedented demand for “ Rough on Rats,” a fresh
supply will be stocked at Colombo. Ladies are respectfully informed
that early application is necessary for the few r small parcels still on hand.
They may be obtained at exhorbitant prices at the Barber’s Shop on
board.
ON THE "ORMUZ" SHIP.
ON the way to London,
On the “ Ormuz ” Ship,
Smooth and glassy water,
Sometimes takes a dip ;
Passengers four hundred,
Average, grand, genteel,
Talking of the voyage,
And of how they feel.
Couple young are seated
On the upper deck,
She with rugs abundant,
Something round her neck ;
Grandee sits beside her,
Never been to sea,
Smiles and talks of sailing,
0, how grand and free.
Night upon the “Ormuz,”
Darkness all around,
Grandee, he has left her,
Of him distant sound
Coming from the cabin,
Better draw the veil—
How that young man suffers,
As we onward sail.


Maiden sitting lonely,
Rug enough for two,
Suddenly a big swell,
Ship is passing through ;
Brings a student to her,
Blushing all the while,
Electric light is shining,
See the maiden smile.
Rather stormy night, sir,
Rather swelly, miss,
I shall not be able
To stand much of this;
Could you move my chair, sir
Where there’s shelter more,
Thank you, that is better,
I’ve sat here before.
Night upon the “Ormuz,”
Rug enough for two,
Waves are rolling lovely,
Grandee still not through ;
Student’s found employment,
Maiden all alive,
All the way to London,
Fittest must survive.— Beta.


LEADER.
IT was not without some qualms of conscious unworthiness that we
embarked upon what appeared at first sight, an extremely arduous
undertaking—the founding and editing of the “ Ormuz Optic ” —but it is
with pride and gratification that we find ourselves in a position to otter
our first issue to the world ; and, in doing so, we must acknowledge
the generous support that has been given us by all, and to our con-
trilmtors especially, we here tender our heartiest thanks.
It is not our intention to waste valuable space with a long leading
article, but, rather, to give a brief explanation of the aims and objects of
our Journal. In short, all we shall do is to put into newspaper form
original articles done for us by the passengers of the Second Saloon,
and to record passing events
To further this object we conjecture that it will be best to take all
papers and contributions sent in, arrange, and at times remodel them,
and subsequently to read everything as one would a newspaper, column
by column, from beginning to end.
Naturally enough, in a small community like ours, personal
references must in some degree enter, but it has been, and will always
remain, our constant endeavour to avoid anything which might, by any
possibility, be misconstrued into a reflection upon any of our friends.
It must be remembered, that, this is our opening number
and we shall be only too glad for you one and all to point out anything
which, in the slightest degre**, would tend to loosen the bonds of good
fellowship, which have entwined themselves around the social life of the
Second Saloon.
Without further apology, we launch our first issue on the troubled
seas of Journalism, and, though we may have our hands to the wheel
and our eyes on the compass, it is to our contributors we must look to
keep the bunkers filled and the furnaces going, till we reach the end of
the voyage, and, with that, the end of our labour of love.
The familiar story of the first appearance of a Cabinet Organ, in a
Primitive Church away in the Western States of America, occurs to us
here. It was thought necessary by the Churchwardens to post the
following notice over the organist’s seat—“ Please don’t shoot the
organist, he does his best! ”
Passengers of the Second Saloon 1 look on us as that organise and
be kind to us in all shortcomings, excusing as much as possible, trusting
to find matters rectified in later issues of the “ Ormuz Optic.”


CONCERT ON THE R M.S. "ORMUZ."
first of a series of Concerts was given in the Second Saloon of
£ the R.AI.S. " Orinuz," in the Indian Ocean, on Tuesday night
June 4th, 1895. All the seating accommodation in the Saloon was taken
up, and the audience was most appreciative. The ladies, who
were all prettily attired, occupied one half of the Saloon, and their
charming dresses and pleasant countenances added to the brightness and
pleasure of the gathering. The delightfulness of the scene was enhanced
by the presence of the passengers from the First Saloon, who
joined the company by invitation. The Commander of the palatial
vessel, Captain H. W. Livett, presided. The Rev. J. J. Hastie, said it
was his duty, as Chairman of the Recreation Committee, to announce
that Captain Livett had done them the honor of consenting to preside
(applause). Captain Livett then called upon the performers seriatim,
and suitably introduced them to the audience. Mr. J. C. Spedding
played a Solo on the Violin (an air with variations), and was greeted with
much applause at the finish of his creditable performance. An interest-
ing Reading, entitled, " The Coolie Boy and Dog," was also effectively
given by him, and the rendering of this piece, judging from the applause
awarded Mr. Spedding at its close, was highly appreciated by the
audience. Mrs. A. W. McMath was very successful in her rendering of
the " Venetian Boat Song," and was heartily applauded. An amusing
Reading, " How a Woman Chops Wood," given by Mr. John Varcoe
was a meritorious effort, and worthy of the approval bestowed, but
Mr. Varcoe would have been more effective had lie pitched his voice a
little higher, thus making due allowance for the spaciousness of the
Saloon, the working of the propeller, and the hissing of the water outside
the port-holes. A Duet, "Bitter Sweet," sung by Airs. Morgan and Miss
Wright, was admitted on all hands to be the gem of the evening. This,
piece wascertainly acharming contribution to theEntcrtaimnent, theladies'
voices blending most sweetly and harmoniously. They were encored, and at
the request of Captain Livett, who conveyed the strongly expressed
desire of the delighted gathering, Airs Morgan and Aliss Wright
repeated the latter portion of the Duet. Miss Wright afterwards sang,
" We'd Better Bide a Wee," and for her admirable rendering of this old
favorite, also secured an ovation. Aliss Guille sang, " Sunshine and
Rain," very sweetly, and fully deserved the hearty applause that was
gratefully awarded her. Dr. Madden scored greatly with his excellent
singing of the humorous Song, " The Polka and the Choir Boy." In
response to an encore, he recited an Irish version of Longfellow's
"Excelsior," this heing a capital specimen of Hibernian humour well
delivered. For this second contribution the audience also applauded the
Doctor very heartily, and gave him clearly to understand that they
would be pleased to hear more from him on a future occasion. Aliss
Bennett sang " Music by Aloonlight," and her sister, Miss E. Bennett,
sang " Gathering up the Shells from the Sea Shore." These young


ladies have very sweet voices, and their Songs were very nicely rendered.
"Gathering Shells," with an effective chorus, was a great treat. Not
only did the audience cordially applaud these young ladies, but they
were unanimous in the expression of a desire to hear them again. Mr.
C. Newby, who has a tine voice, was awarded a pleasing meed of appre-
ciation for his admirable vocalisation of the delightful song, "My
Sweetheart When a Boy." The entertainers labored somewhat under
difficulties, the rolling of the vessel being the principal trouble, This
would certainly account for the seeming nervousness of several of the
vocalists. At the close of the Concert, the Rev. Mr. Hastie tendered the
thanks of the Musical Committee to the ladies and gentlemen who had
taken part in the Entertainment, and hoped that many other concerts
would be given 011 future evenings in the course of the voyage (applause)
He also desired to tender the thanks of the Committee and the passenger
co Captain Livett for presiding (applause). Captain Livett, in responding
said the performers of the evening had afforded the other
passengers a great treat, and were deserving of all praise. If
the Committee should in future be able to put before them such
Concerts as the one they had enjoyed that night, the caterers might
depend upon it, that they would have a full house every time (applause).
011 behalf of the Visitors, he desired to tender their thanks for the
cordial invitation extended to them (applause). Mr. Maurice, Salom
(Adelaide) said the passengers of the First Saloon accepted with pleasure
the invitation to be present at the Concert, and they had certainly
listened to the various numbers that had been given with a very great
deal of pleasure. The success of the Entertainment had been attained
in a great measure by the excellent accompaniments of the worthy
Pianist, Mr. T. Thornton (applause). He also returned thanks 011
behalf of his fellow-passengers of the First Saloon, for the kind invitation
given to them (applause). In reply, Rev. Mr. Hastie, said, "I cannot
say anything except that, if you are satisfied, we are gratified, and if
you are gratified we are satisfied."
The Concert was concluded by the singing of "God Save the Queen.
Muoh of the credit of the Entertainment belongs to the Musical
Committee, viz. : Dr. Madden, Mr. T. Thornton and Mr. E. O'Brien, as
well as to the General Secretary, Dr. T. H. Morgan, and the President
the Rev. Mr. Hastie.
" PARNELLISM AND CRIME"
ROYAL NAVY.
THAT the Irish are a maligned and suffering people, will receive
further confirmation 011 a perusal of the following story which is
founded on fact. Many years ago, at a time when our crack frigates and
cruisers were the pride of their officers and crews, the stowing of


hammocks in long parallel lines, was an important part of the day's duty;
and when done well, added greatly to the shipshape appearance of the
vessel. Special hands were detailed for this work, and on board the
cruiser, to which I was attached at the time, there was among these,
a man named Parnell, who forms the subject of this sketch.
One day Parnell, being 011 leave, was spending his time ashore, and
an Irish messmate was performing his duties, one of which, as I have
said, was the stowing of the hammocks. The Irishman was busying
himself with this work under the superintendence of the First Lieutenant.
He was presently surprised by a hail from the Officer " Stow those'
hammocks parallel."(?) Pat mistaking the word "Parallel" for his friend's
name, shouted back in reply, "Parnell's on shure, sor."
Much to his amazement, the order was repeated more peremptorily
than before, "Stow those hammocks parallel."
This time he gave no answer, but muttered to himself "Be Jabers
and does the chief think I'm to spind my toime talkin about Parnell
when it's worlcin lam for the spalpeen." The Lieutenant ( who bye the
bye is now an Admiral), seeing 110 notice taken of his order, fairly roared
out once more " Do you hear me telling you to stow those hammocks
parallel." "Shure it'ill be Parnell's own mother's son he's after wantin"
says Pat, and raising his voice, he yelled " Did'nt I tell you sor, Parnell
isn't here at all, at all, but bedad it's myself that'll go ashore and fetch
him if your Honour wants him,"
The lieutenant then gave it up in desperation, and having ordered
another man forward to do the work as he wished it done, proceeded to
give Pat a good dressing down. Part was much surprised and disgusted
and cannot understand to this day, why the lieutenant burst out laughing
at the explanation that was given him.
SHORT PARS.
A SUDDEN and awful example was made of a wretched being at the
conclusion of the concert. He was held down by his neighbours
and made to take a few grains of strychnine with a flavouring of ship's
coffee, and ultimately the medical officer was called in and proceeded
"with a sabre true to cut cleanly through his cervical vertebra)" in his
endeavour to reach the following joke which had been forced down
the poor man's throat by his infuriated fellow passengers. Here it is :
Our worthy editor had just finished his song and some one shouted
" Encore." " Encore be Plowed " said the victim " let the same man sing
again."
The coroner's jury returned a verdict of Justifiable Homicide and
the corpse will be committed to the deep to-morrow.


A small and select party of worshippers at the Shrine of Terpsichore
entertained the passengeis of the First Saloon last Thursday evening. As
no passes were forwarded to our staff we cannot give any details, but we
gather indirectly that the dance was carried to a successful issue.
About 8 o'clock 011 Tuesday evening, the 4th inst., there was no
little excitement on board the " Ormuz " as the " Cuzco's " lights became
visible from the deck. Hearty cheers of mutual greetings passed between
the two vessels and the usual signals were exchanged.
The " Cuzco " looked very pretty as she steamed past, but she was
soon lost to view, disappearing as a giant star on the far distant horizon.
As the outcome of a challenge from the gentlemen of the First
Saloon, a Cricket Match was played 011 Friday afternoon on the promenade
deck. Greatly to the delight of the Second Saloon, our representatives
scored a victory by a narrow majority. A full report will appear in our
next issue.
We would like to throw out the hint to " the powers that be " to
get their "Optic" on the rats who have up to the present time held
undisputed sway in the Second Saloon after 10 p.m. Their extermination
seems necessary, judging from the gymnastic exercises which many of
our lady passengers have already indulged in, so that serious disaster
may be averted.
SWEET CHIMING BELLS.
£XEARLY-RISER.
bells are the trouble of my existence. They seem invented
for the puipose of confusing one when one wants to know what the
time of day is. Perhaps they are meant to nuke the time pass unnoticed
as one is constantly losing the run of four hours. Last Sunday morning
I woke after a most refreshing sleep and enjoyable dreams of "love and
jam and other pleasingt rifles," and lay calmly meditating 011 these happy
fancies, when suddenly my ear was invaded by a noisy clang, Six Bells !
Six Bells ! I thought Six Bells whatever dees that mean, after a long
process of mathematical induction, I came to the conclusion that it meant


the hour was 7 a.m. The electric light was shining brightly through
the window from the passage, so I jumped up in great haste for fear of
missing that cup of lovely coffee and set off for the bath-room.
Half-way down the passage 1 bumped into a steward.
“ Hullo ! what are you rushing about like this for ” he asked.
“ I’m going to get a bath” I returned.
“What do you want with a bath at this time of the morning?”
“ Oh I’m not one of those lazy beggars who lie in bed till 8 o’clock ”
1 answered, “ 1 pride myself on my early rising.”
“ I should say you did,” he replied, and laughed rather more heartily
than the occasion justified 1 thought.
When I got to the bathroom it seemed rather dull and quiet. But
it was a very cloudy morning, so I concluded people were lying in just
a little later than usual and I proceeded to have a cold shower bath;
but when I came to look for the towel there was none. Here was a fix
dripping wet and with nothing to dry myself but a suit of pyjamas
and a pair of deck shoes, “Oh ! those lazy stewards” I muttered, but that
didn’t mend matters. So not wishing to make a nuisance of myself I
shouted in a subdued way “Steward ! Stew-ew-ard!”
By and by came the replying “Yes Sir.”
“Steward, where are the towels?”
“ Towels sir ! we don’t bring them down till 6 o’clock sir.”
“Well it’s seven o’clock now and why aren’t they here.”
“It isn’t 7 o’clock sir its only S. Six bells just yone sir.”
I slammed the door in his face and made sundry profane remarks
better veiled in oblivion, about those sweet bells.
1 do not get up now until I hear the breakfast bell.
OUR INAUGURAL CONCERT.
THE Musical Committee are to be congratulated on the success of
their first concert, which was held in the Saloon last Tuesday evening,
in the presence of a distinguished company, presided over by our worthy
skipper, Captain Livett, who was ably supported by our President, the
Rev. J J. Hastie. “ Bright the lamps sh me o’er fair women and brave
men,” as our local Paganini emerged from his retirement (we conclude
our reporter refers to the bathroom. Eds. Optic. ) and burst refulgent
upon the expectant gaze of the assembly.
The preliminary canter was somewhat marred by “the wind that
blows in from the sea,” causing the music to flutter to the floor, but soon
the performer got away and made the running with the “air and
variations.”
The variations decidedly came out on top, (reminding one of
Maccabe’s statement that “the wariation is a worritin of the toon ”)
while the tune could occasionally be heard “ Spedding” away in the rear.


The Venetian Bout Song as rendered, was particularly appropriate
in our rolling condition, because of the frequent exhortation to “ Steady.”
(We might mention that the press-box was at the rear which accounts
for our reporter mistaking “ Starle ” for “ Steady.” Eds. Optic.) Again
with Maccabe it may be said “it’s the top-note what fetches the British
public.”
Then Varcoe chopped wood ala Max Adder. As far as is known
Mrs. Varcoe is not on board, perhaps it’s just as well. Mrs. Robinson
apparently chopped several things and should be in great demand when
next we have frozen brawn. “Bitter Sweet,” the next item, was puzzling.
Which was which ? AVho would dare to say? “Tell it notin Gath,
whisper it not in the streets of Askalon.” Would that we also might
have “ wandered by the river ” ! Minus the Doctor with a shot gun. As
our contemporary the London Times would say the inevitable encore
followed.
Then we had “ Sunshine and Rain ”by Miss Guide (a re-guille-ar
treat.)
The criticism on the “ Polka and the Choir Boy” and succeeding
item was so warm that the type fused “be jabers.” This fact, coupled
with our innate modesty, debars us from further comment. (Eds. Optic.)
Next came the event of the evening, ( personal modesty is distinct
from our profession ), with eloquent gesture and in rounded periods,
the proclamation of the “Optic’s” Nativity, was voiced in the stentorian
tones of the President, calling forth an outburst of receptive acclamation
from the assembled multitudes.
Such a reception is absolutely unheard of in the annals of Journalism
since the days of Mcthusaleh. without further apology we proceed.
Eds. Optic. ) The next ten minutes were spent “ Gathering up the
Shells from the Seashore,” on hearing which melody rendered, many
of us were for following Martha Snell’s example “to burst this mortal
shell and hatch ourselves as cherubims.” The chorus (?) as given by
the choir, was disconcerting rather than helpful to the soloist. They
were evidently in need of a conductor with a “ baton ”(perhaps a
marline spike would answer the same purpose.)
N.B.—We will not assume the responsibility of this paragraph. (Ads. Optic.)
We were then told that “We’d Better Bide a Wee,” but were
unable to accept the pressingly reiterated invitation. AVe sincerely repented
this a moment later for “Coolie’s Dog” loomed upon the scene. (Personally,
we would prefer the Doctor and two shot guns, though we cannot but
sympathise with the dog’s ’orrible fate. (Eds. Optic.) AA 7 hy didn’t we
lock the bathroom? Echo answers why?
“ Music and Moonlight” helped to relieve the monotony of Music and
Electric light for a few moments, paving the way for Newby and his
“ Original Belle.’’ We were given a few practical hints before Newby
“ folded his tent like an Arab and silently stole away.” Over the
oratorical efforts we will draw a veil. Sufficient that they preceded the
singing of the National Anthem which brought the audience to their
feet and the entertainment to a close.


FIXTURES FOR THE WEEK.
SPORTS.
MESSRS. Lory MacLeod and Goodlaud,the Sub-Committee for Sports,
beg to announce that the first of a series of amateur sports will be
held on Monday, 9th inst., on the quarter-deck, wind, weather and cir-
cumstances permitting. The first event will be “ run off” at 2.30 p.rn.
sharp. All events open—No entrance fees or gate money. —ROLL UP.
MUSIC.
The next concert will be held on Wednesday evening, at 8 o’clock.
All wishing to take part (and everybody is invited to do so) will please
notify the musical committee—Messrs. Thorton, E. O’Brien and Dr.
Madden, as soon as possible, in order that a good programme may be
arranged.
GAMES.
The various tournaments arranged by this committee are now being
rapidly played oft', and during the coming week it is expected that the
present series will be completed. As several of the competitors are
“raw hands” a considerable amount of amusement may confidently be
expected.
DANCING.
As we are going to press the inaugural dance is being carried on
with great vigour, and it is only necessary to announce, that, as far as
practicable, Friday will be the evening set apart for this fascinating
amusement.




"THE ORMUZ OPTIC."
Volume I. No. 2. Thursday, June 20th, 1895
Published in the lied Sea, Lat. 13.00 N., Long. Jfl/,.00 E.
Edited by FRANK COLE MADDEN and GILLMORE GOODLAND
C O USTTIEIST TS.
Cradled, Altared and Entombed.
Poetry ; —A Pitiful Tale, by “ The Duke.”
A Pat on the .Back, by Hit A Wrong.”
Fond Memories Renewed, by “ Nemo.”
Leader.
Report of Sports Meeting, by “ The Staff.”
Heard in the Smoking Room, by “ Kde.”
Sketch :—His First Voyage, by “ That Midshipman.”
Interviews with Prominent Passengers:—
Mr. Jno. Spedding, by “ Our Special Representative.”
“ Ormuz,” Day by Day.
A Memory of Colombo, by “ Goosequill.”
Children’s Column :
* Poem : —A Child’s Faith, by “ Beta.”




CRADLED, ALTARED and ENTOMBED.
Born. —Off Socotra, on Tuesday 18th inst, "A Heavenly Calm"
which rapidly spread among the passengers as soon as the island came into
sight. The child is thriving well 011 the concentrated milk and if it
survives the heat of the Red Sea will doubtless reach England in good
order and condition.
Wedded to their respective professions ; the engineering and
nautical students in our midst. They both stick at it well. Has the
length of the hair or the length of the sash anything to do with it 1 Are
investigations being carried on to determine the co-efficient of rupture
of the human hair, or is our other friend studying the Indian Kummer-
bundic mystery.
Died. —The " Braw Scot," who during the recent monsoon, in reply
to the agonized plaint of a fellow passenger "Oh! sir when will this be
over," answered brutally " Eh! MOll soon." He departed this life unosten-
tatiously over the side of the ship and now the only thing the passengers
of the Saloon heave, is a sigh of relief.


A PITIFUL TALE.
THE DUKE
'X'AKE it up gingerly,
| Lift it with care,
Tis the ghost of an Editor
Once, ah ! how fair.
He tost, by wild Monsoon,
Groaning in hunk;
Whitewashed ethereal coon,
Wished “ Ormuz ” sunk.
Roused from his restless sleep
By sound of dinner bell;
One wild convulsive leap,
One weird heart-rending yell
Thus cabin steward speaks :
“ Oh, ye of bilious hue,
Try this day’s soup of leeks
Followed by Irish Stew.”
On him let’s draw the veil,
Gurgling in solitude;
List to his fearful wail.
Groaning in plenitude.
Now speaks his brother Ed.
“ Oh ye of jaundiced hue,
Arise ye. Take up your bed,
Socotra’s in view.”
Gently we watched him
With tearful eye,
No microbes cotched him
For we were by.
Lulled by the stormy main
Our banner’s high,
Staff is itself again
“ Optic ” can’t die.


A PAT ON THE BACK.
( N.B.—The title is our own, Eds. O.O.)
HIT WRONG.
WE all were pleased this morning when we knew,
The “Ormuz Optic’s,” second issue would be read,
For we are all agreed, that we have few
Pleasures, to equal hearing our good “Eds.”
There were not wanting those who thought to see
Them take advantage of their post and sadden
Some; by a thoughtless personality,
But no, the “Optic’s” mission is to gladden.
The genial doctor is by far too Frank
Ever to Madden , with untimely jest,
And surely on Bad sea we all should thank
Good land for adding to our lives a zest.
FOND MEMORIES RENEWED.
NEMO.
Sequel to the "In Memoriam" of our former issue.
Set to Music to the tune of " In the Gloaming."
TN the “Ormuz,” oh poor “Madden,”
! When the Monsoon wind did blow,
And the footsteps of the Stewards
Softly come and quickly go.
When the passengers were moaning
With a deep and earnest woe,
Did yon really think of me lad,
As yon did not long ago.
In the Cabin, Oh, poor “Madden,”
I thought bitterly of thee,
When you ran away and left me,
In the middle of our tea.
Did yon have that sudden longing,
To gaze upon the deep blue sea ;
If so, then ’twas best yon left ns,
Best for you and best for me .


LEADER.
WE must apologise to our Subscribers and to the Public generally
for our apparent remissness and lack of courtesy in so long
delaying the publication of our second issue. It is not necessary to
refer at length to the various causes that have combined to prevent us
from keeping faith with all who have been so eagerly awaiting the
intellectual treat here afforded them.
The “ spiciness ” and piquancy of the Ceylon breezes and subsequent
Monsoon, carrying in their track the indisposition (to speak mildly)
of one of our Editors—whose pitiful lot is fully treated of in
another column—are quite sufficient to account for any dereliction of
duty on our part. To the feelings of our fellow-passengers and con-
tributors we need not here refer, touching as it would be, upon a subject
which is doubtless as unpleasant to them as it is painful to our suffering
selves. Sincerely deploring past delinquencies, and regretting unavoid-
able circumstances which so successfully incapacitated us, we bid you
once more approach the Shrine of the Patron Goddess of Literature, and
open your ears wide to the words of wisdom set before you.
“ Walk ye with wise men, and thou shaft be wise.”


OUR FIRST SPORTS MEETING.
THE initial meeting held under the auspices of the Sports Sub-
committee was carried to a highly successful issue yesterday
(Wednesday) afternoon. The first event was the Egg and Spoon Race.
The wholesale destruction of eggs during the first heat was appalling.
(It was remarked by many that we had eggs and bacon, without the eggs
this morning. Does this race afford sufficient eggscuse T ) The clerk of
the course however, not in the least put out, made a suggestion by no
means Ma-cLecdy, and the contest was finished with the help of the use-
ful, but unshapely spud. In an exciting final, victory fell to Mr. Hall,
Dr. Madden making a good second. In the ladies race after brilliant
running, Miss Wright and Miss Burges gained Ist and 2nd prizes
respectively. The ccck fighting was really good sport, many of the birds
being in fine fettle and well feathered. Perhaps the most brilliant
match was the last, which was once more contested by the previous' final
rivals. The former victor proved to be " Hall there," the Doctor
ruffling his plumes in token of defeat. The Standing Long-jump was
won by Mr. Smithers, whose best was 8-ft. 6|-ins. Chalking the line
was also won by this gentleman, who had what some of the other con-
testants designated " the fancy trick." We submit, however, that his
was the really scientific way of " coming at it." Perhaps the most fun
was occasioned by the game of " Chalking the Pig's Eye." No one got
nearer than 2^-ins. and as this degree of proximity was attained by
Percy Ellis, he was proclaimed victor. Like the original of his name,
the famous Douglas Percy, he may be called "Pierce eye." A good joke
was played at the expense of the genial senior member of the Sports
Committee. Duly blindfolded he was supplied with a potato instead
of the necessary chalk ; carefully groping his way he arrived within what
he belie to be a fair distance of the Porker's Optic, and "made his
mark ;" when, however, he removed the bandage and found the mark
non est Lor 'cdid stare. Fortunately his remarks were drowned in the
hearty laughter which greeted his discomfiture. This incident brought
the merry proceedings to a close, and it is the general hope that the
Committee will soon provide another afternoon's similar enjoyment.
HEARD IN THE SMOKING ROOM.
KOE.
DURING the late spell of bad weather, a group of hardened salts were
seated round the table in the smoking room, whiling away the
time, and reminiscence followed reminiscence in rapid succession, while
the wind whistled, and the waves roared outside in the cheerless night.
Taking advantage of a slight lull in the conversation, a swarthy
weatherbeatcn man claimed attention by a prolonged "ahem" and thus


took up the parable. “ Well, 1 reckon it would have made the flesh of
some of you chaps creep to have been afloat with me, and thirty others
on a clipper ship (I can’t tell you her name, why! you will see presently)
about *2O years back. We were a tight ship, well found in spars and
men, and as we warped slowly out of the docks, there wasn’t one of us,
but felt our hearts glow with pride as we cheerfully laid out aloft to
spread the canvas to the freshening breeze. Our cargo was shipped from
Liverpool, but it wasn’t till we were about 7 days out that it became
known on board, we were carrying 300 tons of powder and guncotton,
consigned to the naval station at the Cape.
1 mind icell now, it was a Friday we first heard of this, and that
very night it came on to blow hard. For three days and nights we
scudded under bare poles before the wind, and such a wind as you only get
in the Bay of Biscay.
Glad enough were we poor wretches, who had hardly closed our eyes
during the whole storm, to see prospects of a change in the weather for
the better. For two days the sun smiled down on us and we made every
effort to patch up our shattered gear and soon we were getting along
under easy sail, once more on our true track.
Eight bells, mid day, had just gone when a fearful cry of “ Fire,”
rang through the ship from stem to stern. Well lads, may you never
know what it is to hear that terrible cry, to feel your blood run cold, as
your awful helplessness dawns upon you. With headlong haste tve
tumbled up on deck co meet our fate. There we were in mid-ocean, with
a damaged ship, caught like rats, with a furnace blazing away under our
very feet, the flames in fitful bursts slowly but surely creeping towards
the magazine and to our certain destruction. For a moment we were
powerless to move, dazed with the awfulness of the scene, but we were
quickly roused by the Captain, who shouted from the quarter-deck, “ All
hands to fire quarters.”
In an agony of despair we slaved for hours against our remorseless
foe, but at last fully realizing the hopelessness of our situation, as the
flames gained constantly upon us, we threw everything down and made
a general rush for the nearest boats.”
As he warmed to his subject the old man’s eyes glistened and his
face glowed with eagerness, while the half stifled breathing of his awe-
struck listeners showed how closely they were following his recital of
this gruesome page in his life’s history. He took a quick glance round
and a sup at his grog standing at his elbow, and went on with great
earnestness: —
“Hands off the boats my lads,” roared the Captain drawing a
revolver as he spoke and pointing it quick as thought, with unfaltering
aim at the mass of men by the boat. There’s nothing like a revolver
barrel to bring a man to his senses after all, boys. Before long the boats
were lowered, and we were soon in our proper places at the oars with all
the provisions and water we could lay hands on in our hurry. The
Captain was only with difficulty dragged from his ship at the last.


We pulled for bare life straight for the open sea. No thought of
land entered our minds only the deadly fear of the awful fate that must
be ours if we delayed another moment.
Suddenly there was a roar. All eyes were dazzled by the fearful
tongue of flame that shot up into the heavens, scattering burning timbers
far and wide. The sublime grandeur of the scene was increased by the
darkness which had fallen, for we had been working all the afternoon and
evening at the tire buckets Many of the glowing embers splashed and
hissed around us as they fell into the water.
Another roar , and all that remained of the hulk of the once beautiful
vessel seemed to leap from the water, a flaming mass, only to plunge
next minute out of sight, swallowed by the waves.
That last flash lasted just long enough to show us the jollyboat
shattered by a falling spar, with its crew all struggling for their lives in
the waves that threatened to engulf them.
A sudden squall made us look to ourselves and we rowed aimlessly
about till dawn, but then no sign of ship, or boat, or land could we
discern.
Well, to make a long story short we steered as best we could by the
help of the mate’s pocket compass, but soon water and food failed and
we lost all hope.
Next day, still the same wide expanse of ocean, no sail, no land, no
w r ater to moisten our parched lips.
Then at last nature asserted herself. We, who were spared, had to
live and so—but no !
“I cannot tell you any more except that the survivors, three of us in
all, dying of thirst, were at length cast upon a small island not far from
the mainland. ”
With a deep sigh as though to banish old memories the narrator
paused and then slowly continued :
“ Our boat was dashed to pieces on the rocks and so all evidences
of the terrible experiences through which we had just passed were lost.
Don’t ask me for more, lads, to-night. I’ve spoilt my rest already, but God
knows I couldn’t help it. The others have died since, so the secret is
now all my own.”
He left the room without another word, and one by one, his
listeners, hardly daring to*look behind them followed, preferring to smoke
the last pipe of the evening on deck.
Few of them slept that night and for several days the smoking room
was strangely silent, no one caring to make any reference to their last
meeting,
“ When ghoul-like forms seemed turning in their graves ”


HIS FIRST VOYAGE.
THAT MIDSHIPMAN.
A NEWLY joined Midshipman was on duty at the gangway of a large
four-masted ship at Calcutta. At this port the ship was under-
going an overhaul, and a stage was hanging over the stern, upon which
one of the ship's crew was busily occupied in painting the ports.
Presently the Captain ordered out his gig and seating himself in it, called
out to the middy, to " let go the painter," (the nautical name for the
rope at the bow of the boat). The middy was greatly surprised at the
order and simply stared at the Captain, as though he could scarce believe
his ears. Again the order was shouted, " Let go the painter." Still
the middy hesitated, but finally, as the Captain once more repeated his
former order, he walked slowly to the stem and loosing the ropes that
held the stage, precipitated the poor painter, pots and all, into the
muddy stream. As he returned to the gangway he was met by the
infuriated Captain, who in language more forcible than polite asked him
why he did not let go the painter as directed. For answer, the middy
now thoroughly mystified, pointed to the water where the unfortunate
painter was frantically struggling, and it was only with considerable
difficulty that the man was saved from a watery grave. After that a
more experienced Officer was left in charge of the gangway.
INTERVIEWS WITH PROMINENT PASSENGERS.
No. 1.
JOHN SPEDDING, Esq., C.B.
OUR popular violinist, having distinguished himself by his performances
at the concert the other evening, and having thereby won many
ardent admirers, our representative, at the express desire of many of the
artist’s numerous friends in the Saloon, interviewed Mr. Spedding to-day
and requested him to answer certain questions with regard to his career.
Mr. Spedding willingly complied, answering questions put to him as
follows :
“Where were you born, Mr. Spedding?”
“In Lancashire, at Blackburn, I came to Auckland, New Zealand in
1887 via. Melbourne, in a sailing vessel, for the benefit of my health.
Auckland, to my opinion, is the finest city South of the Equator.” (We
understand that Auckland is the only city Mr Spedding has visited in
the Southern Hemisphere.— Ed.)
“ You seem to be very fond of practising your art Mr. Spedding?”


“ Yes, Sir, I have discovered it is necessary to spend a good deal of
time at practice if one wishes to play at all^well.”
“ Judging from your performances, I should say that you have been a
player for a considerable time 1 ”
“ No, not for very Some five years ago Poussard, a well known
Australian Violinist visited Auckland, and I then got the inspiration,so to
speak, from him. Since then I have practiced on my violin in all my
spare moments. Were it not that I have a regard for human suffering,
1 would spend six hours every day on this ship, at practice.”
Which is your favourite Solo ?”
“If you mean for the violin, I think the “ Souvenir ”of Haydn, has
given me the most pleasure. But there are so many beautiful com-
positions, that it would be hard for me to pick out the best.”
“ I suppose you have played at many public concerts ? ”
“ Oh Yes ! I am a member of the Auckland Orchestral Union, and
have played at all their concerts since I became a member of it. I have
played Solos now and again at other concerts, but when playing in pviblic,
I prefer to take part in Quartets, etc.”
“What do you think of the passengers on this vessel?”
“ I think taking them all round, that they are the most sociable I
have ever had the pleasure of travelling with. We are particularly
fortunate in having two ministers, three violinists, a flautist and a splendid
assortment of other talent.” (Sic.)
“ I suppose you were at the Dance ? ”
“ Well, I was there, but I did not take any part in the proceedings,
greatly to the chagrin of many persons, 1 believe. Two or three of the
dancers having taken the trouble to come all the way down to tl*e Saloon,
to hear my violin, and having patiently endured the agony of listening to
my performance, thought the least I should do was to take part in the
dance, and they censured me for being a beau (bow) who could not be got
on a string. Knowing that a true artist cannot be proficient in many arts,
1 have clung passionately to my instrument, I have devoted all my spare
moments to my violin, and consequently have not had any time to give to
dancing. The young ladies however, were extremely graceful and it
made me feel I should have liked to have taken part in the dance with
them.”
“ I trust we shall have the pleasure of hearing you play at our
future concerts ? ”
“ Well I sincerely hope that I shall have further opportunities of
contributing to the pleasure of the passengers at subsequent musical
gatherings, seeing that you have been pleased to say that I was the source
of much enjoyment on the last occasion.”
Our interviewer thanked Mr. Spedding for the information he had
so kindly given, and bade him “ Good day.”


"ORMUZ," DAY BY DAY.
Paragraph by “ Our Offis Boy.”
ON the evening of last Saturday week, our quarter deck was thronged
with a brilliant array of talent and graced with a galaxy of beauty,
who were hushed into enraptured stillness as in mellifluous tones our
noble chiefs struck the keynote of the “ Optic,” the full chord of which
will ring down through the far distant ages, and reverberate in echoes
thousandfold shaking the foundations of this terrestrial sphere in earth
and sky and sea. (The office boy’s salary has been paid in advance.
Eds. Optic.)
******
A meeting of the “ Ormuz ” vegetarian society and its associates
was held last week, when the following resolution was proposed and
carried unanimously.—“ That it is essential for the proper working of the
temper and internal economy of the passengers, for fruit to be on the
table twice a day at least, during the hot weather.”
A philosophical subscriber requested us to investigate the meta-
physics andmysticism of two scriptural discourses recently given in another
quarter. We regret to record that of the three members of our staff
appointed as a committee of investigation, two have vanished
(apparently overboard), while the third is now undergoing a process of
reincarnation.
On Saturday night not long after the publication of the first issue of
our paper our fighting editor had his initial encounter. We regret to say
he came out of the conflict very decidedly second best. As is well known
this worthy and invaluable member of our staff pitches his nightly camp
in the centre aisle of the Saloon, directly under the windsail (we under-
stand, that the reason for this proceeding is that his cabin is in a thermal
condition indescribable unless one descends for simile to regions not to be
named in a family newspaper), with diabolical cunning his assailant took
advantage of this fact. Stealthily, by means of much ingenuity and
evidently at great personal risk, he conveyed a bucket of iced water to
the top of the windsail and poured the whole contents down upon the
devoted head of our pugilistic editor. Needless to say this effectually
damped his ardour and took all the fight out of him. As he graphically puts
it "The water out of the windsail, took all the wind out of my sail."
Immediately recognizing this assault as an attack directed against him
in his official capacity, he shouted up the windsail " We apologize " and
" Loud a clarion voice replied " (with a slight nasal twang which is the
only clue yet found of the offender) " That's all right! thought you would !
but I say did'nt you think you were locked in the bathroom 1 " The
fighting editor only wishes to offer one word of warning.—His heaviest
boots are newly tapped and heeled and he has bought a bull pup. Oh !
thou unknown one. Cave Canem.


An unfortunate accident befell one of our passengers late the other
evening. With a considerable display of forethought and ingenuity he
rigged up his hammock in the stern sheets and placing his mattress on
the top, proceeded with the assistance of the bystanders to clamber in.
Hardly had his back touched the mattress, when one of the cross stays
slipped, causing the hammock to twist up like a rope underneath the
mattress. The immediate effect of this was to precipitate the wretched
man on to the deck, while the mattress descended in no uncertain
manner and with considerable force on to the back of his neck as he
groped about on all fours. It has been suggested that the whole affair
was not the accident it appeared, but we are in a position to state that
the occurrence was of a purely accidental nature.
On Sunday June 9th, we "crossed the line," many of us for the first
time but though we had our " optic" open nothing but sea and rain
could be made out. "
Pressure on our space will not permit of a detailed report of the
cricket match, and it must be sufficient that our victory on that occasion
be here placed 011 record. Much of the credit of the victory is due to
Mr. McLeod who did the lion's share of the bowling and made a most
capable captain on this occasion.
Since our last issue we fell in with the South-West Monsoon, which
blew with considerable violence and at great personal inconvenience to
nearly all on board, right on to our arrival at Socotra, which island we
passed 011 Tuesday June 18th, amid general rejoicing. The constant
spray, and the waves breaking over the deck, made everything and
everybody wet and uncomfortable, though now that we are in fair
weather we can afford to make light of our many troubles.
A vein of humour ran through it all. " The Slide for Life," will
long linger in the minds of those of us who were privileged to witness
the spectacle of a worthy divine making a bee line for the starboard
scupper with no thought of the propriety or ethics of his movements.
******
What is the proper way to wear a Kummerbund?
Ah ! this is a vexed question among our passengers.
We do not know what is correct, but we do know what is not. It is
not the proper thing to twist it twice round the waist in tight folds and
then allow the fringed—save the mark—frayed edge, to hang down to
the heels.
One of our most noted fellow-passengers has the fond delusion that
this is the proper way, and he daily parades the deck with his Kummer-
bund tied in this fashion, as proud as the proverbial dog with the tin
catastrophe.
Yesterday, Wednesday evening, we passed the R. M. S. "Lusitania,"
of the Orient Co's Line, outward bound. It seems almost a pity that


the old style of clipper bowed steamers should be so rapidly passing
into the memories of the past, making way for the scjuarer lines of
most of our modern ocean " Greyhounds."
N. B. The next paragraph to give it its full significance should be
accompanied by slow music. (Eds. Optic.)
For the past few days the "Ormuz" barber has been noticed
prowling about the Second Class deck, a wild glare in his aimed
with a pair of freshly-set shears which protrude ostentatiously from
beneath his jacket. Like a war-horse snorting for the fray he pursues
his way up and down and evidently it is not his intention to be Bilked.
of his lawful prey whatever happens and at whatever risks. This is
but the first note of warning, yet, " like beacon blazing on the hills afar,
each one beareth as it kindles message of the opened war."—"Get your
'air cut."
A MEMORY OF COLOMBO.
GOOSEQUILL.
WITH a sigh of relief we all tumbled up from below when the welcome
news that the breakwater lighthouse was visible from the deck was
first announced. Every one was soon on the qui vive, but a tropically
sudden squall of rain sent all below. For some hours we had to dodge
about off the port and it was close on midnight before an anchorage
was effected. Many to make up for the dissapointment of a night on
shore were awav at daylight to see all the wonders of Ceylon's far famed
metropolis. Others less energetic and wiser in their generation delayed
landing until later. Some of the more susceptible scared themselves into
hysterics or something more dreadful when they first caught sight of tier
upon tier of black nakedness,handingupbags of coal from the large lighters
at the ships' side. Every now and again the ship seemed alive with
swarms of Indian crows—bird life and human -all on carrion bent.
Hawkers of all shades and colours, touts called in this sunny
language peons, missionaries with collecting cards, which relic of barbar
ism we"had hoped to have left behind us 111 Australia, money changers,
in fantastic costumes, diving boys clothed in sombre black, vociferating
at the full pitch of their mellow voices Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-av, accompanying
themselves by flapping their sides with their arms, strangely reminiscent
of our barn door Cochin who has just successfully lowered the colours
and feathers of the next door man's Leghorn. All these and many others
representing types of humanity entirely strange to most of us, made
confusion worse confounded.
Soon we were going through the first stage of the fleecing process
on board the launch and threading our way therein amongst the mass
of Catamarans, Bomboats and all kinds of queer looking craft, we were
soon landed 011 the jetty and besieged by a crowd of howling guides,
peons and rickshawmen. We had a look before leaving the landing stage


at the swarm of coolies busily lading the boats lying at the coal-yards
and wharves along the shore. Everyone seemed an oily massof perspiration,
apparently their normal condition in the broiling heat of these latitudes.
Selected guides are now busy bargaining with the rickshaw men around
the landing stage and soon most of us were seated in the “Pullman cars of
the East’’and whirled away in all directions, delighted with the
unaccustomed motion and wondering what page in the “Arabian Nights”
the scene most resembled.
An editor of this journal in the innocence of his heart started to
“do” the town on Shank’s pony, but soon he was the centre of an imposing-
procession consisting of rickshaw men, beggars, money changers, decrepits
and sundry “cux'S of low degree” until finally ho fell in with several Other
“Ormuzites” at the Bazaar, and was cpiickly taken into the fold. For the
rest of the day he rickshawed.
It at once strikes a stranger on arrival at Colombo how many
children thrive there w T ho have never had father or mother, nor anything
to eat since the day of their birth,and herein lies the secret of the finished
chicanery of the developed native, brought up as they arc from the first
years of life in an atmosphere of deceit and distrust.
Mark Twain who insists that “no man nowadays can afford to
deliberately trifle with the truth unless, he is a particularly artistic liar”
must have had Colombo in his mind’s eye as he penned this aphorism.
The other modes of conveyance, the biblical looking ox-carts, the
prototype of the original “one-hoss-shay” of Oliver Wendell Holmes, each
laden with fodder for their own beasts, the Engl sh pony cart all coml inei
to make one great conglomeration, strange indeed to the untutored eye.
The ring in the nose of the Oxen, instead of a bit, reminds an Australian
somewhat of his own land, but there is something very queer in the
strange clucks and hoots of the drivers as they urge their steeds onward,
with the friendly aid of a stick or goad.
Here see a party of natives engaged in road-making, carrying the
stones in wicker baskets and watering out of gourds which might well
be one of those handled by Rebecca at the well, and yet amidst them all
stands a large “Invicta” Steam Roller fresh from the works in far away
Gainsboro’.
What can be said of the people in the small space allotted xis here.
Bare mention must suffice of the innumerable types and castes of
Brahmins, Hindoos, Parsees, Singalese ad infinitum, all clad in the dress
peculiar to their caste with head gear to match.
In other parts many were clothed solely in their native modesty,
encircled by a string belt, gazing up at a sign which bore the suggestive
inscription that a new supply of Mrs Weldon’s paper patterns had just
been received and were now on view.
Almost without exception everyone was bare footed, though a few of
the better class, afpiid of their complexion probably, wore sandals of a
mixed Chinese and Ancient Roman pattern. The majesty of the Law
was fully represented by natives clad in the regulation red coat and
wielding a baton which is kept in a good state of preservation and well


polished by frequent applications to the shiny skins of the poor Singalese.
All trades are represented by the native element and here is a party
of four busily working away with a Singer Sewing Machine, stitching
white coats, while just across the square a little black imp apparently an
outcast from the nether world is hammering away at a mass of glowing
metal.
Here again bakers and butchers flourish, displaying their respective
stocks, between whiles making violent kicks at fowls and other bipeds,
feathered or unfeathered, that- threatened to invade their sanctuaries. In
another place, women and children are very busy cutting the last few
wisps of grass in a public square, armed with a straight bladed sickle.
Here as elsewhere, everything is green, including the casual visitor, a
fact of which the average native takes full advantage. Great Scott ! how
we were all fleeced, but on the whole it did us good and we left Colombo
poorer in purse to be sure, but far richer in oriental diplomacy and primed
to the full, with the science and art of bartering in all its forms.
Space will not permit anything but merest mention of temples and
churches of this queer place. Yet in all this great land of betel nutted
pink teeth and native innocence, there are patches of English civilization
cropping up in unexpected places, rugby football in the barrack grounds
and crosstig in the schools for instance. Only occasionally does English
regime make itself apparent. It comes to a head in the picturesque
Government house which is one of the many sights of this strange
Eastern town.
Four o’clock saw us once more under weigh well pleased with our
experiences and all the happier for our day on shore together.
Children's Column.
A CHILD’S FAITH.
"The President."
I RATHER and child sat on the deck,
The child’s arm circling her father’s neck;
Her cheek against his shoxdder laid
In restful peace. Anon she said,
As looking outward on the deep
On roaring waves that rage and leap :
“ Father, what makes the waters wild 1 ”
He only answered “ Hush ! my child ! ”
She nestled closer, not to sleep,
With eyes still fixed upon the deep;
Her head upon his shoulder still,
And said “ I ’spect it is God’s will,
For mother told me long ago,
God rules in sky and all below ”


“ Arc you afraid to see the wave
Thus white with foam, thus wildly rave ;
Would you not rather go below 1 ”
The child replied “ Please, father, no;
Let me stay here and watch with you,
I want to see, if it be true,
About God being near at hand,
To those on sea and those on land.”
“ Hush child ! you know not what you say,
But look my dear at that cloud of spray.”
“ Why is it, you should want to find,
Who ’tis controls the mighty wind ?
Why are you child, not filled with fear ? ”
“ Because I feel that God is near,
And know He’s on the mighty deep ;
Just rocking you and me to sleep.”
With dreamy sigh, the little maid,
Her head still on his shoulder laid,
Fell fast asleep, The father still,
(Whilst softly murmuring “’Tis God’s will”)
Bethought what simple trust was there,
As he gently breathed an earnest prayer
For faith so childlike and sincere,
“ As rocks to sleep, for God is near.”




"THE ORMUZ OPTIC."
Vol. I. No. 3. Thursday, June 27th, 1895
Published in the Mediterranean, Lat. 36.26 N. Long. 19.J/.6 E.
Edited by FRANK COLE MADDEN and GILLMORE GOODLAND
GOUSTTZEUNTTS.
Olive Branch, Orange Blossom and Cypress Leaf.
Poetry : —“ Out or not. Out,” by “ Shakespeare Outdone.”
In Memoriam, by “ E. E.”
Leader.
Report of Sports Meeting, by “ The Staff.”
Interviews with prominent passengers :
No, 2. Mr. G. O’Brien—Midshipman,
by “ Our Special Representative.”
“Concertus Secundus”—by “Our Musical Critic.”
“ The Passing Show.”
“A Queensland Tragedy,” by “Gymp.”
“ Impressions of the Suez Canal,” by “ Goosequill.”
Ladies’ Letter, by “Sappotina de Jones.”
Notices. *




OLIVE BRANCH, ORANGE BLOSSOM & CYPRESS LEAF
Born. —In the Canal “ Muling and puking in its nurse’s arms'” a
child of Arabian aspect, since seen running along the banks of the stream
lisping, “ backsheesh.”
“ The sins of the fathers arc visited upon the children,even unto the
third and fourth generation.”
Married. —“On June Bth, wedded to Literature, the Editors of
this Journal.”
June 27th, Partnership dissolved and decree nisi sought for. Divorce
proceedings pending.
“ United they stood, divided, how are the mighty fallen.”
Died. —In the Mediterranean, near Naples, “The Ormuz Optic.”
“ Softly he sighed and a gurgle he gave,”
Then plunged himself in to the billowy wave
And a whisper came back from his watery grave.”
“ Protracted nature seeks repose.”
And as the waters closed o’er his devoted head, a thin quavering voice
was heard crooning—
Be jabers, I’m not kilt yet, but I’m spaachless.” —R, I. P.


" OUT, OR NOT OUT!"
SHAKESPEARE OUTDONE.
( Showing Hamlet’s latest soliloquy on being given out leg-before,
when playing for Denmark against an eleven from the adjacent States.)
Hamlet (log) Am I out, Polonius.
Polonius ( Batting at the other end )
I fear so, sire : the man said, “ Chuck her up.”
Hamlet (retiring)
OUT or not out! That is the question !
Out! Ah, then must I go,
Yet tis a monstrous thing
That all this great and most momentous issue
Should hang upon a churlish umpire’s nod.
How now, my lords. ! The ball had bias on it,
And if my leg had been in front, as ’twas not,
Twould never have hit the sticks—no, not by yards.
It did not pitch straight,—it was rising high—
Besides, the man is bowling round the wicket !
Yea, I can sum up a million reasons
Which, being pondered on, conspire to show
The verdict of yon purblind idiot, false.
Well, well !
The thing’s an allegory.
How accident doth wait on carefulness,
And all precaution used. I took one leg :
I wisely questioned, if my toes were clear,
And all for this, Oh Sirs: the pity of it,
1 was firmly set
As any oak tree in the sylvan glade :
I saw the bowling well, the ball appeared
To me as large as the full harvest moon,
Sailing above the strawstack : I had meant
To score an hundred, when that echoing yell
Both from the bowler and the wicket-keeper,
The pre-arranged duet of knavery,
Checked me in mid-success and cut me down.
What weak-kneed umpire could resist that roar,
There’s not a doubt on’t; 1 was bustled out.
Give me a pipe : I’ll drown my grief in smoke,
TJiis cricket is a passing beastly game
“Shakespeare Outdone.”


snemo r i a m.
E.E.
OH ! God to Thee we give our thanks
Our voices we now raise,
For all Thy love and mercy shown
Through many anxious days.
In perfect safety Thou has led us,
O’er this restless sea,
And now, we ask Thee, Lord, to keep us,
Ever near to Thee.
The way to many may seem dark,
But yet, we will not fear,
In God we’ll put our perfect trust,
And He will make all clear.
Give us the grace and strength we need,
To fully do Thy will,
And make each one Thy humble child,
Our hearts with goodness fill.
That when at last, the race is run,
Oh ! may we hear Thy call;
In perfect faith, we will resign
Our life, our soul, our all.


LEADER
With this number “we commit this frail body to the dust” and
the Editors and Staff' creep back again into obscurity with the best
grace possible,. leaving those who have derived any pleasure from our
efforts “to chant our requiem.” Lotus now give a short resume of
our “ Optic” and render an account of our stewardship.
It was not without some qualms that many of our General Com-
mittee agreed to try the experiment of the publication of a journal
among the passengers bearing on current events and containing articles
and papers of general interest to ns all. The great trouble was the
difficulty in avoiding anything of a decidedly personal nature, which
would have tended to spoil the “esprit de corps,” so noticeable all
through, in the Second Saloon.
We leave it to you to judge of the success of the Optic in this respect,
in fact we venture to affirm that on many occasions the “Optic” has
been the cause of a great deal of harmless amusement and “chaff”
amongst us, which helped us over many a long spell of monotony and
bad weather. In this connection we have to refer to the one unpleasant
duty we have had to perform, namely, to suppress and crush the only
really offensively personal article sent in.
This had received our attention in our Answers to Correspondence,
but on reconsideration we have decided to leave what we feel, unsaid,
in the hope that by so doing we will heap coals of tire on the head of
our correspondent. It was hardly to be expected that it wovdd be the
unanimous wish of the passengers to be allowed the privilege of
contributing to the publishing fund of the “ Optic ” and we, having
regard to our literary management could not identify ourselves in any
way with the collection of the necessary “ oof, ” yet our heartiest thanks
are due to those gentlemen “who did the deed” for their energy
and deter mi nafion in such a good cause.
Whatever apology is needed for the short-comings of the ‘Optic’
we hold ourselves directly responsible, for, throughout the whole scries,
we hive received wonderfully I title support from the passengers, by far
the greater part of each issue coming direct from our own peas, while
many of the articles have bem subjected to a rigorous scrutiny and
amendment before appearing in our columns.
To our contributors in all kinds we are deeply grateful, but in
justice to them and not with any wish to “toot our own horn,” we here
assume all responsibility for the deficiencies and unworthiness of the
“ Ormuz Optic ” now defunct.— Vale,


OUR SECOND SPORTS MEETING.
our Special Reporter.
\ /"ESTERDAY afternoon, Wednesday, June 26th, under most favourable
][ auspices, the cream of the athletic world of the “Ormuz” met
together to do battle on our spacious (?) deck.
Eagerly they stripped for the fray, and gorgeous in Eastern costumes
including the fez and other paraphernalia suitable to the climate, engaged
in deadly rivalry in the mysteries of the Potato Race.
After many exciting heats, in one of which our Editor felt the need
of his glasses, (or was too much in his glasses—“ Fighting Editor Optic,”)
for he lost sight of the one potato that might have steered him on to
victory in this event. All through the various heats a fair curly-haired
contestant struck terror into his various opponents and wound up by
.winning the final, though in the exuberance of his spirits, he kicked the
bucket literally and figuratively, while “ the cat came back ” but arrived
a fraction of second behind “ our darling Willie.”
The ladies then entered into the mazy intricacies of this fascinating-
pastime, and in spite of the most vigorous opposition Mrs. Hall showed
superior form and stamina, waltzing in an easy winner, while Miss Wright
pranced into second place with becoming dignity.
The handicappers had such difficulty in suitably matching the
children, that fearful of the wrath of the indignant parents they regret-
fully cancelled the engagement.
Several of the gentlemen in their agitation at actually touching the
hands of the ladies who held the corks, were unable to thread the needle,
but after the use of more or less soft language, here best suppressed, and
prayers (?) not loud but deep, the' event was run off, and Mr. Hall after
running a dead heat for final with Dr. Madden, came away in the straight
and won hard held.
The ladies then tried to embrace the opportunity, (and the gentlemen
who held the corks,) and after sundry little hitches on both sides, Miss
Wright and Miss Burges going strongly, gained Ist and 2nd prizes
respectively.
The High Jump brought out a large array of talent, and after the
sheep had been separated from the goats, ourselves in the latter category.
Mr. Lang proved himself the boss lamb of the flock, and rose to the
occasion to 4-ft. s|-ins., Mr. Smithers bleating into 2nd place at an inch
or two lower. We congratulate Mr. Lang on his sal tutorial expertness
and gladly take him info the fold with the hope that he will enrol himself
as an active member of our general enjoyment committee.
The Wheelbarrow Race was responsible for several disasters, in the
shape of loss of apparel and substance, to the various competitors. After
considerable heart-rending and clothes rending, not to mention barked
knees and shins, Mr. Treadway lifted Mr. Hall again into fame and
pluted him down first’over the line, while our Ed. and Mr. Smithers
precipitated themselves in close proxinity. There were no lady entries.


The Siamese or Three-legged Race then went on merrily, and though
several of the pairs had very little visible means of support at times, one
and all entered into the fun of the thing with great zest. Considerable
interest was taken in the final heat, which fell to Mr. Smithers and
Dr. Madden, who, ‘linked together in friendly tether,’ spread-eagled the
field in great style.
Then came the event of the meeting, styled somewhat euphoniously
“Kicking the Matchbox.” In this conted Mr. Smithers thought he had
again asserted his superiority but another Roland in the person of Mr.
Gerald O’Brien entered the lists, and to put it euphuistically “upset his
apple cart,” demonstrating most conclusively, that whatever power
that gentleman possessed, was as nothing compared with the easy grace
with which our midshipmite gently disturbed the centres of gravity and
oscillation of the distant receptacle for pipe-lights. By an oversight the
exact conditions of the contest were not explained to Mr. O’Brien till he
had wasted all his substance and energy on the desert air, by which time,
he was not in a fit condition to undertake the arduous duty incumbent
on him, for the successful accomplishment of the feat.
Mr. Smithers can apparently “ Sling the Monkey” as well as most,
Mr. Hall, in spite of his elasticity, had not a sufficiency of length without
brea Ith, to come up to scratch, at the most distant mark. Mr. Gerald
O’Brien again distinguished himself in this contest and made several
marks, fortunately all on the deck, though it was no fault of his that the
bystanders did not receive a share in his attentions of this kind, from the
evolutions he performed before landing somewhat unexpectedly on the
broad of his back on the deck.
After several impromptu events had been contested “ we all went
home in a cab ” delighted with our experiences at our Sports Meeting.
INTERVIEWS WITH PROMINENT PASSENGERS.
No. 2.
Mr. GERALD O’BRlEN,—Midshipman.
A REPRESENTATIVE of the “ Ormuz Optic ” waited upon Mr. Gerald
O’Brien, requesting him to furnish a sketch of his career, with a view
to its publication in the “ Optic.” Mr. O’Brien was found luxuriating
supinely on a section of the velvet in the Second Saloon not very remote
from several young ladies, but being made acquainted with our represent-
ative’s mission he willingly complied, and answered questions put to him
as follows :
“I was born at Everton, Liverpool, on the sth of January, 1877,
and took to the sea as a calling in May, 1893. My first voyage was made
from Cardiff to Cape Town and Chittagong, (India), as midshipman of the
“ Hollingwood,” Captain \V. Lewis being in command. From Cardiff to


the Cape took us 73 days which I believe is the longest passage on record,
we however, made up for it by running from the Cape to Chittagong in
49 days. During the voyage, while one of our seamen was taking in
the main top gallant sail he was washed overboard, and another man was
killed by the fall of a big of coal at the Cape.
We left Chittagong for Dundee, calling at St. Helena, but off’
Ascension our Captain died and was buried at sea The Chief Officer
being thus left in charge brought the ship safely to port after a passage
of 120 days.
I left Keith on my second voyage bound for Rio Janiero, where we
stayed for 3 months during the war. We left Rio on September 21st for
Sydney, where I was taken ill and laid up for some six months with
Yellow Fever, (or Yellow Jack as we sailors call it.)
Leaving Sydney, homeward bound in the “Ormuz,” here I am, sondw
you have it all.”
“ Wait, Mr. O’Brien,” said our irrepressible interviewer “ what do
you think of our young ladies 1 ”
“Ah, 1 like them all, but I hardly know which the best, I think on
the whole I like Miss best, but I am not quite sure whether Miss
is not as nice. lam anxiously waiting to discover whether any of those
that I like have any decided preference for me, I fancy I have two or
three of the mothers on my side, working on my behalf. Don’t ask me
any more about them at present, as 1 am somewhat unsettled in my mind
on this point just now.”
“You play upon the violin, do you not 1 ?”
“ Yes, a little, but I don’t believe in practising in the Saloon. lam
rather shy, and moreover have a regal’d for other people’s feelings, 1 once
studied the instrument for some time under a Professor.”
“ I believe you sing too, Mr. O’Brien ? ”
“ Yes, a little, and should be very glad to give any help at the con-
certs, if I were asked.”
“ What is your opinion of the Monsoon 'I ”
“ With one exception we have passed through the roughest time I
have ever seen. In my own ship, while in the Bay of Bengal we struck
our top gallant mast and top mast, besides losing four boats and two men
overboard. At this trying time, we used “ oil on the troubled waters ”
with great success. Our skipper thought we would founder, but I thought
differently, fully believing we would pull through, and my view of the
situation proved correct. We had 3 feet 6 3 / n inches of water in the hold,
as someof the plates were leaking
I think the Captain and Officers of the “ Ormuz ” should be specially
complimented by the passengers as a whole, for the way they have
managed the ship during the terrible weather we have just passed
through.”
“ Did you see any bloodshed during the fighting at Rio 1”
“ Oh Yes ! 1 saw hundreds of bodies thrown into the harbour, and it
was nothing to see dozens of dead bodies floating around our ship. Shots
were flying all over the ship, and the Brazilian Government had to pay
£lOO for repairs to our rigging.”


" Is there anything you complain of in the working of the ship 1' :
" Well I consider that the bath-rooms are not as they ought to be.
for instance, 1 always find it difficult to keep the water in the bath owing
to the leaks at the plugs, moreover, I often have to wait for half-an-hour
or so before the shower will work, by the time it does, a crowd has
assembled outside, threatening to kill, and otherwise maltreat me. It is
then a case of a hundred yards sprint with a furious mob of would-be
bathers at my heels, all thirsting for my gore "
At this stage, a fair young lady passed through the Saloon, and
Mr. O'Brien took his leave precipitately and hastened in the footsteps of
the fair unknown, thus bringing our interview to an abrupt conclusion.
" CONCERTUS SECUNDUS."
OUR MUSICAL CRITIC.
ANOTHER success was scored by the musical committee on the evening
of Saturday last,(22nd inst,) in their second concert. As on the first
occasion Mr. Spedding C. B. opened the proceedings by fossicking round
for the " Harp that once thro' Tara's Halls." He was materially assisted
in his peregrinations by his " trusty fiddle bow" which rendered him
yeoman service in the necessary violent exercises entailed. In the middle
watch, one of the strings got on the loose, and the lost Harp gained
considerably, leaving the violin far behind, till all was again made tight
(this does not refer to the performers we understand. Eds. 0. 0.), and
the chase was renewed on more equal terms. Ultimately the fugitive
harp was caught, leaving the piano and violin alone for a final flutter, a
chance they both made the most of, and came out a dead heat on the
upper C, in fact a regular red C heat. The general effect was enhanced
by the picturesque sandals worn by our "Ormuz" Paganini.
Our old friend Newby has now more lofty aspirations. A fortnight
ago he was content with an ordinary common or garden sweetheart, and
that when a boy, but now nothing less than a sovereign will content him
and he furthermore lays down the.law as to what the attributes of his
"Queen" must be. We sincerely wish him joy in his quest for such an
ideal. Don't bring her on board, Newby, for the present, for such an angel
"no man could face with equanimity."
" To the Woods" we were next bid and would fain have departed at
once or at anyrate by the morning tiain, always provided that the piano
"be left in the gloaming," or anywhere else beyond earshot.
The remarkable longevity and proverbial unkillability of the domestic
feline was the subject of Mr. E. O'Brien's lament. The persistency with
which that cat always came up "to scratch " was most appalling, yet we
have it on excellent authority even that of Louis Wain, that there is one
member of the species still more tenacious of life, still more determined
not to "shuffle off'this mortal coil"-our own " offis" cat.


“ Upwards” we soared with Mr. Birks but sad to relate the winds
and waves caught up the strain and so, few of the audience shared with
us the pleasure of the recital, which was a pai'ody on our chief’s “Bo
Jabers.”
Our fighting editor then girded himself to the fray and got on the
warpath. It is to be hoped that the lady in question was not behind
time at the shrine, as he w T as most anxious himself not to be late. It
would indeed be painful to us to have to record an instance of unfaith-
fulness to one who has made the motto “ True till death ” peculiarly his
own. By the way we hope that “ the parson had pocketed his fee,’ but
w r c had some qualms on this point at times when our revered President
w r as observed stealthily gazing at ihe singer, doubt depicted on his
features, but we were somewhat reassured to notice his lips quiverirlg,
as though lisping the mystic words that make 2 persons 10, ( The woman
the 1, the man the 0). To set the reverend gentleman’s mind at case
here announce that “ Our pay day is Saturday.”
We were then told all there is to know about “Children of the City
and a sad story it is. We could not but contrast them with “ a th w*ee
bairnies” on board. Miss Guide rendered this old favourite of Madam
Patey’s with great feeling, in spite of the vagaries of the First Saloon piano
which had been specially requisitioned for the occasion, more’s the pity.
Our worthy Ed. and musical medico then announced his intention of
leaving for Philadelphia in the morning. We are pleased to state that
he reconsidered the matter and decided to remain with us, fora short
time longer. We should have missed him sorely but w r c do not think that
the whole of the femininity of the ship will be forlorn at his departure.
Others of the staff will be left and we think he is, to say the least of it
very conceited to express such pronounced egotistical opinions. We
expect to be paid off, for offering this frank criticism, but w r e are
willing to become a sacrifice in the cause of free journalism. Or. Madden
might have been justly elated at the reception given his song. Ihe call for
an “encore” was one of no uncertain sound, and in response we were treated
to “ The Old Rustic Bridge by the Mill,” a la the impromptu concert (or
concertina) man.
N.B We are sorry to hear that several other performers were annoyed
at this caricature, each taking it to himself : to these we would repeat
the ancient Phoenician proverb “ If the bloomin topper fits yer, put it on,’
( Eds Optic). But even now the admiring public w r ere not satisfied and
to appease them the I)r. turned his powers of parody into the sacred
precincts of Shakespeare and Geo. Rignold. The Speech of Henry to his
iroops at Harfleur, most humorously rendered was the affliction enforced.
Mrs. McMath serenaded “Johnny,’ assisted by Mr. Thornton, but
soon human nature itself revolted and the violin retired in discomfort,
“we heaved a sigh of relief, sub rosa.” We did not hear much of the
vocalists, a fact ascribable to the pian oforte (accent on the forte.)
Our knowdedge of vocal music extends as far as the Lost Chord and
the Missing Rope, buf our repertoire does not include “ The Lost Key,”
though this ditty is evidently familiar to Mr. O’Brien. The cat came


back but the key wouldn't. After strenuous effort and several changes
of accompanists, and the vocalist informing us repeatedly that "It was'nt
me,' the curtain was rung down mid the hearty plaudits of the audience.
Miss Kennedy sang "Leonore" with great success as far as the
audience in the front rows were concerned. It must have been very
distressing to our talented accompanist to find that owing to the total
absence of the soft pedal he could not at times prevent the piano from
" takin' the floore," in which situation nothing short of a Monsoon could
be trusted with any degree of reliance to drown it. "Tommy Atkins"
by Mr. Baxter, was encored,, and he gave us the " Sentry Song " from
" lolanthe" bringing to a close a very successful musical melange.
Then lastly the audience had a turn and sang the National Anthem with
great fervour, after which Mr. Hastie pronounced the dissolution and
we dissolved to meet in liquidation elsewhere.
THt PASSING SHOW.
I AST Friday Evening in spite of the excessive heat, a dance was held
on our deck. Owing to the want of energy of the gentlemen, a
very few ladies were permitted to do more than enjoy the excellent
music of the band, which furt her enlivened proceedings by two excellent-
ly rendered Selections. After " lying low on the weather bow "at first,
the " Optic ' in the person of its Editor, became rampant, and his
energy quickly became infective, till our quiet and sedate devotees were
all whizzing round in the glorious uncertainty of the Lancers, or Quad-
rilles in a manner which quite put all their previous efft rts in the shade.
The last that was seen of the Editor was a sylph-like wraith, bathed in
perspiration, making a zigzag for the Establishment whose duty it is to
supply the different forms of lubrication to the faucial regions, and here
he once more practically illustrated the exhortation against drink : to
put it down with a strong hand.
It is to be hoped that in the more rational climes of the Mediter-
ranean more gentlemen will be forthcoming to "tread a measure" with
our fair sisterhood.
The return Cricket Match with the First Saloon, ended in a victory
for our opponents, by 2 runs. "W here everything was so exciting and
interesting, it would be impossible to particularise any points in the
Match, except to greet Mr. M. Foley as the most \iseful man to our side.
The final of the rubber will be awaited with interest as both sides are
exactly equal in results so far.
Our Second Concert deserves mention for itself in another column,
and here we simply record it as an event " in the passing Show."
From the nature of the arrangements and paraphernalia in use,
seen from a distance, we infer that a series of Tableaux Vivauts were


hold on the First Saloon deck, on Saturday evening last. We need only
quote our former notice—-"No passes, no report," and leave you all
wondering. In spite of this strong counter-attraction, all our available
seating space was taken up by those who elected to be present at our
Concert.
Several Steamei’s of various nationalities have passed us since our
last issue, the only one that rankles within us is the “ Yille de la Oiotat,”
which made us feel like the man who fell from the balloon—out of it.
We still hope to have our “Optic” on her again before reaching
Naples.
The S.S. " Chiltern " was seen repairing the Cable in the Red 'Sea,
but we have no lender feeling for the boats that made us "tie up,"
literally and figuratively in the Canal.
Just after we left Port Said, the "P- & 0." S.S. " Nubia," passed
inwards, and on Wednesday, the "Orizaba," of the Orient Company's
Line steamed by in full view.
The many wonders of Suez and the Suez Canal, are fully dealt with
in another place.
The shortness of our final issue may need some explanation at our
hands. It was thought that the Presentation of the Prizes won at the
Sports would help to fill in an evening very pleasantly after the last
rites had been paid to the “Optic,” and herein lies the whole explanation.
In ad lition, we lose our fighting Editor at Naples, much to our regret,
and as our Leader will show, mortal man embodied in one being, could
not grapple with the Herculean task of preparing another issue for
publication without the services of such an able and accomplished
Co-worker.
As our Offis Boy remarks. “He is going (W)right away to the
Goodland of England ; “Nor want, nor cold, his course delay.”
N.B. —The Offis Boy has since met with a violent death, and, “we
have just come away from the Inquest.”
QUESTION :—ls it fair to take a man’s bath when ho has gone
for Soap 1
In our peregrinations in the small hours of the morning lately, our
ears were greeted with a series of discordant cries proceeding from one
of the bathrooms, where a melee appeared to be in progress. As we
passed, a head was protruded through the open window—the back view,
apparently quite devoid of hair, and shiny, was all that was visible to
us—and from this head proceeded a voice crying : “ Who says it is’nt
myturn ; why I’ve been keeping this for him for about an hour and a
fhal.”
“ You ’ave, you'know you ‘ ave,” was the moan which floated to us
from the crowd in the passage, and then, Ah ! but, perhaps ’twere best


all relegated to oblivion. Tn the far distance, as we strode onward, we
could still make out a few murmurings, while a whiff of sulphurous
vapour was wafted along the passages as the argument grew warmer.
Betting as to the identity of the principals in the encounter are still
being made, but so far no money has changed hands.
To serve as a clue, we might mention that the occurrence took
place on the morning of the day the " Orizaba " passed us. so all bets
made must be considered off. " From information received."
The children of our Saloon have deputed us to express their thanks
and gratitude to Mrs. Bennett for her great kindness in giving them
such a splendid treat this afternoon. If they enjoyed themselves and
the good things provided, as much as we enjoyed watching them, their
happiness must have been complete.
The final of the Cricket Matches, has resulted in a great victory for
the representatives of the First Saloon. In justice to the losers we
would mention that they were not able to place anything like a
representative team in the field; Mr. M. Foley, for instance, who did
such yeoman service with the bat in former matches, not being willing
to play.
We regret to bear that there has been some unpleasantness with
some of our community and one of the First Saloon, on a little question
which we think need never have occurred if the passenger of the First
Saloon, who so enforced the Motto, that " Right is might," had exercised
a little more of the gentlemanly tact and forbearance that shipmates
are expected to extend to their fellows in a humbler station. The fact
that this unfortunate contretemps took place is sufficient to prove that
it is only a question of £ s. d. inferiority after all, while the lack of
gentlemanly attributes seems to stand in inverse ratio to high passage
money paid for the privilege of travelling in the " Orient" Company, in
the particular instance under comment.
A QUEENSLAND TRAGEDY.
GYM P.
A FEW years ago the authorities at Brisbane were called on to carry
out the full penalty of the law, in the case of a young man, who,
prior to his execution, made a full and complete confession of the whole
circumstances, which ultimately placed him in this awful position It
is this confession that forms the gist of this article.
He was the youngest of a family of five, living in very comfortable
circumstances, in one of the pleasantest counties in England. His
every whim was gratified, and as he reached manhood, nothing he could
wish for or desire was too much for his indulgent parents to gratify.


Under these circumstances, was it any wonder that lie began to stray
011 the downward path. Soon matters • reached a climax, and to save
trouble and perhaps exposure, he was sent to try his luck in the Colonies.
He landed in Brisbane, and confident in the certainty of his monthly
remittance, he " made the pace," soon gaining a notorious reputation as
a hard drinker with all its accompaniments.
After a while he pulled himself together again, and began to
canvass the town with a view of starting in business in the Printing
trade. Knowing his unstable character few took him seriously, thinking
that his ideas were too high flown to be of any practical use in the
actual management of a business of this kind. Finally he got
attached to an Insurance Company as a Canvasser, and in course of
business came to Gympie where he did not make a great success of
things, thence to Bundaberg and Rockhampton,
In the course of his wanderings he met a young lady, Flora
Macdonald by name, with whom he fell violently in love. Unfortunately
his affections were not reciprocated, and once more he gave way to his
old failing which resulted in his losing his billet in the Company,
though all his feelings with regard to Flora were unaltered. Soon he
renewed his suit but was indignantly rejected. A few nights later, in
a fit of drunken frenzy he stealthily crept into the hut (some distance
removed from the homestead) in which the girl was sleeping, and goaded
to desperation, cut her throat as she lay in bed. Then with fiendish
cunning, he set fire to the hut and made his way back to the town before
any alarm was l'aised. No clue was found by the police, and the whole
affair promised to remain a mystery, but in a drunken moment,
probably mad with remorse and racked by a guilty conscience, the
unhappy murderer confessed his guilt, asked for a trial, and quietly
submitted to be led away. He was found guilty, of course mainly on
his own statements, which were confirmed in nearly every particular,
by circumstantial evidence, sutiering the last penalty for his crime, a
penitent and conscience stricken man.
These then are the facts relating to a great crime, which for a
considerable time sent a thrill of horror throughout the whole extent of
the Colony of Queensland.
IMPRESSIONS OF THE SUEZ CANAL.
GOOSEQUILL
ABOUT ten o'clock on Monday morning last, we sighted Suez, and
not long after, we anchored off the town, Soon we were surrounded
by the usual crowd of native bomboats, and our Colombo experiences
stood us in good stead in the bargaining that followed.
A native juggler came on board and caused great diversion amongst
young and old by his clever legerdemain. The facility with which he
produced chicken life was startling. He would sieze a little toddler,


certainly not a week out of the shell, by the neck and pulling at it
would cause it to produce a twin of itself instantly, much to the envy
of those of our lady passengers who have had experience in chicken-
rearing. We did not stay long at Suez, for about eleven the bell rang
to clear the boat; some of the hawkers were so intent on business that
they did not hear or did not heed the warning and were still aboard
when the “Ormuz ” began to move ; these had to jump overboard and
get into their own craft as best they could, at much risk to their dusky
skins from the propeller and from sharks.
We then moved past Suez into the Canal. Suez is the modern
town built on the site of the ancient Clysma. Since the opening of the
Canal it has developed wonderfully and now has a population of about
12,000. English and French houses, Offices and warehouses have been
erected in all directions.
The air at Suez is noted for its salubrity and is particularly pure
and sweet. The Town is supplied with fresh water from the famous
“Sweet-Water-Canal.”
At noon we were three miles from our Suez Anchorage, and we had
not been long in the Canal when we were compelled to “tie up” literally
to allow a German Merchantman, the “ Oceana,” of Hamburg to pass us,
and this delayed us nearly an hour and a half.
The passage through the Canal was very interesting to everybody
and especially to those who had not been through before.
The Bedouin Camps with their own peculiar surroundings, camels,
goats and sheep of strange appearances, enhanced the novelty of the
scene. The desert sand in the foreground and low rocky hills behind,
vividly reminded one of the celebrated “ Scapegoat ” of the immortal
Turner.
Space will not admit of our giving many of the interesting
particulars about the construction and maintenance of this triumph of
modern engineering skill. We can only mention that the work was
first projected by M. de Lesseps, in 1854, commenced in 1859 and opened
to traffic ten years later, November 17th, 1869. Up to 1886, the Canal
cost £20,000,000. In 1875 Lord Beaconsficld bought the Khedives
shares (177,000 out of 400,000) for 4 millions. From England round the
Cape is 11,600 miles and via. the Canal only 7,500.
Night fell just as we entered the lake, on whose shores Ismailia
stands. Ismailia is a small town with a population of only about 3,000.
It is just half-way through the Canal, being 44 miles from Suez and 42
from Port Said.
We had not long got into the Canal proper again when we were
once more compelled to tie up to let another German vessel, the
“ Teutonia ” to pass down.
For quite three quarters of an hour, our boat was brilliantly illumin-
ated by the “ Teutonia’s ” search light.
One of our most athletic passengers mounted the mizzen rigging to
enjoy a view of the boat coming down the Canal towards us. Before
long, however, he was sighted by an A.B. who clambered up after him


and “ chalking his shoe,” making him pay his footing to the extent of
half-a-crown.
Soon after we got once more under weigh and before long most of
us sought our pillows, only to regain consciousness as the “ Ormuz,”
stopped at Port Said about 5 a.m. Sailing notice was posted for nine
o’clock, so we had not much time on shore.
Nearly all however took advantage of the opportunity, such as it
was to have a peep at this unique town. Its population of 20,000 is
made up of representatives of all nationalities, Orient and Occident seem
to touch here as at no other place in the world. An instance of this is
afforded in the buildings. The finest in the town is the new Office of
the Suez Canal Company which is surmounted by three Oriental Cupola
Domes of tesselated mosaic, and these are built on a framing of angle
bars and T iron, which might have been constructed in Middlesborough
or Munich.
Port Said is quite a modern town and is laid out in rectangular
blocks round a square, the “ De Lessep’s Gardens.”
In the garden there has just been erected a granite Monolith, with
a bust of Baron Ferdinand de Lesseps, executed by one of the first
sculptors of the day.
Some of the “ Ormuzites ” enjoyed the novelty of a donkey ride,
most of the animals struggling under the burden of most high-sounding
names such as Gladstone, Sir Henry Parkes, etc.
Most of us had seen all they wished of Port Said before the sailing
time, and nothing delaying us we were soon steaming down the roadstead
between the breakwaters. The western arm is 7,000 and the eastern
6,000 feet long. The lighhouse, fitted with the Electric light, is 180
feet high, and stands on the roadstead in front of the town.
Before long we lost sight of Port Said, and for a time Damictta
showed as a small white speck on the horizon, afterwards we were
“alone on the sea” once more, en route, for Naples.
"LADIES' LETTER.'
ORIENT LINE, R.M.S. “ORMUZ/'
Nowhere in Particular, June 21st, 1895.
My dear Angelica,
It has just occurred to me that when Madge writes Ladies’ Letters
in “ Truth,” I might surely write a Lady’s Letter for the “ Ormuz
Optic.” Of course you know that the “ Optic ” has not such a large
circulation as “ Truth,” but then a minority is certain to comprise more
brains than a majority, and without undue vanity I can safely promise
that my letter will be quite as superior to Madge’s as the “ Optic ” is to
“ Truth.”


1 have thought it advisable to open with a short preface, as all our
great authors have done, though 1 have been burning to describe
my new hat to you, since I took up my pen—it is not a hat, dear, it
is an inspiration, a lovely dream ! I got the idea of it one day in church,
when 1 saw a poor girl there with a summer hat on on a cold wintry day.
I wonder people have not better taste, they should stay at home when
they have not seasonable dress. Let us be fashionable or die ! Well
dear, my hat has four coiners, and each corner can be worn over
the face, if so desired —and each is trimmed to suit a different season.
The first side is trimmed for spring weather, with two birds and nests.
You know my taste in dress has always been original, and I argue that
if we wear birds why not nests ? I assure you that the nests give
a touch of poetry and romance and all that sort of thing, to my hat.
The summer side has a large golden pompom to represent the sun, and
from it my face is shaded by airy, fairy, mousselaine de soir—trimmings
with French names always look more chic than those with English ones.
The autumn side is adorned with very realistic fruit, for again I say if
we wear flowers, why not fruit 1 Why not anything ? What Bridget
calls my “ figgairies ” have all got solid reason under apparent frivolity.
Last, the winter side is trimmed with fur rosettes and powdered alum.
With this hat lam ready for any weather. If the wind changes while
I am out walking I have only to move my hat round and feel quite
fashionable and happy. The girls pretend not to admire my hat and
laugh at it, but I feel sure that they are only jealous. Gentlemen have
much better taste —one told me it is a perfect poem, and that he can
never help smiling ivith pleasure when he sees a pretty face under a
pretty hat.
You say you are quite tired of all the different Cakes you see and
taste. lam very much pleased to be able to send you a new recipe for
Bacon Soup Cakks.— Take of the liquor in which bacon has been boiled
(fat bacon preferred) one quart, into this stir two cupfuls of sugar,
fourteen eggs, a teaspoonful of flour, other ingredients to taste, bake in
a large oven, giving plenty of room to rise, as it will be certain to do, if
given its own time. I assure you that this Cake is perfectly new, in
fact, I have not even tried it myself yet, but I believe that it will at
least look nice, which is the chief thing to be considered when one is
cooking for others.
lam very busy at present composing. I lock myself up in my
room for hours thinking out a dress worthy to be worn with my hat.
Could you offer a few suggestions 1
I am, your sincere friend,
SAPPOTINA DE JONES.


NOTICES.
A DANCE will be held on the quarter deck on Friday evening, 21st inst.,
from Bto 10. The committee confidently expect their efforts to be
more appreciated on this occasion, as bashfulncss on the part of the
gentlemen should have worn off by now.
The sports committee beg to thank the public for their patronage at
their initial meeting, and trust that it will be continued on all future
occasions. Events run off and winners are appended :
Ist. 2nd.
Egg and Spoon Race - Mr. Hall. - Dr. Madden. ’
Chalking the Line - Mr. Smithers. - Mr. Hall.
Ladies Egg and Spoon Race- Miss Wright. - Miss Burges.
Cock-fighting - - Mr. Hall. - Dr. Madden.
Standing Long Jump - Mr. Smithers. - Mr. Hall.
Chalking the Pig’s Eye - Master Percy Ellis. Mr. G. O’Brien.
Wind, weather and circumstances permitting, the 2nd concert will
be held on Monday evening next, the 24th inst.. As several of the items
have undergone most active preparation, a musical treat is confidently
expected.
The following are the results of the games and tournaments under
the control of the games’ committee :
1 st. 2nd.
Whist - Messrs. Treadway and Moody. - Mrs. McMath and Mr. Newby.
Euchre- - Mr. Lory. - - Mr. Lamping.
Cribbage - Mr, Legge - - Mr. Lee.
Draughts - Mr. Lincoln. - Mr Pratten.
Dumps and Quoits have yet to be played off.
NOTICES OF COMMITTEES.
The Musical Committee beg to announce that preparations
are being made for another Concert, the exact date of which will be
shortly notified.
The Dancing Committee intend, probably next Monday
Evening, to bring their engagements to a close by holding a Plain and
Fancy-Dress Ball. No tea is to be partaken of on this evening, as the
arrangements for the Supper will be on an extensive scale,


All the events organised by the Games Committee have now been
played off: —Mr. McLeod won the Quoits, Mr. Smithers, second, Mr.
Goodland the Dumps, closely pushed by Mr. Treadway. The winners
of the other events have already been published.
The various Sports have been carried out and the further results
are appended :
Ist. 2nd.
Potato Race, Gentlemen, - Mr. Birks. - Mr. E. O’Brien.
„ Ladies , - Mrs. Hall. - Miss Wright.
Thread ruE\Gentlemen, - Mr. Hall. - Dr, Madden.
Needle Race, j Ladies, - Miss Wright. - Miss Burges.
High Jump, - Mr. Lang. - Mr. Smithers.
Wheelbarrow Race, |M r I / ‘ in i^? lorB ' \
(Mr. 1 roadway./ \Dr. Madden. /
Three-legged Race,!l n^ t tiers'! iers ' | /?? r ‘ c^ r K S ‘ \
’ (Dr. Madden. J \Mr. Speddmg. /
Kicking the Matchbox, - Mr. Smithers. - Mr. E, O’Brien.
Slinging tub Monkey, - Mr. Smithers. - Mr. Hall.


A few remaining copies can he obtained at
the reduced price of 2 /- each, of the Printer,
H. R. Clarke, 65, Milk Street, Bristol, England,
who will he pleased to quote for similar
publications.




