

THE REVIVAL
OF THE
GIFTS OF HEALING
an address
GIVEN BY
Mr. J. M. HICKSON




THE REVIVAL
OF THE
GIFTS OF HEALING
Some of the Practical Difficulties
which hinder the Revival
of Spiritual Healing.
.In Address given by Mr. J. M. HICKSON
c: the Conference held at Kensington
Town Hall, on July 4th, 1910.
SYDNEY:
( : ~v. “.tores Ltd., Daking House, Rawson Place.




Some of the Practical Difficulties
which hinder the Revival
of Spiritual Healing,
1 have chosen as the subject of my address this
afternoon the difficulties in connection with spiritual
healing which are most frequently met with by
different people.
I find that some of these difficulties form a very
real harrier to the acceptance of the truth of spiri-
tual healing as it was taught by Christ.
I trust, therefore, that I may be able to do some-
thing towards making the truth clearer, and help to
remove some of those very real perplexities which
seem to hinder so many from receiving the full
Gospel message of healing. For none can deny
that the message conveyed throughout the Gospels
is one of full and complete healing and salvation for
Ihe entire nature of man.


We cannot solve such difficulties as these by
human reasoning or even by human experience. We
must go back to the Fountain-head of knowledge:
we must find out what God has revealed to us of His
will. So let us examine them in the light of the
revelation of our Lord, as it concerns both the pur-
pose of God towards us and His manner of dealing
witli us. To do this we need hardly go farther than
the Gospels, for there both these things are fully
brought out and set before us in the life and in the
works of Jesus Christ, Who lived among us that He
might reveal the Father’s will to us. For it is only
by knowing the Father’s will and obeying it that
we can take hold upon that salvation which He
freely offers us.
But if we are to try honestly to solve our doubts
and perplexities on this subject we must put on one
side preconceived ideas and notions about the use
and benefit of the suffering of sickness and disease.
We must also put on one side our thoughts about the
limitations supposed to exist in regard to the opera-
tion of spiritual forces in the physical world. We
must be ready, with open minds, to study, not so
much what man lias thought and said about these
things, but what God has revealed to us about them
in the Person of His Incarnate Son.


T think it will be a help if I gather up the chief
difficulties which I propose to deal with, and put
them simply in the form of questions, just as they
often put to me, so that we shall have a clear
idea of what we are going to discuss.
The main difficulty I have to encounter in my
work is a doubt which confronts most people, and
one which, unless we can get rid of it, makes, and
must make, an almost impassable barrier to any real
acceptance of spiritual healing from God, either for
ourselves or for others. This maiq difficulty, in
which are involved one or two other questions, is:—
1. Is it the will of God to heal all physical
diseases and infirmities in His children, or is it
only some people that He wills to heal?
In other words: Does God intend that some shall
suffer sickness and disease in order that spiritual
benefit may result, and that others shall be relieved
or exempt?
Then come two or three minor questions which are
not directly involved in the principal question, but
which, I think, will find answers in the course of our
examination of that question. They are:—
2. If it is Christ Who is working through the
earthly healer, why are not all healed?


3. Why is not the healing instantaneous?
4. If I come for spiritual healing and do not
get better, may 1 not be in danger of losing my
faith?
5. AVhy cannot we receive healing direct from
Christ instead of through an earthly healer?
Let us take our first question: Is it God's will to
heal all sick people? and see if God has not revealed
to us quite enough to guide us in coming to a definite
conclusion. I think we shall find in Christ’s own
words and works the definite answer we are seeking.
If we could only realise that Jesus Christ lived
among men that He might, by the works which He
did as well as by His teaching, reveal to us the will
of God as it concerns our lives in every way and in
every connection —if we could only realise that,
there would be less of human speculation and less of
mere human reasoning about whether it is God’s
will to heal. We should not hear the assertion that
sickness and disease are sent by God for our
good—thaf sickness is just the loving correction of
the Father for His children’s perfection—for these
and such-like speculations would be impossible
simply because our Lord Jesus Christ has made it
perfectly clear to us that “all manner of sickness


and all manner of disease” was, and therefore is,
abhorrent to Him Who is our Creator. Such specula-
tions would be impossible if we realised that prac-
tically the whole record of Christ’s ministry to men
is the record of an unceasing warfare against sick-
ness and disease in whatever form it was manifested.
We know that wherever He went, up and down
the country, into whatever city He entered, He
destroyed all disease and healed all sickness and all
infirmities in those who sought His help.
Why did lie do so? Did He do so because sick-
ness is a means of spiritual advancement; because
sickness is the loving correction of God?
Were that so, would He not have been opposing
the will of the Father in doing away with it? Cer-
tainly He would. But we know that on the contrary
He came to do the will of the Father Who had sent
Him; the Father Who was “in Christ reconciling
the world unto Himself.” And the working of that
reconciliation was manifested outwardly in the
works of One Who “healed every sickness and every
disease among the people;” and Who when He
spoke of it called it not the will of God, nor the
correction of the Father, but—the oppression of the
devil.


Let us examine more particularly how our Lord
on every occasion dealt with the sick and infirm.
Did lie heal some only, and send others away? Did
He tell any single person that it was good for
him to go on suffering disease? Did any person
ever appeal in vain to Him for help in bodily
suffering? In all His teaching, direct or by parable,
is there any hint that the suffering of sickness is a
thing to be desired, or that disease is the fatherly
correction of God? Is there any beatitude for the
sick and infirm? When did He ever tell one sick
or afflicted person that it was good for him to suffer
in his body?
If we go carefully through any one of the first
three Gospels—(particularly that of S. Matthew)
and note the number of times we are told that Christ
healed every sick person among the multitudes that
constantly followed Him we are struck by the
apparently limitless way in which He healed.
Great multitudes followed Him and “He healed
them all."
They brought to Him the sick from all the villages
round about, and “He laid His hands on every one
of them and healed them."


When the multitudes followed Him into His.
retreat, “He healed them that had need of healing
Wherever He preached the Gospel of the King-
dom “He healed all that were sick
These brief records given in the Gospels are
wonderful glimpses of the work of the Great Healer.
We cannot read them without feeling that something
more than mere historical facts are here related.
They are much more than that. There is a revela-
tion contained in them for those who will see and
hear. It is a revelation, not only of the will of God
as regards man’s physical life in this world, but of
the fulness of the purpose of God in the redemption
of the world. It is shown to us in the Gospels as a
redemption perfect and complete for the whole
nature of man.
Is it God's will to heal all sick people? Is not
this the answer—an answer more definite and final,
more unmistakable and clear than any other that
could possibly have been given us—that our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who came to do the Father's will, spent
the greater part of His three years’ ministry in
doing the Father’s work of healing all who came to
Him, and this work lie explicitly declared to be the
object of His mission to men?


Christ has left nothing to onr imagination or
speculation; and nothing but the simplest conclu-
sions to our reason. In the plainest words He said
that He came to heal and to deliver all men. To
heal those who were sick, or wounded or bruised;
and to deliver those whom Satan had bound or
oppressed. Ilis works of healing proved the literal-
ness of His declaration, and were well called His
“mighty works.” They were mighty in extent as
well as in power and completeness, for let us not for-
get that while the outward and visible results were
manifested in the bodies of men, and therefore could
be seen and testified to, the healing that was then
effected in the spirits and souls of those who received
it was not so easily seen, and was perhaps known
only to a few.
Christ “ went about . . . healing all that were
oppressed of the devil”—so S. Peter describes his
Master’s ministry. That was the light in which it
appeared to him. It was a ministry of healing, in
which none who were in need were passed over. All
were healed; those oppressed in the body, as the
“woman whom Satan hath bound;” and those
oppressed in soul and spirit, like the epileptic and
the possessed. None were passed over, none were
neglected, none were sent away uncleansed from


those vast multitudes who eagerly thronged round
the Great Healer. “He healed all that were sick.”
Is not this a sufficient revelation for us of God’s
will to heal —not a will which is partial and con-
tingent, but all-embracing and absolute?
The will of God towards us does not change.
What He Avilled then, and what He did then,
through His Incarnate Son, He wills to do in the
same manner now. “God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto Himself.” The reconciliation which
God began then in the Person of Ilis Incarnate Son,
He will continue and complete in us. That recon-
ciliation was effected, as we have seen, outwardly in
the bodies of men as it was inwardly in their souls,
and it will go on. But we can hinder it by question-
ing its reality; we can retard it by simply refusing
to accept it.
We have out part to do; our own salvation —in
body and soul—to work out. It is not Christ Who
has changed—we know that; it is not God’s eternal
purpose that has altered, or will alter. It is we who
obscure His revelation, and confuse in our own
minds His great purposes by our little human specu-
lations about the desirability of physical sickness
-and the elevating power of disease. We call it the


fatherly correction of God; and tell ourselves that
to suffer bodily corruption is good for our souls.
How utterly at variance with the teaching of Christ f
No, in Christ’s Gospel disease and infirmity, like
sin, are of the devil. They have one common source.
To heal the sick of the palsy of his infirmity and to
pardon his sins were one and the same operation.
“Whether it is easier to say, ‘thy sins be forgiven
thee,’ or say, ‘arise and walk?’ ’’ The result
would be the same—the healing of the whole nature
of that man.
And so throughout the history of our Lord’s
dealings with sinful and diseased humanity, all who
have faith to receive the healing are healed, cleansed
and pardoned.
The faith which receives introduces a very import-
ant point in connection with spiritual healing;
for though we do not find that anyone who came in
faith to our Lord for healing was ever refused or
sent away, we do find this, that there was one place
where our Lord Himself could not heal-, there were
people whom even He was unable to help. We are
distinctly told, not that He would not, but that He
could not do His mighty works of healing in that
place. He could not heal there as He was accus-


tomed to heal, because He was hindered by the
unbelief of the people. Yet even there He healed a
fe\y sick folk—those whose faith was proof against
the general unbelief. And is not this exactly what
we see to-day among ourselves?
Here, I think, is the answer to the questions:
If it is Christ Who is working through the
healer, why are not all healed? and
Why in these days is not spiritual healing
instantaneous ?
The first of these two questions is already
answered in part. If there were many whom Christ
■could not heal because of the general anbelicf that
prevailed among them, what can be expected in a
community such as that of our own Church, where
the faith in Christ’s willingness to heal seems to be
the exception rather than the rule, and where sick-
ness and disease is too often extolled as a blessing
instead of denounced as a curse, from which we
should labour in the spirit to be freed?
I cannot but feel that if our corporate faith were
greater, if the whole Church were animated by that
faith in God’s will and power to heal our bodily
infirmities —which is such an indispensable condition


of healing—then Christ could again do His mighty
works among us.
As to the second of these questions. There are, I
think, several explanations that may be given for
healing now being seldom instantaneous. There is,
first, that general attitude of unbelief, which I have
just mentioned; the unbelief among those who
profess to believe the promises of Christ. This want
of faith in the whole community cannot but hinder
the full exercise and effect of the healing gift. The
Apostles, let us remember, could not heal the epi-
leptic boy, not because they had no faith—they were
surprised at their failure —but because they had not
sufficient faith, our Lord told them—“because of
your little faith” (R.V.).
Then we must remember that not all our Lord’s
own acts of healing were instantaneously performed.
There was the blind man, upon whom He laid His
hands twice; and the man blind from birth whose
sight was not restored until, after the laying-on of
Christ’s hands, he had washed in the pool of Siloam.
Then, again, I think we must consider the fact of
spiritual healing in the same light as that of spiritual
conversion—which is, in a sense, the healing of the
spiritual part of a man. Spiritual conversion is by


no means always instantaneous; with many people it
is a gradual process; and precisely the same thing is
found to he the case in the spiritual healing of the
physical nature.
To come back again to our main question. Can
we not feel that this difficulty is solved for us in the
life and works of Jesus Christ, as we study His
dealings with mankind with open, unprejudiced
minds? Is not the will of God to heal the sick —
without distinction, without exception—fully re-
vealed to us in those mighty works of compassion
and love ? Have we in the Gospel any ground at all
for imagining that God intends that some people
shall suffer disease that they may be benefited
spiritually? I know no passage in the whole of the
New Testament which in any way contravenes the
clear, explicit and definite teaching of the Gospels—
that is, of our Lord Himself—on this point.
“But there is that passage in the Epistle to the
Hebrews.” people often object, “Whom the Lord
loveth He chasteneth. ...” Yes, certainly, and
also we find in the Book of Revelation those words
of our Lord: “As many as I love I rebuke and
chasten; be zealous, therefore, and repent.” These
are words to be received in humility, love and thank-


fulness, remembering that it is only by suffering
that we can be made perfect. But what possible
warrant can we have for reading into them a mean-
ing which is so alien to the spirit and teaching of
Christ—the meaning that here is intended an allu-
sion to the infliction of disease and sickness as a
punishment or correction? What earthly father,
however unloving and ungodly, would inoculate his
child with a disease like tuberculosis or cancer as a
punishment? Yet this, it seems, is the kind of pun-
ishment which many Christians imagine our Heav-
enly Father to inflict upon His children. Is not such
an idea, to say the least, dishonouring to God? Can
we think of our Lord going about imparting disease
to those to whom He ministered? The very thought
is impossible.
And, further, how can it be supposed that God in-
flicts upon men the corruption, the evil, which fie
declared to be the work of the devil, and from which
He sent His Son to redeem them? The “chasten-
ing of the Lord” cannot be identified with the
work of the devil; there can be no connection be-
tween pain, mental or spiritual—or even physical—
which may be rightly attributed to God the All-
Holy, and the pain and suffering which is bound up
in the corruption of disease. It is impossible. God


■cannot, at one and the same time, both deliver us
from the bondage of corruption, and inflict it upon
us,.whatever we may imagine His good purpose to
be in so doing.
God does not do evil that good may come. But
—and here is a very important point, because it is
probably at the root of most people’s ideas about
•God-sent disease —God does bring good out of evil.
He is continually bringing good out of evil. And
where evil most abounds there God’s saving grace
is found in greater power. And thus it is that
Christ’s triumph over sin and the devil is being
continually exhibited.
There are some, we know, who like to think that
in suffering, sickness and disease they are sharing
in the sufferings of Christ. And yet our Lord never
knew sickness—as He knew no sin: His perfect body
“saw no corruption,” either in life or in death.
Therefore, in such suffering as this we cannot be
partakers with Him. To be partakers of His suf-
ferings, surely our suffering must be of the same
nature as His —where otherwise would be the fellow-
ship 1 ? (If a friend were grieving over the wayward-
ness and ingratitude of a beloved child, one would
not be sharing in his suffering in any sense by suf-
fering from some illness.)


When S. Peter speaks of being partaker of
Christ ’s sufferings, he is speaking of the sufferings
of persecution for righteousness’ sake. He calls it
“suffering according to the will of God,” for our
Lord Himself has pronounced a special blessing on
those who should thus suffer for Him. But there
is no beatitude for the suffering of disease and sick-
ness. Therefore we ought to be very careful in dis-
tinguishing between what is, and what is not, “suf-
fering according to the will of God” (see 1 Peter
iv. 1, 12-19).
Again, let us look at the question from a purely
practical point of view. What do we do when any-
one belonging to us is ill? We send for the doctor
and do all we can for the recovery of the sick
person. We assume at once, without question, that
the patient should be made well as soon as possible.
We do not first deliberate whether it is God’s will
that he should be healed; we do not say that it may
be God’s will he should continue to suffer; no, we do
all we can to relieve his suffering. How then is it,
when we come to the question of healing by spiritual
means, Ave immediately begin to ask if it is God’s
will he should be healed; why do we hesitate to use
the very means Avhich our Lord enjoined to be used
in the case of the sick? Does not the very fact that


His life was a ministry of healing prove to us that
His will is to do now, through His servants, what He
Himself did in person in the days of Ilis visible Pres-
ence among us? If it is doubtful whether we should
use spiritual means of healing, it must be still more-
doubtful whether we should use physical means,
which have not been enjoined upon us as Christians
at all.
We take sanitary and hygienic measures to pre-
vent the propagation of disease, and to stamp it out
as far as we can. For disease is foreign to man’s
nature as God intended it to be. Disease and sick-
ness of any kind corrupt and render impure that
which God created good and holy. They are con-
trary to the laws of our nature, and therefore con-
trary to the laws of God. If we could know this in
no other way (ie., by revelation), we should know
it through the natural healthy working of the body,
which teaches us the fact in the simplest and most
convincing manner.
When a man falls ill, his body (if he be a normally
healthy man) makes special efforts to throw out the
disease which has invaded it. If the sick man has
a strong constitution —if his physical nature is in
good working order —the chances are strongly in
his favour. Sickness is frequently overcome by the


simple effort of nature without the use of remedies
which, in their simple working, assist the ordinary
processes of nature. Here we see the will of God
as it is revealed through the laws of nature.
We must remember, too, that our nature is com-
plex: although in its essence spiritual, it is con-
stituted of mind and body. Here, under our present
conditions, these three parts of our nature are inter-
dependent: and we live in a world in which the
forces of evil, operating as they do on the spiritual,
mental and physical planes, are continually working
against us to corrupt and destroy our nature on each
of those three planes. But our nature, disorganised
as it has become by the Fall, cannot of itself resist
the combined forces of evil which direct their attack
upon us on each plane, and so we need spiritual help
for our bodies, as much as we need spiritual help for
our souls.
111-health often results from the lack of due con-
trol of the spirit over the physical part of our nature,
rendering it unable to resist the attack of evil in-
fluences. But when the spirit is strengthened by a
fresh influx of the life and healing virtue of Christ,
it is able once more to free the mind and body
from the evil influences which attack us on every
plane.


These thoughts bring us to a closer consideration
of the second part of our first question—Does God
will any person to suffer sickness for the good of his
soul ? Is such suffering, in short, productive of spir-
itual good?
We have seen, I think, from the consideration of
Christ’s work and teaching that He certainly never
taught any such doctrine. He did teach that sick-
ness and infirmity were sometimes the result of
individual sin—that is, that the breaking of the law
on one plane of our nature would result in the break-
ing of the law on another. He taught that disease
was the bondage of Satan—the oppression of the
devil. The witness of God through reason and
nature teaches us that disease is the corruption of
our nature: and so we may ask ourselves the ration-
al question if it is conceivable that any part of our
being can be sanctified, or in any way made better
or purer, by the corruption of another part? Is it
conceivable that God, Who is the God of all purity,
wholeness and strength, should work corruption, or
in any sense cause corruption, in any part of our
being? No. He cannot work evil in us, but He can,
and He does, bring good out of the evil that the
devil works in us—that the powers of evil work in
nature and in the world. Because God is Almighty


He can use even the evil to bring about good. It is
thus that He ultimately defeats the power of evil
which works in.the bodies of those who are sick.
It is thus that S. Paul is able to say that “all things
work together for good to them that love God.’’
“God allows sickness and disease among us,
then?” it will be said. Yes, obviously He does, or
sickness and disease' would not exist. He allows it
just as, and in the same sense as, He allows sm
among us— as is also certainly the case, or sin would
not exist.
But no one, therefore, argues that God sends sin
among us, or that He wills us to sin. And disease
is on the physical plane precisely what sin is on the
spiritual—both are a breaking of the laws of God.
Or, in other words, disease is the manifestation, on
the physical plane, of the breaking of God’s law on
the spiritual plane.
In this is involved another question: "W hy so many
saintly people continue to suffer from disease?
Simply because, I think, they accept disease as
God’s will for them, and therefore they shut them-
selves off from the healing He is but too ready to
give them.


There is one thing we know God cannot do. He
cannot save ns either in body or in soul if we do not
will to be saved. If we do not accept the salvation
He offers us for our bodies, He will not force it
upon us. He cannot force it upon us. He has made
us creatures of free will, and therefore He can only
do for us what we allow Him to do. If we hug
our bodily infirmities in the belief that this is a
‘ ‘ cross ’ ’ sent by God for us to bear, how can God de-
liver us from it? We have neither desired nor asked
deliverance; and Christ has not promised to give us
what we do not ask for. The answer to prayer is
strictly conditioned by our belief in God’s will and
power to grant what we ask. The “prayer of faith”
cannot surely be prayed by one who is sure neither
of God’s will, nor of His power to give. Our Lord
has plainly told us “whatsoever thing ye ask in
prayer believing ye shall receive.”
What God can do—what He does do—for those
who thus accept sickness is to save them from the
spiritual consequences of the physical corruption. He
even uses it as a means for higher spiritual develop-
ment through the opportunities it provides for pa-
tience and endurance and courage, which are de-
veloped through reliance on Him. It is an example,
in the physical sphere, of grace abounding where


evil is present in great force. And we know how S.
Paul dealt with that question—the question of our
duty in the matter —‘ ‘ Shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound? God forbid.”
One of the greatest difficulties I have to face in
my work is this deeply-rooted idea that God is the
author and sender of disease and sickness. That is
putting it very bluntly, I know, but if we may say
that God sends sickness as a means of correction or
improvement, that is simply what it comes to.
It is difficult to trace how this idea crept into the
current teaching of Christianity, because as far as
one can discover there is absolutely no foundation
for it in the New Testament. The same thing may,
of course, be said of all the numberless errors that,
at different periods of the Church’s history, have
been introduced into its current teaching—its cur-
rent teaching, I mean, as distinct from its perman-
ent teaching.
To teach that that which Christ and His Apostles
declared to be the bondage of Satan; the conse-
quence of sin; the oppression of the devil —to teach
that that is a spiritual blessing, or in itself the means
of spiritual blessing, must surely be a source of great
weakness to ourselves and to the whole body of the
Church.


This was not the teaching of the Apostles, as we
have seen. It was not the teaching of the Church
of, the first few centuries, if we may trust the gen-
eral testimony of the Fathers. For we find that
the view taken by them—(it is more particularly
enunciated by S. Athanasius) with regard to our
Lord’s works of healing—is that they formed an
essential part of the work of redemption.
It is beautifully put by S. Irenaeus, who, speaking
of the revelation of Christ in His works, says that
"when He found His own work shattered by sin, He
healed it in every way. ’ ’
There is also the witness of the practice of the
early Church. During some four or five centuries
we know that the spiritual healing of the sick was
regarded as a normal part of her ministry—as Christ
Himself had commanded it should be.
This leads us to the last point we had to deal
with: Why we cannot receive healing direct from
Christ instead of through an earthly healer.
I think we shall easily see that it is in accordance
with the general methods of Cod’s dealings with
mankind that spiritual healing should be imparted
to man through man. Throughout the history of


the human race it is seen that, in all His dealings
with man, God uses man as the medium or channel
of His communications.
In the New Covenant this method is initiated in
the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, Who
was the Perfect Mediator between God and man.
And He gave to His Apostles the power to act as
channels of communication between God and man
to act in the same capacity as He Himself acted.
(“As my Father hath sent Me, even so send I you.”)
So He gave to them, among other powers, the power
to heal men in His Name—even during the time He
still dwelt, as Man, among men.
Then upon many other members of His Church
this power was bestowed through the descent of the
Holy Ghost after the Ascension. The power to heal
was conferred when the command to heal was given.
Christ simply gave the Church the power to carry
out His command to “heal the sick.”
So I suppose the only answer to that question is
that we receive healing through an earthly healer
acting in the Name and Power of Christ, because
that is the way in which Christ has ordained that
healing shall be given from Him. It cannot be our


part to question why He has so ordained. We can
only reflect that it is on the lines of God’s general
government of His people.
At the same time there is no reason to suppose
that it is impossible to receive healing direct from
Christ without the medium of an earthly healer.
We may receive healing of our sickness directly in
answer to prayer—there are instances of people of
great faith who have so been healed. But whatever
may be our individual capacity in these respects we
need never have any doubt or scruple about receiv-
ing healing through an earthly healer, for it was for
this purpose that to some has been “ given the gift
of healing by the same Spirit. ’ ’ It is an institution
of God Himself for the restoration of those who are
sick.
There is one word more, in answer to question 4,
which I have to add with reference to our faith
towards God in His dealings Avith us, especially as it
concerns spiritual healing. We must not come to
Him for healing in the spirit Avhich “demands a
sign from Him,” we must not make any individual
case, our own or another’s, a test, as it were, of His
power and willingness to heal. To question A\ T hether
AA r e may not lose our faith if just what we expect


does not happen, is simply to acknowledge that we
have no real faith—and what we have cannot be
worth keeping. .To say, “I believe in spiritual heal-
ing, and if this case is successful that will be certain
proof that it is true, and that God does work among
us in this way now,” does not show the spirit of
simple faith—we can have no right to make this
sort of demand from God; and I doubt if, where such
an attitude is maintained, any “sign” would be
given. We have to remember that much is required
on our side, and that we have so long disbelieved,
so long turned away from Christ as the “Saviour of
the body,” that we should be very humbly grateful
if the least sign is given to us of our Lord’s real and
living Presence among us still, and of His willing-
ness to hear us and heal us.
Let us go forward in faith—“nothing waver-
ing,” nothing doubting—if we doubt, “let us not
think we shall receive anything of the Lord.” Let
us hold fast to our Lord’s promise, “All things
whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall re-
ceive ... if ye have faith and doubt not.”
One word in conclusion. While we keep in mind
these things in the region of religion and faith, we
must not lose sight of the fact that, in the conflict


with the forces of evil, union between those who are
taking part in it is a primary condition of success.
There must be co-operation between those who are
attacking these evils from the physical side and
those who are attacking them on the spiritual side.
Religion and science should be united in their efforts
to overcome and root out disease and infirmity in
mankind. God works from both sides —the physical
and the spiritual—and He uses as His instruments
every gift and talent bestowed upon man.
But we have to realise that the greatest factor in
healing is the spiritual; because it is a spiritual force
alone which can touch the cause of any trouble or de-
rangement of body or mind, when that cause lies
in the spiritual nature.
Herein, then, lies the Church’s responsibility; and
in the face of so much accumulated suffering—
mental and moral and physical—it is a very grave
responsibility. For Christ, in view of the necessary
limitations of physical and mental means, has de-
finitely committed to His Church this spiritual power
of healing to help forward the salvation of mankind.
And He has ordained that this power shall be
exercised in a manner which is in conformity with


its nature; that is, it must be used and cherished as a
spiritual gift, and must remain where our Master
left it—on the spiritual plane.
When the Church has once clearly comprehended
this, and her responsibility in the matter of healing
as a definite part of the work of redemption, she
will be in a position to meet those who are working
.on other planes towards the same ends.
The Church and the medical profession might
then, with some real hope of definite co-operation,
meet and arrange some working basis upon which
their efforts might be united so as to bring the great-
est benefit to suffering humanity.
And so, in the right use of all God’s manifold
gifts of wisdom and power, would the salvation of
all men be truly set forward to the glory of His
Holy Name.








NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
