

“TheVassets of'Wrath Fitted
to Destruction. ”
In Explanation of Romans ix.
SERMON.
By A. RUSSELL
j D UBLISHED BY j^EQUEST.
ADELAIDE :
WILLIAM KYFFIN THOMAS, PRINTER,
GRENFELL-STREET.
i 873-




M33SS ) F ’J
®ljt feds of SiHnitlj Jfittcti fo destruction.
“ Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honour, and another to dishonour? What if God, willing
to show His wrath, and to make His power known, endured with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: and
that He might make known the riches of His glory on the vessels
of mercy, which He had afore prepared unto glory?—Rom. ix. 21 —23.
This is one of the dark and apparently stern sayings of Holy
Scripture, which strike a certain sense of coldness and dread into
the heart of the reader. By a great school of divines it has been
triumphantly adduced in support of the doctrine that God has
elected some among the children of men to salvation, and others to
destruction. And in the mere sound of the words, if separated
from the intricate and noble argument in which they occupy a place,
there does seem, to the casual reader, to lie a very awful meaning.
To some the words seem to say that God has fitted certain men as
vessels of wrath to destruction, and others as vessels of mercy to
final glory ; and that He can no more be charged, in doing this,
with exceeding the limits of justice, than the potter can be charged
with wrong in making from the lump of clay in his hands some
vessels for a nobler and others for a baser use. I hope to show
you, that though judged by the mere sound the words might seem
to have this meaning, yet when interpreted according to their sense ,
they have a far other meaning. Even if you separate these verses
from the rest of the chapter, there are some things in the verses
themselves which, on this interpretation, we shall find it very
difficult to explain.
I. PRELIMINARY GROUNDS OP MISGIVING ABOUT THE TRUTH OP THE
COMMON INTERPRETATION.
First—l would ask you to observe that if there are any souls of
men whom God has beforehand fitted as vessels for destruction, it
is impossible to understand what can be meant by his enduring
them with much long-suffering. Such long-suffering endurance
|l4 - _ I- 'll


implies a hope or a possibility of the wicked whom God thus bears
with, being at last turned from their wickedness. But if they have
by His own act been from the first fitted to destruction, they have
then from the first been disabled of the very power of amendment;
and He who sees the end from the beginning must know this.
Years can make no change in them, at least no change for the
better ; and in such a case long-suffering becomes a mere name.
Secondly —I would ask you to observe that what is here
claimed for God is an arbitrary and not a righteous exercise of will;
that is, an exercise of will based altogether on the idea of His
absolute and uncontrolled power over the things He has made,
without reference to any moral consideration. In other words, a
lower morality is here ascribed to the Righteous God than that
which His creatures have to observe. For, great as may be the
power that men have over one another, we at once pronounce an
irresponsible exercise of that power essentially immoral. We feel
that in our own actions we have to consider not merely whether we
have the power to do this or that thing ; but also, and above all,
whether we have a right to do it. This sense of right, to which we
are compelled to have regard, is what stamps with wrong every
arbitrary exercise of power. And it was the cry of the patriarch
of old, “ Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right V Yes, righ-
teousness is that law which God has set forth as the law of His
own actings. And this is the law which He also imposes on men
who were created in His own image. Fallen as they may be from
their first innocence, they have not lost the freedom of their will;
for law is imperative only over souls that are free. They
alone are able to disobey. They alone can be dealt with as those
who have to answer for what they do at the judgment seat of
God. But, if we could believe that God had from the first so
fettered the will of any soul that that soul should be compelled to
pursue an evil career, so that by no possible effort of his own could
he break loose from it, then personal responsibility would in such
a case be destroyed, and the judgment to come would be no real
trial; it would be merely a form of trial for the purpose of register-
ing the sentence which had gone forth against the man before he was
born. The same sense of unreality, if not mockery, would attach
to every proclamation of the Gospel j for in each such offer of


mercy to the sinner, and each persuasion to faith in Christ, the
man would be apparently besought to do that which really and
secretly he has all along been, and to the end will be, disabled from
doing. If we cannot reconcile the one course with righteousness
in God, neither can we reconcile the other with His truth. For
He is absolute truth, and no system of divinity, however perfect
in the coherence of its parts with one another, can persuade us to
believe that He who is truth would deceive His creatures with offers
of mercy which in the case of those predestinated to destruction
never can be fulfilled. However apparently perfect the logical
proof may be, yet there is something within us which tells us that
there must somewhere be a flaw in the reasoning. If for a moment,
misled by the dreadful sound of St. Paul’s words in our English
version, we might harbour the thought that he teaches this awful
doctrine, it stands in such marked opposition to his teaching else,
where, that from the very first a suspicion arises in the mind of the
reader that ho cannot have got at the true interpretation. These
suspicions will be confirmed the more closely you lay your mind to
the Apostle’s argument.
Once more—A misgiving arises out of that very illustration of
the potter and the clay, which is supposed by some to assert most
strongly the absolute right God has to determine the everlasting
fate of men, some to life and some to death. St. Paul uses a
wonderful variety of imagery in the course of his reasonings, but
his images are used to illustrate different truths which he is in-
forcing. How, then, does this particular illustration bear on the
doctrine of predestination —that doctrine which I need hardly
remind you, consists of two parts, the election of some, and the
reprobation of others? A potter is free indeed to make what use he
pleases of the lump of clay in his hands; he may make any kind
of vessel. But one thing is certain, that in making any vessel, he
never contemplates as the end of his making it that it shall be destroyed.
By constant use it may in the end become useless ; or by accident
it may be broken. But he does not make it in order that it may
be broken ■ he makes it that it may subserve some purpose, that it
may be applied to some definite use. Destruction may enter into
the possibilities of its future, but it does not enter into the purpose
of the potter in the act of making it. Therefore, in so far as this


illustration is used in vindication of an eternal purpose of destruc-
tion on the part of God, it fails of its purpose. St. Paul in this
verse is not thinking of this subject at all. He is dwelling on the
fact that some of the works of the potter are intended for
honourable, and others for dishonourable uses ; as showing that
God may be expected to make use of the most various kinds of
instruments for the fulfilment of His great purpose concerning
mankind; how the wickedness even of the wicked cannot defeat
that purpose ; they may be instruments of the baser sort, but they
are still instruments in His hand. I shall presently have to say
something more about the true interpretation of this dark and
threatening passage.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND ON THIS SUBJECT.
But now I would wish to say that I should not have selected one
of the most difficult questions in theology for a Sunday evening
discourse, but for the fact that in the course of my ministry I
frequently meet with those who are oppressed almost to despair by
this awful doctrine of predestination. And I am sometimes re-
minded by those who hold it that, be it true or false, it is one of the
doctrines of our own church. I wish, therefore, to show you that
this assertion can only be made in a very modified sense. There
is nothing in the doctrine of the Church of England which admits
that there are souls of men who from the first are predestined
to perdition. The 17th Article uses the word “ Predestination,”
but explains it in a way which relieves it of all its horror. “ Predesti-
nation to life,” it says, “is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby,
before the foundations of the world were laid, He hath constantly
decreed by His counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and
damnation those whom He hath chosen in Christ out of mankind,
and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation as vessels
made to honour Furthermore, we must receive
God’s promises in such wise as they be generally set forth in Holy
Scripture.” Not a word here about reprobation. Not a word as to
those chosen out of mankind being a select circle of souls. Not a
word that may be inconsistent with the belief that the elect are
all those to whom the Gospel has actually come, and that the true
election is baptism into Christ’s name. That act of baptism is the
visible introduction of each soul to the actual enjoyment of all


privileges and blessings of the Gospel which Christ in His Incarna-
tion has already assured to all mankind. The article on Predesti-
nation, which is sometimes quoted as if it pledged our church to a
Calvinistic doctrine, is in fact a denial of that doctrine. It quietly
rejects all in it that is repulsive. When carefully examined, it will
be seen to amount to no more than the assertion of that great
truth to which we joyfully cling, that Christ is “ the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world;” that His atonement is the fulfil-
ment of an Eternal purpose of love ; that the eventual redemption
of man is that great end towards which all the eternal counsels and
all the earthly dispensations of God, have been from the first with
unfaltering purpose conducting the history of the world. And
therefore there is no conflict or want of harmony with this doctrine,
when we teach our children to say “ I believe in God the Son , who
hath redeemed me and all mankind .”
11. THE TRUE INTERPRETATION.
Let us now, then, look at the solemn words on which I am dis-
coursing, to see what they really do mean. The whole chapter is
a closely compacted argument in which the Apostle is indeed
discussing a doctrine of election, but not the doctrine of election
which has been wrought out so relentlessly in some modern theolo-
gies. He does not even touch the question of the election of
individual souls to a state of final blessedness or final woe in the
future world. The Divine act of choice of which he speaks is not
an act of choice made in the secret counsels of eternity before the
world was, but is strictly and exclusively an act of choice made
in the course of human history. Moreover, St. Paul is not arguing
for the purpose of proving that God may justly exclude from the
operations of His grace a certain portion of mankind ; he is arguing
for the purpose of showing that He has in fact included within the
circle of His gracious influences, again and again, men who seemed
to lie outside the promises of this or that particular covenant. He
is vindicating for God, against the narrow Jewish notion of election,
a right to exercise a truly Divine mercy, a width and greatness of
compassion which far outruns the mere letter of His written
promises.
THE rejection of unsuitable instruments, and the choice of
BETTER ONES, ILLUSTRATED IN JEWISH HISTORY.
In the first section of this chapter St. Paul is vindicating, by


examples whose authority even the Jew could not deny, God’s right
of selection from among those who were of Abraham’s race the
fittest instruments for the fulfilment of the promise “ In thee shall
all the families of the earth be blessed.” Thus, in the first
instance, the first-born, Ishmael, was passed by, and Isaac chosen ;
in the second instance, the first-born, Esau, was rejected, and the
younger brother Jacob chosen. And the Apostle sums up his
review of the earlier history with the question “ What shall we
say, then ? Is there unrighteousness with God 1 God forbid.”
That is, His was no arbitrary selection; no unrighteousness can be
charged in respect merely of the wise selection of the most suit-
able instruments for the fulfilment of His own righteous purpose.
FURTHER ILLUSTRATED IN GOD’S DEALINGS WITH EGYPT.
The second section begins with the 15th verse, and the key note
is struck in the very first words : “ I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have com-
passion which has been strangely read by men whose eyes their
theological system has blinded, as if it had been written “ I will
not have mercy on whom I will not have mercy,” &c. But, in
truth, it was an assertion of a world-wide range of compassion in
God against the merely local and national view which Moses took
of it. The limited petition of Moses was—“ Consider that this
nation is Thy people.” But the reply was a kind of echo of the
promise to Abraham, that all families of the earth should be blessed
in him. The words instead of being the assertion on the part of
the Lord of His right to make an arbitrary selection of a few
objects of mercy, were, in fact, an early intimation of the fact that
Israel was called, not for blessing beginning and ending with itself,
but rather as a living witness of God as “ the saving health of all
nations .” The declaration was one of those mystic foreshadowings
of a universal redemption—a thought of redeeming love that was
to run through all the ages, like that other saying of the Lord
which was so perplexing to those who heard it—“ Other sheep I
have,” &c. (St. John x. 10).
But here a man of St. Paul’s quick intelligence anticipates the
objection a Jew would make to his construction of the words.
He would naturally say “ What, then, do you say to the case of
Pharaoh, and the judgments sent on him 1 Is this the mercy, the


compassion of which you are speaking?” To which St. Paul’s
immediate reply is, “ The Scripture saith unto Phardoli, even for
this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show My
power in thee, and that My name might be declared through all the
earth. ” And then follows the Apostle’s own conclusion—“ There-
fore hath He mercy on whom He will have mercy, and whom He will
He hardeneth .”
Here, you see, he admits that Phardoh’s case is an awful problem,
yet one that can be solved. How are we to understand his lan-
guage? Which view shall we take of it ? Shall we say (1) that God
raised him up in order to impel him forth on such a course of
wickedness that he should at last be overtaken by a judgment so
conspicuous, that the justice of God in the condemnation of sin
should be publicly declared to the world ? Few persons, though
they may have thought something of this kind, would be prepared
to look fairly in the face the blasphemy involved in this thought.
Or (2) Did God select this man in the actual riot of his wickedness
in order to show that such courses as his can tend only to destruc-
tion ? This is the view which alone consists with the general strain
of the Apostle’s reasoning throughout the chapter; and the only
thing which interposes any serious difficulty in the way of this
interpretation is the clause—“ Whom He will He hardeneth,”
Again we ask then— What does this mean ? Did God make this
man’s heart bad, and then punish him for being what He had made
him ? Or was it not rather the fact that God sent him such warn-
ings, such visitations of solemn meaning that they might have
subdued and softened the man’s nature, but that the man himself
hardened his own heart, and that the more closely God dealt with him
the more he resisted, and therefore the more hardened he became ?
“ The will of God,” as has been said, “ was altogether a goodjwill,
and therefore Pharaoh s will— which was a bad will, a proud
self-will—strove against it, and was lashed into greater fury by
meeting that which was contrary to itself.” But for these Divine
visitations, he might not have become so hard \ and therefore in
one sense it is perfectly true that they hardened him. But this
was no such hardening as left his own free will no room for action ;
it was through the perverted exercise of that free will that he
came to be what he w T as.
* Maurice, “ Lawgivers and Patriarchs.”


SUMMING UP OP THE ARGUMENT.
We have then, got to see what St. Paul, at least, meant by the
“ vessels of wrath fitted to destruction'and in some to honour,” &c.
The immediate application of these phrases is historical. The
Apostle is speaking of Israel and Egypt, and using their different
experience as illustrations of God’s ways, not in the infliction of
punishment hereafter, but in the midst of human history. But
beneath the particular application there lies the eternal principle,
that to contradict the law of good under which God meant man to
live, is to embark on a course of certain ruin ; that destruction, in
one form or another, will certainly overtake all who do this ; that
the way of conformity to the holy will of God is the way of salva-
tion ; and that mutiny against that will equally tends to perdition.
It may not be the final perdition of the individual offender, but it
will certainly be the perdition of all the plans on which he was
shaping his life; and it will cany with it a sharp and awful anguish
of soul which may well inflict on every living man dark suggestions
of dread. But it is not God’s anger against any portion of the
human race that inflicts such suffering. His is a holy love which
must needs in faithfulness and truth, testify to the children of His
love of the miseries which in the very nature of things must beset
them amid every effort of theirs to contradict His holy will. He
would have them understand that every enterprise directed against
good is a futile enterprise, and that the true way of happiness for
all men can be found only in harmony with those great principles
of good which He cannot suffer to be overborne by any opposition
of evil. It is not so much He who inflicts the suffering, as they
who by setting at naught the conditions on which all human
happiness must rest, strike the fangs of suffering into their own
bosom.
I have been seeking this evening, my brethren, to interpret a
difficult passage of Holy Scripture; and I have been especially
urged to undertake this work of interpretation by the knowledge
that a common and popular misinterpretation of it has troubled
the peace and darkened the life of many souls—often of those who
are feeling most earnestly after God—breathing constantly the
prayer, “ Nearer, my God, to Thee”—and yet driven away from


Him into a region of coldness and desolation through the hold on
their minds which this false interpretation has taken. I trust you
do see that the imagined God presented to us in the Calvinistic
scheme is not the God whom the Holy Scriptures reveal to us—
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ—the Father to whom
our Lord has taught us to pray. The image of God as an omni-
potent Ruler and not a Father—as a Ruler resting on His omni-
potence to select some of His sinful subjects for life and others
for death, as if between Him and them there were no relations but
those of Ruler and Subject, you may well discard as one of those
bad dreams which arise out of a morbid state of mind. Not only
“ you may,” but “ you must” discard it; because to retain it in
your imagination would be to deny the Gospel. That Gospel
declares He so loved the world that He sent His only-begotten
Son into the world that whosoever believeth in Him should not
perish, but inherit everlasting life. It declares that His will is,
that “ all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth.” It tells us that for this very purpose He spoke to man
by a Son—that whereas men had for ages dealt with Him as an
angry Ruler, hard to be appeased, He would have them know that
His is a Fatherly rule, and His a truly Fatherly love. And if He
be a Father, He is not less but more a Father than the best of men
who have borne that name on earth. As we should feel that we
were acting unnaturally, cruelly, and wickedly if we were from the
time of their birth to select some of our children for favour and
blessing, and others for exile and punishment, we dare not vilify
God by imputing to Him that which in ourselves we should deem
so unnatural, so wicked, and so cruel.
NO LIMIT TO GOD’S REDEEMING LOVE.
No ; I can put no limit to the love of God, and least of all, to
His redeeming love. I recognize in Christ the second Adam, the
true Head of our race. And recognizing this, lam bound to
believe that all men are now, through Him, knit to the Father of
all in the bonds of an eternal love. Among them there may be
many prodigal sons—many who waste their energies on futile
schemes of earthly bliss; but to them all in their turn we trust
will come the hour of discovery, of profound penitence, of newborn
desire to get back to their Home. And whensoever that desire


revives, thank God there is a Home to which they can go; thank God
for the assurance that even before they have found it, the love of their
Father has gone out towards them and made ready to embrace
them. No repulse has ever driven back any contrite child seeking
Him. The predestinated wrath of which some theologians speak
is a chimera of the imagination oppressed by an overwhelming
sense of human guilt. Never in the whole history of human
repentance has this dark fancy availed to prevent God from pouring
out the richest mercy of forgiving love on the penitent sinner.
It is He who is constantly seeking us; it is we who are so'unwilling
to be found of Him. He is “ far more ready to hear than we are
to ask, and is wont to give us more than we either desire or
deserve.”
William Kyffin Thomas, Printer, Grenfell-street, Adelaide.
