

- m
i< . -
.
■- i':aE2
■


THE RANKENS
OF BATHURST.
COMPILED BY
Mrs. W. B. RANKER
©times :
S. D. TOWNSEND & CO., PRINTERS,
282 Pitt Street,




TO MY CHILDREN
GRAND CHILDREN.
I have often thought how little you all seemed
to know of your relations of the past gene-
ration, and how you are connected with those
who remain. I have, therefore, in this little
Memoir, written all I thought would be interest-
ing, and would furnish a book of reference in
case of forgetfulness. I hope to draw a chart
which will make matters still more clear, and
trust it will be useful to you.
C. G. RANKEN,
11th August, 1916.




The Rankens of Bathurst.
Jacobus de Ranken, a Flemish gentleman,
came to the Court of Alexander 111., King of Scots,
in an Embassy from Flanders, about the year
1280. This, it is most probable, was from Robert,
Earl of Flanders, on the occasion of his daugh-
ter’s marriage with Alexander, Prince of Scot-
land, in 1279. He obtained grants of land, which
his posterity possessed for several centuries to
the end of the 17th Century. The family of the
Rankens of Shiel appears, from the circumstance
of their arms being the same, to have been not
only the same family, but on the failure of the
other branch, to have become the chief.
I. Laurence Ranken, of Shiel, who lived in
the reigns of Queen Mary and James
VI., becoming involved in the troubles
of the times, and contracting debts in
consequence, left at his death a bur-
dened estate to his eldest son.
11. James Ranken, from the wreck of his
father’s estate, settled on the Barony of
Torringdean, in the parish of Cumnock,
prior to the year 1619. He married a
daughter of Douglas, of Glenshamrock,
by whom he had two sons, George and
James.
111. George married Elizabeth Blackwood,
heiress of Ardogreen. He died in 1680.
IV. George Ranken succeeded him; he died
in 1737, when he was succeeded by his
only son.
V. James. He married Jean, daughter of
William Hutchison, of Dalzig, connected
with the families of Auchmannoch, Fair-
field, and Logan, of Logan, by whom he
had a son George, and a daughter Agnes,
who married James Paterson, of Glen-


tagart. James Ranken purchased, in
1760, the lands of Whitehill and others
in the parish of New Cumnock. He died
in 1779, and was succeeded by his only
son.
VI. George Ranken, of Whitehill, who mar-
ried Janet, youngest daughter of James
Logan, of Knockshinnoch, by Mar-
garet, daughter of John Beg, of Dornal,
by whom he had eight sons and two
daughters—
James, a doctor, practised in India, and made
a fortune there.
Thomas, solicitor.
George.
Hugh, a doctor.
John, H. 8.1. Company’s service, killed in
action.
William, a doctor.
Andrew, a doctor.
Arthur.
George, the third son, married his cousin
Janet, daughter of William Hutchison, of Kello-
side, Dumfriesshire. Of a family of seven child-
ren, three only survived at the time of George
Ranken’s marriage—Margaret, William, and
Janet.
In 1818 Jahet Hutchison spent part of the
winter with friends in Edinburgh, and it may be
interesting to her descendants to hear of some of
the gaieties into which she entered. In a letter
to her mother, she writes: “Since you have
expressed a wish to hear about the Rout, I will
give you a full account of it. My gown was white
satin, trimmed with blonde lace and bobbin net,
white shoes and gloves, and a very large flower
in my hair, and a purple velvet reticule to finish
ala mode. Two hairdressers arranged my hair,
and maids put on my clothes. I was put into a
Sedan chair, and carried to Major McPherson’s,
and set down in the hall amongst men and maid


servants. I gave my name, and the footman
repeated it to another man halfway up the stairs,
and he called to another who was standing at one
of the public room doors, where the lady of the
house was. He announced me, and Mrs. McPher-
son and her daughter met me and introduced me
to some of their guests. I sauntered about with
Mrs. Mclntosh, who told me there would be an
immense crowd, as there had been only sixty-five
apologies sent in. Oh! it was quite a delightful
squeeze. The chair came for me at half-past
eleven, and Duncan McPherson handed me in.”
In a letter dated January 10th, 1818, Janet
Hutchison writes:—
“Some of the Taylors, Mrs. McLaren and I
are engaged to go to the theatre on the 21st
with a large party of the officers of the 88th Regi-
ment, and we go to their box. Mrs. Colonel
McGregor will likely be our chaperone, if not Mrs.
General Robertson.”
George Ranken and his cousin Janet Hutchi-
son became engaged in 1820, but there was much
opposition from her mother, sister and brother,
as George Ranken had made up his mind to go
out to Van Dieman’s Land.
Janet writes.to George Ranken:—
“After you left this on Thursday morning
my mother was very much distressed, and wished
me to give up all thought of going to that
sweet land. She had taken into her head that
it is nothing but a desert, and that I would not
have a single friend within hundreds of miles.
What I write at present for is to ask you to get
a letter from Mrs. Campbell to my mother. I
think I understood you to say that Mrs. Campbell
had been in that part of this weary world. I told
my mother so, and she said if she could but hear
from her she would be much comforted. Mar-
garet has desired William to go to your father
to put a stop to it.”
However, all things were settled at last, and


early in May, 1821, Janet and George Ranken
were married at Kelloside. A short time after-
wards they set sail from Leith and took up their
residence at the Spur Inn in London.
Colonel Campbell, of Argyleshire, had deter-
mined to go to the new country and take with
him a large number of his children, and a retinue
of servants, both male and female. The follow-
ing letter gives particulars of the arrangement
by which Mr. and Mrs. Ranken and servants were
to take passage with Colonel Campbell.
“I have seen Colonel Campbell and arranged
everything with him. The vessel he has char-
tered is the “Lusitania,” to be at Gravesend on
the 21st. He will take your friends on the same
terms as others, viz., 80 guineas for cabin and 40
guineas for steerage passengers.”
The following is a letter from Janet Ranken
to her mother:—
“May 30th, 1821.
“I have this moment received Margaret’s
letter, and it has made me quite happy. She tells
me that you have been twice at the Rigg. You
will be rather surprised to hear we have been
detained so long in London, but the Campbells
have put us off from day to day. However, the
captain has promised to clear out to-morrow, and
we board the boat at Gravesend or Dover. We
were asked to dine last Sunday at Boyd Alexan-
der’s. He is a brother of Claude Alexander, of
Ballochmyle. George and Mr. Robertson went,
and I was very sorry afterwards that I did not go
with them, for they wished very much to see me.
Boyd presented George with a puncheon of rum—
-120 gallons!! Hugh Mitchell (my father) came
up on Thursday last and stayed till Sunday. Mar-
garet wishes me to send down my miniature by
post, but it might be very much injured, and I
have given it to Hugh Mitchell to take charge of
when finished. It is thought very like me, but
don’t you think the nose is rather too much?”


In a letter to her sister, Mrs. Ranken writes:
“June Ist, 1821.
“I said in my letter to my mother that I
would write to you after I went on board. But
George thinks there will be a great confusion for
the first day. The sailors will be all drunk, which
would make it very unpleasant for me. So he
intends to ship Mr. Robertson to take care of the
dollars, and the servants to take care of the
dogs, to-morrow morning, and we are to join them
next day at Gravesend. We go in a steam packet.
I have sent my picture this evening to Hugh
Mitchell. He is to take it to Scotland, if he goes
this season for the shooting; if not, he knows of
a friend who is going to Edinburgh, and will
deliver it to the Taylors. When Hugh Mitchell
was with us we went one night to Covent Garden.
It is a beautiful house, and was crowded to excess.
We went to the dress boxes.’’
The following letters were received by George
Ranken, senior, relative to his son’s introduction
to the colony:—
“London, sth March, 1821.
“My Dear Sir, —I have just seen General
Montgomerie, who tells me that Sir Thomas
Brisbane is very happy to hear that your son is
going out, and will, I am sure, from what the
General says, be kind to him. Sir Thomas bid the
General tell me that your son should write to
him (Sir Thomas), mentioning his desire to pro-
ceed to New South Wales, also stating the sum
of money he proposes taking out with him, etc.
Your son should carry out ploughs and other
implements of husbandry with him, although his
attention is chiefly directed to sheep farming.
“Yours truly,
“J. STEVENSON BURNS.”


To George Ranken, senr., from Sir Alexander
Boswell, Bart.:—
“Auchinlech, March 29th, 1821.
“Dear Sir, —I have the pleasure of sending
you a letter to the Lieutenant Governor of Van
Dieman’s Land for your son, which was sent to
me by the Under-Secretary of State for the Colo-
nies.
“Your most obedient servant,
“ALEXANDER BOSWELL.”
The “Lusitania” set sail from Gravesend
early in June, 1821, and arrived at St. Jago, one
of the Cape de Verde Islands, on the 6th of July.
The following letter to her mother describes the
voyage and island, written by Mrs. Ranken; —
“After a rather tedious passage, we arrived here
on the 6th in good health and high spirits. I have
never felt seasick yet, and I am grown so fat that
not one of my rings will go on, and I cannot get
off my wedding ring. On Saturday we all went
on shore, prancing like a parcel of wild horses,
expecting to get our feet once more upon green
grass. But there is not one single blade of grass
on the whole island. The choicest fruit, plenty of
high and rocky hills, with goats and asses and
sheep; but God knows what they live upon.
There is a village close to the shore inhabited by
naked blacks—poor wretches. There are some
French people, and the American Consul, where
we dined, has everything in good style and plenty
of slaves.
“The second day I went on shore the natives
were all clothed. Some of them the most beauti-
ful, handsome creatures I ever saw, although
their skins are as black as jet and as glossy as
satin. On Tuesday Mr. Campbell, Mrs. McLeod,
three Misses Campbell, Patrick, Mr. Ralph and
Mr. Champion (both passengers, and very fine
creatures), George and I went to explore the
country. We crossed the hills, about six miles,
and rested at a place called Trinidad, owned by
a very rich Don, until yesterday morning. We


got all our servants out there likewise, and had
all our soiled linen washed. You never saw any-
thing so inconsistent as the Don’s house in every
respect. The house itself consisted of one large
apartment, with a bed closet not to be compared
to our barn. The house they cooked in was a
good way from this place. There were thirteen
slaves to wash our feet in silver basins! every
night, and we had to lie on shake-downs on the
floor. The gentlemen, the Don, and his family,
went to sleep at some neighbour’s. The place
was in the middle of a plantation of fruit trees.
It was very pleasant to be shaded from the sun by
orange and tamarind trees, and bananas, the
leaves of these measuring 10 feet long. Pine-
apples and all sorts of fruit we had in abundance
for a mere trifle, and plenty of good claret at a
shilling a bottle.
“The natives have the most beautiful neck-
laces and gold chains, and crosses of red coral,
and some of white coral, the latter very precious.
One poor creature took a great liking to me, and
gave me a string of small corals about half a
yard long. When I refused to take it she cried
excessively, so I took it, and George gave her a
piece of Spanish money—the current coin. We
sail from this to-night. A convict ship has made
up to us, and we are to sail together after this.”
From Janet Ranken to her sister, from
Hobart Town, Van Dieman’s Land; —
“My Dear Margaret,—l have so many things
to say that Ido not know where to begin. You
will be expecting a long description of our voyage,
and a long harangue about Van Dieman’s Land.
Had I only the half to tell you I could tell that
half far better than the whole. I wrote to my
mother from St. Jago, and I am afraid she would
never get that letter. You never saw such a hor-
rible place as St. Jago is. We lived on shore for
a week; the sun burns you up; not one blade of
grass to be seen; water lukewarm; sour bread;
naked men and women; and not one decent house


to be met with. But there was some amusement
in eating oranges, bananas, pineapples and cocoa-
nuts, and then we always had at least fourteen
slaves to wait on us when going to bed and get-
ting up. At dinner there were never two dishes
brought in by the same slave. I was very much
amused with our excursion into the country for
the first two days; after that I was wearied and
sick to death of it, and I never wish to see St.
Jago again. So that I was glad to see our ship
spread her white sails to the wind and bear us
out of sight of hill and wood, but that was not
until after we underwent a shower of powder
and shot from the battery owing to some mistake
of our captain not having paid the ship’s dues.
So we were obliged to stay another night in the
harbour, and the captain had to go ashore and
explain matters to his Excellency the Governor.
Mrs. Campbell was very much frightened, and
was ill for three weeks. As for me, I had not the
sense to be frightened. Well, we lost sight of St.
Jago, and then we were becalmed for weeks to-
gether, and but for harpooning sharks and shoot-
ing whales, I don’t know what the men would
have done with themselves, and the ladies were
generally disputing which of their lords or
brothers or lords to be (for there were some
matches made up on the way) had the merit of
sending the poor sporting fishes to their long
homes. And then (but this is rather a serious
story) a young man named Nicholson, a servant
of Mr. Campbell’s, went to sleep in the jolly boat,
and was struck by the sun. He died on the ninth
day afterwards, and was buried on the following
day. I never, never shall forget the sound of the
deep and hollow plunge when the body was con-
signed to its fathomless bed of rest. It was a
calm day, and every wave was as still as death.
The morning after the funeral, all at once, a
breeze sprang up, and in twelve hours we were a
hundred miles from poor Nicholson. After leav-
ing St. Jago, on the 17th of July, we never saw


land again until the 16th of October, when we
arrived at King George’s Sound, on the coast of
New Holland. There we stopped a day. The
gentlemen went ashore and brought back a great
variety of flowers. They saw none of the natives,
and the whole of the hills were covered with
trees, and nothing but one hill rising above an-
other as far as the eye could reach. This was my
birthday, and our men got plenty of rum from
George to give to the sailors and Mr. Campbell’s
men, and as we lay that night at anchor the
sailors had time to make themselves very happy.
I had taken a bad cold, as we all did, from the
sudden change from hot to cold weather, and was
confined to my cabin for some time.
“We arrived in Van Dieman’s Land on the
28th October, all in good health. I did not get a
house until the 31st, but secured a very good one
then; very far superior to anything I had ex-
pected. I see the hills from my windows, and
beautiful little cottages, with their fruitful gar-
dens and hedges of roses. I see a very neat
church, with a steeple, and I can see a signal-post
where they hoist a large flag whenever they see
a ship coming in at the foot of the river. And this
is what I have been watching for. Brauchild (a
name for George Ranken) has been away at Syd-
ney, and I am expecting him home every day.
Now, I should describe the country, but that I
cannot do, for I have never been farther out of
the town than seven miles, but what I have seen
is most beautiful. The river Derwent is a broad
and deep river, abounding with fish of many
kinds, thickly wooded on both sides, excepting
here and there a patch of cultivated land, with
fine, thriving crops. The sail up the river from
here to Restdown, a distance of five miles, is very
fine, quite like the scenery in our Highlands of
Scotland. Mrs. Campbell has taken Restdown
for a few months. George thought of taking part
of the house, but I preferred a house to myself. I
have been there spending my Christmas. This


has been a very cold summer, and I have seldom
been without a fire in the evenings. Not-
withstanding there is a very plentiful harvest
approaching, and fruit is beginning to be plenti-
ful, I have seven or eight nice apple trees in my
garden loaded to the ground, and as for peaches,
I have more than I can ever make use of. I intend
to buy some swine to eat them. Everything is
dear beyond calculation, except mutton, bread
and tea. Good black tea from 4/- to 5/- a pound,
green from 5/- to 6/6. Butter from 5/- to 7/6 per
lb., eggs from 2/- to 3/- a dozen. I bought a pair
of young ducks the other day, for which I paid
6/-, and for eight little chicks which had not left
their mother I paid 12/-. Indian goods are
moderate in price if you buy a quantity together.
I wish I had brought a great many things which
I did not. I have written a list of what I require,
if Willie could find it convenient to send them.
The society here is abominable. Mr. L., a man
worth half a million, is married to a convict
woman. Mrs. L. sent her daughter and sister to
call upon me when I arrived here, but I have
never returned the call, nor shall I, al-
though when Governor Macquarie and his
wife were here Mrs. L. was Mrs. Mac-
quarie’s most intimate friend. I have been
advised to visit her, but they say “evil communi-
cations corrupt good manners.” The colonial
surgeon and his wife are a very pleasant pair.
She was the only daughter of Colonel Davies, late
Lieutenant-Governor of this place, and Dr. Scot is
a Scotchman. I find myself quite at home when
I go to see them. A great many settlers have
come out this season; all of them the grandest
people I ever saw. They are surely come to spend
not to make money. Major Bell, the Comman-
der-in-Chief, and his wife called on me. Mrs. Bell
is a good sort of person, but I hate the Major. The
horses here are dreadfully expensive; anything
good will cost from £BO to £IOO. A dollar here
is thought no more of than a penny in Scotland;


this is to me incomprehensible. Washing is
charged at 5/- a dozen, even pocket handker-
chiefs.
“Mr. Robertson and Miss Campbell have
agreed to marry. Lom is a good lassie, and a
beauty both in mind and in person. She is stay-
ing with me at present, and is to remain until
Brauchild returns. A.C. is as useful, wise and
prudent a creature as ever I saw. I may certainly
bless my stars for having two such trustworthy
servants.” Mr. Ranken sailed to Sydney in the
“Grace,” and arrived there on the Ist December.
He writes on the 4th:—“Arrived after a voyage of
ten days, and everything exactly to my wish, both
at sea and on land. It so happened that it was on
the same day upon which Sir Thomas Brisbane
assumed the command of the colony. I was intro-
duced to him immediately on my arrival. He is a
very good-looking, active-like man, and I have no
doubt will make a very good Governor. I have
had very little talk with him; he is so very busy.
Indeed, I would like to hear first from Mr. Robert-
son what Major Honour has done about Emu
Bottom. What a fine place this Sydney is; you
would be quite delighted were you here. I regret
very much that ever I slept a moment in Van Die-
man’s land, but had you conveyed to this place
at once. The country there is not so good as this;
everything here is in the greatest perfection.
Potatoes and wheat are equal to those grown on
the Derwent banks, and sheep and all kinds of
stock are far superior, and the society is excel-
lent. lam going into the country for a few days
until the ‘Mariner’ arrives, and I write this to send
by the first opportunity.” Mr. Ranken could not
obtain the land in Van Dieman’s Land he had
first fixed upon, the Governor having treated him
unjustly in favor of Major Honour. After seeing
New South Wales, he much preferred it; so he
and his wife left Hobart by the “Venus,” and
arrived in Sydney on February 10th, 1822. They
were most kindly and hospitably received by Cap-


tain Piper, who at that time occupied the position
of Naval Officer, and whose duty it was to receive
all rates levied on goods brought into the colony,
there being then no Customs House.
Captain Piper lived in great style, entertain-
ing all new arrivals. He placed a carriage and
horses at Mr. Ranken’s disposal. Soon after their
arrival Mr. and Mrs. Ranken removed to Peter-
sham, a property of about 2000 acres, owned by
Captain Piper. A lease for seven years was drawn
up between them, rent to be £2OO per annum.
Here Mrs. Ranken’s first son was born on the
81st of March, 1822. He was named George
Somerville, after his grandfather and Miss Somer-
ville, of Sorn Castle, in Ayrshire.
In April, 1822, Mrs. Ranken writes to her
mother:—“l received your long-wished-for letter
about ten months after it had been written, but
when it did come it was like a sunbeam shining
through misty clouds. George has not yet fixed
upon his grant; he intends to take a run for his
cattle away beyond the Blue Mountains, and his
grant nearer Sydney.”
At Petersham, Mr. Ranken was gathering his
cattle by degrees, and having fortunately secured
a Cheshire man of good experience, he began the
making of cheese, which proved a great success.
So excellent was the quality that 2/6 per lb. was
easily obtained for it. Prices for all drapery were
very high in these days. In a letter dated Sep-
tember 4th, 1822, Mrs. Ranken writes;—“l paid
2/6 a yard for nasty stuff to make Somerville
frocks, and for cambric muslin, not fine, 6/- a
yard. The Campbells have got their grant about
twenty miles from here—Bungarribee. Lorn
Campbell is my most intimate friend. She is com-
ing to stay with me while George goes to fix upon
his grant. I think it is likely he will take it near
Newcastle, a place about six hours sail from
Sydney.”


On the 29th November, 1822, Mrs. Ranken
writes to her sister:—
“Since writing to you in September George
has decided upon taking up his grant at Bathurst,
five miles from the town, the country there
pleases him so much. We find that this place is
far too near Sydney; it is getting quite a stage
for travellers, and a drive for the town people, so
that I am too often taken from my household
concerns. Kelloshiel is to be the name of our
new home. The journey to it will be a very long
one, but I am as strong as ever I was, and I look
forward to the going over those high steep moun-
tains with much pleasure. But still I shall be
very sorry to leave Petersham, where I have been
so happy.”
It was in 1822 that the Agricultural Society
of New South Wales was first formed. George
Ranken was on the general committee, which
consisted of the following members:—J. T. Camp-
bell, J. Piper, Edward Wollstonecraft, Nicholas
Bayly, and George Ranken, for the Sydney dis-
trict. There were also committees formed for
Parramatta, Airds, Bringelly, Liverpool and
Windsor.
As showing how severe was the rule over the
unfortunate convicts in those days, Mrs. Ranken
mentions the following incident in a letter to her
mother;—
“A man was employed with a dray and two
horses when, by some mismanagement, the dray
was upset in a waterhole, and both horses were
drowned. This was a serious loss, as horses were
at a very high price. The man was, after an in-
quiry, sentenced to 100 lashes, as it was thought
he had been guilty of carelessness. But after
pleading his case, and representing he was an
elderly man, I obtained his pardon.”
Mr. Ranken was an exceedingly just master
to all his convict servants, and in all the bush-
ranging troubles which ensued in later days, his
property or stock were never molested.


In the beginning of the winter of 1823 Mr.
Ranken returned to Petersham from Bathurst,
having completed all the necessary arrangements
for the reception of his wife at Kelloshiel. It took
them a fortnight to reach their destination. Mrs.
Ranken kept a journal, and wrote a full account
of their journey, which she sent to her mother by
a friend, but unfortunately it was lost.
Mr. and Mrs. Ranken travelled on horseback,
their child and his nurse were in a tilted cart, and
two bullock drays and teams conveyed all their
worldly possessions. Their route was by Mount
York, and they reached the Bathurst Plains by
way of what is now O’Connel.
Mr. Ranken had selected grants for Mr. Icely
and Captain Piper. That of the former adjoined
Kelloshiel, and to it was given the name of Salt-
ram. Mr. Icely was a Devonshire man, and he
called his grant after Lord Morley’s beautiful pro-
perty near Plymouth. When I was a little girl my
father took me once to Saltram, and I there saw
for the first time a black swan. Captain Piper’s
grant adjoined Saltram, and was named Alloway
Bank by Mrs. Ranken, as Captain Piper was an
Ayrshire man.
Mr. Ranken found but little society at Bath-
urst, Mrs. Hawkins, whose husband was Super-
intendent of convicts, and Mrs. Johnson being the
only gentlewomen who had preceded Mrs. Ran-
ken over the Mountains. Mr. Johnson had the
appointment of manager of the Government
Farm.
By degrees other settlers and officials took
up their residence on the Bathurst plains. Col.
Morisset was the first Commandant, Dr. George
Busby the first Government Doctor.
Mr. George Cox had taken up Hereford, and
a large family of Mackenzies settled at Dockairne.
Later Mr. William Lawson took up his grant at
Stoke Farm, on the Macquarie, some miles from
the township, or settlement, as the early residents
used to call Bathurst. On the 26th of September,


1823, Mrs. Ranken’s second son was born. She
writes to her mother that she “was attended by
a convict doctor, an utter scoundrel, but a skilful
surgeon.” This son was called William, after
an,uncle, and Boswell, after Sir James Boswell,
of Auchinlech, in Ayrshire.
In 1824 George Ranken was appointed to the
Commission of the Peace. On the 15th of Decem-
ber he took the necessary oaths before Judge
Forbes. Previous to this, In July, George Ranken
received the following letter from the Governor:—
“Government House,
“July 22nd, 1824.
“Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in ac-
quainting you by his Excellency the Governor’s
command, that it is his intention to appoint you
to the magistracy on an early day, and he will be
glad to know that it meets your wishes, being
satisfied that in giving you the Commission of
the Peace, he has selected a gentleman well
qualified for a faithful and impartial discharge of
the duties attached to it.
T have the honor to be, dear Sir,
“Very truly yours,
“J. OVENS,
“Private Secretary.
For some time past the aboriginals had been
very troublesome in the Bathurst and adjoining
districts. Cattle had been speared and sheep
killed in great numbers. In less than twelve
months twenty people had been murdered, mostly
stockmen living in lonely places. Mild measures
had been tried without avail, so it was now deter-
mined to organise a strong party, and punish
these marauders effectually.
A body of 100 men, mostly soldiers, was sent
out, divided into four parties, each party under
the command of a magistrate, namely Major
Morisset, Mr. Lawson, Mr. Walker and George
Ranken. They expected to be absent about three


weeks, and the party was provisioned for that
time.
In a letter to his wife, dated from Mudgee,
September 28th, 1824, Mr. Ranken writes:—
“Yesterday I dined with the Commandant
after ten days’ separation in different directions.
Major Morisset, in the centre with his party, went
to the north; Mr. Walker had the command of the
left division to the westward; and Mr. Lowe and
I with the right division went to the eastward.
None of us succeeded in seeing the enemy, except
Walker, and that was only in the shape of one
black gin and a picaninny. Morisset goes off to
Bathurst to-morrow with Lawson, the rest of us
scour the country between this and Wallerawang,
where Morisset and Lawson will join us, and I
shall immediately start for home. Although I
have not seen natives I have seen very fine coun-
try towards Newcastle. We went a considerable
way down the Hunter River, and had good coal
fires for two nights upon its banks. This country
in every direction for many miles is far superior
to Bathurst both in point of soil and climate.”
In writing to her sister-in-law about this time
Mrs. Ranken speaks of social matters. “Oh! if
you saw the misery that many people bring them-
selves to in this country, who have been in opu-
lence at home. How sad to see accomplished,
delicate women, living in the back parts, eating
pork and damper. We are very gay in this
quarter at present. There are two young men
just arrived from England looking out for grants
of land. Our friends Mr. Icely and Colonel Bal-
four, of the 40th Regiment, are all here just now,
and to-morrow we expect one of the Macarthurs
and Mr. Glennie. You would be amused to see
how the strangers are put up for the night, in
these remote parts of the colony. Some lying on
shake-downs, some on sofas, and some I don’t
know where, perhaps sent out, like the unfortu-
nate Nebuchadnezzar, to sleep in the fields!”


The following letter was received from the
Governor’s Private Secretary about this time;—
“My Dear Sir, —Doctor Innes, of the Royal
Artillery, who arrived here by the “Hironica,” pro-
ceeds to Bathurst for the purpose of seeing the
country, as he has some idea of becoming a
settler. Perhaps he may look out a grant in your
neighbourhood. If you will lend him your assist-
ance I will be much obliged. No particular news.
I will take good care of the dog.
“Yours very truly,
“J. OVENS.”
Dr. Innes selected Capertee as his grant, but
not long after transferred it to his brother, George
Innes, and returned to India. Mrs. Ranken’s great
friend, Lorn Campbell, married George Innes,
and lived with him for some years at Capertee,
which was afterwards sold to Sir John Jamison.
Lorn Campbell and George Innes were mar-
ried at St. John’s Church, Parramatta, on the
25th of November, 1825.
Mrs. Ranken’s third son, called James Aus-
tralia, was born on the 13th November, 1825.
It was very shortly after that George Ran-
ken’s brother, John Campbell, was killed in action
during a war in Burmah. He was a Lieutenant
in the Madras Native Infantry, and it was at the
storming of the Wollygoon Stockade near Prome
that he lost his life. Twice he was wounded, but
persisted in cheering on his men, until he received
and fell with his third and mortal wound. He
died on the 16th of November, 1825, aged 23
years. In June, 1826, Arthur Ranken arrived in
Bathurst, having left Scotland in the previous
November in the ship “Greenock.” He was for
some time with his brother at Kelloshiel, and
afterwards took up a grant on the Lachlan River,
to which he gave the name of Glen Logan. George
Ranken, purchased 4000 acres adjoining his bro-
ther’s grant some time afterwards, and with his
wife and family spent many winters on the banks


of the Lachlan. Mrs. Ranken’s fourth son was
bom in November, 1826, and was called John
Campbell.
It was about this time that the Bathurst Hunt
Club was first formed. Many retired officers and
others had settled on the Bathurst Plains since
Mr. Ranken took up Kelloshiel. A portion of a
regiment was always stationed at Bathurst, so
there was no lack of members. The Hunt Club
Book, which would have given information as to
names of members, was lent to someone in the
town, and through the carelessness of a cousin,
was lost many years ago. A few years since I
heard of it, but was unable to recover possession.
The members of the Club wore proper hunts-
men’s dress, and on the coat buttons was em-
bossed a dingo’s head.
In 1827 Captain Piper’s affairs in Sydney
came to a disastrous end, much to the regret of
everyone who knew him. He was most highly
esteemed, having been always a kindly, hos-
pitable man, ready to help everyone in need. He
moved to Alloway Bank with his wife and nume-
rous family, and carried on there the same hos-
pitality which he had done at Point Piper. Some
years later he removed to Westbourne, a small
property adjoining Kelloshiel, on the Macquarie
River, and there he died, in 1854.
The value of sheep had much increased, and
it was in this year (1827) that Mr. Ranken sold
to the Australian Company 250 young ewes, for
which he received £1472, an average of £5/17/8
per head.
In 1828 the education of the elder boys—
Somerville and William —was undertaken by Mr.
Barney, who also acted as storekeeper.
About this time Mr. Ranken erected a water
mill on the banks of the Macquarie, a race having
been dug through the Alloway Bank, Saltram.
and Kelloshiel estates from a dam made across
the Macquarie. In 1841 steam power was applied
to this mill; in both cases they were the first of


their kind to be erected on the western side of
the Blue Mountains. Major Sir Thomas Mitchell,
Surveyor-General, and George Ranken main-
tained a great friendship for one another. I shall
from time to time give copies of portions of Sir
Thomas’ letters which contained matters of much
interest.
In December, 1830, he writes:—
“I was at Mount Victoria the other day,
but the weather was much against my intended
operations on Mount Hay. I accomplished much
of what I intended to do, however, notwithstand-
ing the rains. Great want of tools and gun-
powder has much impeded the work down the
hill, but what is done is right, which is some-
thing. lam anxious to push on towards Bathurst,
but we want hands. I have requested the Gover-
nor to keep his word with the Bathurst inhabit-
ants by giving their road the first shipload of
convicts that arrives. But there would be a
better chance of his doing something if they
would petition him, either reminding him of his
promise or of the very bad state of the road to
that promising settlement. . . .
“I have sent home by the “Gilmore,” Capt.
Gearey, three large boxes of bones, and a report
(of 36 pages), with ten plans and drawings to the
Geological Society.
“From these, and your communicating to
Jamison, we may hope, in time, to find out what
‘Father Time has been about.’ ”
On the 17th of January, 1831, Sir Thomas
writes to Mr. Ranken:—
“On my return from an excursion to Broken
Bay on Saturday last I had the pleasure to receive
your letter. And from the news you gave me of
the new caves at Boree I at first determined to
be at Bathurst as soon as the post on my way
to explore them. On more mature consideration,
however, I find that I cannot indulge myself so
much at present. Mr. Lambie is to take charge


of the road, and I wish to show him what is to
be done along the whole line (I am happy to find
that your memorial or petition has had its effect,
and that a shipload of prisoners is given up for
this work), thus I may find it necessary to go
very soon as far as Bathurst, and then I should
explore the caves at leisure. And I have a map of
the colony in hand, which requires great per-
severance to get through, and I have determined
to carry it through for many weighty reasons.”
On August 21st, 1831, Sir Thomas writes:—
“My Dear Ranken, —I was as far as Hayes,
on the new road, the other day, having gone that
length to show the spot for the erection of a
permanent barracks, as the halfway place be-
tween Mount Victoria and Bathurst. My chief
business was to take angles from the Honey-
suckle Hill and Mount Hay, also to look at the
work done on the new line. I was glad to find
it all correct enough, but miserably disappointed
to .see so few hands employed, only 240 working
men. I heard that there really was a considerable
number put on this road at one time, as was pro-
mised, but that they were assigned off in a few
days afterwards. This was keeping a promise
certainly in one sense, and an easy way to get
rid of it. Although I have been so lately near
Bathurst, it is probable that I may very soon call
on you there, with a view to visiting the caves
again, and explore the new ones. My motive for
doing so now in particular is the circumstance of
Captain La Place, of the French discovery ship,
being a friend of Cuvier’s, and desirous to take a
good collection of these fossil bones to Paris, and
as I know that everything depends on accurate
descriptions of the caves, and the particular posi-
tion in which specimens are found, I am much in-
clined to go myself. Should Igo I shall be sadly
disappointed if you are not in the way; pray let
me know by return of post, and also whether you
can send me some good specimens, as I have none
left.”


In a letter of October 30th, 1831, Sir Thomas
writes:—
“I much wish that I could visit the bone caves
again. It is indeed true, thank God, that Darling
is off, and Colonel Lindesay is all I could wish; but
I have many things to put in order before the new
Governor’s arrival. You will. I have no doubt,
have heard from Dr. Lang that I have now the
Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, where I see
honorable mention made of you, and a good deal
about the bones. They find most of them to be
wombats and kangaroos, but Cuvier calls your
large bone an elephant’s. The London surgeons,
however, seemed puzzled about it, and I have
doubts, although the little tusk I got, apparently
belonging to the same individual, would go far
to support its being a young elephant. ... I
am most anxious to explore now, and have some
hopes of being sent. I have some thoughts of
resigning, if I am not allowed, as I came out with
a clear understanding that I should be so em-
ployed.”
In 1831, the Rev. Mr. Thompson went to
Bathurst as the first Presbyterian clergyman. He
brought with him his sister, and they lived at
Saltram, then owned by Mr. Icely.
In the following year Miss Thompson married
Dr. Busby, who was the Government Medical Offi-
cer in charge of the Bathurst district. The wed-
ding took place at Kelloshiel.
On October 15th, 1832, Sir Thomas Mitchell
writes to Mr. Ranken:—
“At length this visit to Bathurst is likely to
be made by the Governor, and I am to go with
him, and I write to inform you, as I promised,
when he is likely to arrive. He leaves Sydney on
Friday next for Sir John Jamison’s. Monday he
ascends, not Lapstone, but a new pass we are
making to avoid it. Keep this a secret,
as I wish to astonish you with it by
opening it before the wheat season. That
day we reach the Weatherboard; next day,


that is, Tuesdqyr, to Collett’s Opening, Mount Vic-
toria, for carriages (sad day for Collett’s), and,
of course, I suppose, for me, as I must go to his
house. Wednesday to Rainville. I hope I may
take the new line, and get to Bathurst, but this
is doubtful. Thursday to Bathurst. His Excel-
lency’s movements may be altered, but at present
I know of nothing to come in the way. I wish you
had written by last post to ask me to stay at your
house, as you were kind enough to do before.”
Another letter, dated from Sydney, 12th
November, 1832:
“My Dear Ranken, —I have had the pleasure
of receiving your note of the Bth instant. I assure
you I was very glad to learn that the Governor
had for chaperon such a worthy fellow as your-
self in his Excellency’s excursion to the Lachlan.
I cannot avoid expressing to you the pride and
satisfaction I felt at the very honorable mention
made by the inhabitants of Bathurst of my name
in their address to the Governor. It shall stimu-
late me to continued exertions for the completion
of a good road, and I need not repeat to you how
sanguine my anticipations are respecting the new
line. We are trying to surprise you also with a
cut at the Pilgrim’s to throw Lapstone Hill off
altogether. ... I have not yet seen his Ex-
cellency, as he is still at Parramatta. lam anxi-
ous to know how he got to Collett’s from Bathurst
by the new line, and how he liked it. But lam
glad to learn that you are to be soon in Sydney,
when I shall hope to hear all particulars.”
On the 3rd of December, 1832, Sir Thomas
writes;—
“You are really so complimentary about the
road that I half fear you are quizzing me. I wish
I could get up there now, as the Governor is deter-
mined you shall have a bridge immediately, and
directed my attention particularly to the town-
ship. The plan I shall, therefore, draw immedi-
ately, and submit for his Excellency’s approval.


You are aware that I examined the road and sur-
veyed it for this purpose when formerly there.
The plan being approved, there need be no delay
in sending it to Richards, who can make arrange-
ments for any lots desired. The Governor
approves of that clear place I formerly proposed
just south of the present buildings, and for a
bridge about the present ford.”
In 1838 Mr. Ranken bought the property of
Saltram from Mr. Icely, and removed his family
there after alterations and additions had been
made to the house. His family then numbered
eight, four sons and four daughters—Susan,
Agnes, Jessie and Margaret.
I have before me a bill from J. Rickards,
Sydney, September, 1832, and the prices may be
of some interest. Longcloth, 1/6 per yard;
muslin, 2/6; black cotton, sd. per reel; broad net,
5/- per yard; and other items in like propor-
tion.
In 1825, Colonel Stewart, of the 3rd Buffs,
came out with his regiment, also bringing
with him the appointment of Lieutenant-
Governor, which he held until he left for India,
and during a short interregnum he was Governor
of the Colony.
The following particulars of his career have
been kindly furnished by his son, Mr. Stewart, of
“The Mount,” Bathurst.
“The departed Governor had left five men to
be hanged for sheep stealing. But my father, be-
lieving that none should suffer that penalty
except for murder, reprieved them. He brought
out with him an authority to select 3000 acres of
land in any part of Australia, and the land on the
south side of the Macquarie River at Bathurst
having just been declared open, he took up his
block near the hill, which the Governor’s wife had
named Mount Pleasant on its first discovery. He
afterwards purchased from the Government the
remainder of the parish.
In 1828 he was sent with his regiment to


Meerut, in India, where he was Commandant for
four years, and in 1832, having received the rank
of Major-General, he left the army on half-pay,
and returned to Bathurst to see after his land. He
then prepared to return to Caithness, in Scotland,
to bring out his family, whom he had left on his
property of Strath, when they all suddenly
arrived in Sydney, having been sent out by his
agent when he learned that the General had re-
turned from India. Being now well advanced in
years, he settled on his property, where he died
in April, 1854, thus peacefully ending a life which
had been a very stirring one. He commanded the
Buffs under Wellington during the Peninsular
War, and passed unscathed through the fiercely-
contested battles of Albuera and Busaco, for the
former of which he received a gold medal. When
he went to Bathurst, Mr. George Ranken had
settled at Kelloshiel, and was rapidly improving
his property there. His big dairy produced the
best cheese in Australia. Colonel Wall lived at
Westboume, several retired military officers
settled in the district, so that a nice social circle
was established.”
The following letter from Sir Thomas Mit-
chell deals with matters of interest:—
“Craigend, 24th July, 1833.
“My Dear Ranken, —I am sorry I had not the
pleasure of seeing you when you lately paid Syd-
ney a visit, as I wished much to have spoken to
you on various subjects, to have asked you how
you liked the town (Bathurst) plan, and to have
explained it fully to you. . . . Also I should
have liked to hear how the road gets on, but I
must inspect it all some of these days. I have just
had a pretty hot job at Hunter’s River, having
marked about 106 miles of road through the dis-
trict in eighteen days, and those the hottest I have
felt in the country. However, I had the luck to
make a good job of it, and I have now completed
the marking of the great roads throughout the


colony, according to one general system. When
they will be made, God knows.
I hope the bones are still all safe in their
places. I shall be at them by-and-bye, in spite of
roads, public works, etc. I understand Buckland’s
nose is put completely out of joint by the bones
from Australia, their not being those of lions and
hyenas is, I find, a fact which is considered in
England to entirely upset his theory. And I have
now heard from the best authority that the fact
of their fossil bones belonging to animals similar
to those now existing has worked a great change
in all their learned speculating on such subjects
at home. The big bone is neither a part of an
elephant or dugong, but a nondescript animal,
perhaps extinct, though peculiar to New South
Wales.”
I shall from time to time make extracts from
Mrs. Boswell’s “Early Recollections.” In 1834
she says, “We spent three months at Saltram at
this time. My father went to Yass to purchase
sheep for his station near Capertee, called, I think,
Burroobin. One day the gentlemen returned from
the settlement bringing the good news that Major
Mitchell, the Surveyor-General, and party, had
returned from an exploring expedition into the
far bush. There was great rejoicing and excite-
ment throughout the colony, as the explorers had
discovered a fine pastoral country to the south-
west. People talked of at once taking up and
stocking the new country, part of which was
named Australia Felix. It is now absorbed into
Victoria/
“Mrs. Ranken’s family then consisted of four
boys and four girls. The two eldest boys were at
school; they still had their former tutor, Mr.
Darney, and the girls had a charming governess
(Miss Taylor), an old friend and companion of
their mother, who had come from Scotland to
live with her, and to help her with her numerous
family and the duties and pleasures of a large
establishment. Aunt Annabella was living at
Saltram, and Isabella Johnson, and a delightful


family lately come from Scotland, lived at Delta
Cottage (near the mill at Kelloshiel), and were
constantly there. It was a large and merry house-
hold. In September Mrs. Ranken gave a dance.
I can remember many of the guests and their
dresses, and how we children criticised them.
There was a pretty Miss Brooks with fair hair. I
saw her many years afterwards as Mrs. Zouch,
and a grandmother. There were two Misses
Stewart and two Misses Piper and Miss de Philips-
thal, Miss Geddis, Ann Macarthur, and many
others were present. Aunt Anna, I suppose, was
really the belle, and the dance was given partly
in her honor, as she was going to Sydney to stay
with her sister, Mrs. McLeod.”
Some years of peace and prosperity followed.
It had been a subject of much debate and anxiety
how their sons were to be educated. Both Mr.
and Mrs. Ranken thought seriously of sending
them to Scotland. But ever since their arrival in
Australia they had looked forward with longing
eyes to the time when they might return to their
native land, and so delayed sending the boys
home. They were now (1835) all at the Aus-
tralian College in Sydney, the girls being edu-
cated by their governess, Miss Taylor. She re-
mained in this position until 1837. Her brother,
Mr. John Taylor, had come out from Scotland,
and had entered the firm of Gilchrist, Watt and
Co., afterwards becoming a partner. He bought
a large block of land at Waverley, and built a
house on it, giving to the property the name of
Lugar Brae. This has now been largely sub-
divided, and absorbed in the suburb of Waverley.
Early in 1837 Mr. Ranken decided upon pay-
ing a visit of some years to Scotland, and he was
all the more tempted to do so by an invitation
from the Earl of Eglinton to attend his famous
tournament. This renowned entertainment was
given at Eglinton Castle in 1840, Mr. Ranken
attending in the costume of a Kilwinning archer.
Mrs. Ranken was present at all the festivities, and
on one occasion, at dinner, sat next to Prince


Louis Napoleon (then a refugee in England), who
was afterwards the Emperor Napoleon III.'
Mrs. Ranken’s fifth son, Thomas Hugh, was
bom in 1837.
It was during Mr. and Mrs. Ranken’s absence
from New South Wales that their esteemed
friends, Major and Mrs. Bowler, went to Bathurst.
The latter mentions in a diary she kept at the
time that on the Ist of June, 1837, her husband
was ordered to take a detachment of his regiment
(the 80th) to Bathurst. They were then quar-
tered at Windsor, and it took them a week to
reach their destination. Major Bowler’s first resi-
dence was in Government House, at the foot of
George Street, on the banks of the Macquarie.
He sold out of the regiment soon afterwards, and
went with his family to Bellerive, on the Vale
Road. Major Bowler was afterwards made Police
Magistrate at Carcoar, and rented a cottage and
farm from Mr. Icely. Unfortunately he put all
his money into sheep, buying at a guinea a head,
and after the disastrous drought of ’39 and ’4O,
selling at half-a-crown a head. Major Bowler
then removed to the Meadows, a small property,
four miles from Orange. This place then con-
sisted of only a one-roomed store and post-office,
kept by a man called Woodward, a public-house,
kept by Beasley, and a lock-up. From Orange
Major Bowler moved to Woodside, a small pro-
perty adjoining Kelloshiel. His family consisted
of two daughters and two sons. Of the former,
the elder, Julia, married John Suttor, of Wyagdon,
the younger, Adelaide, married William Suttor,
eldest son of W. H. Suttor, Brucedale. While
Major Bowler lived at Carcoar the bushrangers
were very troublesome in the district, and on one
occasion Major Bowler was stopped by one—
“bailed up,” in common parlance; and to the gal-
lant officer’s credit be it said, he took him pri-
soner into Carcoar.
A house was secured in Sydney, and thither
Mr. Ranken took his family, in the winter of 1837.
Much preparation had to be made for the long


voyage of those days, and for such a large family.
Mr. Ranken leased his properties of Saltram and
Kelloshiel to the two Messrs. Perrier for four
years. The sheep stations on the Lachlan were
left in the management of James Sloane, and Mr.
Ranken had sent to Scotland for Sloane’s brother,
who was to manage the cattle station, under Jas.
Sloane’s supervision. Mr. Damey was left with
some responsible position at Kelloshiel.
In March, 1837, Arthur Ranken had married
Annabella Campbell, the youngest daughter of the
Colonel Campbell with whom George Ranken and
his wife had voyaged to this country.
Early in January, 1838, the Rankens sailed
from Sydney, and on their arrival in Scotland
stayed for a time with Mrs. Ranken’s mother, Mrs.
Hutchison, at Kelloside.
Mr. Ranken took a place called Drumley,
near the town of Ayr, and it was here that the
youngest son was bom. He was called after his
uncle, Dr. Andrew Ranken, and Claude, after Mr.
Claude Alexander, of Ballochmyle.
Mr. Ranken had heard a great deal in favor
of German schools, and in 1839 he took his four
elder sons and placed them under the care of the
Rev. Mr. Eipper, the pastor of the Lutheran
Church at Stettin, near Stutgard. Somerville, the
eldest son, afterwards became a student at the
Agricultural College of Hohenheim.
Everything was in a prosperous state when
Mr. Ranken left New South Wales, but, alas! all
was now changed. The most disastrous drought
had prevailed since the end of 1837, and not until
1840 was it broken. Of course, Mr. Ranken’s
affairs were in a very altered condition, and he
made up his mind to return to Australia.
He was very anxious to begin the culture of
the vine, and wine-making, at Bathurst. He
selected five experienced vine dressers, and
brought them to Saltram, together with large
quantities of the best and most suitable vine cut-
tings. Over twenty acres of land were deeply
trenched, the vine cuttings grew, together with


others, secured from different parts of New South
Wales. The vineyard became a great success,
and most excellent wine was manufactured for a
number of years. Then the vines in the Bathurst
district were attacked by the disease, Oidium
Tuckerii, and wine-making came to an end. Mr.
Ranken was the first to introduce wine-making in
the Western districts.
As Mr. Ranken’s third son, John, had shown
signs of great delicacy, he was taken back to
Scotland from Germany. The other three sons
remained under Mr. Bipper’s care. The four
daughters, with a good governess, were left in
charge of their aunt, Mrs. Thomas Ranken.
Three young men came out with Mr. Ranken
-James Blackwood, a cousin; William Paterson,
another cousin; and Hugh Hamilton. Mr. Black-
wood joined the Union Bank, and many years
afterwards became a leading man in mercantile
pursuits in Melbourne, and one of the firm of
Dalgety and Blackwood. William Paterson and
Hugh Hamilton entered into pastoral pursuits,
the latter very successfully. He returned to Scot-
land with his wife and family in 1859.
On the Ist of March, 1841, George Ranken,
with his wife and their three sons, and seven ser-
vants, set sail in the “Earl Grey,” for Australia.
They put in at Plymouth, and there met my
mother. On the 16th of April, John Ranken died,
and was buried at sea.
It seems to have been a speedy voyage, and
they reached Sydney safely, but on their arrival
in Bathurst found their property in a deplorable
state from the long-continued drought.
In 1842 the remainder of the family came out
in charge of their governess, Miss Otto. The cli-
mate of Scotland had proved too severe for them.
Agnes died there, and Susan on the voyage to
Australia.
Besides wine-making, Mr. Ranken began a
new industry—that of boiling down fat cattle.


There was no market for stock at remunerative
prices. In addition to the export of tallow to
London, hundreds of tierces of salted beef, of
primest quality were sent to the islands in the
Pacific, Mr. Ranken finding a better market there
than in England. Cheese-making was still car-
ried on at Kelloshiel, a herd of 150 cows being
milked there. Tobacco was also grown and
manufactured there with much success, and hops
grown of the finest quality.
1843 was a year of great prosperity. But in
1844 Bathurst and other parts of the colony was
visited by a severe flood.
From Mrs. Busby’s interesting book of recol-
lections I copy her account of the flood:
“This was the great flood of ’44, when Mr.
George Ranken did his splendid piece of rescue
work. An old couple, of the name of Dwyer, lived
on the bank of the river, not far from the site
the Ranken bridge now occupies. The old man,
Con, had a small tan pit, and his wife Mary had
been a nurse in the Ranken family. Besides the
Saltram Creek, there was a mill race on the
Kelloshiel side, some 2\ miles long, constructed
by Mr. Ranken, through Alloway Bank, Saltram
and Kelloshiel. In flood time this made a second
stream, quite as strong and deep as the river
itself. Between these two streams the old folks
were hemmed in, and as the waters continued to
rise it was evident that in a short time there
would be but one stream, which would sweep
before it the frail cottage and its occupants. Mr.
Ranken, accompanied by his son, James (then
a lad of 19), planned a rescue for his imperilled
tenants.
On the further bank of the mill race stream
stood a huge and solitary swamp oak tree, be-
tween which and the cottage there lay a hundred
yards or so of water of varying depth, but with-
out much current. Mr. Ranken saw that if a rope
could be fixed to this tree the work of rescue


would be comparatively easy. A man in his
employment, of the name of Hollandsworth,
volunteered to swim the current, and, with a rope
tied round his waist, plunged into the seething
waters. Strong man as he was, the stream was
too much for him, and shortly he gave up and
went under. Willing hands quickly dragged him
ashore. He was landed more dead than alive, and
died three days later.
After Hollandsworth’s attempt no one seemed
anxious to volunteer, so Mr. Ranken tied the rope
round his own body, and, disregarding the expos-
tulations of the crowd on the bank, essayed the
raging current. After a hard struggle, he
reached the tree, fixed the rope to it, and partly
wading partly swimming in the quieter waters
between the banks, reached the cottage. He
found his old nurse sitting on a bed with a candle
in one hand (busy with her prayers) and a quart
pot in the iother bailing the water out of the win-
dow, the good woman’s motto evidently being,
“Ora et labora.” Both were landed safely, the
only mishap being that the old man in his transit
went under once or twice, and swallowed more
water than he cared for.
Mr. Ranken, none the worse for his exertions,
went up to Kelso and rescued another man from
a watery grave the same day.”
In this year, 1844, the Lachlan was flooded
to an alarming extent. In some parts the river
spread over ten miles on either bank, although
they were as high as fifty feet from the usual
summer level. Although people on the banks had
to fly from the encroaching waters, and some
had to take refuge in trees for some days, still the
loss of life was very small, and no great number
of stock was drowned. At this time Arthur Ran-
ken lived at Glen Logan, and George Ranken
owned the stations of Mulyan Plains and North
Logan, where Mr. Sloane lived.


The following letter to Mrs. Ranken was
written by her brother-in-law, and gives a good
account of the flood;
“Glen Logan, Oct. 24th, 1844.
“My Dear Sister, —We were very much re-
lieved to hear on Sloane’s arrival the other day
that the report about the Kelloshiel mill having
been carried away by the flood was not true. No
doubt, ’ere this, you have heard reports about us
equally untrue. However, I will give you a full
and particular account of what befel us on the
memorable morning of the 14th of October,
1844.
While we were sitting at breakfast the
stockman came down from Paterson requesting
the loan of a horse and cart to take them from
Mulyan, as they were flooded, and water running
all round the hut. I did not understand what
Paterson meant, as he knew all our horses were
on the other side of the river. Boswell, his friend,
Thornby, and myself went out to look at the river
and saw that it was rising very fast. We then
went immediately to Mulyan, and there saw the
water all round the place, and Paterson nearly up
to his armpits near the hut, leading the horse and
cart out, making for the ridge.
We came back directly, and I determined on
moving off to Sloane’s. I ordered them all off to
the ridge, and would not allow them to get a
change of clothing, or anything else, and before
they got to the point of the ridge they were up to
their knees in water. And before Hood and I got
out with a light cart and horse, and a few blan-
kets, the water was nearly up to our arms. Then
it began raining as if there had not been a drop
before. And there was a sight on the point of
the ridge, thirteen very young children and five
women!! All without any protection from the
weather.
Only a small horse, and weak, could be got,
who could hardly draw the empty cart in the soft
muddy state of the roads, and so they all had to


walk nearly the whole way; the children without
shoes, and it was raining heavily all the time, and
we had to leave the cart a mile from Sloane’s.
Annabella, very tired that night and next day, and
on Saturday was delivered of another boy—the
fifth son.
I have had all hands trying to clear the mud
away, about a foot deep. The place is a wreck,
The water was four feet ten inches deep in the
house for three days. My old man, Watty Munro,
was drowned.”
On the 3rd of January, 1845, Janet Ranken
(always called Jessie) died. She was the third
daughter of George Ranken.
In 1847 Arthur Ranken brought his wife and
family to Saltram from the Lachlan, having had
to give up his station. They remained at Saltram
for several months, afterwards going to St. Clair,
on the Hunter River, of which Arthur Ranken
received the management. It belonged to the
Australian Agricultural Company.
On the 14th of June, 1847, George Ranken’s
youngest and only surviving daughter, Margaret
Elizabeth, died at Saltram, after a very short ill-
ness. She was planting seeds in her garden in
the morning, and apparently perfectly well. In
the afternoon, when at her lessons, she became
ill, and died the next day. Her death was never
satisfactorily accounted for.
This last bereavement had a dreadful effect
upon Mrs. Ranken; she almost went out of her
mind, refusing to see relations and friends. Salt-
ram was shut up and left in charge of a man and
his wife. The family removed to Delta Cottage,
near the Kelloshiel mill, and there they lived for
more than a year.
I have omitted to mention that on the 4th of
July, 1843, George Somerville Ranken died at
Saltram, aged 21. He returned from one of his
father’s stations on the Lachlan very ill, and died
on the following day. It was supposed that he
had had sunstroke, as his death was so sudden.


In April, 1849, Mrs. Innes and her two daugh-
ters arrived at Saltram, and stayed with their old
friends, the Rankens, for seven months.
There was a good deal of visiting with the
Pipers at Westbourne, Mrs. Heathorne, the Stew-
arts, the Morissets, Lawsons, and Streets and
other families in the township. Altogether young
people seem to have lived a happy, cheerful life.
Mrs. Innes and her daughters left Saltram in
November, 1849. Some years afterwards they
took a house in Parramatta, and five sons of
Arthur Ranken and two of George Ranken, who
were pupils at the King’s School, lived with Mrs.
Innes. They must have been rather wild lads, for
they got the name of “The Seven Devils.” In
1851 gold was discovered not far from Bathurst,
and it caused tremendous excitement. Men left
their service in town and country, and flocked to
the goldfield, and placed their masters in very
awkward positions. Few were successful, and
great numbers returned to their work, sadder and
wiser men.
I can find nothing recorded of the next few
years. Bathurst increased in size and the dis-
trict in prosperity.
In 1855 Mr. Ranken had the lower portion of
Saltram surveyed, and laid out in farms and vil-
lage allotments, to which he gave the name of
Eglinton, after his friend in Scotland, the Earl of
Bglinton and Winton. This land sold very well,
some of the smaller allotments near the river
bringing as much as £3O per acre.
The dairy at Kelloshiel had now been given
up. The fine herd of milking shorthorn cattle was
sold, many of them being taken to the South
Coast district, where they formed the nucleus of
some shorthorn herds.
The estate of Kelloshiel was subdivided into
farms, which were well let.
A brewery had been built on the Macquarie
near the Kelloshiel mill, and in 1857 both buildings


were utterly destroyed by fire. A great loss, as
the insurance policy had very shortly before been,
through carelessness, allowed to lapse.
In 1855 Mr. Ranken built the Eglinton bridge
over the Macquarie, from his own design, and
entirely at his own expense. It was opened to the
public on the 12th of January, 1856, and was
much appreciated by the people on both sides of
the river. In 1867 a great flood in the Macquarie
carried away, first the Denison Bridge at Kelso,
and then the enormous quantity of debris which
had collected against that bridge was washed
down and swept away the Eglinton Bridge,
We now come to the year 1858, which saw
the arrival of Aunt Hutchison and myself in Aus-
tralia.
My father, Colonel Hugh Mitchell, had died
in 1851 at Woolwich.
My mother was the daughter of Captain
Richard Edward Bullen, 2nd Dragoons, Scots’
Greys. He was descended from Reymes Bullen,
who settled in Dorset in the early days of Charles
I. reign, and fought as Colonel in the Royalist
army.
The Bullens of Dorset trace their ancestry
from Simon Bullen, of Salle, in Norfolk. Richard
Bullen had only one brother, Admiral Sir Charles
Bullen, G.C.8., who, in the Battle of Trafalgar,
was flag captain of the Britannia. He had no
children, and my mother lived for several years
before her marriage with her uncle and aunt as
their adopted daughter. She married in 1836
Captain Hugh Mitchell, R.M.L.I. He came of a
long ancestry of Hugh Mitchells, of Polosh, and
afterwards Domel.
James Logan, of Knockshinnoch, had six
daughters. Grace married my grandfather, Capt.
Hugh Mitchell; Susan married William Hutchison
of Kelloside; Janet married George Ranken, of
Whitehill, and was my husband’s grandmother.
They were not only cousins, but, in childhood,


had been constantly together, and had much
affection for one another.
Mr. and Mrs. Ranken, still grieving over the
loss of their four daughters, directly they heard
of my father’s death, wrote to Aunt Hutchison
telling her to ask my mother if she would spare
me to become their adopted daughter. But Miss
Hutchison was a canny Scotswoman, and replied
that until my education was finished, the matter
of my going to Australia should not be men-
tioned. And so not a word was said until early in
1858, when Miss Hutchison wrote to say she was
shortly going to Bathurst, and would I go with
her. Should I not like the country I was to be sent
home again at once. I had always had a longing
to go to India, and as there seemed no prospect
of visiting that country, I thought perhaps Aus-
tralia would be next best. Miss Hutchison was
very lame, and was strongly advised not to come
here by a P. and 0. steamer, also she was 68 years
old, and the journey by that route, it was thought,
would entail too much fatigue. Of course, this
was long before the Suez Canal was thought of,
and the journey across the desert was made by a
caravan. Afterwards a railroad was constructed.
So it was decided we should come out in one of
the Black Ball line of clippers.
We left Liverpool in the “Marco Polo” on the
sth of April, 1858, and had a long and most un-
interesting voyage of thirteen weeks. In the
tropics we were frequently becalmed, and the
captain would pace the deck looking the picture
of misery and despair, and, I am afraid, often
using very bad language.
There were twelve saloon passengers, a
queer lot, most of them very common. We
brought with us a very nice maid—Sarah Ken-
nedy by name—who had lived for three years with
some of our relations. She was a clever, bright
girl; had had a fair amount of education, and
sang very prettily.


At last the voyage was over, and we reached
Melbourne about the 15th of July. We stayed
there a week, and then embarked in the steamer
“City of Sydney.” She had lately had to take the
mails to Point de Galle, one of the P. and O. boats
having broken down. She made a remarkably
quick passage, and the Company presented Capt.
Manro, or Moodie, I think it was, with a hand-
some silver cup, in recognition of his services.
And the Captain insisted that we should all drink
champagne out of this cup. On arrival in Sydney
we were met by William Ranken, who took us to
Petty’s Hotel.
Just before entering Sydney Heads, the Cap-
tain called us on deck to show us the scene of the
dreadful tragedy which had befallen the “Duncan
Dunbar.” It was a gloomy morning in July, about
7 o’clock, and I shall never forget the sad impres-
sion those awful rocks and breakers made upon
my mind. The wreck had happened but a short
time before our arrival.
On the 30th of July, 1858, we started on our
long journey over the Blue Mountains. Mr. and
Mrs. Stewart, of the Mount, Bathurst, had lately
returned from a trip to England, and the latter
formed one of our party, and added greatly to
my enjoyment of the journey. The railway was
then finished only as far as Parramatta, and we
spent the first night at the Woolpack Inn, amus-
ing ourselves after dinner in examining the quaint
papers which covered the walls. I think they
were German, and represented scenes from many
lands. We left Parramatta next morning in a
comfortable carriage, with a team of four good
horses. I cannot remember the names of all our
stopping places—queer little inns some of them.
Pulpit Hill was one of them, and the Weather-
board. Then we stayed a night in Hartley Vale,
which I visited last summer, the inn being now
kept by a grandson of the proprietor in our time.
Bowenfels was another stopping place. We
arrived In Bathurst on the 2nd of August. A cold


wind was blowing across the plains, and I thought
the climate worse than an English winter. Here
I parted from Mrs. Stewart, but this was but the
beginning of a lifelong friendship, and her many
acts of kindness and affection I shall never for-
get. The family at Saltram then consisted of Mr.
and Mrs. Ranken, Miss Hutchison and the four
sons, William, James, Tom, Claude, and myself.
To the first his father had remitted all manage-
ment of the three estates of Saltram, Kelloshiel
and Osborne, a property of 3000 acres on the
northern banks of the Macquarie, which Mr.
Ranken had bought some years before from Mr.
Henry Osborne, of the South Coast district. Wil-
liam and James owned the station of Bugabijal,
on the Lachlan, and the latter lived generally
there, William paying it occasional visits.
The Pipers, of Westbourne, were our frequent
visitors, the dear old lady, Mrs. Piper, frequently
walking all the way from Westbourne to Saltram,
a distance of over two miles, and she must have
been then more than seventy years old. How
much I enjoyed the long talks we had, all she
told me of the early days in New South Wales
and Norfolk Island was most interesting. But it
would not bear repeating nowadays. There was
a good deal of friendly visiting in the Bathurst
district in those days. Girls did not go to so much
expense about their clothes as they do now, and
would pack up their dancing frocks in a valise,
sling it on the pummel of their saddles, and ride
off to a dance with the utmost contentment; and
they would dance all night, returning home often
by daylight, or, if they remained as guests, for the
remainder of the night, did not object to sleeping
three or four in the same room.
In the town, of course, dances of a more pre-
tentious kind were given.
In December, 1858, I became engaged to my
cousin, William Ranken, and was married to him
very quietly at Saltram, on the 27th of July,
1859.


In September of that year my father-in-law,
George Ranken, left for England. He was quite
a mechanical genius, and had made an improve-
ment in the screw propeller and paddle-wheel for
steamers. He was anxious to get the invention
patented. On arrival in England, by dint of in-
terest my mother made for him at the Admiralty
(where she had some friends), Mr. Ranken had
a small gunboat, the “Bullfinch,” allotted to him
in Portsmouth Dockyard, and on board this ves-
sel his improvements in the screw propeller were
made.
In January,. 1860, our cousins Jessie and
Andrew Paterson came to stay with us. They
had just returned from Boree, where their brother
John had married Emily Barton.
When at Saltram it was proposed by the
Patersons that my husband and I, with my great
friend, Emily Hawkins, should drive over to Illa-
long to pay them a visit, afterwards prolonging
our journey to Lockyersleigh, to stay with Uncle
Arthur and Aunt Anna. So in the end of Febru-
ary we set out. We drove in a light phaeton with
a good pair of horses—greys—and it was long a
boast with my husband that in all the journey to
Lockyersleigh and back again we never even
broke a strap. Our first day’s drive was to Car-
coar, the next to Cowra. Here Emily and I were
assailed by dread. We had to cross the Lachlan,
and heard that it was very high. But we did not
like the idea of turning back, nor did we want to
wait until the river went down. So we drove to
the best ford on Mulyan Plains, and in we
plunged. It looked a formidable sheet of water,
but the crossing place was good; the horses be-
haved very well, and we reached the opposite
bank of the river in safety, Emily shouting out
“The Rubicon is passed.” The roads were level
and good, and we enjoyed the drive so much. We
stopped at Broughtonsworth, near Burrowa, for
lunch, and were so hospitably received. Mrs.
Broughton was a dear old lady; she was busy


knitting mittens with opossum wool, which had
been spun for her in the most primitive way by
some black gins. The wool was beautifully soft
and warm, and Mrs. Broughton told me her girls
never suffered from chilblains when they wore
mittens knitted with it. From Broughtonsworth
we drove to Marengo, a tiny village with few
buildings besides the inn where we spent the
night. But it was a night long to be remembered,
for although the bedrooms looked clean they
were infested with hordes of insects. We had to
take refuge in the parlour, where matters were
not much better. We merely had a change of
assailants from those who ran to those who
hopped, so we got no sleep that night.
The next day we drove to Illalong, which
was about four miles from the village of Bina-
long. The dwelling was just a comfortable bush
cottage standing in a beautiful garden.
We found quite a large party assembled.
Three young married couples, viz., John Paterson
and his bride, George Ranken, who, with his wife,
had lately arrived from Scotland, Willie and my-
self, Emily Hawkins, and Andrew and Jessie
Paterson. We spent three weeks very happily at
Illalong, and then drove on to Goulburn. We
spent one night at Douro, just beyond Yass, and
on the third night arrived in Goulburn. During
that evening we felt rather a severe shock of
earthquake. It was worse at Yass, where part of
the Anglican Church steeple was shaken down,
and the clergyman was so alarmed that he ran
down out of the pulpit, all the congregation rush-
ing out of the church.
We went on to Lockyersleigh on the follow-
ing day. Here we spent six very happy weeks.
Mrs. Thomas Ranken and her daughter, Willie
Stewart (now Mrs. Stanger Leathes) lived at
Kyle, a property belonging to Uncle Arthur, ad-
joining Lockyersleigh. Visitors were always
coming and going, and Lockyersleigh has always
been noted for its hospitality, and in those days


was a very pretty place. Trees grew most luxu-
riantly all about the house, and a stream of water
flowed through the garden. In the end of April
we turned our faces homewards, and travelled by
the same route as before, but were kindly invited
to spend the night with Mr. and Mrs. Broughton
at Marengo, and thus avoided the objectionable
inn.
On of June, 1860, my daughter, the
first child, was born. She was named Constance,
after my mother. There was much rejoicing at
Saltram because the baby was a girl.
About this time my father-in-law’s health
broke down. He had been subject to serious
affections of the liver for some years past. He
was living with my mother at Charlton, in Kent.
She wrote urging Mrs. Ranken to go home, and
did not disguise from her how seriously ill her
husband was. So in November, 1860, Mrs. Ran-
ken, with her son Tom, set sail in the P. and O.
steamer “Salsette,” but before she reached Eng-
land Mr. Ranken had passed away. Mrs. Ranken
remained but a short time in England, and re-
turned to Saltram in June, 1861.
Life went on very uneventfully. I left home
but seldom, and we did not entertain much. My
second child was born on the 20th of March, 1862,
and was named George Hamilton.
In 1861 gold was discovered at our property,
Bugabijal, on the Lachlan, and this meant the
ruin of the station. In a few months 20,000
people were camped there, and all the cattle scat-
tered to the four winds, except a few which
James had slaughtered and sold to the diggers.
The station was afterwards sold for £3500, and
the Government allowed compensation to the
same amount.
The gold commissioner was anxious that
the town should be called Ranken, but James was
of a very retiring disposition, and would only con-
sent to a street being named after the unfortu-


nate owners of the run. The town was named
Forbes.
In July, 1863, my dear friend Emily Hawkins,
was married to Francis Bathurst, second son of
William Henry Suttor, of Brucedale. And a week
afterwards her cousin, Emma McArthur, who had
been living at Walmer for some time, married
James Ranken. They went to live at Shiel, be-
tween Carcoar and Cowra.
On the Ist of April, 1864, my second son was
born, William Hutchison Charles, always known
as Charlie. In February, 1866, a third son arrived
named Arthur Clifton. Just after his birth my
aunt, Miss Hutchison, fell and dislocated her hip.
The doctors could not succeed in reducing the
dislocation, and she was never able to walk or
even stand again, although she lived sixteen years
afterwards.
Hugh Bullen, my fourth son, was bom Janu-
ary 25th, 1868. Four more children followed—
Florence, Reginald, Margaret Laura and Lau-
rence Edward.
Aunt Hutchison died in 1882, and in 1883
Thomas died from pneumonia at Shiel, and ten
days afterwards his brother Claude died from
pericarditis, after a very short illness. Their
deaths was a great shock to my mother-in-law,
and she died on the 20th of October in the same
year.
James Ranken had left Shiel prior to Tom’s
death, and came to live at Saltram. But we found
that it was not advisable for two families to live
in one house. So in April, 1884, we removed to
the Stewart’s old home across the river, to which
we gave the name of Strath. We had had the place
thoroughly renovated, and built another room,
which we used as a schoolroom. We rented this
place from Mr. Stewart for seven years, and I can
say truthfully they were the happiest years of my
married life.


While at Strath my dear brother Charles paid
me a visit on his way to Fiji to take up his resi-
dence there as Governor and High Commissioner
of the Pacific. About a year afterwards he stayed
with me again on his way to England. He was for
five years Governor of Natal, and nearly as long
Governor of the Straits Settlement. He died at
Singapore in 1899. He left my dear old nurse with
me when she returned from Fiji, where she had
acted as his housekeeper. She returned to Eng-
land not long afterwards.
My second brother, Hugh Logan, came to the
colony in 1861. He went with the Richardsons to
Adelaide, and travelled with sheep from there to
Cannonbar. He lived a long time in Queensland.
And now I think I may bring these brief
memoirs to a conclusion, as you, my dear child-
ren, can remember all that has happened since
we left Bathurst in 1893.
S. D. Townsend & Co., Printers, 282 Pitt Street, Sydney
