

THE
ELECTRIC
LIGHT
AS
APPLICABLE TO THE LIGHTING OF
THE STREETS OF ADELAIDE.
EXTRACTS, REPORTS, &c.
PRINTED FOR
The South Australian
o 9 w
ADELAIDE. SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY
MESSRS. J. L. BONYTHON & CO., ADVERTISER OFFICE,
FUNE 1894.






THE
ELECTRIC
LIGHT
AS
APPLICABLE TO THE LIGHTING OF
THE STREETS OF ADELAIDE.
EXTRACTS, REPORTS, &c.
PRINTED FOR
Cj« Soutb Australian Curs Cumpang,
ADELAIDE. SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY
Messrs. J. L. BONYTHON & CO., Advertiser Office,
June 1894.




CONTENTS.
Introductory remarks to the Citizens of Adelaide ... ... Pages 1 to 3
Correspondence with the Corporation of Adelaide ... ... ~ 3to 5
THE ELECTRIC LIGHT.
Its Cost... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pages sto 13
Dangers and Disadvantages ... ... ... ... „ 13 to 17
Failures ... ... ... ... ... ... ~ 17 to 19
Profits and Losses ... ... ... ... ... „ 19 to 23
Abandonment ... ... ... ... ... ... „ 24 to 28
GAS.
Extension of the Gas Supply ... ... ... ... Pages 29
Improved Gas Burners ... ... ... ... ... ~ 30 to 31
For the following Extracts and Reports we are indebted to English,
American, Colonial, and other newspapers and journals, and to officials
of various Corporate bodies. Many extracts have been condensed, and
numerous others in our possession have been omitted in order to reduce
the size of the pamphlet.




To the Citizens of Adelaide.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
Following on the report of the City Surveyor (Mr. J. H. C. Langdon,
A.M.1.C.E.) and Mr. G. Anderson to the Corporation of Adelaide on the subject
of the electric lighting of the city, a pamphlet has been issued by direction of the
City Council giving a variety of information on the subject, the result of Councillor
Anderson’s travels in Australia, on the Continent of Europe, and in America. As
this pamphlet deals almost exclusively with the advantages to be gained by adopting
this system of lighting, both as to its superiority and economy under all cir-
cumstances, I propose to lay before you a few facts, for which I am in-
debted to the several publications noted, which I submit will demon-
strate that the opinions expressed by Mr. Anderson yet remain to be
proved. In the interests of the South Australian Gas Company, which has hitherto
lit and is still lighting the public streets of this city, in justice to the shareholders
therein, and aa a matter of duty to the citizens, who will in the payment of rates
be the ultimate gainers or losers by the success or financial failure of an under-
taking which will necessarily involve the raising of a very heavy loan, my directors
feel it is desirable that such information as I possess bearing on the subject, as
gleaned from correspondence with corporate bodies in Australia and other
sources, should be placed before you. Considering that some of the information
I submit is obtained from South Australia, West Australia, Victoria, New
South Wales, and Queensland it should have some weight in demonstrating
the want of success which has hitherto attended the attempts to introduce the
electric light in Australia as a substitute for gas in public lighting. As a luxury
(whether real or imaginary) where an intense light is wanted regardless of cost the
electric light may be desirable, and on this basis it has found its way into some of
the aristocratic and closely-peopled districts of London, but where a moderate light
equally distributed at a reasonable cost is considered best in the interests of all con-
cerned (and all those who contribute to the city rates are concerned) I submit that
gas at even the present price paid for lighting the street lamps, with fixity
of cost, would be found far more in the interests of the citizens than
the adoption of a system which would commit them to an unascertained expenditure,
both for construction and maintenance, the results of which could only be proved
when it was too late to retrace their steps. That the electric light has not been
under ordinary circumstances a success is amply proved by the many instances in
which it has been abandoned (after heavy expenditure has been incurred) and the


use of gas reverted to. It is also significant that in many districts partially lit by
electricity the gas consumption has steadily increased, showing that
gas is still holding its position as the popular illuminant.
As regards the street lighting under an arrangement for a reason-
ably extended and assured term, no doubt the present light could be supplied
to the City Council at a lower cost than is now paid or the volume of light might be
increased by the use of some of the newly-invented and improved gasburners. I
now draw your attention to various points in the reports made to the City Council.
The specification issued by the Corporation in May, 1891, provided for :
A. 20 1,000 candle-power lamps = 20,000 candle power.
700 30 “ “ = 21,000 “
fc.
41,000
B. 50 1,000 “ “ = 50.000 “
1,000 30 “ “ = 30,000 “
80,000 “
Tenders were received ranging from £20,028 to £40.000 for installations suitable for
41 000 to 80,000 candle-power. The tenders for working the above-mentioned
installations for six months ranged from £2,400 to £3,610 (£4,800 to £7,220 per
annum for the public lighting only). Messrs. Langdon and Anderson in their report
(pages 39 to 41) for 249,000 candle-power (allowing only 1.200 c.p. for the c.p.
lamps) public lighting, and for private lighting of North-terrace, Bundle, Hindley,
and King William streets allow only £50,000, and they estimate the working
expenses for both public and private lighting, including maintenance and interest,
at £7,466 per annum. Mr. Anderson writes (p. 28 and 29)—“1 may
now impress on the Committee the fact that incandescent street lighting is
nowhere adopted in any of the large cities of the States. Arc lighting
is generally in use j” yet on page 39 he recommends the use of 250
to 300 incandescent lamps in Adelaide. Although on p. 28 he writes from
New York there are in his letters no references to electric matters in this city. Why
did not he furnish some information about New York ? You are requested to refer
to subsequent pages of our pamphlet for particulars as to the cost, dangers, and mial
removal of the electric wires and relighting of the gas lamps in New York. The
present prices of gas in Adelaide are 6s. Bd. per 1,000 ft. (to consumers of less than
50,000 ft. per month) and 6s. 3d. (to consumers of 50,000 ft. and upwards, and
for gas used for gas engines and cooking stores). The city lamps are sup-
plied at a still lower rate, so that the basis of Mr. A.’s calcula-
tions is incorrect. It is ridiculous to estimate a revenue from
tricity at 6d. per unit, when in various large cities in England the
charges are, according to Mr. A.’s own reports (p. 15), Bristol 6d., (19) Liverpool
(and 20) Hull 7d. In other towns in England the charge is still higher. At Lan-
caster the price is Bd. per unit ; at Blackpool (June, 1892) electricity COST IUIS
CORPORATION 8-70 d. per unit, “ not including anything for depreciation or
interest.” In Melbourne there is an Electric Light and Power Company
which has spent nearly £70,000 in works and plant. Although this
Company charges Bd. per unit, the last balance sheet shows a loss of £2,500.
As to the promised increase in illuminating power experiments reported to the
American Institute of Electrical Engineers show that many lamps rated at 16 candle-
power “may” give about 15 at the start, but speedily fall to half the rated
power, whilst the globes used with arc lamps seriously obstruct the light,
38 to 69 per cent, of the light being in some cases lost by the


use of globes. With regard to the 2,000 candle-power which
it is proposed to use in Adelaide, the figures (2,000 candle-power)
are utterly fictitious and illusory and are not proved by reliable photometry. The
2,000 would stand dividing by a figure and then be decidedly flattering to the
stated candle-power. In February, 1891, the City Surveyor reported that it was
unnecessary to use such high-power lamps and he advised the use of 1,000 candle-
power lamps. He also stated that it was important to know whose system of light-
ing it was proposed to adopt. In his report of April 27, 1894, no mention is
made of whose system is recommended, whether it is to be high tension or not,
overhead or underground wires, no details of expenditure are given, and the par-
ticulars supplied relating to the other “ESTIMATES ,r are of the most meagre descrip-
tion. As stated by the S.A. Register of May 15th, 1894, “SUCH ESTIMATES
ARE BUT ESTIMATES.”
JAMES EVANS,
Secretary S.A. Gas Company.
Grenfell-street, Adelaide, June 6, 1894.
CORRESPONDENCE WITH CITY COUNCIL.
S.A. Gas Company,
Grenfell-street, Adelaide,
April 19th, 1894.
The Town Clerk,
Adelaide.
Sir—Observing from a report of a meeting of the Municipal Corporation
of the City of Adelaide, held on the 16th inst., that the Council adopted the recom-
mendation of a Committee “that the Council take immediate steps to obtain the
consent of the citizens for the purpose of electric lighting,” I am instructed by the Direc-
tors of the above Company, in the interest of themselves and the citizens generally,
to express the hope that before the Council take any steps in that direction careful
examination will be made of the relative advantages of supplying the public lamps of the
city with electricity instead of gas, and that the whole question will be placed
before the citzens in such a manner as to enable them to form a judgment thereon,
as there are instances where corporations and others having adopted the electric light
have afterwards abandoned it and returned to gas. There is some conflict among
experts as to the economy of electricity as compared with gas, but it is generally ad-
mitted that the former is the more costly light of the two. Considerable improve-
ment is being made in the application of gaslighting by means of incandescent gas-
burners, which are said to give a better light than an electric light. The superiority
of gas to electricity was referred to in the Gas Journal of March 6, 1894, at
page 426, in the words :—“ Even the electrical journals and the experts who
have studied the subject freely admit that the lighting of Whitehall-place and
Hyde Park Corner by gas surpasses everything that has yet been done by electricity
at vastly greater cost.” Presumably the Corporation desire the cheapest and most


efficient light obtainable, and the experience in the past shows how the cheapening
of gas has occurred by the substantial reductions made from time to time by this
Company to the Corporation in the annual charge for each ordinary street lamp,
which was formerly £10 10s. and is now only £5 14s. Mill further reductions
can be made if the Corporation will give the Gas Company the op-
portunity of tendering for the lighting of the public lamps for a
lengthened period. It will doubtless occur to the Corporation that
unless some great and manifest saving can be effected the citizens could scarcely be
called upon to furnish the large amount of capital which would be necessary to erect
installations sufficient to light with electricity the whole of so vast a city as Adelaide,
comprising as it does 1,000 acres, exclusive of streets, squares, and terraces, whose
lineal measurement exceeds 35 miles, besides the roads connecting the two parts of
the city and suburbs ; and if it should be determined that only a part ot the city
should be so illuminated it would be unfair to those residing beyond its influence to
be compelled to bear the extra cost without deriving any benefit. The directors are
in possession of a large amount of information referring to electricity as a light
which cannot be compressed within the limits of a letter, but which if desired will
be furnished to the Corporation in any enquiry which may be determined upon.
Kindly bring this matter before the Council at the earliest opportunity.
Yours truly,
JAMES EVANS,
Secretary.
Town Hal], Adelaide,
South Australia,
April 25, 1894.
Jas. Evans, Esq.,
Secretary S.A. Gas Co.,
Grenfell-streefc,
Si r __I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 19th insfc.
re Electric Light, and to request that you will be good enough to forward for the in-
formation of the Council all the particulars relating to the Electric Light of which you,
are in possession.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) THOS. WORSNOP,
Town Clerk.


S.A. Gas Company,
Grenfell-street, Adelaide,
May 2nd, 1894.
The Town Clerk,
Adelaide.
«i r i n reply to your letter of the 25th ultimo requesting to be supplied with
all the particulars in our possession relating to the Electric Light, I am requested by
the directors to inform you that they intend printing the information they have
collected, and hope it may be ready for circulation contemporaneously with the
Council’s proposed distribution of reports, so that the matter may come before the
citizens for their consideration, and I will take care that the Council is supplied with
copies.
Yours truly,
JAMES EVANS,
Secretary.
ITS COST.
The following extracts give particulars as to the excessive cost of the Electric
Light in South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, England, and Scotland :
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
POET AUGUSTA.
See Port Augusta Dispatch, February 9, 1894.
Meeting of ratepayers, held February 5, 1894, to consider the advisability of
declaring a
meTclal-Wwould 0 be°reproductive. Councillor Webb strongly O PP OS^J[ h ® «TtaHhto
as the people would find it very hard to pay the cost. It was resolved ‘ That this
meeting request the Councils discontinue the Institute contract, and cut down the
expenditure on the electric light to its lowest possible limit.


VICTORIA.
MELBOURNE CENTENNIAL EXHIBITION.
The outlay for electric machinery and plant to light the buildings was between
£60,000 and £70,000. That cost was further increased by the working expenses
while the plant was in use. To provide for the use of gas a 9-in. main had been laid
through the building, and pipes, fittings, and burners placed all over it. The cost of
these was about £4,600, and the Gas Company was prepared to supply gas in
sufficient volume and pressure to give a very effective light for £12,000.
PALACE HOTEL.
On the comparative cost of electric lighting and gas Mr. Wilson, the manager
of the Palace Hotel, supplied the following figures :
Electricity for 12 Months.
Coal £l,BOO
Wages ... ... ... 800
Renewing 2,000 lamps ... 480
Wear and tear ... ... 360
Interest, £lO,OOO a t 7% ... 700
Depreciation, at 7% 700
£4,840
Gas for 12 Months.
Theatre £6OO
Hotel 900
£1,500
In connection with the electric light Mr. Wilson pays an average of £3O per
month for gas, or £360 per year, which added to the £4,840 brings the total of the
lighting account to £5,200 per annum, against £1,500 per annum previously paid for
gas.
At the Palace Hotel the engines are used for the steam laundry and in connec-
tion with the lifts, &c., and the cost of the electricity is in this way reduced by
about £l,OOO.
This hotel and the Bijou Theatre adjoining were subsequently destroyed by
fire caused by the electric light fittings.
GENERAL POST-OFFICE.
Electric light cost £3,338 per annum ; gas previously £2,193 per annum.
THE CORPORATION INSTALLATION.
Table Talk, of May 18,1894, says:—“That magnificent failure, the electric
light, cost during the half-year ended February 28, 1894, £17,258.”
Ihe Country , dated April 14, 1894, states : —“The electric light in Melbourne
is a dismal failure and the hopes of those who believed that Melbourne was to be
the best lit city in Australia are dashed to zero. The way to rectify the mistakes
made is now under the consideration of the city fathers.”
We are informed that although £90,000 has been spent by the City Council
more than three-fourths of the street lamps are still lit by gas and that additional
electric lamps cannot be lit without a further expenditure on capital account. The
public are disappointed with the light and the councillors are annoyed at the results
and vexed with the electric engineers for promising so much and performing so
little. The electric lights are not satisfactory. The light afforded by the large gas
lamps at the corners of the principal streets was superior to what is now given by
the two arc lamps side by side at one corner only, the other corners being in com-
parative darkness.


PRIVATE COMPANIES’ INSTALLATIONS.
We have evidence of the electric light having been discontinued owing to its
eostine THREE TIMES AS MUCH AS GAS. . , „
Improved gas-burners are displacing electric arc lights satisfactorily as to price
and Light and Motive Power Company in Melbourne, established
“rEVENCE of only fourteen (H)
ss ,r;«
cent, on an outlay of from £45,000 to £50,000. The last balance sheet of the Company
referred to shews a loss of over two thousand pounds.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
LAMBTON.
Although a sixpenny lighting rate is charged the concern is running the muni-
cipality into a heavy debt.
NEWCASTLE.
erTvtrciunS h LMa y %3 n ’VSX’S “hug SeTc SS
candle-power is fully recognised. This would very easily stand dividing by two
- d srndissr-i^
time. ™cost flV^l-'pnn^nnnunn
expenses, and interest only are £2,533 per annum, allowing nothing for
wear and tear. thoroughfare the remainder of the city is undis-
putaS not nearT/ as well lit as it was with gas. The Council was led to believe
that the profits they could make out of the private lighting would reduce the lighting
rate. Instead of this the rate will have to be incr,eased The present
vate liehtine consists of three shops, one of which had to be supplied with a large
him enough light. They are all grumbling about the charges.
One hotel which had it discontinued it on account of the expense and unreliability,
the wire having set fire to the post one night and left the whole place m darkness.
The City Council propose to spend more money on the electric light installation
“ for the purpose of supplementing the deficiencies of the system of lighting which
has now become the property of the municipality”-(see the Newcastle Morniyyj
Herald of May 16, 1894). The electric light is worked at a loss. The ratepayers
were led to believe that the system of electric lighting contracted f?* w°uld be
sufficient and prove a source of profit, but it is now discovered that further
expenditure to a considerable amount will be requisite.
PENRITH AND REDFERN.
The electric lighting is far from satisfactory and much more costly than gas.
TAMWORTH.
Tamworth New South Wales, was formerly lit by gas at a cost of £4,50 PER
ANNOI! gas being then 12s. 6d. per 1,000 ft. The electric lights cost £7OO
PER ANNUM, although not burning as long as the gas lamps did. THE


LIGHTING RATE paid by the ratepayers lIAS BEEN INCREASED from
IvrwFAswm 0 5d ’’ an ! d 18 a .probability that it will be FURTHER
GREASED, as renewals will be required before long. In the annual cost (£700)
no allowance is made for wear and tear. The electric plant cost £3,000 and is work-
full capacity. The Gas Company’s charge for gas is now 9s. lOd. per 1 000
and their dividend is at the same rate as before. * ’ *
used to “*• Wo ° d Wng P '“ iU
, • T h e 'promises made, which have invariably been held out by promoters of elec-
tric light schemes and as uniformly not fulfilled, that the illuminating power would
be greatly increased have not been kept, and the ratepayers would gladly if possible
revert to the old system of lighting, but they have been saddled with the
hrst cost of an Electric Installation, and like other places which have been
persuaded to commence electric lighting they MI ST SPEND MORE MONEY to
keep the electric light going.
ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND.
BLACKPOOL.
,^^ 14 A 1892 -T Wor^. Und \ r unusuall y favorable conditions. The superintend
ro^olfLfr, C s r^ rafclon e e , Ctn r C hg ?- fc statl< ? n finds that electricity costs the Blackpool
Corporation 8.70 d. per unit—four times the cost of gas—without the maintenance
and renewal of the masts. “ One can but form the opinion that there must be an
unpleasant secret in store for those local authorities who fondly imagine that they
can sell current at a profit for 6d. per unit.” ° *
BRADFORD.
Ihe electric light entails a heavy loss upon the proprietors.
EDINBURGH.
f ai -no^ l ft l f g^ ting *.°ii P i r Jv l l CeS ’ Stre - et b y electricit y w as abandoned after it was ascer-
tained that it cost £l,lOO as against £203 for gas.
FINCHLEY.
The School Board applied to the Education Department for their sanction to a
project for lighting the schools by electricity, but were unsuccessful, as the new
OTBtem. would cost £l2O to £l3O per annum, whereas gas only comes to £45.
Electrical Review, April, 1894.
GLASGOW.
The krgest gBS biu for °" e
of de ° Med t 0 liSht ll ' e aSylUm by g “ °" a “ 0U “ 1 '


HASTINGS.
Cost is double that of gas.
HORNSEY.
The Town Council has successfully opposed on two occasions the introduction of
electricity, as they consider the time has not yet arrived when such works could be
undertaken with advantage to the ratepayers.
LIVERPOOL.
Electricity four times the cost of gas.
LEAMINGTON.
Great complaints re street lighting. Very few tradesmen availed them-
selves of the “Advantages” of the new light. Electric lights cost £370
per annum; gas, £176. In addition to the extra annual cost the Council
spent £1,200 for new columns, lamps, fittings, &c. Electric lights frequently go out.
Sixteen-candle-power lamps not more than eight candles. The glowing promises of
the promoters were not fulfilled, although the cost of the new light was more than
double that of gas. The company spent £30,000. (Electric light subsequently
abandoned.)
LONDON.
THE COST OF GAS AND ELECTRIC LIGHTING IN THE CITY OF
LONDON.
Journal of Gas Lighting, November 14, 1893, p. 902.
At a meeting of the Commissioners of Sewers in the City of London
last Tuesday Mr. Johnston moved—“ That it is expedient that Crutclied.
Friars be lighted by electricity.” Mr. Harris was not sure that
the electric light would prove the most effective means in so dark
a thoroughfare, where there were few shops to assist in lighting the street.
The reason why London Bridge was not lighted by electricity
was because the dark shadows thrown by the light and the absence
of supplemental radiance from shops interfered with the traffic*
He would prefer, therefore, and would move as an amendment that the question
should be referred to the streets committee to consider. With regard to the cost of
lighting the Eastern District of the City, he found it was nearly 20 per cent, in
advance of that for the main thoroughfares. In the Eastern District there were 233
arc lights, which at £26 per annum cost £0,055. Adding to this the cost of main-
taining disused gas lamps, about £450, the total would be £6,500. The previous
cost of lighting by gas the whole (three districts) of the city with 1,730 lamps was
£5,550. To light ONE DISTRICT by electricity thus cost £l,OOO in excess
of the expenditure required to light THE WHOLE OF THE CITY BY GAS,
and yet they were told that the cost of the new light would not he more
than double that of gas, while it was actually three and a half times
the cost in the Eastern District. Mr. Johnston said he was prepared to
accept Mr. Harris’s suggestion.


ELECTRIC LIGHTING IN THE STREETS OF THE CITY OF LONDON.
Journal of Gas Lighting, November 21, 1893, p. 931.
The proposal to extend the electric lighting in the City of
London, to include Crutched Friars, which was noticed in a news
paragraph in our last issue, afforded an opportunity for Mr. C. T. Harris
to call the attention of the Commissioners of Sewers to the expense of
the system. The proposal was eventually referred to the Streets Committee, but
not before Mr. Harris had succeeded in putting upon record the fact that the City is
being drawn into paying between THREE AND FOUR TIMES AS
MUCH for the Electric Lighting, so far as it goes, as was formerly
paid for THE WHOLE OF THE GAS LIGHTING; and even
then the electric lighting WILL ONLY BE PARTIAL.
Of course, if the Commissioners prefer to spend the ratepayers’ money in this way
and the public are content to have it so there is no more to be said. But it is just
as well that the truth respecting the cost should not be lost sight of, for the elec-
tricians are as keenly desirous as ever to spread the delusion that electric lighting
costs no more than gas. It is noteworthy that at the same meeting of the City Com-
missioners of Sewers, at which the preceding matter was considered, a report of
the city engineer upon the failures of arc lamps in the streets, also given
in our last issue, was received and ordered to be printed and circulated. Several
serious interruptions of the service were recorded in this return, all of which were
explained by the company. In one case a belt broke ; in another a stoker was guilty
of negligence ;in a third the blame was put upon a defective switch. The nature of
these excuses is as instructive as the incidents to which they refer. They all go to
show that the continuance of the service depends upon the integrity of a num-
ber Of minute details, and that, so far as assuring public lamps against failure
is concerned, the present arrangements are little better than those with
which the city was painfully familiar ten years ago.
MANSION HOUSE.
Electric account for nine months, £607. Gas used to cost £270 per
annum. This nine months’ bill is a striking commentary upon the contention of
Sir David Salomons that the electric light as supplied by the City of London
Electric Company is “hardly dearer than gas.” The electric light at the Mansion
House goes out at inconvenient times.
THE STRAND.
From the Journal of Gas Lighting, August 22, 1893, p. 351.
No Arc Lamps for the Strand. — The assertion that electric arc lighting is cheaper
than gas for street purposes does not “go down” with all local authorities. The
Strand District Board of Works have recently had under their consideration a
tender of the Metropolitan Electric Light Company for lighting the Strand with arc
lamps. The scheme contemplated the substitution for the existing 67 gas lamps,
costing £473 per annum, of 22 arc lamps at a total yearly cost of £1,1h5, on the
understanding that one-half the number w ould be extinguished at mid-
night. These being the terms, it is not surprising that the Works Committee
“could not advise the board to adopt the electric lighting until it became much
Cheaper.” The price asked for the arc lamps in this instance is exorbitant, and
suggests two interpretations of the electrician’s intentions—either they do not want


street lighting or the progress of their industry must be in the backward direction ;
for street lamps of “20»-candle-powcr ” used to be offered years ago at a much
lower cost.
CHELSEA.
The ordinary annual general meeting of the Chelsea Electricity Supply Company
has been held. The circumstances of this Company are specially interesting to
observers of the development of the electric lighting business, because they are
almost the oldest-established undertaking of the kind in London, and
have a capital residential district. They are not, of course, so well off in the
latter respect as the St. James’s Company, but then this company is exceptionally
situated. Of the Chelsea Company it may be said that they have as
good a lighting district as can be found in England ; and
if they cannot make money where they are they could not pos-
sibly better themselves. This being so, what are the facts ? The directors
report a gross profit on last year’s working of £543* out of a total revenue of
£«,0«r; MORE CAPITAL IS TO BE SPENT UPON THE EXTEN-
SION OF MAINS, which, one would have thought, might have been delayed
until those already laid had begun to pay better. However, it. is to be supposed
that the directors know their own business best. The new capital issue is to be in
the form of 6 per cent, preference shares, and when this is spent there will be about
£1)3,000 laid out upon an establishment of 30,000 8-candle-power
lamps. From these lamps it is calculated that an average rental of 9s. per annum
will be received, which would represent a gross income of £16,000 per annum.
There is no knowing how much of this revenue will be required for working
expenses, but at least half of it may be supposed to go that way without
allowing for depreciation. After this way of reckoning the prospects of the
Chelsea Electric Company appear to be anything but rosy. Nor is a gloomy
outlook their peculiar portion.
KENSINGTON AND KNIGHTSBRIDGE.
Kensington and Knightsbridge Company have as tine a district as could
be desired, yet they are practically in the same straits as the Chelsea Company,
having to spend money upon extensions Of mains— which means running after
custom —before those already in position are paying for themselves. Here again the
official apology for the actual state of affairs takes the form of a calculation that IF
they had 40,000 lamps out, at an average rental of 10s. each, there would be an in-
come of £20,000 a year, out of which there should surely be enough to pay interest
on debentures, preference dividends, and leave something over for the ordinary
shareholders. The plea is anything but a strong one, yet it is the best that can oe
offered. Mr. R. E. Crompton, however, rather “ let the cat out of the bag”
at the Knightsbridge meeting by confessing that “there bad been a
hanging back on the pari of consumers at the beginning
of the year ; but they were now going on at a better rate.” Let us hope
that this view is correct, but General Webber at Chelsea is less sanguine. He
admits that most of the consumption which an electric lighting company may expect
to enjoy conics on at first or within a year from the mains being laid past
the front door. After that the process of growth is very slow, being little more than
the adiition of a fresh house here and there as doubters become convinced and resi-
dents change. New consumers have to be gone after with new mains ; and this is
precisely what is now found necessary both in Kensington and Chelsea. Hence we
declare that from the data given the results of these enterprises can hardly
be financially brilliant, since distribution has already to be extended while the home


area wired at first is yet unprofitable. It is to be supposed that the best streets were
wired to begin with, and therefore the extended mains cannot be even so productive
as those already down.
ST. PANCRAS.
Mr. Anderson in his report (page 16) says that he cannot hope to get the exact
figures. When the vestry decided to adopt the scheme of their engineer the outlay
was estimated at £55,000. To December, 1893, the capital outlay was
£96,085—6d. per unit is charged for public lamps and to private consumers. The
cost of production of the light is nearly half as much again as it was prophesied it
would be.
Engineering 1 ‘ cannot state the cost of electric light to the ordinary consu mer in
London at less than an advance of 230 per cent, on the cost of EQUIVALENT
gas lighting.”
At a meeting of the Society of Arts the Chairman (Sir F. Bramwell) said the
electric light was A LIGHT OF LUXURY, suitable for persons at the West-End
of London, who would pay £3OO to £4OO a year rent.
MIDDLESBOROUGH.
The electric lighting committee applied to various local authorities for their ex-
periences of electric lighting. The replies as to cost, compared with gas, were not
encouraging. At Hastings the cost was double, at Liverpool four times, and at
Stafford two to three times that of gas.
MANCHESTER.
Alderman Sir J. Harwood says he has seen every electric installation of any
moment in England. Electric plant cost three times as much as gas plant.
Electric light of 16-candle-power would cost double the amount paid for gas of 19-
candle-power. Electric light could only be used as a luxury and under very excep-
tional conditions. The electriclight boom had been a grand deception.
STAFFORD.
Cost is from two to three times that of gas.
TAUNTON.
Gas, £746 per annum ; electric lights, lit only seven hours each night, £1,360 ; an
equivalent of 2| in £ INCREASED TAXES.


At a meeting of the Society of Mechanical Engineers, held at Westminster in
April, 1894, the°President (Professor Kennedy, F.R.S.) said—“ The commercial
difficulty of producing heat cheaply enough to allow of its general use had not
yet been overcome and until that was done electrical heating, unfortunately,
hardly came within onr ken except for very special purposes.”— (The
Times, April 27, 1894).
The Mechanical World says—“ The electric light comes as an invader to oust
gas light from our factories, but economy guards the light in possession and at
present bids defiance to the invader.”
It now appears that the cheapest electric lighting is that obtained
from private installations, developing (say) from 50 to 100 indicated horse-
power. There is no prospect of this kind of lighting being supplied anywhere at
smaller cost than by such plants, so that it is possible to say now that the funda-
mental data bearing upon the competition of electric lighting with gas are common
property.
Its Dangers and Disadvantages.
We have numerous extracts giving particulars of accidents caused by electric
installations at Bournemouth, Boston, Brooklyn, Glasgow, Hatfield, London,
Lucerne, Melbourne, Montgomery, Madrid, New Orleans, New Jersey, Nantes,
New York, Pennsylvania, Prescot, Sheffield, and San Francisco. These accidents
resulted in many deaths and much damage to life and property. At inquests held on
various occasions electric suppliers were censured by the juries, who enquired why the
law requiring wires to be placed underground was not enforced at once. At New
York the Mayor was asked to direct the removal of wires from the streets.
He repeatedly instructed the electricians to put their wires under ground and
these orders failing to produce any effect he at last gave peremptory directions to
his officers, which resulted in the summary cutting of the overhead wires used for
street lighting and removal of the poles and wires. It is stated that “ cutting down
and carting the poles and wires has cost the city 11,000 dollars to the present date
and will run into a very great deal more before the work is completed all over the
city. It is reckoned that it will be at least two years’ work to clear the whole city
of wires that have been years in growing more plentiful and objectionable. The
probable cost of the process has alarmed the authorities, consequently the Mayor
has drafted a Bill to the Legislature, charging upon the Companies owning the wires


the loss sustained by the city on removing them. It has been attempted to rouse
popular feeling against the Mayor on account of his action, BUT THE PUBLIC
ABE ON HIS SIDE.”
Some time ago a list was compiled which showed that in New York alone to
that date 87 persons had met their deaths through electric installations. This, as
Engineering remarked, was a very serious total. The list was subsequently added to
till 100 persons had been killed in New York alone. Mr. Edison then, in the North
American Revieiv, improved the occasion by saying that “ there is no known insula-
tion which will confine high tension currents for more than a limited period.” The
dangers of such currents are not restricted to the wires which convey the high
tension currents, but other wires conducting harmless currents are liable to be
rendered as deadly in effect as the former. The numerous accidents which occurred
in New York showed the operation of time upon the insulating material.
It is well known that the burying of electric wires has been advocated as a sure
means of escape from the dangers which overhead wires carrying intense currents
have been proved capable of creating. Mr. Edison has never adopted this view, and
in fact holds that to put a dangerous wire underground is to render it more terrible
than ever on account of the increased RISK OF CONTACT with conducting sub-
stances. Hitherto, Mr. Edison remarks, victims of high power and alternating
currents conveyed by overhead wires have mostly been linemen and other servants
of the electric light companies, whose business has lain among the wires hanging out
of ordinary reach. When these are put underground there is no saying what the
current may not pass into, gas or water services, coal traps, ventilating gratings,
anything in short which conducts electricity without showing it. Then, he says,
when housewives and domestics are killed on touching a watertap, when postmen
drop dead on ringing a bell, and passengers along the street fall senseless as soon as
they step on an innocent looking grating, then there will be an outcry to which the
present is nothing ; and instead of asking for the wires to be buried people will
demand that it shall no longer be lawful for anybody to distribute,
whether overhead or underfoot, electrical cu» rents strong enough
to kill when they escape from the conducting wires.
1 As on page 30 Mr. Anderson says “the incandescent lighting for public lamps and
the low tension system would, if it had been carried out in Adelaide, have been a
great mistake” (although on page 39 he subsequently recommends the use of 250 to
300 incandescent lamps), we must assume that he proposes to favor the citizens of
Adelaide with a system of high power currents such as that against which Mr.
Edison, in the words just quoted, spoke so forcibly. A report made to the city
council, Cincinatti, proved that the electric light is unreliable, dangerous to life and
property, and invariably more expensive than gas. At New Orleans there were five
fires in one night, two serious accidents, one death, and three other cases of injury,
all caused by electricity. The American fire underwriters declared electric lighting
to be a most prolific source of danger, and say that its introduction has cost the
insurance companies more than any other method of lighting heretofore in use.
The fire losses in the United States (in one year) attributable to electric light
apparatus amounted to over 5| million dollars. At a meeting of the Electric Light
Association of the United States it was reported that in one year in 425 cities of the
Union there were 518 fires directly caused by electric currents ; 1,754 injuries were
sustained, and 60 men were killed. It is sometimes said that electric progress is
much more generally visible in the United States than anywhere else, and in view of
these figures we may be pardoned for feeling thankful that this is so. Mr. Preece
(the eminent electrical adviser of the Post-Office, London) admits (February, 1894)
that owing to the absence of proper control the accidents in the States are “ terrible
in their number and fatality, and strike the observant Englishman with dismay.”
Associated fire offices and societies of engineers and electricians have promulgated
definite and peremptory rules and regulations in connection with electric installations,
which are significant of the reality of a danger that a careless public has never
sufficiently recognised. The Electrical Review believes the right course to pursue
with underground wires is to construct separate and special subways for them.


OVERHEAD WIRES AND THE ALTERNATING SYSTEM IN
AMERICA.
[Convention of Electricians at St. Louis.]
Mr. G. L. Addenbrooke, a well-known English electrician, has sent to the Elec-
trical Review a thoughtful criticism upon the alternating current system in America.
There has recently been a Convention. of electricians at St# in
connection with which an authoritative paper on this system of electrical dis-
tribution was read by Mr. R. H. Sterling. In the States, as in England, there has
been, and still is, much dispute between experts respecting the rival merits of the
altcrnatiug and continuous systems ; and it is interesting to learn the
views of the subject entertained by practical American electric light purveyors, who
are understood to work with a much freer hand than is granted to their
congeners in this country. According to Mr. Addenbrooke’s summary of Mr.
Sterling’s paper and the discussion upon it, the prevalent English opinion
that this liberty or license has proved in the long run detrimental to
American electric lighting practice is justified. For the sake of cheapness the
Americans adopted from the first a very HIGH KATE of alternation and
overhead wires. This is now perceived to have been a fundamental mistake.
Sooner or later electrical distribution plants will lie torced underground
throughout the States as in this country ; and already the electricians
themselves “recognise the fact that any system of aerial conductois can
never give us the safe and sure service which is necessary to enable
us to compete with a satisfactory and reliable source of illumination such
as gas.” The passage is Americanese, but it is nevertheless intelligible, lhe
truth appears to be that a quickly paying business can be made in America
out of supplying electric light in towns by means of overhead
Wires and alternating currents; and while the town authorities are
content to eUdure the nuisance attending this system, the electricians do not
greatly trouble themselves to improve the service. They understand, however, that
this is a temporary catchpenny kind of trade ; and they admit that when the towns
adopt a more self-respecting policy their circumstances will approach the conditions
created for the United Kingdom by the Electric Lighting Acts—which, by the way,
arc no longer abused by British electricians.
Melbourne, Victoria. —The Melbourne Argus has pointed out the inconvenience,
disfigurement, and danger of overhead wires.
The Australasian Ironmonger of June 1, 1894, says that “it is the intention of
the Victorian Government to bring in a Bill to control electric lighting, &c., in the
interests of public safety.”
Already there have been accidents in Melbourne owing to the electric light.
The Palace Hotel and Bijou Theatre, Melbourne, were burnt down owing to defec-
tive electric light fittings, and for this reason the proprietor experienced some diffi-
culty in reinsuring his establishment.
A BERIIEESf —DISADVANTAGES OF ELECTRIC LIGHTING.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, March 27, 1894, p. 5<9.]
It is a singular commentary upon the nebulosity which characterises the minds
of public men when they affect to do things which their training has not fitted them
for tViaf fVip ntlier week it was reported that the Corporation of Aberdeen had placed
the atrceTs at aVeater distance from each other than


is customary in the expectation that the white granite fronts of the buildings
would make up by reflection for the lack of light, and that it is now found that the
very opposite is the effect. The electric lamps throw a glare upon the buildings, but
the reflection is so little that a zone exists between the distant lamps which
is IN ALMOST TOTAL DARKNESS.
Already one citizen has proposed, in order to get rid of this glare, that the
lamos should be placed in the centre of the street; while another has come forward
with the suggestion that they should be placed upon the tops of the present gaslamp
pillars, raised a foot or two, instead of being hung like balloons in mid-air. It is
seldom that a community so speedily discovers or at least admits tile
disadvantages of electric lighting*
WATERMAINS AND TELEPHONE CABLES DESTROYED BY
ELECTRIC CURRENTS.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, April 10, 1894, page 649.]
We have received from the author, Mr. J. H. Yail, a copy of a paper on “ The
Importance of Complete Metallic Circuit for Electric Railways,” read before the last
Convention of the National Electric Light Association. Mr. Vail is connected with
a New York firm of electrical engineers, and he claims to have made a profound
study of the electrolytic action of currents used in electric railway systems upon gas
and water mains, with a view to its prevention. He illustrates a case of a t»-ill*
watermain perforated in several places by this means in the short
space Of two and a half years. Another piece of pipe was rendered useless
in six months. The remedy for this mischief is, as stated by Mr. \ ail, the adop-
tion of the complete metallic circuit of such low resistance that the current will
circulate freely from pole to pole of the dynamo, and thus have no inducement to
follow such conductors as gas and waterpipes. The recently issued Board of Trade
regulations in regard to this matter aim at ensuring that, if any leakage or return
current passes through the earth, it shall enter gas and waterpipes, and not
them except through proper metallic conductors, whereby corrosion will be pre-
vented. Mr. Vail recommends the use of insulated feeders, so do the Board of
Trade. When discussing these regulations, the Elecirieian expresses the hope that
“ owners of gas and water pipes will soon recognise the simple scientific fact that
their greatest security lies in ample connection with the earthed negative pole of the
circuit.”
[From the Joxmial of Gas Lighting, April 17, 1894, page 696.]
Corrosion of waterpipes and other underground furniture by the ground return
of electric railways continues to be observed. The recent annual report of the
Brooklyn Electrical Subway Commission states that discoveries of corroded water
and gas pipes have been of late SO numerous that there seems no escape from the
conclusion that metal pipes of all kinds extending below the surface
along the route of the trolly cars are being in many places destroyed by tile
ground currents* Engineering News says that at Peoria (111.) the Hater
Company have formally notified to the city authorities that their mains arc
being injured by the currents from the street railways, and unless these
ground currents are removed the Company will refuse to further extend their mains,
or be responsible for the maintenance of those now laid.


DAMAGE TO TELEPHONE CABLES.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, April 24th, 1894, page 764.]
Amnncr the interesting subjects discussed at the recent meeting of the New
EnuW G g as wLTon was the matter of electrolysis. The West-End-road of
n to g r«
reminded the members that the evil occurred when the current passed from t
pipe or cable into the moist earth.
Failures of the Electric Light.
We have numerous detailed accounts of serious failures of the electric light.
The following are samples
[From the journal of Gas Lighting, December 20th, 1892, page 1099.]
T ra I*7 Streets Deprived of Light.—This was by no means the first trouble
experienced with the system. the lamps were as near^y
- rotors for^five W minuses wenf of for
four 6 nighrV' the 6 previous theJumps « «
the street went ®?™P^ et ?y. , * i e f t i n u tter darkness. This is the state
lights all went out and th<e w ol ® do n after years of waiting and experiment,
» m& m aM appliance of the newest and hast.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, August 22nd, 1893, page 301.]
, i • „„ „ thp London newspapers that on th© occasion of
It was reported m one hashanoened in the North of London,
the largest conflagration that has liappei f J t ek it wa3
for many years, which occurred on.thenight in the ’ Btreets
we«iraouanylosinetteir brilliancy. This went on until at 11 o'clock


they went out altogether. At the same time the fire was got under and the
street was ill complete darkness for more than an hour. There was present a
large and excited mob, and the work of the police and the Fire Brigade was
naturally rendered exceptionally difficult and dangerous. This breakdown will
hardly be classed among the successes of the St. Pancras Yestry electric lighting
undertaking. Another illustration of the malignity of fate in connection with
electric lighting was supplied by the collapse on Kank Holiday night of the arc
lamps on Hastings pier and along the sea front. This might have led to serious
results, and as it was considerable alarm prevailed until the gas lamps were
lit. A similar failure interrupted the proceedings at a swimming club entertainment
in the Hastings HatllS on Monday last.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, September 5, 1893, page 459.]
The Recent Electric Lighting Failures at Hastings.—ln our issue for August 22
allusion was made to certain very bad failures of the Electric Light at Hastings,
and we since learn from a local paper that it is no uncommon occurrence to
find some of the large Electric Lamps on the front line in darkness, or comparative
darkness, despite the somewhat frequent protests of the Lighting
Committee of the Town Council. Certain of the leading trades-
people have also had reason to complain of a similar state of
things at their establishments. The entire front line of the borough
was to have been lighted in accordance with a contract made between
the Corporation and the Electric Lighting Company by electricity in October next;
but now the company have expressed their inability to carry out the terms of the
contract until March next —six months later. Our local contemporary does not know
that “the ratepayers need complain of this alteration, since they will have the
satisfaction to know that the splendid Whitehall lamps supplied by the Gas Company,
and which can be relied on to give a steady and continuous light, will be available for
the dark and dreary nights of next winter season. The management of the Electric
Lighting Company are understood to be carrying out some material and extensive
improvements in their system ; and the sooner these are completed the better if
they are to retain the confidence of the public. Meanwhile the lighting committee of
the Town Couucil should be in no hurry to get rid of the Whitehall lamps, or the
inhabitants may some dark evening find the front line of the borough to be presenting
anything but an attractive appearance.”
THE FAILURES OF ELECTRIC LIGHTING IN THE CITY
OF LONDON.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting , November 14, 1893, page 897.]
Our readers may remember that at a recent meeting of the Commissioners of
Sewers of the City of London, tke engineer (Mr. W. Haywood, M Inst., C.E.) was
instructed to prepare a report as to the number of failures of electric lighting and.
the substitution Of gas which have lately taken place in the city. His report,
covering the past six months, was presented at the meeting of the Commissioners
last Tuesday. It stated that the total number of arc lamps in use was 475. The
number of gas lamps disused, but maintained ready for lighting, was 1,219. The
total number of failures of the electric light during the period in question was 301,
the most serious failure being on May 7, when 42 lamps were not lighted until
9 o’clock, The explanation given by the Company was that the switch was defective.
On June IT, 65 LAMPS went out for a considerable period, but the gas was not
lighted. The explanation given by the Company was that there was negligence on the
part of the stoker at Wool Quay. On July 27, 06 LAMPS went out, and the


reason given was the breaking of a belt. The 475 arc lamps, at a cost of £26 per
annum each, gave a sum of £12,350. The length of streets lighted was 13 miles.
The fines for these defects would be deducted from the next account of the Com-
pany. The information regarding these failures was received from the police
force ; and the returns were sent to the Company’s office and filed in the Engi-
neer’s own office. The report was ordered to be printed and circulated.
A FAILURE OF THE ELECTRIC LIGHT IN THE CITY.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, April 10, 1894, page 666.]
At the meeting of the Commissioners of Sewers last Tuesday, Mr. B. Turner
called attention to a serious failure which had occurred in the electric light.
Mr. Ross (Assistant Engineer) stated that he had received a report from the Electric
Lighting Company to the effect that the accident was due to a damaged and defective
cable, which, however, was speedily repaired. Mr. Turner said he hoped the Engi-
neer would impress upon the Company the necessity for preventing, if possible,
-such failures in the future.
Profits and Losses.
Mr. Anderson, on pages 7, 28, 29, 30, 38, gives it as his opinion that “ very
handsome profits” will accrue from supplying electricity in Adelaide. Judging by
the experience of those companies and municipal bodies in the Australian colonies,
England, and America, mentioned hereafter, the electric business does not appear to
be particularly profitable.
VICTORIA.
Shareholders in the various electric companies have “ sunk” (vide
■Australasian Ironmonger of June 1, 1894) £250,000, and so far have had no
dividends.


The last Directors’report of‘another electric light company m Melbourne, says
that -—“During the yeJ 9,500 shares paid up to 12s. 665 shares paid up to
lOg. have been forfeited and have reverted to the Company.
From the Australasian Ironmonger , Ist January, 1894 :-The Electric
assas?-.: pr & r
discusSttwas decided to obtain £1,500, if necessary, at per cent, by mortgag-
in ~ the machinery A sub-committee was appointed to confer with the directors
and report to the general meeting in January as to future prospects and the working
of the Company.
the BENDIGO ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANY.
[From the Australasian Ironmonger, March 1, 1894.]
The Bendigo Electric Light Co. held their half-yearly meeting on January 31,
when a report was presented showing the position of affairs. _ The loss to date was
sriven at £970 and though the business was improving ail increase of capital
wls needed to maintain and extend the Company’s operations After a
somewhat heated discussion the directorate was empowered to increase the capital
either by a loan issue, preference shares, or some other method.
ELECTRIC LIGHT AT CASTLEMAINE.
The electric light at Castlemaine went out during the month owing to the
financial difficulties 8 of the contractor, whose plant was seized. Effortsarebemg
tm.de bv the company formed to take over the lighting to meet the obligations, and
iU the meantime arrangements have been made with the Gas Company to relight the
gas lamps,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
LAMBTON.
[Australasian Ironmonger, June 1,1894.]
The electric lighting plant at Lambton was lately seized by the Com-
•in!lfvnf Australia for an overdraft, but this difficulty has been got oyer, a
Svdnev financier agreeing to lend the town council £13,000 with which to consolidate
fts liabilities and settle its debts. Although a sixpenny lighting rate is charged the
concern is running the municipality into a heavy debt.
BROKEN HILL, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The electric light has been in use nearly three years. The plant cost about
£14,000. The company has gone into liquidation and the plant is now being run
by the mortgagee.


QUEENSLAND.
ROCKHAMPTON.
£1,325 has been lost in 18 months.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The Western Australian Electric Light and Power Company, Limited (in
liquidation), is making a call of Is. per share, being the fourteenth call made by the
liquidation.
ENGLAND.
BRADFORD.
Mr. Lennard, the chairman of the Leicester Corporation Gas Committee, said
at Bradford there had been a net loss on the two years working of the elect
lighting installation of more than £2,000.
HUDDERSFIELD.
Deficiency of £2,547 is shown on the first annual statement.
MORECAMBE.
Canital £5 640 paid up, £1,500 debentures ; total, £7,140. Dividend of 2 per
eent wis recommenced. V directors decided to forego their fees to allow of
this being paid.
notting hill.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, March 28, 1893, page 040.]
Electric Lighting at Notting Hill.
The Notting Hill Electric Lighting Company may be classed high among the
second rank of metropolitan electrical supply undertakings, seeing that the district,
althoueh anvthTng but a poor one, is not a residential or business neighborhood.
Meedfupon general principles, Notting HIU and
offer neculiar advantages to an electric lighting company. If the district Has noo
the distinction of Mayfair and St. James’s, on the other hand it comprises mai y


good houses, which, unlike the town mansions of the aristocracy,
are occupied all the year round, and if it were not
thrown into the shade by the West-End proper it would un-
doubtedly take rank as the fashionable quarter of the town. It is no
exaggeration to describe Bayswater and dotting Hill as equal to the best
residential neighborhood of any large city or town in England* This
being so it is interesting to see how it works out as a field for electric lighting enter-
prise It appears, from the report of the directors of the company, that they have
only been able to get 124 customers as yet ; and as these take 9,438 lamps
between them, which gives an average of more than 76 lamps per house, it would
not appear that Mr. W. H. Preece’s fancy description of the incandescent electric
lamp as the “ poor Ilian’S light ”is justified by this company’s experience. The
profit for the year on the capital outlay of £76,5100 amounts to the handsome sum
of £ll2 ; and the directors do not take their fees. The case of the Nottrng Hill
Company may be commended to the study of any local authorities who are
now contemplating the outlay of public money on even less pro-
mising undertakings with a view to making a profit.
WOODHOUSE & RAWSON.
Loss of £86,700. One of the directors (Mr. Pope, Q.C.), avowed himself
“ thoroughly ashamed of the balance-sheet.”
LONDON ELECTRIC SUPPLY CORPORATION.
Special attention is invited to page 37 of Mr. Anderson’s report re the “Electric
Supply Company” and to the following extracts :
[See Daily News, London, May 18, 1893.]
/ .
Meeting of shareholders held yesterday. The report expressed regret
that the year’s working had resulted in a deficit of £3,914. The
Chairman stated that he believed all the electric lighting companies
were between wind and water. All, he said, had been guilty of an act of folly.
They had all entered into severe competition, which had rushed down the rates.
The standard charge had been reduced to 6ci. and he could not conceive that human
folly would adopt a lower price. They must all commiserate each other in a common
affliction.
CITY OF LONDON ELECTRIC LIGHTING COMPANY.
The report of the directors of the City of London Electric Lighting Company has been
issued, and it shows that the expenditure on capital account up to the end of the pasb
year amounted to £448,163. The commercial existence of the undertaking is dated as
from June 30th last, previous to which time the plant was only run for the purpose
of testing. The gross revenue for the six months was £10,425, against an expen-
diture charged to revenue account of £9,991* “ including the loss on the public
lighting,” whatever this may mean. In this way a credit balance of £434 is shown,
which is a very creditable piece of bookkeeping.


ELECTRIC CONSTRUCTION CORPORATION.
Loss of £360,000.
[From the Journal of Gas Lighting, July 11, 1893, p. 79.]
After hardly more than three years’ working the Electric Construction Corpora-
tion are compelled to submit to their shareholders a scheme of reconstruction involv-
ing a loss Of £300,000 to the ordinary shareholders, while the Electric and
General Investment Company, on the other hand, at their recent annual general
meeting, declared a dividend at the rate of 30 per cent, per annum upon their
ordinary shares. It is observed that it is quite time somebody spoke out, to point
out to the investing public the simple truth that the enormous dividend in ques-
tion came out of the shareholders of the Electric Lighting Corporation, the Brush
Company, the City of London Electric Lighting Company, and the New Telephone
Company (now defunct), all of which concerns were either brought out by or raised
fresh capital through the agency of the Electric and General Investment Company.
AMERICA.
NATIONAL ELECTRIC LIGHT ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA.
At a meeting of this association a member read a paper, in which he said he had
instituted a general enquiry into the condition of electric lighting all over the States.
The price of incandescent lighting (in order to make it [go down with the public)
was generally boo low to pay the suppliers. The result is not to be seen in
the shape of dividends. The president and manager of five electric light com*
panies, some of which are bankrupt and not one in a really satisfactory position,
says :—“ lam aware that books can be kept so as to show an earning, but this is in
many cases at the expense of a constantly-depreciating capital investment. ’ We
seem to hear an echo of this remark from more than one locality nearer home. The
president made an observation which goes to show that in the States, as in England,
private capital is no longer to be had for electric lighting ventures.
BRAINTREE, MASSACHUSETTS.
Second Report.—“ The operations have not been as successful as was expected.
The profits would not “take care of” the interest on bonds and sinking fund.


The Electric Light Abandoned.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
DRY CREEK SMELTING COMPANY.
[The Australasian Ironmonger, August 1, 1892.]
The Dry Creek Smelting Company are discontinuing the use of their installation
and are reverting to oil lamps. The dynamos, &c., are understood to be for sale.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY MARKETS AND THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD OFFICE.
[The Australasian Ironmonger, May Ist, 1894.]
The Wenham Gas Light is making good progress in Sydney. The Belmore
markets have been lighted for some time with 50 lights of two classes, the area illu-
minated by them being about an acre. The experience at this place being so satis-
factory that the Electric Lights have lately been removed from the
Wooloomooloo Fish Markets and replaced by 18 of the most powerful
Weilham Gas Lights. The offices of the Sydney Morning Herald have also been
lighted with this appliance after searching enquiries had been made by the proprietors
as to the relative merits of gas and electricity.
Hunter’s Hill Municipality, eight miles from Sydney, entered into a contract for
Electric Lighting, but subsequently withdrew from the arrangement (at a loss Ol
several hundred pounds) seeing that it would not be to the advantage of the
ratepayers to carry out the electric lighting scheme, and arranged with the Gas Com-
pany to light the streets by gas.
VICTORIA.
MELBOURNE.
Gas is being reverted to, electric light costing three times as much as gas.


ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND.
r- BIRMINGHAM.
[Journal of Gas Lighting , July 18, 1893, p. 136.]
THE BIRMINGHAM CORPORATION AND ELECTRIC LIGHT.
Tt was stated some time ago that the general purposes committee of the City
Council had under consideration the question whether or not the corporation should
themselves obtain a provisional order for the supply of the electee light, and con-
sequently oppose the extended order asked for by the Birarngh™■ EUctacJjupgy
rwwrvo nxr a ffpr rareful enauirv the committee have decided that it wouiu uc
SSSriZibte for theCm&oratton to undertake the supply of elec-
tricity, and they will report to this effect to the council at the next meeting.
BARNET.
After a three years’ trial of electric lighting the
revert to gas lighting. The Barnet press onSghfhasfo t been so
decision causes little surprise, for, to put it mildly, me eie B much
successful as some expected itwould lie whd.tt.~J*£' a time supi
not realise expectations.
BARROW AND THE ELECTRIC LIGHT.
[Journal of Gas Lighting, August 15, 1893, p. 318.]
After along discussion the Barrow Town Council deci f^ a #1 r ® ce “|i
nf nrocrcd with a proposed provisional order for the, supply
"i * Jri tey. The matter came before the council in the form of a recommendation
from Se Ss and water committee, and an amendment in favor of the application
on the ground that any private firm should be kept out was defeated.
CLONMEL.
The question of the public lighting of Clonmel was considered at a special meet-
in A°letter wrread n from the Gas Company offering to light the city at a uniform
rate of £2 l“ <id. per lamp, as proposed by some of the members at the previous
meeting. fr om the Company^ was also thdameTrateTas
Sore ami that they wild be teJlng to l"ht the city for five years if the corpora-
before, y _ , liiidorJiroilllil as required by the Board of
SC" ~
poration determined to accept tlic tender of the Gas Company.


EDINBURGH, PAISLEY, AND ABERDEEN.
Nothing done under Electric Lighting Orders.
[Journal of Gas Lighting , December 27, 1892, page 1,138.]
Electric lighting has, according to its friends, made great progress, but the
casual observer would scarcely detect it. 11l Glasgow early in the year the cor-
poration acquired an existing installation, and they have been busy laying down new
Slant underground to conform to the regulations of the Board of Trade. Iu
idinburgk, Paisley, and Aberdeen, although provisional orders empower-
ing the providing of electric light have been obtained, nothing lias yet been
uOnc in the way of laying down plant for the purpose, the corporations being
content to wait as long as they can to see what success attends electric lighting
schemes in other places.
FOLKESTONE.
The town council decided to proceed with an electric scheme at a cost of
£35,000, but at a public meeting a resolution was passed against the action of the
council.
LEAMINGTON.
At the meeting of the Leamington Town Council Mr. Crowther Davies moved
that the corporation abandon their application for an order, and lie
expressed his gratification at the prospect of the ratepayers being
expense of a risky experiment. The corporation had got rid of
the Midland Electric Light Company, and would take care that in future they should
not get anything beyond fairplay. The motion having been seconded, the Mayor
said he was not at the birth of the electric light in Leamington, but lie was very
glad to be at the death and funeral. The proposition was carried unani-
mously. Previous to the meeting the council received and referred to a committee
a strong memorial from ratepayers against their proposal to supply
electricity.
LIVERPOOL READING-ROOM.
Gas Reverted To.
The Lighting of the Picton Reading-room at Liverpool.—At the meeting of the
Liverpool City Council on Wednesday last Sir J. Picton moved the confirmation of
a recommendation of the Library, Museum, and Arts Committee that the tender of
Messrs. W. Sugg & Co., Limited, for supplying and fixing three ventilating
Argand lamps in the Patent-room of the Picton Reading-room, and to keep them
in repair for twelve months for the sum of £75, be accepted. Sir James stated
that the committee had only come to this decision after making many experi-
ments in regard to the best mode of lighting. Mr. P. H. Rath bone seconded the
motion. Alderman Shallcross said he was recently in the Picton Reading-room and
he never saw a more miserable affair tnan the electric light there.


Sir J. Picton remarked that it was the best light in the kingdom. Alderman Sliall-
cross said the light was extremely brilliant, but it flickered in thc most
extraordinary way, and went in and out so much so that he could no
any of the books with pleasure. He was quite sure gas gave a
electricity, and it would be a very great improvement to introduce it. Sir J.Picton
said the lighting of the Picton Reading-room had been universally admired, and M .
Shallcross was the first person he had heard object to it. ShaUcross d
he was speaking from his own experience. The recommendation > ■
agreed to.
MAIDSTONE.
Electric Order for Sale.
HOVE.
Profit of £1 2s. Bd.
THE PRUDENCE OF MAIDSTONE.
[From the Gas Journal , March 27, 1894, page 565.]
The announcement that the Maidstone Local Board have deputed to S«U their
Electric Lighting Order to a company if they can find a rum nascr,
the fact of this decision having received the emphatic suppor fli »
press, are to be taken as signs that not every local authority is to be had nymg
by the electrical sportsmen who are engaged in stalking such game up
country. oircums tance that the said Order expires in about four months'time
may be interpreted in various ways as bearing upon this prudent resolve of the
Maidstone burghers, but it at least testifies to the deliberation with which they e
aCted Tir e th at the Local Board meeting which ended in the way
recorded are illustrative of the manner in which public bodies are often
edged on to embark in undertakings much better left alone by enthusiasts
who can only boast of that ‘‘little knowledge” which being partial
as well as small, is of the most dangerous kind. An alderman asked the ratepayers
of a little place like Maidstone to involve themselves with electric lighting because
he had heard that the Bradford Corporation are producing electricity at less than 2d.
per unit Of course, this rash guardian of the interests of the people of Maidstone
did not mention the fact that at Hove-not such a far cry as Bradford the
directors of the local Electric Lighting Company, who have spent £3O,< 00° upon their
undertaking and are about to lay out £lO,OOO more, regard a profit balance of
Bd. on the’past year’s working as extremely satisfactory. Fortunately for
Maidstone the local board contains among, its members some mdlv iduals. who are
*il»le to winnow electricians’ promises with a thoroughness not within the
power of all gentlemen in municipal office; and, consequently, it is not surprising
that the board wisely decided to part with the provisional order to who-
ever is willing to take it at a price. We doubt if there will be any bidders, for at
present it is a practical impossibility to get any capital together for a central station
electric-lighting venture.


We take credit to ourselves for having helped to keep the Maidstone ratepayers
from tying the millstone of an electric lighting undertaking round their necks by
persistently exhibiting in the light of day that seamy side of the business which the
electricians (small blame to them) are so careful to keep turned away from the public
eye ; and one little town saved from trouble of this kind is ample return for all the
pains taken in this regard.
STIRLING ELECTRIC ORDER NOT PROCEEDED WITH.
[Journal of Gas Lighting, March 27, 1894, page 580.]
The Stirling (Scotland) Town Council recently held a special meeting in order
to consider whether they should go on with their proposed application for a pro-
visional order to enable them to supply electric lighting.
The Corporation on that occasion resolved by ten votes to eight not to pro-
ceed with their application for an order.
[Journal of Gas Lighting, August 30, 1892, page 399.]
THE ABANDONMENT OF ELECTRIC LIGHTING AT WATERFORD.
The following paragraph on the above subject appeared in the Munster Express
last Saturday :—We understand that the Gas Company will, as stated in their
letter to the corporation, be enabled to light the portion of the city now lit by
electricity on the Ist September. Had the tender of the company been accepted two
months ago the whole city by that date would be properly lit by gas and the inhabitants
of the backward portions of the town would not be in the position they had been the
past five years. Commenting on the action of the corporation, at a special meeting
held on the subject, the Evening Telegraph says : —lt is hardly an augury with regard
to electricity for public lighting that the Corporation of Waterford have just
decided to abandon the electric light. The contract for lighting the city
having expired, the contractor increased the price. The corporation refused to pay
and have fallen back on gas, and the electric lamps will be extinguished on the Ist
of September.
UNITED STATES.
NEW YORK.
RESUMPTION OF GAS LIGHTING.
According to a telegram received through Dalziel’s Agency, the New York Com-
missioners of Public Works have decided to resume gas for lighting the streets of
the metropolis, rather than pay the high prices that are demanded by the electric
lightingcompanies.
Mr. W. H. Preece told the Institution of Electrical Engineers (February, 1894)
that electric lighting had not generally made the rapid progress during the past nine
years in the States that was expected from its great rate of growth during the
previous four years.


Extension of the Gas Supply.
SALE OF GAS.
LONDON.
On pages 9 and 10 of his report Mr. Anderson states that the “ enormous and
rapid increase in elecric lighting” in London has caused a decrease in the sales of
gas by two of the three London companies.,
The Chairman of the Gaslight and Coke Company, London, says (see J.G.L. ,
February 7, 1893, page 233): —“The expenditure on capital in the past half-year had
been £136,000 —£97,000 on machinery and buildings in extension of the works to
meet the requirements of their district. As regarded the present year he believed
that about £75,000 would have to be spent to finish the extensions they had in
hand.
INCREASE IN SALE OF GAS.
[Journal of Gas Lighting, June 20, 1893, page 1,136-7.]
Proceedings at the Thirtieth Annual General Meeting of the Incorporated Gas
Institute held at Belfast, June 13, 1893.
Denny Lane, Esq., M.A., president, said—“ The increase of gas consumption in
London alone in one year would give once and a half as much light as the whole
electric lamps of Great Britain.”


Improved Gas Burners.
[From South Australian Register, June 5, 1894.]
The one conclusion which may be definitely reached from the present conflict
between gas and electricity for the illuminating of public streets and buildings and
private dwellings is (says the Australasian Ironmonger of June 1) that the last word
has not yet been said on either side. Reports that reach us of experiments in London
with incandescent gaslights show that the effects have been equal, if not superior, to
anything effected with electric lighting and at reduced cost. New gaslights for shops
and dwelling-houses on the same principle have also convinced the public that, for
beauty at any rate, gas can produce quite equal effects to electricity.
[Sydney Morning Herald, May —, 1894.]
ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.—The Cathedral yesterday
evening presented an unusually brilliant and cheerful appearance,
owing to the use for the first time in public of the incandescent gas
burners. Two of these have been attached to each standard of five ordinary
burners, and the effect is satisfactory. On Friday night last a trial of the new
burners was made before the Dean and Chapter, as a result of which, it is
stated, the two lights on each standard were found to give a better, more
brilliant and steady light, than the five ordinary burners, at an expenditure of
less than a quarter of the quantity of gas. The two jets which stand at the
corners of the organ screen give a brilliant appearance to the front of the
instrument; indeed, the whole interior of the building is enhanced in
appearance.
j[ Australasian Ironmonger, June Ist, 1894.]
The Welsbacli Incandescent Gas Lamp was last week placed in the
Streets of Sydney for the first time in Australasia, and the result has been
highly satisfactory. The place chosen was George-street, lacing the Bank of
New South Wales and the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney, and the result
is that that particular oortion is brilliantly illuminated. The lights were of the
ordinary 70-80 candle-power, and can be fitted to any burner, and use only 3f feet
per hour against the ordinary 16 candle-light using 4| feet per hour. This has been
thoroughly proved by the Company putting a small meter under each of the gas
lets. As special permission of the Mayor was necessary, and he is thoroughly satis-
fied, there is a probability of this system being adoptea for street
lighting in Sydney. We may mention that a large number of public buildings
have been illuminated with these lamps, including the Sydney University, St. Mary’s
Cathedral, a large number of churches, the Free Public Library, and Public
Asylums, &c.


MELBOURNE.
Improved gas burners are taking the place of electric arc lights with satisfactory-
results as to cost and illuminating power.
CONTINENT OF EUROPE.
German Continental Gas Company.—More than 8,000 incandescent gas lights
have been put up in this company’s district within eight months. Many new cus-
tomers have been attracted through it who have hitherto used electric light or some
other illuminant. It has immensely improved the public lighting. It produces less
carbonic acid and less than half the quantity of heat given off by the ordinary gas-
burner, saves gas, and gives a much better light.
[Journal of Gas Lighting, March, 6, 1894, p. 42G.]j
GAS LIGHTING HYDE PARK SURPASSES EVERYTHING YET
DONE BY ELECTRICITY.
There was not much in Professor Robinson’s Society of Arts paper on the St.
Pan eras electric lighting venture ; but the author said something not quite correct
SssCT«remarked that “the present lighting of the thoroughfares
in the metropolis is a reproach,” which is true enough, and L b< g°/ y f d
engineers the past 20 years. He then proceeded to claim that St. Pancras has led
thfway in reforming this,” which is absurd. If St. Pancras had been the first
parish to experiment with arc lighting, there might have l
observation; but as it is even the electrical journals _ and the experts
who, like Mr. A P. Trotter, have studied the subject, freely admit
that the lighting of Whitehall-place and Hyde Park
Corner by gas surpasses everything that has yet w ® ei
done by electricity at vastly greater cost. Belfast
Birmingham, and many other places can strengthen the cas , _
lighting by gas ; so that if Professor Robinson thinks that St. Pancras hasid
anything noteworthy in the way of street lighting by putting up a few arc amps
along some second and third-class thoroughfares, he ha,s a good deal to learn or wnat
is going on in the world outside this pet parish of his. London street lighting is
generally bad, we admit, but this is simply because the authorities who have to pay
for it think the bill heavy enough as it is. Yet there are parishes, even in poor and
dingy South London, where as good public lighting as could be desired for all practical
purposes may be seen every night. There is nothing flashy about these examples.
But then the> do not cost nearly so niiich as the St. Pancras show;
and the ratepayers have the comfort of knowing that when they have paid the Gas
Company their responsibility ceases. There is no demon of unrest, by name
Depreciation or Loan Repayment to sit on the pillow of a South or
East London vestryman. We doubt if Professor Robinson himself knows what the
St. Pancras electric lighting costs “all in;” and it is pretty clearly the object of
the parochial authorities to keep such information from the public as long as
possible.
J. L. Bonython & Co., Printers, “Advertiser” Office, Adelaide.






