

The
League of Loyalty
to the Empire
AND FOR
THE PROTECTION OF
CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS
RIGHTS
“IN QUIETNESS AND CONFIDENCE
SHALL BE YOUR STRENGTH.”


WHY WE SHOULD FORM A
LEAGUE.
mHE ROMAN CATHOLIC MENACE in State
and Federal Politics and in Municipal and
Civil Life has become so acute that the mem-
bers of other Churches must throw off their leth-
argy and indifference, unless they desire to find
Australia separated from the Empire and her
people absolutely dominated by Rome. They
must follow Archbishop Cerretti’s advice to the
Catholic Federation and organise—organise —not
for controversial purposes, not for strife, simply
and only for Protection against this encroaching
domination.
The League of Loyalty has already been
organised in Queensland, and branches are now
being organised in Sydney and throughout
Australia. You can help by joining the
League.


THE MENACE OF ROMAN
CATHOLICISM.
MEETING OF THE CATHOLIC FEDERATION.
MESSAGE FROM THE POPE.
Archbishop Cerretti: “The condition of the Catholic
Church in Australia was flourishing and its prospects most
promising. To attain them there must be organisation. The
Holy Father the Pope had commanded him to give the organi-
sation of the Catholic Federation his best assistance. They
must organise, organise, organise! . . ."
Archbishop Kelly: “The Catholic Church progressed des-
pite all opposition . . . because of organisation. . . . The Catholic
Federation had great potentialities, etc."
The “Hobart Mercury" of February 3, 1917, in a strong
article, points out that the Catholic Federation is a political
organisation and Anti-British.
This Federation boasts that a year ago it had a member-
ship of 50,000 men without the women members.
Archbishop Donaldson (in “Brisbane Daily Mail")
ROMAN CATHOLIC INFLUENCE.
DR. DONALDSON (ARCHBISHOP OF BRISBANE),
SPEAKS.
REPLIES TO A CHALLENGE.
Archbishop Duhig has compelled me to speak. I had de-
cided not to respond to his challenge of February 5, and the
governing factor in my decision was the expressed wish of an
official whom every loyal subject is bound to respect. That of-
ficial, I know, communicated with Archbishop Duhig, and I
understand from him that the Archbishop intended to make
no further comment except in the interests of peace. But in
his speech at Clifton, as reported in to-day's press, he chal-


lenges me'once again, and as he misunderstands my silence, I
must speak. ’
He has asked for proof of my statement that the Roman
Oatiiolics, among others, push their own interests and their own
people m a way detrimental to national unity, and likely to
ceep the nation a collection of rival, racial and religious factions.
I take tour spheres of common life, and I give one instance in
each sphere.
(1) Politics—l am quite aware that here the Roman
Church as such is not openly a political organisation with a
Parliamentary party, as it is in some European countries- but
ever since I have been in Queensland I have heard of the “ Irish
Catholic vote,” and no politician would dare to face the people
without having carefully considered how that vote would be
cast. Archbishop Duhig denies this; but I am interested to
note that Archbishop Mannix agrees with me, for he said in
his speech to the Hibernian Society, as reported in “The Daily
Mail” of February 17: “If they hung together they should
have the strength they ought to have. The Catholic vote, they
knew, was a strong vote, of which people were afraid, of which
they had good reason to be afraid, and of which he hoped they
would be much more afraid as time went on. 7 7 It appears that
on this subject at least the voice of Rome is a divided voice.
Moreover, we must not forget that at a meeting of the Hiber-
nian Society at St. Brigid’s, Red Hill (I quote from the “Catho-
lic Advocate” of November 23, 1912), Mr. F. McDonnell said
that Roman Catholics now have the nucleus of a really good
Catholic party in the Legislative Assembly.” What is true of
the larger sphere of State politics applies equally in more local
matters.
(2) Imperial and Patriotic Sphere.—At the beginning of
last September, Mr. Fihelly, a Minister of the Crown, made a
speech which has now become notorious. That speech was made
at a Roman Catholic gathering, and Mr. Lennon, also a Cabinet
Minister and a Roman Catholic, said, on the same occasion,
that he ‘ ‘ admired Mr. Fihelly for his outspoken utterance. ’ ’ Mr.
Fihelly, in the course of that speech, said: “The opinion is held
by many young Australians that every Irish Australian re-
cruit means another soldier to assist the British Grovernment to
harass the people of Ireland. ’ ’ No representative Roman Catho-
lic has ever publicly repudiated this speech, and the “Catholic
Advocate,” the chief organ of the Roman Catholic Church in
Brisbane, in its issue of September 7, 1916, so far from re-
pudiating it, says “it was like inhaling a breath of fresh air
to hear Mr. Fihelly speak at the Irish Association Rooms last


Saturday night. ” After this speech, when a vacancy occurred
in the Cabinet, the Roman Catholic members of the Caucus
voted in a block for Mr. Fihelly to till it.
(3) The Press.—A leading paper in Brisbane, when it
commented on Mr. Fihelly’s speech, received a direct expres-
sion of strong resentment, and was warned of boycott unless
its policy in regard to the Roman Church ceased.
(4) Business.—As in politics, I have heard of the Roman
Catholic vote ever since I have been in Queensland, so
also I have constantly heard of undue Roman Catholic pressure
in business. Definite statements have been made to me, and by
way of an example, I give one of which I have the fullest evi-
dence. A prominent trader in Queen Street was recently can-
vassed for advertisements in a very influential Roman Catholic
newspaper, and when he declined to increase the amount of
his expenditure upon advertising, was definitely threatened with
the loss of the business of a Roman Catholic institution trading
with him.
It is with the greatest reluctance and aversion that I men-
tion these matters. It is not my way to be inquiring into the
faults and errors of my fellow-citizens; and I desire to repeat
that the question before us does not concern the religious be-
liefs of the Roman Catholics (whose loyalty to their Church
and faith is an example to us all), but of their practices as
citizens. The matter is now before the tribunal of the people,
and I have no doubt as to its verdict; but as Archbishop Duhig
has repeated his challenge, I break silence (for the last time)
to state these instances of well-known facts.
“Argus,” Thursday, April 12: —
Quite in keeping with the spirit which Dr. Mannix has
displayed in discussing public questions is his tyrannical treat-
ment of Mr. Benjamin Hoare, whose services to the Roman
Catholic Church won a decoration from the late Pope. Mr.
Hoare had dared to dissociate himself from the outrageous
views which Dr. Mannix has expressed with regard to the war
and to Australia’s part in it. Dr. Mannix had not the courage
to refute Mr. Hoare nor the strength to disregard him. In
popular language, he “waited for him,” and has succeeded in
punishing him by having him deprived of his seat on the execu-
tive of the Catholic Truth Society. Dr. Mannix might have
done worse, but apparently this was the only means of coercion
available—do be used as a warning to any other member of the
Church who might venture to stand up for the Empire against


the scandalous utterances of Dr. Mannix, who must not be cen-
sured—not even contradicted. He must be obeyed. He is the
autocrat. The same spirit which was displayed in the penal
action against Mr. Hoare is the spirit which was expressed m
the sentence uttered on Easter Monday: “I intend 10 keep
conscription out of Australia if I can.” No one is to gainsay
this mighty man. “Upon what meat has this our Caesar fed?
PRIMATE’S VIEWS.
LITTLE ANIMOSITIES SHARPLY CONDEMNED.
Sydney, Monday.—The Primate of Australia (Archbishop
Wright), in the course of an address at a large meeting in the
Sydney" Town Hall to-night, pronounced a sharp condemnation
of political differences and divergences in the present grave
crisis in the world’s history, and of “little political and per-
sonal animosities,” which held back the Prime Minister (Mr.
Hughes) from the place “where the Germans do not desire to
see him.” .
“I am no politician,” declared the Archbishop, but X
have my thoughts, and so have you, and _ of late weeks my
heart has felt, full low as one reads of political differences that
seem to he so small in face of the enormous issue of the world
for God, or the world for the devil. (Applause.) I may not
agree with Mr. Hughes in everything, hut I have learnt m tnese
last months to admire him, his conviction, his courage, his hop-
ing, and hurrying on. And still more is this borne upon me as
I notice that many who oppose him belong to the great com-
munion in our midst that forbids the Bible to its people. Let
us circulate the Bible more and more in future, that at last
we may come to the day when the sword has been sheathed—
it cannot be sheathed until victory is won—for if there be no
Bible there can be no complete or lasting victory. ” (Applause.)
In the face of the condition of things in Queensland, it
was decided that it was necessary for'mutual protection for the
other Churches to organise.
LEAGUE OF LOYALTY TO THE EMPIRE AND FOR THE
PROTECTION OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS RIGHTS.
FORMED IN BRISBANE.
BIG MEETING AT EXHIBITION.
IMPORTANT RESOLUTIONS CARRIED.
The inaugural meeting of the League for the Maintenance
of Civil and Religious Rights was held in the Exhibition Hall


last night, under the presidency of Mr. F. T. Brentnall, M.L.C.
There was a large assemblage. All the seating accommoda-
tion in the body of the hall, in the gallery, and on the platform
was taxed to its utmost capacity, while the passages and door-
ways were thronged with people who reached the hall too late
to secure seats. ... In answering the questions asked at the
opening of his remarks, the chairman said they were assembled
that night to insist upon the common rights of all subjects of
the British realm to equality of treatment in civil and religious
life. (Applause.) That was the common basis of eitzenship.
They asked for no favours; they simply asked for liberty of
British rights to serve their God in their own way, and to serve
the country with the best- moral principles they could, as well
as with the best patriotic zeal they could call up to their aid.
(Applause.) They were not prepared to withhold just and
equal rights from any section of the community. (Applause.)
Without obstruction, or imprecation, or despite they wanted
the same freedom as other people people claimed foi them-
selves; and what was more, they accepted no contempt from
anybody without a righteous resentment, (Applause.) They
were not going to be the doormat for people who thought them-
selves vastly superior to themselves in religious sentiment and
aim. (Applause.)
Mr. J. Adamson, M.L.A., then submitted the following
resolution: —
Whilst regretting the need for public action to protect our
civil and religious rights, yet, in view of the dissatis-
faction, resentment, and alarm felt throughout the
State, occasioned by several questionable actions of the
Ryan Government, indicating undue influence of the
Roman Catholics in Parliament, in the public service
of the State, in municipal, in industrial, and in other
organisations, thereby constituting a real menace to
the common weal, this meeting records its strong con-
viction that the establishment of the league for the
maintenance of our civil and religious rights is an
urgent necessity.
The Rev. W. G. Pope, in seconding the resolution, said
they very much regretted all sectarianism, but in the present
instance it was not the Protestants who started it. .If they
were sectarian, it was because there was fight in their blood.
They could not help it when they considered, their rights were
being over-run. The old British lion said, “We don’t want to
fight, but by Jingo if we do, we’ve got the cause, we ye got
the right, we’ve got the courage, too.” (Applause.) While the


Protestant boys were giving their life-blood for the nation,
and while the Protestant portion of the community was contri-
buting to patriotic funds, the Eoman Catholic Church was out
building schools practically at the rate of one a week. If they
would only give a half of the money they were spending on build-
ing schools to the lads back from the front they would think
more of them. (Applause.) Protestantism stood for justice and
toleration from everybody, but they found that the Eoman
Catholic Church claimed all the toleration, and gave as little
of it as it could. Protestants were always loyal to their own
home Government, but the Eoman Catholic was pledged first of
all to the Church of Eome, and then to his country. They
were now asking that Protestants should rally round the cause
of toleration for every man, and the right of freedom. He
trusted that God would give them the victory. (Applause.)
The resolution was then carried by a show of hands, fol-
lowed by cheering.
Mr. T. M. Hall, M.L.C., then submitted the following re-
solution :
This meeting expresses its hearty approval of the objects
of the league, to wit: —
(1) To maintain loyalty to the throne, the unity of
the Empire, and to promote the national develop-
ment of Australia.
(2) To uphold civil and religious freedom and equality
for all citizens.
(3) To resist any encroachment on the rights and
privileges of the people of the Eoman Catholic or
any church or organisation.
(4) To maintain the national system of education,
without endowment, concession, or privilege in any
form to any denominational or private schools.
(5) To secure just and equitable distribution of pat-
ronage, employment, and promotion in the Public
Service of the State.
(6) To return to Parliament and other public posi-
tions men whose character and principles are in
accord with the objects of the league. And this
meeting commends the above-named objects to the
favourable support of the citizens who desire civil,
political, and religious justice for all persons, irre-
spective of ecclesiastical, creed, or political party.
He said he did not wish to say anything unkind of any
person’s religion, which was a sacred matter between himself


and his Maker, but what he complained against was an organi-
sation, which was supposed to look after the spiritual well-being
of its people, endeavouring to get State craft to control the
wdiole community. They had had a very pronounced instance
of it, and they had waited for the person who had uttered the
sentiments in question to be called to order, but that had not
been done. That individual having received no rebuke from the
people above him, it remained for the people in such a demo-
cratic community to insist that the men who did not consider
the British flag good enough to live under to get out. (Ap-
plause.) He hoped the time would never come in Queensland
when anything in the nature of a continual bickering spirit
was going to divert the people from the one great object of
building up the State. Protestants were tolerant and benevo-
lent towards other people’s views, but whenever they retaliated
they were told they were bigots. He would say that he for
one w T as no bigot. They now realised that there was a tight
before them, and the sooner they got to work and saw that
none of their views was trampled upon by any section of the
community the better. He trusted that the league would not
be aggressive in the sense that it would create strife, but he
hoped it would be so strong as to be able to repel anything in
the nature of an attack.
The Rev. W. Worley, in seconding the resolution, said it
was necessary that a few people should have got together to
decide what was to be the manner of their moving. They had
decided upon the manner of their moving, and he trusted they
would move in Queensland until they should make the whole
of Australia feel there was a power that was loyal to the Em-
pire, of which they were an integral part, and that was deter-
mined to stand loyal to the end. (Applause.) They were at
a grave crisis in the history of the nation. A force had been
got together for the purpose of humiliating England. Everyone
should remember that behind the force of Germany was the
force of the Roman Catholic Church. (Hear, hear.) It was
because of that that they stood there that night and said they
were loyal to the Throne, to the community, and the Empire.
After seeking to prove that the Roman Catholic Church was be-
hind Germany, he said it was not Germany that was going to
seize them if she were victorious; it was that great octopus, the
Papacy. It was their duty, therefore, to speak out, and to work.
(Applause.)
The resolution was carried unanimously.
Chaplain-Colonel A. C. Plane then submitted the follow-
ing resolution:—


that the religious instruction to be so given shall in every case
be the religious instruction authorised by the Church to which
the clergyman or other religious teacher may belong. Pro-
vided further that in the case of the non-attendance of any
clergyman or religious teacher during any portion of the period
agreed to be set apart for religious instruction, such period shall
be devoted to the ordinary secular instruction in such school.
Branches of this league are being formed throughout
Australia.
OFFICE OF THE LEAGUE:
1 ‘ DAILY TELEGRAPH ’ ’ BUILDINGS,
Fifth Floor.
Tuesday and Friday, 9.30 to 11.30.


League of Loyalty to the Empire
i
To
You are earnestly invited to riieet the Executive of the
(t League of Loyalty to the Empire” at the Hall , Pitt
Street Congregational Churchy on Thursday, June 7th,
at 8 p.m .
THE OBJECT OF THE MEETING :
To discuss the present threatened disintegration of the Empire .
SPEAKERS:
Loyalty — REV. THOS. TAIT, D.D.
Forces that disintegrate - J yu fcS-V £ faoA/ujUug,
Organisation —RICHARD TEECE, Esq.
Ministers of Churches are requested to bring L. VICKERY,
at least tiOo laymen, Hon. Sec. ( pro tem )
