









-5-AN OLD HOME-?*
IN the farthest cove of Mossmans’ Bay the water narrows to the
dimension of the tiniest mountain lake, creeps round a last point,
the tiniest mountain lake, creeps round a last point,
and, shallowing upon a long flat, settles itself in the calm of morning and
evening as a sheet of glass mirroring the rich-colored rocks upon its
' margin, the glossy lustrous leaves of the trees, and the rugged and
mountainous heights of the hills above. Sailing gently into that placid cove,
some foreign growth is observable on the brow of the highest hill, broad
crowns of .pines and spires of cypress, with one old grey turret just visible
betwixt them. It is only seen for a moment, the patch of grey stone, a few strokes
of the oar, a single dash of the steamer’s paddle float, and it is lost behind the trees.
The trees themselves sink, too, as an old broken causeway of rock is passed, and there
is nothing seen but the glassy water, the bold crag face, or rich forest growth of the hills,
and the patch of blue sky above. In the far extremity, if any summer showers or winter
rains have fallen, a trickle or splash of water will be heard, and, as the boat’s prow touches
the marginal rock, down through a bosky dell, rich with fern and myrtle and lilly pilly, a merry stream
H|.’ will be seen leaping and laughing and frolicking with a last glad bound to the embrace of the salt sea
lips. Tis just such a creek as that Orara, of which Kendall sang, and just such a wish as Kendall’s


possesses the stranger’s mind as he peers up through the foliage and thinks back to the grey turret and the
shadowy pines, and lets imagination teach him what fair things are concealed there.
“ Ah! brook ; beyond the upper bend
I often long to stand,
When you in cool bright rills descend
From the untrodden land.”
What lies within that untrodden land ? What mystery of beauty is indicated by that grey turret, just seen
amongst the pines ? What tale has the brook to tell, creeping out of that old home place, winding about the
little plateau where holiday people picnic and play, and make light and laughter and colour about the grey
rock and amongst the old trees ? What has it told to the sea through
all the years since the crews of the Spaniards anchored in Neutral
Bay, pulled round to fish and bathe, and old Ben. Boyd’s whalers
rested and feasted from their labours upon the green flat beside the
great fig tree, and the old trying down house under the rock ? Let us
climb up and see. We need not, however, breast the rugged face of
the cliff, nor creep with difficulty up the glen of the creek. Without
any desecration of the bush or marring of the natural beauty of the
hill side, a road has been made, rising gradually, and winding easily
with the course of the creek —a pleasant road, with,- ample shade
from overhanging trees, with long sprays of epacris within easy hand-
reach, and dainty white heaths and fairy blue lobelias waiting to be
gathered, just within the woods ; —a road that runs by easy grades to’


1
*V 7M 1 4» wm& JtttkA $\%sk
■
•
*-Ay'Mmr!!££r ’ ' '■-'■• I ■> #V«V '’----a
■ ;ir ■fj’ Sy^* a ~jfc3f
lmli^MBiBESES - JS^H
v yaSSs£l
V fr , «/l E. ffijpjlESg
• *•
' : » y*c4 *fL£r ’ '• . ;v ** - *. tAp^ :^ ffppv
'i•>#/. . v3jfffif{/ A-ft- k^
™ .t A 9
’ ' - T<1
/* = *£ ;&»**
,-•.■■> * ■*, Bf> •'«■& • ■ '■'• v *..1ihH
.•< *




THE RANGER’S.
farther than a great gate, on a forbidding fence,
just where the brook breaks in its first waterfall,
a quarter of a mile, an easy ten minutes from the
shore of the bay, It is the gate of
The Ranger’s estate lies within, and the little
bit of grey masonry we saw from the water was
the turretted chimney top of rf The Ranger’s ”
home. We are privileged to see that home, to
enter into one of the few places about our city,
rich with the grace of years, through which a cultured taste has constantly laboured, placing every stone,
turning every sod, planting every tree with love, fitting the exigencies, the refinement, and the luxuries
of the human life into the abundant beauty made by nature from the beginning. Approaching the house,
the branch road crosses the creek’s head, in a gorge rich with fern and heath, and graced with tall clumps
of bamboo and pampas grass, whose light and feathery foliage contrasts pleasantly with the dark growth
of green forest, through which are caught little glimpses of the blue water of the bay. Beyond the gorge an
old oak gate opens, and by one of those magnificent grey rock walls, the sandstone cliffs of Sydney frequently
afford, the road leads to the house, the hidden beauty of which we have dreamed since the first glimpse of the
seaward approach. And now let us gain a special coign of Vantage, and enjoy for a while such an exquisite and
varied, and perfect view, as even the most specially-favoured surroundings of “Beautiful Sydney” seldom afford.
Some rough-hewn steps lead to the crown of the rock, and upon that crown is a little rustic cot with a tall gothic win-
dow looking to the South. Turn we also beside the cot and look out to the South, and what a matchless


picture lies before us! The dark green woods—the merry green
woods we may well say, for from far below comes a faint and
pleasant murmur of holiday folks at play—reach down to the water’s
edge, the lake-like water that meets in the middle distance the bolder
flood of the harbour, whose multitudinous reaches, coves, and long
river arms are seen flecked with white sails, or crowded with masts,
or fringed with the gardens of a hundred palace homes, or lined
with the solid warehouse walls, leagues in length, along all the south-
ern shore; and stretching far and wide is seen the great and ever-
growing city, walls and roofs gleaming, heights swathed in smoke, tall
spires standing out clear against the blue. It is a marvellous view! a picture of infinite variety, colour is seen
there, more tints and brighter hues than ever were woven into the web of any most gorgeous fabric, ultramarine
and sapphire and indigo, and emerald and opal, in the water; all the greys and browns that rich deep tones can
form on rocks and cliffs and beach, heavy sepia with inner lights of fire on the city and ships, all of green that
can be dreamed of in the near bush, and far away on northern and southern harbour headlands, flushes of pink
from the blossoming heather. And do you know why that cottage was built, and that tall gothic window let into
its side just there?—that the proprietor of the house we have not yet seen, might enjoy the matchless view, perhaps!
But no, there is a better reason. It was to satisfy the wish of one, who now stands supreme, almost alone in
virtue of absolute mastership, amongst the famous painters of the world. Long, long ago, in the year ’4B,
Oswald Brierly was in Sydney; Oswald Brierly, now the specially favoured water-colour artist of the English
Court; Oswald Brierly, whose pictures, in our own National Gallery, interpret to us the majestic poetry of wild
sea waves; the great painter, then in all the strength and enthusiam of youth, came to Sydney, and after
wandering around all the harbour shores, chose that special rock for the scene of his temporary encampment.
The kindly proprietor of “The Ranger’s,” built the artistic “humpy” there, and there the artist lived and






laboured, and learned much, which has, doubtless, had large in-
fluence in his more recent work. It is something to sit upon that
rock to think: “here, Brierly sat in days gone by”—to try to see as
he saw. There is, indeed, some consecration in the knowledge
that such an one did live and labour here; and, not far away, we
may see some of the large results of his strong bold work. For
just below the rock, only a stone’s throw away, is the dear, fair,
quaint, old house, amongst the cedars and the pines, surrounded
by the smooth, shining lawns and dainty carpet gardens and
level breadth of turf; its wall covered with ficus and ivy, its roof of old red tiles, weathered to a hundred
mellow tints. It is a bit of the old world; the very trees about it spread paternal arms of grateful shade
above you, and, rocked gently by the winds, whisper down all their rough-grained trunks like talking oaks
of another “Summer place.” Ah! what a summer place indeed is here; how invitingly cool looks the
deep shadow of the broad verandah!—the great porch, all stone-paved and oak-roofed! Pull upon the iron
handle of the bell there, and let us see what mysteries are within. As the gate of a cathedral the heavy door
opens and discloses more mysteries indeed. The hasty intruder is checked with a sense of awe, though it is but
a Hall, twenty feet wide by fifty in length, which opens to him. But what are these faces of old kings, or
prophets, or gods, that look upon him from the walls? Of more than mortal bulk , and with all the solemn dig-
nity of hoary age, many-branched antlfers amongst them, and quaint old carved oak below. What ho! Sir
Seneschal, will you shortly appear with silver beard, and golden chain, and wand of office, or were you smitten
to sleep when these things were hung, full fifty years ago? The seneschal does not appear, the house is void of
human life —a rare and deserted shrine. But what exquisite Art, and what fine faculty of adaptability to all the
requirements of a comfortable life in a trying climate had the. architect of the great hall, with the cool flags be-
low, and the deep-arched roof above, through which comes the whispering coolness of the little breeze from the


sea, bearing the fragrance of the fresh brine, the
odour of the pines, the scent of all the flowers!
How luxurious to sit here upon a hot Summer’s
afternoon! How restful to recline here upon a
sweltering Summer’s night! only half-a-mile
away, and yet Two hundred feet above the sea
level—within sight of the city clock and sound
of its bells —yet far removed from all its smoke
and smells. The hall, the porch, the nave, or
aisle of the house, is itself a fair home; and
what of the sanctuaries ? Let us peep into that
long room, over the painted glass, of whose great
window the green leaves creep. It is a very spacious chamber, fifty feet in length, and full twenty-five feet from the
floor to the centre of the arched roof; at the foot of each rafter of polished oak, is a carved head of a king;
central in the wall, is a massive stone fire-place, a place for yule logs to roar and glow; or, in summer time, for a
fountain to play, or a bank of flowers to lie; a dozen more of these paintings with figures of heroic size, which
astounded us in the hall, are here; they are done in distemper ; they represent biblical subjects. Moses with the
tables, the hoary prophet, aghast at the idolatry of Israel, dashing the divinely graven commands to the earth.
“ The offering of the first fruit.” “The slaying of the Dragon,” from the Apocryphal story. Elijah, and Samp-
son, and Jephtha, they were painted by Appiani, in Florence, (they once adorned the palace of a noble of the
house of Ferrari) ; and, when owing to the pinch of poverty following the too ardent pursuit of modern pleasure,
the art treasures of the Ferrari were sold, these were purchased by Mr. Bloxsome, and transported here, and
very fittingly placed in the one house in Australia (at that time, perhaps) fit for their reception. The well-tra-
velled and artistically-educated, and deeply-observant visitor, may look well at these, as the man of shallow mind


Zo » Sy (T . tjv




■ 7 #'
' . : ; ■*: '' Vi- ■■’
‘ '■ •;'i‘ ■ ■
will at least look curiously. But neither will look long on a first visit to this room, by reason of a something of
which we must endeavour to give a fairly adequate description, under the title of
THE GREAT PICTURE.
I think it is the largest picture in Australia, and certainly it is one of the most valuable. I have told you the
room is full twenty feet in width, the picture is of the whole width, it js on the end wall, and covers the whole of
that wall, from a line drawn about ten feet from the floor to the roof. It contains something more than two
hundred square feet of painting, by Oswald Brierly. Now, although it might not be fair to take the size and
the price of Brierly’s gems in our national gallery, and make comparisons, we come at some better idea of actual
value, after a little reflection of the sort. It is more agreeable, however, to speak of artistic work, than money
value, to look at the bold work of a young giant here, to note the yeasty, spumy froth of the great live waves ;
the bent spars and strained canvas of the ship heeled over to the squall, the sudden anger in the sky above,
and the pace and passion of wind and water. The subject is, H. M, S. “ Rattlesnake” in a squall, off Timor.
Brierly came out in the “ Rattlesnake,” and, doubtless, rushed on deck as halyards were let go, and all hands piped
hurriedly to take in sail ; he saw, and felt, and imbibed all the spirit of the storm, took it unto himself, photo-
graphed it upon his mind, and so reproduced it here—dashing on great brush strokes strong as the gale and free
as the water. Those who have experienced a squall at sea, will know how “at the first stroke of the wind, the
very composition of the water seems changed, the deep blue waves which rolled solid , and as unbroken as flint
caverns , become brown hummocks, and mounds, and furrows. It is as though the waters were vexed to their
very depths, and the pits of the sea were churned to its surface. All this strange discolouration, as all the fury
with which it is accompanied, is perfectly depicted here ; and the great breadth of the picture gives scope for a
space of sea miles broad. It is not a picture of a single wave; the ship, though painted so big that all her gear
is clearly perceived, and the action on her deck understood, seems to ride upon a waste of water, which leaps
and plunges, and rolls tumultuously ; while all the development of the squall is seen in the. sky. What should


be done with such a picture ? Cannot the gable upon which it is painted, be cut clean out. bound up with an
iron collar, backed by whatever material is strongest or best adapted, and built into some public gallery of the
colony. It is a question which our architects surely would do well to ponder.
And have we anything more of art that is worthy of particular mention ? The answer is yes, and the guide
leads us to the great drawing-room, and points to
THE OIL PAINTINGS OF THE OLD MASTERS.
These are works, which, though familiar enough to travellers in Italy, have very rarely been seen in Australia.
Copies done by great modern artists in their earlier years, of those supreme works of Art which are the most
cherished heirlooms of nations. Holy Families by Titian and Tintoretto ; Madonnas, by Murillo and Raphael ;
Strange heads of Flemish cavaliers by Rembrandt, with one or two good pictures of Genre subjects unsigned,
but bearing so clearly the stamp of genius, as to need no written testimony of worth. All these, hanging in
the long and lofty room, inspire some strange monastic sentiment, as in the old hall the ear awaits, and almost
anticipates the ring of an armed heel , and the entrance of a knight-at-arms ; so, here one might expect to see a
side door open noiselessly, and a Prince of the Church enter, and bow in mute adoration, before the Holy
Family, whose Virgin Mother looks down with the divine love, in whose pourtrayal all the artists of mediaeval
times, expended their highest efforts. To the cultured mind, there is much pleasure in the contemplation of
such works as these, and to the enquiring student much instruction. They are the nearest approach which can
be made to the actual work of the greatest men of all time—the work, in fact, of true artists striving faithfully
and zealously to realise the ideas of their great masters
But, the rational modern mind cannot live always in the past, and so, apart from these stately chambers and
corridors of the ground floor of the “The Ranger’s,” the skilful architect planned, many a sunny little nook—
quaint rooms reached by a winding stairway that terminates in a miniature tower, with windows overlooking


everything—lawns, flowers, and trees immediately around, forest beyond, then harbour, water and city, and ocean
or mountain on the merge. There are half a dozen such rooms as these, each with a peculiar quietude and sense
of repose within, and a far and broad prospect without.
And what will be the fate of such a fair home-place as this ? The builders and makers have all departed. It
is in the market for sale, the auctioneer’s board stands in the angle of its bounds ; the subdivision pegs are right
across its lawns. In its present condition, it is as beautiful a home as any man needing repose from daily toil
or rest after a long life’s labour, could desire. Ample space, abundant shade, infinite variety in flower and
foliage without, and comfortable and luxurious and cesthetic provision within. It is almost melancholy to think
that in order to make way for a dozen wooden villas, its lawn should be cut up, its timber felled, its flowers des-
troyed, its very walls with their one great artistic treasure broken down and demolished, and its fine collection
rudely dispersed ? Yet, unless the powerful hand of wealth, following the dictates of a mind conscious of the
duties and alive to the powers of wealth, intervene, such will be its fate, and so will be lost one more of those
grand old homes, which no less than cathedrals, universities, schools, museums, art galleries, and magnificent
public buildings, aid in building up and fashioning, and sustaining the better and higher life of a growing people.


|(Tp W IPP
v vl j) r Vf 1 T^
MOSSMANS’ BAY, NORTH SHORE
This unrivalled Waterside Estate, comprising about 40 Acres of Land, the greater part of which consists of
Cultivated Land and Gardens, planted with English and other ornamental trees, has been subdivided into
190 LARGE ALLOTMENTS,
with frontages to wide streets, as shown on the PLAN OF SUBDIVISION, after page 22, and will be Sold by
Public Auction on SATURDAY, the Bth of MAY, at 2.30 o’clock, on the
Ground, by
Messrs. BAIT, ROOD, & PURVES.
Sale of the House and Furniture in two lots, at 12.30; Luncheon at 1.30; Sale of Allotments at 3 o’clock sharp,
when every lot offered will be sold to the highest bidder; at the same time will be offered (if not previously
disposed of by private treaty) THE STATELY MANSION AND DELIGHTFUL GROUNDS,
and the Purchaser of the Mansion will have the option of taking with it any quantity of land he may desire.
The Ranger’s occupies a high plateau, commanding lovely views of the harbour, and the Natural Beauties
of this delightful spot have been accurately described in the foregoing pages. It is seldom such an admirable
Building Estate comes into the market, and the day of sale should be anxiously awaited by the public.


The mansion is a magnificent property of solid stone, containing over 20 spacious apartments, and replete with
every convenience of modern life, while the grounds are delightful beyond conception. The subdivision has
been carried out in accordance with the natural features of the land.
The Terms are very Easy, namely, 10 per cent, deposit, the balance by 10 equal quarterly
payments, with interest at 6 per cent, from the date of sale added.
The Title is a Certificate under the Property Act.
All particulars of which may be had from the Vendor’s Solicitor, Geo. M. Dunn, 39 Castlereagh Street.
There is a splendid road, called the Avenue Road, leading from the Mossmans’ Bay Ferry to the entrance
gate of the Ranger’s.
There is also a good road leading from the North Shore Ferry at Milson’s Point. The house is dis'ant
about half-a-mile from the Mossmans’ Bay Ferry, and about a mile from the Milson’s Point Ferry. Steamers
run every few minutes from the Circular Quay to Milson’s Point and Mossmans’ Bay.
THE MAGNIFICENT FURNITURE AND APPOINTMENTS are superb, and in every respect
in keeping with the house, and in harmony with the Paintings, and they will be offered for sale at the same time
as the house.
THE MAGNIPTCENT OIL PAINTINGS are works of rare merit, by famous masters, and were
purchased at Rome and on the Continent of Europe by the late proprietor, Mr. Bloxsome. They are to
be disposed of on the ART UNION PRINCIPLE, and the drawing will take place at the house on the
day of the sale, there are —
44 PRIZES RANGING
FROM 260 TO 2 GUINEAS IN VALUE.
N.B.—Every Purchaser shall be entitled to one free ticket for the Art Union for each allotment purchased , and the Purchaser of the house shall be
entitled to ten free tickets .


The Vendors would particularly direct the attention of all lovers of Art and
Beauty to the accurate description given on pages 1 to 3 of the matchless views by
which the house is surrounded, and to the Illustrations and Photographs.
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Pictures has been prepared, and Copies and
Tickets for the Art Union may be had on application to
Messrs. NICHOLSON & CO.,
ELVY & CO.,
HUENERBEIN & CORBETT,
MOSS & CO.


THE RANGER’S GALLERY
ART UNION.
THE MAGNIFICENT OIL PAINTINGS, DRAWINGS, ENGRAVINGS, &c.,
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING
-H CATALOGU Eh
WILL BE DISPOSED OF ON THE
aet Tjnsrxoisr PEinsroiPLE,
On Saturday, the Bth May, 1886,
AT THE RANGER’S, MOSSMANS’ BAY,
BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE HONORABLE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL,
in pursuance of the Aet for legalising Art Unions, 14 Victoria, No. 13,
There are 44 Prizes, ranging in value from 260 guineas to 2 guineas
total value £2082 16s. Od.
The number of tickets will be 1500 at £1 each


CATALOGUE of the COLLECTION
LILTS OIL L^ILTTILTGFS
AND
RARE ENGLISH LINE AND MEZZOTINT ENGRAVINGS
NOW IN THE MANSION
'• The Ranger’s. ” Mossmans' Bay:
Accompanied with a description of the CHIEF PICTURES and a short but reliable
historical account of the GREAT ARTISTS represented in the collection.
It is necessary to state that the first eight pictures are not originals. They are copies made from the originals
by two famous modern Artists —GIOVANNI FERRINI of Rome, who painted the Italian, and JAN
VANS VELDT of Amsterdam, who painted those examples of the Flemish School. Both these Artists
possess a wondrous power, and must also possess the faculties of high art, to have produced the works under
notice —many of them being equal, in every respect, to the originals.
Arranged according to precedence in value.
N.B. —The Frames of the first eight pictures are of the most expensive character, being carved Italian frames, richly
burnished in mat gold, costing from £2O to £5O each, and in condition equal to new. The remaining
works are all well and suitably framed.
The Catalogue compiled by Mr. P. Fletcher Watson


*«THE PICTURES.*-
Ist PRIZE
value £250 : 0 : 0.
SARTO, ANDREA DEL. “ The Holy Family,
cultivation of his talents to his admiration and study of Michael Angelo and Leonardo da Vinci.
2nd PRIZE
value £ll5 : 0 : 0.
ALLORI, ALESANDRO. “ The Hospitality of St. Julian.”
3rd PRIZE
value £l5O 0 0.
GUERCINO, GIOVANNI. “ The Sibyl.”
This picture is considered the most perfect example of sacred art work. Its composition, harmony of
color, and expression are almost unapproachable. It was painted by command of Francis the First,
of France. Andrea del Sarto was born at Florence, 1488 ; died, 1530. He was indebted to the
This work represents St. Julian exercising the chief attribute of Christian life —Charity. There is an
expression of singular nobility in the central figure —the harmonious coloring and fine grouping, and
the general arrangement are masterly in the extreme. Allori was born at Florence, 1535 ; died, IGO7.
Losing his father in early life, he was placed under the care of Angelo Bronzino. His first important
picture was finished at the age of 17. The “ St. Julian” was the picture of his life, and has always been
highly esteemed.
The medigeval monks reckoned twelve sibyls, and gave to each a separate prophecy. This picture
represents “La Sibylla Cumana,” with the Sibylline Book, “ Oracula,” compiled 138 to 167.
Guercino was born 1590, died, 1666. He was the disciple of Nature and his own genius, and, unlike
most other artists, admired, but did not imitate, other masters.


4th PRIZE
value £l4O : 0 ; 0.
MURILLO, BARTOLOME. “ The Madonna and Jesus.
i Tins work is perhaps the noblest of Murillo’s pictures. Many qualities combine to produce this result.
The loving dignity, sweetness and calmness of the picture rivet the attention. The original is in the
Vatican. Murillo was the greatest master of the Spanish school. Born 1613, died 1685. His pictures
possess the truth of Titian and the tenderness of Vandyck.
sth PRIZE
value £l2O : 0 : 0.
REMBRANDT, VAN RYN. “ Portrait of the Artist.”
This portrait is considered the finest work in portraiture extant. It has been constantly studied by all
the leading artists of times past and present. The original picture is in the English National Gallery,
and was purchased at a cost of £4OOO. Rembrandt was born 1606, died 1674. Intended by his father
for one of the learned professions, his talent for drawing led him to art instead of the classics. He
became the first of the Dutch school of painters. He so thoroughly understood the different colors
friendly to each other, that his works possess a harmony unapproached by any other artist.
6th PRIZE
value £lOO : 0 : 0.
TITIAN, FIZIANO VECELLI. “ Titian’s Daughter
This most attractive picture remained in the artist’s possession until his death, and was bequeathed to
the Italian nation. It is now in the Eitti Palace, Florence. There is extreme of colour and the
utmost refinement in treatment. Titian was the descendant of a noble family. Born in 1477, died in
1559, at the Castle of Cadore. As a colorist he holds an unrivalled dominion. No painter has viewed
nature with so chaste an eye.


7th PRIZE - - ualue £B5 .■ 0 .• 0,
BAROCCIO, FEDENGQ. “La Madonna del Popolo.”
This picture appeals at once, and receives the sympathy it deserves. It is simply beautiful, representing
a mother and children in the act of public adoration. Baroccio was born 1528, died 1612. He was the
son of a sculptor. In his pictures we discover an elegant taste and great harmony of colouring. He
painted much in the manner of Correggio.
Bth PRIZE
value £75 .• 0 .• 0.
VANDYCK, SIR ANTHONY. “ Charles the Fifth.’
Representing the Warrior Monarch of France. This is a small copy of the important original, but repro-
duces admirably the hue Aerial tone and drawing. Vandyck was born 1599. His works are full of life
and expression. Superb in color and composition. His chief Patron was Charles the Ist of England,
and many of his finest works remain in private collections.
9th PRIZE - - value £7O 0 0.
WEST, EDQUR E. “The Rescue.”
The work of a living English Marine Artist, an occasional exhibitor at the Royal Academy. It is a very
attractive picture, telling its own tale with ease. The sky effect is very fine, and the deep-sea color of
the water admirable. Edgur West is thought very highly of, and his pictures find their way readily into
the first collections.
THE FOLLOWING TWELVE PICTURES are undoubtedly original works in Tempora—that is, the
colors mixed with a solution of glue instead of oil. Many of the most valued Art works have been and
are thus produced and are equally lasting with those painted in oils.
APPIANI FRANCESCO. This Artist was born at Ancona in 1702, died 1774. He resided in Perugia,
where these twelve pictures were painted by order of Benedict XIII. They procured the Artist the
honour of a Gold Medal and Chain.


10th Prize - - value £65 • 0 0.
Elijah reproving Ahab.” —see Ist Kings, 18th Ch. 17 to 40 Verses
llth Prize - - value £65 0 •0.
Bel and the Dragon.” —see Apocrypha, 27th Verse.
“ Then Daniel took pitch and fat and hair, and did seethe them together, and made lumps thereof.
he put in the Dragon’s mouth, and so the Dragon burst in sunder, and Daniel said, ‘Lo ! these
Gods ye worship.’ ”
12th Prize - - value £65 0: 0.
The Submission of the Syrians.” — see Ist Book Kings, ,20th Ch. 32 Verse
13th Prize - - value £65 .• 0 : 0.
The Repentance of David.” —see 21st Ch. Chronicles 14th Verse.
14th Prize - - value £65 0 0.
Vision of the Restoration of the Church” —see 3rd Zechariah, 9th Verse,
4th ~ 10 th
15th Prize - - value £5O : 0 : 0.
Moses viewing the ‘ Promised Land’ from Mount Nebo”— see Deuteronomy, 32nd Ch.
16th Prize - - value £5O : 0 ; 0.
Elijah bringing Fire from Heaven” —see 2nd Kings, 1 ch. 12th Verse.
17th Prize - - value £4O : 0 : 0.
Moses breaking the Tables of the Law” —see 32nd Ch. Exodus, 19th Verse.,
18th Prize - - value £4O : 0 : 0.
Daniel in the Den of Lions ’’see 6th Ch. Chronicles, 16th Verse.
are the
49th Verse


19th Prize - - value £40 0 0.
“Elijah taking leave of Elisha” —see 2nd Book Kings, 2nd Ch. 11th Verse.
20th Prize - - value £40 : 0 : 0.
“Elisha took up the Mantle” —see 2nd Book Kings, 2nd Chapter 13th Verse.
21st Prize - - value £40 : 0 .* 0 .
“ Elijah in the Wilderness” —see 1st Book Kings, 19th Ch. 4th Verse.
22nd Prize - - value £30 0 : 0.
ZALASGY, H. “ An Italian Landscape.”
A fine Cabinet Picture of first-rate finish and quality—an original work.
23rd Prize - - value JB : 0 .• 0.
HONDEKOETER, MELCHIOR. “ Dead Game.”
This Artist was born in 1636—was a famous Painter of Still-life subjects. His Pictures fetch very
high prices and are scarce.
24th Prize - - value £25 : 0 : 0.
The Companion Picture.
25th Prize - - value £20 : 0 .* 0.
NICHOLO, GUISEPPE. “Lake Averno.”
26th Prize - - value £20 : 0 : 0.
The Companion Picture ; both original oil paintings of merit.
27th Prize - - value £20 : 0 ■■ 0.
“ The Preston, off Dover ”
An engraved picture, after the manner of Vandervelde.
19


■* ENGRAVINGS.^
The following Prizes are a series of FINE LINE and MEZZOTINT ENGRAVINGS. They are in VERY
VALUABLE CONDITION, uncut margins, and are much sought after by COLLECTORS.
28th PRIZE - - ualue £lO :10 : 0.
After Sir DAVID WILKIE. Born 1785, died 1841. “ Blind Man’s Buff.”
29th PRIZE
ualue £lO :10 :0.
Sir DAVID WILKIE. “Village Recruits.”
30th PRIZE
value £lO :10 : 0
Sir DAVID WILKIE. “ Village Politicians.”
31st PRIZE
ualue £lO :10 . 0
Sir DAVID WILKIE. “ Reading a Will ”
32nd PRIZE
ualue £lO 10 0.
Sir DAVID WILKIE. “ Rent Day.”
33rd PRIZE
ualue £lO 10 0.
Sir DAVID WILKIE. “Blind Fiddler.”


•
\
84th Prize - - value £10 .• 10 0.
After SIR EDWARD LANDSEER, R.A. “ Bolton Abbey in the Olden Time.”
35th Prize - - value £10 10 : 0.
After R. B. DAVIS, F.S.B.A. “ Royal Party in Windsor Park.”
86th Prize - - value £10 : 10 ; 0.
After W. P. FRITH, R.A. “ Coming of Age.”
87th Prize - - value £10 : 10 : 0.
After W. P. FRITH, R.A. “ An English Merry-Making.”
38th Prize - - value £8 .- 8 : 0.
Oil Painting by VALENTINO. Subject “ Amalfi.”
89th Prize - - value £8 : 8 0.
Companion picture, subject “ Babke,” both good pictures.
40th Prize - - value £6 6 0.
After CLARKSON STANFIELD, R.A. A fine Engraving, “ Tilbury Fort.”
41st Prize - - value £5 .- 5 .- 0.
Copy of a well-known picture by SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS, P.R.A.
21


42nd Prize - - value £5 5.• 0
Copy of Picture by SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE, P.R.A. “La Amour dormiente.”
48rd Prize
value £2 2.- 0.
Oleograph by BRANDEIS. “ View in Venice.”
44th /V/ze
value £2 : 2 0.
Companion Picture. “ The Rialto, Venice.”
Every Purchaser of an allotment in the Ranger’s Estate, will be entitled to 1 free ticket for the above Art
Union for each allotment purchased, and the Purchaser of the house will be entitled to 10 free tickets.
Tickets for the Art Union may be had on application to
M ESSRS. NICHOLSON & CO.,
ELYY & CO.,
HUENERBEIN & CORBETT,
MOSS & CO.
-y.G.Fp
70S' SoS?




- ->. - - —'*p «• ' • r ’ •
’ Vi .
• . ’i
* -V
•
4
•
t
* ♦
*.»- I#; --'
♦
I* -afcr’;
* *
«SfiL
/ *-♦ ■
*
•
•
• .
• •
ft •
ii ■Pr
; •
*
!
*
- ■ » . •
.
ft 1 /
♦
.
* J
•" * •
• ,
/
k
“1
» .
—
i ii inMir 1
•
v T
. ... •
ft
1 *
\ • . *
TCI
•
•
• *
f
- ■
•
ag™
'
• »
•
.
. • »
4
.. . *
. .
%
.
. -
[ *
■
.
4 ' ‘
r “
«*v
■
f ■ . '
1 ’ ' '
S
' M
!•-
*
* * »
1 • • * •
L . • . ■ —. ..
• , . A -ft*
* fc4 *. ]fl


*■


