

R2TO PPrvn
_l„-?SLs>
f\.. T*^




jy / M /•• „ C / tfPXCLf
ftL- /f' 1 ■/ /
/ \'Lst' 7 *^Cy
431
, • >f 1 ’HIP*
THE CONVICT SYSTEM OF VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
Frederick Maitland Innes.*
The spirit of inquiry which so peculiarly distinguishes the present age, and
which is gradually exposing to the test of improved science and philosophy
some of the most important institutions and arrangements of society, has
recently been directed to the detail, operation, and general influence of a
system of convict management, through which, within the space of half a
century, more than a hundred thousand British criminals have been fcom-
mitted to pass, and on which an expenditure approaching to eight millions
sterling has been made. The inquiry, conducted by an able and perse-
vering committee of the House of Commons, has unfolded a compound
rarely paralleled in the history of political combination, whether it be viewed
in itself or in its results. The integrity, however, of the committee has
been questioned; the credibility of the evidence received by them has been
disputed ; and their labours have been exposed to all that sort of opposition
which comes from the boasters of “ practical,” which means partial or
limited, experience; from the opponents of “ theory,” which means any
improvement in the place of existing abuse; and from the claimants of
“ vested interests,” who are the fraction against the whole. It might
perhaps be sufficient to overthrow the defences thus generally character-
ised to state them; but, independently of the dulness of arguing against
folly, and of analysing verbiage, which generally provides its own antidote,
better service may be done by submitting the arrangements of the system
in question, detailing their operation, and characterising their social conse-
quences, as these have respectively struck a very recent and attentive ob-
server.
According to the “ system ” of convict management in operation till
within a very recent date, on the arrival of a transport vessel in Van
Diemen’s Land a return was delivered to the local government by the
surgeon-superintendent of the vessel, showing the number, age, birthplace,
crime, period and place of conviction, sentence, whether married, whether
able to read and write or either, trade, character from the jailer and from
the hulk, alleged qualifications, behaviour on board the transport, with a
reference to each convict. An abstract embracing these particulars was
submitted to the lieutenant-governor, and from him passed to the Assign-
ment Board, a board composed of four officers of the government, not
necessarily or generally all of the police department, whose duties were to
consider the return or abstract in connection with applications for assigned
men or women, wanted either for public (government) or for private ser-
vice. The state of assignment corresponds, in its essential features, to the
state of slavery, and, in reference to the convict, was determined by an econo-
mical demand on the one hand, and by a corresponding supply on the other.
The regulated condition of a felon in assigned service will be most unobjec-
tionably shown in the words of the official memorandum particularising it; and
from this I quote: —“He is required to devote his whole time, and his best
services, from morn to night, to his master. A fixed but limited ration is
* We consider it essential to the interests of truth that a paper of this description should bear
the impress of authority and responsibility; and therefore it appears with the name of the author,
a gentleman who has resided for some years in Van Diemen’s Land, where he was proprietor
and editor of a public journal. En, M. C.


allowed ; and clothing of the commonest description, according to an ap-
pi’oved scale, must be furnished by the master, together with decent
bedding and surgical attendance when required,” &c.
“ Beyond the common necessaries of life, no luxury is authorised by the
government: plain food, and merely such rest as nature and circumstances
require, is all that the convict assigned servant can obtain for his labour;
but his master is bound by government regulations to see that the moral
state is strictly attended to, and he is also compelled to attend divine service
whenever practicable.” The penalties attached to misconduct in assigned
service are imposed by a magistrate, and consist of flogging, solitary con-
finement, being sent to a road party, to a chain gang, and, in extreme cases,
to the penal station of Port Arthur.
Presuming the successful operation of this discipline —so to name it
upon the convict, and that he had escaped magisterial punishment, —if he
were transported for seven years, at the end of the fourth; if for fourteen
years, at the end of the sixth; and if for life, at the end of the eighth year,
—he might receive his ticket of leave. A ticket of leave, according to the
official memorandum, “ entitles the holder to choose his own employment,
and to engage on wages, if he labours for another; and it imposes on him
the obligations of attending divine service weekly, if there be a place of
worship in the district; of being present at occasional musters; and of
confining himself within the bounds of the district, unless where special
leave from the magistrate is given.” The ticket-of-leave man is not held
legally capable of possessing property, and he can neither sue nor be sued.
The tenure by which he holds his indulgence is characterised as “ a slight
one; the condition of holding it (continues the official memorandum) is
such, that the very first conviction of any offence before a magistrate renders
the possessor liable to forfeit it, and be returned to the state of bondage
from which his ticket relieved him.”
With the above outline and definitions, embracing the two prominent
features of this “ system,” and all that (till recently) was necessarily com-
prehended in the general punishment of transportation, I shall be enabled
to proceed intelligibly to the reader. I observe, then, that from the outset
of these arrangements, the supply of labour accommodation to economi-
cal wants not the punishment of the convict, was the object contem-
plated. England, when she sanctioned them, established not so much two
penal as two slave communities; in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land; and the whole character of the results which have followed will be
found to illustrate the parallel. Penal or reformatory efficiency has scarcely
been contemplated; it is invariably lost sight of in the colonies, when you
come to discuss the “system,” even in intelligent circles. I never once
found myself in argument with a colonist of Van Diemen’s Land on the
question, without the discussion degenerating into one of labour supply.
Take the press of the island, the same nearly exclusive prominence is given
to economical, in contradistinction to moral, considerations. Consult even
the reports addressed to the home government in defence of the “system,”
by the officers engaged in its administration; and although there some
caution was obviously imposed, still an undue regard to what has been, and
ought only to be, an incident, is manifest; the incident is magnified into a
primary object.
From the beginning the arrangements in question abandoned the convict
to the chance treatment of settler-masters. The government was left only
a casual part to act in connection with the interests of the criminal, either
in the way of punishment or reform. Regulations might be imposed; but


regulations which embraced some hundred establishments it was vain to
expect would be obeyed. The conditions of three hundred convicts, landed
from the same vessel, might be as various, within a month after their arrival,
as the tempers, caprices, and circumstances of nearly as many masters. Not
only so; the adoption of an economical standard in determining the lots of
the convicts often proved a precise reversal of the order of justice. Suppose
three men, accomplices in the same crime, convicted in the same court, con-
demned to the same punishment. The first is a fellow of bad principle, an
adept in crime, but a clever domestic servant; the second is an out-door
labourer, a modification of the former in point of moral worth; and the third
is a simpleton, neither positively good nor evil, and, substantially, of corre-
sponding value: they arrive in the colony; their destination, under the ar-
rangements detailed, would probably be, the first to be the well-fee’d,
well-fed, well-clad, comfortably-housed servant of an easy-living townsman ;
of the second, the comparatively (to England) trifling labour, the abundant
fare of a settler’s establishment; and of the third, an assignable road party,
where he would enjoy common fare, meet with abandoned associates, sleep
in a gloomy hut with thirty or forty other beings like himself, have to submit
to jokes whose point consists in their brutal indecency, and listen to the ha-
bitual language of blasphemy.* The rogue had thus a sphere provided in
which to practise his villany, and the fool was sent where he could not fail
to be instructed.
Assignment is destitute of every feature calculated to give it preventive
efficiency; it has many features likely to allure to crime. Colonel Arthur,
in his evidence before the Transportation Committee, admitted that it re-
quired a long residence in the colony to discover the severity of assignment,
while he strongly insisted on the fact of that severity. It has thus been in
opposition to the best ends of punishment, which embrace society; it has
failed to produce fear; while it has had the worst effects of punishment which
relate to the criminal, and are involved in the production of an insurgent
spirit incompatible with any thing like reform. Its inefficiency to deter
arises from its physical associations, ordinary labour, plentiful fare, com-
panions, &c.; but its positive cruelty is as certain as its preventive impo-
tence ; and the apparent contradiction is explained by the fact of that
cruelty being of a moral character. From the first the convict is at a loss
to comprehend the justice which gives to an uninjured individual the
benefit of his retributive sufferings. In relation to his master, he does
not feel as perhaps he might in relation to the man he had injured, were
he required to recompense him ; as he probably would under a judicious
system in relation to the government, whose right of coercion can be
readily apprehended: the connection between crime and retribution is
broken by the intervention of a third party, and by the character of the
relationship into which he is introduced to him; and to that party he
feels, not as a humbled and penitent transgressor, but as an injured
slave. The insulting idea degrades him ; incidental mitigations are power-
less in conflict with a social arrangement whose regulations interfere with
his every-day and every-hour existence and agency: he is a slave; and he
revenges himself on his driver by doing as little for him as his own safety
permits, and by doing that little as badly, subject to the same limits, as he
can. I have taken every opportunity in my power to collect the feelings
of these men : it is by them we are to judge the influence of the arrange-
ments in question, and of all corresponding arrangements; and I have been
* I have been shocked at the familiarity with which convicts take the name of God in vain, in
the person of the third in the Trinity.
VOL. V. F F


struck by the familiarity, the readiness, and the varied illustration in which
the obnoxious sentiment in question has been stated; while' its practical
demonstration did not fail to arrest my attention every where. The
physical relations of life are those to which our natures soonest accommo-
date themselves; they are those which least affect our permanent happi-
ness or misery; and yet it is by them we persist in determining the lot of
our fellows its joy or sorrow. This error is a great one ; it led to the
defence of black slavery on the score of humanity, and it disguises the
cruelty, at once useless to society alid ruinous to its outcasts, of white
slavery now.
The inequality of infliction, without any proportion to crime, which
essentially belongs to assignment, renders it severe, without advantage.
Convicts soon learn the different circumstances in which an old shipmate
or companion is placed, and they are irritated by its conceived injustice.
This irritation is perpetually being renewed, and imparts its character to
these men as a class. The assigned servant of a friend in the interior
spent a night in my house, where he acquired some distaste for his master’s
establishment, by seeing the comparatively easy service of the only assigned
man I kept. On going shortly afterwards in my friend’s direction, I was
apprised at a place of stoppage (a friend’s) that the man in question had
produced a day of irritation and indolence there, by his accounts. Such
incidents are worthy of mention, not because they are uncommon, but pre-
cisely the contrary, familiar, and every-day. They are the pervading
effects of a bad “system,” and combine the mischief of a disordered, peevish,
and irritated character in society, with hopeless criminality in the convict.
The cruelty and moral wickedness, as well as the political folly of
assignment, appear in the temptations to which it exposes the convict, the
severity with which the “system” punishes his guilt, and the lottery in
which it involves either his suffering or impunity. Suppose a convict in
domestic service in Hobart Town; suppose the master abides by the
government prohibition of wages. The poor being is, in the midst of the
strongest temptations*, deprived of the means of honestly enjoying any of
them. The town has more than a hundred licensed public-houses, whose
open doors invite him to buy a temporary oblivion to his cares, his mor-
tifications, his degradation ; it has, beside, numerous “ sly grog-shops:” one
or two streets literally forbid the passage of a respectable individual, they
are so tenanted by harlots, whose brazen effrontery is disgusting f; and
the unfortunate convict finds in every town some readily vendible article
which he can carry to one of the many marts for stolen property which the
town supplies, and thereby gratify his solicited appetites. J And what
follows the discovery of his guilt? why, that is a question which requires
the settlement of a preliminary one in order to its determination. Is the
convict a generally useful, though a dishonest, and sometimes drunken,
servant ? The master cannot spare him then; his crime is overlooked.
* Between the arrangements of the assignment system and the crimes most commonly practised,
the connection is as obvious as cause and effect can be. In reply to the question of the Prison
Discipline Society, “ What description of crimes are most prevalent in the colony ? ” the officers
chief in control of the convicts reply, “ Drunkenness, disobedience, idleness, and pilfering.” Are
these not necessary results?
f These women are chiefly importations sent out to purify the community; many of them were
as bad as they could be before their arrival; and others have fallen victims to the influences
abroad.
X Mr. Murdoch, in his evidence before the Transportation Committee, speaking of the female, —
but the remark equally applies to the male, convicts, —justly observes, that their refractoriness is
owing, not to the insignificance of the punishments to which they are exposed, but the intensity of
the temptations by which they are surrounded. (Question 1452.)


no charge is brought against him; a smaller inconvenience, involving crime
and impunity on the part of the convict, is preferred to a greater, the want
of a good servant, by the master. But suppose the convict has committed
himself in such a way as not to escape a constable. Then, if he is of any
value to the master, the latter promptly appears at the police-office th&
following morning, when the man is likely to be brought before the magis-
trate, and the probability is, that by the favourable representations made
of the general conduct of the prisoner, and the entreaties of the master,
who cannot spare him, if his offence is venial, he escapes; if of any mag-
nitude, his punishment is made a brief one. Should the poor fellow,
however, not be of much value economically, no master in all probability
appears; no mitigating circumstances are brought forward in his defence;
no previous good character; — nothing! I gave my assigned servant a holi-
day on one of the days of the races annually held in the neighbourhood of
Hobart, in ignorance that convicts were forbid to be present on those
occasions: he did not return at the appointed hour; he did not return at
all; and as my time was a good deal engaged, I had no leisure to inquire
what had become of him. I procured a ticket-of-leave man in his
place, and quite forgot the other; till about a fortnight afterwards, when
he made his appearance, on questioning him, I found that he had been
arrested on the course, taken before the magistrate, and sentenced to the
treadwheel: his face corroborated, in some measure, his representations
of a discipline, new in his experience. In mitigation, as it were, of his
offence, and in gentle reproach against me, the fellow said, “ Had you only
come to the office in the morning, Sir, I would have got off; there were
numbers in the same way.” He spoke truly; for, I had once been at the
police-office, and got away two pressmen; because pressmen could not be had
otherwise; and such incidents were familiar. In 1838, a striking and
notorious illustration of the “system,” and its accommodation to economical,
and indifference to moral, objects, was furnished. A cook in the employ
of the ex-attorney-general, was convicted of appropriating to himself
monies to a considerable amount (85 1.), which in small sums {every one
of which he had appropriated) had been given him for the purpose of
meeting weekly claims upon his master: his guilt was aggravated by the
fact of his master having, some time before, procured him his emancipation,
and otherwise greatly befriended him: the sentence imposed on the pri-
soner, on two indictments for felony, on both of which he was convicted,
was transportation for fourteen years on each. But it so happened that
the colonial secretary at that time wanted a good cook, and almost before
Clapperton was sentenced, his destination to the service of the officer in
question became known. Within a month from his arrest, this dishonest and
ungrateful servant found himself in the equally comfortable kitchen of a new
master, in the immediate locality of his old place, —in convenient neigh-
bourhood to those who had benefited by the fruits of his guilt, —■ with all
the opportunities of renewed villany, and actually, on his way thither,
entered the house of the ex-attorney-general (his late master), and pro-
claimed to the astonished servants the terms of impunity on which he was
now nearly as well off as before! Cooks being scarce, and Clapperton being
a good cook, constituted a sufficient atonement for Clapperton being a
great thief. Had he been less guilty, but also less valuable, in an
economical sense, his fate would have been the penal station of Port Arthur,
or a .chain gang in the interior.
The Transportation Committee, in their Report*, show, that while in
* Transportation Report, pp. 23, 24.
F F 2


1834 the number of convicts in Van Diemen’s Land was 15,538, and in
1837, 18,000, the number brought before the police was upwards ol
12,000 in the former year, and in the latter 14,000. Of course, many
of these were renewed charges ; so many different persons , it may be con-
cluded, did not appear before the police: but many appeared two, three,
and more times. Yet, gross as is the showing furnished by the returns
quoted by the committee, they may be concluded to fall far short of the
actual crime committed, from causes which have been already stated and
illustrated, and which are comprehended in the general fact of the interests
of a settler, and the duties of a jailer* conflicting.
The government, indeed, required on the part of masters an attention
to the moral improvement of the convicts assigned them: but, even did
social organisation f not do more than neutralise the effect of any moral
teaching, where it is attempted, what security is there for the effort in the
conduct or character of the assignee ? It were too obnoxious a thing for
any Board to undertake minutely to determine whether the character of
a private individual entitled him to have assigned servants or not; and,
that the characters of many to whom the office of jailer is committed in
Van Diemen’s Land do not justify the trust, I shall quote recent and
impartial evidence to show. The True Colonist of February 15th, 1839, in
a lengthened defence of assignment, on the score of moral efficiency, and
financial saving, has this admission coming from a writer of unequalled
local information:
“ It is a fact, which the authorities cannot deny (for I the writer is addressing Lord
Glenelg in his own name have, within this month, shown several instances of it to the
principal superintendent, from documents in his own office), that convicts are often, on
recommendation of the district police magistrates, assigned to persons of known bad cha-
racter, as common thieves or receivers of stolen goods. The Board of Assignment cannot
prevent this, when they get a certificate from the resident police magistrate that the appli-
cant is a proper person to have assigned servants. Nothing can be worse, my lord, than
the manner in which the assignment system has been carried on.”
The writer proceeds to give his suggestions for the amelioration of the
“system:” these consist in an extended, more minute, and obnoxious dis-
cretion. “ Blunder upon blunder has been perpetrated in the arrangements
devised for these colonies; and it is the character of their school of govern-
ment and of politics never to revise principles, but to seek to amend
details ; to be plainer, how to folder, how to stop a leak, how to keep
up the floating carcass of a crazy and diseased system |, betwixt wind and
water, swimming still upon her own dead lees, that is the deep design of
their- politicians.” § It was a very yreen idea (if the expression may be
allowed) from the first, to suppose that men, colonising a new country,
called to put forth all their energies to keep above water, and from cir-
cumstances, in part only indicated, having less of that disinterested sym-
pathy than may perhaps be found in communities differently situated, —
* “ Bentham’s notion, that jailers should possess a personal interest in the reform of the con-
victs under their charge is beautifully realised in Van Diemen’s Land : settler or farmer, his
prosperity depends, not only on the discipline and control, but also, which is more pertinent to the
present question, upon the selection of his servant. ” So says Sir George Arthur !
f For preaching, indeed, is the gift of the Spirit as best seems to his secret will; but discipline
is the practice-work of preaching directed and applied, as is most requisite, to particular duty ;
without which it were all one to the benefit of souls, as it would be to the cure of bodies, if all
the physicians in London should get into the several pulpits of the city, and, assembling all the
diseased in every parish, should begin a learned lecture of pleurisies, palsies, lethargies, to which
perhaps none there present were inclined; and so, without so much as feeling one pulse, or giving
the least order to any skilful apothecary, should dismiss them from time to time, some groaning,
some languishing, some expiring, with this only charge, —to look well to themselves, and do as
they hear ! Milton's Reason of Church Government, booki. chap. i.
| “ Monarchy or State ” (original). § Milton’s « Of Eefornaatiqn in England,” book ii.


would ever very earnestly set about the troublesome office of regulating
the “ moral state” of a parcel of refractory convicts; and, that they did not
do so, involves them in no very serious blame. But what did the govern-
ment ever do for this “ moral state,” respecting which some regard is pro-
fessed? In districts in which hundreds of assigned servants were to be
numbered, no church bell was sounded, and no itinerant ministrations
were in most instances provided; and this state of things yet exists. The
missionary sent out by the Independents in 1838 writes home of a visit
made by him to a district in which there were upwards of two hundred
free persons, and where there must have been a proportional amount of
convicts, in which (the italics are in the original) “ there have been hut three
reliyious services for nine years’’ The dispersion of the convicts occasioned
by assignment incurred the alternative of a most extravagant religious
establishment or a total disregard to the moral improvement and ever-
lasting welfare of those unhappy men. This indifference, however, proved
itself, in time, to involve not the moral interests of the convict only, but the
substantial interests of the settler; and the corrective has been an increas-
ing police establishment, which now costs upwards of 24,000/. yearly. It
is the wind in the fable; the effects of which are to make the convict wrap
himself more closely in his cloak of crime,— assume appearances, while the
disease is raging with greater virulence within. In the latter part of 1837,
an ecclesiastical arrangement was adopted by the legislature of Van
Diemen’s Land, the total omission in which of all reference to, or provi-
sion for, the spiritual interests of the most needy, and the class whose
claims were otherwise most imperative, is in keeping with the arrange-
ments of the convict “system,” and in harmony with the conclusion that, as
moral agents, the unhappy objects of that “ system,” are not recognised.
The act* in question engages the erection of a church, and the support of
a minister, on conditions, one of which is, in the country districts, the sub-
scription of eighty free adult persons, residing within a radius of ten miles,
to a declaration that they frequent, or intend to frequent, such place of
worship; which must belong to one of three denominations, Episcopalian,
Presbyterian, Roman Catholic. But there may be seventy only f, of either
of the denominations in question, with, however, five hundred convicts; and
still no provision can be claimed by this act. Here we have religion
ministered to those who can receive it with pomp or external decency; here
it is virtually denied to the poor, the naked, the blind, and the miserable.
Worse than Lazarus, they are denied the bread of life which he mingled
with the crumbs from Dive’s table. “ The whole head is sick, and the whole
heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no sound-
ness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; they have not
been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.” The
picture is a melancholy one for a Christian people to contemplate, and a
Christian country to have so long sanctioned.
The good which a well-disposed master, taking a religious interest in his
convict servant, may do, is nearly certain to be obliterated in the subsequent
experiences of the individual. I knew one who, by judicious management,
had impressed his servant beneficially; the man however was, from changes
in the assignee’s establishment, removed into the interior. Seeing him
* In referring to the ecclesiastical arrangement above, I commit myself to no opinion of its
merits in the design of embracing the religious interests of the free population, and only remark on
its entire neglect of the convict as a religious or moral agent.
•f - It is perhaps obvious enough, without specific reference, that the provision above referred
to does not comprehend eighty persons , but eighty of one denomination. The distinction is im-
jnaterial.
F F 3


there, the] latter accosted him at the door of his employer’s farm-servants’
hut, expressing his hope that he attended to the counsel which had often
been tendered him, kept from vice, and escaped censure. The poor fellow
replied with a shake of his head, and an expression of remorse, looking
in at the hut door, “ that it would be a difficult thing for a man to keep
right there.” Indeed, that was sufficiently apparent; for there were half a
dozen “old hands” exchanging their lewd jests, and the hut was an almost •
nightly scene of promiscuous intercourse with an assigned female in the
master’s house hard by.
Assignment, viewed in relation to female convicts, is as bad, —if possible,
worse, than in relation to the male. Should the destination of one of these
women be the country, an application is first made to the Assignment
Board, and an order is thence received on the female factory. I was
commissioned by a friend in the interior on an errand of this kind, exactly
twelve months from the time at which I now write. I had in town a gig
belonging to my friend, and an assigned farm servant, a man of bad cha-
racter, who had frequently come under local sentence, was sent to take the
vehicle back, and in it the female for whom application was to be made.
Having driven to the factory, I was there shown a list by the superin-
tendent, and at length, from a number, older and younger than each other,
in crime as well as years, one was procured. Having attired herself with
some respectability for her station, she was committed to the protector,
whose character has been given, for a journey of between two and three
days’ duration, through a thinly-peopled country, many miles of which the
pair must have travelled without meeting a soul. This was punitive and
moral discipline! It could not surprise me, a few weeks after, to learn
that, beside having arrived in very tattered garments (the others had
probably been sold on the way), the female in question was the brute
property of five or six men on the farm. In one sense it might,
but in another it did not, surprise me, some months later, to learn
that it had become necessary to dispense with her services, and to’
send her away to —. Her place I found, on my next visit, supplied
by an old woman, ugly as sin; ugly, with indecency in the character of her
ugliness; who was generally understood, even by the young females of the
house, to have been at one tipe (whether in the condition of a ticket-of-
leave holder in the colony, I could not ask) the keeper of a house of ill-
fame. Such is the common character, and the too frequent condition, of
convict females in the interior of Van Diemen’s Land; a character and
condition gross and demoralising, but entailing less inconvenience upon the
assignee there than in the towns. In towns masters are perpetually changing
their female assigned servants: nearly one half of the time of these women is
passed in satisfying local sentences. Even in establishments controlled by
government, in which responsible officers are employed, and where some
degree of system may therefore be presumed, effects are the same. The
Queen’s orphan schools in Van Diemen’s Land are supported at an ex-
pense of nearly 6000 Z. annually; their objects are the support and education
of destitute children of both sexes, the offspring indifferently of free or
convict parents: the average number in the institution is about 500;
250 of these are generally estimated as convict offspring, and of this
number the great proportion is illegitimate. From the Report of a Com-
mittee of Inquiry (in the latter part of 1837), consisting, among other
public officers and private individuals, of the chief police magistrate, the
colonial treasurer, and the attorney-general, the two former warm de-
fenders of assignment, some useful hints and illustrations may be gathered,


bearing immediately and generally on the question in review. I begin
with the following: •
“We cannot adduce stronger evidence of the necessity which exists for putting an end
to the employment of convict women in the institution, than that which is afforded by the
principal superintendent’s return now before us, by which it appears that in three years
terminating on the 10th of June, 1837, no less than‘l23 female convict servants have been
sent from the factory to the Queen’s orphan schools. Ten of them are there now (the
number to be kept up was fifteen) ; but the frequency of change manifested by the return,
added to the detailed history of each woman’s offences, which another return we have
received from the chief police magistrate exhibits, proves, beyond all doubt, the demoral-
ising consequences which may be expected to arise to the children of the institution from
coming in daily contact with servants of such abandoned character. Had we not seen the
return, with the names and particulars of each woman’s case, we should scarcely have
credited the statements we have received as to the extent of the danger of contamination.”
In a previous page the Report has these testimonies to the baneful in-
fluence of female assignment on the rising members of society,
“ At an early period after my appointment to the superintendence of the institution
(this is the evidence of the superintendent, quoted by the committee), I found an utter dis-
regard of truth and honesty amongst the children of both schools ; and disclosures were
made evidencing that they were well tutored in vice and cunning. Upon tracing this to its
source, I found, by the admission of the persons who had been previously in charge, as
well as by that of the children themselves, that contact with the prisoner servants had
mainly prevented their moral improvement, and tended to confirm any bad habits which the
children might have brought with them.”
Again, the committee report
“ It appears also (as might be expected) that licentious and profane language has been
frequently used by the female convicts. It further appears that there have been some
instances of intoxication among the girls (children), the cause of which was traced to the
introduction of spirits by the convict servants. Mr. Naylor, moreover, mentions an instance
of one of the convict women having been dismissed from the institution for having got into
one of the boy’s beds.”
The foregoing are illustrations, furnished with the frugality of a Board,
and commented on with the mildness to be expected from the defenders of a
“ system ” whose effects they were obliged to record. And yet how con-
clusive the condemnation which the details of the Report pronounce ! I
cannot afford, however, to dismiss this document yet, and I borrow one
more passage from it the grave recommendation of the committee,
which is
“ In the event of children above five years of age entering the school, whose conduct or
language denotes a depraved character, some provision should be made for them by the
appropriation of a separate school-room, play-ground, and dormitory.”
Provision for the moral ablution of the tainted victims, of five years of
age, of a defended “ system ! ”
Hired service is rendered degrading, and thereby becomes demoralising,
in relation to the free *, under the influence of assignment. A free man or
woman, entering into employment, finds no distinction by which the one
or the other can be known from the bond; no difference of treatment
can be pursued in an establishment where the two classes are met; and
* This is corroborated by a writer, whose testimony to the fact I adopt: “ Ticket-of-leave
men, as they are now denominated, whether as superintendents or other servants, are preferable for
employment to low freemen, who, in consequence of the want of power in their masters to control
them, become often insufferable. The free low-born European soon acquires a thorough acquaint-
ance with the evil practices of the convict, and speedily becomes as little worthy of confidence;
while at the same time he imbibes such ideas of liberty, equality, and independence (in which he is
borne out by the government and by the courts of justice), that he is found to be afterwards com-
pletely incapacitated for the situation of a subordinate.”— Ob ervations on New South Wales and
Van Diemen's Land, by Henderson. Calcutta.
F F 4


thus identified, the free compensate themselves for the disgrace by the
licence of the other class. They become even worse; for, without any
moral or social influence to deter them, they are also free from the restraint
of regulation.
And the “ system” of assignment continues to exert its evil influence
over the whole course of the convict’s subsequent career. Trained under it
as a child, fed, clothed, housed, acting in social relations, yet required in
them to preserve no foresight, —equally deprived of the possibility of being
frugal or extravagant, —when he becomes free he has only the capacities
of a child, for the duties of a man. This is the consequence of the econo-
mical features of assignment, as much, or perhaps more, than of its moral,
as the above indicates; but the evil goes further. In the service of a
settler, the convicts’ huts are not generally most decent or cleanly*, and
their persons correspond. Housed together in groups or parties, there is
no individual feeling sufficiently strong to secure the first; and its neglect
will any where entail the omission of the other, even did not the omission in
Van Diemen’s Land more palpably evince itself as the necessary effect of a
service from which wages are excluded, and in which consumable enjoy-
ments are too liberally, both in kind and quantity, afforded. Mr. Malthus,
in his second volume on population, has a passage which receives its illus-
tration in many characteristic features, in Van Diemen’s Land.
“ It seems (says he) to be proved by experience that the labouring classes of society
seldom acquire a decided taste for conveniences and comforts till they become plentiful,
compared with food, which they never do till food has become in some degree scarce. If
the labourer can obtain the full support of himself and family by two or three days’ labour,
he will; and if to furnish him with conveniences and comforts, he must work three or four
days more, he will generally think the sacrifice too great compared with the objects to be
attained, which are not strictly necessary to him ; and will, therefore, often prefer the luxury
of idleness to the luxury of improved lodging and clothing.”
In the penal colonies, men systematically trained in the abundant gratifica-
tion of their grosser wants, and in the negligent provision of the “conveniences
and comforts” of good housing and clothing, when they come to receive
wages, instead of accumulating money, or indulging the salutary pride
which induces an English peasant to clothe himself with neatness and clean-
liness, spend it on “ sprees,” in which are included eating, drinking, and
debauchery.f Here is one vice/correcting another ; the vice of a dissipated
and gross habit correcting the vice of indolence. We have the labourer, be
he emancipist or freeman, —for all acquire the same character, —passing
through alternations of excessive labour and excessive dissipation. The
effect predicated by Mr. Malthus is modified, if not checked, by the action
of another cause ; his principle, nevertheless, remains (generally) illustrated.
* Bentham, in his Panopticon, prescribes details, which he premises “ are not dignified in them-
selves, but receive a dignity from the object proposed.” Among these are, a clean though coarse
dress, hair short, regular use of the bath, prohibition of tobacco, and every custom contrary to the
practice of the best-ordered houses ; ” and he finely observes on these minute provisions, “ An
attention to cleanliness is a security against indolence ; it accustoms the mind to circumspection,
and teaches us to extend, even to the smallest things, a regard to decency. Moral and physical
purity have a common language. We cannot praise one of these virtues, without a part of this
praise being reflected on the other. Hence those minute rules of purification and ablution, to
which the founders of the religions of the East have attached such importance. Those who have
no faith in the spiritual efficacy of these sacred rites will not'deny their external influence. Ab-
lution is a type; may it also be a prediction.” The remark finds a negative illustration in as-
signment.
f “ 1521. I suppose, in a colony where wages are so high, freemen were disinclined to under-
take laborious and irksome operations ?—They had no objection to laborious operations, if they were
not constant operations; but they like to go and have a spree, as they called it, every month or
so, after they collected 20/. or 30/., to go to Hobart Town, and spend it in rum and women.”— Mr.
Murdoch's Evidence bef r» the Transportation Committee,


The fact that convicts have accumulated immense wealth is no contradiction
of what I have laid down; —it is an exception ; and, considering the numbers
attached to that class, and the opportunities of acquiring money and pro-
perty in the penal colonies, a rarely illustrated one.
The assignment “ system” has been the pretext employed in justification
of a discretionary government, whose distinct impress is the most obnoxious
feature in the character of society in Van Diemen’s Land. Deprived, by this
“system,” of a control calculated to benefit the unfortunate convict, the govern-
ment possessed itself of a discretion most obnoxious in its manifestations to
the free community, and fruitful in jealousies, animosities, and bickerings ; a
discretion which penetrates the establishment and the domestic arrangements
of individuals, and turns the testimony of felons into a ground for annoying
freemen and exposing their private relations. In Van Diemen’s Land, for
a long period, a spy system was kept on foot, which reflected all its wickedness
on the character of society. When this could no longer be permitted, when
it ceased to be systematic , it did not, however, cease to be incidental; and whe-
ther the interpretation were correct or not, so sure it was said as an indivi-
dual happened to be in collision with the government, at any particular time,
so sure was he to receive some intimation or other connected with his convict
servants, from the Assignment Board. A friend, who did not impose on
me the obligation of withholding his name, gave me some of these notes in
May last. That which I shall give is rather an amusing rencontre , in which
the Board comes off second best:
“ The Board request Doctor linlay will be so good as to furnish them, as early as pos-
sible, with a list of the names and ships of all his assigned servants employed at his whaling
stations on the coast, should Doctor Imlay have convicts there employed.
“ Board of Assignment,
“ 17th July, 1838.”
“ Mr. Imlay will be happy to furnish any information to the Board of Assignment re-
specting the employment of his assigned servants, and has given directions to the superin-
tendent of his farm at Forrester’s Peninsula to transmit a return of his assigned servants on
that farm, the whale fishery at that spot being the only one to which any of his assigned
men could have access, but, before producing this return, Mr. Imlay expects that the
Board will call for a similar return from Messrs. M‘Lachlan, Ker, Alexander, and Co.,
A. Morrison, Petchey, Hewitt, and Kelly, who have whaling stations on the coast.
“ July 24th, 1838.”
“ The Board, in reply to Dr. Imlay’s letter of the 24th instant, beg to acquaint him that
it is as unusual as it is inadmissible for any settler to impose, as he does, conditions on the
Board previous to supplying them with any information they may require on the subject of
their assigned servants.
“ The Board therefore request that Dr. Imlay will be pleased forthwith to furnish, as
requested in the Board’s letter of the 17th instant, a list of his assigned servants employed
on the whaling grounds at Forrester’s Peninsula, or elsewhere upon the coast.
“ The Board beg further to observe that it is not courteous towards them to presuppose
that they were about to adopt a measure which was not to apply equally to all persons
engaged in the whale fishery upon the coast.
“ Board of Assignment,
“ 26th July, 1838.”
IV.
“ Mr. Imlay regrets to find that the Board of Assignment has misapprehended the pur-
port of his note of the 24th instant, transmitted on his return to town, in reply to the
Board’s note of the 17th instant.
“ Mr. Imlay disclaims the most distant intention of imposing conditions in furnishing any
information which the Board might call for respecting his assigned servants ; but with refer-
ence to his conversation with the principal superintendent on the subject, who, in his usual


candid and straightforward manner, informed Mr. Imlay that the return was required in
consequence of notice given to the Board, or some of its members, that Mr. Imlay’s fishery
at Forrester’s Peninsula was composed of his assigned servants, with two or three ex-
ceptions, and that they were even employed as headsmen of whale-boats ; which state-
ments Mr, Imlay at once, in the presence of Captain Cheyne, declared to be at variance
with the fact. The Board will also find that Mr. Imlay did not presuppose the measure
adopted; but in the principal superintendent’s office was actually informed that the Board
was not even aware of the names of the persons engaged in the whale fishery upon its
coast, which was the sole reason which induced him to communicate to the Board the con-
cluding paragraph of his note, considered as uncourteous ; and he did so under the impres-
sion, that in the impartial conduct of the members of the Board, as exhibited in the com-
munications and conferences which he has had the honour to hold with them, he would find
in this case an ample guarantee that they would not exact from him information which they
would not equally require from others similarly situated with himself.”
“ Campbell Street,
“July 27th, 1838.”
Dr. Imlay, at the period of this correspondence, was in collision with the
government respecting the boundaries of a property belonging to him; in
which the point being referred to the Caveat Board, a board of equity,
established by local enactment, —it was virtually taken out of the Board’s
hands. The only decision which the government would sanction was com-
municated to it, and the case in the issue was adjudicated against him.
How natural is the process which connects one dispute with another,
and one annoyance with another, under a discretionary administration of
affairs.
I have far from embraced all the arguments, both in theory and practice,
which condemn the crude “ system ” under discussion ; but I think I have
embraced enough to justify the analogy I have alleged it bears to slavery.
Here we have the convict like the negro, it may be, physically better off
than the free labourer, but degraded in his own eyes, and in the estima-
tion of others miserable , while the process of his destruction, his misery,
and his degradation, passes for actual benevolence! Here, as there, we
find the standard of estimation applied to a fallen, yet not hopeless, crea-
ture, and, under all circumstances, a being stamped with his Maker’s
image, and destined to survive time, the same which regulates the pur-
chase of a horse, or the disposal of an ox! “ The greatest villain in a
moral respect,” writes an opponent* of black slavery in 1824, “may be,
and sometimes is, the most valuable slave; the natural consequence of
which is, that the negroes, as a people, are as destitute of correct morality as
they are of liberty.” Precisely the effect pourtrayed by the most intelligent
and competent observersf of things in the penal colonies; while the
analogy in the cause is, without any equivocation, employed in vindication
of assignment by the most strenuous supporter of that “ system ” “He
(the assignee,,says Colonel Arthur}) acts under a similar inducement with
that which prompts him to break in the colt he intends for a riding-
horse.” As black slavery was defended on the score of its lenient execu-
tion, so now is white; as there, so here, executive ameliorations have been
substituted for systematic correction ; but the force of the principle in both
cases has been found to survive the changes in the arrangements embodying it;
and in the systematic character of its effects the condemnation of the prin-
ciple is pronounced, and its hopeless iniquity shown, in spite of incidental
mitigations. Identity of interest was contended for, as the security of the
slave; and here the convict fares the worse: he is a temporary property,
and the permanent value of the animal is sacrificed to his temporary use
as a beast of burden. In the penal, as in the slave colonies, the process of
* Mr. Cooper. t Captain Maconochie, Dr. Lang.
$ Observations on Secondary Punishments, p. 26.


demoralisation applied to its victims has been justified by its effects; and
men brutalised, it has been contended, should be dealt with as brutes: they
were made what they were; and they ought to be kept so, because they were
so. There is the logic of the argument. As in the one instance, so I have
shown in the other, hired service has been degraded, in relation to the free,
by its compulsory character on the bond; and the latter being identified
in outward position with the former, the former again have identified them-
selves with the vices of the other. It is beside my purpose to show that
the analogy is economical as well: let it suffice that it is so ; the labour of
a convict in assigned service being in the same proportion in value to that
of a free labourer as that of a slave has been found.* And this whole
discussion has been characterised, like that on black slavery, by the same
forward contempt for the conclusions of a science founded on human
nature, not on any particular exhibition of it; and the same absurd claims
for local observation, and executive experience, in the one instance as in
the other. The last defence of a threatened edifice of corruption has been
appealed to, and “ vested rights ” have even been contended for, in the
perdition of British convicts as of negro slaves; but the assumption is too
gross to have fared otherwise than it has. The axe is at the root of the
detestable upas; the abominable iniquity has received its condemnation ;
and the greater wonder is, that in an age like this it should so long have
escaped. It is a reflection on the science, on the humanity, on the religion
of England; a lamentable demonstration of the wisdom of practical men,
and a lesson of caution before committing to a distant legislation British
interests so liable to be brought in competition with local. I have termed
the crude mixture of incapacity and sin a “system;” but I have felt all
along, in applying the substantive, that I erred against the proper meaning
of words. It merits no such distinction, and I now explain the licence by
alleging its convenience.
Having discussed the question of assignment, the only punishment
applied till recently, and the only moral machinery employed in reference
to three fourths of the criminals sent out by the mother-country for offences
strictly British, I desire now to direct attention to other incidents and
arrangements in the convict system; in the review of which a solution will
be furnished to the problem, how, consistently with the showing of the
preceding pages, assignment has been so much defended. The vindica-
tion has in every instance been on grounds purely comparative. Towards
the end of April, 1839, immediately before leaving Van Diemen’s Land, I
requested from the acting superintendent of convicts an order to inspect
the arrangements of the Penitentiary, Hobart Town, which request he
politely acknowledged by accompanying me through the establishment, and
affording every satisfaction in his power to my inquiries. I applied at the
same time to Mr. Spode, the acting chief police magistrate, for an admission
to the female factory, and from him I received the same prompt attention
as from Mr. Gunn, the officer before alluded to, in the shape of an order on
the resident head of that institution. And lastly, from Captain Cheyne,
the intelligent and excellent director-general of roads and bridges, I
received a letter to the superintendents on the roads, directing them to
afford me every facility in examining the apparatus, and learning the
operations pursued by the parties there. The result of my inquiries and
inspection, in the respective quarters mentioned, I recorded with pencil at
the time, and subsequently transcribed at length. I may, perhaps, be
* See Hodgson on Slave Labour, and Report of the Director-General of Roads, Van Diemen’s
Land, on Transportation.


deemed unnecessarily minute in this preliminary explanation, but my
desire that nothing affirmed may be exposed to the doubt attached to a
heedless record, is the sufficient reason which I offer.
The Penitentiary is designed to receive all male prisoners on their first
landing in the colony. New arrivals are kept apart from those already in
the establishment. From the Penitentiary they are distributed in assigned
service, and on the roads; those only being retained for whom there is
government employment in and about Hobart. During hours of leisure,
with the above temporary distinction only, the men are flocked indis-
criminately together youth, age, the old convicted, and the young in
crime, the simpleton, and the adept. The day on which I visited the
Penitentiary being rainy, the men attached to the works in the neighbour-
hood were loosely associated in the dinner-hall, to the number of some
hundreds idle. The religious provision attached to the Penitentiary is a
simple attendance on Church of England prayers, and in a church frequented
equally by the free population. No clergyman comes in personal contact
with the prisoners. The separation in the sleeping wards between the
beds consists of nothing more than a board, scarcely more in breadth than
is necessary to keep one from rolling upon another during sleep: the wards
contained divisions for forty men, and under; a lamp is kept burning at
night, and a watchman sleeps in each ward. The overseers attached to
the working parties belong to the class of prisonez*s; and their general
moral chai’acter was described as bad. There is no established standard of
punishment for offences; it is discretionary, and rests with the super-
intendent, who is a justice of the peace; he is determined in apportioning
punishment by his knowledge of the character of the offender his greater
susceptibility to one or another form of it. The solitary cells are unac-
companied by labour, and are generally dreaded; flogging was found to
harden most men, and, therefore, is comparatively seldom inflicted. I
asked Mr. Gunn, with some apology for putting the question, whether he
had ever studied criminal treatment as a science; at which he smiled,
ridiculed “ theory,” praised “ practice,” and assured me that for the many
years he had been in that institution he had never read one work on
the subject, excepting a Report, circulated among the officers of his depart-
ment by the lieutenant-governor, relating to the separate and silent systems,
a few months previously. In reply to an interrogatory on another point —•
the reformability, &c. of convicts Mr. Gunn shook his head, and doubted
the effects of any system, in a general sense, proving really reformatory:
he had seen very, very few instances which he could refer to in that sense.
I inquired whether there was much sympathy of feeling, freemasonry, or
esprit-de-corps among the convicts; to which Mr. Gunn replied, by stating
the celerity with which a report, involving the interests of the class, or of
individuals in it, was communicated through the colony; and adding that
measures could often be scarcely put in motion for the conviction of
under-hand offenders at a distance, before they were fully prepared to
baffle them ! prepared from a distance, sometimes, of nearly 100 miles !
In reply to a third question, whether attention was paid to the recrimin-
ations of the convicts among themselves, I was informed in the negative;
wffiich Mr. Gunn justified, by alleging that he would have nothing else to
do, were he to attend to such complaints. I visited the treadwheel, the
cells, bakehouse, &c. on the establishment. The first seemed to keep in
motion a good many culprits; the second, as I have already said, were
described as very effective; and of the last, as of all the other physical
arrangements here —in themselves I can only say that it was good.


There were few sick, and the health maintained, every thing considered,
I found to be tolerable.
Mr. Gunn, who has been long over this part of the convict establishment,
is an indefatigable, a benevolent, and excellent officer. The pity is, that
one whose character is composed of features so valuable should have a
“system” to carry out more powerful in itself for evil than his personal
qualities can ever be able to make it for good. His contempt for science
in penal arrangements is no reflection upon him, but exhibits the school in
which he has been trained the whole school of penal wisdom in the
colonies. His shrug of the shoulder, and shake of the head, at the question
as to convict reclamation, afford a twofold lesson; they instruct us that the
executors of the “system” are animated by low objects, and that their
arrangements are only calculated to secure such. “ Practical” men are apt
to measure the attainable by what they realise; to reduce their object to that
standard; to condemn as visionary arrangements which aspire after any thing
higher, and to blame poor human nature for the consequences of their own
bungling or empiricism. “ The progress of society is retarded by nothing
more than by the low views which its leaders are accustomed to take of
human nature.” The remark is Dr. Channing’s, and it comprehends
every machinery designed to operate on man as a moral and intelligent
agent.
The average number of females in the factory (an establishment cor-
responding to the Penitentiary) I learned, from the superintendent, to be
between two and three hundred. At the period of my visit there were 275.
Of this number, all except one (Miss Julia Newman) were sent there under
local sentence. Separation is maintained between those who are assign-
able, those who have undergone sentence, and are again assignable,
and those who are under punishment: the two first are associated, the
latter are kept by themselves: the one class is engaged in easy employ-
ment about the establishment; the other at spinning, the washtub, &c.
Three fourths of the women then under punishment had been, in the
opinion of the superintendent, there before. This illustrates what dread is
entertained for the place: women smile at being sent there; some even
commit offences for the purpose. When sentenced by a police magistrate to
the tub for a certain time, they are often heard to exclaim, “ I’ll soon
bowl that out!” They have the association of numbers like themselves,
and the work imposed on them is uncared for. The solitary cells (I was
informed by the superintendent) alone were dreaded; no punishment was
felt so severely. The officer in question remarked to me, with much deci-
sion, his conviction, that long sentences were highly prejudicial: they
ceased after a while to be felt as severe, while, in the process of their
operation, they hardened their victims. The old women in the fac-
tory, of whom there were several, were pointed out to me as by far the
worst. Forty or fifty females had been sent, during the preceding year,
to be delivered ol illegitimate offspring at the institution; many more
had been sent to the Launceston factory. Mr. Hutchinson, the super-
intendent (who is a Wesleyan preacher), had seen one or two women of
this class die penitent; but he shook his head incredulously at my inter-
rogatories respecting the tendency of the system generally. The factory is
attended every Sabbath by a clergyman of the Church of England, and
by a Roman Catholic priest; and their labours, accompanied by the distri-
bution of a few bibles, tracts, &c., constitute the medicament by which the
redemption of these poor lost creatures is looked for, in defiance of the
hostile power of promiscuous association, circumstances of intense trial and


temptation, long and cheerless processes of punishment and degradation,
unrelieved by hope; for every object of hope is placed at too remote a
distance for it to act on the life. A flickering taper, every moment liable
to be blown out, is thus expected to dispel the thickest darkness; an infant’s
arm to break the moral antitype of a Hercules’ strength; the cold, wishy-
washy discourse of a once-a-week sermoniser to put to flight the deli-
berately concentrated and interwoven strength of sin ! God forbid that I
should question the power of religious truth; but I do doubt the virtue
of the mere letter, —of the letter contradicted with refined care, in the
spirit of social arrangement. But the foregoing is the consistent illus-
tration of Australian penal science. When I fancy to myself a poor being,
probably of some religious education in youth, but by crime engendering
crime, reduced to the condition of a convict in Van Diemen’s Land, on
some occasion or other, by a sentiment often impressed in earlier years,
by a text frequently quoted to him then, by a parable familiar to his
memory, or coming home to his experience, suggested by the preacher;
when I conceive to myself the moving power in his soul of such an in-
fluence; when I enter into the silent invocation of the penitent to the
Father of Grace and Mercy, and am made to appreciate his wishes and
resolves, and then again, after a short lapse, am made to see the invincible
power of sin-concentrating arrangements upon his habits and his history, I
am reminded, in the difficulties with which exhorted virtue is encompassed,
of the fate of Tantalus, his appetite ever solicited by lovely fruits,
which there was a physical or moral impossibility interposed between him
and the enjoyment of. The “ system ”is a machine contrived to make the
sense the traces of virtue in the mind—>a burden or an incubus; its
arrangements necessitate guilt, which its incidental moral teachings, while
they are powerless to prevent, are yet capable of punishing with remorse
and misery.
The road-stations, to visit which I availed myself of Captain Cheyne’s
letter, were those of Green Ponds, Spring Hill, Snake Banks, and Perth.
I was regulated in the choice by no previous bias or prejudice, but by the
convenience of a journey to the northern side of the island.
The men at the Green Ponds station, I found, were assignable; their
average number 160. The huts in which they slept and fed were of the
most rude description, something like inferior barns or stables; the floor
being earth-hardened, and the roofs thatch. Such is the general character
of the road-huts; but I shall particularise as I proceed. The first dormitory
I entered was intended for forty-nine men: the number actually in it
Varied. It was kept (as all are) locked at night, and (as some are) dark.
No watch was kept within; but I was informed that the cook, or some
other prisoner-officer on the station, having a greater stake than the con-
victs generally, was usually looked to for the exposure of any thing out-
rageously bad. I was also given to understand that, in case of sudden
and serious illness, the watchman, who walked up and down without the
hut, was informed from within ; that he again apprised the resident (convict)
surgeon, who used his discretion in attending the patient immediately, or
not, where he suspected the reality of his sickness. A fire was kept burning
during the night. There were other dormitories for smaller parties, the
individuals composing which were determined by some standard of good
conduct. No prayers or daily service was kept up here; but a clergyman
of the Church of England visited the station three times in the week,
including Sunday. Offences committed on the station, I was further
informed, were punished by the sentence of the visiting magistrate, whose


residence was not far distant. The police character, which generally em-
braces breaches, not average conduct, had a considerable part in deter-
mining punishment. I met here a prisoner employed in some particular
service on the station, in whom I was led to take some interest, on learning
the place of his nativity and his relations, known to me by name: from this
man, who possessed superior intelligence, I received most dreadful accounts
of the corruption and brutality which passed under his notice.
Spring Hill, the next station I visited, was intended for a force •of 200
men, not in chains, but under local sentence. The huts I found easy of
access or escape, by the roof: my rough notice on this place was “ miser-
able hole:” its situation was the declivity of a steep hill. In the huts, I
was informed, the men slept and fed as well. No light or fire was kept
here, as at Green Ponds, by night (this matter, I was informed the
government memorandum nevertheless rested with the superintendent).
I visited an edifice used as a chapel: the overseer, who had been on the
station for three months, informed me, that during that time no clergyman
had performed service. There was a morning service, however, daily,
which, I was told, required so much time as was occupied in its perform-
ance to be taken from the men’s sleep: the service used was that of the
Church of England, after which a chapter w T as generally read. On Sabbath
sermons were delivered in the forenoon and afternoon, from a book pub-
lished by the Religious Tract Society: the officiate was an officer on the
station, whose aspect and tongue did not give promise of very effective
teaching. There were, in an apartment adjoining the chapel, some books,
which were lent to the men on Saturday, and returned on Sunday even-
ings : I numbered among them Paley’s Natural Theology, Seeker’s Lec-
tures on the Catechism, Beauties of Dwight, Abbott’s Works, Tract
Society’s Publications, Penny Magazine, and sundry others, chiefly of a
religious character, making, in all, about ten dozen books and tracts.
The average number on the Snake Banks station, which was just on the
eve of being broken up, and the men removed to a different place on the
road, was little more than a hundred. The dormitories, fitted for the
number of forty men, were included in a confined space, and in structures
corresponding to those at the other stations. No watch was kept inside at
night; light occasionally. Every morning Church of England prayers were
read by a prisoner, who had undergone his sentence, but was retained for
that and other purposes. There were only two solitary cells, and sup-
posing more than two men were convicted of the same offence on the
station, it was necessary, on the surplus number, to inflict a different punish-
ment from solitary confinement, —it might be flogging, or to be at the
trouble, expense, loss of time, &c., to send them a distance of ten miles to
another station, to undergo the same penalty there. The station, on Sun-
days, I was informed, was visited by a catechist (lay preacher), who read the
Church of England service, and addressed the prisoners extempore. I had
some conversation here with the surgeon a convict; he gave me the
history of his misfortunes: he had married early, lost his wife, fallen into
dissipation into crime, was transported. In reply to my inquiries, after
a good deal of hesitation and reserve, he assured me of the crime and ob-
scenity perpetrated in the huts; in a feeling, though still diffident manner,
he described his alarm and disgust, when for some time he was obliged to
witness the scenes there passing; I remember well, the poor fellow saying,
“ I would have given all I was ever worth to have found a place by myself.”
He assured me of the pernicious effects of association, physical as well as
moral, which came under his notice, especially from culprits of extreme


ages being mingled together. I was much affected by this man’s conver-
sation, and, as I gave him my hand in departing, could not fail marking his
subdued spirit subdued by a word of kindness, and an expression of good
will. Few are the sympathies such unfortunates meet; the executors of the
“ system” in question, and those who witness its operations, stand as dry-
rocks to them, hardened, callous, indifferent; and they become petrified in
return, panoplied alike against heaven or hell! inaccessible alike to hope
or fear!
The Perth station I found to be superior to any of the previous in its
physical arrangements; and it embraced a chain gang, a road party, and
a mechanic party; each of which was kept apart from the other, but ra-
tioned, &c. alike : the number of men was nearly three hundred. Prayers
were read daily, and a clergyman preached at the station every Sabbath.
The diseases most prevalent here (as at all the stations) were diarrhoea,
dysentery, ophthalmia. The solitary cells, though recently erected, and
apparently designed for permanent purposes, were very close; the stench, on
opening the doors of one or two, which were occupied, I found to be intole-
rable. It was some time before I discovered how fresh air could enter. In
making inquiries as to the crimes of some who were under sentence to this
punishment, 1 was amused in learning, in reference to one man, that he was
there as an hospital patient; being a notorious runaway, a cell was deemed
the most suitable place for him.—There was science here certainly !
My space is circumscribed; I therefore, as briefly as possible, sum up
the testimony contained in the preceding pages. The influence of the con-
vict system upon its immediate subjects is inexpressibly cruel, capricious,
deteriorating; upon the free labouring classes even worse, in some respects,
than upon the bond, because not counteracted in their case by those causes
which restrict it in the other; upon the better classes of the community it
needs some discrimination in the statement.
1. In estimating the social features of the community in Van Diemen’s
Land, we ought to bear in mind that it is a colonial community, and in re-
ferring effects to their causes, we ought not to attribute to the convict
system effects that are common to all similar societies effects owing to
colonial causes alone.
2. In reference to Van Diemen’s Land, we are to remember that the
convict system has not been so Jong in operation there as in New South
Wales; that a society has not had time to grow up under its operation ; con-
sequently, that a social effect produced by it can there scarcely be predi-
cated.
Colonial communities are made up of elements , in which generally the
same stability is not found as in the elements of an old society; they are
themselves the communities not so much under the influence of esta-
blished interests and relationships as older communities. The nature of an
old society is to establish relationships, to equalise profits, to give certainty
to business; the nature of a new society is to afford opportunities of exces-
sive profits, to make business fluctuating, fortunes rapid either in acquire-
ment or loss; and the effect of these incidents again is to intoxicate
society, to weaken moral feelings, &c. We are not to allege against the
convict system the production of such effects as these, nor subsequent
effects of the same genera they are colonial.
The character of convicts is of a decided, unqualified, and gross descrip-
tion, embracing those elements which the vulgar part (an expression used in
contradistinction to our refined perceptions) of our moral nature repels;
and from which, consequently, least danger of contagion is to be appre-


bended. We ought not, therefore, to look for the effects of the convict
system in such characters, especially, as I have hinted, in a community not
born and traitied under their influence.
The influence of the convict.system of Van Diemen’s Land has been, and
is, the influence of its arrangements ; not of the convicts, but of the system.
This is a distinction which has been overlooked in the estimate formed of
the better classes of the free society of Van*Diemen’s Land; and a dis-
tinction which, had it been preserved, would have obviated in the mind of
the Archbishop of Dublin the conclusions on which he has founded his
extreme recommendations respecting the emigration of settlers and others
to that colony; recommendations, the force of which, at the same time, I
do not perceive, even supposing the truth of their premises. And what is
the influence of the arrangements in question ?
On the master of assigned servants, it is the influence which produced
the character of the slave-owner in the West Indies, modified by the fact of
the slave being English and convict; the modification compensating the
owner for the restriction of his tyranny by the aggravation of his suspicion.
On society, it is the influence of a discretion which holds in subjection to it
the most minute interests and relationships of individuals; a discretion
enjoyed by the government, which stifles every independent feeling, and
tends to produce a mean, cautious, sneaking subservience. Such are the
tendencies of society in Van Diemen’s Land. There the police-office of
every district is an established tyranny, which penetrates a man’s politics,
presumes to investigate his character, exposes him to spies, has him enrolled
as a favourite or a marked man ; and, through its discretion in punishing
present servants, either summarily to the convenience, or in a prolonged
way to the inconvenience of masters, pleases or annoys them; and
which, in recommending for new assignments, or interposing difficulties
in the way, secures their fealty or irritates their opposition. No one can
calculate the effects thus produced, the reserve, the suspicion, the sacri-
fice of principle to interest. These are its natural fruits; and I hesitate not
to say, while I am careful to discriminate their character, they are the xcorst
fruit of such a cause: they are effects which accumulate and involve others
apparently having a grosser quality, but really not so; for they come not
so entirely within the number of Bentham’s prolific vices.
A SISTER’S MEMORY.
How oft we turn the pages of the past,
And measure cherish’d hopes with present joy;
’Till each glad dawn seems brighter than the last,
And Manhood weeps o’er all that bless’d the Boy!
How oft, in vain, that parent hand we seek,
Which flung the sunny locks from childhood’s brow;
And forms, whose laughing lips oft press’d our cheek,
Seem lovelier far than those which fly us now I
Sweet sister Marian ! can I e’er forget
Thy look of heaven thy gentle ministry ?
Sweet sister Marian ! dost thou linger yet
Where each lone hearth proclaims thine elegy ?
VOL. v.


Sole comrades in our father’s echoing halls,
Thy patience stoop’d each childish sport to share;
Nor dar’d I scan those warrior-dighted walls,
Till veil’d beneath thy golden streaming hair.
Thy dauntless heart and oh ! that loving eye I
The silvery sopg, soon lost in childhood’s dream
The fairy step that trod so joyfully
Float, like soft music, down on Memory’s stream I
Thy little petted steed even starts again,
As some light footstep falls upon his ear ;
And many a homestead bordering on the plain
Mourns for the smile that bade the sorrows cheer !
And when, alas ! warm youth’s maturer thought
Taught me to judge of woman’s heart by thine,
’T was but to mourn that beauty may be bought
With treasures found not in affection’s mine!
Still, oft that voice comes on the breath of night,
In dreamy songs of heaven-restored ties,
Till Time’s wide shadow faintly dims the light
That streams where Joy’s eternal mansions rise.
’T is thus we linger o’er each absent grace,
And weave our garland of the flowery past;
Behind before unveil'd is Pleasure’s face ;
The present sky alone is overcast!
SKETCHES OF SPANISH GENERALS, CARLIST AND
j CHRISTINO.
No. VI. Sarsfield.
“ Je sais bien qu’il n’importe guere it des gens qui n’ont plus ni conscience ni foi, de miner leur
patrie, et de bouleverser un royaume on ils ne sont point consideres. Mais pent on suffrir que
leurs intrigues se fassent sous votre nom ? ”
Matignon au Connetable de Jiourhon. M£zerai, Histoire de France.
However picturesque and beautiful may be the character of the country
in Spain, the appearance of the smaller towns and villages, on a close and
intimate survey, is most uninviting. Ferrer, in his “ Memorias de la
Monja Alferez utters bitter complaints against the barbarity of the
* Monja Alferez means, the Nun an Officer—alferez being the term in Castilian for ensign,
or sub-lieutenant. The extraordinary person whose memoirs are alluded to was a nun in the con-
vent of the Antigua, near San Sebastian, in the sixteenth century. She escaped from it at the age
of eighteen, and became a volunteer in the army, having assumed male attire for that purpose. She
distinguished herself so much that she soon obtained promotion. She passed through so many
strange adventures, and underwent so many vicissitudes, that her fame soon became”spread, not
only throughout Europe, but also through Spanish America, the entire of which she traversed on
foot. Her daring boldness, and utter contempt of danger and of death, made her renowned at all




3 1508 00670755 3
