

A LECTURE
THE NEW HEBRIDES MISSION.
BY THE
REY. ROBERT STEEL, D.D.,
SYDNEY.
ILLUSTRATED BY LANTERN SLIDES.
SUDNEY:
JAMES MILLER & CO„ GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS,
78 CLARENCE STREET, NEAR BARRACK STREET.
1884.




A LECTURE
THE HEW HEBRIDES MISSIOH.
BY THE
BEY. ROBEBT STEEL, 0.®,,
SYDNEY.
ILLUSTRATED BY LANTERN SLIDES.
Sydney :
JAMES MILLER k CO., GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS,
78 Clarence Street, near Barrack Street.
1884.




THE
NEW HEBRIDES MISSION,
Illustrated by Lantern Slides.
LIST OF THE SLIDES.
*]. The Map of the Islands —in relation to Australia, New Zea-
land, New Caledonia, and Fiji.
*2. The Death of Captain Cook.
*3. The Mutiny of the Bounty.
*4. The Wreck of the Pandora.
*5. John Williams, the Missionary Martyr.
*O. Williams landing on Eromanga.
*7. The Scene of the Martrydom.
*B. Bishop Selwyn of New Zealand.
9. Rev. Dr. and Mrs. Geddie.
10. Aneityum, Anelgauhat Harbour.
11. Waihit, Chief and Teacher.
12. Dr. Geddie’s Stone Church.
13. The Mission House (broken).
14. Lathella, Native Chief, and Wife.
15. Rev. Dr. and Mrs. Inglis.
16. Nowanpakow, Native Chief at Aname.
17. Rev. Joseph Annand and Wife.
18. Wreck of first Mission Vessel, Dayspring.
19. The Second Dayspring.
20. The Island of Futuna.
21. Rev. J. G. Patou and Wife.
22. Mission House, Aniwa.
23. Church at Aniwa.
24. School at Aniwa.
25. The Island of Tanna—west coast.
*26. The Crater of the Volcano.
27. Port Resolution.
28. The Mission House, Port Resolution.
29. Nowar, Chief „
30. Rev. Wm. Watt and Wife.
31. Mission House, Kwamera.
32. Grass Church, „
33. The School, „
34. The Scholars, „
35. Page of Primer, „
36. Girls in Mrs. Watts’ „


37. First Communicants „
38. Tannese mode of wearing hair.
39. Dillon’s Bay, Errpmanga.
40. Rev. G. N. Gordon and Wife, Erromanga.
41. Rev. James D. Gordon, „
42. Rev. H. A. Robertson and Wife „
43. Martyrs’ Church, „
44. Mission House, „
45. Numpwat, Native Teacher, „
4G. Rev. J. W. Mackenzie and Wife, Fate.
47. Mission House, Havannah Harbour, Fate.
48. Rev. D. Macdonald and Wife, ~
49. Native Church at out station, „
50. Cocoa Nuts on Tree.
51. Mau and Pole (islands).
52. Nguna—Group of Natives and Missionaries—Fraser and
Lawrie.
53. The Rev. 0. Michelsen and Wife, with Natives.
54. Mission House, Tongoa.
55. Grass Church, „
50. Native House, „
57. Fatese Teacher and Wife, Tongoa.
58. Mission House, Api.
59. H.M.S. “Wolverene” at Api.
*6O. Natives of Mallicollo.
*6l. ~ of Marquesas Islands.
*62. Diagram of Population of World, shewing religions.
*63. All Nations Praise the Lord.
Slides marked * are from Dr. George Smith’s set on “ The Romance
of Modern Missions.”
N B.—These Slides may he had, for payment of carriage, to illus-
trate the Lecture, on application to the Rev. .J Copeland, Presbyterian
Offices, 164 King-street, Sydney. Single copies of Lecture, 6d»
each. A large reduction on quantities for sale after Lantern
Exhibition. A Collection is expected for the Mission.


THE NEW HEBRIDES:
The Islands and the Missionaries.
I.—The Map of the Group.
The New Hebrides Islands are in the western part of the South
Pacific Ocean, and lie between the 14tli and 20th degrees of south
latitude, and between the 165th and 170th meridian of east longi-
tude. They are 200 miles from New Caledonia on the south-west,
and 300 from the Solomon Isles on the north-west, and about 400
miles from Fiji on the east. . They are 1200 miles from Sydney, and
somewhat less from New Zealand. There are 30 islands in the
group, extending over 400 miles. They were first sighted by the
Spanish navigator De Quiros in 1606, who thought he had dis-
covered the great Australian continent. He called the most northerly
part Tierra Australis del Espiritu Santo. Bougainville, the French
navigator, in 1768, found that Espiritu Santo was an island, and he
discovered other islands near it. But it was reserved to the great
English navigator, Captain Cook, to discover the remaining isles in
1774, when he sailed twice through the group. He gave the name
New Hebrides to them, and also the names by which all the islands
are still known on the maps. The natives were savages of a low
type, and now scarcely number more than 100,000.
2.—The Death of Captain Cooic.
Captain Cook had also discovered New South Wales and New
Zealand, and when he published his “Voyages,” great interest was
drawn to the South Seas. The perusal of his books led Dr. Carey
to become a missionary, and it occasioned the formation of a Mis-
sionary Society to send the Gospel to Polynesia. Captain Cook
said that Christian missions would never be sent to Polynesia, “as it
can neither serve the purpose of public ambition nor private avarice ;
and without such inducements I may pronounce that it will never be
undertaken ! ” But the love of Christ and of perishing souls was a
stronger motive than these. Captain Cook was killed by the savage
people of Hawaii in 1771).
3.— The Mutiny of H.M.S. “ Bounty.’’
In 1787 the British Government sent H.M.S. “Bounty” to
Tahiti to procure plants of the bread fruit tree for the West Indies.
After leaving the island in 1781) the men mutinied, and placed
Captain Bligh and eighteen others in an open boat on the ocean.
Captain Bligh passed among the northern islands of the New
Hebrides, but did not dare to land for fear of the cannibals. He
landed at Timor after a voyage of 3,500 milesln an open boat. He
was afterwards Governor of New South Wales.


4.—The Loss of H.M.S. “Pandora.”
H.M.S. “Pandora” was sent in quest of the “Bounty’’ but did
not find her, as the mutineers had burnt her at Pitcairn’s Island.
Fourteen of the mutineers were, however, arrested at Tahiti and put
in chains. The “ Pandora ” struck on a reef off the Australian
coast near Torres Straits, and went down in 1791. There were lost
81 of the crew and 4 of the mutineers, but 81 of the “ Pandora’s”
men and 10 prisoners were saved. The surviving mutineers and
their descendants by Tahitian women were found 20 years after »t
Pitcairn’s Island. Under John Adams’ instruction they were an
orderly and Christian people. In 1856 they were removed to Nor-
folk island, when they numbered 198. In 1884 there were 470
persons on the island, exclusive of the Melanesian Mission. They
had 1846 cattle, 269 horses, 2000 sheep, and 365 pigs. Fora long
time each couple on marrying received a grant of 25 acres. This
has now ceased. Some 5000 acres have been alienated, of which
1000 acres belong to the Melanesian Mission.
5.—-John Williams.
In 1839 the apostolic John Williams, after his successful mis-
sionary labours in eastern Polynesia, set sail with twelve native
teachers for the New Hebrides. He had heard of the fierce and
cannibal propensities of the people, and was anxious to carry the
Gospel among them. “ I cannot be content,” he said, “ within the
narrow limits of a single reef.”
6.—Williams Landing on Eromanga.
The vessel called first at Futuna, the most easterly island of the
group, but Williams was not encouraged to leave teachers. Next
day Tanna was reached, and three Samoan teachers were left. Ero-
manga was sighted the same evening, and next morning, the 30th
November, 1839, Mr. Williams went ashore in a boat along with
Captain Morgan and Messrs Cunningham and Harris. The
natives at first seemed friendly, but soon after attacked the party.
Two got on board the boat, but Mr. Harris and Mr. Williams were
murdered and eaten.
7.— Bird’s Eye View of the Scene of Martyrdom.
Great was the lamentation at the death of Williams. The Chris-
tian natives of Samoa and Rarotonga bewailed their loss, saying,
“Awe, Williamu! Awe, Tama!” (Alas, Williams! Alas, our
father !) Near the same spot the Rev. G. N. Gordon and his wife
fell by the savages in 1861.
B.—BisHor Selwyn of New Zealand.
Another pioneer of the Gospel in the New Hebrides was George
Augustus Selwyn, I).I)., who became bishop of New Zealand in
1841. He cast a longing eye to the islands of the South Seas, and
in a little craft of 22 tons sailed among the savages. He had a
wonderful power of conciliating the natives, and trusted himself
freely, quite unarmed, among them. He would sometimes swim
ashore alone. He founded the Melanesian Mission, and cruised seven


times through groups of cannibal islands, opening up the way for
others. He was succeeded first by Bishop Patteson, and then by his
own son, Bishop John R. Selwyn.
9. —Rev. Dr. Geddie and his Wife.
Bishop Selwyn’s object was to get young men to go with him to
Auckland to be instructed in Christian truth, and then returned to
their native islands to teach others. The London Missionary Society
also sent native teachers to reside among the savages and prepare
the way for a resident missionary. The first resident missionary in
the New Hebrides was John Geddie. He was a native of Scotland,
but had been taken to Nova Scotia in childhood. After he became
a minister he tried to excite a missionary spirit in his synod, and on
carrying the motion, offered himself as a missionary. He was
accepted, and was sent forth. With his young wife he set out, going
literally by faith, not knowing whither he went. He sailed round
Cape Horn, by Honolulu to Samoa, and on consulting with the
London Society’s missionaries there, learned that an opening for a
new mission might be found in the New Hebrides.
10. —Anelgauhat Harbour, Aneityum.
Native evangelists had been located on Aneityum, the most
southerly of the New Hebrides. Mr. and Mrs. Geddie were accom-
panied there by the Rev. T. Powell, one of the Samoan missionaries.
When they arrived they found that eight Roman Catholic missionaries
and eight lay assistants had taken up a station on the island. These,
however, soon left, and none of that Church has ever attempted a
mission in the group. The native teachers hailed the arrival of
Messrs. Geddie and Powell in 1848.
11.—Waihit, Chief and Convert.
It was a difficult sphere of labour among a low and cannibal
people whose habits were gross, and whose superstitions were potent.
The custom of strangling widows was universal. Mr. and Mrs.
Geddie had many trials, but they persevered amidst all opposition
and privations. At length some joined their worship. One of their
early converts was Waihit, a chief more dreaded than any man on
the island. He was a sacred man, and was supposed to have power
over the sea. His mind opened to the Gospel, and he became a
Christian. He was a valuable helper to the mission, and pioneered
the Gospel to Futuna. He was the first native missionary from
Aneityum.
12. —The Stone Church.
By degrees the people yielded to the Gospel, and a large stone
church was built. The huge beams across its roof were carried from
the hills on the shoulders of the people, the chief standing on the
beam in his plumes directing the progress. The church is thatched,
and needs to have its roof renewed every four years. It is now too
large for the people.


13. —The Mission House. (Slide broken.)
Mr. and Mrs. Geddie were greatly blessed, and had the satisfac-
tion of seeing the whole people on the island embrace the Gospel.
Many were taught to read and to work. Books were prepared. A
neat mission house was also erected. After sixteen years’ labour
they returned to Nova Scotia and were warmly welcomed. Mr.
Geddie had led a forlorn hope, and had returned a conqueror. He
had gone among a savage people, and had left them a Christian
Church. He was made D.D. by the Queen's University, Kingston,
and Mrs. Geddie was loaded with presents.
14. —Lathella, the Chief, and his Wife.
T)r. Geddie was anxious to have taken the Christian chief Lathella
and his wife to Nova Scotia as trophies of the Gospel, but at Mel-
bourne it was found that the health of Lathella would not warrant
him to take the voyage, so he returned to Aneityum, where he has
long been useful to the Native Church. Dr. Geddie came back in
1866, but was never able for much work. Two of his daughters
married missionaries who went to the New Hebrides. After the
marriage of the second he was seized with paralysis, and though he
rallied a little and reached Australia, he died at Geelong in Decem-
ber, 1872. A tablet of wood has been erected to his memory on the
wall of the church at Aneityum on which are these words ; —“ When
he landed here in 1848 there were no Christians, and when he left
in 1872 there were no heathens .”
15.—The Rev. Dr. Inglis and Wife.
In 1852 the Rev. John Inglis, who had been labouring as a mis-
sionary of the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland among the
Maoris in New Zealand, joined Mr. Geddie and settled on the other
side of the island of Aneityum. He and his wife were conveyed
there by the Bishop of New Zealand in his little vessel “The Border
Maid.” “ Had we been his own missionaries,” said Mr. Inglis, “he
could not have done more to accommodate us, and to furnish us with
facilities for bringing with us whatever we considered necessary for
the mission.” Bishop Selwyn often called on the Presbyterian
missionaries. One time when Mr. Inglis sent his watch to Auck-
land by the bishop for repairs, the bishop left his own with Mr.
Inglis till he returned the year after. He also once collected
£lO3 16s. 4d. in New Zealand by telling Presbyterians there what
he had seen of their missionaries. Mr. Inglis laboured very success-
fully for twenty-five years. He baptized 1200, and admitted 700 to
the Lord’s Supper. He had 11 elders, 7 deacons, and 28 teachers.
He and Dr. Geddie translated the whole Scriptures into AneityumeSe.
The New Testament was printed by the British and Foreign Bible
Society under Mr. Inglis’ care in 1861, and the Old Testament in
1879. The natives paid for all by contributions of arrowroot. An
abridgement of the Pilgrim's Progress, made and translated by Mrs.
Geddie, was also printed along with a hymn-book and the Assembly’s
Shorter Catechism. Mr. Inglis crowned his labours by publishing
an Aneityumese dictionary in 1882, and in 1883 he was made D.D.


by the University of Glasgow. Altogether in Aneityum under these
two missionaries 2100 were baptised, and 1300 admitted to the
communion. There were 50 schools under as many teachers, and
many converts have gone forth to the other islands as missionary
teachers. Well may we say “ What hath God wrought ?”
10.— Nowanpakow, Chief at Aname.
Nowanpakow, the chief, became a Christian and an elder, and was
very useful. Dr. Inglis always kept up the authority of the native
chiefs, and urged them to make and execute good laws. Mrs. Inglis
did much among the women, and trained up a succession of orphan
girls in her household service. Nowanpakow ably assisted Dr.
Inglis’ successor. He died in 1883.
17.— Rev. Joseph Annand and Wife.
At Dr. Geddie’s station the Rev. Joseph Annand, M.A., who
joined the mission with his wife in 1873, has been settled. They
came from Nova Scotia. The jiopulation is decreasing ; the deaths
are more than the births. The whole population on Mr. Annand’s
side of the island is 4 ( .)G, and of these 171 are communicants. Half
of the people are regularly in church at the same time. They can
all read, and all possess the Scriptures. Mr. and Mrs. Lawrie were
sent in 1879 by the Free Church of Scotland to occupy the station
of Dr. Inglis. Under the faithful ministration of Mr. Lawrie a
revival of religion has taken place, and a new church of wood built
and paid for by the contributions of arrowroot. The population
attending church is 150 at the chief station, and 50 and GO respec-
tively at two other places. The population is 550. The contribu-
tions of arrowroot now go for maintaining religious ordinances
among themselves, and the proceeds are paid to the churches sup-
porting the mission. The natives have exhibited a fair average of
Christian morality in their lives, and are all able to read the Word
of God. They are devout and decorous worshippers of God. They all
wear European clothing and purchase some European manufactures.
This island forty years ago was occupied by a wild cannibal people,
but now is entirely evangelised, and is a part of the Christian
Church. The population, however, has diminished one half in 20
years. Where once were 12,000 there are now only 1000. Chris-
tianity came late, and while it saved the soul could not avert the
physical decay.
18. — The Mission Vessel “Dayspring” Wrecked.
As the Missionary work advanced, a vessel was much needed to
sail among the Islands. Numbers of the natives who ventured in
their frail canoes to other islands, perished in storms every year. The
first Mission boat was called the “ Columba,” after the apostle of
the Scottish Hebrides. It was only five tons, and could not stand
much weather. The next was larger, and had a little cabin which
could hold six persons, with a platform capable of holding 30. She
was built in Glasgow, and cost £320 ; she was called the “ John
Knox,” after the great Scottish Reformer. When this little craft
arrived in Aneityum great was the excitement of the people, and the


cry arose, and was echoed from hill to hill, “ John Knox is come !”
The next vessel cal'ed “The Dayspring,” was built in New Glasgow,
Nova Scotia, and cast about £3BOO, all raised by friends of the
Mission, chiefly in Australia. On her first voyage under Captain
Fraser, she brought three missionaries from Nova Scotia. She did
good service for nine years, but perished in a hurricane in the har-
bour of Aneityum, in January, 1873. No lives were lost.
19.—The Dayspring, No. 2.
A new vessel was purchased in 1873. She was built in Sydney,
and is a remarkably good sea boat. She is a schooner with three
masts, cabins for missionaries, for native teachers, crew and native
crew. This vessel is 160 tons burthen, and an excellent sailer. She
goes twice a year from Sydney to the New Hebrides, taking mis-
sionaries, stores, letters, and papers, and wooden frames for houses
and even churches. Her course is taken through the Islands twice
on one voyage and once on the other. £2OOO were obtained from
the Insurance Offices after the loss of the ship, and a sum of £2500
was collected by Presbyterian Sabbath*Schools in Australasia. There
was, therefore, enough to pay for the new vessel, with a balance for
repairs. The Rev. Joseph Copeland started an Insurance Fund in
New Zealand, which the Rev. J. G. Paton carried to a successful
issue in Victoria, and now a sum of £3OOO is funded to pay for in-
surance. The vessel costs about £IBOO a year, of which £I3OO is
provided by the Sabbath Scholars in Presbyterian Churches of Aus-
tralasia, £250 from Nova Scotia, and £250 from Scotland. The
hold is always full to the top on leaving Sydney, and a portion has
sometimes to be left behind.
20.—The Island of Futuna.
This is most easterly of the New Hebrides. It is a huge rock
which rises 2000 feet high with a tableland on the top. The natives
scarcely number more than 700 at the present time. It was first
visited by John Williams in 1839. The London Missionary Society
afterward settled two teachers, who were cruelly murdered by the
savage people in 1843. In 1853, the Christians of Aneityum sent
Evangelists Waihit and Josepha, who had hard work to pioneer the
Gospel. In 1860, the Rev. Joseph Copeland and his wife settled
there. After earnest and continued labour, about 150 attended the
preaching of the Gospel, and a number learned to read. Mr. Cope-
land printed Primers, a Catechism, Scripture Extracts, and Hymns
in the native language. He also translated the Gospels of St. Mark
and of St. Luke ; the first of these was printed in Sydney in 1875.
Mrs. Copeland died on the island in January, 1876. Mr. Copeland’s
health also failed so much that he had to resign in 1879. The work
of the mission was left for a time in the hands of the native teachers,
superintended by Mr. Lawrie, who paid an occasional visit to the island.
In 1882, the Free Church of Scotland appointed a medical M ission-
ary, Dr. William Gunn, to this station. He reached the island
along with his young wife in April, 1883. He has acquired the
native language and has begun to hold religious services among the


people. About 150 persons attend public worship. A medical
missionary was much wanted for the New Hebrides.
21.—The Rev. John G. Paton and Wife.
The Rev. John G. Paton joined the Mission in 1858, at the same
time as the Rev. J. Copeland. Both were sent by the Reformed
Presbyterian Church in Scotland, and were appointed to Tanna ; but
Mr. Copeland had soon to remove to take the place of the Rev.
John Inglis, on his leaving for London. Mr. Paton had the Rev.
S. F. Johnston as his colleague. They had severe trials to go through
in Tanna by reason of the great opposition of the savage heathens by
whom they were threatened. Meantime, Mr. Johnston died sud-
denly, leaving a young widow (afterwards Mrs. Copeland.) Mrs.
Paton and her infant also died. Mr. Paton had next to flee for his
life to the station of Mr. Matlieson, at Kwamera. There perils fol-
lowed them, and the whole Mission was broken up. The Missiona-
ries all escaped to Aneityum safely. Mr. Paton was then sent to
Australia to plead for the Mission and for a good vessel. His advo-
cacy was veiy successful, and a large sum was raised for a new vessel
for native teachers and for more Missionaries. Mr. Paton then went
to Scotland for a reinforcement, and in this he succeeded also. On
his return with Mrs. Paton, he became theJMissionary of the Presby-
terian Church of. Victoria, and was settled in 1866, on Aniwa, a low
coral island, ten miles in circumference, near Tanna.
22. —The Mission House, Aniwa.
A suitable house was erected on what had formerly been sacred
ground, used also for cannibal feasts. The people thought some
trouble would happen to the mission family if they resided there, but
as no evil befel them, it helped to break the spell of superstition.
The house is about 100 feet long with verandahs at both sides, and
only one room in breadth.
28.—The Church at Aniwa.
The Church is built of wooden posts interlaced witli reeds, and
thatched both on roof and sides. The natives, who murdered one
of the first Christian native teachers and nearly killed another, at
length became obedient to the Gospel. They all wait on the means
of grace and a number have been baptized. The population is, how-
ever, small, and rapidly decreasing. Mr. Paton had to leave the
islands for his health, but ho has done much for the Mission in the
Colonies. He revisited Britain in 1884, and addressed Synods and
General Assemblies.
24.—The School at Aniwa.
There are several school-houses erected at different places on the
island, but the principal one is near the Mission House. Most of
the people have learned to read, and Hymns and Catechisms and
Gospels have been printed for their use.


25. —Tanna.
Tanna is 50 miles from Aneityum, to the north-west. It is 30
miles long by nine and twelve broad. It is agreeably diversified by
hill and dale and very fertile. Its most striking object is the vol-
cano, which is a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night.
It was active when Captain Cook first saw it in 1774, and has con-
tinued active ever since. Most of the islands of the group shew
marks of volcanic agency, and there are three islands which have
active volcanoes still—Tanna, Ambrym, and Lopevi.
20. —The Crater of the Volcano.
The crater often discharges large stones (red hot) with a noise
that can be heard 40 miles away. It throws them very high into
the air and they fall back into the large crater. The volcano acts as
a lighthouse, and is seen at a great distance. The mouth of the
crater is 700 feet bv 500 feet. The depth to the red hot lava is 200
feet ; the mountain is only GOO feet high. Much sulphur is deposited
by the volcano, which may yet supply the commercial wants of Aus-
tralia.
27.- Port Resolution. •
The chief harbour of the Island is at Port Resolution, whicli has
often been visited since it was discovered by Captain Cook, and
named after his ship. Here John Williams landed his teachers. Here
Messrs Turner and Nisbet were settled in 1843, but they had to flee
in an open boat to save their lives. Here also the Rev. Messrs. John-
ston, Copeland, and Paton, were located. Mr. Johnston and Mrs.
Paton died there. The natives are clever, but very devoted to their
heathen practices, and have been slow to yield to the Gospel. They
have been much demoralised by parties in European vessels.
28. —The Mission House at Port Resolution.
The Rev. Thomas Neilson and his wife (a daughter af I)r. Geddie)
were placed here in 18G6, and got a Mission house erected at the
harbour. They laboured till 1882. Numbers were taught, and a
company regularly attended public worship, but none were baptized ;
many respect the Sabbath, and have been taught to read. A regular
attendant there was Nowar, a chief, who befriended the Missionaries.
29.—Nowar.
Nowar saved Mr. Paton’s life in 1861, and was always friendly to
the Missionary. He hovered near the kingdom of God, but did not
openly enter in, yet could and did pray in public. Many deeds of
blood have been perpetrated near Port Resolution, which has, in
consequence, been frequently visited by ships of war. Traders have
have also frequented this port. The harbour was much changed by
an earthquake in 1878, which elevated the rocks on the west side
over 20 feet. Boiling water runs into the sea in several places. The
Tannese are skilful marksmen. They are reputed to be fine workers
when taken to the sugar plantations in Fiji and Queensland. The
yams of Tanna are the best and largest in Polynesia and sometimes
weigh 50 lbs. If this Island became Christian it would rapidly


develope in all the accompanying results to trade as well as to life
and work. The Tannese chiefs, 68 in number, desire annexation to
Britain, and sent a memorial to the Queen in 1884,
30. —The Rev. W. Watt and Wife.
A Mission Station was opened to the south-west, and the Rev. J.
W. Matheson and his wife, from Nova Scotia, were settled there in
*B5B. They were obliged to escape for their lives along with Mr.
Raton in 1862. Both died shortly after. The way was not open for
re-occupying the mission till after the settlement of the Rev. Thomas
Neilson, at Port Resolution. He conciliated the natives greatly by
his mode of dealing with them. At length, in 1869, the Rev. Wil-
liam Watt and his wife came to Kwamera, and they have laboured
there with perseverance and with some success as agents of the Pres-
byterian Church of New Zealand.
31. —The Mission House, Kwamera.
They have a comfortable house which looks picturesque, but the
landing is very awkward and through a narrow reef. It is often
dangerous ; there is no anchorage for the Mission vessel near the
place.
32. —The Church, Kwamera.
For several years a grass Church was used for the public services ;
but it has recently been replaced by a wooden building provided
entirely at the expense of the Christian people. About 100 persons
regularly attend on the Sabbath.
33. —The School, Kwamera.
Mr. Watt has devoted much care and time on teaching and has
instructed many. The school is built of wood, near the Mission
house.
34. —The Scholars.
The Foundry Boys’ Society of Glasgow, in whose benevolent work
Mrs. Watt was a zealous labourer, have taken great interest in the
Tannese Mission. They sent out a printing press with a consider-
able quantity of type and paper. Mr. Watt has used these to print
Primers, Hymns and Catechisms. He has also done similar work
for his brethren, by the help of some natives, whom he has trained to
the trade. Ihey are quick to learn, and show a special adaptation to
musical exercises. Mr. Watt has taught then to be excellent singers
of Christian Hymns.
35.—Page of School Primer.
The young especially have waited upon the means of instruction,
though numbers of persons well up in life have learned to read.
36.—The Girls in Mrs. Watt’s House.
Mrs. Watt has done good service in training young women to be
useful in the house. It is a pleasant sight to see them in their
parti-coloured dresses as they wait upon her, and as pleasant to hear
them sing in Tannese.


37. —The First Communicants.
There have been several baptisms, and quite a company were ad-
mitted at once to the Communion of the Lord’s Supper. After long
and patient labour and prayer and waiting, their hearts were opened
and they confessed their faith in Christ. Mr. Watt has now taken
charge of the Port Resolution station where a native teacher resides.
Other teachers are located on different parts of the south-west side,
where the same language prevails. To Mr. Watt we owe most of
the beautiful views which have been prepared from photographs
taken by him.
38. — Tannese Mode of Wearing the Hair.
The Tannese men pay great attention to their hair, and wear it in
long cords consisting of a few hairs twisted with the fibrous thread
of bark from a plant. It takes several years to prepare the hair in
this form, and some men have as many as 700 of these cords on
their heads. There is a tuft of curls hanging at the back. This
practice prevailed on all the southern islands, but is generally given
up when they become Christians. The Rev. W. Gray and wife
were settled at a place on the north side called Weasisi in 1882.
They are the agents of the Presbyterian Church of South Australia.
The language there is different. There is a good population around,
and they have been encourged. The whole population of the island
is about 8000, and it is said that over 1500 of the able bodied have
been away at the plantations of Fiji and Queensland. Many of
these on their return show more indifference than before to the
teaching of the missionaries, and are very mischievous.
39. — Dillon’s Bay, Eromanga.
After the murder of John Williams, some native teachers from
Samoa tried to pioneer the Gospel in Eromanga, but they had a try-
ing experience and had to be removed. Four young men were then
taken to Samoa to be taught Christian truth, Two of these, after
their return, tried to teach their countrymen. Bishop Selwyn also
visited the island, and took some boys to Auckland to.be taught.
There had been a sandal-wood station on the island at Dillon’s Bay,
and natives of other islands were kept there, between whom and the
natives were frequent scenes of blood. In that trade the lives of
300 white men were lost. It is said that £75,000 worth of sandal-
wood was taken from this island to China, where its fragrant odours
were much valued for temple fires.
40.— The Rev. G. N. Gordon and Wife.
In 1857 a Missionary was settled at Dillon’s Bay, 27 years after
the death of John Williams. The Rev. G. FT. Gordon came from
Nova Scotia to the New Hebrides. He met with a devoted young
lady in London, who became liis wife. They reached Eromanga
and began the work in hope. Several gathered round them. Por-
tions of Scripture were translated and public worship maintained. In
1861 a hurricane occurred, which did much damage. Measles were
brought by a trading vessel, and spread with fatal results among the


natives. The Missionary was blamed for these deaths. The people
fancied that no death occurred except by the witchcraft of some one.
A plot was laid to take the lives of the faithful couple who were sacri-
ficing themselves for the good of the people. Mr. Gordon was en-
ticed from the house he was building, on the plea of getting medicine
for a sick person, and in a wood, he was clubbed and tomahawked.
Mrs. Gordon heard the yells, and came to the door, when a heathen
appeared; he said it was the boys playing. She turned to look, and
a blow from his tomahawk was given her ; another blow followed,
and she was dead. Thus fell the Christian man and his wife ; “lovely
and pleasant in their lives, and in their death not divided.” Bishop
Patteson was the first to arrive in Dillon’s Bay to hear the heavy
tidings. He greatly esteemed Mr. Gordon, and used to call to see
him when passing in his Mission vessel “The Southern Cross.”
He went and read the English Burial Service over the graves of the
Presbyterian Martyr-Missionaries. The “ John Williams ” arrived
soon after, and brethren wept and prayed under their sense of sorrow
and of loss.
41.—The Rev. J. D. Gordon.
A great thrill of sorrow throbbed through missionary circles in
the South Seas and in the parent Churches when it was reported
that another martyrdom had occurred on Eromanga. But in 1864
a new missionary landed on the island, though it was stained with
his brothers blood. The Rev. J. D. Gordon took up the fallen
standard. He could speak a few words in the native language when
he landed, and was welcomed by the few Christian people. He
laboured with great zeal and self-denial for nine years, won some
converts to Christ and celebrated the death of Christ with them on
that blood-stained isle. He also pioneered the Gospel on the large
island of Espiritu Santo, one language of which he had picked up
from two lads taken away by the labour vessels and left on Eromanga.
Mr. Gordon spent four months on Espiritu Santo in 1869 in a tent
given him by the ladies of the New Hebrides Mission Association in
Sydney. He had prepared a primer before he went, and taught a
number to read. He hoped to go back, but it was not to be.
While translating the narrative of St. Stephen’s martyrdom he was
struck by the tomahawk of a savage at Portinia Bay in 1872, and
fell a martyr to Jesus Christ. The Rev. James M‘Nair, who joined
the mission with his wife in 1866, and who laboured with great
earnestness and some success, died at Dillon’s Bay in 1870, and
was buried beside the martyrs.
42.—The Rev. H. A. Rorertson and Wife.
Another man took up the colours after James Gordon’s death,
and in 1872 the Rev. H. A. Robertson landed there with his young
wife. It was a brave attempt, but God has signally blessed it.
Mr. Robertson had been on the island of Aneityum in a lay capacity,
and was so interested in the mission that he went to Nova Scotia
and prepared for ordination as a missionary. He came as the re-
presentative of the Church of Scotland in the Maritime Provinces


of British North America, now joined to the united Church in Canada.
The Eromangan people, so long noted for their treachery and
cruelty, at length yielded to the Gospel. There are 1000 nominally
Christian out of a population of 2500, and 195 are communicants.
The Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark, the Acts of the Apostles,
and the Book of Genesis have been translated and printed, besides
catechisms and hymn-books. The four Gospels are recently printed,
and the people are paying for the work by their contributions of
arrowroot. “ The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church. ’’
43.— The Martyrs’ Church, Eromanga.
It was proposed in 1863 to erect a monument to John Williams
in Eromanga, and about £4O were collected for that object, chiefly
by the Rev. W. Wyatt Gill. It was not practicable then to do
anything on the island. Sixteen years afterwards it was agreed to
erect a church at Dillon s Bay to the memory of the martyrs of
Eromanga. The sum of £2OO was collected in New South Wales,
and a good weatherboard church was prepared in Sydney. The
frame was set up in Sydney in 1879, and opened by the Rev. Dr.
Steel and by the Rev. A. W. xMurray, the missionary, who had often
visited the New Hebrides. The church was shipped on board the
“ Dayspring,” and erected not far from the scene of the martyrdom.
It was opened with much solemnity, and a son of the murderer of John
Williams offered one of the prayers at the ceremony. The building
has been carefully plastered inside with coral lime. It is lighted
with lamps presented to it, and seated with pews long used in an
English church in Sydney.
44-—The Mission House, Eromanga.
A very neat house for the missionary’s family has been erected by
Mr. Robertson. . It is well situated near the sea, and free from the
malaria on the river bank. The property of the sandal-wood traders
has been purchased for the Mission on both sides of the Williams
River.
45. —Numpwat, Native Teacher, Eromanga.
There are 34 native Christian teachers employed on the island, all
natives of Eromanga—a large share of Christian workers out of 195
communicants. There are 32 school-houses where these men teach
and preach. A net-work of Christian influence now covers the
island.
46. —The Rev. J. W. Mackenzie and Wife.
The island of Fate was discovered by Captain Cook in 1774, and
called Sandwich after the noble earl, then First Lord of the
Admiralty. Fate is 60 miles N.W. from Eromanga, and is 75
miles in circumference. It is richly diversified in scenery, and has
splendid harbours and excellent soil. The natives are stouter than
those in the southern isles of the New Hebrides. The women are
tall and thin, and have their hair cropped short. The people were
inveterate cannibals, and were wont to kill, cook, and devour not
only those slain in battle, but shipwrecked mariners —European or
native. Sandal-wood traders often perpetrated great cruelties there,


and this led to revenge. Christian teachers were first settled there
in 1845, from Samoa, by the London Missionary Society’s agents.
Ihey had to endure great hardships. Some were cruelly murdered
by the people, others had to be removed from danger. New volun-
teers offered, and in 1858 three Christian teachers from Rarotonga
tried again to introduce the Gospel. Two years after, when the
Rev. Dr. Turner called in the “John Williams,” he was astonished
to find the people at Erakor professing Christianity. In 1861 Dr.
Geddie baptized 8 men and 2 women, and observed the Lord’s
Supper at this cannibal island. The Rev. Donald Morrison and his
wife, who came from Nova Scotia in the “ Dayspring,” were settled
there in 1864, and the good work was consolidated and extended
among the heathen. Mr. Morrison’s health declined and he had to
leave in 1867 ; but he had translated the Gospel of St. Mark and a
few hymns into the native language, which he got into print before
he died. The Rev. James Cosh and his wife, who came from Scot-
land, but were adopted by the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, were
placed on the island in 1866, and they followed up Mr. Morrison’s
work. The book of Genesis was translated and printed for the use
of the Christian natives. Mr. Cosh had to resign in 1870 on
account of his wife’s health. The Rev. J. W. Mackenzie, from
Nova Scotia, succeeded in 1872, and has been spared to carry on
the mission successfully. He officiates in 6 villages with the aid of
native teachers. There are 300 professing Christians, 75 commu-
nicants, and 30 in the catechumen’s class, and 160 in schools, while
200 more hear the Gospel. A great change has passed over many.
Mrs. Mackenzie has been useful among her own sex. The people
there that once way-laid the shipwrecked to kill and eat them, have
since hospitably kept 90 shipwrecked men from a labour vessel for a
month ! There are some 300 of a Christian population around the
mission station. What a change in 30 years, when the crew of the
“ British Sovereign ” were murdered, and their bodies devoured !
47.—The Mission House, Havannah Harbour.
Havannah Harbour, about 10 miles long, is landlocked by two
islands, and is about a mile and 2 miles broad. The water is very
deep. The mission was begun here in 1872, though the way had been
pioneered for some time by native teachers. The spot selected for
the mission house is midway up the harbour, and opposite a narrow
passage between the two islands. It is healthy, and open to the
cool and refreshing breeze from the sea. The scenery is lovely all
around, and as lovely in coral forms below, where the bottom is seen.
48.—The Rev. D. Macdonald and Wife.
The Rev. Daniel Macdonald and wife were settled in 1872 as the
agents of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. Mrs. Macdonald is
a daughter of the late Dr. Geddie. Several villages have become
Christian. There are about 300 under instruction, and 60 of these
are communicants. Mr. Macdonald has aided the work of transla-
tion, and has lately got the Acts of the Apostles printed for the use
of the converts. Thus in the whole island there are 600 professing
Christianity and attending worship, of whom 135 are communicants.


49.—A Native Church in Fate,
Services are held by Mr. Macdonald and his native teachers in
the grass churches erected in the villages. Several European settlers
have taken up land in this fertile island, and a store has been estab-
lished for supplying their v/ants. Lately the French New Hebrides
Company have made great purchases of land, and have established
their head quarters in Havannah Harbour. Many fears have arisen
from this, as they desire convict labour from France. The Imperial
Government of Great Britain have been urged by the Australian
Colonies to annex the group, and if not, to protect it.
50. — Cocoa Nuts on Tree.
Cocoa nuts grow plentifully, so do bananas. These form a staple
food of the natives. When the cocoa nut is green it is used for
drinking. When ripe it is used for food. Children deprived of
their mothers are fed upon the pulp of young nuts.
51.— Mau and Pele.
At the upper end of Havannah Harbour to the east is a narrow
passage for boats to reach the islands of Mau, Pele, and Nguna, on
which, as on other islands to the north, the Fatese language, with a
few dialectal differences, is spoken. On Pele, native: teachers have
laboured with some success, and the European missionary from
Nguna has regular services there. About 60 attend worship. All
the people are favourable. Mau for a long time refused teachers,
but at the death of the chief recently a change for the better occurred,
and teachers have been welcomed. There ought to be a medical
missionary on Fate where there are so many European settlers, and
so many islands near in which one language is used. He would
have a large sphere.
52.— Nguna : Group of Natives and Missionaries.
On the Island of Nguna the Rev. Peter Milne and his wife have
resided since 1870, among 1000 cannibals. The people were slow
to accept Christian instruction or learn to read and write, but the
ministry of love at length won converts. About 100 attend church
regularly and 40 are communicants. More of the young people have
been taught to read. Mr. Milne has translated Primers, Catechisms,
and portions of Scripture. The gospels of St. Matthew and St.
Mark and a Hymn Book were printed in Edinburgh, when he was
on furlough in 1881. A weatherboard church, sent from Sydney,
has been erected, to be paid for by arrowroot. The Islands of
Metaso and Makuru to the north of Nguna have been occupied by
native teachers from Rarotonga, one of whom, Ta, has laboured suc-
cessfully ; the people are nearly all under Christian instruction. Mr.
Milne sometimes goes in an open boat (twelve miles) to Metaso, and
spends a month in a grass house, and preaches to the people. He
then goes ten miles farther to Makuru, and remains a few weeks
preaching every day. Mrs. Milne sometimes accompanies him. Mr.
Milne thus operates on four islands in addition to Nguna.


58.— Rev. Oscar Michelsen, Wife, and Natives, Tongoa.
There is a group of five small islands in the centre of the New
Hebrides, to which Captain Cook gave the name Shepherd Isles, in
honour of his friend, Dr. Shepherd, Professor of Astronomy at Cam-
bridge, in 1774. On the largest of these, Tongoa, the Rev. Oscar
Michelsen and his wife are settled. Mr. Michelsen is a Norwegian,
but offered himself for the Mission in Otago, by which he is sup-
ported.
54.— The Mission House, Tongoa.
He began his work in 1879 ; gained the attention of the people by
his guitar and song, and then preached the Gospel to them. He has
now r regular services in six villages, with an average attendance of
509. As many as 250 have already learned to read, and Mr.
Michelsen has got Primers and Scripture portions specially prepared
for them. The language is a dialect of Fatese.
55. — Native Church, Tongoa.
In four villages, native churches, made of grass and reeds, have
been erected, and the people have destroyed their fantastic drums,
around which they were wont to dance as they practised their heathen
rites. A road has been made the whole length of the island—six
miles. Mr. Michelsen got a horse sent him from Sydney, paid for
by friends in Otago. It excited great wonder, as no such animal had
ever been seen.
56. —Native House, Tongoa.
People came out of their houses to see Mrs. Michelsen ride on
horseback. The houses are open at the sides.
57—Fatese Teacher and Wife.
Mr. Michelsen has felt the want of a sufficient number of teachers.
One from Fate has assisted in the work, but an effort has been made
to get some more educated men from the London Missionary
Society’s Stations in Samoa. The friends of the Mission in Otago,
New Zealand, who support Messrs Milne and Michelsen, have con-
tributed liberally for native ieachers.
58.— Mission Station at Api.
The Mission is steadily overtaking the Islands to the north, and
the Rev. R. M. Fraser and his wife were settled on Api in 1883.
They represent the Presbyterians of Tasmania. They have made a
favourable impression on an island where many deeds of blood
"evenge have been committed by the natives on Europeans, chiefly in
connection with the labour traffic.
59. —H.M.S. “Wolverene” at Api.
H.M.S. Ships have several times had to visit and punish tribes on
this island. The Commodore in the “ Wolverene ” was there a few
years ago, after the massacre of a crew of a vessel.


60. —Natives of Mallicollo.
The long island of Mallicollo was visited by Captain Cook in the
year .1774. He estimated the length of the island to be 60 miles.
He was not prepossessed with the natives, but some traders who have
taken up stations among them have found them much like the
others. The island is likely to become a centre of enterprise.
Though frequently visited by Bishop Selwyn and Bishop Patteson
and the “ Dayspring,” no Missionary has yet been located on this
large and fertile island.
The Island of Ambrym, which is 60 miles in circumference, and
has an active volcano, has been occupied by a Missionary since 1883.
The Rev. W. B. Murray, M.A., and his young wife settled there as
the representatives of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales,
and have been making ground, acquiring the language, and gaining
the good will of the people.
The island is rich and rises to a height of 3500 feet. Clouds of
dust are sent from the volcano, and ships out at sea are often covered
with it. Traders have taken up stations on this promising island,
and the French Company have land there and a sphere of work.
On three islands to the north Bishop Selwyn has operated with
considerable success. Many young men have been taken to the school
at Norfolk Island and taught Christian truth, and sent back among
their countrymen. Some of the European Missionaries and the
Bishop him«elf spend a month or two on some of of the islands dur-
ing each year : numbers have been baptized. Many of the male
population however have been taken away by labour vessels, and this
has greatly hindered the work of the Missions and led to much blood-
shed. It ought to be prohibited. Bishop Selwyn says that most of
the adult males on the shore have been removed, and Mission work
must be now carried on among these farther in the bush.
The most northerly island of all is the largest; it was first dis-
covered in 1606, by Quiros, and by him called Espiritu Santo. He
desired to see all the Australian continent, which, lie thought he had
discovered, made a land of the Holy Spirit. He founded a New
Jerusalem in the large bay where he anchored, and lie named a river
that flowed into it the Jordan, where the dusky tribes might be bap-
tized into the faith of Christ.
No Missionary settled there for 260 years ; the Rev. J. D. Gordon
went for four months in 1869, and tried to pioneer the Gospel. He
was well received; and hoped to return, but he was not permitted.
In 1871, the Rev. John Goodwill, from the Synod of the Church of
Scotland in the Maritime Provinces of British America, fixed his
abode near Cape Lisburn and acquired the language; but the health
of his family led him to resign in 1874. The work has still to be
done, as no successor has yet been found to settle at Espiritu
Santo, the most populous of all in the New Hebrides. There
is great room for a large increase of Missionaries, several of whom
should be Medical Missionaries.


In thirty-fire years of the New Hebrides Mission, 4500 con-
verts have 1 been won to the faith of Christ. There have been thirty
European and Canadian Missionaries connected with the islands.
Of these seven are dead ; seven have retired ; four remained a very
short time ; and there are twelve now in the field. There are 100
native teachers, 8G schools, 800 communicants, and about 3000 regu-
lar worshippers of the true God. The whole Scriptures are printed
in Aneityumese; the Gospels in Aniwan; the four Gospels, Genesis,
and Acts of the Apostles in Eromangan ; a Gospel in Futunese ; a
Gospel in Tannese ; a Gospel, Acts, and Genesis in Fatese ; and
two Gospels in Ngunese—a dialect of the Fatese.
There are large islands yet remaining for the growing Presbyterian
Churches of Australia to evangelise. Bishop Selwyn operates on
three or four of the group to the north-west. The Wesleyan Metho-
dist Church has evangelised Tonga and Fiji, and is extending
the work to New Britian and New Ireland. The London Mis-
sionary Society has agents in the Loyalty, Samoan, Hervey, and
Ellice groups, and are now penetrating into New Guinea. The
French Protestants are occupying Tahiti, and the Hawaian native
Christians have crossed the line to reach the Marquesas Islands, whose
tattooed and savage people were so long in being Evangelised.
Gl.— Natives of the Marquesas Island.
The spheres of work in the South Pacific Ocean are thus divided
among the Missionary Societies without sectarian feeling, and with
the only rivalry of doing good. There are mission vessels attached
to the work. The “John Wesley” sails to Fiji and other stations ;
the “ John Williams” sails over the wide sphere of the London
Missionary Society’s work; and the small steamer “ Ellangowan ”
aids the Mission in New Guinea ; the “ Southern Cross,” which has
auxiliary steam power, visits the wide spread stations of the
Melanesian Mission; the “Dayspring” visits the New Hebrides,
and the “ Morning Star,” of the American Mission, crosses the
equator to visit the Marquesas. This has also got steam auxiliary
power, which the others may soon have.
G2.—Diagram of Population of the World.
Missionary work in the South Seas has blessed 300 islands and
won half a million of people to Christ. But there are 1000 islands in
the Pacific Ocean. There are large countries elsewhere. There is
much yet to be done. There are 1,400,000,000 of people in the
world.
Of these the Protestant Churches have ... 135,000,000
The Roman Catholic Church has ... 195,000,000
The Greek Church ... .. ... 85,000,000
There are of Jews ... ... ... 8,000,000
There are of Mohommedans ... ... 172,000,000
Leaving still Heathen ... ... ... 1,000,000,000


63. —The Triumph of Christ.
What a call to the Christian Church to arise and send forth the
Gospel till the Cannibal of the Isles, the Red Indian of the Prairie,
the Negro of Africa, the Buddhist of the Orient, and the Malioin-
medan all join in their Hosannas to the Saviour whose name is to
be blessed for ever, and whom all nations shall ever bless.
“ Saviour, lo ! the isles are waiting ;
Stretched the hand, and strained the sight,
For Thy Spirit new creating
Love's pure flame and wisdom’s light.
Give the word, and of the preacher
Speed the love and touch the tongue,
Till on earth by every creature
Glory to the Lamb be sung.”
JAS. MILLER & Co., Printers, 78 Clarence-street, Sydney.


NEW HEBRIDES MISSION.
The work of Christian Missions on the New Hebrides Islands is conducted
by Missionaries in connection with various branches of the Presbyterian
Church, as follows :
Missionary. Appointed. Location.
Church Supporting.
Rev. J. W. Mackenzie 1872 Efatd j
Re v. Joseph Annand, M.A., 1873 Aneityum V
Rev. H. A. Robertson 1872 Eromanga )
Presbyterian Church
of Canada.
Dr. Gunn .....1883 Futuna )
Mr. James H. Lawrie 1979 Aneityum 5
Free Church of Scot-
land.
Rev. John G. Paton 1868 Aniwa )
Rev. D. Macdonald 1871 Efate $
Presbyterian Church
of Victoria.
Rev. William Watt 1869 Tanna |
Presbyterian Church
of New Zealand.
Rev. Peter Milne 1869 Nguna I
Rev. Oscar Michelsen.. ..1878 Tongoa (
Presbyterian Church
of Otago and
Southland.
Rev. Mr. Gray 1881 Tanna j
Rev. Mr. Fraser 1881 Epi |
Presbyterian Church
of South Australia
and Tasmania.
Rev. W. B. Murray, M.A 1883 Ambrym
Presbyterian Church
of N. S. Wales.
Clerk of the New Hebrides Mission Synod.
Rev. D. Macdonald, Efate.
Agent for the New Hebrides Mission.
Rev. Dr. Steel, Sydney.
NEW HEBRIDES MISSION VESSEL “DAYSPRING.”
The “ Dayspring ” is employed in carrying on the work of the Mission,
and is supported by the annual contributions of the Sabbath Schools of the
following Churches, viz. : The Presbyterian Church in Canada, the Free
Church of Scotland, and the Presbyterian Churches of New South Wales,
Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania, New Zealand, and Otago
and Southland. The affairs of the vessel are managed by a Board in Sydney,
appointed by the New Hebrides Mission Synod.
The Board consists of the following gentlemen :
Rev. Dr. Fullerton,
Rev. Dr. Steel,
Rev. R. S. Paterson,
J. H. Goodlet, Esq.,
Captain Brlmner.
Rev. James Cosh, M.A., Secretary.
Agent for the Day spring :
Rev. James Cosh, M.A., Balmain, Sydney.
SST All communications respecting the Mission to be addressed to the Rev. Dr. Steel,
Sydney.
All communications respecting the “Dayspring” to be addressed to Rev. James
Cosh, M.A., Balmain, Sydney.






