

/=■! 3730
THE PAMPHLET
ENTITLED
“THE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISMS,”
(Lately re-printed and circulated in Launceston)
BROUGHT TO THE TEST OF SCRIPTURE.
Knowing how readily the mind may be tempted to embrace any form of
doctrine purporting to be Scriptural, by which that ordinance of our Lord’s
kingdom which is least convenient to flesh and sense may be set aside, and
as it is possible there may be some whose minds may be drawn to reflect
upon the subject of Christian Baptism, with a view to its adoption, and not
established in the Scripture verities pertaining to this ordinance, I have
undertaken the following corrective remarks, hoping to be a means of pre-
venting any from being misguided, or the mind disturbed by the publica-
tion above referred to. The writer thereof evidently displays great
earnestness and sincerity of purpose to glorify God in the views he pub-
lishes, but, as there is a zeal of God, not according to knowledge—it
behoves all Christians, by the inspired Word, to try the spirits and the
doctrines, whether they be of God.
My only intention being to expose and correct what I believe unscrip -
tural, with all consistent brevity, I proceed (commencing at page 9, where
in Ist paragraph the writer states the meaning of John’s testimony to be
“ I that am a servant do baptize with water, but He that is the Son bap-
tizes with the Spirit,” Observe an error here in using the present for
the future tense. John did not say “he doth baptize,” as though it were
a thing present and in perpetuity, as of the ordinary gifts of the Spirit,
but “ he shall baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire,” and this evi-
dently refers, first, to that special and abundant outpouring of the Spirit on
the day of Pentecost, accompanied by a visible appearance of fiery tongues,
intended to mark the advent of the kingdom of God, and indicative of the
future effect of this marvellous baptism, so called from the extent of the ma-
nifestation, for “ it filled all. the house where they were sitting,” and of the
subsequent operations of the Holy Ghost in that, by the heavenly light
and truth then and after communicated, all that was opposed to Christ in
God’s people—whether Jewish tradition or prejudice, or the pride of the
heart and self-righteousness—should be burnt up: thus “our God is a
consuming fire” ; —and, secondly, to that special occasion of the outpouring
of the Holy Ghost whereby the Lord was pleased to introduce the know-
ledge of his grace to the Gentiles. In proof of the above I quote Acts L
4 and 5, “ And (Jesus ) being assembled with them commanded them
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of
c S $


, o til hi ne, ye have heard of me. For John truly bap-
tized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many
days hence.” Also Acts xi. 15, 16—“ And as I began to speak the
Holy Ghost fell on them as on us at the beginning” (not in the ordinary
daily exercise of his gracious office, but as at the beginning, that is, at Pente-
cost). “ Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said
John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost.”
Surely John’s having, in the course of his ministry mentioned this
baptism with the Holy Ghost—which, with his own water baptism,
had, in reference to Christ’s kingdom, its proper place and order—by no
means shows that there was not another baptism appointed for profession
of faith in a Saviour glorified, as well as one yet to suffer; and besides
this, let it be observed that this singular and manifest descent of the Holy
Ghost was the immediate and independent act of Christ—“ He shall bap-
tize.” But was there no baptism enjoined to be performed by the apos-
tles or disciples of the Lord ; and, can it be supposed when the Lord Je-
sus (Matthew xxviii. 19) commanded his apostles to go and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, that he commanded them to undertake that which was his
own special office to accomplish, and could not be done by any other ?
That it was a special injunction to them, to undertake this baptism is clear ;
for the command continues—“ teaching them to observe all things what-
soever I have commanded you, all which must necessarily be the apostles
office to perform, since none but themselves and those to whom they com-
municated it could know what things they were which Jesus had com-
manded. Go teach, baptize, and teach. Again, it is quite clear the word
baptize or any of its derivations never occurs in Scripture meaning the
baptism of the Holy Ghost, excepting it be expressly so stated, but always
refers to baptism in water; and, when it is said baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, it is meant
that, as the result of this professional declaration of faith in Christ through
his mediatorial transactions, they are received by the Church into the pro-
fessed family of God, recognizing the glorious Trinity in their joint love
and several acts of grace to the redeemed.
In reference to the intention and import of John’s Baptism, it was mani-
festly a form of profession enjoined on those who acquiesced in and em-
braced John’s message, which was, that the kingdom of heaven was at
hand; it was a baptism of repentance from the vain conversation received
by tradition from the fathers, by which the Jews had-become impressed with
erroneous ideas of the benefits resulting from a descent from Abraham (so
said the Baptist, think not to say within yourselves “we have Abraham
for our Father,” &c.) and from a supposition of possibility and expectation
of obtaining life and favour by adherence to the ceremonies of the la\v, it
was likewise a confession of conscious sinfulness, and of hope in the remis-
sion of sin, published by John through the Lamb now appearing to take
away the sin of the world. John declared “ but that he should be made
manifest to Israel therefore am I come baptizing wjth (water.” Hence it
will be seen it was not nor could be (as stated in 2nd paragraph 13th page)


For John truly bap-
ie Holy Ghost not many
3 I began to speak the
INg” (not in the ordinary
ginning, that is, at Pente-
-ord, how that he said
il be baptized with the
ninistry mentioned this
is own water baptism,
dace and order—by no
appointed for profession
to suffer; and besides
ifest descent of the Holy
Christ — u He shall bap-
performed by the apos-
sed when the Lord Je-
es to go and teach all
md of the Son, and of the
ke that which was his
r 7 Kfx. u, Hiv/UIOGIVCO dim
be done by any other ?
ake this baptism is clear;
bserve all things what-
be the apostles
those to whom they com-
“ which Jesus had com-
municated it could know what things they were which Jesus had com-
manded. Go teach, baptize, and teach. Again, it is quite clear the word
baptize or any of its derivations never occurs in Scripture meaning the
baptism of the Holy Ghost, excepting it be expressly so stated, but always
refers to baptism in water; and, when it is said baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, it is meant
that, as the result of this professional declaration of faith in Christ through
his mediatorial transactions, they are received by the Church into the pro-
fessed family of God, recognizing the glorious Trinity in their joint love
and several acts of grace to the redeemed.
In reference to the intention and import of John r s Baptism, it was mani-
festly a form of profession enjoined on those who acquiesced in and em-
braced John’s message, which was, that the kingdom of heaven was at
hand; it was a baptism of repentance from the vain conversation received
by tradition from the fathers, by which the Jews had-become impressed with
erroneous ideas of the benefits resulting from a descent from Abraham (so
said the Baptist, think not to say within yourselves “we have Abraham
for our Father,” &c.) and from a supposition of possibility and expectation
of obtaining life and favour by adherence to the ceremonies of the law, it
was likewise a confession of conscious sinfulness, and of hope in the remis-
sion of sin, published by John through the Lamb now appearing to take
away the sin of the world. John declared “ but that he should be made
manifest to Israel therefore am I come baptizing wjth Vater.” Hence it
will be seen it was not nor could be (as stated in 2nd paragraph 13th page)


the last and liveliest ceremony of the law, nor any ceremony of the law at
all; for it was a profession of repentance from expectation of remission of
sin through any legal sacrifice, work, or ceremony whatever.
Page 15th, Ist paragraph, our author asserts John’s Baptism did not
give entrance into the kingdom of God. No, but the subsequently
appointed water baptism—the Christian baptism of the New Testament —
did, as spake the Lord himself — tC Except a man be born of water and of
the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God”—thus most distinctly
declaring the only appointed entrance into the visible kingdom of God is
through water baptism. How can it be thought, as our author asserts,
that the kingdom of God on earth Is wholly a Spiritual kingdom while
composed of sinners professing faith in things unseen. Did not the apostle
accuse one of the churches of carnality ? Such it never will be till at that
final separation testified by our Lord in Matthew’s 13th chapter, in several
places : at the last of which, commencing 47th verse, the Lord very clearly
thus explained the character of his kingdom on earth—“ Again the king-
dom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the sea, and gathered
of every kind, which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down
and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away—so shall it be
at the end of the world” &c.—Not until the consummation of all things,
when it will be formed entirely of the glorified Spirits of the redeemed,
will it be altogether a Spiritual kingdom. Why then, so long as the
visible and corporeal includes the Spiritual, should it be objected that the
entrance thereto should be visible and material in its nature, forming
according to the Lord’s design, a visible means of religious profession,
symbolizing spiritual things, for a visible kingdom, manifestly composed,
according to the Lord’s teaching, of good and bad till the final judgment.
Page 16th, 7th line.—lt is implied that John’s Baptism is a figure or
shadow of the baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire, which it never was.
John says it was for the manifestation of Christ to Israel, and not the
Holy Ghost, or any woi’k of his.
Same page, 32nd line—it asserts “to bring signs and ceremonies into
the kingdom of truth is to act against Christ glorified ; ” yet the Lord
himself most distinctly ordained two visible ceremonies, each with its
special use as pertaining to his visible kingdom, viz., water-baptism
and the Lord’s Supper, one as a mean of Christian profession, the other
commemorative of Christ, and to exhibit professionally Christian fellow-
ship and unity.
Last paragraph, same page—l answer, according to the Word of truth,
that water- baptism professionally makes men Christians ; for the doctrine
of the Lord declares that it giveth entrance, as will presently more clearly
be shown, and the Acts of the Apostles prove the same thing. “As many
as gladly received the word were baptized, and the same day were added
to the Church about three thousand souls,” baptism being the initiatory
rite. The intermixing of the Church and the world is not the effect of
Christian Baptism, but of men’s perversion and blindness, and Satan’s
craft and delusion, who has abundantly availed himself of baptism and
other outward forms of visible Christianity for promoting his ill designs.
To save time, I reply to the last paragraph but one (page 17) by


quoting from a pamphlet, embracing another aspect of controverted visible
Christianity. It bears upon the import of the Saviour’s discourse with
Nicodemus, recorded 3rd chapter'of John’s Gospel. The Saviour, conscious
of the mistaken dependence placed by the Jew in his Ahrahamic descent,
communicates to him the important and startling truth that something
more than a mere birth in nature was essential to a knowledge and enjoy-
ment of the kingdom of God—even a being born again. This provokes
from the Jew an expression of surprise and enquiry as to the nature of
this new birth. In the sth verse, Jesus, in reply, explains a little further
that there is a twofold sense in which a man is to be born again—first of
water, without which none can enter into the visible or professional
kingdom of God on earth; and, secondly, of the Spirit, without which
none can enter the eternal kingdom of God in the heavens. In the next
verse the Lord further explains a distinction implied between the being
born of water and of the Spirit—“ That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; signifying that the fruit of
the flesh, whether it be natural generation or religious profession, is only
fleshy, and subject to corruption—“ the flesh profiteth nothing;” while
the fruit of the Spirit is spiritual in character, incorruptible, and eternal;
and as the wind, independent of human agency, is recognised by its sound,
so the members of Christ, born of the Spirit—equally independent of any
thing pertaining to the flesh (“not of him that willeth nor of him that
runneth”) —are known by the Spirit’s fruits. Some aver that the Lord
Jesus, by the phrase “born of water,” meant born of the Spirit, or water
as an emblem of the Spirit. Why the Lord should be supposed to have
used such a singular repetition, “ Except a man be born of the Spirit and
of the Spirit,” I cannot imagine, or see the common sense of it. Nor does
it appear to me throughout the whole of his conversation with Nicodemus
that the Lord discoui'sed in any other than the plainest language, not seek-
ing to mystify with symbolical terras, but to explain the spiritual ideas
he intended to communicate by a reference to such resemblances in nature
as best served to illustrate his meaning. To my mind there is no doubt
that when the Lord said “ born of water,” he plainly intended a pro-
fessional birth with Christ, through the instrumentality of water; and,
when he said “ born of the Spirit,” he meant a vital and gracious union
with Christ, the first-born from the dead, revealed to the mind by the
agency of the Spirit.
While here, it will bo desirable to trace out the Scripture import of
being born again, and the very fact that the new birth is declared to be
essential to an entrance into the kingdom of God refers us to Him who is
emphatically the door, the way. the life, and the truth. Was Christ, as
Head of Life, and Representative of his people, born again to God ? Read
for a reply 13th Acts, 30th to 34th verses —“ God raised Him from the
dead, and we declared unto you glad tidings, how that the promise made
unto the fathers. God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that
he hath raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the 2nd Psalm,
Thou art my Son, This day have I begotten thee.” What have we here
but a clear and distinct prophetical testimony to Messiah’s regeneration or
being born again in his resurrection, and the comment of the Holy Ghost


by the Apostle thereon, forming a complete Scripture explanation of what
is meant by being boim again—Jesus made sin for the salvation of his
people, and as such, forsaken of God, (sin’s just penalty.) Separation is
a necessary effect of sin, (see 59th Isaiah, 2nd verse.) —“ Your sins have
separated between you and your God.” Where sin is, there must be sepa-
ration. What a proof of this we have in the words of his dolorous cry
emitted in the moment of his overwhelming soul agonies, separation his
chiefest pang—“ My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me,” re-
corded 27th Matthew, 46th verse. Jehovah saw the travail of his soul,
and was satisfied; beyond that moment it was not possible he should be
holden of death; wdierefore God raised him up, (2nd Acts, 24th verse,)
and he is then (Ist Romans, 4th verse,) “ declared to be the Son of God
with power according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from
the dead.” Also, (Ist Coloss. 18th verse,) —“ The firstborn from the dead.”
Having put aw'ay sin by the sacrifice of himself, he is born again unto God
in his resurrection, and his sonship, as begotten afresh, or born again, is
therein very blessedly witnessed to by the Holy Spirit, when Jesus in his
baptism exemplified his resurrection as recorded by three of the four
Evangelists, (Matt. 3rd chapter, 16th verse,) has it—“ And Jesus, when
he was baptised, went up straightway out of the water, and lo ! the heavens
were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a
dove and lighting upon him, and 10, a voice from heaven saying, This is
my beloved Son in wdiom I am well pleased: thus testifying to his re-
surrection glory as manifesting the completeness of his work, resulting in
the renewal of his sonship, called a being begotten of God ; and Ist Peter,
3rd chapter, 18th verse,) as Head of his Church, he is said to be quickened
by the Spirit, and elsewhere, as the first-born and first-begotten from the
dead. Thus is the Church, with and in her living and glorious Head,
born again to God, to a sinless, and righteous, and endless life.
In the Ist John and 12th verse we find it stated that receivers of Christ
are capacitated to realize their relationship to God as sons, being born
not of human will or agency, but of God, that is in Christ, so that their
receiving Christ is the fruit and evidence of their sonship, which arises not
from human intervention or will, but from the working of the “ Mighty
Power of God which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the
dead and gave him to be Head over all things to the church, which is his
Body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.” The head and members
were thus together born again or renewed in life to God through the re-
surrection from the dead. In the Ist chapter of Peter’s Ist Epistle and
23rd verse, immediately connected with the resurrection of Christ men-
tioned in the 21st verse, it is thus written :—“being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth
and abideth for ever,” from which the plain inference appears to be that the
being born again of incorruptible seed relates to the unity of the members
with the Head in His resurrection, who is indeed, as the promised seed,
the substance of the Word unfolded to the heart by the sure message of the
Gospel of God through the Spirit. Indeed, is he noffemphatically desig •
nated The Word?
In James, Ist chapter 18th verse it is said, “of his own will begat he


us with the Word of Truth,” signifying that the Word of Truth was and
is the instrument made use of to give us the knowledge of our spiritual
regeneration or new birth in Christ, which is indeed substantially the^ gos-
pel revelation. “ I delivered unto you,” says the Apostle, “ that which I
also received, how that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures
and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to
the Scriptures.” “In Christ shall all be made alive.” So by the Gospel
we arrive at the knowledge of the foundation upon which we enter the in-
visible and eternal kingdom of God s—so5 —so it is, born of the Spirit, begotten
by the Word :—but all refer to Him in whom the Church is redeemed
from sin by blood, and raised or born again of God to righteousness and
glory, quickened or made alive or born again together with Christ.
In the first Epistle General of John we read in several places the ex-
pression “ born of God,” and in all, the ultimate if not immediate reference
is, to what the Church is in her risen Lord. For instance, 1 John 3rd
chapter 9th verse—“ He that is born of God doth not commit sin —-is
manifestly such ; for James says, speaking of the Church in her terrestrial
estate, “In many things we offend all.” Paul to the Romans says “The
evil that I would not that I do,” and to the Galatians “ The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would,”
From all the above, I think it must be gathered, that the term born
again used by our Lord in the 3rd chapter of the Gospel by John imports
an identity with Christ in his resurrection, and the term born of water
refers to "an exemplification of faith therein professionally, through the
appointed medium of water, and the term “born of the Spirit” signifies
not the first operation of the Lord the Spirit upon the children of God,
whereby, according to the Gospel record he convinces of sin, but that
secondary fruit of his gracious working whereby he convinces of righteous-
ness, (because says Christ I go unto my Father,) leading them into a con-
scious deliverance from sin by a spiritual fellowship with the Lord Jesus
in his resurrection —that crowning point of his triumph over sin, death, and
hell.
Thus, it may be clearly seen, that material water exactly answers all
the purposes for which the Lord ordained its use; and the Spirit and the
water perfectly harmonize in sacred testimony to the Christ of God.^
The matter of the last paragraph but two (page 18) I have considered
and answered in showing that Scripture warrants the belief that the
baptism of fire referred to the visible fiery tongues appearing at the
great Spiritual immersion on the day of Pentecost.
What is advanced in page 19 has already been commented on in other
places, till the paragraph concluding the page, and continuing the next,
to which I reply, it was not to be expected in the narrations of the bap-
tizings of the apostles and first Christians, that it must be stated each
said—l baptize thee in the names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
because, when the Scripture records the fact that they baptized, all must
needs understand that, as the apostles of the Lord, they exactly conformed to
the Lord’s precise injunctions, whether as to material, form, or declaration.
Besides, does it not appear most plain from Paul’s question to the Ephe-
sian disciples, when he found them ignorant of the existence of the Holy


Ghost—“ Unto what then were ye baptized ? —that the name of the Holy
Ghost was mentioned in the form of Christian baptism, how else should
Paul expect, on account of their having been baptized, they must b e
cognizant of that name ? ” On being informed that they had only been
baptized in faith of a Saviour expected, they corrected their mistake, _ and
were at once baptized in the name of the Saviour, manifested in sufferings,
death, burial, and resurrection, as symbolised in ordinance —and as
the one way of reconciliation and access to a Triume God.
The next paragraph (page 20) requires that I observe upon that saying
of Paul to the Corinthians—“ I thank God that I baptized none of you but
Crispus and Gaiushis reason for the assertion is obvious, which was,
that there was a disposition in the Church to attach more importance to
teachers than was meet, and with minds so unstable as some of those he
addressed, it was a very reasonable conception that some might say or
imagine Paul had baptized in his own name; but it cannot be supposed,
though Paul baptised not with his own hands, that he was indifferent to
the Lord’s ordinance, or failed to see that those who believed tlnougli his
testimony, made a due profession of the name of Jesus by the agency of
those his companions who undertook that work. If, as our author asserts,
Christian Baptism were that alone with the Holy Ghost and with fire, or
the operations of the Holy Ghost on the minds of believers, I aul s minis-
try must have had a very limited effect in Corinth, which the Scripture
evidently contradicts. Is it at all reasonable to suppose that Paul ever
baptised with the baptism of John, or that the only hearts on whom God
wrought, through his ministry at Corinth, were those of Crispus and Gaius,
and the household of Stephanus ? One or other it must be, if there were
no other baptism but that of John and with the Holy Ghost. Indeed our
author appears to take the liberty of making the term baptise mean w uc i-
ever answers his purpose; when the Saviour commands baptism it means
that of the Holy Ghost; jwhen Paul says I baptised, it means the baptism
of John. He also assumes,' what the Scripture certainly does not indicate
or warrant, but otherwise, viz., that there were many Churches planted in
Paul’s time, who were never washed at all with water baptism. Indeed,
Paul knew well the precise intention of baptism with water, as ordained
by the Lord in the visible church, and exactly what was the power and
influence of the Holy Ghost in manifesting the new creation of God.
In answer to last paragraph (page 20 and continued page 21), I uou t
ask, can anything be more unreasonable than the supposition, that in a 1
the numerous instances of baptising recorded in the Acts of the Apostles,
the Apostles and their coadjutors practised the baptism of John ? dhcir
commission being to preach salvation through a suffering and gloufied
Saviour, is it in the least likely they should baptise believers into a pio-
fession or faith in the Saviour’s appearing being yet at hand and future ?
Surely the one solitary instance of Paul’s circumcising Timothy, for a very
special reason, because of the difficulty of access to the Jews through an
uncircumcised person, could be no means of giving the least foundation for
asserting that the Apostles of our risen Lord ever on any account admin-
tered the Baptism of John. . ~
Last paragraph (page 21) it is stated that ‘ ‘ Anabaptists make washing


“ with material water so necessary a thing in spiritual worship—yea, and
“ more essential to the communion of saints than the very Spirit itself,” —>
which I think will be best replied to by stating the views in this particu-
lar, which I think more generally obtain with Christians, called for dis-
tinction’s sake Baptists or Anabaptists, embracing what is called the close
communion sentiment. They hold that water baptism is plainly asserted
in Scripture, as Christ’s own appointment, designed as a mean of entrance
into his visible kingdom—that being distinctly enjoined by the Lord, no
man, therefore, ought either to alter or omit it: it is consequently
essential to a right professional entrance to that visible kingdom, which
the Lord has said cannot be entered without it—“ Except a man be born
of water, he cannot enter into the kingdom.” Without adopting this
entrance—there being no other—how can anyone have right to the visible
fellowship of the kingdom he has not entered, or the visible ordinance
exclusively pertaining to it? We claim no right to any interference with
the exercises of the Spirit’s fruits in the Lord’s people, but feel, as the
Lord’s church, that a responsibility rests on us, both by precept and exam-
ple, to teach what the commandment of the Lord is, in reference to the
order and constitution of his visible kingdom, and that it ought not to be
neglected, or any human invention substituted for it. We ascribe nothing
to it but what the Lord ordained it for—a visible entrance to that which
is visible, external, and temporal, and no other importance to it, but
that it is assuredly the definite command of our Lord and Saviour.
Our author next proceeds (page 22) to explain his views of what he
terms Christ’s, or the only New Testament Baptism, which he asserts is
Spirit or fire Baptism, and he quotes for it Ephesians iv. 6, in which I
cannot, with my utmost effort, find any proof of such assumption. In the
context we find Paul urging the maintenance of peace among the unity of
the Spirit by these considerations—“ There is one body and one Spirit,
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and Father of all.” What proof can hence be gathered
that baptism means the influences of the Holy Spirit ? Most clearly none.
Undoubtedly, were such intended, it would precede the word faith in this
sentence, being the cause thereof; but it comes after, and represents the
one water baptism ordained by the Lord to be adopted as the fruit of faith,
constituting one visible form of profession of the Church’s most holy faith.
Thus, One Lord Jesus, the Mediator between God and men, one Faith,
embracing his person and salvation, and one baptism, ordained and prac-
tised for the visible and manifest profession of such faith, and thereby the
mean of entrance into the visible kingdom of God : —1 Cor. xii. 13 is the
next quotation we have to notice.— “ For by one Spirit we are all baptized
into one Body, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit,”—the
clear import of which we have in the context. The Apostle, having
spoken fully of diverse spiritual gifts, proceeds to guard the church against
a possible effect of them in leading to partialities, or erroneous ideas of the
superiority of one above another; to this end he reminds the church, first,
that whether the gift be of a higher or lower order, it is the self-same
Spirit that worketh and divideth to all severally as He will, and that, as
many different members harmoniously constitute one human body, so also


the spiritual Body of Christ. Then, in the verse quoted, he refers to the
visible professional baptism of the Church, and the teaching of the one
same Spirit, directing to a recognition of the unity of that body into which
all were baptized through Christ the Head, and which in baptism they
professionally join. That Spirit makes the baptismal ordinance in its
symbolic illustrations, effectual to the purposes of manifest union, and into
that one Spirit in its influences all have been made to drink or participate,
whatever may have been their previous circumstances or condition, whether
Jews or Gentiles, bond or free ; in all which are comprised several reasons
wherefore there can be no schism of the body without contradicting the
teachings of the Holy Ghost, and wherefore there should be the same
apparent care among the members one for another, whatever form of gift
each might possess. Surely in all this is nothing to shew that there is
only a Spirit baptism, and no water baptism in the Christian Church.
Let it be specially noted the Holy Spirit is here said to be the baptizing
agent, not the material baptized into, as on the occasion of the abundant
outpouring on the Day of Pentecost. So then He it is who, while the
Church accomplishes that which is external of the ordained symbol, bap-
tizes the living Church through the figure into her glorious Head, making
effectual that ordinance to spiritual purposes which, without his grace, is
but a lifeless form.
Page 22nd, 6th line (Acts viii. 16) is quoted—“ For as yet the Holy
Ghost was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus;’’and the author really undertakes to explain the
baptism there recorded as John’s Baptism. Did John ever baptize in the
name of the Lord Jesus ? Those who embraced John’s message were
baptized as John’s disciples, with the baptism of repentance, which he
preached, associated with an injunction to believe in Him that should
come after him. Certainly none were ever baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus until after his resurrection glory by the Great Witnesser
of Truth, opened up to the eye of faith the perfection of His mediatorial
transactions, and exhibited his Divine suitability for all the purposes of
mercy and salvation to a guilty, helpless world. It could therefore be
none other but the one baptism in water invariably used by the Lord’s
Apostles, indicating fellowship with a risen Lord, and not fellowship with
John’s Doctrine of a Saviour yet to be revealed. I have heretofore
remarked on the matter with which this paragraph concludes.
Page 23 (next paragraph).—That spiritual and real comfort is alone
derived from the gracious operation of God the Holy Ghost, who is em-
phatically the Comforter, is most fully admitted; but, that it is effected
by the baptism of the Holy Ghost, which was a Pentecostal manifestation,
as before named, cannot be proved.
Same page (last paragraph) occurs a quotation from Ephesians v. 26, —
“ Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the word.” The Scripture sense whereof,
as I understand it, I here transcribe from a previously named pamphlet—
“ evidently implying that the sanctification and cleansing mentioned is
that fruit of the Lord’s grace in his substitution which pertains to the
operations of God the Holy Ghost in his unfolding truth upon the mind.


of the Church through the Word, and its constraining influence to an
obedience as to professional standing and manifestation of purity through
the emblematic ordinance of water baptism,” and then the glorious ultima-
tum that he might present it to himself a glorious Church without spot or
wrinkle or any such thing.
From page 24 to the end many good things are ascribed to what the
author calls Spirit Baptism, but which being the ordinary gracious gifts
of the Holy Ghost to the redeemed, I have no more to say but as they
seem to be simply the Spirit’s effectual ordinary operations, and by no
means the result of any baptism or extraordinarily profuse descent of the
Spirit, to which alone Scripture applies the term Baptize with the Holy
Ghost, I shall therefore now only notice the several Scripture texts the
author has selected in support of his views. First, that in Galatians iii.
27, —“As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ;”
wherein the Apostle, having warned the Galatian church against legal
Judaizing teachers, reminds them of the profession made by each in bap-
tism, which was or ought to be a visible declaration of putting on Christ
in his resurrection life, in which all distinction of birth, nation, and every
temporal circumstance whatever, is entirely obliterated. We put on
Christ professionally by water, and spiritually and truly by the Holy
Ghost, We understand and know our oneness with Christ, not by Spirit
baptism, but by the teaching and witness of the Holy Spirit within us to
that great reality.
Romans vi. 3. and following verses, quoted last paragraph (page 25).
The Apostle, supposing that as a sequence of his publishing the doctrines
of grace, as stated in the former part of his epistle, such a question might
arise, as that, seeing God is glorified in pardoning iniquity, shall we not
add sin that grace may more abound, instantly calls the thought of the
Church to the profession of oneness with Christ in his death made in bap-
tism, through which ordinance all had visibly put on Christ, and immedi-
ately inquires, how it is possible that the dead should commit more sin,
our old man being crucified with him that the body of sin might be
destroyed ? Such a conception must involve a palpable contradiction to
their baptismal profession. How can the dead act so as to commit more
sin ? By immersion in the watery symbol, they professionally participate
in the grave of Christ, and by rising up out therefrom—(the form as
exactly detailed in the baptism of the eunuch, Acts viii. 38, 39) —in his
resurrection ; having made therefore such profession, we ought to walk in
that newness of life we have professed to believe in, a life at God’s right
hand, where Christ sitteth, freed by death from our Adam-nature, with all
its sinful propensities and actings, and not entertain a thought of doing
that, which that nature that is destroyed alone can do. “Knowing this,”
says the Apostle, “ that our old man is crucified with Him, that henceforth
we should not serve sin, for he that is dead is freed from sin,”—That is to
say, by faith of union with our Sacrificial Head and Saviour, being dead,
we are therefore freed from all the fruits of sin, consequently can do no
more to serve it or subject ourselves to its penalties—the one full atone-
ment made having taken in all the debt of the Church, past, present, and
future, it is impossible more debt by them can be contracted; therefore
the idea is self-contradictory.


Next quotation (close of page 26) is from 1 Cor. vi. 11.—“ And such
were some of you, but ye are. washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God.”
Here the Apostle reminds the Church of the rich blessings of redeeming
grace they possess in the Lord Jesus, the consciousness whereof is com-
municated to them by the Spirit of our God. So that in some sense, as in
reference to present influence upon the minds, He is said to be the agent
of these things, that is, he now conveys them to us, we being washed in
the blood of Christ, He informs us thereof in his office of Sanctifier and
Witness. But nothing here about Spirit baptism, nor water baptism
either, except it be that the water baptism may probably enough refer to
the professional cleansing resulting from putting on Christ in the shadow
of the water, made spirit and life, by the Glorifier of Christ.
Page 27 (Ist paragraph) Ephesians v. 26 is previously considered.
Same page (last paragraph) Titus iii, s.—“ According to his mercy he
saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost,”
is thought by our Author to speak of Spirit baptism, which I cannot at
all find, but conceive we have therein a reference to water baptism, under
the designation of the washing of regeneration, or that immersion or wash-
ing in water whereby we visibly put on Christ in the fellowship of bis
regeneration, or being born again to God, and then the mind kept in faith
and remembrance thereof by the renewing of the Holy Ghost: —thus,
according to his mercy, he saved us—visibly among men, by his ap-
pointed ordinance of Washing—mentally and secretly by the revealing grace
of the Holy Ghost by the Word.
In the Epistle to the Hebrews x. 22, we find it written—“ Having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water” (that is, baptismal, illush'ative of our profession) “ let us holdfast
our profession, for he is faithful that promised.” This passage (so clear to
the point) our Author has found it most convenient to slip by.
Same paragraph (makes reference to 1 Peter iii. 20, 21.) —“Few (that
is eight souls) were saved by water—The like figure whereunto even
baptism doth also now save ns (not the putting away of the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ ” —wherein I conceive is explained the mind of God in
those passages of Scripture where baptism seems to be associated
with salvation, which is that baptism has no cleansing virtue in it,
but simply serves professionally to declare before men our good conscience
toward God, and to exhibit that it arises from fellowship with the Lord
Jesus in his resurrection to a life without sin—a regeneration to God. It
likewise condemns the world, in as far as it shews the Christian’s regard
to God’s message concerning the wrath to come, from which he flees by
putting on Christ, God’s only way of salvation, and which the world
disregard or despise. In the same way did Noah evidence his fear of
God’s threatened destruction on account of sin (in which the world believed
not) by preparing the ark. The pouring out of Divine wrath against sin
was the made salvation of the righteous, the water which drowned the
wicked saved them; in like manner, the outpouring of Divine wrath upon the
Church’s surety, the desert of sin, represented in baptism—saves the Church.
It is surely a bold and singular contradiction to assert that water bap-
tism is not here alluded to. As the ark represents God’s mean of salvation


r ; M /
vl «q>i . f
from temporal destruction, so baptism represents Go®
from eternal ruin. And is it not an equally strange as
place Peter puts an end to baptism,”
—“ Even baptism doth also IS OW save us, not indeed the putting away of the
filth of the flesh,” —that is done by Him alone that “ loved us and washed
us from our sins in his own blood.” Circumcision purified as far as was
intended—that was ceremonially. Baptism purifies just so far as ordain-
ed, that is professionally, declaring before men our good conscience toward
God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Again, the apostle’s declaring that the outward form only of circumcision
did not impart spiritual character to a Jew, was merely given to correct
such erroneous ideas as to the use and value of that rite as the Jews were
commonly prone to, and it does not imply that circumcision ought not to
have been used, —that, as well as baptism, is the ordinance of God and each
has its several distinctive ends. The w r ater baptism of the Christian
Church being like circumcision, but an external emblem, of course can of
itself confer nothing Spiritual. A Simon may adopt it as making up the
number of tares among the wheat, to grow together until harvest; never-
theless all who assume the name of Christian ought to observe it because
the Lord commanded it, and designed its use for another purpose accord-
ing to his wisdom.
In reply to concluding paragraph (Page 29) I think it may be easily
understood that substance and shadow may consist together—at any rate
ceremonies and shadows may have special uses in the absence of the substance
—when we live and walk by sight in heaven instead of by faith, as now on
on earth, then will shadows and the use of them have passed away.
In conclusion, I recapitulate the main points I have deduced from the
Scriptures considered: —
Ist. —That the visible kingdom of heaven is represented as composed of good and
had, wheat and tares, making a common profession, and both growing together, until
the final judgment awards each his respective place.
2nd.—That the Lord Jesus instituted water baptism a visible form of entrance into
this kingdom, and asserted in plain language that the kingdom could not be entered'
but by that sign, that the apostles clearly understood this, and constantly and inva-
riably practised it, as also the ordinance of breaking of bread, appointed by the Lord.
3rd.—John’s preaching and baptism were an introduction to the coming of the
Lord and of His kingdom—“ The kingdom of heaven is at hand,” and his baptism
could not be consistently used after its advent.
4th.—That the baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire foretold, referred to the two
instances of the special and manifest descent of the Holy Ghost, first at Pentecost on
the Jewish church, secondly on the occasion of the Lord making the ingathering of
the Gentiles known to the apostles—that this was God’s own act, and no creature
could do it—yet the commission to the apostles was teach in the letter, and baptize
with water, the attending power and demonstration of the Holy Ghost would be,
and is, the result of the immediate will and act of God; and in following out the Lord’s
commission they have the promise of His presence unto the end of the world.
6th.—That Baptism was not intended to, nor could perform any spiritual office ;
nevertheless it is not therefore useless, as our author would imply, although it could
not cleanse from sin. As well might it be said it were useless to eat the bread and
drink the wine ; for, after it is done, we are no more partakers of Christ than we were
before ; the bread and wine cannot communicate Christ; neither baptism do the office
of the blood of Christ—wash away sin—yet each are the ordinances of the Lord, and
designed to be used in the church for the Lord’s glory. In the using of the one the
Lord promises to be with his followers to the end of the world, and the other is said
to be appointed to shew the Lord’s death till He come—“ Even so come Lord Jesus,
Amen.
