





> MOUNT VICTORIA,
@ i- §• Willi Hi’ Proprietor.
SISTANT from Sydney 77 miles, is 3,600 feet above tlie level
of the sea, and is in the immediate vicinity of all the most
romantic and charming scenery to be found on the
BLUE MOUNTAINS,
And is most Centrally situated for getting Trains to all parts-
The Hotel contains over Sixty Apartments (no expense having been
spared by the Proprietor to make it as homely and comfortable as
possible), comprising spacious and comfortable Dining and Drawing
Booms for Public use* and Suites of Booms for those who prefer
privacy.
The Bedrooms are lofty, well ventilated and comfortably furnished, all
Mattrasses being made of the very best Curled Horse Hair,
and Cleanliness is a speciality.
THE BILLIARD ROOM IS FURNISHED WITH ONE OF ALCOCK’S
BEST TABLES.
<Che Cellar i 0 otoeheb Inith ®tineo, spirits, anb § eero
of the berp best branbs-
THE STABLES ARE IN THE CARE OF AN EFFICIENT GROOM.
SEPARATE BATH ROOMS FOR LADIES AND GENTLEMEN.
uifi attendant will meet each train, Letters and Telegrams ‘promptly attended to.
THE NEAREST ROHTE TO THE CAVES, - DAILY COACH,
TEEMS: 10s. 6d. per day; £3 3s. per week-


The Tourists' Guide
TO THE
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
The Blue Mountains of New South Wales have won for
themselves a world-wide and well-merited fame for the
majestic grandeur of their scenery, and for the endless
variety of their natural beauties —from the frowning wall
of rock, beneath which lies a yawning abyss, to the little
tinkling waterfall nestling amongst the ferns.
Tourists and Health-seekers from all parts of the
civilised world have visited these mountains, and after
viewing them with astonishment and delight, have returned
home invigorated by the bland pure air, and enchanted
with all they have seen.
The public of New South Wales are truly to be con-
gratulated upon the fact that they have so close at hand
scenes quite as wonderful, quite as beautiful, and quite as
health-giving, as the historic old world mountain resorts;
for it can truthfully be asserted that the Blue Mountains,
whilst they possess many characteristics which are unique,
are unexcelled even by the rugged grandeur of the Alps,
the Pyrenees, or any other mountain scenery of Europe
or America.
Of all the townships situate upon the Blue Mountains,
the oldest and by far the most convenient to sightseers
is TWount \sictopia. This town, which a recent writer
has well defined as “ The Paradise of Tourists,” lies 77


“THE SCHOOL”
Jffjmtjl t/gfona, Jjfomjlaitt**
A BOARDING SCHOOL FOR BOYS.
Limited, to 60. Present Number 50.
M . G, RIENITS, Principal,
Assisted by efficient Teachers.
Commodious buildings have been erected, with due regard to the
efficient working of the school, as well as to the comfort of the boys.
The healthiness of Mount Victoria is well known. The bracing-
air and invigorating climate work wonders in the case of delicate
boys; these receive every attention necessary. The domestic arrange-
ments are attended to by Mrs. Rienits, who strives to secure the
comfort of the boys.
In the course of instruction, special attention is paid to Writing,
.Spelling, Composition, Letter Writing and Arithmetic, subjects so
essential to boys preparing for business. Book Keeping is included
in the coarse for the advanced pupils. A special class is formed for
the younger pupils. Regular evening lessons are given.
Pupils are at all times under strict supervision. Military Drill
and Dancing form part of the course of instruction. The bearing
.and manners of the boys are well attended to.
4ss s m n
For an English Education according to the Standard for the
Civil Service Examination.
£ll 11s. a quarter; Including Washing, Mending, etc.
Payable in Advance.
Quarters commence from date of entrance
An Entrance Fee of £2 2s. is charged to cover expense of plate and
linen. One quarter’s notice, or half a quarter’s lee, required before
removal of Pupil.
EXTRA S:
Music (Piano or Organ) ... ... £2 2s. a quarter.
Latin, French, or German ... ... £1 Is. ~
Text Books for these subjects may be obtained at the School.
PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION


miles by rail west of Sydney, in the centre of all the most
lovely and enchanting scenery of the district, at an
elevation of 3600 feet above sea level. One cannot take
a stroll in any direction from Mt. Victoria without being
charmed with the views to be seen on all sides —whilst
from Mt. Victoria, through some of the most beautiful
scenerv in the world, runs the best road to the world-
j 7
renowned Jenolan or Fish River Caves. These caves, the
most perfect of their kind ever known, have been graphi-
cally described by many able writers, both native and
foreign, and have been the theme of universal admiration ;
but after all. words are totally inadequate to convey any
idea of the truly marvellous skill which nature has em-
ployed to make these caves enchantingly lovely, and on
a personal inspection, the visitor will fully endorse the
opinion, so often expressed, that the dazzling beauty of
stalactite and stalagmite defy alike the genius of the
word-painter and the ingenuity of the photographer.
The road to the Caves, via Mt. Victoria, is not only
the best, but it is by far the shortest and least expensive.
The only other driving road necessitates a longer journey
in the train by 44 miles, an extra day’s coaching, and the
extra expenses of staying the night at the Hotel at
Oberon. So that no person, consulting his own interest
and comfort, should hesitate for a moment over the choice
of routes. Hitherto, the great drawback to the Mt.
Victoria road has been the walk from Mt. George to the
Cave House. This difficulty has now been completely
removed by the construction, at an enormous expense,,
or a first-class driving road—an easy gradient —from the
top of the hill to the Grand Arch, so that visitors can
now be driven to the door of the Cave House. By this
large expenditure the Government have, in a very practical
way, recognised the claims of this road in advance of
any other. Without doubt, that part of this road recently


R. R, KIENBLEY,
General Storekeeper,
j>wup Victoria
TIMBER, CEMENT, & GALVANIZED IRON.
MM kinds Produce Bought and Sold,
The Newest and Best Assorted Stock on
the Mount, and at the lowest possible
Prices.


constructed, besides being an engineering triumph, is
a great attraction to the Mt Victoria route, for the
views to be seen in transit are worthy the canvas of an
Academician. Thus, with increased facilities, the trip
from Mt Victoria to the caves can now be accomplished
in 4-J hours, inclusive of half an hour for luncheon half-
way, and these natural wonders can now be seen without
discomfort or inconvenience. A coach leaves Mt. Victoria
every morning for the Caves, and parties of two or more
can be sent at any time-
The climate of Mt. Victoria is the most perfect in
the colonies. The pure and invigorating atmosphere is
both healthful and healthgiving. Literary and professional
men, whose brains are weary with the strain of business,
will find the mountain air eminently suited to their case,
and the sleep which was denied them in the heat of the
metropolis, here comes quite naturally with corresponding
beneficial results. Here the gentle mosquito chanteth
not through the night watches; this is a great desideratum,
especially to persons unaccustomed to this prince of
insect fiends.
Although the public generally are fully alive to the
fact that a trip to the Blue Mountains in the summer is
very beneficial, an impression seems to prevail that these
mountains are almost uninhabitable in the winter. A
greater mistake than this was never made, as nothing is
more conducive to good healthy exercise than the cool
crisp weather which prevails during the winter months.
This part of the year is without doubt the time which
pedestrians should choose for their visits to the Blue
Mountains, as long distances can then be walked with a
minimum of fatigue. It is also an established fact that
the Blue Mountains stand unrivalled as a health resort
for consumptives and persons with weak chests, else why
should they be recommended by the most eminent


Swings (©hildi^en.
Fresh Eggs, Butter and Milk.
i Good lath.
OTTAGE,«-
Mount Mctorm,
PRIVATE BOARD and RESIDENCE,
Mrs. llfflll, lioprietress.
iIS situated only five minutes’ walk from the Railway
I? Station. Visitors will not regret paying this homely
retreat a visit during their trips to the Blue Mountains,
as Mrs. Howell makes it her special study to provide
in the best manner possible for the wants of Visitors.
Ladies wishing a change of air, but who are unable
to be accompanied by their friends, will be well cared for.
The House is situated on two acres of ground, one
acre tastefully laid out in Lawn and Flower Garden.
TERMS:
6s. per Qai; 3ss. per each Person.
ALSO (sOTTAGBS TO ItBT.


physicians of the day, In preference to the fashionable
though inferior, European watering places—for instance,
the South of France and Italy, or even Madeira?
Mt. Victoria affords every convenience to visitors of
all descriptions. Here are to be found first-class hotels,
unsurpassed in the Southern Hemisphere for their accom-
modation and internal arrangements. The several
proprietors have spared neither pains nor expense to
render their hotels all that could be desired, whilst their
cuisine is a speciality, and their hygienic appliances are a
study. To each of the hotels is attached a livery stable,
whence saddle horses and vehicles may be hired at any
time.
The various boarding-houses of Mt. Victoria are
models of comfort and convenience. Where all are of a
very superior class, it would be invidious to particularise,
and the intending visitor will do well to choose for him-
self, after consulting the advertisements, resting assured
that which ever be his choice, he will find himself in good
hands, and all his wants studied and attended to with the
utmost care and solicitude. An attendant awaits the
arrival of every passenger train at the Railway Station,
so that there need be no anxiety about conveyance of
la gg a g e > &c -
Furnished cottages of all sizes are at the disposal of
families or parties who wish to find themselves. Such
will find every necessary supplied by the various trades-
men of the town, whilst the purest of milk and dairy
produce of every description are supplied from the farms
situated in the salubrious district of Little Hartley. This
mode of spending a few weeks on the mountains, is
largely resorted to by families who are unable to afford
hotel expenses ; and as the cottage accommodation of
Mt. Victoria has greatly increased of late, visitors have a
proportionately larger choice of site.


MOUNT VICTORIA BAKERY.
HonfeotioneF, Pancjs Bread and Biscuit Baker,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
WARATAH HOUSE,
Uroprietredd.
y RS. has much pleasure in informing her
former Patrons and the Public generally that she is now
prepared to receive Visitors for the Season.
Terms * - «- 2 guineas f>er vueeiV
priuate Suites * 3-J do. do.


The hotels and boarding-houses afford all sorts of games
for the amusement of visitors. Billiards, bagatelle, cricket,
lawn tennis, and other recreations are at their disposal.
The services of the Church of England are ad-
ministered by the resident clergyman twice on Sundays,
whilst periodical services are held by Presbyterian,
Wesleyan, and Catholic Visiting Clergy, from Lithgow.
Church of England Sunday-School is held regularly in
the afternoon.
There are two boys’ schools at Mt. Victoria, and the
special advantage of the pure, healthy atmosphere should
have no small weight with parents in selecting schools for
their sons. At the larger of these schools at Mt. Victoria
military drill is enforced, with the best results to the
physique of the pupils.
A circulating library has been established at Mt.
Victoria, whence all the newest works of fiction may be
obtained. Here, also, is a very fine collection of
photographs of all the most beautiful scenery in the
district. These are well-worth the price asked for them,
as souvenirs of what may safely be called the pleasantest
holiday the visitor ever had.
The amateur photographer could not possibly select
a more fitting locality into which to bring his camera, for
a grand collection of photos could be made in a very short
space of time of views close at hand, though to photo-
graph all the lovely views, within driving distance, would
fill a lifetime. The same remarks apply in full force to the
artist, who will find not a few of his brethren u dreaming
the happy hours away” with brush and canvas.
To sportsmen who enjoy a kangaroo hunt, Mt.
Victoria offers ample pabulum to the taste, for marsupials
in abundance abound in the vicinity, to be captured with
dogs or to fall a prey to the gun, whilst hares in plenty
can be bagged by a good marksman.


N, & G. B, DELANEY,
Wholesale and I^bipail
(Jjamilir gtitchqs aid §ali^,
MOUNT VICTORIA,
BLACKHEATH, AND LITTLE HARTLEY.
lilie fleet mi jjutton, flairy*fed Igtl
r * J J v
ETC., ETC.
SMALL GOODS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
Always on I)and.
All Orders for the Surrounding District Punctually
Attended to.
.A, TRIAL SOLICITED.




Mount Bictoria.
eV[Vi)
77 miles from Sydney.
3500 feet above Sea level.
I. 1. mmm - - Proprietor
Tr)E-OPENING of the old-established Model Boarding House ?
V known as Manor House, Mt. Victoria, with its large grounds,
extensive views, close proximity to the Station, and handy to all the
beautiful Scenery of the Bine Mountains, where Visitors can be
accommodated at the liberal charge of 7s. per day, or £2 2s. per week.
Liberal allowance will be made for families. Good Drawing, Reading
and Smoking Rooms, and Evening Amusements —Billiards, Chess,
Draughts, &c.
The whole is fitted and furnished with every comfort —not to be
equalled on the Mountains.
The Proprietor has also three nicely-furnished Cottages, com-
manding the same views as Manor House, and containing four and
seven rooms each, which can be rented by families from £2 2s. to
£3 3s. each per week, firing included. Arrangements can also be
made, if desired, to have their cooking done by the proficient cook
of Manor House.


A duly qualified Medical Practitioner resides at
Mt. Victoria.
Three passenger trains run from Sydney to Mt.
Victoria daily, accomplishing the journey in four hours.
The times of departure from Redfern Station are —•
9 a.m., 5 p.m., and 8 P.M. (the Mail), whilst on Saturdays
an Excursion Train leaves Sydney at 7 a.m., and another
at 1 '45 p-M.
The trains leaving Mt. Victoria for Sydney daily
are —2‘io a.m. (Mail), 5’15 a.m., and i'so p.m., arriving
in town at 6 a.m., 9'15 a.m., and 6 p.m. respectively.
On Monday mornings a Special leaves Mt. Victoria at
7*45, arriving in Sydney at 12 noon. Being the crossing
station for passenger trains, and the shunting station for
all mixed and goods trains, Mt. Victoria possesses
facilities and conveniences for sightseeing by rail of
which no other station upon the mountain can boast. In
the summer, when the passenger traffic is great, special
trains run daily in all directions.
Dept, from Sydney. Arr. at Mt, Vic. Dept. Mt. Vic, Arrive Sydney.
7 a.m. (Sat.) 11-30 a.m. 2-10 a.m.
9 A.M. 1 P.M. 5'15 A.M. 9-18 A.M.
145 p.m. (Sat) 6 - 30 p.m.
5 p.m. 9 - 45 p.m. 7’45 a.m. (Mon). 12 noon.
8 p.m. 11-50 p.m. 2-10 p.m. 6 - 5 p.m,
To describe even in the fewest words all the scenery
that is worth seeing in and around Mt. Victoria, would
fill a large volume —the following, of which a brief
account is given, are the principal but by no means all
the sights worthy of a visit in the immediate neighbour-
hood :
MOUNT PIDDINGTON.
Twenty minutes walk from Mt. Victoria brings the
visitor to the summit of Mt. Piddington, from which a very


FURNISHED COTTAGES,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
Situated on BATHURST ROAD, five minutes walk from
Railway Station.
THREE, FOUR OR FIVE ROOMS—PARLOR, BEDROOMS AND KITCHEN.
Each Cottage is completely and comfortably furnished. Bed and
Table Linen, Cutlery, Crockery, Cooking- Utensils, etc.
Also, Wood and Water provided.
Butcher, Baker, and Milkman call daily.
There are Three Stores at Mount Victoria where all necessaries
may be obtained.
lisp 13 Luggage will be Carried from and to Station free of Charge.
Rent for each Cottage SOs., 40s. & SOs. respectively,
For further particulars apply to
Mrs. H. G. E.IENITS, Mount Victoria,
Balmain Flousb, (Hount Uigtoi^ia.
SUPERIOR PRIVATE
Accommodation for fi&itors I families
TERMS - - 355. per week.
HORSE AND BUGGY FOR HIRE on the Premises at reasonable
terms, to convoy Visitors to the various Sights of the District.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO,
MRS. DOUGLASS,
Proprietress*


commanding and comprehensive view of the surrounding
country may be obtained. To the west, in the distance,
lie the ranges of hills which separate this district from
Bathurst, and in which lie hidden the Jenolan or Fish
River Caves. Hundreds of feet below Mt. Piddington,
on the same side, is a vast valley—the Kanimbla
Valley—the larger part of which is now converted into a
cattle station, the property of the Hon. E. Vickery. In
a southerly direction from Mt. Piddington is a good view
of the railway line as it twists and turns about in its
serpentine course, whilst on clear nights the South Head
Light may be clearly seen. On all sides mountain-peaks
stand out against the sky, some comparatively near, some
in the far distance ; but all shrouded in the peculiar veil
of blue characteristic of these mountains, and whence their
name is derived. Mt. Piddington is a government
reserve, and many improvements have been made by the
Trustees to facilitate inspection of the sights in the
immediate vicinity. A pavillion has been erected
upon the top of the mount, and paths have been con-
structed in all directions. After “doing” Mt. Piddington,
the visitor would do well to proceed, as directed by a
finger-post to the
FAIRY BOWER.
This is a most beautiful spot. Here the rugged nature
of the country is lost, and one enters into a vision of
dreamland. Ferns of every variety grow in luxuriance
on all sides, whilst at one’s feet runs a small streamlet,
ever and anon falling over in miniature cascades, and in
the early mornings the presence of the Lyre bird, with its
peculiar and ever varying note, adds to the fascination of
the spot. Passing on a little further the visitor arrives
at the Witches’ Glen.


EXCHANGE STORES,
MOUNT VICTORIA d BLAGKHEATH.
HUDSOII # SDBTDER,
(Sentpi
TIMBER AND GALVANIZED IRON
MERCHANTS-
ALL KINDS OF PRODUCE DEALT IN.
—gur gtorea otipply cverij requisite
at ||tjdnctj ||ate^


THE TOURISTS’ GUIDE TO THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
THE WITCHES’ GLEN,
Another charming spot! Here the ferns and flowering
plants are, if possible, more numerous and varied than
in the Fairy Bower, and, indeed, the Witches’ Glen is in
itself worth the trouble and expense of a trip to Mt..
Victoria. On the path to the left is Fern Cave.
COX’S CAVE.
This cave is called after its discoverer, and though a
little climbing is necessary to reach it, one is fully repaid
for the exertion by a glimpse at its interior.
GOVETT’S LEAP.
This truly majestic work of nature lies six miles from
Mt. Victoria, and as a good road runs the whole way, a very
pleasant drive is the result. Starting after breakfast,,
the visitor has ample time to see the Leap and to return
to lunch.
The Leap derives its name from a romantic incident
which lead to its discovery, A convict, Govett by name,
was working in a gang of roadmakers in the neighbour-
hood, and had the good fortune to elude the vigilance of
the guards and managed to make his escape. Seizing a
horse, he quickly mounted, and made off at full speed
closely followed by his guardians. On through bush
and scrub the fugitive urged his horse, until he came
the edge of a precipice. Utterly unable to check the
mad flight of his steed, the convict took that wild leap-
into eternity, to be dashed to pieces on the cruel rocks a.
thousand feet below.
The grandeur of Govett’s Leap defies description y
and one can but gaze on the scene in awe and wonder.




From precipitous heights the visitor gazes down to the
valley below ; so vast is the distance, that timber trees,
two and three hundred feet high, appear but shrubs, and
•enormous tree ferns, with the outstretched fronds, appear
to be little green spots flat on the ground. Over these
perpendicular walls of rock pours a mass of water, the
Govett’s Leap Falls, and as well described by a recent
writer, descends white and misty as driven snow, sways
as the wind blows to and fro like the veil of a bride ; the
vast height of the waterfall, the strong contrasts of
•colour, and the undulating motion so produced, impart-
ing a most charming effect. When the sun attains to a
certain altitude, a rainbow plays for hours around the
cloudy folds oTthis fairy veil.
Whilst visiting Govett’s Leap, the inspection of the
Mermaids’ Cave may be undertaken. This is an
exquisitely pretty spot clothed in lichens, ferns and
mosses. A small stream of water ripples through the
cave, and passes on in its course to the valley through a
scene as beautiful and fantastic as any depicted in the
Midsummer Night’s Dream.
FAIRY DELL.
This enchanting glimpse of the supernatural is the
property of the Hon. W. R. Piddington, who has by
damming the water at the fall, constructed a fine bathing
place. Visitors who enjoy a morning swim can make
use of this bath by obtaining permission, which is very
readily granted by the genial and worthy owner.
THE LITTLE ZIG-ZAG.
This is a pass from the top of the cliff at Mt. Victoria
to the Kanimbla Valley. As its name denotes, it consists


Mount Victoria Inn,
A New House lately opened, is situated at the foot of
Mount Victoria Pass, miles from Railway Station-
Visitors will find here all the comforts of a Home, a
first-class MENU, Moderate Charges, and every ac-
commodation necessary to make a trip to the Mountains.
one of the most agreeable epochs in their life.
Good Stabling attached to the House, and Special'
Vehicles kept for conveying Visitors to the various,
sights of Interest in the surrounding district, including;
the famous Jenolan Fish River Caves
Righolas Delaney,
PROPRIETOR,.


of a series of well-defined and well-constructed zig zag
paths, seventeen in all. These will try the staying power
of the tourist, but if taken slowly the ascent on the return
journey is not nearly so severe as might be supposed.
In the valley at the bottom of the Zig-Zag the
sportsmen will find kangaroo, scrub and rock wallaby,
and birds in plenty. At the foot of the seventh point,
nearly half way down the Zig-Zag, are to be seen the
Bushrangers’ Caves, which are most interesting. Care
.should be taken in exploring these caves, as a large chasm
in the rock exists at the far end of the upper cave, and as
no sunlight finds its way into them, these caves require a
■ candle for their inspection.
THE ENGINEERS’ CASCADE.
This is a really pretty little fall of water, especially so
in the winter months when the water becomes frozen, and
long icicles being formed, it presents a most charming sight.
Close at hand to this cascade is Ross’ Cave, which is
well-worth a visit.
MOUNT VICTORIA PASS.
This pass was constructed by convict labour, and is
really worth seeing as a specimen of the early enterprise
and engineering of the Colony. It is about two miles from
the station, on the old Bathurst Road. Lovely and fine
views are commanded all along the road ; the grand
peaks of the principal mountains standing out against
the sky, whilst occasional views of the valley beneath
may be had.
MOUNT YORK.
Mt. York is a nice drive or walk from Mt. Victoria. This
was the last place on the Blue Mountains passed by


Blaxland, Wentworth, and Lawson in their second
historical exploring expedition, and it is proposed to
erect a memorial stone on this spot. The view into the
valley of Hartley from this elevation is very fine, and is
totally different from any other view upon the mountains.
MOUNT WILSON.
The most beautiful drive in the colonies is that to Mt.
Wilson, which is situated some fourteen miles from
Mt. Victoria, and is a very favourite spot for picnics. Here
the country changes entirely from rocks and sand to deep
rich chocolate soil, and with a corresponding change of
vegetation. Magnificent tree-ferns, thirty and forty feet
in height, and immense sassafras trees are here to be
seen, whilst the views in all directions are simply perfect—
a more enjoyable day than one spent in a visit to Mt.
Wilson could not be imagined.
COAL MINE AND VICTORIA FALLS.
These lie about five miles from Mt. Victoria, and,
therefore, within easy driving distance. The mine has
not yet been opened, but seams of coal are visible on the
surface in many places. From the top of the mine may
be seen the prettiest and most picturesque waterfall on
the Blue Mountains—“ The Victoria Falls,” —whilst im-
mediately at the foot of the mine lies the valley of the
Grose.
Most interesting drives may be undertaken to
Lithgow, Hartley, and Hartley Vale. At Lithgow,
which is a mining town, the various coal mines, the iron-
works, and the potteries are all worth inspecting. The
road to Lithgow runs through Bowenfels, where the far-
famed Hassan’s Walls may be seen. Here are the cherry


THE TOURISTS’ GUIDE TO THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
orchards, to which so many picnic parties wend their way
in the fruit season.
At Hartley Vale, a seven mile drive from Mt.
Victoria, are the N.S.W. Shale & Oil Co.’s Works and
Mine. A visit to the Mine and the Refineries will be
found most interesting and instructive, and no visitor to
the mountains should leave without witnessing the
various processes gone through in making kerosene oil
out of the shale.
The above are a few of the grand and interesting
sights to be seen upon the Blue Mountains, but, before
closing this brief list, special mention must be made of
that wonderful triumph of engineering—the Great Zig-
Zag. This marvellous example of man’s ingenuity in
overcoming obstacles placed in his way by nature, is
situated between Mt. Victoria and Lithgow, and can be
viewed best by a morning trip from the former station.
Visitors leaving Mt. Victoria at 9-45, have ample time,
after passing over the Zig-Zag, to see Lithgow, and
return in time for luncheon at Mt. Victoria.
As before remarked, the visitor to Australia cannot
truthfully say that he has seen the Colonies without
paying a visit to Mt. Victoria, and all who do so will be
more than pleased, and their only regret will be the brevity
of their trip.
Walter Akhvrst Co, Printers, Sydney.


00707972


digt9ri?i.»-
(©HAS. ffIANNING, P^OP^IETO!^.
—H *t °
The accommodation
very moderate. TCorses
cription on hire, and an
any time and at most moderate rates.
To) * kt
BING only one minute’s walk from the ]^ail=
way, it is the most conveniently situated place
of accommodation on 3/[ount Victoria for
Tourists —more especially those visiting the
different places of interest on the Blue
is first*class, and the tariff
ses and TTehicles of every des=
an attentive groom is always in
the Jenolan or Fish River Caves at
l
