

ﬂﬁgitwe muss ﬂeague.
PRICE ONE PENNY


, DEAN’S YARD, WESTMINSTER ABBEY S.W
2
OBJECTS.
I.—-Purity among Men.
I I.A—-A Chivalrous Respect for Womanhood.
II 1.-The Preservation of the Young from Con-
tamination.
IV.——Rescue Work.
V.—A Higher Tone of Public Opinion.
All men who approve of the above objects should
take their part in helping to carry them out.
Full particulars of the Society’s work and methods
may be had from the Secretary.
Funds are greatly needed to extend the work.
REASONS FOR JOINING THE SOCIETY.
Because I AM A CHRISTIAN, and because the
sins against which this Society is contending are a
hateful offence against the purity and holiness of Him
by Whose Name I am called, and Who died for me.
Becausel AM A MAN, and therefore bound to
help all women, as being weaker than I am, and to
save them from degradation ; bound, above all, not to
make them the victims of my passions.
Because the evil is organised, and can only be met
by counter organisation. '


PAPERS FOR MEN.
No. VI.
THE TESTIMONY OF
MEDICAL MEN.
ARTHU R T. BARNETT.
64th THOUSAND.
PRINTED FOR THE
WHITE CROSS LEAGUE,
7, Decm’s Yard, Westminster Abbey.
1911.
Pl/ice Id.


LIST OF. AUTHORITIES QUOTED
Acton, William, the late; M.R.C.S.
Allbutt, Sir T. C. ; K.C.8., M.D., Cantab., D.Sc
F.R.S.
Barton, ]. Kellock, the late; M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
Beale, Prof. Lionel S., the late; F.R.S., F.R.C.P.
Carpenter, Alfred, the late; M.D., M.R.C.P.
Carpenter, W. 8., the late ;,M.D., F.R.S.
Chambers, T. King, the late ; M.D., Oxon.
Clark, “Sir Andrew, Bart, the late; M.D,
F.R.S.,V&C. ' " k
Clark, F. Le Gros, the late; F.R_.S., F.R.C.S.,
Clouston, T. S.; M.D. ‘
Cowell, George; F.R.C.S.
Duckworth, Sir Dyce; M.D., LL.D.
Dukes, Clement; M.D., M.R.C.P_
Edge, A. M.; M.D., B.Sc., M.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.
Gowers, Sir W. R.; M.D., F.R.S.
Humphrey, Prof. Sir G. M., the late; M.D.,
Cantab., F.R.C.S.
]acobson,=W. H. A.; M.A., Oxon., F.R.C.S.
Nason, James; M. 8., M.R.C.S., ].P.
New York, Medical Representatives of
Norway, Faculty of Medicine
Paget, Sir James, Bart., the late; D.C.L.:
LL.D., F.R.S., F.R.C.S. .
Parkes‘, E. A., the late; M.D., F.R.S..
Wheelhouse, C. G.; F.R.C.S.
“ Chastity is the conservation of life, and the conse-
cration of its forces to the highest use. Sensuality is
the waste of life, and the degradation of its forces to
pleasure divorced from use."


THE TESTIMONY OF
MEDICAL MEN.
ARTHUR T. BARNETT.
IN collecting the materials for this paper,
an attempt has been made to show, from
the Writings of eminent medical men-
(i.) That serious harm is done by allowing
boys to grow up without any deﬁnite
warning against impurity, since in
boyhood the foundation of much of
’ the social evil is laid.
(ii.) That continence is in no way injurious
to health, and that recommendations
to impurity are, from a scientiﬁc point
of view, unjustifiable.
(iii) That self-control is comparatively easy
for those who have kept themselves
pure during boyhood.
(iv.) That the cases quoted to show that
vice is a necessity, only prove how
imperious may become the claims of
this, as of any other habit, when
once men have become its slaves.
It should be borne in mind that this


medical evidence has been brought forward
to help the many thousands of men who, in
their best moments at least, wish to live
a Christian life, and who, nevertheless, have
an idea that on this question the moral and
the physical law are in conflict. There are
other men, of course, who are impatient of
any law, human or Divine, which interferes
with their notions of enjoyment; such men
this paper can hardly be expected to touch.
The number of extracts might, of course,
have been greatly multiplied, had it been
thought advisable to do so.
No argument is more often used to defend
a life of Vice than that which rests on the
“ necessity ” of sin ; i there is none which
tends more to make those who are struggling
to do right give up the battle in despair. It
seems, therefore, all-important to make it
clear that the so-called “necessity ” is only
a necessity parallel to that which confronts a
drunkard, who ﬁnds it almost impossible
(unless by outside aid) to break through the
chains that years of indulgence have wound
about him ; and in realizing this fact, workers
for purity will strain every nerve to keep the
young from those ﬁrst'beginnings of evil,
which, if yielded to, do, to a great extent,
make vice seem a “necessity.”


It will, perhaps, appear to some men,
when they turn to their own experience, that
(whatever may be said to the contrary)
continence is injurious to health. The
evidence given below goes to show that
restraint is harmless to those who are anxious
to be pure, and who are willing to use all the
helps at their command to keep themselves
from sin. The man who contents himself
with refraining from immoral acts, While
putting no ‘restraint upon impure thoughts
and the indulgence of sensual excitement,
can hardly wonder if he misses the reward
which comes to the really chaste.
As Mr. Acton says, “ No man or woman
can indiscriminately indulge their own sexual
passions without running the risk of ﬁnding
a disposition to gratify their sexual passions
at an early age inherited by their off-
spring.”
Yet human nature is not a “ ﬁxed quantity,”
but something which varies inﬁnitely in
different men, and which may be lifted,
altered, and transformed by the inﬂuences
which are brought to bear upon it; and we
are further told that such modiﬁcations for
good as we may be able to effect in our own
lives will be handed on to our descendants,


making it for them “easier to do right, and
harder to do Wrong.” -
If it is true that, through heredity, vice
may become almost natural to some, it is
equally true that; through heredity, self-
restraint may become natural to the children
of those who have kept their bodies in
subjection.
(I.) “That serious harm is done by
allowing boys to grow up with-
out any deﬁnite warning against
impurity, since in boyhood the
foundation of much of the social
evil is laid.”
WILLIAM ACTON (THE LATE), M.R.C.S., Surgeon to
the Islirzgton Dispensary, and formerly Exterrze to
the Vmereal Hospitals, Paris; F.R. Med.zmd
C/22";/. Society, cﬁc.
“I have said that it is my deliberate
opinion that in many cases it would be true
wisdom and true kindness for a parent,
openly and in plain language, to lay before
a boy the full extent of his danger, and that
the consequences of yielding on his part
would be most lamentable.”
ALFRED CARPENTER (THE LATE), M.D., M.R.C.P.;
Formerly Pa/esidmt of the Council of the British


Medical A ssociation, Examiner in State M edioine for
Univ. of London and Camba/idge; ].P. Sm/1/ey,
a"c.——“ The Principles and Practices of School
Hygiene,” p. 107.
“ Evil habits are learned most certainly in
very early life, and vicious practices will not
be so likely to be indulged in after fourteen if
they have not been learned before.”
F. LE GROS CLARK (THE LATE), F.R.S. Consulting
Surgeon 0 f St. Thomas’s H osjaital, and late Pl/esident
of the Royal College of Sm/geons.—“ The Physical
Consequences, Personal and Social, of Im-
purity.” (A Paper read before the C.E.P.S.,
November sth, 1885, p. 6.)
_ “ Reticence on this subject is a cruel denial
of the just claim of a child on his parent; for
it is idle to suppose that he will not be sub-
jected to temptation by his own nascent
passions; or that he can escape pollution in
the midst of many where one so disposed
can, and generally will,» corrupt others. . . .
We must not despise the day of small things,
or forget that the boy is father of the man,
and that the precocious indulgence of boy-
hood may, for obvious reasons, ripen into the
ungovernable passion of manhood, and thus
become responsible for the support of
prostitution.” '


CLEMENT DUKES, M.D., M.R.C.P., P/zysicicm to Rugby
liness, Temperance, &c.” (Pfintedfor private
circulation.)
F‘ I believe that the reason of the existence
of so much incontinence and prostitution in
the world is largely owing to this Vice of
masturbation in the young” (p. 150). . . .
“I believe that it is this eomrhencerﬁent of
evil which leads to so much debauchery after
school-life is over” (p. 155).
“Parents must begin to teach their
children the value of purity of life before they
ever part with them. Only to begin when
they are young men and women is about as
useless as to try to get on and stop an
express train when it is going at full speed.
It cannot be done ” (p. 162).
Eng., Physician to the Snlfoa/d Royal Hospital, and
to the Manchester Southern Hospiml.——“ Self-
Control,” p. 6.
“But the boy, or the young man, is beset
with peculiar temptations, which in them-
selves are sufﬁciently strong, but which are
rendered still more so by the poisonous
advice‘ which he too often receives from
others a little older than himself, and by the


absence of any wise counsel from his parents,
his clergyman, or his medical adviser, which
might serve to counteract the poison."
G. M. HUMPHREY, M.D., Cantab., F.R,C.S., Prof. of
Surgery, and late Prof. of Anatomy at the Um’-
versity of Cambridge. In “ Holmes’ System of
Surgery," 1;). 603. L
“It would be a very good thing if those
who have charge of boys were less scrupu-
lous in giving warning upon this matter.
Much trouble and anxiety might be spared
by timely advice, seriously and kindly
given. . . . An extensive acquaintance,
through years, With those who have just
come from our schools, has impressed the
importance of this matter upon me.”
C. G. WHEELHOUSE, F.R.C.S., Eng., Representative on
General Medical Council, Consulting Snrgeon to
llie General Inﬁrmary at Leeds, late Member of
Conneil of R.C.S. Eng., and President of ihe
Council of Brit. Med. Association. “Social
‘ Purity.’-’ (Paper read before the Ripon Diocesan
Conference, 1885, p. 5.)
“To us medical men, especially to those
of us who have lived so long and have seen
much of the severer evils of the social World,
the story is one of almost everyday experi-
ence. Thus health is destroyed or broken,
the physical strength and bodily vigour is


thus so sapped and undermined as to reduce
it to a condition of disease or of premature
senility ; and the almost invariable confession
is that all has come from the one evil habit
.——the habit of solitary sin, learned and
contracted at school, and not discontinued
even in later and more mature years, until at
last it has become the one absorbing and
uncontrollable passion of life.’’
T. S. CLOUSTON, M.D., Lectztv/er 2'o Students on Mmml
Diseases, Edz'nbm/g/2 Um'vel/sz'ty.
It is in my judgment not only right, but
requisite, that young men entering on the
threshold of manhood should calmly and
earnestly direct their attention to certain
facts about the reproduction of the species
and the relation of the sexes, and come to
right conclusions about them. No right
conclusion worth the name is ever come to
Without ﬁrst getting at the facts, and science
alone can enable us to do so. . . . .
Surely for the youth of to-day, who is to
be the teacher and exemplar of manhood
to-morrow, this method of looking at one
of the most subtle and intense inﬂuences of
human life is of high importance.


(II.) “That continence is in no way
injurious to health, and that
recommendations to impurity
are, from a scientiﬁc point of
view, unjustifiable.”
WILLIAM ACTON (THE LATE), M.R.C.S., Surgeon to
the Islmgton Dispensary, and formerly Extermz iv
the Venerml Hospitals, Paris, F.R. Med. and
Chin Society, dim.
“The argument in favour of incontinence
deserves special notice, as it purports to be
founded on physiology. Ihave been con-
sulted by persons who feared, or who
professed to fear, that if the organs were
not regularly exercised they would become
atrophied, or that in some Way impotence
might be the result of chastity. This is the
assigned reason for committing fornication.
There exists no greater error than this, or
one more opposed to physiological truth. In
the ﬁrst place, I may state that I have, after
many years’ experience, never seen an
instance of atrophy to the generative organs
from this cause. I have, indeed, met with
the complaint: but in what class of cases
does it occur ? It arises in all instances from
the exactly opposite cause—early abuse ; the
organs become worn out, and hence atrophy
amass,” ‘ ' 1


SIR T. C. ALLBUTT, K.C.8;., M.D. Cantab., D.Sc.,
F.R.S., Regius Pl/ofessor of Physics, ‘Cambridge.
“ Continence, so far fr\om being harm-
ful, is not harmful at any age: and in
adolescence and early adult life it is physi-
cally and mentally economical. it Growth
both of body and brain have then to ‘be pro-
vided for, and the energies directed to their
enlargement and development, not to Waste»
ful expenditure.” y
]oHN KELLOCK BARTON (THE LATE), M.D., F. and
Ex-Pi/esillemf R.C.S.I. ; Seaioi Sm/germ of the
Adelaide H ospital, Dublin ; formerly Univ. Lectiwer
on Comparative Anatomy. “ Address to D.
“Continence is possible, and not only
compatible with but conducive to health.
The experience of many will prove both these
assertions; but I go further, and I maintain
that continence is the only healthy and
normal state in youth, and that, when
maturity has been reached, those who have
led a continent youth will be able to bear the
trials of life and undergo its work far better
than those who have not; while they will
transmit to their descendants ‘a stronger
constitution than will those‘who"have spent
their early and immatureypowers in away


Nature did not intend, and thereby enfeebled
their whole system.” i
LIONEL S. BEALE (THE LATE), F.R.S., F.R.C.P.,
Professor of the Principles and Practice of Medicine
in King's College, London. _ A“ Our Morality and
the Moral Question."
' “ I would remark here that, notwithstanding
very strong assertions to the contrary, and
by authorities who profess to have thoroughly
studied the question, no sufﬁcient valid
objections a have been established, upon
reasonable grounds, or upon facts of
physiology and health, to living, nay, to
passing the whole life, in a state of celibacy”
(p- 4o)- ,
“The argument that, if marriage cannot,
for various reasons, be carried out, it is,
nevertheless, necessary, upon physiological
grounds, that a substitute of some kind
should be found is altogether erroneous and
without foundation. It cannot be too dis-
tinctly stated that the strictest temperance
and purity is as much in accordance with
physiological as moral law, and that the
yielding to desire, appetite, and passion is no
more to be justified upon physiological or
physical than upon moral or religious
grounds” (p. 47). '


T. KING CHAMBERS (THE LATE), M.D. Oxon.,
F.R.C.P. Lond., Member of the General Medical
Connczl, Senior Consulting Physician at St. M m/y’s
Hospital. A Letter. See “ Medical Opinions ”
(2nd Edition). Published by S.P.A., p. 8.
“ As to the harmlessness of chastity to any
man or Woman, at any time of life, as far as
bodily health or powers are concerned, it
seems so much a platitude thatl could not
sit down and deliberately Write especially
about it.”
F. L 1: GROS CLARK (THE LATE), F.R.S., Consulﬁng
Sm/germ of St. Thomas’s Hospital, and late Presi-
dent of the Royal College of Sm/geons. “The
Physical Consequences, Personal and Social,
of Impurity.” (A Paper read before the
C.E.P.S., November sth, 1885, p. 8.)
7 “Here, however, I must ﬁrst say a few
words respecting a preliminary hindrance to
chastity which has been suggested by some
persons, who allege that sexual intercourse
for man is essential to the preservation of
health. This assertion I emphatically deny;
but it may he proﬁtable to consider this-
apology for vice a little more in detail.
Setting aside the plain fact, that such a-
natural law would be antagonistic to God's
Word, I would appeal to physiology and-
experience in confuting this opinion.”


CLEMENT DUKES, M.D., M.R.C.P_., Physician to Rugby
School, céc. “The Preservation of Health, as
it is affected by Personal Habits, such as
Cleanliness, Temperance, 850.” (Printed for
private circulation.) i
“ It is a frequent observation instilled into
the young at all ages, ‘I am told it is very
bad for me to be continent; my health will
suffer from it.’ No greater lie was ever
invented. It is simply albase invention to
cover sin, and has no foundation in fact”
(p- I 58- ,
A. M. EDGE, M.D., B.Sc., M.R.C.P.Lond., M.R.C.S.
Eng., Plzyslcicm to the Salfol/d Royal H ospltal and
to the Manchester Southern Hospital. “ Self-
Control,” p. 15.
“Do not, therefore, I begyou, give any
credence to those who tell you that continence
will cause the loss of power in the sexual
organs, so that when you marry you will be
unable to properly fulﬁl the duties of the
married state. This is simply alie. Perfect
chastity before marriage is not only an
unmixed advantage to a man, but his
children will be more ‘numerous and more
healthy.” l
G. M. HUMPHREY, M.D. Cantab., F.R.C.S., Professor
of Surgery and late Professor of Anatomy at the
Um'vel/sity of Ctmzbwdge. In “Holmes’ System
‘ of Surgery,” p. 603. -


“There are no organs so_ much under
control as those of generation. Their func-
tions are neither directly nor indirectly in the
least essential to life-scarcely even to the
well-being of the body. The functions of the
testicle, like those of the mammary gland and
the uterus, may be suspended for a long
period—possibly for life; and yet its struc-
ture may be sound, and capable of being
roused into activity. In this respect, its
qualities peculiarly adapt it for subserviency
to man’s moral nature.” _
J.‘ J; NASON, M.B. Lond., M.R.C.S. Eng; 1.13.,
‘Sm/geon to the StmU‘o‘l/d-upon-Avon Hospital
and the Nursing Home and Childrews Hospital.
“ Presidential Address at the Annual Meeting
of the Birmingham and Midlands Branch of
the Brit. Med. Association, I 884," p. 23.
“ We must strongly urge that, in order to
secure vigour and healthy development" in
early youth, the reproductive organs must be
kept in a state of quiescence; and that under
no conceivable circumstances can we regard
-illicit intercourse at a later period of life as
anything less than an unmitigated evil.”
SIR JAMES PAGEI, Bart. (THE LATE), D.C.,L.LL.D.,
F;R.S., F.R.C.S., &c., Sergeant-Surgeon Extra-
nrdimu/y to H.M. Queen Vicioz/z'a, Consulting


Surgeon to St. Bmrtholomeufs Hospital, cﬁc.
7“ Clinical Lectures and Essays." Second
Edition, p. 293.
“ Many of your patients will ask you about
sexual intercourse, and expect you to pre-
scribe fornication. I would just as soon
prescribe theft or lying or anything else that
God has forbidden. If men will, practice
fornication or uncleanness, it must be of their
‘own choice, and on their sole responsibility.
. .- . Chastity does no harm to mind or
body; its discipline is excellent. Marriage
can be safely waited for, and among the
many nervous and hypochondriacal patients
who have talked to me about fornication, I
have never heard one say that he was better
or happier for it.” t ‘
EDMUND A. PARKES (THE LATE), M.D., F.R.S., Pro:
fessor of Militmfy Hygiene in the Army Medical
School, (to. “Manual of Practical Hygiene.”
Fourth Edition, p. 468.
“ I do not for a moment share the opinions
of those who look on prostitution not only
as a necessity, but as a good—as a shield
against worst vices, and as a guard of
married virtue. One feels instinctively that
such arguments, however plausible at first
sight, are untrue; in fact, they do not bear
investigation.”


SIR DYCE DUCKWORIH, M.D., LL.D., Physicicm and
Lectm/er, St. Bm/tholomeuﬂs H ospiml, Hoh.
Physician ho H.M . the . King, Treasurer and
Representative on the General Medical Council of the
Royal College of Physicians, a‘%c., cﬁc.
Speech at Westminster Town Hall, fume 51311, 1901.
“ We have heard that it is a common idea
that it is impossible to reach the age of
maturity without giving full vent to the
passions which naturally arise in the human
body, and that so common is this course, so
intensely tempting is this course, and so
seductive and overpowering is this course,
that a great many ﬁnd it impossible to resist
it, and so it is given way to.
“ It is also said that it is unnatural not to
give Way to it, because what are the various
organs in the body given to us for if not to
be used and to perform the functions and
carry out the duties for which they are
ordained? That looks very specious, and
seems at ﬁrst sight a measure of philosophy
very attractive to the selfish and the indulgent,
and the foul-minded.
“Let me tell you from the aspect of
physiology and good medicine that that is a
mistake and an error, and that it is not
necessary for any young man to use those
organs which perform these functions in the


same way, and with the same activity as the
organs that perform the other functions that
go on in the body. That may be a very
remarkable statement to make,but it is based
on the principle of true physiology, and
upon past experience of those principles.
The sexual organs can lie dormant for years,
can be left alone, out of consideration, and
forgotten, so to speak, until the time comes
for matrimony, as it should Come and may
be expected to come to every young man.
In due time these organs will be fully
qualiﬁed to perform the functions required of
them. They will be found in no degree
whatever impaired, but ready to do all they
are called upon to do.
“ These are physiological facts from which
there is no going back, and they answer the
very seductive philosophy which the ignorant
and unlettered young man of the present day
puts faith in. There is no excuse, no require-
ment of nature, no overpowering necessity for
the gratiﬁcation of these human passions.”
NORWEGIAN FACULTY OF MEDICINE, UNIVERSITY OF
“ The assertion that a life of purity is hurtful
to health is, according to our experience,
unanimously expressed, completely false.”


FIFTY-NINE PROFESSORS, PHYSICIANS, AND SURGEONS
OF THE NEW YORK HOSPITALS, &c.
“In view of the widespread suffering,
physical disease, deplorable hereditary results,
and moral deterioration inseparable from un-
chaste living, the undersigned members of
the medical profession in New York and its
Vicinity unite in declaring it as our opinion
that chastity, a pure continent life for both
sexes, is consonant with the best conditions
of physical, mental, and moral health.”
tively easy for those who’ have
kept themselves pure in boy-
WILLIAM ACTON (THE LATE), M.R.C.S., Surgeon to
the Islington Disﬁenscwy, and fol/mm/Zy Exteme to
the Venereal Hospitals, Pm/is; F .R. M ed. and Chi:/.
Society.
“ My own opinion is, that where, as in the
case with a large number, a young man’s
education has been properly Watched, and
his mind has not been debased by any vile
practices, it is usually a comparatively easy
task to be continent, and requires no great or
extraordinary effort; and every year of
voluntary chastity renders the task easier by
the mere force of habit. .


“Our object ought to be to preserve a
pure and healthy mind in a pure and healthy
body. judiciously-directed , training and
exercise of both towards this deﬁnite object
would, I am sure, in most cases, reduce the
difﬁculty of living a chaste life to a minimum,
and, indeed, render the conflict rather a
proud and thankful sense of self-command
than an arduous struggle.”
SIR T. C. ALLBUTT, K.C.8., M.D. Camb., D.Sc.,
F.R.S.,,Regius Professor of Physics, Camb.
“ No inﬂuence upon us, however slight or
transcient, is annihilated, but produces in
its degree a permanent effect. No impres-
sion, no stain upon the mind is lost, or
physically speaking, washed out. From the
moment that an unclean thought occupies
the mind, that mind is so far altered, and for
always :—an awful thought in any case, and
only not terrible if we can trust that purer
and wholesomer thoughts and actions are
entering in greater proportion. Thus, whether
in married or celibate life, science gives its
imperious sanction to purity of heart
and clean habits of thought. A young
man who realizes this responsibility will no
longer toy with lasciviousness, even in
thought, or suppose that so long as he keeps
physically straight he incurs no evil. An


instant and resolute expulsion from the
mind of any unclean idea, however in-
sidious or disguised, is scientiﬁc, as Well as
moral conduct: and he who creates thus
such a habit, ﬁnds it easier and easier to
keep it, until it is almost automatic. Such
an one will not have to ﬂatter himself that
his passions are so strong that he cannot
curb them; for their strength and set,
depend on the accumulation of many and
many a lascivious idea, indulged and for-
gotten.”
Lxomu s. BEALE (THE LATE), F.R.S.. F.R.C.P.,
Professor of the Pl/z'ncz'pZes and Practice of Medicine
in Kilzg’s College, London. “Our Morality and
the Moral Question,” p. 62.
“ It will be found that, Whether we look at
it from a religious, a purely philosophical, or
a scientiﬁc, or a rational standpoint, the
acquirement of self-restraint is the beginning
and end of all human endeavour in the
interests of humanity. The earlier in life
self-training begins to work, the better for
the individual.”
W. B. CARPENTER (THE LATE), M.D., F.R.S.
“ Human Physiology,” p. 938.
“ Nothing tends so much to increase the
desire as the continggl direction of the mind


towards the object of its gratiﬁcation, whilst
nothing so effectually represses it as a
determined exercise of the mental faculties
upon other objects, and the expenditure of
nervous energy in other channels.”
]. ]. NASON, M.B. Lond., M.R.C.S. Eng., ].P., &c.,
Sm/geon to the Stmzfford-on-Avon Hospital and
the Nm/sing Home and Chz'ldl/en’s H ospital.
Presidential Address at the Annual Meeting of
the Birmingham and Midlands Branch of the
Brit. Med. Assoc., 1884,” p. 26.
- “ The habit of continence, early established,
will make the practice of it in after years a
comparatively easy thing ; whereas the early
and restrained indulgence of the passions
will bring about such nervous irritation and
constitutional unrest—not to mention great
instability of purpose and diminished powers
of self control—-as will lead the unhappy
sufferer to seek relief in unlawful and perilous
expedients, which Will, like dram-drinking,
not only feed the disease they were intended
to remove, but also in themselves become the
parent of other ills far more difficult to bear
than the salutary rule of self-restraint.”
EDMUND A. PARKES (THE LATE), M.D., F.R.S., Prof.
of Military Hygiene in the Army Medical School,
(1%. “ Manual of Practical Hygiene.” Fourth
Edition, 13- 457-.


“It has been supposed by some that, in
early manhood, continence is impossible, or
if practised, is so at the risk of other habits
being formed, which are more hurtful than
sexual intercourse, with all its dangers. But
this is surely an exaggeration; the develop-
ment of this passion can be accelerated or
delayed, excited or lowered, by various
measures, and continence becomes not only
possible, but easy.”
T. S. CLOUSTON, M.D., Lectm/er to Students on Mental
Dismses, Edinbwgiz U niversizfy.
“ To say, as has been said, that self-control
is often impossible, and that indulgence, real
or imaginative, is good for the health in
youth,’is to say that nature has contradicted
herself in this matter. Self-control is perfectly
possible where there is no disease, and indul-
gence is inﬁnitely more dangerous to health,
bodily and mental, than self-control. The
power of controlling the lower impulses in
all directions is given to the higher inhibitory
parts of the brain, and it can be strengthened
by practice and cultivation. Such cultivation
of all the higher controlling powers is a duty
laid on all reasonable men. . . .


“If the best of mankind had not practised
‘self-control’ over lower desires, civilisation
and a higher human life would have been
impossible.” _
(IV.) “That the cases quoted to show
that vice is a necessity, only
prove how imperious may be-
come the claims of this, as of
any other habit, when once
men have become its slaves.”
WILLIAM ACTON (THE LATE), M.R.C.S.,Sm/geon 259
the Isliwgton D2‘s_[>msm/y, and formerly Exzfmze to
the Venmml H ospital, PM/is ,' F .R. Med. cmci Clair.
Society.
“ It is a solemn truth, that the sovereignty
of the will, or, in other Words, the command
of the man over himself and his outward
circumstances, is a matter of habit. Every
victory strengthens the victor.”
F. LE GRos CLARK (THE LATE), F.R.S., Consulting
Surgeon of S 25. Thomas’s H asp/ital, and late President
of the Royal College of Sm/germs. Paper read
before the C.E.P.S., p. 8.
' “ The passion may be strong, and the
craving imperious, but this proves rather the
slavery of the individual than the necessity of
a body which is kept in subjection.”


GEORGE COWELL, F.R.C.S. Eng., Senior Sm/geon of
Westvmnster Hospital, Surgeon to the Royal
Wesz‘4m'nstel/ Opthalmic Hospital, cﬁc. “Church
“Continence is quite possible and quite
compatible with health, although, in obedience
to the universal law of nature, continence
becomes very difﬁcult when the body has
become accustomed to incontinence; but
even then I believe it is neither impossible
nor injurious to health.” '
A. M. EDGE, M.D., B.SC., M.R.C.P., Lond., M.R.C.S.
Eng., Plzyslciaa to the Salfovd Royal Hospital and
to the Manchester Soathem H ospllal. “ Self-
Control,” p. 14.
“ It is a great mistake for a young man to
give way to habits of fornication.
He will find that the more ‘he yields to his
passions, the more imperious will they become,
until they have to be gratiﬁed at any~c_ost,
and he will have to sacriﬁce, one by one, all
his pure and noble ambitions, all his innocent
pleasures, for the sake of this one overpower-
ing lust.”
Sm ANDREW CLARK, Bart. (THE LATE), M.D., F.R.S.,
F._R.C.S., &c. Lecture at Oxford University.
“ Continence does no harm, does not
interfere with development, elevates the
Whole nature, increases energy and sharpens


insight. Incontinence is not necessary,
weakens self-denial, establishes habits of
indulgence, dulls and lowers the Whole
nature, and exposes to disease which may be
handed down to generations. To say that
fornication is necessary to the health of
young men is not only an error, but a cruelty;
not only Wrong but mischievous. There is
difﬁculty, trial, and distress, but no injury in
continence, and from successful resistance the
highest good.”
SIR W. R. GowEßs, M.D., F.R.S. Lecture to the
Medical Society of London, 1889.
“Strange is it to think that this malady
(syphilis) rivalled in its total capacity for
wrecking human happiness, and health, and
life by no other . . is formidable by reason
of our limited power over it. There is but
one ‘Way by which it can be prevented, a
method not only possible, but sure, and open
to all. It is the certain prevention secured
by unbroken chastity. .. . The opinions
which on grounds falsely called ‘ physio-
logical’ suggest or permit unchastity are
terribly prevalent among young men, but
they are absolutely false. They rest only on
sensory illusions, and are illustrations of a
maxim I have often to impress on sufferers
of various kinds, ‘ There are no liars like our


own sensations.’ With all the force that any
knowledge I possess, and any authority I
have, can give, I assert that this belief is
contrary to fact. I assert that no man ever
yet was in the slightest degree or Way the
worsefor continence or better for incontinence.
From incontinence during unmarried life, all
are worse morally; a clear majority are, in
the end, worse physically; and in no small
number the result is, and ever will be, utter
physical shipwreck on one of the many rocks,
sharp, jaggecl—edged, which beset the way, or
on one of the many banks of festering slime
which no cars can possibly avoid. They are
rocks which tear and rend the unhappy
being who is driven against them, when he
hasiyielded to the tide of passion; they are
banks which exhale a poison for which no
true antidote exists.”
T. S. CLOUSTON, M.D., Lecturer on Mental Diseases,
Edinburgh University.
‘The persistent non-practice of self-control,
not only in deed, but in thought and feeling,
often results in’ trains of thoughts so
morbidly strong that they come to dominate
the mind, and cannot be beaten off ; . . .
Such a state of mind and feeling leads to
perverted sexual practices sometimes, and in
other cases such perverted practices cause


this morbid state of mind. In regard to
such practices science is absolute and stem
in its condemnation. Nothing but evil
consequences result to body and mind from
them. The perversion of any natural function
is followed as surely by future pain and
misery as putting the hand into the ﬁre is.
“In this age, with its hurry and compe-
tition in all walks of life, young men who
want to hold their own need a surplus stock
of energy, an abundant ‘staying power,’ and
a careful husbanding of their vital resources.
They need to order their lives so as to
obviate any predisposition to break down
anywhere, and to guard their weak points.
Physiologists, parents, and teachers have
discovered that there is no such adjunct to
sexual self-control in youth as outdoor games.
Through them the procreative energy is
transformed into muscular force, just as
motion is transformed into electricity in a
dynamo. The mental and moral effects of
sexual indulgence are evil in many special
ways, and as is the case in regard to all
practices that go contrary to her laws, nature
exacts many special penalties. In this case
the ﬁrst, and one of the worst, effects is, that
self-control, which was. comparatively easy


before, is rendered ten times more difficult;
an unnatural desire is set up; the active,
imaginative force of the period of life
becomes unrestrained, and almost unre-
strainable in some cases; morbid longings
are experienced; tainted hues are given to
previously and naturally harmless subjects ;
social intercourse between the sexes of the
innocent and natural sort--healthful because
natural———is apt to be poisoned.
“The youth Whose ideal of Womanhood has
been formed on that of his mother and his
sister is almost safe against his lower
passions, for he instinctively recoils against
lust as a dishonour to them."
W. H. A. ]AcoßsoN, M.A., Oxon., Fellow and Member
of Examination Bocml, Royal College of Surgeons,
England ; Sm/geon, Gny’s Hospital, and Consulting
Surgeon, Royal H osjaiml for Children and Women.
“ In many cases the struggle to keep down
the sexual ﬁres is attended at ﬁrst with real
distress. .' V. . . Young men in all the
early prime of life often suffer really keen
distress, and We medical men cannot be
surprised that . . . . they are found to
declare that, after facing for a While these
struggles, they have yielded, and that sexual
intercourse has done them good, both in
bodily and mental power. The fallacies here


are obvious, the answer ready to hand, though
there are many to Whom it is a waste of time
to point out the one or to make the other.
The trial is usually made needlessly harder
because it is faced, not ﬂed from.
“Of those who win their way to strict
continence during their unmarried life,
a few do so because they can command
their thoughts by a strong effort of will, and
can determinately apply their minds to other
subjects, but the majority win their way out
of the distress by remembering that this is the
only Warfare where victory is won by ﬂight.
“Those who come complaining of the
restlessness and irritability produced by
continence, and hope that the medical man
will prescribe the remedy which they desire,
are more eager to ﬁnd an excuse in the
sternness of the struggle to justify their
indulging their sexual desires, than they are
earnest in endeavouring to control them.
Such, before they yield, their medical
adviser should earnestly urge to make a trial
of rational treatment. Better than anyone
else, he can explain how it is that it is the
half-continent who are subject to this
constant -irritability of the sexual organs,
and that it is they who, from unshunned
excitement, must suffer from an excess of
seminal secretions and its results.


“On the other hand, it is the strictly
continent men who keep themselves healthily
occupied in mind and body, men Who, when
attacked by imperious sexual desire, simply
sally out, and seek in exercise a change of
surroundings ; to such as these the secretion
of semen is soon only sufﬁcient to be easily
got rid of by an involuntary emission during
sleep once or twice a month, a state of things
which is perfectly natural.”
A PARTING WORD.
A RETIRED PHYSICIAN.
“This book may be read by some whose
health has been more or less shattered, and
their will enfeebled, by indulgence in some
form of sexual vice. If they really wish to
be freed from the bondage of these habits,
and to regain their self-respect, there is no
need for despair, though the struggle may be
long. \/Vhatever their failing, whatever their
symptoms, they may be sure that any
experienced and honest doctor will be
familiar with them, and give common-sense
advice. Let them abhor secrecy and
quackery, and if they cannot secure other
‘proper advice, let them write to the
Secretaries of t.h§ White Cross League.”


WHITE_ CROSS LEAGUE,
7, DEAN’S YARD, WESTMINSTER ABBEY, S.W.
THE PRAYER.
LORD JESUS CHRIST, sinless Son of Man, who art
evermore ready to succour them that are tempted, grant
unto us Thy servants in this League both valour and
constancy, that we may keep undeﬁled our own purity, ﬁght
manfully against the corruption that is in the world, and shield
and rescue those that are in peril and sore beset.
Restore the fallen, O.Lord, to themselves and Thee; and in
garments white through Thy Blood bring us all unto the home
where the pure in heart see God.
These things we ask of the Love of the Father and the
Power of the Holy Ghost, in Thy Name, who with Them
livest and reignest one God, world without end. Amen.
If you wish to be a MAN LY man
you MUST keep _
Che “ulbite Cross” Obligations.
I.—To treat all women with 1-esnect, and endeavour to
protect them from wrong and degradation. _
2;—To endeavour to put down all indecent language
and coarse‘ jests.
3.—T.‘o maintain the law of purity as equally binding
on men and women.
4.—To endeavour to spread these principles among my
companions, and to try and help my younger brothers.
s.—To use every possible means to fulﬁl the command,
“ Keep TI-IYSELF pure.”
MILLER, SON, AN‘D COMPY., LTD., PRINTERS, FAKENHAM AND LONDON‘


7, DEA N’B. YARD, WESTMINSTER, LONDON.
“ PAPERS FOR MEN.” Price one Penny each.
Postage: 4 copies Id., 12 copies 3d. »
No. I.—Letter of Warning to a. Lad .. .. Anon.
No. ll.—Your Duty .. .. .. .. Lt.~Col. H. Everitt.
No. ill.——christian Marriage .. .. . Lt.-Col. H. Evmtt.
No. IY.—-The Ride of Death . . . . . . Ellire Hopkins,
No. Y.—'l‘he Perils of Impurity.. F. Le G705 Clark, F.R.S.
No. Yl.—'i‘he Testimony of Medical Men Aythur T. Barnett.
No. Yll.—Llfe .. .. , .. .. , .. .. Rev. .E.»Thring.
No. Ylll.—'i‘rue Manlinees .. .. .. .. J. E. H.
No. .. IX.—Da.maged Pearls .. .. .. Ellz'ce.Hopkins-
No. X.--Lost in Quicksand .. .. .. .. ]. E. H.
No. XI.--A Brothers Advice . .. .. Arthur T. Bamett.
No." Xll.—Ma.n or Beast? .. '.. .. Lt.—Col. H. Everitt.
No. XIII.-——Ma.rriage .. .. .. .. Arthur T. Barnett.
No. ..XlY..—.'l‘he .Na.t_lona.l Flag . .. . .. Ellice. Hopkins.
No. XY.—-Moral Trainingoi Children .. .. R. Al'thu7,M.D.
No. _ XYl.——The Great Struggle . . . . Bishop Moorhouse.
No. XVlll.—Married Life ‘ ~ Rev. Canon Hon. E. Lytteltoh.
No. XlX.—The Greeley Expedition . .. Ellice Hopkins.
No. XX.———Purity the Guard of Manhood ‘.. .. J. E. H.
(A Conﬁrmation Paper.) _
M-ANNERS MllKY'i'l-I MAN. Price 641. nett, postage lgd.
THE BLANGO BOOK. Price,,_,,6d. nett, postage 2d. A
FALLING BIRTHRATE. Price 6d.,postageld. Lt.-Col. H. Evemt.
A lVlo'i‘HEß’s PART.’ Price 2d. ‘.. _.. .. .. M. P.
INTEROESSIONS AND PRAYERS. Price 2d. ' _
THE MARRIAGE QUESTION. Price 2d. The Archbishop of York.
KEEP 'i‘i-IYSELF PURE. Price 2d.
SHORT PAPERS (Price ad. each).
Postage Id. for 12 copies. ~ 1
Power to Let. ; Moral Dangers in our Schools.
b LEA FLETS (2s. per 100).
. Postage Id. for 25 copies.
- Seein Lite.
;mI;1¢::::::’: ¥aa.lll‘xg:ith Lads. '"‘°m§’§"¥n “°“‘° °*"“5T
Words of Warning. ‘ Hl3 11; §'anlly',
Helps to Purity. . This Hill is Dangerous.
