





THE
"GOSTA RIGA packet-
O s lE,




WHAT MAY HAPPEN TO A
BRITISH CAPTAIN.
A State paper recently issued by the Government of New
South Wales, under the title of The Report from the Select
Committee of the Legislative Council on the 11 Costa Rica
Packet ” Case, is a document calculated to make people rub
their eyes in astonishment, and ask themselves with
unaffected incredulity whether the piratical proceedings
therein detailed by a foreign Power towards a captain
Hying the British Hag could have possibly taken place at
the close of the nineteenth century. The Palmerstonian
tradition, that the British Hag is a sure and all-suHicient
protection against outrage or indignity in any part of the
civilised world, has for so long been an accepted rhetorical
commonplace, that it comes upon us with quite a shock of
indignant surprise, and with all the force of an un-
pleasantly humiliating revelation, to learn that in the
immediate neighbourhood of one of the most important
sections of Greater Britain a British captain may be sum-
marily seized by the representatives of a foreign Power,
taken a thousand miles away from his ship, imprisoned in
a noxious, insanitary dungeon, subjected to all manner of
indignities, and, after a wholly unwarrantable detention of
twenty-eight days, discharged without the semblance of a
trial, or the smallest word of apology, and left to find his
way back to his ship as best he can.
The master mariner who was fated to undergo these
repulsive and extraordinary experiences bears the name of
-John Bolton Carpenter, of Sydney, New South Wales. He


left that port on the 15th July, 1891, in command of the-
Costa Rica Packet , a well-equipped barque, bound for a
whaling cruise in the seas surrounding the Malay Archi-
pelago. On November 1 the barque called in for a supply
of fresh provisions at Ternate, an island in the Moluccas
Passage under the control of the Netherlands-India
Government, who are officially represented there by a Resi-
dent. Immediately after his arrival Captain Carpenter was
sent for by this Resident, and on his obeying the injunction,
was promptly placed under arrest. Inquiring what was the
nature of the charge on which he had been arrested, the
Resident replied that he had no information on the subject,
beyond an order from the Court at Macassar to effect the
arrest. Captain Carpenter energetically protested against
such treatment, and represented to the Resident the serious
consequences likely to ensue from the arbitrary arrest and
detention of a whaling captain at the beginning of the
whaling season. But it was all of no avail. Even Captain
Carpenter’s liberal offer to enter into a bond for 100,000
guilders, equivalent to £B,OOO of English money, that he
would deliver himself up to the Court at Macassar at the
end of nine or ten weeks, in consideration of his being set
at liberty for that period, so that he, his principals, and his
crew might not lose the profits of their whaling enterprise,
was unceremoniously refused on the plea that “ there was
no such thing as bail in Dutch countries.” Thereupon*
Captain Carpenter, before being removed to gaol, informed
the Resident that he would hold the Dutch Government
responsible for all losses occurring to himself, his ship, and
her crew, in consequence of their unwarrantable action.
It is a significant circumstance, and one that helps to
explain the high-handed proceedings of the Dutch authori-
ties at Ternate, that there was no British representative on
that island. As a matter of fact, there were no English
people nearer than Sourabaya, a distance of more than a
thousand miles.
About 11 p.m. on the fourth day of his imprisonment
at Ternate, the gaoler entered the cell of Captain Carpenter-
and told him that he was to start at once for Macassar.
Taken on board a steamer Captain Carpenter found to his
disgust and indignation that the authorities had arranged.


-a “deck passage” for him amongst the coolies, where he
would be exposed to the weather without shelter or
bedding, and would have nothing to eat save rice and salt
iish. In order to secure better accommodation he had to
pay for a berth in the second cabin out of his own pocket.
The voyage to Macassar occupied ten days, and on the
arrival of the steamer there, Captain Carpenter was taken
ashore and cast into the ordinary criminal gaol. Over the
door of the cell in which he was placed there ran the
•cheerful inscription, “For condemned Europeans.” The
theory that every man must be held to be innocent until
he is proved guilty, apparently finds no place in the canons
of Dutch jurisprudence as interpreted by the Macassar
• representatives of the Netherlands-India Government.
For the sake of companionship Captain Carpenter would
have been pleased to have another “ condemned European”
ns a cell comrade, but no such alleviation of his woes was
forthcoming, On the contrary, the cell was already in the
possession of a sick Malay prisoner when he was thrust
into it, and for twelve days the uncharged and arbitrarily
arrested master of a British barque had to submit to this
■degrading and repulsive association. The sanitary arrange-
ments of the place, as detailed in evidence by Captain
Carpenter before the Select Committee of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, were of the most abomin-
able description, and the only exercise permitted to the
Captain was in a large courtyard simultaneously used for
the same purpose by the chain-gang and all the prisoners
in the establishment. At six o’clock in the evening he
was locked up in the cell, and there he had to remain in
total darkness until six in the morning. For the first two
days of his imprisonment at Macassar Captain Carpenter
went without food for the very good and sufficient reason
thus stated by himself: “ I would not eat the food at all.
The food for all the prisoners was brought in by coolies.
The rice was in a basket, and the meat in a box, and it
was dished out by the dirty hand of one of the native
•convicts on to a plate, and was given to us without any
knife or fork or anything else. I refused to eat it.” After
forty-eight hours of abstinence from such uninviting prison
viands, Captain Carpenter was allowed to communicate


with Mr, Bernard, apparently the only Englishman,',
residing in Macassar, and through the friendly offices of
this gentleman, his meals were sent in from outside durin"
* J _ P 1 • 1 , O
the remainder of his detention.
It was not until the sixth day of his imprisonment at
Macassar that Captain Carpenter was officially informed of
the nature of the charge that was to be preferred against
him. An exceedingly flimsy, unsubstantial, nebulous-
charge it was. Hie incident to which it related occurred
four years previously on the occasion of a former visit of
Captain Carpenter to these waters, and is thus described by-
himself ;
On the 24th January, 1888, we saw a derelict prow, sunken
and water-logged, with just the top of the deck Hoating above the
water, and with a big hole in her bottom, We found her driftin'’
thirty-two miles from the nearest point of land. We first saw her
in the evening. Next morning she was a little closer to us. Ihe
evening before, when the derelict was a long way off, the men asked
me to let them go after it, but 1 would not allow them to lower the
boat. But next morning at daylight the prow being a little closer
to us they lowered the boat, and brought it alongside the ship.
When it was alongside, the men found a few boxes which they had 1
rooted out, and which they brought on deck. There were a few
cases of arrack, a couple of cases of native brandy, or something
or other, and a tin of kerosene oil. We took these few odds and
ends out of the prow.
“I went into a Dutch port about three weeks afterwards—the-
port of Batjan—-and reported the whole matter. I had it put
down in my ship’s log, and in my own official log, and although all
these logs were handed to the Government representative there,
nothing was said about the matter. When the arrack was taken
on board the ship, it was put on deck, and some of the crew got
hold of it, and they had a fight, and I ordered the whole of it to
be thrown overboard. Instead of throwing it all overboard, they
stowed a couple of boxes away. The fourth officer was drunk
every day, and I could not imagine where he got the drink from,
because I never carry anything of that sort on board the ship.’
When we got to Batjan, the crew could get liquor on shore. I
suppose they got plenty of it there, but they told someone that
there were a few bottles of arrack on board the ship, and a
Chinaman came off and asked to buy it. I told him we had not
any, but the crew said we had, and they unearthed these couple of
boxes, and I allowed them to change it for 75 lb of sugar. That
was my offence—my piracy.”
And this was the trumpery accusation thqt served the
Dutch authorities in the Moluccas as a sufficient pretext


tor dragging a British captain a thousand miles away from
his ship, treating him in the most outrageous manner, and
luining the prospects of what promised to be a very profit-
able whaling cruise.
Not the least extraordinary feature of this singular
case was the refusal of the Dutch authorities to allow
Captain Carpenter to telegraph his arrest and unfortunate
position to the British authorities at Batavia. He re-
peatedly requested permission to do this, but this natural
and reasonable request only elicited jeers and laughter from
his captors. Another illustration of the astounding
arrogance of these foreign officials is afforded by their
refusal to let the captain see the lawyer whom lie had
engaged, and whom he desired to consult. Five times was
the captain brought before a Macassar magistrate, and in-
terrogated in private. As showing the wholly unnecessary
and uncalled-for indignities to which he was exposed, the
manner in which the captain was taken from the prison to
the presence of the examining magistrate may be
instructively quoted :
" Chairman : After reading your evidence you wish the com-
mittee to understand that there are some things you wish to tell
them which may be of importance ? Yes.
“ Amongst others I believe is the mode in which you were con-
ducted from the prison to the office of the Dutch magistrate in
Macassar? Yes.
Will you describe it to us, please? I was taken out of the
prison by a native policeman, armed with a cutlass and a rope, as-
he takes a common murderer, and in that way I was walked a dis-
tance of about three-quarters of a mile across the town to be a spec-
tacle for every one in Macassar.
“ What was the object of the rope and cutlass? I suppose if I
had proved obstreperous the native policeman would have used
them. The rope, I know, is used to tie up a native malefactor if
he will not walk along the street, and I suppose I would have been
served in the same way if I had not gone quietly.
“ You, having a knowledge of the customs of these people and
the feeling amongst the natives, realised that it was the greatest
indignity that could have been put upon you? Yes.
‘ Did it appear to be an intentional act on the part of the
Dutch authorities? I do not know whether such treatment was
meant for me jilone, whether anyone else would have been served
in the same way. As I never saw a European in custody there-
before, I do not know how they are treated.


“You were taken in the same way as you have seen them take
tlhe ordinary native criminals? Yes.
“ At what time in the day did this happen ? I was taken from
the gaol to the magistrate’s office between 9 and 10 o’clock in the
morning, and brought back again between 1 and 2 o’clock in the
afternoon.
“ You were examined before the magistrate; was it a public
examination in any way ? No ; it was altogether private.
“ Were you ever confronted with any witnesses? I never saw a
witness from the time I was arrested until I was discharged.”
It was not until the close of this series of private
examinations that the captain was informed by the
magistrate that he would be committed for trial for
piracy in connection with the derelict prow, and would be
allowed ten or fifteen days to prepare his defence. But
long before those ten or fifteen days had expired the Dutch
authorities, finding that the unjustifiable arrest and deten-
tion of Captain Carpenter had come to the knowledge of
the British Consul at Batavia and the Governor of the
Straits Settlements, apparently came to the conclusion
that their best policy was to clap a sudden extinguisher on
the whole proceedings. There is a certain amusing
audacity in the characteristically unceremonious style in
which they dismissed Captain Carpenter after having kid-
napped him and spoiled his whaling enterprise.
“ On the sixth day after I was committed for trial,” says the
captain, “the Sheriff of Macassar came to the door of my cell and
told me to get my traps ready. I got them ready, and he then con-
ducted me to the front door of the prison, where he told me I was
free to go ; the information being conveyed to me in the Malay word
‘pigie,’ which is equivalent to our ‘clear out.’ From this point
my existence was practically ignored by the local authorities, and I
was left, after the hard treatment to which I had been subjected, to
find my way back to my ship 1,000 miles away as best I could.”
The mere recital of these facts, disclosing as they do
the amount of contempt and degradation that may be
heaped upon a British master mariner by the representa-
tives of a puny foreign Power, is certainly calculated to
raise a doubt whether our boasted naval supremacy is a
mythical tradition or a living actuality. The Select Com-
mittee appointed by the Legislative Council of New South
Wales to consider and report on Captain Carpenter’s case
pointedly and forcibly suggest this important consideration


ia the concluding words of their report : “ Beyond and
above all, as a matter of Imperial concern, is the feeling
which will be forced on loyal subjects that should not the
full reparation claimed be quickly paid on the demand of
her Majesty’s Government, the protection supposed to be
•afforded by the British flag to the most humble subject of
the Queen is not the glorious inalienable right it has always
been considered.” Lord Rosebery, writing to Sir Horace
Rumbold, the British Minister at the Hague, formulates
the view of her Majesty’s Government that there was “ not
■even such a case of reasonable suspicion as could be treated
■ as justifying the arrest of Captain Carpenter, and her
Majesty’s Government are therefore of opinion that in the
absence of reasonable evidence, Captain Carpenter is
• entitled to compensation for personal damage.” Cold,
precise, formal, diplomatic language of this description is
■of course in accordance with the established etiquette of
the Foreign Office, but after reading the narrative of
Captain Carpenter’s arbitrary arrest, degrading imprison-
ment, and contemptuous release, most undiplomatic people
will feel inclined to characterise the action of the Nether-
Jand-India authorities in far stronger and forcible terms.
They will also be disposed to entirely dissent from the
decision of the Foreign Office, that £2,500 would be
adequate compensation to Captain Carpenter. It can
easily be understood that the Dutch Government are quite
willing and even eager to be relieved so cheaply of the
consequences of the barbarous behaviour of their represen-
tatives at Macassar towards an inoffensive British master
mariner, but it will be very regrettable indeed if they are
-allowed to escape so lightly. The Australian press and
public have taken up Captain Carpenter’s case with the
keenest sympathy and earnestness, and there is general
indignation at the Antipodes as the result of the suggestion
that a grant of £2,500 from the Dutch Government would
be ample satisfaction to Captain Carpenter for the un-
fmerited wrongs he has endured and the serious financial
■ losses entailed upon him by the high-handed action of the
Dutch authorities in the Moluccas. The Select Committee
-has reported unanimously that Captain Carpenter is en-
titled to compensation of not less than £IO,OOO, and when


it is stated, and has been proved to the satisfaction of the-
► Select Committee, that the captain has been permanently
injured in health by his horrible imprisonment and
pecuniarily ruined by the loss of the whaling season con-
sequent on that imprisonment, few will be disposed to deny
the moderation and reasonableness of his claim.
Apart from the personal aspect of this particular case*
it is obviously necessary to teach these piratical foreigners-
an exemplary lesson in the international proprieties with a
view to the protection of future British mariners who may
find themselves in these seas, and who may have occasion
to call at some port under the jurisdiction of the Nether-
lands-India Government. As the Select Committee very
properly points out:
“ Quite independently of the wrong to Mr, Carpenter, action of
such a character by the authorities of a nation whose possessions
are in the immediate neighbourhood of Australia, is a grave peril to
every subject of the British Empire whose business may take him to
the seas immediately to the north of this Continent, and who might
be obliged, by accident or necessity, to enter a port of
Netherlands-India, as it is manifest that a friendless man of
British nationality may be arrested and charged, on the unsupported
evidence of a man of bad character, with some shadowy offence sa d
to have been committed years before, in refutation of which, from
the lapse of time, it would be impossible for him to procure witnesses
having any knowledge of the incident, and he, perhaps, would be
convicted and sentenced, though innocent, to a long imprisonment.”
In the same connection, the Select Committee call
attention to the very important fact that—
“ Independently of the direct injury inflicted on the persons-
immediately concerned in this case, who are citizens of this Colony,
the whole of Australia has suffered from the attitude assumed by
the Netherlands-India Government, as further enterprise by our
fellow-colonists has been checked when the field of the proposed
operations has been the Malayan seas or islands, even though not
subject to the Netherlands-India Government, from a fear that
should the operators be forced by necessity to enter a port subject
to that Power they might be subjected to outrage of similar
character as unjustifiable as in the case of Mr. Carpenter.”
The Sydney Morrdny Herald has given expression to
the general colonia sentiment, by pointing out that
Captain Carpenter’s is
“ a case that might happen to any mariner sailing those seas andi
falling into the blundering hands of the Netherlands-India officials*.


who seem to exercise a somewhat high-handed authority in the
waters of that archipelago. Like the Portuguese on the south-
eastern coast of Africa, the Dutch administrators in Nebherlands-
India appear to require waking up to the fact that the world has
been moving during the past hundred years or so. Those seas
which have so long lain undisturbed under the somnolent rule of the
Dutch, have become a great highway of commerce, in which the
Australias have a large and ever-increasing interest ; and it is in-
tolerable that a British subject should be wantonly subjected to
such an outrage as this without reparation being demanded and
enforced.”
That reparation and compensation will be made to
Captain Carpenter for the outrages and indignities he was
compelled to undergo, may be taken for granted, seeing
that the Government of the Hague has practically pleaded
guilty to the charge of having, in the persons of its
representatives in Netherlands-India, illegally and
violently seized, deported, and ill-treated a British master
mariner. It only remains for the Foreign Office to insist
that the reparation shall be complete and the compensation
adequate to the injuries inflicted. To what extent the
owners of Captain Carpenter’s vessel are entitled to com-
pensation, is a point to which the Select Committee devoted
much time, care, and attention, and the result at which
they have arrived is formulated in these terms :
*■ The claims made on the Netherlands Government for these
losses, in addition to that of £lO.OOO by Captain Carpenter, are, on
the part of the owners, £10,0(0, and on that of the subordinate
officers and crew, £5,000. The evidence shows that such claims are
but reasonable and moderate demands in reparation for the injury
sustained by them as a direct consequence of the arrest of the master,
which in justice should be promptly paid, with in erest for the delay
that has occurred in settlement, and we would earnestly press on the
Government the duty of its making the strongest representations to
the Imperial Government to this effect on their behalf.”
The Imperial Government, on the advice of their law
officers, Sir Charles Russell and Sir John Rigby, is in-
disposed to urge the claims of the owners and crew on the
attention of the Dutch Government. Replying to a
question of mine in the House of Commons on the subject,
Sir Edward Grey, the Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs,
while admitting the justice and propriety of Captain Car-
penter’s claim for compensation, added, as the opinion of
the law officers of the Crown; “It is not, however, con-


sidered that the alleged loss to the crew arid owners of the
‘Costa Rica Packet can be properly included in the claim.”
It would of course be a piece of presumption on the part of
any layman to argue a point of law with two such eminent
counsellors as Sir Charles Russell and Sir John Rigby, and
it may therefore be concluded that, as a matter of strict
legality, the claims of the owners and crew cannot be en-
tertained. It was, of course, open to the officers and crew
■of the Costa Rica Packet , after the arrest and imprisonment
of their captain, to unfurl their sails, clear out of the
harbour of Ternate, go away in search of whales, and leave
Captain Carpenter, a prisoner in a foreign land, to his fate.
Lawyers become habituated to looking at everything from
a cold-blooded, intensely practical point of view, and this is
probably the consideration that weighed with the Attorney-
General and the Solicitor-General in advising the Foreign
Office that the owners and the crew had no legal claim.
But no unprejudiced person can read the evidence in detail
with care and attention without coming to the same con-
clusion as the Select Committee arrived at—viz., that the
losses sustained by the owners and crew were the direct and
necessary consequence of the arbitrary arrest and imprison-
ment of the captain, and that, if not in law, certainly in
■equity, the former are no less entitled to substantial com-
pensation than the latter. For it was clearly proved to
the satisfaction of the Select Committee that Captain Car-
penter, as a result of his thirty-five years’ experience in
these waters as a trader and whaler, had acquired a special
and exclusive knowledge of the best whaling grounds and
the right time to visit them. As that knowledge was
virtually a valuable trade secret not shared in by, and not
communicable to, any of the officers and crew, it follows
that the latter, had they put out to sea after the captain’s
arrest, would have been placed at a serious disadvantage,
and would have incurred a responsibility of no little weight
and magnitude.
The following extract from Captain Carpenter’s evidence
not only summarises the situation at ihe time of his out-
rageous arrest, but also conveys some interesting and little-
known information as to the extent and importance of the
whaling industry in Australasian waters :


“On what date does the whaling season commence in the
neighborhood of Ternate? I consider about the beginning of
November. I have caught whales a few days before that date ; but
as a general thing, we never troubled to whale before the Ist
November.
“ Then on the day of your arrest you had just arrived on your
whaling ground? Yes. I went into Ternate to buy a few boat
loads of fresh provisions, and to get medical advice for one of the
men. It was my intention to go out again on the same day, and
had I done so, I could have been on the whaling ground in twenty-
four hours.
“I suppose, from your knowledge of the habits of whales, you,
expected to meet with whales almost daily until what day ? Untili
the 10th January.
“ Then your experience teaches you that the whaling season in .
those seas ceases about the 10th January ; Yes ;it ceases until the
Ist June.
“Then from the Ist November until the 10th January was your
opportunity for making a voyage? Yes.
“ And you had every reason to believe that you would have
had a highly successful voyage ? From the experience of former
voyages. I believe I should have done a great deal better than ever
I did before, because I went before with only part of a crew, and
with very indifferent whalemen, but this time I went with a full
crew and good whalemen.
“In a former voyage how many boats did you lower ? Gener-
ally three, but sometimes four.
“ H u w many boats were you prepared to lower on this voyage ?'
Six.
“ On a voyage when you lowered three boats, do you remember
the value of the oil captured ? I took sixty-two whales between
the Ist November and the Ist or 10th January.
“ Roughly speaking, what was the value of those sixty-two
whales? From £14,000 to £15,000.
“The marketable products of a sperm-whale are oil. spermaceti,
and sometimes ambergris? Yes.
“You have a chance of getting ambergris in any whale you.
may capture ? Yes.
“ You always search for it ? Yes.
“What is ambergris worth? Grey ambergris is sometimes
quoted at £lO an ounce.
“ How much has been got out of a whale ? Two thousand,
pounds in weight, I have heard.
“ Did you ever get any ambergris out of a whale ? I got 501 b
once.
“ What did you sell it for? I did not sell it; I was only an
officer of the ship.


“ Ambergris is always a very saleable and marketable product ?
Yes.
“Then on a former voyage you absolutely obtained from
£14,000 to £15,000 worth of oil during a similar season in a ship
less efficiently equipped? Yes.”
The claim of the officers and crew to compensation is
based on the fact that it is the custom to admit them as
partners in whaling enterprises. In the technical slang
of the trade, they each receive a prescribed “ lay,” or frac-
tional proportion of the profits of the cruise. That is the
only payment they receive for their services. In the pre-
sent instance it was stipulated that Captain Carpenter’s
“ lay,” or relative share of the profits was to be one-twelfth,
the first mate’s one-eighteenth, the second mate’s one-
twenty-fifth, the third mate’s one thirty-fifth, the fourth
mate’s one forty-fifth, the fifth mate’s one fifty-fifth ; the
boat-steerer-s were to receive the same “lay ” as the fifth
mate, the steward and cook were to take one-sixtieth, and
the “ lays ” of the ordinary crew varied from one-hundredth
to one hundred and fiftieth. As the cruise was brought to
a sudden termination at the outset by the forcible seizure
and removal of the captain to a distance of a thousand
miles from his ship, none of these “ lays ” were realised,
and it does not seem unreasonable under the circumstances
to call upon the Dutch Government and their official
representatives, as the parties obviously and directly
responsible for the non-realisation of the “ lays,” to make
due and adequate restitution.
Last, but by no means least, the owners of the Costa
Rica Packet , an association of enterprising Sydney citizens
and British subjects, had a not important “lay” in the
‘ business, that calls for consideration at the hands of the
Foreign Office and the Government of the Hague. They
had reckoned on a profit of £11,170, an estimate based on
the returns of previous whaling cruises of the Costa Rica
Packet. But the Netherlands-India officials not only
deprived them of the opportunity of realising that profit,
but actually subjected them to a positive loss of close on
£B,OOO. For, when Captain Carpenter, after his peculiar
liberation from Macassar gaol, got back to Termite,
which he did not succeed in doing until some three months


ihad elapsed, he found his crew prostrated with illness,
the ship Avholly neglected and seriously depreciated from
lying idle so long in tropical waters, the ropes and sails
rotting, and all hope of utilising the Costa Rica Packet for
the whaling season gone. It was therefore deemed the
best course to sell her at Singapore for what she would
bring, and as the sale only realised £1,250, whereas she
had cost the owners £8,930, according to the sworn testi-
mony of their managing director, it certainly does seem to
the ordinary non-legal mind that the owners have a pretty
substantial foundation on which to build up a claim against
the Government of the Hague for the resultant effects of
the illegal and uncivilised conduct of their accredited
representatives in Netherlands-Inciia.
Such is the history of a curious and suggestive con-
temporary international episode—an episode that carries
the mind back to those distant days when mariners
ploughed the sea and entered strange ports at their peril,
when a wide berth was given to every suspicious looking
sail, and no naval officer went ashore in a foreign country
Without a strong protecting bodyguard. It is surely an
aggravating anachronism that in the last decade of the
nineteenth century, in an era of universal peace when the
comity of nations is understood to be an established reality,
and not a mere figure of diplomatic speech, that a British
captain cannot enter a port under the jurisdiction of a
European State without liability to seizure on some stale
and frivolous charge, deportation to a distance of a
thousand miles, imprisonment under revolting conditions
liberation without trial, apology, or means of returning to
Ids ship, and the utter ruin of his professional prospects.
The Imperial Government has a plain duty to perform in
this matter, and that is to strenuously assert its Imperial
character and responsibilities and carry conviction to the
minds and pockets of arrogant foreigners in out-of-the-way
localities, clothed with a little brief authority, that they
will not be permitted to play fantastic tricks with British
subjects with impunity. Australian colonists have taken
up Captain Carpenter’s case with warmth and earnestness
because he is one of themselves, and because they feel an
honest indignation at the gross treatment he received at


the hands of the Netherlands-India authorities. They call
upon the Imperial Government as a matter of right and
duty to vindicate Captain Carpenter’s character and claims,
to exact full compensation, not only for the wrongs and
outrages he was personally compelled to endure, but also
for the concomitant losses of his principals and partners,
and to emphasise the exemplary lesson that every colonial
captain flying the British flag in the remotest and least
frequented waters of the globe is as fully and absolutely
under Imperial protection as if he were navigating the-
seas surrounding the British Isles.
X. E. Hogan.
-r a r-
-34i p
tieuo
io 4^
M L
i Printed at the Mining Standard Office, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney .




