

May and Co., Printers, g Mhclcillop-strcet, Melbourne.




CORRESPONDENCE.
Park-street, South Yarra,
2WI April, 1873.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR G. BOWEN, &c., GOVERNOR
OF VICTORIA, &c.
Sir,- —I do not think any apology is required in addressing
your Excellency on a matter of public importance and in the
interests of humanity.
The melancholy loss of life by shipwreck, and destruction of
property, may, in my humble opinion, be prevented in a great
measure by a very simple method, founded on the most scientific
principles.
A deal box, 6 feet long, 2 feet wide, and 4 inches deep, with
inch sides and ends, half-inch tongued and grooved top and
bottom, made watertight, containing cubic feet of air, will
balance in water 240 lbs. nearly. Take the average weight of a
man at 140 lbs. —the same box, forming the bottom of his bed,
would be a life-buoy sufficient to keep him from being drowned.
These boxes, connected by ropes or laniards* at the sides and
ends, could be united or joined to form a large raft capable of
supporting a number of persons and a considerable weight of
goods.
It is needless to trouble your Excellency with more details, as
they can easily be furnished by any intelligent mechanic : my
object in addressing your Excellency being to get the idea placed
before the British Government. As they make regulations for
the health and comfort of emigrants and passengers, they may
also for the purpose of saving life.
An enclosed cube of air, calculated according to the specific
gravity of a ship and cargo, and the weight of water, would
prevent any ship whatever from the possibility of sinking.
I have the honour to be, &c.,
W. STANWAY.
Chains and swivels might be better.


The Private Secretary is directed by the Governor to acknow-
ledge the receipt of Mr. William Stanway’s communication of the
28th ultimo, and to inform him that it has been referred by His
Excellency to the department of the Honourable the Commis-
sioner of Trade and Customs.
Private Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 2 7id May, 1873.
Park-street, South Yarra,
9 th May, 1873.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR G. BOWEN, &c., &c.
Sir, —The importance of the subject is my only apology for
again addressing your Excellency, trusting that your Excellency
will kindly excuse and make allowance for any apparent abruptness
or informality in this address.
It appears that there is no reason why vessels should either be
burnt or sunk at sea, excepting under most extraordinary and
unforeseen circumstances, as a vessel 300 feet long, 40 feet wide,
and 1 foot deep, will contain 12,000 cubic feet of air, each cubic
foot equal to 684 lbs. weight of sea water: equal to 768,000 lbs.,
under two decks equal to tons. Or, iron tanks beneath the
decks would keep any vessel from sinking; and in case of fire,
the ship could either be scuttled or flooded at pleasure.
It would be necessary for an Act of Parliament rendering it
compulsory on every ship owner or builder to have on board a
certain number of empty tanks, according to her tonnage. They
should be thoroughly watertight and have no opening, as the
avarice, recklessness, or stupidity of shipowners would otherwise
render them useless. Insurances would soon be at a minimum,
and a quantity of capital liberated for other purposes, besides
giving employment to mechanics and others.
The American Consul promised to submit the plan to his
Government; and it is my humble opinion that, if submitted to
the British Government, it would meet with proper attention and
consideration.
I have the honour to be your Excellency’s most humble
servant,
WILLIAM STANWAY.
The Private Secretary is directed by the Governor to acknow-
ledge the receipt of Mr. William Stanway’s communication of the
9th instant, and to inform him that it has been referred by his
Excellency to the Department of the Hon. the Commissioner of
Trade and Customs.
Private Secretary’s Office,
Melboukne, i 2th May, 1873.


Department of Trade and Customs,
Melbourne, 21st May, 1873.
D 73 | 472.
Sir, — I am directed by the Honourable the Commissioner to
acknowledge the receipt of your letters of the 28th April and 9th
instant, addressed to, and transferred to this department by, his
Excellency; in the first of which communications you detail a
plan by which certain watertight boxes may be so constructed as
to be the means of saving life at sea, by being used singly, as
buoys, or as a raft, by being put together.
Your letter of the 9th instant submitted a further plan, by which
ships could be made secure from sinking, by means of a number
of tanks secured beneath their decks.
In reply, I have to inform you that, your suggestions having
been referred for the opinion of the professional officers attached
to this department, it is thought that, as regards the first-named
plan, there would be great difficulty in keeping the boxes in an
efficient state; and that in the confusion which would arise upon
the occasion of any sudden marine casualty, the form of the life-
buoys (rigid boxes, 6 feet x 2 feet) would very seriously interfere
with their being quickly used, from the difficulty of taking them
up the hatchway.
With regard to the plan for preventing vessels foundering at
sea, it is considered that the displacement of a vessel of the
dimensions indicated in the margin * would, when loaded at a
17 feet draught of water, be equal to 3,260 tons; so that, to carry
out your proposition, it would require a vessel, or tank, 300 feet
long, 40 feet high, and 10 feet deep, to equal the above displace-
ment; or, in other terms, it would necessitate vessels of large
tonnage losing one-third of their carrying capacity, if supplied
with tanks to overcome the displacement.
For this and other reasons, the Honourable the Commissioner
is of opinion that your propositions are not of any practical value.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. CHATFIELD TYLER,
Assistant- Commissioner.
Mr. William Stanway,
Park-street, South Yarra.
* Length, 340 feet; beam, 44.4 feet; depth, 35 feet.
Park-street, South Yarra,
23 rd May, 1873.
D 73 I 472-
Sir, — I had the honour to receive yours of the 21st instant,
informing me that the Honourable the Commissioner of Customs
“ does not consider my propositions of any practical value.”


ist. It is thought “ there would be great difficulty in keeping
the boxes in an efficient state.”
Answer. The difficulty is only imaginary; and it is the strongest
known form of construction, being the same as that of the Britannia
tubular bridge, and the boxes alone would support a man in the
water without the enclosed cube of air.
2nd. “The confusion that would arise upon the occasion of
any sudden marine casualty would very seriously interfere with
their being quickly used, and the difficulty of taking them up the
hatchways.”
Answer. There need be little confusion in a well-commanded
ship ; and there is generally sufficient time, as in the case of the
Captain and the Northfleet, for the purpose. There would be no
difficulty in taking them up the hatchways, as they only weigh
about 35 pounds; and a man could carry one under his arm.
With regard to the plan for preventing vessels foundering at
sea, my dimensions of 300 feet long and 40 feet wide are applied
to a vessel 340 feet long and 44 feet wide; and it is to be
remarked that, the greater part of a ship’s cargo generally con-
sisting of casks of wine, beer, spirits, and measurement goods,
the buoyancy required would only apply to dead weight and
ballast.
I can see no practical difficulty in the way, and am ready to
answer any further objections.
A reconsideration, and another answer, are most respectfully
requested.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
WILLIAM STANWAY.
J. Chatfield Tyler, Esq.,
Assistant-Commissioner of Customs.
Department of Trade and Customs,
Melbourne, 4 th June, 1873.
U 73 I 529-
Sir, —I am desired by the Honourable the Commissioner of
Trade and Customs to state, in reply to your letter of the 27th
May, that the Chief Harbour Master has nothing to add to the
remarks intimated to you in my letter of the 21st May; but I
am to say that when difference of opinion exists in matters of
this description, the only mode of arriving at a practical result as
to the value of a theory is by actual experiment. If you could


induce any shipowner to test your plan in a vessel, you might,
perhaps, be able to come to some conclusion.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. CHATFIELD TYLER,
Assistant-Commissioner of Trade and Customs.
Mr. Wm. Stanway,
Park-street, South Yarra.
Park-street, South Yarra,
5 thjune, 1873,
D 73 I 529-
Sir, —In answer to yours of 4th instant, it appears to me that
the reply of the Chief Harbour Master to my letter of 23rd May
is supercilious, disingenuous, and evasive. Agreeing with the
Honourable the Commissioner “ that the only way of arriving at
a result as to the value of a theory is by actual experiment,” I
may state that the only object of my suggestion being to save
life, neither my time nor means will allow me to make experi-
ments which I consider it the duty of the Government to institute.
This closes the correspondence, and I now consider it my duty
to proceed to publication.
I have the honour to be, &c.,
VV. STANWAY.
J. Chatfield Tyler, Esq.,
Assistant-Commissioner of Customs.
Park-street, South Yarra,
25 th April, 1877.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR GEORGE FERGUSSON
BOWEN, K.C.M.G., GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEF AND
VICE-ADMIRAL OF VICTORIA, &c.
Sir, —Once more I take the liberty of addressing your
Excellency in the cause of humanity, humbly requesting that the
plan I have submitted may be examined by a more scientific and
practical man than the Chief Harbour Master, who, however
competent he may be to fulfil the duties of his station, may not
perhaps be sufficiently qualified to judge of a matter requiring a
thorough knowledge of the science of hydrostatic* and their
practical application.


That I was wrong in applying to your Excellency does not
appear, by your Excellency submitting my plan to the Department
of Trade and Customs; but I do not feel satisfied to have the
calculations and study which I have given to the subject, and the
unanimous opinion of all practical and scientific men with whom
I have spoken, summarily disposed of by the ipse dixit of the
Chief Harbour Master, who may not have time or inclination to
bestow proper attention to the matter. As the theory may be
applied to ships of war, the question is not of trifling importance.
It is only necessary that ships should carry a sufficient quantity
of enclosed air in compartments to counterbalance the weight
of any parts of the ship and cargo of which the specific gravity
is greater than the same cubic content of water, to prevent them
from immediately sinking on the occurrence of any trifling or
serious accident.
It might not be considered too great an interference with
vested interests, or the liberty of the subject, to enact a law
compelling shipowners to carry a certain amount of empty tanks,
to prevent ships from immediately sinking, so involving the great
destruction of life and property.
I have the honour to enclose a rough model, which proves the
correctness of my data and calculations
64 lbs. of salt water, equal to 1 cubic foot.
y 2 lb. of water „ cubic inches.
The content of the model, which will support a y 2 lb. weight.
I have the honour to be your Excellency’s most obedient and
very humble servant,
WILLIAM STANWAY.
The Private Secretary is directed by the Governor to acknow-
ledge the receipt of Mr. W. Stanway’s communication of the
26th April, and to inform him that it has been referred to the
Honourable the Commissioner for Trade and Customs.
Private Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, April, 1877.
Observatory, 14//? January, 1878.
Dear Sir, — I have examined your models for life-buoys, and
think the method would be very effective, while it is simple and
inexpensive. Forming, as it will, the bottom of the ordinary
bunk, or bed-place, very little extra room is required for stowage,
which is a matter of no small importance on board ship. Pro-
vided you can arrange against the buoys getting water-logged,


from protracted immersion, I think there can be little doubt of
their practical utility, either as single life-buoys or connected
together as life-rafts.
Yours faithfully,
ROBT. J. ELLERY.
To Mr. Stanvvay.
AN UNSINKABLE SHIP.
A number of gentlemen interested in steam navigation have
paid a visit to North Woolwich to inspect a small steam-launch,
or yacht, constructed on a principle invented by a gentleman
who believes he can render ships unsinkable, and at the same
time secure “ greater stability under canvas, a higher rate of
speed under steam or sail, greater cargo capacity, less draught
and consequently greater freeboard, and greater cheapness in
original construction.” Outside the true skin of the vessel, on
each side, is a row of flat air-tight cylinders, or drums, the inner
heads of which form part of the framing and skin of the vessel.
These drums project on either side of the ship, and are cased in
the under sides of the casings normally resting upon the surface
of the water and becoming slightly immersed under a load. The
result is a light draught with great freeboard, while the tonnage
measurement remains unaltered, as she is measured from her
inner skin. The enormous floating power thus obtained will, it
is contended, enable a ship carrying a given weight of cargo to
be much higher out of the water than a ship of ordinary con-
struction carrying the same weight. In case of collision, it is
alleged that some only of the cylinders will be destroyed, and
that the rest will float the ship even though the water should
enter so as to find its level. The experimental launch is built of
steel, and is 37 feet long, 6 feet deep, and 5 feet 8 inches beam
internally. She has seven cylinders fitted on each side, each
cylinder being 3 feet 6 inches in diameter and 1 foot 8 inches
deep, and which give her a width on deck of 9 feet over all. She
draws 2 feet of water without her load, and has a freeboard of
4 feet. The cylinders, of course, add greatly to the strength,
though not to the beauty, of a vessel; but what their effect may
be on her speed is a matter for shipbuilders to decide. In the
short run made with the visitors on board a fair speed was
attained, the launch moving very steadily. An iron model was
flung into the Thames, and also thrust under; but it refused to
sink, and floated when full of water. It is the patentee’s intention
to cross the Atlantic next year in his little vessel. — Willesden
Chronicle, 15 th October, 1880.


CONCLUDING REMARKS.
The displacement of a ship represents the weight of everything
in her both above and below the surface of the water ; therefore,
the statement of the Chief Harbour Master that it would require
a tank 10 feet deep to counterbalance the displacement, means
that it would be sufficient to keep her entirely out of the water,
as bodies immersed lose their weight according to the greater or
less specific gravity when compared with water. A man out of
water weighing 140 lbs., when in the water weighs nothing ; the
body of a man being about the same weight as the same cubic
content of water, as in the trial by Archimedes in his bath. It
does not require the gift of prophecy to foresee and predict that,
at a future time, all passenger and excursion ships will be
provided with sufficient means of buoyancy to keep them from
sinking as in the case of the Princess Alice , in the Thames, sunk
in sight of land with about 700 passengers.
This plan for saving life can only be of partial efficacy. There
will always remain enough of danger to voyagers to cause
sufficient pleasurable excitement; cases will occur, and accidents
happen, fraught with mournful and deplorable reality. Yet the
chances of escape will be 'numerous, and hundreds, perhaps
thousands, of lives may be saved, and, what is considered by
many of more value than life, much property.
W. STANWAY.
351 Albert-road, Emerald Hill.
21st December , 1881.




