

CAMPED WITH THE HACKS
WTHII


®( CA
>0 ~"
AUSTRALIAN YOUNG FOLKS’ STORY
BOOKS
□ □ □
Written, Illustrated, and Printed in Australia
no □
A Real Bush Story
BUNYIP SAYS SO
A True Tale of the Camp where the
Animals and Birds of the Bush hold their
Meetings and tell their Wonderful Stories
W. M. FLEMING
“One of the best. It is an excellent fairy-tale.”
—Melbourne “Age.”
“Children will find Mr. Fleming a good friend.”
—“The Australasian.”
“Here is a book that should be wherever there
are Australian children.”— “Stock and Station”
Journal.
□ no
108 Pages Illustrated
One Shilling
n □ □
EDWARD A. VIDLER, PUBLISHER, MELBOURNE


THE MAGIC SPEAR
CAMPED WITH THE BLACKS


v § dnjj^L
3$Pll0&ji| iilsfPyif «« iilHHlI^^'^Sp^sHfi
%s£f &?:*&&.. .mI! qffi«l& wp :^i'- N $sms!&&>m® . a^B
BaK\ Jk£ : ■£*£-**& m Ttk: "7% * <*&9W
THE CORROBBOREE


AUSTRALIAN YOUNG FOLKS’ STORY
THE MAGIC SPEAR
CAMPED WITH THE BLACKS
A Tale of the Early Days
Wm. T. HILL, B.A.
Author of
“THE GOLDEN QUEST”
Illustrated by R. Wenban
Written, Illustrated and Printed in Australia for
EDWARD A. VIDLER, Publisher
W. A. HAMER, Printer. 205-217 Peel St., North Melbourne, N1


PREFACE
I Ms little book Kas been written for young
Australians. It is an attempt to interest our
boys and girls in the aborigines—those dark-
skinned people whose ancestors wandered to and
fro over the face of our great continent long
before the first white men visited its shores.
Very few of our boys and girls have ever
visited a native camp —in fact, many of them
have never seen a native; but we can all learn
something, even from the most humble folk,
and it is the hope of the author that the story
of Harry Pascoe and his "Magic Spear” will not
only prove of interest, but will also be the means
of teaching the young reader something of the
habits and customs of our Australian blacks,
and, in addition, the value of cultivating that
power of observation upon which the natives
depend so much in their work of hunting and
tracking game in the forest.
W.T.H.


i lie Magic Spear
CHAPTER 1.
LOST IN THE BUSH.
Harry Fascoe was an orphan, both his parents
having died when he was a little fellow of three.
He had been brought up by his Uncle Jim, who
was a pioneer settler in the north of Victoria, in
the early days, his selection, “Pine Bank” being
close to the great Murray River. Harry was at
this time a fine lad of fifteen. He was tall and
broad for his age, and, thanks to his uncle s
training, he was as good a bushman as many
men.
One day Uncle Jim and his man, Sam Treloar,
set off at dawn with a mob of cattle, which they
were driving to Echuca. They expected to be back
some time the same night, and left Harry in
charge of the work at the homestead. During his
uncle’s absence the lad went about his work as
usual, proud of the trust placed in him, for his
uncle, before leaving with the stock, had said:—
“Now, Harry, I’m leaving you in charge. Take
good care of Aunt Jane and Mary while I am
away.”
Then, with a cracking of stock-whips, away
went Uncle Jim and Sam Treloar, driving their
mob of steers to the market.


While Harry was at work in the barn, an agent
drove up to the homestead, but on hearing that
Mr. Pascoe was away from home, drove off again,
carelessly leaving the sliprails down. A little while
later several young horses, which were feeding
in the home paddock, found their way out and
scampered off down the road. They were not
missed for some time: but, when Harry came in at
lunch time, they were nowhere to be seen. One of
the horses had been bred at a station about a
hundred miles down the river; and, as their tracks
led downstream, Harry concluded that they had
gone towards this station, and prepared to follow
them.
After lunch he packed his saddle-bag with a
three days’ supply of food, saddled a fast horse;
then, telling his aunt that he might not be home
for a day or two as the colts had obtained a good
start, he took his repeating rifle and belt of cart-
ridges, and set off on the track of the runaways.
Mile after mile Harry rode, and when night fell
he was fully thirty miles away from home. He
made his camp beside a beautiful creek, which
flowed beneath a canopy of wattles and native
willows, while flowering shrubs and plants made
the scene a most inviting one to the tired travel-
ler. Game was plentiful, too; but Harry did not
trouble to shoot any, as his saddle-bags contained
a plentiful supply of food.
Next morning he started early, and followed
the tracks of the horses till midday, when he


halted to give his horse a rest, and to eat his
lunch. After the meal, Harry lay at ease on
the turf, while his horse cropped the lush grass
that grew in the shade beside a brook.
Suddenly the lad sat up with a start. What
was that? There was a crashing, rushing sound,
as of some mighty animal trampling the timber;
and, the next moment, a mob of kangaroos came
tearing through the scrub a little to the left of
him. His horse, a flighty chestnut, immedi-
ately took fright and, rearing on its haunches,
strained at its halter.
“Crack!” the bough to which the animal was
tied snapped like a carrot, and away went the
frightened horse, with the branch flapping against
its side and goading it into a frenzy of terror.
Harry jumped up, shouting “Whoa! Whoa!”
but he might as well have spoken to the wind as
his horse, for in less time than it takes to tell,
the terrified animal was out of sight. What was
the lad to do? His position was serious. He was
at least fifty miles from home, without horse or
food, for his saddle-bag and blankets had been
carried off by the runaway. Luckily he had his
rifle, which was leaning against a tree, his belt
of cartridges, and a box of matches; so he felt
that things might easily have been far worse;
and being a good bushman, Harry did not mind
having to spend a night or two in the forest.
After considering for a while, the lad decided
to follow the course of the little creek before set-


tling on a place in which to camp for the night.
He wandered down-stream till he came to a fine
lagoon, into which the creek emptied its waters,
leaping and foaming its way over a beautiful
waterfall. Harry stood at the head of the fall,
delighted with the scene. At his feet lay the wide
lagoon, dotted here and there with black swans,
ducks, and other water birds, while blue herons,
spoonbills, and pelicans waded among the reeds,
searching for food. The sight held such a charm
for Harry that he forgot his own plight, and it
was some little time before he noticed a thin
column of smoke curling above the timber at the
far end of the lagoon. After watching this for a
moment or two, the lad came to the conclusion
that a tribe of blacks had pitched their camp
there, and decided to make his way in that direc-
tion. He did not fear the blacks, as he felt quite
able to take care of himself.
On rounding a bend, he came upon a newly-
made grave, and, on approaching it, he saw a
spear standing upright in the centre of the mound.
As he stood beside the grave, there came to his
mind the story of William Buckley, the Wild
White Man, who, when found by the blacks, was
carrying a spear which he had taken from a grave,
and was hailed as the spirit of the dead member
of the tribe, and treated with great respect. Harry
made up his mind to take the spear with him in
the hope that it would win him a welcome from
the blacks whose Camp he could sec in the
distance.


As the lad approached it he was greeted
by the barking of dogs and the shouts of piccanin-
nies, who ran excitedly to warn the camp of the
approach of a white stranger. Harry could see
a number of men seated at a little distance from
the fire, at which several lubras were busily en-
gaged in preparing the evening meal. At his
approach some men caught up their spears; but
the lad halted at a distance of about thirty yards
from the fire, and raised his right hand above
his head in token of friendship. Then, at a sign
from one of the blacks, he advanced and stood be-
fore the group seated near the fire.
CHAPTER 11.
THE NATIVE CAMP.
Harry advanced to the fire with a certain
amount of misgiving, especially as he had seen
some of the warriors catch up their spears; but,
at a word from the chief, these men resumed
their seats on the ground. Holding the spear in
his right hand, the lad kept his rifle in his left.
As he stood before them, the blacks looked at
him, and began to chatter excitedly to one an-
other, pointing to the spear which the lad had
taken from the grave of their dead comrade.
Harry knew that, on seeing the spear, they had
taken him for the spirit of their relative returned


from the dead, and he also knew that he would
be quite safe as long as he cared to stay with the
tribe.
Many of the blacks have a belief that the white
people are members of their own race who have
come back from the grave. Their belief is told
in this legend.
“When Pund-jel, the Creator, made the first
blacks, he gave them orders not to go near a big
tree (tainya) where Bon-nel-ya, the Bat, lived, as
he was on no account to be disturbed. One day
Nonga, the woman, who was gathering firewood,
went too close to the tree, and frightened Bonnel-
ya, who at once flew away, and in his place
came Death. Shortly after this many blacks died,
and after death they returned as white men to the
scene of their former life.”
If a “newly-returned” person was deemed to be
one of their own kindred he was treated well and
shown every mark of respect. Harry Pascoe was
fortunate in this respect, for a young warrior had
died a few days before his arrival, and he was
looked upon as the Uri-uri (spirit) of this youth,
who had returned to his tribe, bearing the spear
from his own grave as a token.
After the blacks had consulted together for
some time, one of them, who was able to speak
English, addressed Harry Pascoe. This man had
formerly worked on a cattle station , and had
picked up some knowledge of the customs and
language of the white men; but he had later re-


turned to his tribe, or “gone bush,” as it is called.
He addressed Harry in these words: —
“Baas, white pfeller, Uri-uri; you comma long
way; long, long way, mine tinkit.” Here he pointed
to the spear in Harry’s hand. “Come, baas, you
bin sit by fire.”
Thus invited, the lad advanced into the circle.
He was presented to the king of the tribe, whose
name was Yang-uia, or the Left-handed. He was
a man of splendid build, well over six feet in
height, straight as a ramrod, and as strong as
an ox. Harry shook hands with “His Majesty,”
who motioned him to a seat beside himself. The
lad’s fears for his safety had by this time quite
disappeared, for he saw that he had been accepted
as a friend by the whole tribe.
Harry was much interested in all he saw. The
camp consisted of about thirty gunyahs, or mia-
mias; some built of bushes and some of sheets of
bark, while others were built of both bark and
bushes. A score of children were present, play-
ing about the gunyahs, or shyly watching the
stranger who had so suddenly come amongst them
from “the land beyond the grave.” The women
were busy at the fire, cooking supper for the
tribe, as the smell of singed fur and charred flesh
gave evidence. There are some animals, such
as the Koala or native bear, which it is not law-
ful for the blacks to skin before roasting; so they
are cooked, fur and all—hence the strange smells
that arose from the cooking fire.


The meal was a much better one than Harry
had hoped for, judging by the odours which the
fire had given forth during the cooking. There
were fish that had been broiled on the coals, and
roast ducks that had been cooked in a way quite
new to Harry. The lubras had merely plastered
the ducks, feathers and all, with a thick layer of
wet clay, and then baked them. When the ducks
were cooked, the clay was knocked off, and with it
came the feathers, leaving the flesh beautifully
cooked, and keeping all its natural juices. For
vegetables there were yams, which had been
roasted in the coals, and tasted like radishes to
the lad.
The lubras waited on the men, bringing them
the whole of the food, from which they selected
all that they required, the women and children
being content with what was left over from the
banquet.
At sunset, the scene by the lake was one of
great beauty; the barred clouds catching the last
beams of the setting sun, “blooming the soft-
dying day, and touching the tree-tops with a rosy
hue.” It was a sight worth watching, and as
Harry stood there, drinking in the beauty of the
evening, he heard a step behind him, and, on look-
ing round, he saw Quandini, the black who had
addressed him in English.
“How beautiful!” said the lad. “It reminds me
of a poem which I have read, ‘The broad sun is
stooping down in his tranquility.’ ’’


The black knew nothing of Wordsworth’s lines,
but he understood the lad who quoted them.
“Yes, baas,” he said, “sun sink down now, go
away; but him come back next day. Long time
ago, baas, sun kept up in sky all ’a time; all day;
all night too. Sun keep up much long time, so
poor blackpfeller no get sleep. He lie awake all
night, baas, much tired. But Nooralie, good Uri-
uri (spirit) he come gibbit blackpfeller rest. He
say to sun:—
‘Yhuko warrie, yhuko warrie,
Yarrarama, wane dilya.
Yanthe yanthona, wane dilya
Tull, tull.’”
Some time later Harry Pascoe read a translation
of this native poem, as follows: —
“Sun, sun, burn your wood;
Burn your inside substance.
Go down. Go down.”
But Quandini’s explanation was this:—
“Him sun burn all day, baas; he need more
wood or fire go out, so sun go down at night to
getum wood. He come back again next day, warm
poor blackpfeller, give more light.”
From this speech Harry gathered that the
blacks had a legend to account for the change from
daylight to darkness. They thought that the sun
spent the night in his storehouse, or wood-yard,
renewing his supply of light and heat so as to give
them service on the morrow.


As Quandini finished his story the sun sank
below the horizon, so the white lad and his black
companion turned towards the camp. The moon
was now rising over the tree-tops, and Harry,
eager to learn more of their quaint beliefs, asked
the black how it was that the moon shone only in
the night, and not by day.
“Ah, baas,” said the black, “him moon libbit on
ground long time before. He do lot of harm to
poor blacks, so Nooralie puttum up in sky, and
tellum shine in night. But moon shine only when
he like, so Nooralie say to moon:—
‘Die, you bones white, bone powder, powder.’
(Die! may your bones whiten, and turn to
powder.)
Moon do as Noorlie say, baas. He die, then
come back, gibbit blackpfeller light, like Nooralie
tellum.”
The black also explained that the stars were
formerly men or beasts, who had been taken up
to the sky by the spirits. Every night they left
their huts and performed the same work in the
sky as they had formerly done while on the earth.
Quandini pointed out the planet Mars, which
shone with a ruddy hue, and said:—
Dat one eagle, baas. Dat one,” pointing to
another cluster of stars, “him crow. All little
stars alonga him bin him lubras” (wives).
As they entered the camp, Harry noticed that
all the blacks were busily engaged in collecting
wood, which they piled near the fire, Quandini


then told him that there was to be “one big
pfeller corrobboree” that night, in honour of the
guest who had returned from the spirit world.
Needless to say, Harry looked forward to the
performance with great interest.
CHAPTER 111.
THE CORROBBOREE.
As soon as night had fallen, a party of young
blacks stole quietly from the camp. These, said
Quandini, were the dancers, who had gone to
decorate themselves in readiness for the Yain-
yang, a Corrobboree dance.
Meanwhile, more wood was thrown on the fire,
until the flames leaped and flared to a great
height, lighting up the whole glade. The gun-
yahs, the trees, and the moving figures of the
blacks looked ghostly in this leaping, dancing
light. It was a weird, uncanny scene, and as
Harry sat watching, and waiting for the dancers,
he felt a creepy sensation run down his spine.
When everything was ready, a number of lubras
seated themselves in a semi-circle, at some dis-
tance from the fire, each having an opossum rug
tightly stretched across her knees. These lubras
were the “band,” who supplied the instrumental
music for the dance. They beat upon their rugs
a kind of tattoo, making a sound not unlike that


of a drum, and at the same time they chanted a
weird corrobboree song:—
“Wilpon,
Tho Wilpon,
Me-e, Gra-a-a.”
Seated in front of the “music” makers was an
old black who acted as bandmaster. He beat time
with a pair of corrobboree sticks. These sticks
were made of hard, dry wood, sharpened at each
end, and gave out a loud, ringing sound when
beaten together.
At last the dancers appeared. There were
twenty young men in the party, and weird figures
they looked as they stepped into the circle of fire-
light. Their naked bodies were painted with pipe-
clay, of which there was a plentiful supply on
the banks of the lake. Each man was decorated
according to his own ideas of taste, though all
the dancers had painted white rings around his
eyes, and a streak across his forehead. Lines were
painted on their bodies, too; the streaks and daubs
being put on in such a manner as to make the
bodies of the dancers look like skeletons in the
light of the fire.
The dancers had green boughs tied to their legs
just below the knees; they also wore aprons of
dressed opossum skins. As they advanced they
raised their hands, in which they carried corrob-
boree sticks. Taking their time from the band-
maoter, they struck the sticks together, at the
same time swaying their bodies from side to side.


As the music grew faster, they bounded into
the air, knocking their sticks together, and chant-
ing their song over and over again. Then they
formed up in column, four deep, and advanced
towards the singers. Then, as they bounded for-
ward, they appeared to become mixed up, and
the flying sticks looked very dangerous; but no
mishap occurred, for the whole action was
concerted and well planned. Shouting, jumping,
stamping, and making a blubbering noise “br-r-r-r,
br-r-r-r,” with their lips, they made the night
ring, for they sang at the top of their voices, while
the women beat upon their rugs, and sang with
all their might, adding to the general clamour.
Suddenly the dancers retired in a body, like one
man, but reappeared a moment later, marching
in a curved line. The performance was then
varied, for they imitated the movements of the
dingo, the emu, the kangaroo, and other animals,
to the great delight of the onlookers. To see the
whole party bound forward in imitation of a mob
of kangaroos was a very funny sight indeed, and
Harry laughed till his sides ached. Next a frog
dance was performed, and the antics of the
dancers were very amusing. The whole dance
was a fine imitation of the movements of the wild
animals, and Harry Pascoe was delighted with
the performance, which was held in his honour.
While the dance proceeded, the remainder of the
tribe watched from a distance. The lubras sat
with their rugs stretched over their knees, while


the men stood or lounged about, their spears
stuck in the ground beside them. All appeared
to be delighted. The women beat out the time and
sang, while the men conversed in low tones,
praising the performance, and comparing the skill
of the different dancers.
One tall black acted as policeman, his duty
being to keep back the onlookers, so that the
dancers might have plenty of room. He strutted
up and down, feeling very proud of himself and
his office, Harry was much amused to see the air
of importance of this man, especially as the spec-
tators were all at some distance from the dancers,
and did not require the strong arm of the law to
keep them in order.
When the bandmaster considered that the per-
formance had lasted long enough—which was not
until some of the dancers were nearly dropping
from fatigue—he raised his sticks above his head
and struck them heavily together. The women
then took up their rugs and retired to the gun-
yahs, while the dancers, forming into line,
marched to the spot where Harry was standing
with Quandini. As a sort of wind-up they pointed
their corrobboree sticks skywards, and gave three
tremendous shouts. The leader then advanced,
stroking himself upon the breast in token of
friendship.
Harry held out his hand, which was taken by
the leader; then, as each of the dancers came up
in turn, the lad, having made a beginning, was


obliged to shake hands with the whole party. By
the time they had all filed past, his hand was
nearly shaken off. However, as Harry afterwards
said, it was worth it.
As the corrobboree was ended, preparations
were made for retiring for the night, and Quan-
dini approached Harry, saying: “Baas, you bin
sleepit mine gunyah.” So the lad went with the
black to spend his first night in a native hut.
CHAPTER IV.
THE BUNYIP.
When Harry entered Quandini’s gunyah, he
found an abundance of opossum rugs in one corner,
and the lad guessed that these had been borrowed
from neighbouring huts in order to make him
more comfortable. He lay awake for a long time,
turning over the day’s adventures in his
mind, and thinking of his home and the anxiety
of his uncle and aunt when he did not return. What
a fright they would get if his horse came back
without him?
“If only I could send them word of my safety,
I wouldn’t care,” he mused. “I could put in a
splendid time here for a week or so, but they are
bound to be anxious about me.”
After a while he became drowsy, and was just
on the point of dropping off to sleep, when he
heard a sound that banished sleep at once. What


was that? Harry listened intently. Yes, there
it was again—a low, rumbling noise that grew
louder and louder, ending in a roar like that of a
bull. Harry jumped up, grasped his rifle, and
started for the door of the gunyah; but a hand was
laid on his arm, and on looking round, he saw
Quandini standing beside him, his teeth chatter-
ing with fright.
“Baas,” he gasped, “no go outside. You stop in
gunyah.”
“Why, what is it?” asked Harry.
“Bunyip, baas. No go outside,” gasped the
poor black, who was almost beside himself with
terror.
When the noises had died away, and the black
had grown somewhat calm, Harry asked him
about this strange creature, of which he appeared
to be in such dread. The black replied that the
bunyip was a dreadful monster, which lived in
the lagoons, lurking in the shadows, ready to
spring upon any poor human being who strayed
from the gunyahs. His body was not like that of
any known animal, but he had a big head and ears,
and a body covered with fur or feathers. Nobody
could describe him clearly, for none who had been
close enough to have a good look at him had re-
turned to tell the tale.
“He no eat poor black,” said Quandini. “He
holdum under water till him die.”
The bunyip was believed to come suddenly upon
the blacks when he meant to destroy them. He


only appeared when the weather was calm, and
the surface of the water smooth. He had great
power, and could cause sickness, disease, and
death. Only the Koradgee men (doctors or
wizards) could tell where he lay hidden, and were
able to inform the rest of the tribe concerning
him. Sometimes his lair was a deep water-hole;
sometimes a lagoon surrounded with reeds.
Harry had heard his uncle talk of the power
exercised by the Koradgee men, who took advan-
tage of the fears of the other blacks, and when
he heard Quandini say that they alone knew
where the bunyip lived, he suspected that these
wizards knew a good deal about these midnight
noises—which, to his ears, sounded distinctly
human—and were using this means of keeping up
their power over the rest of the tribe.
These “doctors” were old men, and were ap-
pointed in a special way. When a Koradgee died,
his spirit was said to return and appear to the
man who was to succeed him in his office. This
man then performed certain duties, and received
great powers. He slept one night on the grave of
the dead Koradgee man. During that fearful
sleep, the spirit of the dead wizard would come,
seize him by the throat, and take out his intes-
tines, which he would then put back, and close up
the wound. After going through this ordeal, the
new Koradgee would be free from all dread of
future ghosts. He at once took up his duties as
g wizard, apd wps looked up to with respect,


The old men kept all the power in their own
hands, and made laws for the rest of the blacks.
There were certain kinds of food which it was not
lawful for any but the old men to eat. Instant
death would result if a woman or a young man
were to eat these foods. The old men were thus
sure of a supply of good food, and, at the same
time, were respected by the other blacks because
of their superior position.
Having turned the matter over in his mind,
Harry addressed Quandini.
“How do you know,” he asked, “that there is
such a creature as thebunyip, if nobody has ever
seen him?”
“Baas, you bin hear him,” answered the black.
“Yes, I heard something; but it need not have
been a bunyip.”
“Listen, baas,” said Quandini. “Mine tinkit I
show you. Long time before, way down that way”
(pointing to the south) “a tribe of blacks camp by
big lake. They catch plenty much eels—five, ten,
plenty much. Lubra pullem eels out of water as
fast as black pfeller bin carry him to gunyah.
Black pfeller wonder why so many eels. He go
gunyah; lubra stay to catch eels. He come back;
lubra gone. No lubra him see; no, not nowhere,
baas.
“Bunyip come, catch lubra while black-pfeller
in gunyah. Bunyip send plenty eels; lubra much
busy catchem eels. Bunyip come up much quiet,
pull Iqbra qnder wqter. Black pfeller much heap


frightened ever since, when he hear bunyip make
noise in night.”
“But,” asked Harry, “how do you know it was
the bunyip that took the lubra? Nobody saw
him.”
“Well, baas,” replied Quandini, “when black
pfeller come one time, he find lubra there. Him
go gunyah. When he come two time, no lubra
there. Bunyip come take lubra. Dat prove Bunyip,
baas.”
This, to Quandini’s mind, was a complete proof
of the existence of the bunyip.
Harry lay still for a while, turning all this over
in his mind, and wondering at the ignorance of
the poor blacks, who put all their misfortunes
down to this fearful creature which dwelt in the
lake. After a while he dropped off to sleep, and
when he awoke, the sun was shining through the
door of the gunyah.
CHAPTER V.
FIRE-MAKING.
Harry jumped up, and, after a dip in the lake,
dressed himself and made his way to the scene
of last night’s corrobboree. During the night
there had been a smart shower of rain, and the
fire had gone out. Harry was much interested
as he watched the blacks preparing to light an-
other.


fr^
■A i. ... jHT -A»j
One of the men went to a gunyah, and brought
forth a “fire-stick,” with which he proceeded to
make “bikya” (fire). This fire-making apparatus
consisted of two straight sticks, which fitted
closely into a round lump of resin, or gum, shred-
MAKING FIRE
aed over with red berries. Below this head, the
sticks were wrapped carefully in folds of yellow
reed, which were lined with gum to keep the sticks
perfectly dry.
The black drew the two sticks from their case
and, placing one on the ground, he fitted the point
of the other, which he held upright, into a socket


in the horizontal stick, and twirled it rapidly be-
tween his hands. Soon a tiny column of smoke
rose from the socket, showing that the wood was
becoming hot enough to burn, as the result of rub-
bing the two sticks together.
Some finely-shredded bark and leaves were now
placed around the smoking stick, which was
twirled faster than before, two men working to-
gether, and drawing their hands down the upright
stick as they twirled it, causing it to press more
heavily in the socket underneath, and thus cause
greater heat. This was kept up until the stick
became red hot, and a smoking coal broke off the
end.
Picking up a handful of tinder, with the red-
hot coal in the centre, the black waved it to and
fro until it burst into flame. He then placed it
under a small heap of dry leaves which had been
gathered from the gunyahs and other sheltered
places, and soon had a fire burning merrily.
Harry was keenly interested when he saw a fire
kindled without matches, and said to Quandini;
“Now, I call that really clever. I’ll never be
stuck in future when I want to make a fire.”
Quandini then related to him the legend told
by the blacks to show how they obtained fire in
the first place.
“Long time before, baas, black pfeller no have
fire. Everything very much bad. He no cook
’possum or kyemery (kangaroo). No keepum


warm on cold day. Then Uri-uri (spirit) come
gibbit fire to two lubras. They belonga bad spirit,
he hate poor blackpfeller berry much, baas.
Lubras keepit bikya (fire) all to self; no gibbit
blackpfeller. One day one man come; he good
friend to blacks. He come say he get bikya from
lubras, gibbit bikya to blacks. So he go to lubras,
makit out him friend. He stay with lubras every
day. One day he steal bikya, and puttem it behind
him back. Bikya burnit him back; him no care.
Then he go away from lubras, takit fire-stick, too.
Him gibbit fire to blackpfeller.
“Long time after, baas, him turned into little
bird by Uri-uri, gibbit him little red mark on
tail. Dat red mark made by fire, baas. Eber
since dat time, poor blackpfeller habbit bikya to
make him warm and cookit ’possum.”
Harry listened to this story with interest; then
he said:—
“Oh yes, I know that bird, Quandini. We call
him the fire-tail.”
“Dat right, baas; him fire-tail. Him gibbit fire
to blackpfeller long time before.”
Harry now thought it was time for him to
show the blacks how he could light a fire; so he
collected a little heap of dry leaves and grass, and,
having struck a match, soon had a bright fire
burning. The blacks were filled with awe when
they saw this magic, and gazed at Harry with
wonder. The lad then offered the box to Tomboko,
one of the tribe, who stood near, but the black


was afraid to touch the magic box, much less
attempt to use it.
“Too much debbil debbil, him tinkit, baas,”
said Quandini. “Him say it bad Uri-uri come
takit poor Tomboko, so him no touchit firebox,”
King Yang-uia (the left-handed) then held out
his hand, as he wished to try the magic fire-box
of the white men. Harry handed him the box
and, for a joke, held out the spent match, which
he had blown out after lighting the fire.
Yang-uia rubbed the dead match up and down
the edge of the box, but without result. Then he
handed it back to Harry, who quietly took out an-
other match while he explained matters to the
King by means of dumb-show. Then he struck the
match on the box, and a light instantly flamed up.
This was too much for the King and his tribe,
none of whom would touch the magic fire-box,
and Harry was looked upon as a wizard, who
could make bikya by means of magic.
Meanwhile the lubras had been at work cook-
ing breakfast, so the warriors, with Harry among
them, sat down and enjoyed a hearty meal.


CHAPTER VI.
A DAY IN THE CAMP.
After breakfast the blacks settled down to per-
form various duties about the camp. They had
been engaged in hunting on the previous day;
and, as game was plentiful, there was plenty of
food on hand for the present needs. Harry in-
quired of Quandini in which direction they had
been hunting, and, on hearing his reply, came to
the conclusion that the hunters were indirectly
responsible for the accident which had cast him,
a stranger, amongst them. It was when attacked
by the hunters that the mob of kangaroos had
come crashing through the bush, frightening his
horse, and causing it to break away from the
camp, while Harry was resting beside the creek
on the previous day.
Harry wandered about the camp, an interested
spectator of the various groups. He was eager
to learn something of the lives of the natives,
and as he watched the various workers, and noted
the skill with which they performed their different
tasks, he was filled with wonder. He had always
heard the blacks spoken of as a very stupid race,
very low down in the human scale; but as he
watched them at their tasks, and saw the
amount of skill and intelligence which they put
into their work, he realized that they were capable
of teaching many people who thought themselves
far superior to the poor blacks.


First he watched the lubras at work over the
fire, and noticed that their cookery consisted
chiefly in baking and roasting. They knew no-
thing of boiling, as they had no skill in the making
of pots. Some of their baskets were capable of
holding water, but, of course, they would not
stand the fire. A favourite method of cooking
was by covering the animal or bird with clay and
roasting it, fur or feathers and all, just as Harry
had seen the ducks treated when he had his first
meal with the blacks on the previous evening.
A porcupine, spines and all, was covered with
wet clay and roasted in the ashes. When it was
well cooked, the clay was knocked off, and the
skin, spines and all, came away, leaving the flesh
ready for eating. Harry was much amused at
this novel method, and made up his mind to tell
his aunt all about it when he reached home. One
of the lubras offered him a piece of the porcupine,
but the lad did not fancy such food, as the
porcupine lives chiefly on a diet of ants; but he
sampled a piece of brush turkey which had been
treated in the same way, and found it very good.
He then strolled across to where a group of men
were at work sewing skins together to make rugs.
The thread used was made from the tail sinews
of the kangaroo, and the work was beautifully
done. Some lads were engaged in scraping the
skins and tanning them for the rug makers.
Other blacks were at work mending weapons,
which had been damaged in the chase, and carving


new ones. Their tools consisted of a stone chisel
for the rougher work, while for the delicate
carving they used a sharp tool made from an
opossum’s tooth, firmly fixed into a wooden han-
dle. The carvings were all worked out without
any curved lines, only patterns of straight lines
and herring-bone being used; but many of them
looked very neat indeed.
One man was repairing spears which had been
broken. Some of these were made of reeds, chosen
because of their straight stalks, and tipped with
emu’s bone. Others were made of myall, or other
hard wood, which had been charred in the fire,
and fastened to reeds. These were so well joined
that, when poised on the finger, the reed and the
wooden part balanced each other perfectly.
A number of lubras sat at a little distance,
weaving baskets and nets, and plaiting fibres of
bark. Each woman used a heavy stone to keep
her work in place, and this allowed her to use both
hands (peeyin) constantly, the band of fibre being
looped about the big toe (daybon) of the right
foot. These women chatted or sang while they
worked, just as white women chat with their
friends or read books while engaged in knitting.
Some other women were preparing thread from
the fibres of the balyan (bulrush). They stripped
the root of its outer bark, and placed it in the
ashes for a few moments; they then twisted it
to loosen the fibre, and by chewing the root
obtained a quantity of gluten, which looked very


much like wheaten flour. This gluten forms a
plentiful and wholesome supply of food for those
tribes who live in swampy districts.
The women chewed the roots till nothing was
left but the fibre, which looked like hemp. A ball
f 52 (~== j
.- "3
%
NATIVE IMPLEMENTS AND WEAPONS
(1) Stone Knife; (2) Sheath; (3) Stone Pick; (4) Stone Axe;
(5) Boomerang; (6) Stone Chisel; (7) Possum-tooth Chisel;
(8) Firemakers; (9) Spear; (10) Bark Canoe
of this fibre was then drawn out and rubbed with
the palm of the hand on the bare thigh, while
the fingers of the other hand twirled a small
wooden spindle, which twisted and held the
finished thread.


Harry was amused at the novel method in which
the lubras carried their picaninnies. A narook
(opossum rug) was slung over the mother’s
shoulder in such a way as to form a bag, and here
the little one nestled in comfort, while the mother
had both her hands free to perform any task she
wished. The babies wore bracelets and anklets
of opossum skin, for the mothers believe that
these act as charms to ward off illness and to make
their children grow up strong and healthy.
After watching the basket and net makers for
some time, Harry strolled in the direction of the
lake. Here he saw several blacks busily engaged
in making a bark canoe. Having selected a
tainya (big tree) with a good, smooth trunk, one
of the blacks climbed it, notching the bark with
his byaduc (stone axe) to secure a foothold, but
taking care not to mark the selected piece of bark.
Then he proceeded to cut the bark in the shape of
a canoe, and, by pressing the handle of his axe
and a piece of wood between the bark and the
trunk on either side of the cuts, he and his mate
soon stripped the koon-toom (sheet of bark) from
the tree. The bark was then warmed over a fire,
and beaten into the required shape, after being
turned inside out. The tree selected was a stringy
bark, and as the bark on the outside was very
porous, the inner surface was used to withstand
the action of the water. When a red-gum was
selected, the bark was not turned inside out.
When the shaping of the canoe was finished
to their liking, the blacks tied the two ends


securely with fibre, and plugged clay into the
chinks to make a water-tight joint. Any small
holes or cracks in the bark were then blocked up
with gum, and several sticks were fastened inside
the boat to act as spreaders. It was then ready
for use. It was a fine canoe, eighteen feet long,
and capable of carrying six men.
When the canoe was finished Harry strolled
back to the camp, where several old men were
seated near the fire. As any young black finished
a piece of work he brought it to one of the elders
for his opinion. The old men were looked up to
by these young blacks, for they had had much
experience in the making of spears, boomerangs,
shields, and other weapons, and were able to in-
struct the younger members of the tribe.
The old men are of great importance in every
native camp. They are not equal to the fatigue
of the chase, so they remain in the camp, where
they see that the laws are obeyed, and keep order
amongst the members of the tribe. They also
receive any visitors from other tribes, and arrange
any business between their own tribe and out-
siders. On the whole, they conduct themselves
with dignity, and hold a position of honour.
After wandering about all the morning and
watching the various members of the tribe at
work, Harry began to feel hungry, and was not
sorry when the signal was given that the mid-day
meal was ready.


CHAPTER VII.
HOW THE PICCANINNIES ARE TAUGHT.
As soon as dinner was over, Harry noticed a
party of boys, each armed with a light spear,
moving towards the lake, accompanied by one of
the old men. He at once followed this party, as he
wished to see what was about to happen. The old
man went to a gum-tree, from which he cut
a round piece of bark about the size of a dinner
plate. Then, choosing a level grassy plot of ground,
he ordered the boys to stand in a line.
When they were quite ready, the old man threw
the disc of bark with a sharp, down jerk, so that
it bounded over the turf. Then each boy, in turn,
threw his spear at the moving target, no boy
being allowed to throw out of his turn. In this
way they were taught, not only to become success-
ful hunters, but also to learn such fine qualities
as steadiness, obedience, self-command, and a
sense of fair play.
Another group of lads was being trained in
throwing the boomerang. The old man who
acted as teacher stood facing the wind, holding a
boomerang in his right hand. He then threw the
weapon with a slight, downward jerk of his arm.
The boomerang skimmed along the ground; then
rose into the air, described a circle about fifty
yards in diameter, and dropped right at the feet
of the thrower. The boys then tried, using


Mow THE PICCANINNIES ARE TAUGHT
smaller boomerangs, suitable to their strength.
Some were successful in their efforts, and were
able to catch their boomerangs as they returned,
for by this time they were moving quite slowly.
A LESSON IN BOOMERANG THROWING
Others were not so fortunate, for their weapons
fell at some distance from where they stood. The
old black was a very patient teacher, and praised
any boy who made good progress. Needless to
say, they all tried hard to win words of praise
from their teacher. Nothing seemed to be too


much trouble in teaching the boys, who w r ould one
day take their places as men in the ranks of the
warriors.
Some other boys were being taught to use nets
on the lake, but Harry did not stay with them
long, as he had already had some experience in
this work, and knew as much about it as they
did. He was more interested in watching a party
of lads who were learning to track game in the
woods. The slightest signs were pointed out by
the old man in charge of the party, and the boys
were most watchful, each trying to discover some
faint sign that had escaped those trained, ex-
perienced eyes. A few grains of sand on the trunk
of a tree; the faintest scratch on the bark; a hair
on a leaf—such faint signs were noted, and
pointed out with pride by the sharp-eyed pupils,
who were anxious to hear the old man praise their
powers of observation and their patience.
While the boys were being trained in those
arts which would fit them for taking their places
among the hunters and warriors of the tribe, the
girls were not idle. Under the guidance of an
old lubra, a party of girls was engaged in collect-
ing gum, and in choosing suitable rushes and
grasses for the purpose of weaving baskets and
nets. Another band of girls sat together, learning
to weave baskets from these reeds and grasses.
Another party was being taught the art of
building a gunyah. The old woman in charge


HOW THE PICCANINNIES ARE TAUGHT
collected bushes, which she wove together so as
to form a bush shelter. The girls watched care-
fully; then, working in pairs, tried to copy the
work of the old lubra. Each pair built a small
gunyah. When the work was finished, it was
inspected by the old woman, who praised those
girls whose work was neatly done.
After spending a couple of hours at work, the
youngsters were dismissed to amuse themselves.
A favourite game among the boys was dialk
(ball). A bladder was blown up, and thrown or
kicked by the boys, who stood in a circle, the win-
ner being the boy who caught the ball the greatest
number of times.
Another popular game was wrestling. If any
boy wished to challenge another, he threw a
handful of dust in his direction. Then a tussle
began in real earnest. The older blacks took great
interest in this sport, and gave all kinds of advice
to the boys. A good wrestler was held in high
esteem by the tribe, as he was able to hold his
own when brought into a hand-to-hand conflict
with an enemy. The boys were therefore en-
couraged to practise this sport as often as possible.
The younger children played a game something
like our “hide-and-seek.” A boy hid himself in
the depths of the forest, and, when ready, whistled
to the others, who then sought him, following the
direction from which the sound had come.
Another game in which they delighted was
“digging the wombat.” In this game a boy got


into a hole, and the others attempted to dig him
out. Judging by the laughter and chattering, the
picaninnies enjoyed this game very much.
Harry noticed that, while the youngsters
were enjoying themselves, several blacks had
gathered about a high tree, towards which the
lubras were carrying firewood; so he left the
youngsters to enjoy their game, and walked
across to see what was happening at the foot of
the big tree.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE COMING-OF-AGE CEREMONY.
When Harry reached the party of blacks who
had gathered at the foot of the big gum-tree, he
saw that they were stacking brushwood around
the butt. Presently one of the Koradgee men
applied a fire-stick to the tinder, and in a few
minutes the butt of the tree was ablaze. Before
long it was a charred, blackened mass. Harry
thought it a pity to spoil so fine a tree; so he
sought out Quandini, in order to ask the reason.
“Ah, baas,” said the black, “him one younga
blackpfeller pucka (die). This tree belonga him
moa (dead man) so we makit bikya (fire) around
him tainya (tree), then tainya belonga him al-
ways.” From this speech of the black, Harry
gathered that the tree was being charred as a


monument to the dead member of the tribe. It
had been his tree while he was alive, and now
that he was dead, the tree was being killed also,
in memory of the dead man.
Quandini also told the lad that, when a boy
reached the age of fifteen years, he was admitted
as a full member of the tribe. Before he was
taken as a member, however, he had to go through
a trial, and prove that he could bear pain without
flinching. He was taken by the Koradgee men
into the depths of the forest, where his two front
teeth, in the upper jaw, were knocked out. These
teeth were then brought back into the camp, and
handed over to the mother (kama) of the youth,
who selected a high tree, among the topmost
branches of which the teeth were safely hidden.
This tree was then said to belong to the young
warrior, though he himself did not know where
his teeth were hidden. That was a close secret,
known only to his parents and the Koradgee men.
If the son (yaka) died, the tree which held his
front teeth was killed by fire, and its dead trunk
left as a monument to the dead warrior.
The coming-of-age ceremony, or Narra-mang,
as it was called, was a form of religious service
with the blacks, and no white man was allowed to
witness it, unless he had been admitted to the
tribe as a brother, and was held in favour by the
old men. It so happened that there was to be
a Narra-mang performed that evening, and as
Harry Pascoe had been admitted as a brother of


the tribe and a corrobboree held in his honour, he
was allowed to be present.
The lads who were to be admitted to manhood,
three in number, were led into the dense forest.
Here, in the centre of a glassy glade, a circle was
marked out on the ground, and a gunyah was
built near it. A Koradgee, painted with pipeclay,
and adorned with emu feathers, led the youths
into the circle, while the other Koradgee men
chanted these words:—
“Kannaka kanya, marra, marra,
Karndo kanya, marra, marra,
Pilberri kanya, marra, marra.”
The boys were then taken back to the gunyah,
from which they were brought forth one at a
time. As each took his place in the circle, a
Koradgee stepped forward, armed with a stone
tomahawk and a piece of wood shaped like a
punch. The boy was ordered to lie on the ground;
then the Koradgee held the punch against his two
upper front teeth, and with a blow of the toma-
hawk knocked them out. When this operation,
which, to say the least, must have been very pain-
ful, had been performed, the lad was taken back to
the gunyah, and another took his place in the
circle.
When all had been treated in the same manner,
the Koradgee men took the newly-made members
of the tribe into the gunyah, which was so
closely woven that not even a beam of light could
be seen from the outside. The rest of the war-


riors sat about on the grass. They were silent,
and Harry noticed that they looked in the direc-
tion of the camp, as though expecting somebody.
Soon a wild chanting was heard in the forest;
it gradually came nearer, and a party of lubras
came into the glade, each carrying a lighted pine
torch. They marched round the gunyah, chanting
a weird strain in honour of the newly-made mem-
bers of the tribe. Harry did not understand a
word of this song, but he learned afterwards that
it meant:—
“ Tis now that you are ill;
But soon will grow your beard,
And on the magic musk-duck
You with the men shall feed.”
The three Koradgee men now came from the
hut, each bearing the front teeth of one of the
three lads. These they handed to the mothers
of the youth and the women, accompanied by
one of the Koradgees, went away to hide the teeth
in the forest, as has already been told.
According to the custom of the black race, the
youths who have been newly admitted to the ranks
of the warriors are compelled to stay in the forest
for the period of one moon. They are hidden from
the sight of all but the Koradgee men. Should
they chance to be seen by a woman during that
period, they would, according to Quandini, be
stricken with instant death, for Fund-jel is very
angry if the law is not strictly obeyed.


When the month is over, the youths return to
the camp, and take their places among the men
around the camp-fire. They are then treated as
full members of the tribe, and are allowed to eat
the flesh of my-loa (the black swan); joh-gah (the
musk-duck); also the fat of the emu.
Harry Pascoe was not sorry when the man-
making scene was over. He shuddered as he
watched the dentists at work, but the youths did
not murmur; they bore the fearful pain bravely,
for it was an important day in their lives, when
their powers of endurance were being tested, and
it was considered unmanly to show fear or to cry
out.
As the party returned to the camp, Harry
thought of all he had seen, and thanked his lucky
stars that he was a white lad, who had to pass
through no such trying ordeal upon coming of
age.
As he lay awake that night, he thought of his
home and the anxiety of his people. He knew that
his uncle would be searching for him, and that
his aunt would perhaps be mourning him as dead.
“Poor Auntie!” said Harry to himself. “If she
only knew that I was in no danger, I wouldn’t
care a scrap.”
He tossed about for a long time, and at last
dropped off to sleep; but his rest was disturbed
by a fearful nightmare. There before him stood
his Uncle Jim, armed with a big axe and a mighty
pair of pincers, ready to extract all his front teeth,


while all around him lurked little demons, who
laughed and jeered at him in a horrible manner.
His uncle raised his arm, ready to strike, when
—ah, joy! He awoke, to find that day was break-
ing, and that the fearful laughter was not made
by demons, but by a flock of kookaburras perched
on a gum-tree overhead.
CHAPTER IX.
A DAY WITH THE HUNTERS.
Harry jumped up, glad to see the daylight, and
to escape from the horrors of the nightmare. He
found the camp in a state of bustle and hurry;
and, on asking the reason, was told by Quandini
that the men were going on a hunting expedition.
Harry heard this news with pleasure, as he was
hoping to learn something as he watched the
blacks at work tracking and hunting game. He
had already had one lesson, amusing as well as
instructive, which showed him that the blacks
can hold their own, even with so cunning a bird
as the crow.
On the previous day a flock of crows had been
cawing noisily among the trees. Now the crow’s
flesh is considered by the blacks to be a special
dainty, whether his song is sweet or not; and one
black, Tomboko by name, when he saw the crows
in the trees and heard their harsh notes, felt
that there w£is nothing he desired so much 33 3


meal of crow’s flesh. He set to work in a novel way
to procure that dainty fare.
Holding a piece of fish in his hand, he stretched
himself upon a rock, as if asleep in the sun. One
of the crows, seeing the piece of fish and not
observing any movement on the part of the native,
at once pounced down upon the fish, and was
caught in an instant by the wily black, who, after
killing it and cooking it over the fire, settled down
to a meal which, for pure enjoyment, might have
been envied by anyone.
After an early breakfast, the hunters set out.
They were well prepared; their spears were sharp;
their boomerangs and axes were thrust into their
opossum-skin belts; while each man had a bag,
woven from bark-fibre, thrown over his shoulder.
Quandini told Harry that he and Tomboko were
going after a mob of kangaroos, whose tracks
they had discovered not far from the camp; so
Harry followed them as they crept silently
through the bush. Soon they caught sight of a
mob of kangaroos feeding in a grassy glade.
Taking note of the direction of the wind, the two
blacks separated. Quandini remained where he
was, while Tomboko crept off through the under-
growth, so as to come up on the other side of their
quarry, against the wind. Kangaroos are very
keen of scent and hearing, so that, unless this pre-
caution is taken, it is a difficult matter to approach
within spear-throwing distance.
As the ground beyond the kangaroos was not


well timbered, Tomboko had made himself a screen
of bushes, behind which he crept steadily nearer
to his prey. Meanwhile Quandini, who remained
CATCHING KANGAROOS
hidden from view, began to make slight noises
by breaking twigs, in order to attract the atten-
tion of the kangaroos in his direction, and tbps


gave his mate a chance to creep upon them unseen.
Suddenly Tomboko dropped his leafy screen,
and, running forward, hurled his spear with all
his force. His aim was true, for a fine kangaroo
fell, pierced through the heart. The rest of the
mob, alarmed by the suddenness of the attack,
dashed off like the wind.
Having secured their prize, the blacks prepared
to follow the mob, and after half an hour’s tramp,
saw them in the distance, feeding on a patch of
plain country. As there was no cover within two
hundred yards of the mob, there was not much
hope of creeping upon them, especially after the
fright they had just received. Harry then offered
to shoot one of the kangaroos with his rifle. He
lay on the ground, and after taking careful aim,
fired. There was a flash and report; then a fine
young buck leaped into the air, and fell back,
dead.
At the sound of the shot Tomboko, who had
been watching Harry intently, fell to the ground
in terror, and lay there writhing and jabbering in
his own language, which the lad did not under-
stand.
“Why, what’s the matter with your mate?”
asked Harry, of Quandini.
“Baas, him tinkit your gun one debbil-stick,”
answered the black. “Him say ‘no kill poor Tom-
boko with thunder and lightning,’ ”
“Oh, I won’t hurt him,” laughed Harry. “Tell
Jlim to go and get the kyemery” (kangaroo),


CLIMBING TREES AFTER OPOSSUMS


During the morning the lad shot several kan-
garoos, and the blacks were delighted with the
plentiful supply of meat which he had secured so
easily with his “thunder-stick.”
As they were returning to the camp, Harry saw
a couple of blacks climbing trees after opossums,
which during the day were lying asleep inside
hollow tree-trunks. Before climbing a tree, the
blacks carefully examined the bark for signs of
’possum. They breathed on the bark, in order to
detect the presence of hairs or grains of sand;
they looked for the faintest scratches on the sur-
face. If they found traces of ’possum, they
climbed the tree. First, a black cut a notch
in the trunk, about four feet from the
ground. Putting his big toe into this hollow, he
drew himself up; then, holding on tightly, he cut
another notch. In this way he climbed up to the
place where a branch had broken off. Then, hav-
ing found the ’possum, he soon got him out by
cutting a hole in the tree-trunk.
As he watched these men, Harry realized why
the old blacks had taken such pains in teaching
the boys the science of hunting. No sign was unim-
portant in their eyes; they neglected nothing,
however small it might appear. It was this
thorough attention to detail that made the blacks
such wonderful hunters.
While Harry was watching the ’possum hunters,
he saw a black rushing towards him through the
forest, as though he had suddenly gone mad. But


the black was not mad; he was engaged in nothing
more dangerous than gathering honey. The native
way of finding a hive was rather clever. Having
caught a wild bee—which is little bigger than the
ordinary house-fly—the native stuck a bit of white
down or feather to its body, and gave it its
freedom. Then he watched the direction of its
flight, and rushed after it like a madman, stum-
bling over rocks and roots, but never for an instant
losing sight of the bee. In this way he found the
tree in which the hive was hidden, and was well
paid for his trouble. Though not so firm as garden
honey, the wild variety has a very fine flavour,
and is much prized by the blacks.
Another thing that interested Harry very much
was the way in which a black stalked a wild tur-
key. He carried a snare made from a long stick
like a fishing rod, and provided at the small end
with the skin and feathers of a little bird.
There was also a running noose, the end of which
was held in the hand of the black.
Hidden behind a leafy screen, and waving his
decoy to and fro, the man slowly approached the
turkey, the attention of which was soon caught
by the fluttering wings of the little bird on the
stick. When near enough the black slipped his
noose over the turkey’s head and, bearing his
prize in triumph, returned to the camp.
While the men were hunting, the lubras had not
been idle, but had been engaged in digging for
yams and truffles. These fungi, which grow under


the surface of the ground, are regarded by the
blacks as a great treat. When cut open they have
the appearance of unbaked loaves of brown bread.
Sometimes they grow to a great size; the lubras
found one that was at least fifty pounds in weight.
Another kind of food collected was the leaves of
the “pig-face.” These thick, pulpy leaves werr
gathered either before the tips had turned red, or
after they had quite dried up.
As it was by this time well past mid-day, Harry
was very glad when “luncheon was served.” He
made a hearty meal of kangaroo steak, roasted
truffles, and yams; which he found very much to
his taste. After lunch he went for a walk by
the lake, where a band of blacks had gone fish-
ing, also snaring wild-fowl. Here he found much
to interest him, and the afternoon slipped by all
too soon.
CHAPTER X.
ON THE LAKE.
As Harry reached the lake, the blacks launched
their large bark canoe, which he had seen them
strip from the tree on the previous day. They
made signs to him to take a seat; then they
paddled out to the middle of the lake.
Harry was charmed with the beautiful sight.
The water was fringed with rushes and reeds,




while the sloping banks were hedged with green
trees and undergrowth. Scores of wildfowl were
dotted here and there on the surface of the water,
while many more were wading among the reeds
in search of food.
The lad was greatly interested in the method
employed by the blacks in catching ducks. A net,
about fifty yards in length, was stretched across
the lagoon, and held by two natives so that the
lower edge was about four feet above the surface
of the water. Two other blacks then went along
opposite shores for some distance and, moving
slowly and cautiously, so as not to frighten the
birds into rising, they succeeded in driving them
close to the net. When he judged them to be near
enough, one of the blacks drew a piece of bark
from his belt. This was cut in the shape of a
hawk. Watching his chance he hurled the bark
hawk amongst the ducks, at the same time making
a cry like that of a hawk. The ducks, hearing this
cry, dipped under the surface, and at the same
moment the two blacks allowed the net to fall,
and several ducks were caught in its folds.
The canoe was then paddled across the lake
towards a large bed of reeds, near which many
ducks were swimming about. When they were
as near as they could go without alarming the
birds, one of the blacks slipped into the water,
carrying a hollow reed in his hand. Swimming
under water, and breathing through the reed, he
approached the ducks without noise. Reaching


up his hand, he seized a duck by the feet, and
pulled it under quickly to prevent splashing.
Having wrung its neck, he thrust it into his
belt. In this way he captured six ducks, with
which he proudly returned to the canoe.
The blacks were expert swimmers and divers,
and seemed to be as much at home in the water
as on dry land. Some of them could remain
under water for as long as two minutes without
coming up for breath —in fact, one of them stayed
under for so long that Harry began to fear that
the poor fellow had been caught among the reeds
or snags; but he reappeared after a while, and
seemed none the worse for his long stay under
water.
Among the reeds were several fine pelicans,
with bills almost as large as their bodies. They
waddled about in the mud, searching for yabbies
and frogs. Harry pointed them out to Quandini,
and asked why the blacks did not hunt them as
they did swans and ducks.
“Ah, baas,” said Quandini, “him pelican that
pfeller. He no lubbit blackpfeller. Listen, baas,
mine tellit you story. Long time before, many
moons—six, ten, plenty much,” and Quandini
rolled his eyes, as if to convey by these words that
it was a very long time ago—“there bin plenty-
big flood. Water cover ground everywhere; all
blackpfeller him drown; only one man, three
lubras left. They libbit on mud-bank, baas, in
middle of water. Then him pelican come in canoe.


When he see people, he go helpit them. He see
one lubra, and wantit her for him lubra. When
she try to get in canoe, him pelican say ‘not now,
you waitit next time.’
“So he takit the others, and say he come back
for lubra. While him gone, lubra left alone, gettit
much frighten, baas; so she wrappit up log of
wood in ’possum rug, makit log look like lubra bin
sleep; then she swimmit away.
“When pelican come back he say to log, ‘Come
on now, mine takit you.’ But he gettit no answer.
Then he gettit wild, and gibbit kick to log; makit
him toe sore. When he findit out that lubra gone,
he gettit mad. He paint himself white, to
look out fight with blackpfeller.
“When him half painted, black and white, one
more pfeller pelican comit along and see funny
black and white pfeller pelican. Then he gibbit a
hit with him beak, and killit painted pelican. Be-
fore that, baas, pelican black all ober; now he
black and white like you see.”
Harry was delighted with this story. He had
often heard his uncle speak of the quaint legends
of the natives, and now he was learning some of
them for himself. He realized from Quandini’s
story that even the blacks had some idea of a
great deluge, in which the world was drowned,
and thought to himself that he would be able to
surprise his uncle, when he told him all the
things he had seen and heard.
Soon after this the canoe was paddled inshore,


and, stepping out, Harry strolled along the water’s
edge. At that moment a flock of galahs came cir-
cling over the lake, their beautiful rose-tinted
plumage glowing as they wheeled in the sunlight.
As the birds approached the shore, one of the
natives took a boomerang from his belt and stood
ready for action. Suddenly he darted forward and
hurled his weapon. It skimmed over the surface
of the water; then rose with a peculiar zig-zag
motion which completely puzzled the birds. Right
amongst them flew the boomerang, dealing death
as it went. Three galahs fell to the water; two
dead, the third with a broken wing.
Taking the wounded bird, the black fastened it
to a tree to act as a decoy. Its cries soon had the
desired effect; for the birds, hearing the call of
their wounded mate, circled over the lagoon again
and again, with the result that, in a little while,
the hunter had captured more than a dozen birds.
Next, Harry visited the fishermen, who were at
work at the lower end of the lake. The King,
Yang-uia, was an expert at spearing fish. As he
stood upon a log overlooking the water, his three-
pronged fishing spear poised in his hand, he looked
like a figure carved in ebony, so motionless was
he. Suddenly the figure awoke to life as a fine
perch rose to snap at a fly. There was a quick
thrust of the spear, and in a twinkling the fish
lay struggling on the grass.
Two or three men were engaged in netting fish
a short distance away. Each was armed with a


net, semi-oval in shape, about twenty inches long
and seven inches deep. These nets were kept in
shape by a wooden hoop at the top. The native?
SPEARING FISH
dived to the bottom of the lake, searching among
the weeds for fish. As soon as he located one,
the black gently pushed his net under the fish:
then, rising suddenly, he held his victim at arm’s
length above his head. Having bitten the fish’s


head to kill it, he threw it on the shore, and dived
again.
The natives were very skilful at this kind of
work, and it was an interesting sight to watch
several men diving together in a friendly contest
to see who could secure the finest fish. Meanwhile,
the scared fish swam wildly about, seeking shelter
in the mud and weeds, where they only succeeded
in becoming an easier prey to the clever fisher-
men.
As Harry watched the different parties at work,
he realized that, after all, he knew very little
about bushcraft, and his respect for the blacks
rose considerably.
CHAPTER XI.
THE KORADGEE’S MAGIC.
It was Hippy-Yhuko (sunset) when the party of
fishermen returned to camp, where a variety of
smells announced the fact that the lubras were
busy over the fires. There was to be a feast that
evening, for both the hunters and fishermen had
been successful and there was plenty of food.
Plenty was needed, too, for it was surprising to
see the amount of meat which a hungry black
could dispose of at a sitting. When the blacks
saw the kangaroos which Harry Pascoe had shot,
they were loud in his praises, and his magic fire-
stick was the object of much attention. Harry


took care to unload the rifle, as he did not wish
to see anyone injured while examining the won-
derful stick which could make thunder and light-
ning, and kill kangaroos so easily.
Just as the feast was about to begin, a man
was seen tottering towards the camp as though
badly wounded. This was Toolabor, one of the
tribe, who had been hunting during the day. He
appeared to be very weak, though Harry could
not see any marks on him. The poor fellow told
his story with difficulty. He said that, while re-
turning to the camp, he had been pounced upon
by a bad uri-uri (spirit) who had held him fast,
and, opening up his back, had robbed him of his
kidney-fat.
When one of the blacks becomes ill or dies, his
friends believe that he has been bewitched. Some-
one is therefore to blame, and the death of a rela-
tive must be avenged. When wounded in battle,
a black will bear great pain without a murmur.
He understands his condition then; he has fought
and has been wounded by an enemy. But when
sickness comes—and there are many causes, such
as hunger, or over-eating, or drinking bad water
—then he thinks that he has been bewitched, and
that some wizard or spirit is trying to take his
life. Thus it was that Toolabor, feeling ill, had
come into camp, firmly believing that he
had been set upon by a wild spirit, who
had stolen his kidney-fat.
Harry could see from the looks of fear on their


faces that this was looked upon as a very serious
case by the tribe. The men at once seated them-
selves around their sick comrade, forming a three-
fold circle with the old men in the centre; next
came the middle-aged warriors, while the younger
men occupied the outer circle. Orders were given
for silence to be kept, and everybody was told to
tread very softly, so that no breaking of branches
or twigs should be heard by the bewitched man.
About three paces from the sick man a small
fire of bark had been made. No flame was allowed,
but only a smouldering, smoky fire. From this
fire, smoking pieces of bark were laid, at intervals
of about one hundred yards, in the direction of the
place where Toolabor had been bewitched.
When all these preparations had been made,
Kooloorlook, the chief Koradgee man, appeared on
the scene. This wizard, or doctor, professed to
have great powers. He claimed to be able to fly
through the air as fast as an eagle; he could also
leave the earth and visit the abode of spirits when-
ever he wished. In fact, if one believed his own
account, he was quite a wonderful person; and,
strange to say, he was able to convince all the
other blacks that he was a wonder, too.
These wizards are great imposters. They claim
to know all things. They can not only cure, but
also cause, disease by means of their charms. They
pretend to draw stones, sucji as pieces of quartz
crystal, out of the bodies of persons who are said
to be bewitched, and in this way they cure the


evil, or claim to do so, and win great respect from
the other blacks. They are lazy, and seldom hunt
or fish for a living—or do any kind of work, for
that matter. Their trade is to deceive the rest
of the tribe. They wander about at night, when
the other blacks are in their gunyahs, and make
fearful noises, in order to terrify them. They sleep
in the daytime, while the rest of the tribe are
at work. By means of their cunning they are able
to deceive their fellows, and at the same time live
very comfortably on the profits of their power
over them.
Kooloorlook advanced to the inner circle, and
looked at poor Toolabor. Then he said that he
must make a flight over the tree-tops to the sky,
in order to bring back the stolen kidney-fat. After
commanding the whole party to sit quite still, he
went off into the darkness, while the rest of the
blacks sat motionless, as they feared that any
movement on their part would bring about the
instant death of the bewitched man.
Soon a great crackling of bushes announced the
fact that the old wizard was winging his way
above the tree-tops. Then Kooloorlook’s voice
was heard, shouting “Goo, goo, goo,” a great way
off.
“Goo, goo, goo,” answered the elders, who were
seated close to the sick man.
Kooloorlook did not*at once find the evil spirit,
so he was compelled to make quite a long trip
through the sky. After about twenty minutes,


the rustling of branches announced his return.
The old men then called in their language:—
“Come, bring back the fat! Make haste!”
Kooloorlook soon appeared, and without utter-
ing a sound, seized the almost dying man in a
savage manner, rubbing him violently and beating
him on the sides and back with all his force. After
a few minutes of this treatment, he jumped up,
and announced that the cure was complete. Great
was the joy in the camp, where a short time be-
fore had been silence and grief. Then, to Harry’s
astonishment, the sick man got up, quite well
again, and took his place amongst his friends by
the fire, quite at his ease.
Quandini told Harry that Kooloorlook had flown
as a hawk, swooped down on the spirit of the wild
black, and taken the kidney-fat before the spirit
knew that the wizard was near him. Had he been
one minute later, the wild spirit would have eaten
part of the fat. “Den, baas,” said Quandini, “him
Toolabor bin die; no save him. He havit no
kidney fat.”
“But how did the old wizard fly up to the sky?”
asked Harry. “Nobody saw him do it, you know.
Besides, he brought nothing back with him.”
“Baas,” said Quandini, in a serious tone, “you
bin see him Toolabor sick, lostit kidney fat. Koo-
loorlook him come to him. He go away, then he
comit back, gibbit kidney fat to Toolabor, he get
better. He sick; he get better. That sure proof,
baas.”


Yong-wida (the moon) had risen over the tree-
tops and bathed the camp in her silver light, be-
fore the tribe settled down again to the feast.
The meal was in full swing when there arose a
great barking of dogs, which announced the
arrival of strangers. Then a black lad came run-
ning to the fire, shouting something, which Quan-
dini explained to Harry thus: —
“White pfeller him come; kee-gap, pullet, big
heap plenty.” (One, two, very many).
At this news Harry jumped up, and ran to meet
the newcomers, for he knew that his own people
had found him, and that his stay with his dusky
friends was at an end.
CHAPTER XII
CONCLUSION.
When Harry’s horse had bolted from the camp
by the creek, it had made its way back to the
homestead. It must have travelled all night, for
when Mr. Pascoe arose next morning, he was sur-
prised to see the animal standing there at the slip-
rails. He at once called Sam Treloar, and pre-
pared to go in search of Harry, who was, more
than likely, lying wounded by the roadside.
Sam Treloar at once rode off to the homestead
of John Harris, their nearest neighbour on the
river, with the news of Harry’s accident. The news
soon spread, and before long there was a party


of horsemen assembled at the farm, ready to go
in search of the missing lad. They knew the
direction in which he had gone, and soon found
the tracks of his horse; but these were hard
to follow, as they were two days old; besides,
there had been a shower of rain in the meantime.
Just before sundown they came to the place
where Harry had camped beside the creek, on the
night he had left home. They knew that they were
on the right track then, and decided to camp at the
spot for the night, and to scour the bush next day
for signs of the missing lad.
During the next afternoon they found the place
from which Harry’s horse had bolted, and decided
to separate, in the hope of picking up the lad’s
tracks. Soon they heard a shout from the direc-
tion of the creek. It was Sam Treloar, who, in
following the course of the stream, had come
across the prints of Harry’s boots in the soft mud.
This showed that the lad had travelled down-
stream, so the party followed the creek till they
came to the waterfall at the head of the lagoon.
Here they lost all traces of the lad; and, as it
was sunset, they decided to camp, and in the morn-
ing to divide their party and search both sides of
the lake. Just then one of the party gave a shout,
and pointed to the far end of the lake, where a thin
column of smoke could be seen curling above the
tree-tops. The party at once pressed forward, and
soon caught sight of the camp-fire. Their ap-
proach was soon made known by the native dogs,


and the shouts of the young blacks. You may
imagine their joy when they found Harry, alive
and well.
Mr. Pascoe was most grateful to the natives
for their kind treatment of his nephew, and pro-
mised that, when he reached home, he would do
something practical to show his gratitude.
The rescue party sat about the fire till a late
hour, listening to Harry’s story; then they
“turned in,” as they wished to ride away early.
In the morning Harry said farewell to his
coloured friends, and set out for his home. He
was received with open arms by his aunt, also
by Mary, the kitchen maid, who looked upon
Harry as a hero. What stories he told them, as
they sat around the fire in the comfortable farm
kitchen!
Mr. Pascoe did not forget his promise. He and
Harry returned to the camp, their pack-horses
laden with those things which blackfellows love—
bright steel axes, knives, red cloth and beads; but
best of all—in the eyes of the chief, at any rate
—was a brass plate, in the form of a half-moon,
on which was rudely engraved:—
To Yang-Uia, the Left-Handed
As a token of gratitude,
min
THE END.
ilimiw;
3 1508 01701019


Date Due


MUSIC BOOKS FOR AUSTRALIAN
CHILDREN
Songs of the Bush
for Children
Twelve Delightful Songs written and composed
By ISOBEL LANGLANDS
With many Charming Illustrations
FIVE SHILLINGS
“The Songs are very simple, and should prove
captivating to the The publica-
tion is attractive’.m every Way.”— Melbourne
“ Age -”
|s c/fflsti! , , t
The New First Pianoforte Teacher
MUSICTt JOY
DORATHEA MACMASTER
Fifteen Practical Pianoforte Lessons
for the Beginner.
The title reveals the secret of success. Practice
will be performed with keen interest and every
lesson will prove a delight.
□ □ n
EDWARD A. VIDLER, PUBLISHER, MELBOURNE


V g toO
AN IMPORTANT EDUCATIONAL
Prescribed by the Education Department
of Victoria
on □
Teaching Number
To Junior Classes
FANNY M. HAMBLETON, T.T.C., I.T.C.
Late of
Glenferrie Observation and Practising School
The authoress, after many years of teaching and
observing in Australian schools, has endeav-
oured to show in this work a proved method
whereby the child is able to deduce principles
and become a factor in his or her own develop-
ment.
With Tables and Diagrams
CLOTH —FIVE SHILLINGS
EDWARD A. VIDLER, PUBLISHER, MELBOURNE
W. A. Hamer, 205-217 Peel St., Nth. Melbourne, N.l.
