

THE LAND TAX
AND THE
REASONS IN DUSTIFICATION
CONSIDERED.
BY THE REV. JAMES S. WHITE, LL.D.,
GOWRIE, SINGLETON.
Printed at “Mercury” Office, Maitland,




The Land Tax.
THE REASONS IN JUSTIFICATION, CONSIDERED
BY THE REV. DR. JAMES S. WHITE, OF
GOWRIE, SINGLETON.
With the question of the necessity of a
land tax, in any form, or to any amount, thin
paper does not profess to deal. The question
of necessity, in any case, is always finally
settled independently of argument, for
necessity has no law. The grounds on which
the advocates of a land tax seek to justify
the imposition of it, shall alone be discussed.
It may be observed at the outset that by an
assumed political license, the term land is
put for “ land owner,” possibly not without
design, and that a questionable one. Land
cannot be taxed ; only the land-owner
can. He, and not the land, must pay the tax.
He, and not the land, must suffer ail the
wrong and hardship possibly involved in the
paying of it. The term “ land,” however, will
be used. Let the reader discriminate.
Of those who advocate a land-tax, there are
two parties. 1. The single-taxers, who regard
landowners as “ thieves and robbers, wuo
should deem themselves mercifully and even
tenderly dealt with, if they were not only de-
prived of their lands, but compelled to dis-
gorge all the profits that have accrued
therefrom, and were delivered to the officer to
be cast into prison till they shall have paid
the uttermost farthing. This sentiment
siDgle-taxers repeat, and with most obstinate
persistence reiterate, until the mind of men of
weak intellectual power and feeble purpose
is nauseated. The mental arena swims around


them. They become incapable of contemplat-
ing the subject with a steady eye. In the
dizziness of collapse they murmur acqui-
escence—monsters ! sarve ’em right!!
Single-taxers argue that as the land pro-
duces everything, the land ought to bear the
whole burden of the taxes. The term “land”
in this connection means land as distinguished
from the waters beneath and the atmosphere
above. Land, in this sense, does not produce
everything. It is but one factor in the busi-
ness of universally producing. The waters
and the atmosphere are other, and not less
potent, factors. The mind of man is another,
and possibly the chief, factor in combining,
modifying, directing, and applying unintelli-
gent matter and forces, and in hoarding and
distributing their results. This distinction is
not a mere vox etprceterea nihil —a distinction
without a difference —as some affect to think.
It is strictly relevant to the terms and form
in which single-taxers propound their argu-
ment. It has its foundation in fact, and it
has been practically recognized in the im-
posing of taxes. Fishing grounds have
been, and they still are, taxed. The
products of land and sea birds have
been, and they still are, taxed. Windows
and chimneys, that is light, heat, and air, have
been taxed. The inodorous coin, with the
sight of which Vespasian sought to allay the
nausea of Titus, his too sensitive son, over a
malodorous subject, represented a tax upon
cleanliness and health. A scrupulously
conscientious pasha has been known to exact
a tax for the use of his teeth in eating whilst
on a round of official inspection. A tax on
produce is really a tax on industry; and a
tax on manufactured goods is really a tax on
skill. That the land, properly so called,
produces everything, is a discovery reserved


for the single tax pundits of these latter days,
and the inference deduced from the assump-
tion is drawn from one of the forms oE
syllogism disallowed by Aristotle. The argu-
ment, when formulated, with the single-
taxer’s own major, stands thus:
The land, properly so called, produces
everything: that which produces everything
Bhould bear the whole burden of the taxes ;
but the land, properly so called, does not
produce everything. Therefore the land,
properly so called, should not bear the whole
burden of the taxes. Admitting that it
ought, no matter for what reason, to bear the
whole burden of the taxes, the land has been
doing, and it is now doing, all that eing.e-
taxers require of it: for, if it ha. yielded,
and is still yielding everything, it has
been, and is still yielding the whole of
the taxes, for if it has been, and is still yield-
ing everything, it must have been, and it must
now be, yielding the whole of the taxes, which
are a part of everything. Lst the sing.e-
taxers untie the Gordian knot. The sword
may not be so efficient an instrument for this
purpose in their hands, as it was in those ot
the son of Ammon. Suppose land, in either
the least or most comprehensive sense of
the term, produces everything, is the fact ot
its doing so any reason why it should bear
either the whole or any part of the burden of
the taxes ? The function of producing is one
thing, and that of bearing a burden another.
The two functions are totally distinct ano.
independent; nay, they may be contrary, or
even antagonistic. Taxes are imposed tor the
maintenance of Government. "What connec-
tion is there between producing and govern-
ing? How does the former imply the latter ?
A few acres may supply all the needs ot a
family, as they do in fact, in many cases.


Are they, therefore, necessarily to be charged
with the whole, or any part of the cost of
governing the family ? In the case of some
families, there may be no need of government
in the popular sense of the term. In the case
of otherr, if there is need of it, it needs not,
necessarily, cost anything. In the case of
yet others, although needed, it might be dis-
pensed with. In the first and second cases, there
would be no obligation, either on the land or
on anything else. In the third, government
might be established and carried on at the
cost of mere self-denial. These cases, which
are fairly representative and illustrative,
Bhow the fallacy of connecting inseparably
the function of producing and that of
governing, and, much more, the fallacy of re-
garding the former as necessarily involving
the latter. What is the land of the globe
but an aggregation of so many plots of a few
acres. What is a nation ? What is the
whole human race, but an aggregation of
families? If the argument hold with respect
to the plot and the family, and it does hold,
it must hold with respect to the territory and
population of a country, and to all territories
and all families. Hence, if the land, in any
sense of the term, does produce everything,
the land, in any sense of the term,
ought not to bear either the whole or
any part of the burden of the taxes. Taxes are
for the maintenance of G-overnment. Those
who monopolise the benefits of Government
should pay all the taxes. But landowners
do not monopolise the benefits of Govern-
ment ; therefore, landowners ought not to pay
all the
2. Another party, which shall be designated
“land-taxers,” would impose upon land a
certain part of the burden of the taxes, on
the ground that land acquires an unearned


increment, or increase of value, without the
action of the owner. This, it will be per-
ceived, is a ground totally different from
that relied on by the single-taxers. The
onus lies upon land-taxers to show (1) that
the value of land always increases; (2) the
amount of the increase ; and (3) whether the
whole, or what part of the increase, is un-
earned. The value of land does not always
increase. It sometimes remains unchanged ,
and it sometimes decreases. In fact, its valu e
is a quantity of as many variables as there are
causes at work in the land market. Accord-
ing to the land-taxers’ own principle, land,
whose value bad either decreased or remained
unchanged, would be exempt from the tax,
for in neither case would there be an incre-
ment, earned or unearned. The increase of
the value of land is not always an unearned
increment, although it may, at first Bight,
appear to be so. Increase of population
land-taxers affirm to be the main cause of the
increase of the value of land. It is not so.
Let us admit that it is. A land owner may
have done nothing to improve his land, but he
may have done much to increase population in
its neighbourhood by the exercise of various
talents and art, as in the case of
the land speculators of the United
States of America. The adventurous
pioneer, who, sacrificing the advantages
of home, of society, and of civilization,
goes forth into the howling wilderness, as
many of our early settlers did, and established
himself, induces others to follow bis example,
and prepares the way for them. The increase
of population causes, in both cases, an increase
of the value of the land. In both cases, the
landowner, being the cause of the increase of
population, is the cause of the increase of the
value of the land ; therefore, in neither case


is the increment unearned. In both cases the
land would be exempt from the tax, for there
would be no unearned increment to be assessed.
In like manner, it might be shown that in
many cases of mere business speculations,
what appears to be an unearned increment
on land, is well earned. In such cases also
land would be exempt from taxes.
Yet another case. A man bought a piece
of land fifty years ago for £5. It is now
worth £SOOO, from the increase of popula-
tion, towards which he has done absolutely
nothing. Even in this case the increment
may not rightly be said to be unearned. If
the owner had invested bis money fifty
years ago in any ordinary venture, at the
usual rate of interest, it would have, without
any action on bis part, amounted to more
than £4995. The increase of the value of
the land, in this case, is not unearned. It is
earned by the owner’s self-denial for fifty
years, during which the community have bad
the benefit of his £5, which, with its ever
accumulating interest, at the expiration of
the period is represented by £SOOO, has been
in circulation. The £SOOO, the value of the
land, is but an equivalent for an equal, or a
larger amount, which his original investment
would have realized in the form of interest.
An owner of land, just purchased, pays, in
its market price, the amount of increment up
to the date of purchase. To tax him on an
increment by which he not only is not a
gainer but a loser, would manifestly be
monstrous. In the meantime, the seller
profits to the amount of the increment and
escapes taxing.
The case of those who received free grants
of laud from the Crown needs no special con-
sideration, since, if they did not render the


value of it in money, they may be presumed
to have rendered it in service.
There are comparatively few landowners to
whose case one or other of these illustrations
does not apply ; therefore if the proposed
land tax be fairly assessed there are com-
paratively few of them who can be called
upon to pay it without inconsistency, in-
justice, and hardship.
The amount of tbe land tax will illustrate
the ridiculous mouse produced by the moun-
tain in labour. If the tax in question be not
fairly assessed, then the legislation anent it
will be class legislation in its most oppressive
and objectionable form, and injuriously
affecting one of the most important interests
of one of the most deserving classes of society.
If the siDgle-tax principle is the right one
on which to tax land, becauses it acquires
unearned increment, then it is the right prin-
ciple on which to tax everything acquiring
that increment. Almost all commodities,
whether for purposes of use or ornament,
acquire it ; therefore, it is the right principle
on which to tax them. Many of them are
taxed, but not on this principle. That they
are not is inconsistent and excites suspicion of
class legislation. The profit on newspapers,
for instance, increases with the increase of
population, towards which increase the pro-
prietors do nothing. Why not tax news-
paper profits ? Not only are they not taxed,
but the unearned increment of their profits is
virtually increased by free carriage by post,
and a reduction of the rates for telegraphic
communication, for both of which concessions
the public pay. Some land-taxers, as if to
prove their consistency and impartiality in
seeking to impose a tax on the unearned in-
crement of land value, propose to tax also,
on the same principle, certain professional


incomes ? What connection is there be-
tween the unearned increment of land value
and a professional income ? What has the
one to do with the other ? No part of a pro-
fessional income is an unearned increment.
A professional income is simply remuneration
at the market rate for services rendered. But
the designs of legislators are sometimes dark
and their ways crooked and past finding out.
It may be objected that to apply to a prac-
tical subject, such as taxation, the rigid and
inexorable rules of abstract argumentation, is
at once inconsistent and useless Not so.
The practical is the concrete, which, although
it bulks so largely in the field of sensuous
apprehension, is wholly subordinate to the
abstract, of which it is but the instrument.
The economic laws, which, like all the other
fundamental laws, are fixed, invariable, and
universal, constitute the abstract in this case.
They move, direct, and control the practical,
or concrete, which, when moved, directed,
and controlled aright by them, are their
externization. The practical, to subserve our
interests, must be framed and carried out on
their lines. Their counterpart in the human
mind is Bight Reason, which is to be attained
only by the diligent and rigid investigation of
first principle*, until, like refined molten gold,
they give back themselves to the mind and
photograph themselves upon it. Bight reason
is a vade mecuvn in the business of legislating,
and, when aided by history, observation, and
experience, is always a present and reliable
guide.
Of the authors, expounders, and advocates
of many of the social and political theories
(among others those respecting land) pre-
sently agitating and convulsing the world,
there are two classes : 1. The selfish and self-
seeking demagogues, who feed themselves


without fear ; who are clouds without wa'er,
carried about of winds; trees whose fruit
witheretb, without fruit ; raging waves of the
sea, who, speakiDg great swelling words,
foam out their own shame; wandering
stars. 2. Men whose emotions are
stronger than their intellect, who, during the
earlier impressionable and teachable period
of life, abandon themselves to the influence
of feeling. By the loDg continued and affec-
tionate contemplation of social and political
phenomena, through the medium of the
emotions, the counterpart of the fundamental
economic laws, in their minds, is an emotional
representation —formed and operating on
emotional lines. But inasmuch as the laws
in question are not framed on these lines, and
do not operate in accordance with them, those
who act as though it were otherwise act incon-
gruously, and their plans fail, for they are
working in opposition to the fundamental
arrangements of the Supreme law-giver.
They are, in fact, like one who, having but
an imperfect and a distorted notion of a piece
of mechanism, should apply to the original
the aetion proper only to a piece correspond-
ing in its parts and mode of working to that
notion. Whilst right reason insists upon
conformity to the fundamental laws, as the
only possible means of success, the masterful
emotions, unaccustomed to bear any rival
near their throne, silence her voice, and
dominate action. Thought becomes the
instrument, not of reason, but of passion.
Human legislation is brought into conflict
with the divine agencies of administration.
Who can contend with God, and prosper?
The use, then, of the rigid rules of argumenta-
tion, in the business of legislating, is not only
desirable, but absolutely necessary. Legis-
lators may be ignorant of the fundamental


social and political laws ; they may not know
whether there are any such laws ; they may
dare to defy them ; —but they exist neverthe-
less—fixed, invariable, universal, eternal, un-
slumbering, with Nemesis nestling in their
bosom. Sooner, or later, they assert and
vindicate themselves, in the sad experiences
of transgressors, who realise that their way is
hard, and the end, social and political dis-
organisation and ruin.
Whether the members of our Legislative
Assembly, with honourable exceptions, belong
to either of the above classes, or partly to one
and partly to the other, or to both together,
let their utterances, their lives, and their
legislative action decide.
To what extent their utterances, lives, and
legislative actions have, in their results, realised
the evils predicated of the agency of these
classes, let the financial, social, political, and
moral condition of the colony determine. How
long such legislators, and the results of their
legislation, are to be endured, it is fortunately
for the misrepresented, disgraced, and suffer-
ing community to say. . Well might the
great and patriotic Wentworth exclaim, in
view of the irrational, fanatical, and mad
democracy that was to supersede the con-
stitutional government, conceived by his
genius and established mainly by bis efforts,
“ God help my poor country !” Rest, rest,
illustrious immortal! God will help her, if
she will but help herself.
