

f'hh d e j
OF THE
WORKING GLASSES
THEIR FRIENDS.
EDITED BY S. BANNISTER, M.A.,
FORWERLF AT Joaxay-OEN'KRAI. OF saw JOVTH WALKS.
“ Hero- worship has made much noise; but these benefactors
are the Heroes most worthy of our homage. Their examples
are better than other men’s precepts.”—lntroduction.
sjftonfc iSbiticm.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY T. C. NEWBY,
WBLBECK-STREET, CAVENDISH-SQUARE,


4 *>l
'" Cv \


\ ViA~sclL .4^
ov\. f
">W OM I ia i U- V ,
4
/ttt*
kt « 772-
C **
i o***
yH^ Ph/Jl O
«?*«»




THE WORTHIES
OF THE
WORKING CLASSES
THEIR FRIENDS.
EDITED BY S. BANNISTER, M.A.,
FORMERLY ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
“ Hero-worship has made much noise; but these benefactors
are the Heroes most worthy of our homage. Their examples
are better than other men’s precepts.”— lntroduction,
£econtr iEfcitton.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY T. C. NEWBY,
WELBECK-STREET, CAVENDISH- SQUARE.




l® I bb
- VI - •
INTRODUCTION.
The labour of many minds and many hands has
contributed to make up the sum of good things with
which the world before us abounds ; and the best
titles to a fair share of these good things are, the will
and the ability to improve and distribute them with
honest industry, with intelligence and kindness.
The character and use of governments may be fairly
tested by the degree in which they secure that fair-
share to the deserving; and things are tending in
England to put this particular duty of the State upon
a secure and better footing. Free competition is fast
succeeding to privilege. Merit, not favour, is to be
the rule of appointment and promotion in various
public services. This was an express enactment last
year in the India Bill; an express injunction in the
police circular of last autumn; and it is an express
promise of this session in the Queen’s speech. In all
this there is nothing new, except the practice. By a
law of Richard ll.’s time, it is declared, that to seek
for public employments of any sort by favour, shall
disqualify the candidate from holding office ; and this
law is still in force. In Queen Amne’s time, a Chan-
cellor, Lord Macclesfield, had to pay £30,000 fine for


breaking it. TMs gold ore of the law is to be made
current coin. Other reforms are preparing. The
Free Grammar-schools are to become what their
founders meant they should be, the common ground
of wholesome intellectual struggle for rich and poor;
and education will be universal ere long. Without
violently breaking down any fair pre-eminences, all
will have the just rank intended by Providence for
the industrious and the good members of all callings
in life. Even the oldest criminal will, on repentance,
find a door of restoration to society open to him;
whilst the young culprit will be rescued from the
broad highway of crime by means afforded for early
reformation.
All this brings a new world before the working men •
and as there have never been wanting in that class
those who, by intelligence and worth, have vindicated
human nature, and whose career is a consolation
and encouragement in all struggles, a few brief
notices of the most eminent among them will be
acceptable.
Great families may be traced to such founders .
Shakspeare’s “mean-born gentleman,” and the squire
of low degree of our ballads, are shadows of the
wholesome doctrine of merit and manners making
the man. The soil, the loom, and the shop sent
forth famous men before the days of William Cobbett
and Richard Arkwright. Nor is Richard Cobden the
first to claim equality in mind and competence and
power for an educated people ; nor the first man in
England who has proved that the acquirements of
intellect are as useful as the gifts of high birth.
To have overcome difficulties in life is an old title
to honour; but the selections here made will be
limited to those who have deserved their reward, and
not extended to those who have merely won. it. It will


also include examples from other lands, and occa-
sionally from other races. It is a wise saying that
industry and education are the parents of civilization ;
and nothing better shows the capacity of the whole
family of man for improvement than the frequent
cases that occur among the rudest , of individuals who
appreciate us and our Avorks, and are eager to adopt
our means of improvement. The memoirs of such
individuals well deserve a record.
Least of all must worthy women he left out of this
account. Sarah Martin, of Yarmouth, gloriously
devoted the poor earnings of her hands and her fine
intellect to the service of the reformed convict.
Catherine Wilkinson, of Liverpool —an Irish
orphan, rescued from shipwreck, and brought up in
a Lancashire factory—is the founder of our admirable
system of Public Baths and Wash-houses. The
negress, Phillis Wheatlv Peters, bought when a
child in a slave-market in New England, was fit
in Old England to be the companion of the en-
lightened slave, Sancho, her countryman; and she
possessed literary talents that, like his, were appre-
ciated by so acute a critic as Lawrence Sterne.
To such brilliant examples of the humbly horn,
will be added others of elevated birth, but even more
distinguished for personal merit, and for their warm
sympathies with their fellow-creatures. These “ bene-
factors ” of their kind have been known to all ages.
They are the links that the most effectually hold
society together, and secure its progress. Hero-
worship has made much noise ; hut it is the “ bene-
factors ” of all ranks who are the heroes most worthy
of our homage.
By the law of England from of old, no absolute
demarcation exists between the several classes ; and
the attempts made in had times to enforce one


were ever put down by the sturdy resistance of our
British race.
It remains for us to realise this legal equality of all
by the blessing of universal education—of which the
eminent individuals to be here remembered will be
found to have been strenuous advocates.


EDWARD RUSHTOJST THE ELDER.
Born 1756; Died 1814.
This catalogue of the worthies springing from the
ranks of the millions , is opened by a memoir of Ed-
ward Rushton, the elder, of Liverpool.
Edward Rushton was born in Liverpool in 1756, of
needy parentage : he died in 1814. At the Free
School of his native town he picked up a little
learning ; and entering young in a merchant vessel,
he made several voyages to the West Indies and the
coast of Africa, before the mast. Thus trained,
Rushton became a fearless and skilful seaman ; as
he proved when a mere youth. On a voyage home,
a violent storm came on as the vessel neared the
Lancashire coast, with which he was familiar. The
captain gave up the command in despair, and all
was alarm on board. In the confusion, the young
apprentice—for such only Rushton then was—seized
the helm, and called the crew to their duty. They
obeyed him, and the ship was saved. For this
gallant conduct he was publicly thanked by the
owners, the captain, andcrew; and promoted.
But he was more than a brave seaman; he was
one of the best of men. Among the sailors in
one of his voyages was a negro, to whom Rushton
showed much kindness. The ship was wrecked,
when the black man and his friend swam for
their lives to a floating cask—their only chance of
safety. It could save but one; and the stronger
negro reaching it first, saw Rushton struggling with
the waves in vain. He plunged into the sea, pushed
the cask to the failing lad, and with a “ good-bye,
shipmate,” struck boldly for the shore. He never


reached it! He gave up his life in a feeling of fond
devotedness to one who had been his kind bene-
factor.
Rushton’s sympathies, already well disposed in
behalf of the negro race, henceforward kindled to en-
thusiasm in the negro’s cause. He had proved that
race to be intensely capable of the highest human
virtue, and the goodness of his own heart could well
respond to the equal goodness he had thus had expe-
rience of in a negro comrade. In after life he never
told this story without a tear. It was a melancholy
remembrance, scarcely needed to make him the
negro’s warmest advocate.
Soon after the foregoing event, he made a voyage
in a slaver to the coast of Africa, where he protected
the captives from cruel insult so boldly, that he was
himself threatened to be put in irons. On that voyage
also, when a malignant ophthalmia broke out among
the slaves, he caught it by attending them humanely
in the hold, and the disease was fatally confirmed on
his return home. This deprived him of sight at the
age of nineteen, and ruined his professional prospects.
He struggled bravely against the difficulties of his
hapless lot, aggravated by the narrowest family cir-
cumstances. It was difficult to find occupation suited
to his condition ; but perseverance had its reward,
and after some disappointments, he settled quietly in
Liverpool, in the business of a stationer, and ulti-
mately acquired independence as a bookseller. In
his blindness he had turned eagerly for companion-
ship to literary pleasures ; and by being read to, he
became extensively acquainted with the best authors.
His early lessons in the Free School bore fruit to his
reflecting mind ; and he habitually exercised his good
natural talent by dictating in prose and verse, and
entered successfully into various literary engage-
ments.
During the heats of the early years of the French
Revolution, Rushton, who ever boldly expressed his
approval of reform and progress, was one of the ob-
jects of those violences towards individuals which
disgraced the times. This was once carried so far as
to expose him to a pistol shot, which grazed his head.
A more alarming measure of his political opponents
was their attempt to ruin his trade. This scandalous


proceeding, however, only gave him an opportunity
of displaying his manly character in a fresh light,
when offered pecuniary help by the friends who never
failed him. The poor blind patriot refused the bene-
volent aid, preferring the rude trial of persevering
parsimony, in confidence of better days coming; a
fine lesson to all the stragglers against injustice and
ill-fortune.
His verse was now ever ready upon his favourite
topics; and whether in expressing sympathy for
Burns or Chatterton, for the slave or the “ neglected
tar,” his poems were remarkable for indignant vigour,
sweetness, and good taste. To Ireland and the Irish
he was a zealous friend, and wrote of their wrongs
and their merits with a peculiar grace. Of American
independence he was an enthusiastic advocate, but
at the same time a severe reprover of American slave-
holding.
With a seaman’s recollections ever fresh in his
mind, as his writings prove, it is not surprising that
the pressing of sailors, with its frequent iniquities,
should have been the subject of his wise and earnest
appeals to the public. His sound practical views,
on the difficult question of a better way of manning
the royal navy, would be now consulted with advan-
tage, His memory was recalled affectionately by his
fellow townsmen, when they lately opened their noble
Sailor’s Home. These excellent retreats, established
in all the great sea-ports, —the seaman’s club-houses,
libraries, and safe-banks, —sprang unquestionably
from the good feelings chetished in such lines as his,
called
THE NEGLECTED TAR.
I sing the British seaman’s praise,
A race renowned in story !
A race whose wrongs are Britain’s shame,
Whose deeds are Britain’s glory !
By them, when Courts have banished peace,
Your sea-girt land’s protected ;
But when war’s horrid thund'rings cease,
These bulwarks are neglected.
Chorus.
Then oh ! protect the hardy tar,
Be mindful of his merit;
And when again you’re plunged in war,
He’ll show his daring spirit.


When thickset darkness covers all
Far on the trackless ocean;
When lightnings dart and thunders roll,
And all is wild commotion ;
When o’er the barque the foam-capt waves
W ith boisterous sweep are rolling,
The seaman feels, yet nobly braves,
The storm’s terrific howling.
Chorus.
Then oh! protect the hardy tar, &c. &c.
When long becalmed on southern cruise,
Where scorching beams assail him ;
When all the canvas hangs supine,
And food and water fail him,
Then oft he dreams of that loved shore
Where joys are ever reigning.
The watcli is called, the dream is o’er, —
He sighs, but scorns complaining.
Chorus.
Then oh ! protect the hardy tar, &c. &c.
Much to these fearless souls you owe;
In peace would you neglect them?
What say you, patriot souls ? Oh, no!
Admire, preserve, protect them.
And oh ! reflect, if war again,
Should menace your undoing,
Reflect who then would sweep the main,
And shield your realm from ruin.
Chorus.
Then oh! protect the hardy tar, &c. &c.
Perhaps his best work sprang out of his own for-
lorn calamity, as it led him to devise consolations, and
even relief, to his fellow blind. It was not less the
experience of the suffering poet, than his good genius,
that dictated his appeal :
Ah ! think, if June’s delicious ray
The eye of sorrow can illume,
Or wild December’s beamless day
Can fling on all a transient gloom ;
Ah I think, if skies obscure or bright.
Can thus depress or cheer the mind ;
Ah ! think, midst clouds of utter night,
What mournful moments wait the blind.
And who can tell his cause for woe ?
To love the wife he ne’er mast see;


To be a sire, yet not to know
The'silent babe that climbs his knee;
To have his feelings daily tom
With pain the daily meal to find;
To live distrest, and die forlorn,
Are ills that oft await the blind.
The author of these stanzas was the originator, and
one of the active founders, of the Blind Asylum of
Liverpool, the earliest of those blessed institutions in
England, and established without any knowledge of
that previously formed by Abbe Hauy, in France.
Rushton lived literally to see his own Blind Asylum
prosper—an operation, by Mr. Gibson, of Man-
chester, having given him a dim sight in his old age.
Having slowly, but successfully, won his way after
his forced retirement from the sea; he became one
of a little band of patriots and philanthropists, in
his native town of Liverpool—the Roscoes, the
Rathbones, and the Croppers who long stood
forth, in a trying period, devoted advocates of
all reforms. In him the pure, the humane, the
virtuous man justified the promise of the kindly,
the courageous, and intelligent youth by widening
from year to year the circle of his sympathies, shrink-
ing from no peril or privation in the discharge of
duty, and never unmindful of its humblest, whilst
nobly responding to its loftiest calls. His intrepidity
and nautical skill, shown in an hour of extreme danger
when a stripling ; at another time his example of
self-devotion with a fearful result to himself; after-
wards, extensive literary acquirements under the dis-
advantage of blindness caused by that self-devotion ;
and a life of fortitude and honour under grievous suf-
fering, of successful perseverance under many diffi-
culties, all give to Edward Rushton strong claims
to our affection and respect.
He left a family most worthily represented in the
person of the late Edward Rushton, chief magistrate
of Liverpool, whose too early decease was marked
the other day by the universal grief of the inhabitants
of that great town ; and his great merits were recog-
nised in the magnificent immediate provision made
for his afflicted family, within the briefest space
after his death.
Of the many lessons taught by the example of the


elder Eushton, there is one especially deserving of
notice at the present critical moment. When his loss
of sight stopped his nautical career, the resources of
his mind were left unharmed. His recollection of
his scanty Free School learning helped him to profit
the more from what he could only hear read. Surely
Such a proof of the value of early teaching should add,
to the many like cases in our working men’s stories,
an irresistible argument in favour of universal educa*
tion.


SARAH MARTIN, DRESSMAKER, OF
YARMOUTH;
THE IMPROVER OE THE POOREST, AND THE CONVICT’S
REFORMER AND FRIEND.
The subject of this notice—the more than Elizabeth
Fry of humble life for many years voluntarily
taught the neglected children of the workhouse, and
without reward instructed, and even procured the em-
ployment of the more neglected inmates of the gaol.
This she effected with pecuniary resources so small
as to rouse her personal efforts into acts of heroism
in herself; and, as examples to others, those personal
efforts are beyond price. Indeed, she not only ac-
complished, with some aid willingly yielded by
those who felt as she felt, much of what the
reformer of Newgate, Mrs. Fry, did by the lavish help
of wealthy connections, and with the well-deserved
applause of sovereigns, but she took the lead of all in
important departments of philanthropy. She com-
pleted her work, too, with a degree of perfection that
leaves to others only the humbler task of following it
out to the proportion of the evils most urgently
wanting remedy. Her original and practical character is
peculiarly illustrated by her novel proceedings in be-
half of convicts after their discharge , treated of in
some detail at the close of this notice.
Sarah Martin was born in 1791, of needy parents, at
Caistor, in Norfolk. She died on the 15th of October,
1843, and was buried in the place of her birth.
Losing both parents in infancy, she was brought up
by an indulgent grandmother. In her fifteenth year
she was apprenticed to a dressmaker, and she
was much employed in that business to a late
period her life, in and about Yarmouth. Her


educational training in childhood was carefully
superintended; but for several years afterwards,
having far outstripped her good grandmother’s
powers, she followed her own way of study, and
went through a vast amount of miscellaneous read-
ing, little profitable to her religious principles, how-
ever that reading may have contributed to the very
remarkable extent of her knowledge.
At about nineteen years of age she assisted in
teaching a sunday-school, whilst still diligently fol-
lowing her business as a dressmaker, and going out
in that capacity for one shilling a day.
The official management of both workhouses and
gaols had fallen into the very worst condition, and
the voluntary agency of good people in promoting the
improvement of their inmates was looked upon with
jealousy, and often most unwisely rejected by the
authorities. As yet the good seed was cast by her and
others upon stony ground. Statues were raised to
Howard, but his recent example had produced
few corresponding results. The brilliant efforts of
William Hay in the House of Commons, so much
earlier as in 1736, to establish by law universal edu-
cation for the most destitute, in the place of ignorance,
as well as useful employment for the most criminal,
in the place of the halter and of idleness, had failed,
notwithstanding those efforts obtained honourable
praise from John Wesley in his poem of the “ Prison
Opened,” and from James Thomson in his “Seasons.”
These efforts failed in spite of the support of a pow-
erful body of men in and out of Parliament. The
measure of 1735, introduced by Mr. Hay, for those
most important objects, was quoted with applause by
the Chief Poor-law Commissioner Baines when bring-
ing forward the bill upon Settlements ; but the Go-
vernment of the day treated that very measure with
gross neglect, and at last it was thrown out in the
House of Lords, after being pressed for twenty years
by its worthy author. He wisely insisted that good
teaching would be of great general advantage; and
that when extended in numerous cases to navigation,
as he proposed, especially promote our naval strength.
His measure, laboriously propounded, and sanctioned
by careful parliamentary inquiry, was a complete
system of pauper and criminal administration, which


should now be revived. Mr. Hay and his friends
trusted for success to the principle of voluntary
private zeal being brought, either by individuals or
by societies, in aid of the Government —a principle
which the experience of Sarah Martin tends exceed-
ingly to recommend. With the zeal of an original
mind she long pursued her work alone; but she lived
to see that work recognised by the highest au-
thorities. The greatness of her merit may be esti-
mated by the fate of the movement of 1735. It was
zealously promoted by Baron Price, of Foxley; by Sir
JamesLowthei', of the North ; by Tuffnel, of Essex;
by Cornewall, of Herefordshire; by Lewis, of Radnor ;
dnd by many more members of the House of Com-
mons, whose families are still worthily represented
among us. Nevertheless it failed ; for the public
mind was then incapable of compi-ehending its value.
But this good woman has, by the force of her bene-
volent genius alone, practically worked out the same
thing; and the better temper of the times entirely
approves of it.
In the spring of 1810, she first visited the Yax--
mouth workhouse. Having heard of a young woman
being deeply afflicted there by disease, she found
admission to her. The woman died; but Sarah
Martin, as it is expressed in her own narrative of her
life, “obtained the desire of her heart,” in the re-
quest of a number of aged and sick women in the
room to continue her visits, to read the scriptures,
and pray with them—a comfort she soon extended to
all the sick rooms.
She followed this out in the workhouse many years,
imparting the consolations of religion to old, and in-
sti’ucting the young in industrious occupations, as well
as in letters.
Even, then, whilst frequently passing the gaol, she
felt a strong wish to obtain admission to the prisoners,
to read to them. They were shutout, she thought,
from the society whose rights they had violated, and
they were destitute of the instruction they so much
needed.
It was several years before this wish could be gra-
tified. But in 1819, when she was about twenty-
eight years of age, the case of a mother, who had
cruelly beaten her young child, roused all Sarah Mar-


tin’s pity. There were, however, difficulties to be
overcome before entrance into the gaol was allowed
her. She had feared this, and had not mentioned
her object to her grandmother, “lest any obstacles
should stand in the way, and her project be visionary.”
Upon a second application she was admitted.
This prison was then in a most wretched condition,
dark, dirty, and without proper ventilation, but its
moral state of corruption was still more to be de-
plored. The doors were locked upon the prisoners,
but no means used for their reformation. One was
allowed to corrupt another, so that they often left the
place more depraved than when they entered it. As
no employment was found them, they spent their
time in gaming, swearing, playing, and fighting.
There was no school-master, no chaplain, nor any re-
gard paid to the Sabbath. The wealthy inhabitants
seemed not to be aware of this state of things until
the poor dressmaker called their attention to it. This
was the state of things when she first visited the gaol;
but she did not despair of ultimate success in her
plans of reformation.
The manner of her reception is narrated by herself
with admirable simplicity “ When I told the wo-
man, who was surprised at the sight of a, stranger,
the motive of my visit, of her guilt, and her need of
God’s mercy, she burst into tears ; and she thanked
me, whilst I read to her, in the twenty-third chapter of
St. Luke, the story of the malefactor, who, although
suffering justly by man’s judgment, found mercy from
the Saviour.” Those tears and thanks shaped the
whole course of Sarah Martin’s subsequent life. If
she had been rudely repelled, even her fortitude might
have given way.
Her reception at once proved the necessity for such
a missionary, and her own personal fitness for the
task ; and her visit was repeated again and again,
during such short intervals of leisure as she could
spare from her daily labours.
Out of this single case grew her devoted attention
to all the prisoners in the Yarmouth gaol during
twenty-four years, until her decease. From reading
to them she proceeded to teach reading and
writing, and soon perceived that more was wanted,
and that habits of application must he acquired.


How, after discontinuing her personal attendance at
the workhouse, she extended her labours in the
prison, is strikingly stated in her autobiography.
Here, as in her school, she perceived that habits of
industrious occupation must be fostered, besides im-
parting religious and secular instruction.
“ This delightful privilege was mine until 1838,”
she says, in reference to the management of the
workhouse school. “ The new workhouse was built,
and a schoolmaster and schoolmistress appointed, and
then, being no longer wanted there, I entered on
teaching at the gaol every day, at which place
means of employment for female prisoners had been
first provided in 1823; and one gentleman gave me
10s., and another £l, for prison charity. It then
occurred to me that it would be well to expend it in
baby-clothes being made ; and having borrowed pat-
terns, cut out the articles, fixed prices of payment for
making them, and ascertained the cost of a set, that
they might be disposed of at a certain price, the plan
was carried into effect. The prisoners also made
shirts, coats, &c., and on the plan being made known,
charitable persons supported it, and thus did good in
two ways ; for, in giving to the poor, they also sup-
ported empl ,/ymeat for the prisoners. By means of
this plan, many females who were not able to
sew, learned the art, and, in satisfactory cases,
had a little money to take at the end of the term of
their imprisonment, which, in many instances, proved
of great use. The fund of £l. 10s. for this
purpose, as a foundation and perpetual stock,
soon rose to £7. 75., and since its establishment above
£4OB worth of various articles have been sold for
charity.
“ In the absence of hard, labour for male prisoners,
at different periods, individuals have been occasion-
ally employed in whatever work could be contrived
or thought of; the number of prisoners then were
few. They made straw hats, and, at a later period,
bone spoons and seals; others have made men’s and
boys’ caps, cut into eight quarters, the material old
cloth or moreen, or whatever my friends could find
to give me for them. In some instances young
men, and more frequently boys, have learned to sew
grey cotton shirts, and even patch-work, with a view


of shutting out idleness, and making themselves
useful. On one occasion I showed to the prisoners
an etching of The Chess-Player, by Retzch, which two
men, one a shoemaker and the other a bricklayer, de-
sired much to copy ; they were allowed to do so ; and
being supplied with pencil, pen, paper, &c., they suc-
ceeded remarkably well. The Chess-Player presented
a pointed and striking lesson, which could be well
applied to any kind of gaming, and was on this ac-
count suitable to my pupils, who had generally
descended from the love of marbles and pitch-
halfpenny in children, to card&, dice, &c., in men; the
business of copying it had the advantage of requiring
all thought and attention at the time. The attention
of other prisoners was attracted to it, and for a year
or two afterwards, many continued to make copies of
it.” —Life of Sarah Martin, by the Religious Tract
Society, No. 20.
For six or seven hours in a day she would attend
keeping all at work, and making the whole a scene of
useful activity and moral and religious training.
Her persuasive way of proceeding, her sermons,
and her success, recall Goldsmith’s account of the
good Yicar of Wake n eld, when himself in prison. In
a few days the most stubborn would beg to take
their part in her instruction, and in the work going
on under her directions.
Once within the circle of her influence the effect was
curious. Men old in years, as well as in crime, might
be seen striving for the first time in their lives to hold
a pen, or bending over primers and spelling-books, or
studying to commit to memory some precept taken
from the Bible. Young boys, as impudent as they
were ignorant, beginning with one verse, went on to
long passages ; and even the dullest were enabled by
perseverance to furnish their minds and memories
with “ from two to five verses every day.” Without
the importance of wealth or station —without even
extraordinary powers of mind—she ruled by a word
the roughest and most depraved natures. She needed
no compulsory power, for they knew that she had
no motives but their welfare to sustain her exertions ;
and they were conscious that they had in her a friend
anxious to assist them to recover their lost position
in society.
18


This general conviction of the sincerity with which
she watched, and wept/ and prayed, and felt for all,
rendered her the general depository of the little con-
fidences, the tales of weakness, treachery, and sorrows,
in the midst of which she stood ! and thus she was
enabled to fan the rising desire for emancipation, to
succour the tempted, to encourage the timid, and put
the erring in the way.
Upon one occasion, when giving them Scriptural
instruction, a man interrupted her rudely with, “ As
for the Bible, I won’t believe one word of it; victuals
is what I want.” “Yes,” chimed in another, encou-
raged by his companion’s boldness in speaking,
“ Victuals is what we want; we don’t want religion,
we want victuals.” Sarah Martin, with that happy
tact which so well qualified her for the station she
occupied, immediately pointed how the Bible taught
honesty and industry, and that the want of these
virtues had caused their own wretchedness. She
then, with solemnity, addressed them on the insult
they had offered to God, the author of the Bible, and
expressed her determination to discontinue visiting
them until those who disliked it were removed ; the
one apologised at once, the other in a day or two.
The money with which this was done was mainly
the wages of her own labours as a dressmaker for
some years. But at her grandmother’s death she en-
joyed an annuity of £l2 a year, which she gave to
her work. Others, too, contributed liberally to it.
One lady gave her one day’s wages every week, that
she might take rest for her health’s sake. But the
afternoon of this new day she dedicated to the work-
house children, whom she taught in a garret.
In the prison she established a chapel service,
which will be best described in her own words, and
in an account of it by the Inspector of Prisons. She
says : “ I had long desired and recommended the pri-
soners to form a Sunday service, by one reading to
the rest. It was at length adopted ; but aware of the
instability of a practice in itself good, without any
corresponding principle of preservation, and thinking
that my presence might exert a beneficial tendency, I
joined their Sunday morning worship as a regular
hearer. On discovering that their afternoon service
had been given up, I proposed attending on that part


of the day also, and it was resumed. After several
changes of readers, the office devolved on me. That
happy privilege thus graciously opened to me, and
embraced from necessity, and in much fear, was ac-
ceptable to the prisoners, for God made it so, and
also an unspeakable advantage and comfort to myself.
I continued the two services on Sunday till 1831,
when as my strength seemed failing for both, it
pleased God that a good minister, who then came to
reside in our parish, should undertake the afternoon
service, which was a timely relief to me.”
These modest sentences convey but a very faint
notion of the nature of these singular services. But,
in a report of Captain Williams, one of the Inspectors
of Prisons, we have a far more adequate account of
the matter. It stands thus:—
“ Sunday, Nov. 29, 1835. Attended divine service
in the morning at the prison. The male prisoners
only were assembled ; a female resident in the town
officiated ; her voice was exceedingly melodious, her
delivery emphatic, and her enunciation extremely
distinct. The service was the Liturgy of the Church
of England; two psalms were sung by the whole of
the prisoners, and extremely well; much better than
I have frequently heard in our best appointed
churches. A written discourse of her own composi-
tion was read by her Second Report of Inspectors
of Prisons, 1836.
For several years the Inspector continued to re-
port well of Sarah Mar-tin’s prison labours until her
death, when he formally declared their inestimable
value, and the excellence of her character.
But the most original, and at the present moment
the most important, part of Sarah Martin’s work, re-
mains to be stated in some detail. Her liberated
prisoners’ book contains the complete display of that
most important part of it; and it affords the germ
of a system destined to go far towards resolving the
chief difficulties of our penitentary administration.
The abolition of transportation, so well begun last
year, has now forced attention forcibly to the charac-
ter of discharged convicts in society at home. But
the incident is only the occasion of the increased in-
terest taken in the subject, which has always been of
extreme importance, however little cared for. When


transportation was at its height, the number of the
convicts sent out of the country bore a small propor-
tion to the masses of criminals discharged at home,
but the addition of the 3,000 or 4,000 of the worst cha-
racters to these masses not unnaturally has brought
the whole subject of this treatment under anxious
review.
Sarah Martin from the first perceived that the
greatest care of the convict during confinement,
would he insufficient in many cases unless suitable
provision could be made to secure honest employ-
ment afterwards. Large numbers have found their
way again into various walks of society, improved
by punishment, and safe for the future. At all times
the hearts of many of the disobedient have been turned to
the wisdom of the just. But in far too many cases, also,
the terrors of punishment and the effects of the
kindest penitentiary discipline were thrown away
solely because the partially reformed convict had no
considerate employer willing to give him a chance of
following an honest life on his discharge.
One of Sarah Martin’s objects of zealous care in re-
gard to the workhouse girls whom she taught to sew,
as well as to read and write, was to help them find
good places, She also, during many years, applied
herself with equal zeal to provide proper homes for
the convicts after they had benefitted by her
lessons of industry in prison. She followed up this
wise proceeding by never losing sight of them ;
thus supplying to the friendless the considerate moni-
tor, the want of whose encouragement and checks had
perhaps often led to their original fall. She realised the
principle of the law which forbids us to cast his crime
into the teeth of the criminal, and she helped his
restoration to the good-will of society by securing
employment to the well-disposed offender.
Her treatment of them depended upon the character
of the respective cases. By the help of friends, who
supplied the money for the purchase of materials, she
found some employment; she visited others at their
homes to encourage them in their work. Some who
had been servants she recommended into places ; and
all were encouraged to confide in her as their friend.
Many instances of permanent good came to her
knowledge and helped to cheer her onwards in her


labours of love. In her Liberated Prisoner’s Day
Book the following occur:—
“ Oct. 17, 1837.—N. has been in the gaol six months
for stealing deals out of the sea; he has a wife and four
children, and earned his living by fishing, selling fish, &c.
The chief means of their support in winter appears to have
been that of selling fish in the villages, which was hung
in hampers on each side of his donkey. During his im-
prisonment his wife sold the donkey, as she wanted the
money for her own support.
“Oct. 18, N. came to speak to me this morn-
ing as I desired; he was liberated yesterday; he thought a
donkey would save him and his family from the work-
house. I judged the thing worth the trial, and consulted
where it would be best to seek one, as I was at liberty, in
the hope thathe would turn out well, to purchase a donkey
at the expense of the magistrates; which, if it answered the
purpose, and he used it well, would, in the end be his own.
His wife’s relations, at a village a few miles off, knew of
one four years old, which had not been broken down by
bad usage, for which the owner asked £l. He offered to
go and fetch the animal for me to look at, which I desired
him to do, and as he had six persons to feed, and was
earning nothing, I gave him one hundred herrings to sell
on his way. N. came this evening with the donkey and
its owner; it seemed a good animal, and I bought it for
eighteen shillings. N. sold his herrings on the way, and
said he got Is. 3d. by them. He engages to lead the don-
key to my residence frequently for me to see, and inform
me of his success.
“ Oct. 19, N. called this morning to say he had sold an
hundred and a half of herrings, and that no donkey can
go better.
ft March 11, the donkey 1 bought H. they have now,
and value greatly.”
A shorter entry is to this effect ;
“ S. 8., aged 39, charged with felony.—Can neither read
nor write. Accounted a disorderly person and a thief, and
had been in prison before. After three and a half years,
perfectly reclaimed. She has never been guilty of any im-
moral practice since, and seems to have been the means of
reclaiming her husband, whose former character was bad.
I see her every month or two. She has suffered much
from poverty and illness, without complaint.”
Such cases, which were numerous in her experi-
ence, establish the great importance of her system ;


and they are happily proved, by the experience of
others, to be capable of indefinite extension.
The intellectual acquirements of Sarah Martin were
not inconsiderable. In early life, as above stated, she
indulged in much miscellaneous light reading ; and it
is said she acquired a knowledge of the French lan-
guage in her solitary walks to and from Yarmouth.
In the decline of her life, the Corporation made a public
recognition of her merits, and insisted upon granting
her a small annuity, which she reluctantly accepted.
Since her decease a testimony to her has been set up,
by designating a painting in a church in Yarmouth the
“Martin Window.” Her latest days were spent in
arranging her journals and books relative to the
great work among the prisoners, which had formed
the chief occupation of her life.
The little penny narrative which has been freely used
in this memoir (the admirable “ Biographical Gems” of
Mr. Wright, of Bristol), concludes it in words worthy of
an universal echo ; —■“ Ho situation in life,” it is there
said, “is so humble but its occupant may do some-
thing for others; no station is so high but will derive
additional lustre and dignity from its being used to
promote the glory of God and the happiness of man.
Life is given us as opportunities of usefulness to
others, and our own happiness is best promoted by
our using it for this high and holy purpose. Sarah
Martin was poor, and unattended by most of the
concomitants that are usually deemed essential to
happiness, but we doubt not that her humble and
solitary apartment was the abode of more present
happiness than is often found in palaces.”


GERALD MASSEY, THE BUCKINGHAMSHIRE
POET.
BORN MAY, 1825.
Sharp critics and honoured poets are cheering
Gerald Massey on his way; and he will not fail to
note their friendly corrective hints. He must not
doubt of there being such a thing as “ pure undefiled
English nor spare his pains to give us large drafts
from its ‘ l well.”
One who has won a great name, Walter Landor,
closes a hearty eulogy of Massey’s vei’se in terms that
will be read with universal satisfaction. “ I feel
almost as much of pleasure in bringing the volume
farther out into public notice,” says Mr. Landor, “ as
I should of pride if I had written one of its pages.
Here is such poetry as the generous Laureate will
read with approbation ; such poetry as Jeffrey would
have tossed aside with derision, and as Gifford would
have torn to pieces with despair. Can anything more
or better be said for it ? I now close it, and place it
by the side of Linton’s sonnets.” Gerald Massey’s
station in life is obscure, and his fortunes far from
prosperous. Such, also, was the condition of Keats,
to whom he bears, in many features of his genius, a
marvellous resemblance. Keats has found patrons
now he is in the grave: may Massey find them on
this side of it.
Lord John Russell, in support of a provision in
the new Reform Bill, to extend the suffrage to more
of the working classes than have hitherto enjoyed
it, asserted with truth that those classes are
rising in character and weight—that they are ad-
vanced in conduct, in skill, and in enterprise.
Here is a young man of this class, the son of a poor


Hertfordshire canal-boatman, unable to write his
name, or do more for his son than send him for a
short time to the meanest penny school, who produces a
work which, by its great merit, justifies its earnest
claim of political equality for the author’s fellows.
An admirable mother had encouraged in him a
desire to read. His books, however, as we learn
from the biographical sketch in the volume, were
very scarce. The Bible and Bunyan were the
principal; he committed many chapters of the former
to memory, and accepted all Bunyan’s allegory as
bond fide history. Afterwards he obtained access to
“ Robinson Crusoe” and a few Wesleyan tracts left at
the cottage. These constituted his sole reading, until
he came up to London, at the age of fifteen, as an
errand-boy; and now, for the first time in his life, he
met with plenty of books, reading all that came in his
way, from “ Lloyd’s Penny Times, ” to Cobbett’s
Works, “French without a Master,” together with
English, Roman, and Grecian history. A ravishing
awakenment ensued—the delightful sense of growing
knowledge—the charm of new thought—the wonders
of a new world. “ Till then,” he says, “ I had often
wondered why I lived at all—whether
“ It was not better not to be,
I was so full of misery.”
“ Now I began to think that the crown of all desire,
and the sum of all existence, was to read and get
knowledge. Read ! read ! read ! I used to read at
all possible times, and in all possible places; up in
bed till two or three in the morning,—nothing daunted
by once setting the bed on fire. Greatly indebted
was I also to the bookstalls, where I have read a great
deal, often folding a leaf in a book, and returning the
next day to continue the subject; but sometimes the
book was gone, and then great was my grief ! When
out of a situation, I have often gone without a meal
to purchase a book.”
Of Gerald Massey’s verse, a specimen or two will
be sufficient to show the character of the man, as
well as the taste and power of the poet who sings of
liberty with the fervour of a martyr, yet foretells its
triumph with the sanguine hopefulness of an enthu-
siast :


A VISION.
I was a dweller amid shadows grim:
Till Freedom touch t my yearning eyes, and lo!
Life in a shining circle, rounding rose,
As heaven on heaven goes up the jewell’d Night.
New floods of passionate life swelled at my heart,
Like Ocean-surges rolling round the world:
And Freedom was my glittering bride. For me
She walkt the world as a Divinity,
Sang like a Spirit in Life’s darken’d ways,
Turn’d common things to beauty: as the sun
Doth kindle glory in the grass and dust —
Went forth flame-plumed, in chariot sublime,
And rode the winds, like him who walks the worlds
When the roused Storm-God strode his war-horse,
Ocean,
That sloughs the foam, with flying mane of Are!
And when the fresh Morn flower’d like a Rose,
Birds sang of her, and all their happy hearts
Rang out in music, Leaves clapt faery hands,
The Flowers for joy stood tearful in her glory,
And World went singing unto World, of Freedom.
And I would blazon her melodious name,
Sing some wild psean should touch the world to tears,
Or chariot it to battle in her Cause:
For O ! her softest breath, that might not stir
The summer gossamer tremulous on its throne,
Makes the crowned Tyrants start with realmless looks
I would have given the lustre of my life
To add one jewel to her Diadem! ”
HOPE FOB, THE PEOPLE.
“ Our birds of song are silent now,
There are no flowers blooming !
Yet life stirs in the frozen bough,
And Freedom’s Spring is coming!
And Freedom’s tide comes up alway,
Though we may strand in sorrow:
And our good Bark, aground To-day,
Shall float again To-morrow.
‘ Through all the long, dark night of years
The People’s cry ascendeth,
And Earth is wet with blood and tears:
But our meek sufferance endeth!
The Few shall not for ever sway,
The Many moil in sorrow:
The Powers of Hell are strong To-day,
But Christ shall rise To-morrow.


“ Though hearts brood o’er the Past, our eyes
With smiling Futures glisten!
For lo ! our day bursts up the skies:
Lean out your souls and listen!
The world rolls Freedom’s radiant way,
And ripens with her sorrow :
Keep heart! who bear the Cross To-day
Shall wear the Crown To-morrow.
“ Build up heroic lives, and all
Be like a sheathen sabre,
Ready to flash out at God’s call,
O Chivalry of Labour !
Triumph and Toil are Twins; and aye
Joy’s sun’s i’ the cloud of Sorrow;
And’t is the martyrdom To-day,
Brings victory To-morrow.”
EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOUR.
“ I lay my hand on England’s heart, and in each life-throb
mark
The pealing thought of freedom ring its Tocsin in the dark.
I see the Toiler hath become a glorious Christ-like preacher,
And, as he wins a crust, stands proudly forth, the great world-
teacher ;
He still toils on, but, Tyrants, ’t is a mighty thing when slaves,
Who delve their lives into their work, know that they delve
your graves.
Anarchs! your doom comes swiftly! brave and eagle spirits
climb,
To ring Oppression's death-knell from the old watch-towers of
time;
A Spirit of Cromwellian might is stirring at this hour,
And thought is burning in men’s eyes with more than speech-
ful power.
Old England, cease the mummer’s part! wake, Starveling,
Serf, and Slave!
Rouse, in the majesty of wrong, great kindred of the brave!
Speak, and the world shall answer, with her voices myriad-fold,
And men, like Gods, shall grapple with the giant-wrongs of old.
Now, Mothers of the people, give your babes heroic milk ;
Sires, soul your sons to daring deeds, no more soft words of silk ;
Great spirits of the mighty dead, take shape, and walk our
Their glory smites our upward look, we seem no longer blind ;
They tell us how they broke their bonds, and whisper, “So
may ye,”
One sharp, stern struggle, and the slaves of centuries are free!
The people’s heart, with pulse like cannon, panteth for the fray,
And, brothers, gallant brothers, we’ll be with you in that day.”


The following extract from a poem on the late
Thomas Hood are very characteristic and beautiful; —
Tis the old story ! —ever the blind world
Knows not its Angels of Deliverance
Till they stand glorified ’twixt earth and heaven.
It stones the martyr; then, with praying hands,
Sees the God mount his chariot of fire,
And calls sweet names, and worships what it spurn’d;
It slays the man to deify the Christ;
And then how lovingly ’t will bind the brows
Where late its thorn-crown laught with bloody lips—
Red, and rejoicing from grim Murder’s kiss !
To those who walk beside them, great men seem
Mere common earth; but distance makes them stars.
As dying limbs do lengthen out in death,
So grows the stature of their after-fame;
And then we gather up their glorious words,
And treasure up their names with loving care.
So Hood, our Poet, lived his martyr-life:
With a swift soul that travell’d at rare speed,
And struck such flashes from its flinty road,
That by its trail of radiance through the dark,
We almost feature th’ unknown Future’s face —
And went uncrown’d to his untimely tomb.
Certes, the world did praise his glorious Wit—
The merry Jester with his cap and bells!
And sooth, his wit was like Ithuriel’s spear;
But’t was mere lightning from the cloud of his life,
Which held at heart most rich and blessed rain
Of tears melodious, that are worlds of love:
And Rainbows, that would bridge from earth to heaven,
And Light, that would have shone like Joshua’s sun
Above our long death-grapple with the Wrong;
And thunder-voices, with their words of fire,
To melt the Slave’s chain, and the Tyrant’s crown.
His wit ?—a kind smile just to hearten us! —
Rich foam-wreaths on the waves of lavish life,
That flasht o’er precious pearls and golden sands.
But, there was that beneath surpassing show !
The starry soul, that shines when all is dark! —
Endurance, that can suffer and grow strong—
Walk through the world with bleeding feet, and smile!
Love’s inner light, that kindles Life’s rare colours!
And thoughts that swathe humanity with such glory
As limns the outline of the coming God;
And wine of Beauty for the panting soul.
In him were gleams of such heroic splendours
As light this cold, dark world up as a star
Arrayed in glory for the eyes of heaven :


And a great heart that heat according music
With theirs of old —God-likest, royallest men !
A conquering heart! which Circumstance, that frights
The Many down from Love’s transfiguring height,
Aye mettled into martial attitude.
He would have clutched the palm of Victory
In the world’s wrestling ring of mightiest deeds ;
But he went down like a rich Argosy
At sea, just glimmering into sight of home,
With its rare freightage from diviner climes.
The world may never know the wealth it lost
When Hood went darkling to his tearful tomb.
Gerald Massey’s first poetical essay was published
in his native town of Tring. He has since been a
busy writer, and has many admirers. With such
men among us, it were indeed a sin to despair of
“ the good time coming.”


J— F—, THE YOUNG CHARTIST ;
FRANCIS PERRIN, THE REFORMED FRENCH
CONVICT.
The two good men here classed together, deserve
attention on very different grounds. The young
Chartist, J. F., whose merits must be proclaimed
under the initials of their official record, was a simple
political malcontent, whose imprisonment no more
implied moral delinquency than Algernon Sidney’s, or
Lord William Russell’s executions; and, like those
executions, it was held by millions to be martyrdom
in the good cause. That he bore his sentence man-
fully will be readily believed; and it is certain that
his conduct since his release has justified the good
opinion of the chaplain of the prison in which he was
confined.
He is here selected as an excellent example of those
who are busily engaged in advancing a great local re-
form—the improvement of our penitentiary system.
The high principle that actuated this young politician
was especially shewn in the interest he took in the
fate of convicts, whose utter ruin he helped to avert
by zealous and judicious proceedings. His personal
qualities gave him influence over them, and he exerted
that influence to induce them to undergo a training
to industrious habits whilst confined, so as fit
for honest employment afterwards; and he himself
laboured hard to find such employment for them.
His own account of his endeavours, in a letter of
thanks to the worthy chaplain of the Kirkdale prison,
presents satisfactorily, both the method pursued by
J. F., and his complete success according to the extent


of Ms means. It is as follows, with an introduction
to it from the chaplain :
“ The following letter has been written to me by Mr.
J. F., one of the Manchester Chartists, who, daring the
time that he was in gaol, conducted himself remarkably
well, and was always most industriously employed, both
during the hours of labour, when he worked as a shoe-
maker, and during those reserved for mental improvement.
He often expressed to me his regret that so many poor
boys should have no occupation to follow on their leaving
the gaol, and formed a resolution to endeavour to take
charge of some of those so circumstanced as soon as he
had established himself in his business again, and teach
them his trade. From this letter it will be seen that he
has begun in earnest his novel and interesting design,
which I trust may eventually be in some degree sue-
cessful.
‘ Rose Villa, Pendleton, Feb. 11, 1850.
‘ Reverend and Respected Sir,—Pardon me for writing
to you this note; but I wish to inform you that G. came to
me about twenty-five days past, and I kept him for nearly
three weeks. I could find nothing for him to do. I was
compelled to part with him in orde r to avoid sinking into
difficulties. He was willing to do good, if he got but the
chance; and having spent about two pounds of my earn-
ings upon the lad which I now have, I could not keep him
longer.
* I intend, with the blessing of God, to take the two J.’s
(which I had under me when I was in prison), when they
are discharged, if they be willing to come to me—for Mr.
Wright and Mr. Joseph Thomson wish that we should
save them from ruin, if their mother will be willing to have
them done for and placed in such a position as to be able to
earn an honest living. By their sending me theirmother’s
address I will communicate with her before then. I will
either go to receive them or they can be sent to me. You,
Sir, will be so good as to speak to the governor, and tell him
that I hope that he will urge those children’s instructor to
instruct them as fur as lies in his power, as I will be able to
judge hy them, to a farthing, what the cost would be in re-
forming a criminal. You can tell the brothers J. that I
will take a house of my own a fortnight before they come
out, and if they will be but good they shall want for
nothing.
‘ I have been unable since my discharge to use your
French grammar, in consequence of being in lodgings; but
as soon as I go into a house of my own, I shall commence
to finish my knowledge of French.


m ‘Would you, Sir, be so kind to write to me a line, let-
ting me know whether W. and J. J. would come to me,
and if they would, what their mother’s address is, so that
either lor Mr. Wright could communicate with her. I
must conclude with returning to you my thanks for your
kindness to me, and I hope that you, Sir, and your family
enjoy the best gift of Providence, good health, which is the
earnest wish or—Your obedient and humble servant,
(Signed) ‘J. F.
1 Rev. Mr. Appleton, Chaplain,
‘ Kirkdale Prison.’
“ I wrote in reply to this, sending the address requested,
and communicating the readiness of the J.’s (particularly the
younger) to avail themselves of F.’s kind offer. The mother
has given her consent, and they are to go to him on their
release, a few days hence.”
The Chaplain of Kirkdale has expressed a very
strong opinion on the general subject. “ Mr.
Wright,” says he, “the well-known and valued phi-
lanthropist of Manchester, has assisted several of our
discharged prisoners with money and employment,
and most of them have done credit to his kindness.
I do think that every man, upon leaving a gaol re-
formed, should have a fair opportunity of having his
principles tested by being helped to support himself
in an honest calling. If private individuals cannot
effect this, an institution to supply the want wouldhe
worthy of the benevolence that distinguishes the age.”
The French have adopted measures which are going
far to meet the difficulties of the case of discharged
convicts, by means of such an institution.
In 1832, some years after the success of the Con-
vict Boys’ Farm at Stretton-on-Dunmore, in War-
wickshire, and after that of similar establishments in
the United States and in France, the French Govern-
ment issued a decree commanding all local adminis-
trations to find proper employers, in town and country,
for young criminals, instead of sending them to prison
at all. Hence arose a system, managed by the autho-
rities, with the aid of private societies, which is called
patronage, now extended to adults after they have
served their time in gaol. The working of this system
is well described in a story published by Mons. Vidal,
who had a high post in the Home Office in Paris.


FRANCIS PERRIN, THE REFORMED CONVICT.
In 1846, says lie, in a small village near Marseilles,
X made acquaintance with the mayor, the curd, and
the doctor. The difficulties commonly in the way of
discharged convicts, and the new patronage system,
planned in order to meet their difficulties, were fre-
quent subjects of our discourse. My friends were
warm advocates of that new system. Their approval
of it arose from experience of its benefits, for they
were all members of the committee for carrying it out
in their district, a populous one, bordering upon the
stirring seaport of Marseilles. I had not been unob-
servant of the efforts made in other parts of France
to promote this good object, but the success of those
efforts had always struck me to be extremely doubtful.
To remove my doubts by a remarkable fact, they
took me one day to the workshop of the very best
man of the village, a cabinet-maker, who had now
lived seven years with his family in this place of his
birth, after long absence, during which the firs
punishment of an early crime had been followed by
sincere repentance, and by a well-merited restoration
to civil rights and social consideration. In prison he
had been under a good system of penitentiary disci-
pline, and he had received the benefit of benevolent
patronage after quitting it. We found him busily
employed with his journeymen and two apprentices
The house and garden were in perfect order. He re-
ceived us without embarrassment, like a man accus-
tomed to be treated with suitable respect himself,
and his wife, who was nursing a young child, cheer-
fully offered us seats. The curd ordered some re-
pairs for his church; and, after half an hour’s conver-
sation with the cabinet-maker, we came away.
Francis Perrin, for that was the name of the honest
tradesman, who had become such after passing through
a gaol—Francis Perrin, said the curd, as we hurried
away from the house, realises all our hopes. His
single case is enough to illustrate our new system, in
which stern justice is tempered with mercy. We do
not meddle with the law or its execution. We take
up the criminal after his punishment, whom formerly
the law let loose upon society. We, on the contrary,
bring him at once to a new home ; and at the same


time we subject him to the brdinary influence of the
world, by providing him with occupations. But we
watch these influences and his behaviour under the
struggle with the greatest anxiety. We take care he
shall have the fair means of resisting its temptations.
Formerly the discharged criminal had no prudent
friend to turn to. We provide him with one.
This man, Francis Perrin, after being ill brought
up by very poor parents, fell into very profligate
courses, and at last committed a great crime ; he was
condemed to a long imprisonment. Happily the
lessons of the chaplain made a deep impression upon
him, and along with the full employment provided in
the prison, those lessons encouraged reflections that
led to a resolution to lead a new life.
Before he left the prison, still young, with a cha-
racter, he was almost an altered man. His first reflec-
tions were not devoid of satisfaction. A feeling of
independence in the resources of the trade he had
learned, strengthened by the possession of some small
savings from his labour in prison, consoled him in
the utter absence of all near connections. Here,
however, arose his first perplexity; he was an only
child, and his parents were dead. He had acquired
good principles enough to resolve not to go near his
old, vicious companions; but this resolution left him
alone in the world, as when condemned he was un-
married, like to the majority of criminals. He had
resolved, too, not to go yet to his native village. He
wanted to earn a character first. He then disclosed
his difficulty to his chaplain, who furnished him effec-
tual relief, by giving him a letter to the curd of the
town; they together selected his abode. It was large
enough to secure work at Perrin’s trade, and a pa-
tronage society was known to be founded there, to ob-
tain employment for men in his condition. In this
town accordingly he settled; his perseverance and
skill for several years confirmed the good opinions
which his patrons and employers were prepared,
although with proper caution, to entertain in his
favour. He conformed strictly to the rules prescribed
by the society; and he found that steadiness and
industry did not fail to gain even for him, their usual
reward.
As time passed, he met with many mortifications,


and had a few serious embarrassments. His old
companions in crime sought him out; and when they
could not seduce him from his right way, they en-
deavoured to injure him in the eyes of his employers
and fellow workmen, by telling his history. He had
anticipated and defended that sort of malice, by pre-
viously communicating that story to all with whom
he was in any way permanently connected. On one
occasion his kindness to a man, released like himself
from the penitentiary, put the strength of his re-
covered character to a severe test. In hope of this
man’s reformation he encouraged his frequent visits,
at his own lodgings, and he was therefore involved
with him on a charge of aggravated robbery; his
comrade was convicted, but Perrin’s supporters were
firm. He was really innocent, and the tribunal re-
jected all harsh inferences, suggested from the single
fact of his imprudent association with a confirmed
offender.
His marriage was not effected easily. But it
crowned his career of reformation, and was its best
reward. It was brought about with the good-will of
his wife’s parents and relatives, by the same frank
disclosure of his story that had defeated the malice of
his fellow convicts, when he refused to consort with
them again. This marriage furnished a retreat from
casual associates, and so enabled him at last to ac-
quire peace and credit, notwithstanding the disasters
of his early life. This good conduct was ultimately
rewarded by a free pardon, which relieved him from
all legal disabilities. Thus restored to civil rights
and standing, Perrin boldly returned to his native
village, where I saw him really independent in cir-
cumstances, and respected in character.
This is a specimen of the change introduced in the
last fifteen years throughout France, and extensively
adopted in other countries. The system has already
begun to make a perceptible impression upon a class
of people hitherto a general scourge. Its elements,
viz., Ist, strong capability of reforming prisoners, and
2ndly, kindly disposition towards them in numerous
private individuals, are found everywhere.
Both have been adopted by the government
zealously, as the basis of a system of national peni-
tentiary reform.


That in this country we possess the same elements
of improvement, none will doubt who examine our
prison history of the last ten years, abounding in
satisfactory parallels to Perrin’s case on the one hand,
as well as in frightful proofs of the evil consequences
of neglecting to provide against the difficulties that
beset the discharged criminal on the other.
The problem, then, to be solved is, how the re-
maining 30,000 can be distributed over society at
large ? The government could accomplish it unaided ;
but by calling such men as the Kirkdab Chartist into
activity, we shall confer upon them the reward due
to their merits, and derive a great public good from
their exertions.


WILLIAM HAY, M.P., GLYND, SUSSEX ;
REFORMER OF CRIMINALS, AND ADVOCATE OP UNI-
VERSAL EDUCATION. BORN, 1695. DIED, 1755.
The Parliamentary advocate of the perfect freedom
of labour —by the abolition of the law of settle-
ment—of the education and employment of the
poorest—-of the substitution of useful occupation in
confinement, instead of capital punishments—and of
well-regulated prisons furnished with means of indus-
try, and therefore of reform, in the place of the old
gaols, which were so many nurseries of idleness and
of crime—the man who spent thirty years of his
life in and out of Parliament in perseveringly advo-
cating all these things—deserves to be recorded among
the benefactors of the people.
The measure introduced 120 years ago by this man
provided for a happy combination of private charity
with public rates for the poor; and it planned an ad-
ministration for paupers in equal districts and by
general rating, instead of leaving it to the unequal
parish management still in use. Finally, his measure
included the guardianship of the poor in large districts,
and high official inspection of pauper schools, work-
houses, public charities, and gaols. Founded upon
the union of individual benevolence with national re-
sources, and of private zeal with public duty, his mea-
sure anticipated several important enactments which
have since passed, and proposed others still much
wanted.
Such was the enlightened designs of William Hay,
of Glyndbourne, near Lewes, in Sussex —of a family
that for a century and a half sent members to the
House of Commons. One of them, his grandfather,
Herbert Hay, was in the Long Parliament, and ac-
tively engaged against Charles the First. Others of
them, of whom the subject of this notice was one,
were always steady and independent friends of the
Liberal cause in the House of Commons. The parents
of William Hay djdng in his childhood, he was


brought up by an aunt, and well educated at the
Lewes Grammar School and at Oxford. He afterwards
studied the law in the Temple ; and, besides being a
member of several parliaments, he during many years
zealously discharged the duties of a county magis-
trate. A liberal landlord, he took the lead in impor-
tant rural improvements. He was a kind husband, an
affectionate father, a hospitable neighbour, and a
warm friend. His literary acquirements were consi-
derable ; his essay on “ Deformity” may now be read
with interest, as a humorous apology for the defects
of his own person, and in displaying the compensa-
tions afforded by Providence in the worst circum-
stances. This essay concludes with a grave direction
that after the author’s decease his body should be
given for dissection, in order that the cause of a ma-
lady he had long suffered under might be discovered
by science—an act of public spirit that well became
the author of the “ Religious Philosopher,” the most
remarkable of all Mr. Hay’s works. His attendance
in Parliament was sufficiently regular to occasion
the observation that he was one of “ the first in, and
of the last out of the House of Commons.”
In an essay on “ Civil Government,” published in
1728, he first laid down the principles of his system
of pauper and penitentiary administration, to the
development of which he devoted a large portion of
his life.
He was the able precursor of Beccaria; and,
without going so far as to deny the right of the
State to inflict capital punishment upon great crimi-
nals, he urged the propriety of abolishing sanguinary
laws wherever possible, as working no amendment
of the offender, whatever terror they may strike into
the living. He also proposed to confine prisoners in
well-managed gaols rather than transport them. He
insisted that it is better a man should be usefully em-
ployed in this world, than sent unprepared into the
next, and be doing good at home, than be a vagabond
in a strange country, to which he may become a
burthen, as he has been a reproach to his own.”
But besides showing the importance of cheeking
crime by milder punishments than were then in force,
he expatiates upon the great usefulness of rewards
bestowed the State with liberality and discretion
for men’s good actions.


Upon being elected a member of the House of
Commons in 1733, Mr. Hay applied himself diligently
to the practical reform of our pauper administration
and to those of the gaols. A Committee of the House
of Commons was appointed in 1735 “ to consider the
laws in being relating to the maintenance and settle-
ment of the poor, and what further provision might
be necessary for their amendment.”
Mr. Hay brought up the report, by which it was
resolved, Ist, That the laws of settlement were vexa-
tious to the poor, and little advantageous to the public.
2d, That workhouses, hospitals, and houses of correc-
tion should be erected for the destitute, the sick, and
the criminal. 3d, That they should be supported by
rates and by voluntary contributions. 4th, That each
county should be divided in one or more districts for the
guarding of those establishments, 12 landed residents
in such districts being returned to the quarter sessions,
like the jurymen, with benefactors, as the guardians.
5, The guardians to be a corporation to hold chattels,
till all land, except a few acres for buildings and
gardens for the use of the poor. 6th, Parliament to
vote funds for the building of workhouses and prisons.
7th, The funds for furniture, &c., to be raised by rates
not exceeding half of the average of the three previous
years’ poor rates. Bth, The parochial payments to be
in proportion to the paupers sent. 9th, The revenues
of public charities and the collections to be paid over
to the guardians. 10th, The Lord Chancellor was to
appoint inspectors of the workhouses and prisons, and
to inquire into charities.
This admirable plan, founded as it was upon a
solemn inquiry before a committee of the House of
Commons, was cut down to a bill to encourage volun-
tary donations to the poor—to be administered by
boards of guardians—and even this bill, after passing
the House of Commons, was lost in the House of Lords.
It may be hoped that when our statutes shall be com-
pletely codified, a collection will be made of the
best bills that never became statutes.
Some of the leading points in Mr. Hay’s system
for system it was, have been adopted in modern
statutes; such as the board of guardians of the
poor, unions, and inspectors of the poor, of prisons,
and of charities.
His great principles of uniting voluntary charity


and private agency with official management; equal
rating; and of universal education and the universal
employment of prisoners, remain still to be carried
out. Mr. Hay was zealously supported by the Ogie-
thorpes, the Tuffnells, the Eltons, the Lewis’s, the
Cornewalls, the Lowthers, the Prices, the Onslows,
and the John Wesleys of his generation. These
honoured names are not without representatives
among us; and although Mr. Hay’s family has
passed away—one being put to death at Patna, in
India, another, his father's successor in Parliament,
being a victim to consumption at home, the repre-
sentatives of his supporters are bound to vindicate
his memory by reviving his plans, so as to complete
what is now wanting to our pauper and peniten-
tiary administration.
The Poor Law Commissioner, Mr. Baines, should
take advantage of his admirable arguments against
the law of parochial settlement, which will struggle
hard against the proposed reform, and which Mr.
Hay would have reformed a century and a half ago.
The name of William Hay has a respectable place in
our Parliamentary annals; and his prison and pauper
committee, of 1735, called forth the praises of the
poet of the “ Seasons,” Thomson, as it gave a power-
ful subject to the genius of Hogarth. He and his
colleagues of that committee were among the best
men of the times following the revolution of 1688,
the failures of which period are less correctly known
than the events of any portion of our history. If the
revolution gave us a large share of constitutional
liberty, it left official corruption untouched, and so
led the way to the scandals of a century and a half of
official and Parliamentary peculation. Free Trade,
and the redemption of the National Debt, were then
refused, and so the natural progress of the nation
was impeded. Colonial reform, and the improvement
of the negroes, were also refused; whilst convict
transportation and negro slavery were extended, so
as to hasten the loss of the American colonies.
Finally, popular education, with a mild administra-
tion of the criminal law, were then rejected, to the
enormous injury of the national character.
Mr. Hay’s share in the struggles for the better
things thus thwarted gives him a title to be remem-
bered among his country’s worthies.


JOHN BAGFORD.
SHOEMAKER, ANTIQUARY, BOOKSELLER, AND PROMOTER
OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES. BORN, 1651. DIED, 1717.
When universal education is become an object of
urgent interest, it is especially fitting to pay a tribute
of respect to one of the people who, by his unassisted
industry, did more than any other individual towards
perfecting two main instruments of such educa-
tion —namely, the knowledge of books, and the exten-
sion of public libraries.
This was John Bagford, of London, so success-
ful a self-taught scholar, and so great a lover of
learning, that to his zeal and authority was largely
owing the establishment of the Society of Antiquai'ies
in the reign of Queen Anne; and his labours con-
tributed as lai’gely to the formation of those literary
tastes in England which at length, in the British
Museum, produced the beginning of so much that is
destined to enlighten and adorn the country. In the
language of one of his contemporaries, John Bagford
“ was a man of surprising genius, and, had his educa-
tion been equal to his natural gifts, he would have
proved a much greater man than he was. Without
education he was the greatest man in the world in his
way.”
John Bagford was born in London in 1651. He
was brought up a shoemaker; but acquiring unassisted
a taste for reading, he turned his attention from the
earnest perusal of books to bookselling. He was
a careful collector of even fragments of learning of
all sorts, and ultimately established himself in the
metropolis, less as a man of business than as an
esteemed member of the republic of letters. His
chief work, the “History of Printing,” was never
finished ; but his collections of materials for it may


still be consulted with advantage. They are deposited
in the British Museum. His efforts, supported by
Wanley and Murray, revived the old Antiquarian
Society, which under their auspices took its present
form. One of his essays is of much interest at this
moment, when the state of our public libraries is about
to undergo a suitable inquiry. The following pas-
sages from it are as creditable to his patriotism as to
his learning :• —
“An Account of the several Libraries, public and
private, in and about London, for the satisfaction of
the Curious, whether Natives or Foreigners. (Haul.
MSS. 5900). —It is usual for travellers (I mean such
as are lovers of learning), when they come to reside
in any city or place of note, to make inquiry after the
libraries of learned men, and get information of the
rare books, medals, paintings, statues, prints, and
other pieces of antiquity, that are to be seen there,
and who are the proprietors of them.
“ Having been abroad, and seen the several cities and
universities in Holland, and the French having given
large accounts of their libraries at Paris, hath put me
upon this subject, to give an account in print of our
public and private libraries. Nothing of this nature
having been attempted here in England, only the
two universities, the Bodleian Library, and the cata-
logue of MSS. in colleges and cathedral churches, and
those in private hands that would communicate them;
I thought fit to inform the world that in London and
Westminster are not only abundance of rare-printed
books and MSS., but antiquities, as statues, medals,
paintings, and many other curiosities, both in art and
nature, which may vie with any city in Europe,
Rome excepted.
“ I shall not trouble the reader with an account of
such great abundance we have of good books, and how
well the conventual fryeries and abbies were fur-
nished with them before the Reformation. My design
is only to direct you to the place where they are to
be seen.
“ In the great cloyster of the Abbey of Westminster
is a well-furnisht library, considering the time when
it was erected, by Dr. Williams, Dean of Westminster
and Bishop of Lincoln, who was a great promoter of
learning: he purchased the books of the heirs


of one Baker, of Highgate. He founded it for public
use, every day in term time, from nine to twelve and
from two to four. The MSS. are kept in the inner
part, though now many of them are consumed by a
late fire. There I saw the rare book of the ‘ Rites
and Ceremonies of the Coronation of our Kings.”
There is a manuscript catalogue in the library.
“ St. James’s Library, founded by Henry YIIL, well
furnished with curious MSS. collected by Jo. Leland
and others, at the dissolution of the abbies. There
are books in all languages, and all sorts of printed
books, well worthy any man’s seeing. There is great
variety of the first printed books, both in vellum and
paper, in all volumes. The catalogue of the MSS. is
printed in the general catalogue of the MSS. in Eng-
land. This library was first founded for the use of
the princes of the blood, and so continues. But our
kings had not only their books kept there, but had
studies and libraries at several palaces, Whitehall,
Hampton-court, Nonsuch, Windsor, Oatland, Green-
wich, &c. But this at St. James’s was the chiefest,
and hath been much made use of by learned men. He
that can obtain the sight of it will be extremely
pleased with the keeping of this library. It would
much redound to the honour of England if all learned
foreigners did see it when they come hither.
“ Prince Henry caused a piece of ground near Lei-
cester-fields to be walled in for the exercise of arms,
which he much delighted in; a house was briiit at
one end for an armory, and a well-furnished library
of all such books as related to arms, chivalry, military
affairs, encamping, fortification, &c., the best that
could be got in the kind in all languages, at the charge
of the Prince, who had a particular learned man for a
librarian, whose name I have forgot. It was called
the Artillery Ground, and remained till the restora-
tion of King Charles 11. ; and then it fell into the
hands of the Lord Gerrard, who let the ground out to
build on.
“ In the church-yard of St. Martin’s-iu-the-fields, the
then incumbent, Dr. Tenison, built a noble structure
extremely well-contrived for the placing of books and
the lights. It was begun and finished in the year
1688, at the said doctor’s charge, now Archbishop of
Canterbury, and by him furnished with the best


modern books in all faculties, perhaps the best of its
kind in England. The studious of all parts may have
free access there to study, giving their names and
places of abode to his Grace.
“ In the days of Edward VI, in the chapel adjoining
to the Guildhall, called my Lord Maiors chapell, was
a library very well furnished, being all MSS. Stow
says, the Duke of Somerset borrowed them, with a
design never to return them; but furnished his own
study in his pompous house in the Strand : they were
five eartdoads. Thus the City at that time had a
public library, besides many others within the walls,
as at Grey Fryers in Newgate-street, was a good library
of MSS. to which Whittington was a benefactor.
“ The White Fryers spared for no cost for books, and
so their collection must be great and good; and Bale,
one of their fraternity, said, there was no book to be
sold but they had their emissaries to procure it for
them ; and indeed the Carmelites engrossed all they
could lay their hands on, and I believe other orders
did the same; so that a layman, though he were
both able and willing to purchase, had but few fell
into his hands ; so that books and learning were only
to be found in monasteries.
“ Sion College was founded by the will of Thomas
White, vicar of St. Dunstan in the West, for the use
of divines and others in and about London. They
are a body corporate, by charter, 1630. Great part
of the books were destroyed in the fire in 1666; some
of them were saved by the industry of the librarian,
John Spencer; and since that rebuilt, and the library
furnished with many good books by the Viscountess
Camden 1643, Lord Berkeley, and John Lawson,
M.D. of late, and is an object well deserving of pious
benefactors that are lovers of learning, it being a place
very conveniently situated out of the noise of coaches,
carts, and waggons, and the only public library within
the walls of the city of London; a large convenient
spacious room, capable of containing many thousands
of volumes; and it were to be wisht there were
made a compleat collection of Bibles, especially in the
English tongue ; as also of our Latin and English
historians ; for persons generally give to public libra-
ries books of show only and of no value, such as
they do not know how to dispose of.


“Gresham College has a noble library; but it belongs
not to the foundation as a college, but to the Fellows of
the Royal Society. These books, for the most part,
were collected by the noble and learned antiquary the
Earl of Arundel ; and most of them (I mean the
MSS.) were collected by him in Germany, when he
was ambassador to the Court of Vienna; the journal
whereof is written by one Crown, of his own retinue,
but imperfectly. In this expedition he bought
up all the valuable books, statues, medals,
pictures, and some libraries, and some pieces of the
remains of that at Heidelburg. I had once a cata-
logue in manuscript of all the curious MSS. and
printed books collected by him in Germany, besides
what was presented to him by the Duke of Saxony,
being a collection of the draughts of his medals, gold,
silver, and copper, drawn by hand, and curiously per-
formed in costly volumes, with rare antique MSS. on
several subjects, and, if I mistake not, there is an
ancient MS. of Vitruvius, seldom seen in catalogues.
This library was presented them by the Duke of Nor-
folk ; and, if a catalogue were taken of it agreeable to
its merit, it would outshine many in Europe. In the
year 1687, Mr. Marmaduke Foster took a catalogue of
it, and indeed no man fitter with respect to the
printed books, and he took great pains in it; but be-
fore it was printed, they thought fit to have it con-
tracted, which was done by one who knew little of
the matter, so that we have not Mr. Foster’s cata-
logue; but he was deficient in the knowledge of an-
cient MSS. as appeal-s by two Irish MSS. which he
says were in the Piet language in an account of those
two MSS. I often visited him whilst he took a cata-
logue, to stick on each press, containing the books
there ; and I took the opportunity to turn over many
of them, and found they deserved a better catalogue.
They are MSS. intermixed with printed books, and
the MSS. are alone in the general catalogue printed
at Oxford; but neither have done them justice. I
am the more earnest in this point, because it is not
my opinion only, but of those far superior to me in
judgment. We see that in France, Italy, and Ger-
many, they extol and magnify many trivial collec-
tions ; and if we had encouragement given us here, we
have as noble collections, and might find as able


pens to illustrate them. What rare books in noble
collections are, as it were, imprisoned by the capri-
cious humours of many ill-natured persons, like the
dog and ox in iEsop ! It is very detrimental to the
honour of the nation, as well as injurious to learning
here, for persons to have rare and useful books in
their possession, not to exhibit catalogues of them to
the world, and to permit the curious to have access
unto them.—Gresham College library is in a spacious
gallery on the right hand of the quadrangle, in con-
venient cases on each side, and is to be seen by any
curious inquirer.
“ At Mile-end is a library curiously chosen, erected
by a person that spared for no cost ; it is for the use
of [Qu. whom ?]
“At Dulwich College, erected by one Alleyn, who
formerly had been a strolling player, is a library,
having a collection of plays given by one Cartwright,
bred a bookseller, and afterwards turned player ; he
kept a shop at the end of Turnstile-alley, which was
first designed for a ’Change for vending Welsh flan-
nels, frizes, &c., as may be seen by the left side going
from Lincoln’s-inn-fields; the house, being now di-
vided, remains still turned with arches. Cartwright
was an excellent actor, and in his latter days gave
them not only plays, but many good pictures, and
intended to have been a further benefactor with
money, and been buried there, but was prevented by
a turbulent woman. There is a fine view of London,
taken by John Norden in 1608; at the bottom is the
Lord Maior’s Show. I could never see another.
There being so many able and wealthy men of the
Company of Stationers, it were to be wished they
would erect a library in their hall, which is so near
the grand passage of the City ; and it would redound
much to their honour, having got their estates by
learning. This would soon be done, if every one of
that numerous society would give but one book of a
sort; in five years it would be a good library; and
half a dozen of all the pamphlets that come out
weekly, for the use of such as wanted them, and would
present bound books for them, but still to keep one
for the use of the library. One Mr. Tomlinson, with
great pains and care, made such a collection from 1641
to 1660; and King Charles I. wanting a particular


pamphlet, and hearing Tomlinson had it, took coach
and went to his house in St. Paul’s Church-yard, to
read it there, and would not borrow it, but gave him
£lO. There are several hundred volumes, bound
uniform in folio, quarto, and octavo, so well digested,
that a single sheet may be readily found by the Cata-
logue, which was taken by Mr. Foster, and is twelve
vols. in folio. This collection deserves to be pub-
licly reposited.
“ The Apothecaries not long since had a design to
collect all sorts of Dispensatories and books relating
to Botanicks, as Herbals, &c.
“ The Barber-Surgeons have collected such books as
relate to Anatomy at their hall in Monkwell-street.
There is also that admirable piece of Henry YIII.
sitting on his throne, and giving the Master and
Wardens their charter, painted by the famous Hans
Holbein.
“ Dr. Hans Sloane hath a very curious collection of
books in all faculties, as physicks, mathematicks, the
classicks, &c., in all languages ; old printed books; a
great number of MSS. on divers subjects, both an-
tient and modern. He hath a most admirable collec-
tion of natural and artificial rarities, shells, insects,
fossils, medals, both ancient and modern, Roman and
Greek antiquities, ores of several sorts, as gold, silver,
copper, tin, lead, and a vast many other antique rari-
ties that had been Mr. Charleton's ; so that, with
what he had before, and since hath collected, he hath
the greatest in England. He has books of plants of
several countries. A large collection of voyages, dis-
coveries, travels in foreign parts, in most of the Euro-
pean languages, not only printed, but most of them
in MS., in Latin, Italian, French, Flemish, Dutch, and
English—nothing having escaped him that he knew
of, either here or abroad, that could be purchased.
He is copiously furnished with books on all curious
subjects. Perhaps there is not such another collec-
tion in its kind in all Europe.*
“special libraries.
“ The inclinations of persons are vastly different in
their collecting, as particularly Lord Clarendon,
* The whole of Sir Hans Sloane’s collections is in the British
Museum.


mainly about the affairs of Ireland and its Govern-
ment.—Mr. Wilde, formerly living in Bloomsbury ;
his consisted of architecture and agriculture, admi-
rable in its kind.—A gentleman that lived in the
Inner Temple had a collection consisting of books of
necromancy and magick, &c., mostly MSS.—Mr. Tho-
mas Britton, the small coalman in Clerkenwell; his
books were of chemistry, as may be seen by the cata-
logue printed for their sale by auction. He hath a
vast collection of musick, prickt by his own hand,
and esteemed of great value.
“Dr. Beamont for some years past hath col-
lected whatever he could, relating to mystical divi-
nity, spirits, witchcraft, and such-like subjects.
“ Capt. Aston, for some considerable time, hath pro-
cured a large quantity of voyages, travels, &c., in
most of the European languages, besides books on
other subjects.
“ Mr. South erby, in Hatton-garden, hath a curious
collection of books, both MSS. and printed, besides
his fine medals.
“At a leisurable opportunity I will obey your
commands in giving an account of the antiquities of
buildings—as churches, monuments, palaces, great
houses, statues, both antient and modern, collections
of paintings, and other pieces of curiosity, though I
intend first to show you the several parts of the City ;
and what is remarkable and worthy to be seen in
each. “ J. Bagford.”
If inquiries such as Bagford’s had been duly made
into our numerous public libraries, they would not
have been so disgracefully abused as they now are.
The whole country abounds in them, in ruins, more
disgraceful than the destruction of the monastic col-
lections by the Reformers !
It is not creditable to us that this excellent man
should be without a suitable record. The most
eminent of his time greatly esteemed him. His
simplicity of character, his integrity, his vast and
exact learning, were acknowledged. Yet he died an
inmate of the Charter-house retreat for the unfortu-
nate ; aud the proposal to give him a monument in
Westminster Abbey, befitting “ the first man on his
way in the world,” ended with the eulogy of an
epitaph never set up !




THE WORTHIES
THE WORKING CLASSES
/rteik
EDWARD RIJSHTON the Elder, of Liver -
pool, Sailor, Blind Poet, Patriot, Originator of
Asylums for the Blind in England.
SARAH MARTIN, of Yarmouth, Dressmaker,
Teacher of the Poor, and Reformer of the Con-
vict.
GERALD MASSEY, of Tring, the Factory
Boy, Poet and Patriot.
J. F., the Chartist, Reformer, and Employer
of the Discharged Convict.
FRANCIS PERRIN, the Reformed Convict,
—Example of the Success of the French System
of Convict Reformation.
WILLIAM HAY, M.P., of G-lynd, Sussex,
Founder of Modern Popular Education and Con- j
vict Reformation.
JOHN BAGFORD, Shoemaker, Antiquary,
Bookseller, and Promoter of Public Libraries.
