

3 A-F p
6.1 o
The Spirit of St. George
in A.ction
THE CHIEF EXPLORER OF AUSTRALIA
Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N.
His Life and Times
1774—1814
“KANGAROO”
London :
&o?af &odetj> of g»t. George
54, Victoria Street,
S.W.I.
Price is.




The Spirit of St. George
in Action
THE CHIEF EXPLORER OF AUSTRALIA
Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N.
His Life and Times
1774—1814
“KANGAROO”
London :
Wi)t is>ocietp o£ George
54, Victoria Street,


DEDICATED
to the British Nation :
and especially to the officers and men of the Australian Forces
now serving God, King, and Empire,
by Sea, by Land, and in the Air*


Foreword
THERE is no single explorer to whom Australia owes more
than to Flinders.” For “the accuracy of his surveys” and
“ the boldness and untiring energy of his undertakings ”
he was unequalled. His researches were to benefit mankind, and
make history for an entire Continent; but whereas in other times
his actions, and those of such as strove to follow him in spirit, would
have been “ treasured like the deeds of classic heroes of old, in our
own day they are not heard much beyond the shores of Australia.”
Thus in 1865 wrote the author of A History of the Discovery and
Exploration of Australia* From that time until his death in 1889
he strove by word and pen to bring home to our people, in and be-
yond Australia, how vast are the obligations of posterity to the few
far-seeing minds which combined the vigour and initiative of men
of action with the acumen and precision of the scientist and the patience
of the philosopher. But though Flinders died in 1814, no biography
was published until 1914. Professor Ernest Scott of Melbourne
University then brought out a large illustrated volume of some 500
pages, in which he treated also of events previously described by him
in relation to the French navigator Baudin, to whom Napoleon Bona-
parte’s government attempted to transfer some of the laurels of Flinders
while detaining Flinders six years in captivity.
The Life of Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N., by Professor Scott,
issued in Australia, is long out of print, and few today, even in the
Navy, read Flinders’ own volumes or study his maps; but the ensuing
brief sketch contains within itself everything necessary for under-
standing the main issues.
In a recent pamphlet where a table is given of the British Possess-
ions and how acquired, Australia is merely stated to have become
ours “by settlement.” It should be Discovery, Exploration and
Settlement. Far from gaining our dominions, as Hitler alleges, by
* Julian E. T. Woods, himself an explorer and scientist, who produced numer-
ous works on the geography, geology, and resources of the Australasian Con-
tinent.


“ robbery and piracy,” our expansion has resulted from the fore-
sight, self-sacrifice, and wisdom of pioneers gifted with prophetic
intellects and gallant hearts. The saying of one of our own scholars
that the British Empire came into being in “ a fit of absence of mind ”
is remarkably misleading. From Sir Humphrey Gilbert in 1566,
writing his Discourse on the probable existence of a North West
Passage, to Sir John Franklin who found that Passage and perished
in the attempt, and McClintock who discovered the traces of Franklin’s
expedition, our explorers have worked in a spirit of loyal devotion
and persistent concentration, the opposite to “ absence of mind.”
In Australia a high and permanent place is justly given to Flind-
ers, —as we hope it will be in England, now that the fundamental
facts are indicated so concisely that they can be read in less than an
hour, but should scarcely be forgotten in a lifetime.


Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N.
THE birth of the future explorer took place when British power
and prestige were declining. Our Parliament in 1774 having
passed an Act laying a duty of 3d. in the pound upon all teas
imported into America, the Colonists denied the right of English
M.P.’s to tax them; and summoned at Philadelphia a General Con-
gress which was the precursor of the War of Independence. It
usually escapes notice that in the year of this ill-judged Act, which
led to the revolt of America, there came to earth the soul destined
to lay the foundations of a vast Empire under the Southern Cross,
in vicarious atonement for the loss of England’s transatlantic possess-
ions.
The battles of Lexington and Bunker Hill were the chief events
in 1775; and in 1776 Congress declared all the American Colonies
free and independent. But the end was not yet; for Long Island
and the City of New York were held by the King’s troops. The
following year occurred the surrender of the English General, Bur-
goyne, at Saratoga, 17th October; and in 1778 King Louis of France
came to terms with the new American Republic, and encouraged
French Volunteers to fight against England. It was in that year
’7B that the French and English fleets met in battle, under d’Orvilliers
and Keppel; and that in India Pondichery passed from French con-
trol into English possession.
Next came war between England and Spain. Finally in 1781,
the surrender of Lord Cornwallis to an allied French and American
Army under the Comte de Rochambeau, at Yorktown in Virginia,
marked the desperate humiliation of old England. But instead of
repenting of the Act which had led to these heavy losses, the House
of Commons in 1782 merely sent an Address to the King admonish-
ing him to desist from further war in North America. And though
Admiral Rodney in April defeated the French fleet near Dominica,
and an attempt upon Gibraltar was repulsed, Holland and America
signed a peace treaty, and His Britannic Majesty’s Commissioners
met the American Commissioners in November in Paris, where,


making a virtue of necessity, they declared the American Colonies
“ free, sovereign, and independent.”
In 1783 a Treaty of Peace was concluded between Great Britain,
France, Spain, and the United States of America. But the subver-
sive movements in France —not originated by the French people
but organized underhand by Von der Goltz and the Prussian An-
archarsis Clootz —were increasing in power and intensity. By 1786
a revolutionary Society, ironically calling itself “ the Lodges of Har-
mony,” had spread a network over the country. The anonymous
secret handbook of the Lodges began, “ There is no God, but there
is animal magnetism, by means of which both individuals and wdiole
masses of people can be swayed to do our will. Within the next
four years we shall have completely altered the system of Govern-
ment in France.” Four years later, 1789, the year young Flinders
entered the Royal Navy, the storm burst in Paris, and surprisingly
began by an assault on the Bastille, an ancient fortress, then almost
empty; used of old not for criminals but for political prisoners chiefly
of noble birth. As we shall come, later, to a serious clash between
Flinders and the French Governor of Mauritius, we should not forget
these events, happening while the English boy was midshipman
successively in the Bellerophon and Providence, and on one occasion
took part in a naval engagement against the French.
The assassination of King Gustavus of Sweden in 1792 by a renegade
nobleman; the imprisonment of the Royal Family of France, the
orgy of massacres making the name of “ Liberty ” synonymous with
widespread savagery; the judicial murder of King Louis XVI, who
had thought to placate the destroyers by surrendering his power,
when the one hope would have been in standing firm; the mock-
trial of the Queen, Marie Antoinette, and her condemnation to death
by bloodhounds in human form, —all these tragedies occurred before
Flinders was twenty years of age, and made a deep impression upon
him.
His father, a country doctor, had not wished him to go into the
Navy. A brother of Matthew and an uncle were already wearing
the King’s uniform afloat, and the father thought that Matthew should
settle down at home and follow the medical profession.
The family of Flinders was believed to have come originally from
the Netherlands to England in the time of Queen Elizabeth. John
Flinders, born at Donington in 1682, surviving until 1741, was great-
grandfather of the future explorer. Though in the Elizabethan


era our principal leaders by sea —Gilbert, Hawkins, Drake, Gren-
ville, and others —hailed from the West Country, it was Lincoln-
shire in the late 18th century which was the cradle of three explorers
destined to great national achievements and personal misfortunes;
Flinders, Bass and Franklin.*
At the time when the Flinders family first appear in Donington
records —about 1600 —the town was still of considerable local im-
portance; with horse-fairs, a weekly market, and a large hemp-grow-
ing industry. Donington School was subsequently founded and
endowed in 1718 by Thomas Cowley, to be free to children of all
local residents. At the age of twelve Matthew was transferred from
Cowley’s to Horbling Grammar School. There during three years
he so assiduously studied mathematics as to master the science of
navigation from text books without tuition. He was solidly grounded
also in Latin and Greek; and his graceful caligraphy and excellent
English completed his equipment in “ good learning.” He stands
high among men of genius who never came under the influence of
a University, but nevertheless were well equipped for the unique
work they were destined to perform. But despite a classical edu-
cation, it was neither Homer nor Caesar who lighted the spark of
adventurous fervour in the heart of the Lincolnshire boy. As he
confided to the editor of The Naval Chronicle, he was beguiled into
going to sea “ against the wishes of friends ” by reading Robinson
Crusoe/[
His uncle in the Royal Navy warned him that advancement was
*Dr. Flinders married Susanah Ward in 1773; she was mother of the explorer.
She died when her son was ten years old. His father wedded secondly Eliza-
beth Weeks, whose sister was married to Willingham Franklin of Spilsby.
Of the numerous children of the Franklin marriage, John, bom 1786, was
the future Arctic explorer, and Governor of Van Dieman’s Land (now Tas-
mania). Sarah married Henry Selwood whose daughter Emily married
Alfred Tennyson, Poet Laureate, Ist Baron Tennyson, and was mother of
Hallam 2nd Lord Tennyson, Governor of South Australia 1899-1902, Govern-
or General of Australia 1902-1904, who unveiled the memorial to Flinders
at Westernpoint, Victoria.
fHis affection for that story was lifelong; one of the last letters he wrote,
5 July, 1814, runs as follows : —“ Captain Flinders presents his compliments
to the Hydrographer of the Naval Chronicle and will thank him to insert his
name in the list of subscribers in his new edition of Robinson Crusoe ; . . . . ”
Before the publication took place, Flinders had died; after having exempli-
fied the virtues ascribed by Defoe to Crusoe —“ invincible patience under
the worst of misery, indefatigable application, and undaunted resolution
under the greatest and most discouraging circumstances.”
Scott, The Life of Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N., 1914, Angus and Robert-
son, Sydney, p. 13.


neither easy nor swift. After eleven years at sea he himself had
not yet won promotion to Lieutenant. (It may be added nor did
Nelson until after seven years of service.) Securing his Lieutenancy
only after long waiting, the uncle sailed in H.M.S. Cygnet to the West
Indies, whence he was fated never to return. Though he admonished
his nephew sorrowfully as to the drawbacks of the Service, he named
three valuable works —Robertson’s Elements of Navigation, Hamilton
Moore on Navigation, and an edition of Euclid, all of which young
Matthew contrived to procure. Captain (afterwards Admiral) Pasley
heard that a boy in the Fen Country was studying navigation all
alone. Sending for him, and finding him astonishingly competent,
Pasley put him into H.M.S. Alert, 23rd of October, 1789. By 1790
he was midshipman in the Bellerophon, 74 guns : the ship ultimately
to carry Napoleon a prisoner to St. Helena, —the would-be world-
conqueror remarking to Captain Maitland that wherever there was
water to float a ship, the English always got in his way !
The 18th birthday of Midshipman Flinders was spent in the Pacific :
“ a hemisphere where the sea was not yet cloven by innumerable
keels, and where beauty, enchantment and mystery lay upon life
and nature like a spell.” This his first long voyage was under a
Commander “ who had lived the romance that other men wrote
about and read about,” —Captain Bligh. “ A new passage through
an intricate and dangerous Strait was found and charted; a whole
archipelago was delineated, named, and taken possession of . . .
And even at this early stage of his career, young Flinders was efficient
in “ the preparation of charts and in making astronomical obser-
vations.”*
Bligh in the Providence and Assistant returned to England towards
the end of 1793. Before Flinders saw Southern waters again he was
to experience fierce fighting off Brest; but it was his voyage under
Bligh which sowed the seeds of his later ventures, the extent and value
of which it would be hardly possible to overestimate.
*Scott, pp. 39, 40. For earliest conjectures as to the extent of Terra Australis
see The Spirit of St. George Under The Southern Cross, by H.H.; Royal Society
of St. George, 1943.


It would seem to be by destiny that Australia was to be peopled
from the British Isles —and not from Spain, Holland or France. The
Spaniard Torres had sailed in 1606 through the Strait which we still
call by his name. Next came the Dutch; and the Englishman Dam-
pier. Then in 1770 —four years before Flinders was born—Captain
Cook discovered the east coast and called it New South Wales. Cap-
tain George Vancouver discovered and named King George’s Sound
in 1791; and the French Admiral Dentrecasteaux in 1792 sailed along
the coast of the Australian Bight for hundreds of miles. But nobody
had yet realised that Terra Australis was one vast Continent. The
French Government in 1800 supposed it to be “ two great and nearly
equal islands.” As Flinders subsequently wrote, “ Was it a vast
desert ? Was it occupied by an immense lake —-a second Caspian
Sea, or by a Mediterranean .... ?”*
In February, 1795, H.M.S. Reliance and Supply left Plymouth,
bound for Port Jackson, New South Wales. With Flinders in the
Reliance was another Lincolnshire man, George Bass, Naval Surgeon,
aged thirty-two —“ one whose ardour for discovery was not to be
repressed by any obstacle or deterred by danger.” These are the
words of Flinders, who planned with Bass such explorations as the
“ prudence and friendship ” of their superiors joined in discouraging
if not in opposing. No official confidence being felt then in their
projects, it seems almost incredible that Bass and Flinders started
their independent venture in a boat eight feet long, five foot beam,
the crew consisting only of themselves and one boy. Sailing out
of Port Jackson, south to Botany Bay, they made their way up George’s
River. On their return their sketch maps so impressed Governor
Hunter that he examined the country for himself and founded Banks-
town, —called after Sir Joseph Banks, one of the few English en-
thusiasts for colonisation. Space forbids following in detail the
adventure of the two friends, after they were allowed to use for their
further enterprises H.M.S. Reliance ; which, however, was soon so
battered in a gale as to require extensive repairs. Whilst Flinders
was working on the renovations, Bass set out in December, 1797
across the stretch of sea separating Australia from Tasmania. It
was then that he discovered the Straits since called Bass’s. As ex-
pressed by Flinders, “ A voyage in an open boat, and in which six
hundred miles /of coast were explored, mostly in a boisterous cli-
*Flinders Papers. Scott, p. 75.


mate .... has not, perhaps, its equal in the annals of maritime
history.”
During 1798 in the course of further explorations, Flinders was
the first to find “ kanguroos,” mutton birds, and other then unknown
but now familiar animals, whose habits he noted as carefully as he
recorded nautical details. “ The original manuscript containing
Flinders’ narrative of the expedition to the Furneaux Islands is in
the Melbourne Public Library .... 22 quarto pages, neat and
regular, every comma and semi-colon in place . . . .
There followed a voyage of Bass and Flinders together, “ a happi-
ness based not only on personal regard but on kindred feeling for
research work and a similarity in active, keen, and ardent tempera-
ment.” So wrote Flinders in his Voyage to Terra Australis. His
descriptions of Van Dieman’s Land (Tasmania) are especially strik-
ing. And whereas in ancient Rome, Juvenal, when he wished to
express an extreme rarity, referred to “ a black swan,” hundreds of
black swans were seen by Flinders within the space of a quarter of
a square mile. But eloquent and elaborate as were his reports, and
much as Sir Joseph Banks sympathised with him, “ the political
situation ”at home in 1799 was so difficult, “ and His Majesty’s
Ministers so fully employed in business of the deepest importance,”
that Banks could not gain their attention : “ Colonies of all kinds ”
were “ put into the background ” under stress of the struggle w T ith
Napoleon.
In 1798 during the course of further explorations, Flinders had
nameda hill Mount Chappell, and a small group of islands the Chappell
Islands, He gave no explanation at the time. But on his return
to England he was married to Anne Chappell, step-daughter of the
Rector of Brothertoft in Lincolnshire. She and Flinders’ sisters,
and the daughters of the Franklin family, were all friends with each
other; and Flinders from the Reliance had written letters to them
collectively as “ My charming sisters,” but separately to Anne Chappell:
“My dearest friend .... I have been long absent; have done
services abroad that were not expected but seem approved.” Look-
ing forward eagerly to seeing her, he signed himself her “ most affect-
ionate friend and brother.”
The wedding on the 17th of April was at Partney, near Spilsby.
The bride was the more excited in that she had decided to accompany
*Scott, p. 132.


her husband on his new venture to the Antipodes. Sir Joseph Banks
had represented to the Admiralty the importance of enabling Flinders
to continue his explorations; and a sloop called the Xenophon , 334
tons, had her name changed to Investigator for the purpose. Flind-
ers had taken her over in January of 1801, and had been promoted
to Commander the next month. The ship was in wretched con-
dition; Flinders formed a very “ unfavourable opinion of her strength.
. . . . Should it be asked why representations were not made and
a stronger vessel procured, I answer that the exigencies of the Navy
were such at the time that I was given to understand no better ship
could be spared .... and my anxiety to complete the investigation
of the coasts of Terra Australis did not admit of refusing the one
offered.”*
When Volunteers were invited for the expedition, 300 men from
another ship were called up and the nature of the intended service
was described to them. Some 250 wished to go with Flinders, but
he only required eleven of these; his total ship’s company consisting
of 83.
The official instructions given to him were that he was to go down
the Australian Coast from the Great Bight to Bass’s Straits, and dis-
cover such harbours as might exist; then call at Sydney to refit; and
next return along the coast and examine it as far as King George’s
Sound. After exploring New Holland, he was to sail north-west
and examine the Gulf of Carpentaria, the Torres Straits, and all
the north-west and north-east coasts; and then more fully explore
the east coast, before returning to England.
As England and France were at war, and the Investigator was a
ship of the Royal Navy, Flinders asked what he was to do in the event
of meeting French vessels at sea; for unless he had orders to the
contrary he presumed he would be expected to fight them. He was
bidden to behave to French ships as if the two countries were at peace.
As to other powers with which England was at war, he was to endeavour
to avoid communication with them, and not take letters or packets
other than such as he might receive from the Admiralty or His Majesty’s
Secretary of State. He was provided, however, with a passport
from the French Government, to the effect that his voyage of dis-
covery was not part of the war but was undertaken to extend Nautical
Science in general. Provided he did not commit any act of hosti-
lity against the French Republic, nor traffic in contraband goods,
♦Scott, pp. 175-176.


French officers by land and sea were not only ordered not to molest
the Investigator but were authorised to render assistance. This
passport was signed by the Minister of Marine on behalf of First
Consul Bonaparte.
Before the expedition sailed, Captain Flinders had a sad disappoint-
ment; for Sir Joseph Banks wrote to rebuke him for having Mrs.
Flinders on board, and unjustly ascribed what he termed laxity of
discipline to her presence. Flinders in his reply left his wife’s name
out of the matter, and expressed surprise at the Admiralty blaming
him for the desertion of men who had run away not from the Investi-
gator but from the Advice, for which not he but the officers of that
brig should be held responsible.
Mrs. Flinders was acutely grieved at being refused permission to
accompany her husband, and he wrote to her that he felt as awkward
without her “ as one half of a pair of scissors without its fellow.”
He asked her to write to him “ constantly, pages and volumes,” to
tell him her dreams, and what dress she was wearing, and anything
about herself which should enable him to picture how she passed
her time in his absence : “ Adieu, my dearest best Love. Heaven
bless thee with health and comfort, and preserve thy full affection
towards thy very own Matthew Flinders.” Her affection was never
to fail or decline; but many years were to pass before she saw him
again.
All went well at first on the voyage; and from the Cape of Good
Hope (16th October, 1801) Flinders could report that not a single
person in the crew was on the sick list. He took what were in those
days extra precautions as to diet and cleanliness; and encouraged
music and dancing on the forecastle to keep his men cheery. Though
he was only twenty-seven, his care for his crew was fatherly.
On the 16th of December the coast of Australia was sighted, and
the ensuing work is well summed up by Professor Scott : “ It is doubt-
ful whether any other single navigator in history applied names which
are still in use to so many capes, bays and islands, upon the shores
of the habitable globe, as Flinders did; .... no former navigator
pursued extensive discoveries so minutely, and consequently found
so much to name.” Posterity has endorsed Flinders’ opinion that
the country on the east was more valuable than that on the borders
of Spencer’s Gulf. Within forty years, the city of Adelaide had come
into being.
Flinders’ meeting with a French ship under Baudin took place in


apparently friendly conditions. The two explorers compared notes,
and Flinders gave Baudin a copy of one of his own charts. There
was no forecast of the trouble ahead between France and England
as to the Australian discoveries.
Professor Scott rightly says that history should do justice to the
“ spiritual potency of personalities that dominated the events,” and
that in the widest sense “ Flinders was the true discoverer of the whole
of the Southern coast of Australia.” He made no such claim him-
self, “ but we who estimate the facts after a long lapse of years can
see clearly that it was so ... . His personality dominates the
whole group of discoveries. We chronicle the facts in regard to
Grant, Baudin, Murray and Bass, but we feel all the time that Flind-
ers was the central man.”
In 1801 when George Bass again went through the Strait dis-
covered by himself and called by Governor Hunter after him, he
made no reference to his own previous achievements. It would
seem that he had wearied of adventure, and longed to get home to
his wife and mother. He was an only son. But his further fate is
shrouded in mystery. In February, 1803, the Governor of New
South Wales gave him a certificate : “ Mr. George Bass of the brigan-
tine Venus, has been employed .... upon His Britannic Majesty’s
service in procuring provisions for the subsistence of His Majesty’s
Colony;” and should Mr. Bass find it expedient to resort to any
harbour in the dominions of the King of Spain, his object would
be to procure food as aforesaid, “without any ‘private commerce’
or other business whatsoever.”
Bass sailed from Sydney on the sth of February, and was never
seen again. As the war between Spain and Britain did not begin
until the end of the following year 1804, there is the less reason to
suppose him captured or detained in Spanish America. But his
wife and mother waited for him in vain; and though the importance
of his services was amply testified both by Flinders and by the Governor
of New South Wales, the politicians at home gave no pension or aid
to his desolate womenkind, —who mourned him the more in that
he had been a faithful and affectionate son and husband, as chivalrous
as he was daring, as gentle as he was brave.


It was in December, 1801, as we have seen, that Flinders in the
Investigator entered Australian waters. In February and March
of the next year he discovered Spencer’s Gulf, Kangaroo Island and
St. Vincent’s Gulf. His meeting with Baudin ensued in April. In
July he reached North Australia; in August he discovered Point
Curtis and Point Bowen. During November he passed through
the Gulf of Carpentaria; and by April, 1803 he had circumnavigated
Australia. In June of 1803, at Sydney, occurred the condemnation
of the Investigator as unseaworthy. Sailing in July in the Porpoise
he was wrecked in August on the Barrier Reef. He returned to
Sydney in the Hope : and when in September he embarked for Eng-
land in the Cumberland he intended to return via the Cape of Good
Hope. But he encountered such heavy weather, and his ship—29
tons —was so seriously damaged, that he was obliged to alter course
and make for Isle de France alias Mauritius. The Cumberland
having become unfit to hazard the voyage to England, he meant
to sell hen and procure a passage in some other vessel.
On the 15th of December he came in sight of Mauritius; but not
until armed troops appeared, and his arrival manifestly aroused
hostile excitement, did it occur to him that he was likely to have
trouble.
When he was taken before Napoleon’s military Governor, General
Decaen, as his French passport specified his former ship Investigator
and not the Cumberland, Decaen thought it “ not probable that the
Governor of New South Wales would send away the Commander
of a discovery expedition in so small a vessel,” and accused Flinders
of trying to deceive him. Being a provincial lawyer who had risen
to high military rank by his own exertions, but without previous
training in military etiquette, Decaen with his suspicious mind and
rough manners was exceedingly displeasing to Flinders, who was
dismayed and affronted on discovering that he was regarded as under
arrest. His charts, papers, letters and journals were taken from him;
but were sealed at his request in his presence. He supposed his
detention would be only temporary; and he was permitted to send
letters to his wife and other relations. As he was not legally a prisoner
of war, and as his passport testified to his nautical work as of value
to the world in general, he applied confidently by letter to high per-
sonages in French scientific circles, urging that he should be released


at the earliest possible date. But his imprisonment continued, and
in June of 1804 a sergeant of the Guard demanded of him to give
up his sword.
“ It is highly inconsistent with my situation in His Britannic Majesty’s
Service,” protested Flinders, in writing, to the Governor; adding,
“ I am ready to deliver up to an officer bearing your Excellency’s
order, but I request that this officer will be of equal rank to myself.”
After a year’s detention Flinders wrote again to General Decaen,
and demanded that he and his crew might be sent to France, whence
“ if the decision of the Government should be favourable, we can
immediately return to our country, our families and friends; and my
report of our investigations be made public, if it shall be deemed
worthy of that honour.”
To this the Governor vouchsafed no reply. Five and a half more
years were to pass before Flinders left Mauritius. Several times
he might have escaped, but could not in honour attempt it after being
allowed some liberty on parole. Meanwhile the Admiralty, instead
of securing his release, placed him on half pay; and his wife was com-
pelled to be “ very economical.” Two Frenchmen, Bougainville
and Fleuroit, made personal appeals to their own Government—
representing that the indignities imposed upon Flinders were un-
precedented in the nautical history of civilised nations. And Sir
Joseph Banks wrote to tell Mrs. Flinders that after many rejections
by Bonaparte of the applications made to him from different quarters,
he at last had consented to order Captain Flinders’ case to be laid
before his Council of State.
The Council was in favour of Flinders being set free; but Napoleon
had no leisure to attend to their communication. At Boulogne he
was preparing for the invasion of England, and inter alia had de-
vised a medal to confer upon his soldiers after the conquest. Though
coined in France, he characteristically caused it to be inscribed as
“ struck in London ” {f rappee Londres).
Could Flinders have known what was happening in Europe, he
would hardly in December, 1803, have hazarded his person upon
ground governed by France; and during the six and a half years
that he was kept prisoner he remained in comparative ignorance
of events in the outer world; but he must have inferred from the way
he was treated by Decaen that England’s prestige was declining and
the power of France increasing.
In the spring of 1804, Bonaparte proclaimed himself Emperor of


the French; and the Parisians accepted enthusiastically the master-
ful Corsican. His Coronation in December, was conducted at Notre
Dame with much magnificence. He knew that the requisite im-
pressiveness could not be attained in the eyes of Europe by a merely
secular apotheosis, and that his rise to Imperial rank would be most
effective if seemingly conducted under heavenly benediction. As
the French Governor of Mauritius became more and more arrogant
to his English prisoner, we should remind ourselves of the series of
French victories of which Flinders was unaware.*
The year he set out on his daring enterprise, 1801, was memorable
for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland. The first Parliament
of the United Kingdom met on the 22nd of January. Peace was
signed in February between the Austro-German Emperor and the
French Republic. For England the chief event that year was the
battle of Copenhagen, —the famous occasion when Nelson put the
telescope to his blind eye so as not to see the signal to leave off action.
After many events, the battle of Trafalgar and Nelson’s triumph and
death on October 21st, 1805, were followed by Napoleon’s victory
over the Emperors of Austria and Russia at Austerlitz in December.
The conqueror could thus dictate his own terms of Peace at Shonbriinn.
The funeral of Nelson at St. Paul’s in 1806, the French subjugation
of Naples, the Prussian King’s seizure of Hanover, the proclamation
of Napoleon’s brother Louis as King of Holland, and the English
declaration of war against Prussia, were followed by a Napoleonic
victory over the Prussians at Jena. Then came the Turkish de-
claration of war upon Russia. During the following year the Eng-
lish forces were twice defeated in Egypt; and upon the triumphs of
Napoleon over the Russians and Prussians, followed his invasion
of Portugal. After the French defeat of the Monarch,
and the declaration of war between Russia and England, we will
not fully appreciate the firmness with which Flinders stood up to
the representative of France unless we realise that Napoleon’s armed
hordes were overrunning Europe as heavily as Hitler’s Nazis to-day.
Indeed more so,—for Napoleon made one of his brothers “King of
*ln Professor Scott’s Life of Flinders, the reader’s attention is mainly con-
centrated on the biographical aspects. But we can better value Flinders’
achievements if we realise that the times in which he attempted and accom-
plished his constructive work were when England had a hard struggle to
survive; and when had it not been for the genius successively of Nelson
and Wellington, the Napoleonic dream of a World-Empire seemed likely
to have been fulfilled, and Australia might have been French instead of British.


Westphala,” and yet another, Joseph, “ King of Spain,” and General
Murat, “King of the Two Sicilies,” and it appeared as if the world
had become his chess-board. In August, 1808 Nemesis in the person
of Sir Arthur Wellesley (subsequently Lord Wellington) defeated
the French in Portugal; though even that advantage was to some
extent counterbalanced by the death of Sir John Moore in Spain
at La Coruna, and the retreat of his army, the following January.
The renewal of war between France and Austria, the entry of the
French into Vienna, the crushing defeat of the Austrians at Wagram
were followed by the Anglo-Spanish victory at Talavera. But Bona-
parte continued his domination of Europe. Dissolving his marriage
with Josephine in January of 1810, so as to wed the Archduchess
Marie Louise of Austria, he next took complete possession of Holland,
and presented Sweden to Bernadette. But in 1811 General Beres-
ford defeated Marshal Soult at Albuera, —the famous occasion on
which the English, seemingly baffled, were bidden to “ die hard,”
and by refusing to surrender turned disaster to triumph.* In the
same month of May, Wellington repulsed Massena at Almeida; and
in 1812 came the English storming of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajos
and overthrow of Marmont, followed in July by Wellington’s triumphal
entry into Madrid on the 14th of August.
A Peace Treaty had been arranged between Russia, England and
Sweden; and in March of 1814 the Tsar of all the Russians rode
victoriously into Paris, and Napoleon fled to Elba.
The Treaty of Paris was signed by the Allies on the 30th of May;
and on the Bth of June the Tsar, with the King of Prussia and Prince
Bliicher, and some other high personages, arrived in London to be
warmly welcomed. It seemed as if the war was at an end. Neither
Flinders nor any one else at that time can have foreseen the escape
of Napoleon from Elba the next spring while the Peace Conference
was sitting at Vienna. It was then that the Tsar turned to Welling-
ton, and putting his hand upon his shoulder, remarked, “It is for
you again to save the world.”
The battle of Waterloo on the 18th of June, 1815, was followed
by Napoleon’s surrender to Captain Maitland, July the 15th, on
board Flinders’ former ship H.M.S. Bellerophon. In his Preface,
dated from London the 20th of May of 1814, the calm manner may
*The common habit to-day of calling supposed defeated reactionaries “ Die-
hards ” shows surprising ignorance of history; for the “ Die-hards ” at Al-
buera were the victors, and a “ Die-hard ” is one who refuses to accept defeat.


have been the less of an effort in that his long captivity must have
seemed more bearable in retrospect, now that England, which in
his childhood had been rapidly declining in credit and prosperity,
had arisen like a lion refreshed.
“ The publication in 1814 of a voyage commenced in 1801, and
of which all the essential facts were concluded within three years,
requires some explanation,” wrote Flinders prefacing his magnum
opus. “ Shipwreck and a long imprisonment prevented my arrival
in England until the latter end of 1810 ;* much had then been done
to forward the account, and the charts in particular were nearly pre-
pared for the engravers; but it is desirable that the astronomical
observations, upon which so much depended, should undergo re-
calculation, and the lunar distances have the advantages of being com-
pared with the observations made at the same time at Greenwich;
and in July, 1811 the necessary authority was obtained from the
Board of Longitude.”
Greenwich observations were then found to differ so much from
the calculated places of the Sun and Moon given in the Nautical
Almanacks of 1801, 1802, 1803, as to necessitate fundamental altera-
tions in the longitudes of places settled during the voyages. Re-
construction of the charts was taken in hand by Flinders, who tested
drastically all his other conclusions, and hoped “ that the advantage
in point of accuracy will compensate for the delay.”
“ Latitudes, longitude, and bearings, so important to the seamen
and uninteresting to the general reader ” had been transferred from
the text, with which they at first were interwoven, into tables that
could be comprehended at a glance. He distinguished also between
night and day tracks, which no previous chart-maker had attempted
*Flinders does not explain why he was released in June, 1810. We may
reasonably suppose that the French Governor was influenced by the fact
that Rowley had taken Bourbon, 9th March that year, and that Captain Pym’s
attack upon Mauritius was impending. The Royal Navy had the situation
in hand, and if Flinders had not been set free by the French he would have
been rescued by his own countrymen six months later. Mauritius was cap-
tured by the English forces, 3rd December, 1810.


to do.* And he required to revise some of the calculations of even
“so great a master ”as Cook : —“ Time-pieces were in their in-
fancy in 1768 when Captain Cook sailed upon his first voyage, and
he was not then furnished with them.” Errors therefore were “ un-
avoidable.” So it was necessary to produce new charts in which
Captain Cook’s track “ is laid down afresh ” for the benefit of “ any
navigator who may follow the same route.”
Then Flinders, whose achievements should remain to posterity
for ever famous, apologised for his lack of experience in authorship :
“ The first quire ” of his manuscript was “ submitted to the judgment
of a few literary friends,” —but “ the criticisms they had the kindness
to make ” related only to “ redundancies of expression,” easily avoided
as the work advanced. So he gave them “no further trouble :”
and “ If the reader shall be satisfied with the selection and arrange-
ment, and not think the information destitute of such interest as
might be expected from the subject, the utmost of my hopes will
be accomplished.” Thus ends a Preface which for wide scope and
gentle modesty could hardly be surpassed.
The fruits of his labours he dedicated “ to the Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty.” In his beautiful handwriting, as clear as print,
his MS. can be seen in Melbourne Public Library, with its elaborate
title page ;
“ A VOYAGE TO TERRA AUSTRALIS undertaken for the
purpose of completing the discovery of that vast country, and prosecuted
in the years 1801, 1802, and 1803, in His Majesty's ship the “ Investi-
gator,” and subsequently in the armed vessel “ Porpoise ” and “ Cumber-
land ” schooner. With an Account of the shipwreck of the “ Porpoise ,”
arrival of the “ Cumberland ” at Mauritius, and imprisonment of the
Commander during six years and a half in the Island. By Matthew
*“ It has appeared to me that to show the direction and strength of the winds,
with the kind of weather we had when running along those coasts would be
a useful addition to the charts .... This has been done by single arrows,
wherever they could be marked without confusion; they are more or less
feathered proportionate to the strength of the wind intended to be expressed
and the arrows themselves give the direction;” single arrows indicating the
winds, and double arrows the tides and currents.
“ On land the shading of the hills gives a general idea of their elevation,
and it has been assisted by saying how far particular hills and capes are visible
from a ship’s deck in fine weather .... Behind different parts of the coast
is given a short description of their appearance, which it is conceived will
be gratifying to scientific and useful to professional men. The capes and
hills whose positions are fixed by cross bearings taken on shore or from well-
ascertained points in the track ” have “ distinguishing marks.”


Flinders, Commander of the “ Investigator .” In Two Volumes wit
an Atlas.”*
Regret for Bass who had shared so many of his risks and hardships,
must have cast a shadow over Flinders’ joy in completion of his great
volumes. But he himself seemed to have reached “ port after stormy
seas.” His wife wrote proudly describing his “ tenderness and
regard “ Day after day, month after month passes, and I neither
experience an angry look nor a dissatisfied word. Our domestic
life is in an unvaried line of peace and comfort : and oh ! may Heaven
continue it, so long as it shall permit us to dwell together on this
earth. ”f
In April 1812 their only child had been born ; a daughter. After
years of anxiety, agonising suspense, much patience, faith and forti-
tude, it seemed as if the time had come for an earthly paradise of
harmonious companionship. But in his eagerness to put on paper
the results of his Australian discoveries, Flinders had allowed him-
self no rest. And as he progressed with his book so also had increased
the dire malady the seeds of which had been sown during his captivity.
Though only thirty-nine he was so emaciated that he might almost
have been seventy; and he was constantly in pain. Yet he never
seemed irritable; and his brain lost nothing of its precision and exacti-
tude. On July the 18th, the first copies of his large folio volumes
were delivered at 14, London Street, Fitzroy Square, where he was
staying to see them through the press. His wife put them on his
bed. Too late ! He was beyond seeing or hearing. The next day,
the valiant soul passed from the worn-out frame. At the last, in
delirium or a dream, he sat up suddenly and asked for his manuscripts.
Then his mind wandered to the time in the Investigator-, and he
murmured, “ It grows late, boys; let us dismiss;” and fell back dead.
To a French sympathiser his widow wrote, “You, who were in
a measure acquainted with the many virtues and inestimable qualities
he possessed, will best appreciate the worth of the treasure I have
lost, and you will easily imagine that were the whole Universe at
my command it could offer no compensation .... The company
of my little girl soothes and cheers many an hour that would other-
wise pass most wearily, but life has lost its chief charm, and the world
appears a dreary wilderness to me.”J
* “ London : Printed by W. Buhner and Co., Cleveland Row, and published by
G. and W. Nicol, Booksellers to His Majesty. Pall Mall, 1814.”
fScott, pp. 412-413.
JScott, pp. 387-398.


In the parish church of Donington his kinsfolk erected a tablet :
“ In memory of Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N., who died
July 19th, 1814, aged 40 years.
“ After having twice circumnavigated the Globe, he was sent by
the Admiralty in the year 1801 to make discoveries on the Coast
of Terra Australis, and returning from his voyage he suffered
shipwreck, and by the injustice of the French Government was
imprisoned six years in the Island of Mauritius.
“ In 1810 he was restored to his native land, and, not long after,
was attacked by an excruciating disease, the anguish of which he
bore, until death, with undeviating fortitude.
“ His Country will long regret the loss of one whose exertions
in her Cause were only equalled by his perseverance. But his
family will most deeply feel the irreparable deprivation : they do
not merely lament a man of superior intellect; they mourn an
affectionate husband, a tender father, a kind brother, and a faith-
ful friend.”*
The Country and the Government seemed not to realise the magni-
tude of his services. To Captain Cook’s widow the Admiralty had
granted an annuity of £200; equal in purchasing power to about
j£6oo to-day. But though King William IV suggested that Mrs.
Flinders should receive a similar sum, he took no measures to ascertain
whether his Ministers concurred; and she seems to have been too
proud to supplicate assistance. If the explorer’s dedication of his
work to the Lords Commissioners did not impress them, what appeal
of hers could prevail p-f-
Day by day, year by year, her life was one long vivid thought of
her husband’s grace and nobility of character, one ceaseless grief
over the apathy of the Government and the nation. It added to her
sorrow that she had not even a satisfactory portrait of him; for though
*Donington Church, a Gothic edifice with a tall spire, contains marble tablets
also to the memory of Flinders’ father, grandfather, and great-grandfather.
These were not contemporary. They were erected by request of Flinders
himself. Poor as he was, he left money by Will to provide these memorials,
for his forebears; and this again is characteristic of his generous heart.
fThose who now believe the destinies of nations are ruled by ‘ economics ’
should be reminded that the most honourable professions, the Navy and the
Army, entail much self-sacrifice and scant material reward for officers : and
that it is their preference for patriotic duty, and willingness to forego large
profits, which enable our civilian commercial men to make fortunes, while
the Services bear the chief burdens and are the custodians of public safety.
This fact is not taught clearly enough in our schools.


two artists had commemorated his features, they failed to convey
the animation and charm.
At last a rumour reached Australia that Mrs. Flinders had been
living for 38 years on the meagre pension of an ordinary Post-Captain’s
widow. The Parliaments of New South Wales and Victoria then
voted her an annuity, with reversion to her daughter. But even as
Flinders’ final volumes only reached him in print when he was un-
conscious, so the news of the benevolence of Australia did not arrive
in England until Mrs. Flinders was dead. “Could my beloved mother
have lived to receive this announcement, it would indeed have cheered
her last days to know that my father’s long-neglected services were
at length appreciated.” Thus wrote the daughter; adding that
the gift would enable her to educate her young son “ in a manner
worthy of the name he bears—Matthew Flinders.”* Born under
a more fortunate star than his grandfather, this boy, Matthew Flinders
Petrie, was to become as interested in ancient Egypt as Captain Flind-
ers had been in the virgin Continent of Australia. But though in
Australia the fame of the explorer steadily increased with the develop-
ment of the regions he so largely discovered, —his statue in Melbourne
and the memorial cairn at Westernpoint do him the honour he de-
serves, —England was a cold step-mother rather than a benevolent
parent to one of the most devoted of her sons. Even his grave has
vanished; for when the burial ground of St. James’s, Piccadilly, was
altered, many tombs were ruthlessly carted away : “ among them
that of my unfortunate father,” wrote Mrs. Petrie, in her distress
that he was “ pursued by disaster after death as in life.”f
In ours the largest and wealthiest Empire the world has ever seen,
many rich men have given lavishly to good works. The National
Maritime Museum, for instance, could not have materialised in 1937
without the solid financial assistance of Sir James Caird. But to
the majority in England today the name of Flinders means nothing
at all. With such astonishing ingratitude have we treated one of
the most self-sacrificing and constructive of our race.
The Continent of Australasia is now among the wonders of the
world. How it has matured within the last hundred and thirty years
since Flinders died, those who have sojourned under the Southern
Cross can best testify. So instead of apologising for our Empire,
and alleging —as was lately said in London in vague general terms
*N.S.W. Parliamentary Papers, 1854, Vol. I, p. 785.
f Scott, pp. 400-401.


that we have “ much to regret,” it would be more helpful if the Life
of Flinders were to be studied in every British school. Empires
are not saved by “ economics ” but by mind and soul. Education
becomes error set in motion if it countenances the fallacy that money
is more important than men; or, as was said by a popular Professor
not long since, that happiness depends upon good health and a suffi-
cient income ! Flinders had neither; but where in the history of
English Discovery and Exploration can we find his superior ?
Though sorrow can be sorely aggravated by undeserved impecunios-
ity, and the irreparable grief of Flinders’ widow must have been daily
emphasised by the cramping poverty in which she was left, she seems
to have resembled her husband in being too deeply imbued with faith
in God to become embittered by the injustice of man.
The career of Flinders should appeal in perpetuity to all who have
in themselves potentialities for service; for to understand his character
and actions is to realise how much the many owe to the far-seeing
few. This is recognised under the Southern Cross. It might also
be realised in England,—if national education is to be worthy of our
great Empire, which, as Queen Victoria declared, is administered
“ for the good of all the peoples resident therein,” and so should
inspire us with an ardent sense of obligation both to the men of the
past and to the needs of the future.


