

THE
OPINION OF A DEIST
A Paper read Sunday Afternoon, in September , at the Free Discussion
Cosmopolitan Society , Victoria Parade, Fitzroy , Melbourne.
BY J. R: MANN-
Is the God of the Bible a creation of man’s imagination ? Has
man represented God with his own attributes magnified ? And
has he composed the book called the Bible ?
In the first epistle of John (i John iv. 12), is recorded, “ No man
hath seen God at any time.” If this statement is correft—and we
must allow it is rational, all descriptions of the personality of God
are the work of man’s imagination; for if God be what we call spirit,
I may ask, How can a spirit be seen ? for I am satisfied that very
few of the present generation believe in silly ghost stories. I use
the word God, as referring to the generally believed cause of all
life, called also the Creator; whom. the majority of the world’s
population believe to have called into being or originated all that
has ever existed or can exist; in whom we believe only from what
we regard as evidences around us of creative power and design-.
It is therefore, reasonable to assume that, if anyone records a state-
ment that God, or a God, has been sees, it is a God of his own
creation (by the faculty of imagination), or else one made by hands,
and therefore not God in the true sense of the word.
Arguing from the rational point of view that “no man hath seen
God at any time,” it follows that anyone giving what purports to
be a historical account of the personal actions of a God can only be
drawing on his imagination, or, giving an account of some impostor
by whom he has been deceived, or else, copying statements made
by some other or others, that are no more truthful than
could be. Now let us apply this logical mode of reasoning to the
book called the Bible, and ascertain if it is worthy of credit as a his-
torical narrative of events. Let us first inquire, Does the Bible
record any instances of God or a God being seen ?—research proves
it undoubtedly does, and that it even attempts to describe him, as,
for instance, the statement, in Exodus xxiv. 9-11, where we are in-
formed that 74 persons saw 11 the God of Israel" and even ate and
drank in his presence. He is described as having hands and feet,
and the account seems to imply that he could have placed his hands
upon any of those present, had he so wished ; for it informs us that
be did not do so. Now, whatever the God of Israel was, as he, or
it, was credited with having been seen, it is certain the title cannot
have been applied to the Creator of all things.
In Genesis xxxii., it is actually asserted that Jacob wrestled with
a man- wh& wished to get away from him before daybreak, but
Jacob, evidently being the stronger of the two* would not allow him
to go unless he bestowed-a blessing upon him, After prevailing


over the man and receiving the blessing he declares it was God
who wrestled with him ! for it is recorded, in the 30th verse, “ And
Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, for I have seen God face
to face and ray life is preserved.” The word Peniel means the face
of God, and the latter clause evidently had reference to what it is
pretended God said, as recorded in Exodus xxxiii. 20, namely—
“ For there shall no man see me and live ;" and possibly Jacob
was supposed to be exulting that it was not so in his case ; unless,
indeed, we take another view and consider that Jacob was not a
man, any more than the one he wrestled with, and that therefore
the clause did not apply to him ; this view, however, is only for
the wise.
It is evident, therefore, that there are records of the God of Isra-
el having been seen and even handled, and if we are to believe the
accounts given, he is like a man, having hands, feet, head and in-
testines—all, or nearly all, the portions and functions of the human
body. They are certainly ascribed to him. He is even described
as acting as a tailor for Adam and Eve, for we are informed that
he made coats of skins for them, though whether he killed the
animals to get their skins, or how he got them, is not stated. Now
1 think you must allow that, in order to make clothing, manual
labour is necessary, and the account distinctly asserts that “the
Lord God made coats of skins.”
It seems also as if he was on familiar terms with Adam and con-
versed with him, which he could not possibly do without organs
of articulation; and the account implies that Adam was so familiar
with him, that, when he heard his voice in the garden, he knew
who it was, immediately.
It is also recorded in Genesis xii. 7, that the Lord appeared to
Abraham. Now, how could he possibly do so without Abraham
seeing him and dying ?—that is, supposing Abraham to have been
a man. In Gen. xviii., it is recorded that three men paid Abram a
visit, that he set food before them, of which they partook, and from
what is recorded in the next chapter, together with what preceded
it, we are led to infer that two were angels and one was the Lord
himself. There arc other cases that Ido not think it necessary to
refer to at present, all confirming the statement that God, or a God,
has been seen, and even heard to speak. That God, we are led to
infer, was the God of Israel. Therefore it is evident that, as “no
man bath seen God at any time,” so far, at least, as the Bible
writers are concerned, Man has created God, even in bis own image
and likeness, and that, by the power of imagination : that is, he
formed a conception that as he was the superior animal on Earth,
the creator (if any) must be like himself in appearance, and have
similar attributes; and in this manner is the God of the Bible cre-
ated. And we find that, as man improves in knowledge, the old
barbarous ideas of God are toned down to meet the requirements
of the age in which he lives, as also are his conceptions of a future
state*


Now comes the question, Is the book called the Bible the word
of God or the manufacture of man ? I consider, and 1 think you
will agree with me, that that which comes from a divine source
should be perfect. For, if imperfect, how are we to recognise God’s
workmanship ? for if there are imperfections and blemishes in what
you profess is God’s work, you accuse him of being an imperfect
workman, and incapable of making a superior article. Now let
me inquire, Is the Bible a perfect book ? Is it without faults ?
Reverend divines and its most zealous exponents say, it is not,
They even quarrel among themselves as to the meaning of parti
cular parts : not only so—no living being knows, or is ever likely
to know, who first wrote the books of the Bible, or when or where
they were written; it is all conjecture or supposition. And can we
be expected to believe its contents upon such a treacherous found-
ation ? Surely not! No reasonable being should expect it. To
pin our faith to a book of absurdities (<i), of contradictions ( b ), and
of delusions (c), simply because those who make their living by
asserting it to be God’s word do so assert! Surely no ration-
al being arrived at years of discretion should accept it on such
grounds 1 To me the contents of the book, taken literally, appear
to be a libel on the character of all that can be called God ; it is
full of blasphemy against him. Did we wish to believe the God
of the Bible perfect, the accounts of him given in the book would
not allow us to if we used our reason. It undoubtedly accuses him
of giving vile instructions by the mouth of his prophets (i), it also
represents him like a weary man (2), as persuaded by man to
alter his intentions (3), as sorry for his actions (4), giving orders and
then angry because they were obeyed (5), as angry with the merci-
ful for extending mercy (6), as acting unjustly (7), as allowing
slavery (8), as sanctioning crime (9), as favoring murderers (10), and
actually, as assisting in destroying a people fleeing before their per-
secutors (n). And now, though much more might be brought forward
to show the light in which Bible authors represent their God, enough -
(0) Talking serpent—Gen. iii. Talking donkey—Num. xxii, 28. Jonah and
the whale—Jonah i. 12. etc. and Matt, xii, 40. /
(1) Contradictions—l John iv. 13; Exod. hit. 9-10-14, and in many other
places.
(c) Those who accept all the s’atemsuts in the Bible literally are undoubtedly-
deluded—Think of the account of Lot’s wife turning into salt (Gen. xix. 26) l—
of Noah’s flood I—of Samson’s feats of strength, etc., etc.l
(1) “ Destroy and have no pity ” —Deut, vii. 16.
(2) Gen. ii. 2 ; Exod. xx. 11—God rested.
(3) Exod xxxii. 9-14—Moses persuades God. v
(4) Gen. vi. 6—" It repented the Lord”—
(5> Baalam—Num. xxii. 20-22.
(6) 1 Sam. xv. 7-11 —Angry with the merciful,
(7) 1 Chron. xxi. 8-IL—David’s census.
(8) Gen.xvii, 13-21—Slavery.
(9) 1 Bam. xv. 3—The case of the Amalekitc?
(10) Mdses. tlimueL Ehud. Jael, etc.
11) Jojh. a, 11 Destroying a fleeing people


616L10
[ — I Q. 3
jV
has been presented to convince any man of average ability, who
will take the trouble to investigate for himself, that all the allegations
made respecting what is in the Bible are true ; and, consequently,
the Bible is man's invention. There is nothing in the book to show
it to be otherwise ; and we may safely conclude that they who in
simplicity believe the statements of its exponents are like men who
grasp at shadows and lose the substance: they are no wiser than
the poor Pagans whom they condemn and smile at for their absurd
ideas; they can claim no more authenticity to their sacred writings
than can the others; their book contains stories quite as ridiculous,
and it is, from beginning to end, purely and simply imposed upon
simplicity. They never allow Reason to have full sway and carefully
investigate from a critical stand-point the statements made by the
authors of the book : for remember, that when they attempt to do
so, their sincere belief in its divine authorship prevents them from
forming a correCt judgment as to the statements made. When
others draw conclusions unfavourable to the authors, the believers
raise a howl of indignation that their fetish should be thus ruthless-
ly handled, and the more simple and zealous they are, the more
are they liable to be stirred up to a state of fanaticism in which
they are capable of allowing their worst passions full sway and of
aCling in the manner attributed to the followers of the God of the
Bible who, in the barbarous days of the past, destroyed man, woman
and child of those who differed from them in religious opinion, and
carried their frenzy so far as even to destroy the'unfortunate cattle
of their enemies. Alas, poor blinded ones! With the veil of
mystification before their eyes, they are fed on imagination, and
that is their reward.
1 will now put the substance of the argument in syllogistic form.
/Yf First Syllogism.
man hath seen God at any time."(i John iv. 12.)
i. TUiPiPfijm. any man who testifies that God has been seen is
a liar, or mistaken
4*. Some of the authors of the book called the Bible state that
he has been seen they are liars, or mistaken
Second Syllogjsm.
1. A book whose author or authors records 4yi»g statements is
not to be trusted. s
2. The book called the Bible contains lsuag statements.
3. Therefore the Bible is not to be relied on.
In conclusion, if any Christians read this, I should like them
carefully to compare the statements made with the accounts in the
book in which they believe; and, if they think the statements
wrong and would like to debate the subject, I am willing to prove
them true upon any public platform in Melbourne or suburbs.
Thos. OArboll, Printer, 19 Bourse Street,' Melbourne, . ‘
fa*
- NOV 1992
\\ O J*A


&ow comes the question,-Is the book called the Bible the word
of God or the manufacture of man ? I consider, and I think you
will agree with me, that that which comes from a divine source
should be perfect. For, if imperfect, how are we to recognise God’s
workmanship ? for if there are imperfections and blemishes in what
you profess is God’s work, you accuse him of being an imperfect
workman, and incapable of making a superior article. Now let
me inquire, Is the Bible a perfect book ? Is it without faults ?
Reverend divines and its most zealous exponents say, it is not,
They even quarrel among themselves as to the meaning of parti-
cular parts : not only so—no living being knows, or is ever likely
to know, who first wrote the books of the Bible, or when or where
they were written: it is all conjecture or supposition. And can we
be expected to believe its contents upon such a treacherous found-
ation? Surely not I No reasonable being should expeCt it. To
pin our faith to a book of absurdities (a), of contradictions (&), and
of delusions (c), simply because those who make their living by
asserting it to be God’s word do so assert! Surely no ration-
al being arrived at years of discretion should accept it on such
grounds 1 To me the contents of the book, taken literally, appear
to be a libel on the character of all that can be called God : it is
full of blasphemy against him. Did we wish to believe the God
of the Bible perfect, the accounts of him given in the book would
not allow us to if we used our reason. It undoubtedly accuses him
of giving vile instructions by the mouth of his prophets (i), it also
represents him like a weary man (2), as persuaded by man to
alter his intentions (3), as sorry for his actions (4), giving orders and
then angry because they were obeyed (5), as angry with the merci-
ful for extending mercy (6), as aCting unjustly (7), as allowing
slavery (8), as sanctioning crime (9), as favoring murderers (10), and
actually, as assisting in destroying a people fleeing before their per-
secutors (11). And now, though much more might be brought forward
to show the light in which Bible authors represent their God, enough.
(а) Talking serpent—-Gan. iii. Talking donkey—Num. xxii. 28. Jonah and
the wbale—-Jonah i. 12. etc. and Matt. xii. 10. ,/
(*) Contradictions —1 John iv. 12; Exod. xxiv. 9-10-14, and in many other
places.
(c) Those who accept all the s'atements in the Bible literally are undoubtedly
deluded—Think of the account of Lot’s wife turning into salt (Gen. xix. 26) 1—
of Noah’s flood I—of Samson’s feats of strength, etc., etc.l
(1) “ Destroy and have no pity ” —Deut. vii. 16.
(2) Gen. ii. 2 ; Exod. xx. 11—God rested.
(3) Exod xxxii. 9-14 —Moses persuades God.
(4) Gen. vi. 6 —" It repented the Lord”—
(5> Baalam—Num. xxii. 20-22.
(б) 1 Sam. sv. 7-11—Angry with the merciful.
(7 ) 1 Cbron. xxi. 8-IT David’s census.
(8) Gen. xvii. 13-21—Slavery.
(9) 1 Bam. xv. 3—The case of the Amalekitc?
(10) Mdses, SamueLEhud. Janl, etc.
11) Josh, a, 11 Destroying a fleeing people


BisUo
t — 13. SI st 3
has been presented to convince any man of average ability, who
will take the trouble to investigate for himself, that all the allegations
made respecting what is in the Bible are true ; and, consequently,
the Bible is man's invention. There is nothing in the book to show
it to be otherwise ; and we may safely conclude that they who in
simplicity believe the statements of its exponents are like men who
grasp at shadows and lose the substance: they are no wiser than
the poor Pagans whom they condemn and smile at for their absurd
ideas; they can claim no more authenticity to their sacred writings
than can the others; their book contains stories quite as ridiculous,
and it is, from beginning to end, purely and simply imposed upon
simplicity. They never allow Reason to have full sway and carefully
investigate from a critical stand-point the statements made by the
authors of the book : for remember, that when they attempt to do
so, their sincere belief in its divine authorship prevents them from
forming a correct judgment as to the statements made. When
others draw conclusions unfavourable to the authors, the believers
raise a howl of indignation that their fetish should be thus ruthless-
ly handled, and the more simple and zealous they are, the more
are they liable to be stirred up to a state of fanaticism in which
they are capable of allowing their worst passions full sway and of
acting in the manner attributed to the followers of the God of the
Bible who, in the barbarous days of the past, destroyed man, woman
and child of those who differed from them in religious opinion, and
carried their frenzy so far as even to destroy the'unfortunate cattle
of their enemies. Alas, nonr hlinH#»d ones ! With the veil of
Eire fed on imagination, and
argument in syllogistic form.
!sm.
time.”(i John iv. ia.)
s that God has been seen is
called the Bible state that
they are liars, or mistaken
s records 4yi»g statements is
C
ins iyie# statements,
relied on.
d this, I should like them
ade with the accounts in the
they think the statements
bjedt, I am willing to prove
Melbourne or suburbs.
lie Street," Melbourne,
