

£T-0 --P
lituiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiii
Historical COorks
Hubert Hotue Bancroft
IH THEIR RELtHTIOH TO THE
Progress and Destiny of the Pacific States
liitiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiifiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!


Yol.
I. Central America...
((
u
Vol.
VI
Vol.
I. Mexico
U
((
Vol.
IX
Vol.
II Mexico
U
((
Vol.
X
Vol.
II. Central America.
u
u
Vol.
VII
Vol.
III. Mexico
ii
u
Vol.
XI
Vol.
I. North Mexican
u
u
States and Texas..
C i
((
Vol.
XV
Vol.
I. California
“
ii
Vol.
XVIII
Vol.
I. Northwest Coast...
u
ii
Vol.
XXVII
Vol.
II. Northwest Coast..
a
u
Vol.
XXVIII
Yol.
IV. Mexico
((
a
Vol.
XII
Vol.
V. Mexico
CC
“
Vol.
XIII
Yol.
II. California
u
u
Vol.
XIX
Vol.
III. California
a
n
Vol.
XX
Vol.
I. Alaska
a
ec
Vol.
XXXIII
Vol.
IV. California
a
a
Vol.
XXI
Vol.
V. California
u
n
Vol.
XXII
Vol.
I. Oregon
n
a
Vol.
XXIX
BANCROFT’S WORKS.
ORDER OF PUBLICATION.
The publishers of the works of Hubert Howe Bancroft announce the
following as the order of publication.
The Native Races Bancroft’s Works, Yols. J-V
Vol. I. British Columbia... “
Vol. 111. Central America. “
Vol. I. Popular Tribunals. “
Vol. 11. Popular Tribunals “
Vol. VI. Mexico “
California Pastoral “
California Inter Pocula “
“ Vol. XXXII
“ Vol. VIII
“ Vol. XXXVI.
“ Vol. XXXVII
“ Vol. XIV
“ Vol. XXXIV
“ Vol. XXXV
Bancroft’s Works are published as a rule, in chronological order, but
not in numerical sequence. When all are issued, they will run consecu-
tively from I. to XXXIX. Each division of the subject, or history within
a. history, bears its own numbers as a complete part of the whole series.
The volumes appear in the order in which the subject naturally presents
itself, that is, the order in which the volumes would naturally follow
one another were the Pacific States all of one nation or government.
The Native Races, the first five volumes of Bancroft’s Works, cover
the entire field. Though it need not be read first, as a whole, it is an
apt introduction, leading up to and flowing into the history (proper) of
the Pacific States. While following the narrative in the volumes from
VI. to XXXIX., the reader may also, by reference to The Native Races ,
pursue that most interesting of all investigations, the study of the social
conditions and customs, the arts, industry, architecture, the myths,
traditions, and languages, of primitive peoples. Thus he is able, at
pleasure, to draw from The Native Races at any point as he advances
through the History.
As a further explanation of the order of publication as announced, it
may be stated, the first points , touched by Europeans on the North
American Continent, were the Isthmus of Darien and parts of the coast
thence northward. Naturally, then, the History of the Pacific States
opens with the History of Central America, which covers the period
from 1501 to 1530. But instead of the second volume of Central Amenca,
the first of Mexico comes next, because the period involving the con-
quest of Mexico, that is, 151(5 to 1521, is included within the period of the
first volume of Central America. Then, instead of proceeding with the
second volume of Central America, which is from 1530 to 1800, \ve
issued next the second volume of Mexico, 1">21 to 1600, and then Vol.
11. Central America , and after that Vol. HI. Mexico, 1600 to 1800. Then
Vol. 1. History of North Mexican States and Texas, down to 1800. Tlu*
early history of Texas constitutes part of the history of Mexico. In this
volume, and in Vol. 11. of the same subdivision, the affairs of Texas are
most fully delineated. Having thus brought all of Mexico and Central
America down to the year 1800, we proceed north, and issue Vol. I
California , 1542 to 1800; then Vol. I. Northwest Coast, 1543 to 1800; then
Vol. 11. Northwest Coast, 1800 to 1346. The narrative then runs on in
Mexico IV. and V. to 1863; California 11. and HI. to 1840; Alaska;
California IV., to 1846 ; California V., to 1848 ; Oregon 1., 1834 to
1848; British Columbia ; Central America HI., completing this topic.


THE HISTORICAL WORKS
HUBERT HOWE BANCROFT,
IN THEIR RELATION TO THE
PROGRESS AND DESTINY OE THE PACIFIC COAST.
At the dnwn of civilization there were set in motion two human
streams, which took opposite directions from the Asiatic cradle
of the race; one flowing eastward through India and China to
the Pacific coast of Asia, and the other flowing westward through
Europe, and across the Atlantic, finding its way finally over the
new-found continent to the Pacific coast of America. Here both
must forever rest, their further progress being barred by the
same great ocean. Conquest and colonization on any consider-
able scale are at an end. The world is for the most part occu-
pied by the dominant races, at least all the better portions of it.
There are no more good, fertile lands in the temperate zone to
be had for nothing, or at merely nominal prices. >
The first-mentioned current of humanity, proceeding eastward
from Egypt, or Armenia, reached the eastern border of .Asia at
a comparatively early day, and before any very high plane of
intelligence or refinement had been attained. And in this half-
civilized, stagnant state the people of eastern Asia have ever
since remained. Very different was the fate of the other stream,
which became cleansed and purified all along its course. To
the arts and refinement of Greece were added the literature
and learning of Rome, and the practical inventions of western
Europe; so that when the men of Spain and England first stood
upon the shores of the Pacific, they were second in energy and
intelligence to none the sun shines upon. Here, indeed, was a


grand beginning for a great commonwealth, or rather for a num-
ber of commonwealths. What visions of empires filled the
brain of the chivalrous Spaniards, under Vasco Nunez de Bal-
boa, as they first gazed upon the placid waters of the South
Sea! And how was fired the enthusiasm of Hernan Cortes, as
he built ships on the western coast of Mexico for northern ex-
plorations ! Later the friars of St Francis marched along the
shore, and established their line of missions from San Diego
to San Francisco Bay. Then men of Anglo-Saxon origin crossed
the continent farther north, and hunted for furs in the region
drained by the River Columbia; establishing posts north to
Fraser River and beyond. Missionaries also came to teach
the tribes of the Willamette, and those living on the tributaries
of the great rivers to the North. Gold was on every side dis-
covered, and men, who afterward became settlers, came rush-
ing in for immediate riches. And on the coast nearest Asia,
the Cossacks from Russia landed, after a century-march through
Siberia. Thus was European occupation established through-
out the Pacific portion of North America, and thus it happened
that the men who laid here the foundations of empires were
among the most intelligent and enterprising in the world.
And in regard to the fitness of these lands for the occupation
of man, surely there is no fairer or more healthful strip of
earth than this western terminus of migrating civilization.
Of these Pacific States of North America, including within that
category Texas, Mexico, and Central America, and onward
along the Pacific slope to Alaska; with fertile soils and tem-
perate airs; a protecting range of mountains in the background,
while opening in front upon an ocean whose waters wash the
four corners of the earth; with agricultural possibilities almost
unlimited and millions of mineral wealth yet unearthed —there
may be made an imperial paradise. What benefits and bless-
ings of nature are here lacking that may be found on any
other part of this planet? With such a people so environed
there is no reason why there should not in due time appear on
these shores nations among the foremost in the world; nations
that shall dominate the world; nations whose history will be
of vital interest, not only to the people themselves, but to the
world, as any which have hitherto been written. To some it
may seem that Greece and Rome and England have exer-


cised a broader and deeper influence upon the destinies of
man than will ever Mexico or Oregon, Texas or California;
but we cannot tell. We cannot tell how near the all-know-
able and eternal may yet come to man, nor on what chosen
spot of earth will the sublimest culture next favor. The
civilizations of antiquity flourished while yet the world was
small, and thought circumscribed. When Utah shall have
had three or five thousand years of national life, perhaps her
annals will tell of more benefits to the race than those of Egypt
can now boast. But aside from any question of relative impor-
tance, what can be of more transcendent interest and value to a
nation than its own early history, Avhich tells of its origin, its
growth, its trials and temptations, its failures and successes,
the almost insurmountable obstacles it has overcome, and its
final prosperity and happiness? Men gather gold and sit down
to count it; they seize lands and cultivate them; they build
houses and fill them—calling it all wealth, and the nation hav-
ing many such members, rich and prosperous. But the true
wealth of a nation lies in its accumulated experiences, its
storehouses of knowledge, and the hearts and minds of a free
and intelligent people. These are the kind of acquisitions that
history encourages; the quality of development that history
accomplishes. What is a nation without a history —without its
experiences placed on record to be preserved in an enduring
form? Even half-civilized peoples have their holy book, their
national book, half superstition, half invention, though always
containing something true of their past; and savages have
their myths, though they may not record them. It is one of
the strongest instincts of man thus to remember and preserve,
to recite or read, the doings of his forefathers. Thus it is that
as the world makes history, men are found to record it. As
soon as they can write, and long before, they seek to place in
permanent form the annals of their nation, and the deeds of
their ancestors. The conditions are vastly different under
which the histories of the several peoples of the world have
been begun and carried on. Some histories have no beginning,
no clearly defined starting-point, being obscured by the mists
of antiquity; others have knowledge of the nation’s inception,
tne causes that engendered it, and the hour of its birth.
• The advantages to us of the recorded experiences of the race
3
BANCROFT'S WORKS.


are manifold and obvious. With a knowledge of the origin of
human societies, and the ways and means by which they grow
and become great and prosperous, we may learn to adopt their
virtues and avoid their errors. It is the possession of such
knowledge that constitutes the difference between civilization
and savagism. Further than this there is palpable and direct
money value in it for the nation, and for every individual hav-
ing a stake in the country, this placing on the shelves of every
important library in the world, and in the hands of thousands
of intelligent and influential men everywhere, a full and re-
liable account of what has been, what is, and what may be.
If this be true —and no intelligent person will for a moment
question the general correctness of the proposition —then the
labors of the historian are second in importance to none, and
they should be intrusted only to able and truth-loving men.
Let us glance briefly at the life and literary undertakings of
Mr Hubert Howe Bancroft, and see what just claims, if any,
he may have as an earnest and honest historian.
% Mr Bancroft was born at Granville, Ohio, the sth of May
1832, His younger days were spent in work and study. At
the age of sixteen he entered a bookstore in Buffalo, New York,
as clerk. In 1852 the proprietor sent him to California to
open business there. Having strong and intelligent literary
tastes, he began at once collecting everything within reach on
the history and physical features of the country of his adoption,
though with no definite object in view. He saw that on the
Pacific coast was already well begun the building of empire
on a magnificent scale. Material for the history of the repub-
lics and states thus planted could then be secured, and saved,
much of which would otherwise soon be lost. To many impor-
tant and still unrecorded events there were yet remaining
living witnesses, who would soon pass away, carrying much
valuable knowledge with them, unless it was by some one
rescued from oblivion. Much could then be saved, which, in
ten or twenty years, would be forever lost.
Mr Bancroft saw all this; and although he felt that one man
in such a vast field could accomplish but little, yet he would
do what he could. There was no one else at hand to attempt
the labor, or even to assist in it. All were eager after money,
and indeed, Mr Bancroft had his fortune to make before he


could accomplish his grand purpose, for he was still a young
bookseller with very limited capital.
As his business prospered, he applied himself to the task in
good earnest. He purchased every book, map, and manuscript
printed or written within his territory, or elsewhere, relating to
it, that could be found in California and Oregon, in Mexico
and Central America, and in the eastern United States He
visited Europe several times, searching thoroughly the chief
cities in person, and appointing purchasing agents there. Six
years thus passed, during which time were secured 10,000
volumes, among which were most of the standard chronicles,
such as Oviedo, Peter Martyr, Las Casas, and Goraara, with all
the later standard histories, like Herrera, Robertson, and Ala-
man, with large collections of printed documents, such as Ter-
naux-Compans, Izcabalceta, Documentos Ineditos, and the
like, and also many original manuscripts. Next, and while
still continuing the work of general collecting, Mr Bancroft
began taking the dictations of pioneers, settlers, and statesmen;
going out himself and sending his assistants, until the leading
men, those who had helped to make the history of their coun-
try, throughout the entire length and breadth of his vast terri-
tory, had been invited to contribute their experiences. This
labor resulted in thousands of manuscripts containing the
deeds and reminiscences of as many living witnesses, all of
course absolutely original, and nowhere else existing. To these
were added copies of county, state, and national archives,
made at a great expenditure of money; while huge piles of
original documents, public and private, were secured from
other collectors, and from the descendants of old and patriotic
Spanish families, whose members had some time played an
important part in history. These were collected and bound in
in thick folio volumes, and constitute the most invaluable
material for history.^
The field thus covered is equal in area to one twelfth of the
earth’s surface; and we venture to assert, that never since the
world was made, have the early annals of any nation or im-
portant section been so thorougldy, so conscientiously, and so
intelligently gathered. This statement is made not without
reflection, nor in a boastful spirit. It is given simply as a fact,
and one capable of the fullest demonstration. We do not say


that a hundred others might not have done the work as well or
better than Mr Bancroft; or that a hundred others did not see
golden opportunity slipping from their grasp; we simply affirm
that he alone seized upon the occasion, and stepped in and
accomplished the task at the only time and in the only way in
which it could be thus so fully and successfully accomplished,
and that timely labor of such quantity and quality has never
been performed for any other people.
f To elucidate: this work of collecting has been going on for
twenty-five years. The collection numbers 50,000 volumes,
and additions are being made at the rate of about 1,000 volumes
a year. It constitutes a magazine of priceless treasures, which,
if properly preserved, is destined to exercise its influence upon
this coast throughout all time. Some of the territory covered
dates its history back four hundred years ago, more than a
century before the pilgrim fathers landed on Plymouth Rock;
but the greater part of it was comparatively new when Mr Ban-
croft began his labors. The whole country was old enough to
have a history, but not so old that the beginning of things, by
diligent search, could not be found. There were at the time
many men living who had contributed of their intelligence and
energy to fashion the early history of their country, and there
are some such yet remaining, though they are rapidly passing
away. The work of collecting could not have been successfully
begun much earlier, as there would have been nothing to collect;
it could not have been longer delayed, or much of it would
have been lost. And again we assert, that how much soever
has been left undone, what is done has never been equalled in
any other age or nation. For the greater safety of the collec-
tion, Mr Bancroft, in 1881, erected a two-story, fire-proof build-
ing on Valencia street, in the city of San Francisco, where his
literary labors are at present conducted. Thus was consum-
mated the work of collecting—of creating, we might almost
say —this library; for large portions of it were called into
existence by Mr Bancroft; and other considerable portions, but
for him,'would ere this have dropped into oblivion. At an
almost infinite outlay of labor and pains, of time and money,
by one man, unaided by any individual society or government,
innumerable human experiences have been gathered, which
cannot fail be of the greatest benefit to mankind for genera-


tions to come; and if this were all, we might safely say that
Mr Bancroft had successfully accomplished one of the most
important labors possible for man to engage in.
But this is not all. Very far from it. All that had been
accomplished thus far was but preliminary to yet greater un-
dertakings. In its crude and original form, the knowledge Mr
Bancroft had gathered could be of but little practical value to
the people at large; it must first be thrashed and winnowed,
and the precious grains separated. To this end Mr Bancroft
determined to write a series of historical works in 39 volumes,
which should embody such historical information as was worth
preserving, and which was originally contained in the entire
library. This would place within the reach of all, in compact
form, and at comparatively small cost, the sum and essence of
this magnificent collection, which had been gathered from the
four quarters of the earth at the cost of so many years of labor,
and so matiy hundreds of thousands of dollars in money.
Something, however, besides time and money must be forth-
coming properly to write history. Had Mr Bancroft the abil-
ity ? This remained to be proven. He himself did not know;
he had an almost overwhelming desire, for he regarded the
writing of history as one of the highest occupations of man;
but he could only make the endeavor. This important ques-
tion is being answered to-day, as the volumes of his history
appear, by the press of America and Europe, wherein is paid
him the highest tributes of praise. Nor have the brightest
scholars of the world, such as Draper, Dana, and Lowell in
America, and in England, Helps, Lecky, and Herbert Spencer,
been backward in their acknowledgments. It is universally
conceded that the clear and condensed narrations of Mr Ban-
croft, from such a wealth of original material as was never be-
fore dreamed of by any writer of history, and which, were it
accessible to all, would be wholly beyond the reach even of its
possessor except by methods originated and employed by Mr
Bancroft, and which will be herein shortly explained; it is uni-
versally conceded, we repeat, that history so written from
material so gathered, and by a method so thorough, must for-
ever constitute the foundation of Pacific States history, the
bottom facts of our historic superstructure, built from the


ground upwards, and which never can be ignored or under-
mined.
The grand central figure of Mr Bancroft’s literary undertak-
ing is the History of the Pacific States of North America. In-
troductory to the history is The Native Races of the Pacific
States, in five volumes, vol. I. being devoted to the wild tribes
of the entire territory; vol. 11., the civilized nations of Mexico
and Central America; vol. 111., Myths and Languages; vol.
IV., Antiquities; vol. V., Primitive History. Then comes the
history proper, subdivided as follows: Central America, 3 vols.;
Mexico, 6 vols.; North Mexican States and Texas, 2 vols.;
Arizona and New Mexico, 1 vol.; California, 7 vols.; Nevada,
Colorado, and Wyoming, 1 vol.; Utah, 1 vol.; Northwest Coast,
2 vols.; Oregon, 2 vols.: Washington, Idaho, and Montana, 1
vol.; British Columbia, 1 vol.; Alaska, 1 vol/ The series con-
cludes with the following supplementary volumes, all on kin-
dred topics, but which could not be embodied in the history
proper; namely, California Pastoral , being life and society
under the missionaries from Mexico, 1 vol.; California Inter
Pocula , or times during the gold-mining epoch, 1 vol.; Popular
Tribunals , 2 vols., containing the doings of Vigilance Commit-
tees; Essays and Miscellany; and Literary Industries , or the
history of Mr Bancroft’s literary labors. All these works are
written in an interesting and attractive style, and so as to
command the attention of both old and young. {
Mr Bancroft had been collecting some ten years before he
fully made up his mind thus to place his priceless information
within the reach of all, in the form of thoroughly condensed
and well-written history. Once determined on this course,
he set about its accomplishment with all the energy of his
nature. He had spent thus far, not counting his own time or
travelling expenses, some $300,000, and the writing and put-
ting in type of his proposed series would involve an outlay, in
addition to many long years of the severest toil and self-denial,
of over $400,000 more. The cost of manufacturing the books
from the stereotype plates must be added to these amounts.!
‘lt was the severest labor of the kind ever undertaken by a
private individual. There are few governments which would
not hesitate over the outlay, even to accomplish such magnifi-
cent results. But there is no government in Christendom, even


were it willing to spend the money, that could accomplish the
results. It required the single-minded efforts of a brave, de-
termined man; of a man at once willing, able, and possessed
of the means sufficient for the purpose. Besides courage, an
iron will, and presistent application, he must have a true and
heartfelt love for the work; an enthusiasm that no difficulties
could dampen and no discouragements extinguish; and he
must have the health which would carry him through the
ordeal. These are conditions which no government possesses,,
involving qualities which no money can buy. All the re-
quired conditions and qualities could not be found in one man
out of a million. Business instincts and experience were as
essential as literary tastes and intellectual ability; there must
be time as well as inclination; habits of application were as
necessary as stores of physical strength; the work could no
more be accomplished without money than without mind;
hence it to say, that if Mr Bancroft had not undertaken
this work, no one else would have done so, for in him alone
seems to have been centred all the requirements.
But with all the qualifications, and all the other conditions
provided for, how was it possible to accomplish in a single life-
time work sufficient to occupy one man at least three hundred
years? Authorship involves something more than the min-
gling with a magic wand of time and money, and the speaking
into existence of a series of thoroughly digested and well-exe-
cuted volumes. After due consideration, having resolved on
the undertaking, Mr Bancroft turned over to his brother, Mr
A. L. Brancroft, the active management of a large and success-
ful business which had been built up, still retaining his interest
in the same, however. He then engaged a score of competent
assistants and went to work. First the entire library was in-
dexed as you would index one book. This occupied on an
average six persons for ten years, and cost over SBO,OOO. It
was the only means possible by which the several topics re-
quired could be reached, and all that the several authors had
said on each incident or subject brought together. Another
set of men would take the references thus made by the indexers
and abstract the information, which was called rough material.
Still other and more competent assistants arranged and
revised this rough material, sometimes dividing it into chap-


ters; sometimes writing chapters from it; so that by every and
all means the work might be placed in the hands of the author
in as advanced a state as possible. Mr Bancroft then rewrote,
and revised until the work was finished. Many of the more
important volumes and parts of volumes he worked out with
the greatest toil alone, not trusting any one even to take out the
material in the rough. It is impossible fully to explain all the
means and experiments, the failures and successes, by which
the results were reached. The difficulty of obtaining compe-
tent assistants was a serious drawback, as out of every hundred
tested not more that one would be secured who could work to
the general plan, evolved after years of labor from the neces-
sities of the case.
There were maps to be made, and the incoming works of
new authors to be examined and compared with what bad been
written, often involving months of revision, even of matter
already in type. Some further idea may be gained of the
thoroughness of the work, however, when we say that the
entire series, notes and text, was compared with the original
authorities by still other men, after the work had been put
into type, but before the pages were stereotyped. In a word, the
means for the accomplishment of the purpose had to be devised
as the emergencies arose; and it is safe to say that only by
the employment of this or a like method could the work ever
have been accomplished. It was a heavy strain upon his health,
which several times gave way; but an iron constitution carried
him through, until the completion of the herculean task was
placed beyond a contingency.
In the matter of patronage, Mr Bancroft does not present
himself in the guise of a mendicant. He has given his time,
and has poured forth his money freely; he would not recall
any portion of either. No thought of the cost, or of the returns,
entered his mind in embarking in the work, except the general
one that it would absorb the greater part of his fortune. 4 He
had been fully taught, by his experience as a publisher, that
literary work of this kind does not pay. He feels, as is most
natural, that if he has accomplished a meritorious work, he
would like the approbation of his fellow-men; if he has con-
ferred an important and lasting benefit on his country, and on


every individual member of it, he claims that his services
should be recognized.
Now, we ask in all earnestness and honesty, ought not these
literary undertakings of Mr Bancroft to be supported and en-
couraged? If the work was worth doing, if it is, as is claimed
for it, and as the leading scholars and scientists throughout
the world do not hesitate emphatically to pronounce it, well
and thoroughly done, is it not a mistake in several ways for
good men to withhold from it their support? It would cer-
tainly seem so, and for these reasons: first of all, it is men
like this and work like this —men who will do something bene-
ficial to the commonwealth, which no one else will do, and
work which is elevating and improving to the minds of old
and young —that make the difference between a free, enlight-
ened, and progressive people, and an illiterate, unintelligent,
revolutionary, and non-progressive people; lienee they cannot
afford to pass by and give the cold shoulder to such effort as
this to benefit themselves and the community —-else they are
not high-minded and liberal men. Schools, and colleges, and
seminaries of learning are supported by public and private
means for the purpose, of educating and informing the young.
Governments employ historians and scientists, as well as gen-
erals and statesmen, and print their writings at a heavy cost
to the people. Money enough to found a university has been
expended on this work, and judiciously expended; not the
public money, but the private means of one individual only;
and it would be well to mark this, that Mr Bancroft has never
asked nor received aid from any government, society, or indi-
vidual, nor would he accept aid were it offered. He merely
desires the better and more intelligent class to avail them-
selves of the benefits of his labors, and to express their opinion
of them by taking a copy of the volumes into their houses and
reading them, and giving them to their children to read.
Thus will they exercise an influence in this community and
throughout the world —an elevating and educating influence
equal to that of a dozen universities.
As a matter of fact, arguments are unnecessary to prove the
value to the community, and to individuals, of Mr Bancroft’s
work, and the necessity of supporting such efforts. The man
is yet to be found who says tha + such a work is useless, need-


less; that it is not in the highest degree desirable; further than
this, the man is yet to be found who says the work is not well
and thoroughly done. Minor criticisms have been made; but
what are these beside the most extravagant praise? It is not
claimed for the work that it is perfect; nothing is perfect in
this world. But the chief object and effort of the author
throughout his entire labors have been absolute accuracy and
impartiality, freedom from error, and from religious and politi-
cal bias. Indeed, the system by which he works prevents
them from being far from right, for he goes by his authorities,
and gives the authority for everything he says. According to
the evidence, therefore, his works cannot be inaccurate. It
being admitted, then, that the work is one that ought to be
done by somebody, and that somebody has come forward and
accomplished it, and accomplished it well, no one will for a
moment say that it ought not to be supported; no one does say
so. No one says that it is not a work that every American
should be proud of, or that it is not a work which they should
have in the house, and in the hands of their children.
As regards the cost, a book is the cheapest thing in the
world. We do not realize what the printing-press does for us.
For four or five dollars a volume, one can secure what is equiv-
alent to the entire results of Mr Bancroft’s expenditure of
over half a million of dollars, and a quarter of a century of
time/ The volumes the purchaser obtains are just as valuable
in themselves, convey just as much information, and exert as
powerful an influence for good as if they were the only copies
in existence. Books are not like houses, or any other kind of
property. You cannot print houses; you have to build each
one separately from the beginning, and one costs but little-
more in proportion than fifty. If but one copy of Mr Ban-
croft’s books had been made, the cost of it would be, in time
and money, a million of dollars. These are simple facts and
figures, without exaggeration, and easily understood by all.
When the matter is thus placed before good and intelligent
men, we do not believe they will say they cannot afford to buy
these books They will say, rather, that they cannot afford
not to buy them; and they will have a pride, and a very lauda-
ble pride, in taking the volumes as they come out, in having
them in their houses, where they and their families can read


them, and they will speak to their neighbors in terms of com-
mendation of the author, and the works which he has done.
One word more, in conclusion. There are some who say
they will take the work when it is done; that it is a good
thing, a most desirable thing, in fact a necessity, and they cer-
tainly will have it in time. This fails to accomplish the pur-
pose, either for the purchaser, the publishers, or the author.
The purchaser wants the volumes to read now, as they appear;
the publishers want a list of subscribers in order to enable
them to meet the heavy expenditure of placing the volumes on
the market, and the author wants appreciation and acknowl-
edgment now, and not ten or twenty years hence, when it will
be of no benefit to him.
There are some who would subscribe for part of the series,
but do not care to take the whole. There are several reasons
why the set should not be broken. First, it is one work, though
issued under several titles, and should be read with the vol-
umes so far as published, all at hand, there being necessarily
frequent cross-references. Secondly, as a complete work, it has
a permanent pecuniary value to the publisher, which, divided,
the several sections would not have. The purchaser may rest
assured that the publisher will never offer the work for sale at
less than the published price; therefore, it will always possess a
commercial value should he ever wish to dispose of it. Again,
there is a benefit to all, in each having the entire set. If it is
well for Oregon that her history should be in the hands of
the people of Texas, then it is well for Texas that her history
should be in the hands of the people of Oregon. Xo iponey or
reputation that any single state could afford to give would be
an inducement for any one to write its history, as Mr Bancroft
is doing it, and place it in all the principal public and private
libraries of the world. But in purchasing the full set, the citi-
zen of Nevada or of British Columbia is assisting the author
to write the history of their country, and the publisher to place
it in the hands of influential persons who would never otherwise
have it.
And finally, the moment the works are offered to purchasers
in subdivisions, the efforts of the publishers to place the work
in the hands of intelligent and progressive men throughout the
world, thereby exerting the greatest influence and securing the


greatest benefits to the country whose history is thus given,
must cease; the expenses of so placing the works would far
exceed the sales. In other words, we have to sell the works
only in complete sets or Cease our efforts in that direction.
The objection raised by some during the earlier stages of
publication, that possibly the volumes may never all of them
be published, has been met by the prompt appearance of the
several volumes thus far in such a way as to inspire confidence
for the future. Three fourths of the work is already done, and
the remainder as good as done. In a word, the publishers are
prepared to assure subscribers of the completion of the work
beyond question.
Any doubt of this must have been dispelled by the attitude
of the historian after the terrible disaster of the 30th of April,
1886. On that day, a sudden fire consumed the publishing
house of A. L. Bancroft & Co., and their entire stock of goods,
in which were included about 9 volumes of plates of Bancroft’s
Works and a great number of printed volumes. The loss to
Mr Bancroft, the historian, in the destruction of property in-
dispensable to the carrying on of his work, was enormous; the
shock was sufficient to have paralyzed any one but a man of
his unparalleled devotion to a life-task. Without hesitation or
wavering, he met the emergency with a strength and a spirit
peculiar to him all through his enterprise. His first thought
was to re-establish the department which is occupied with the
publication of Bancroft’s Works; that this might be done, no
sacrifice was considered too great. The remnants of a vast
publishing business were brought together and piled upon the
altar of the history. The rehabiliation of this department first
of all, after the disastrous conflagration, ought and we believe
will, commend Mr Bancroft’s labors more closely than ever to
the attention of his fellow-citizens.
His work will be completed as announced in the beginning
and according to the original design. To students of history
and an enlightened public it would seem that he cannot appeal
in vain for that intelligent consideration and hearty sympathy
which the character of his work and his personal efforts so
clearly entitle him to.
v V


WHAT IS BEING SAID OF MR HUBERT H. BANCROFT AND HIS
LITERARY WORK.
STYLE.
“His style is clear and without affectation, recalling the straightforward
simplicity of Herodotus.”— London Westminster Review.
“ He writes well and gracefully,”— New York Sun.
“I am full of admiration at the immense reading it displays, and at the
singular, vivid, and graceful English in which that reading is expressed.”—
W. H. Lecky .
“The work is intensely interesting. Mr Bancroft's style is clear, his
arrangement of materials judicious, and his symmetry admirable.”— Chicago
Journal.
‘ ‘ Striking passages are welded together with a logical cohesion so strict
that it is alrapst impossible to detach them.”— New 1 ork Herald.
“I am particularly pleased with the sharp, condensed form in which the
facts are given.”— Oliver Wendell Holmes.
“Mr Bancroft’s style deserves great commendation.” — S. F. Bulletin.
‘ ‘ The information has been digested into a flowing and entertaining narra-
tive.”—New York Observer.
• ‘ Clear, concise, forcible, and well adapted to the requirement of modern
students. ” — Overland Monthly.
ABILITY.
“He has applied the scientific methods of history-writing in a manner
never before dreamed of.”— Record-Union.
“Beyond all the patient labor in marshalling details, Mr Bancroft shows
also a sound, healthy literary judgment.”— Atlantic Monthly.
“ He has investigated with the most conscientious care and criticised with
no little skill the enormous mass of official documents which in different ways
relate to his subject; and he has digested the results of his laborious toil into
a narrative clear, logical, and attractive.”— London Times.
“You have handled a complex, sometimes even tangled and tautological,
subject, with much clearness and discrimination.”— J. R. Lowell.
“The plan of the great work has been honored in the execution.'— Daily
Oregonian.
“ It is a monument of well-directed industry and great ability.”— Edinburgh
Scotsman. ,
“A lasting monument to the scholarship and ability of its author. —Louis-
ville Courier-Journal.
“The industry, the sound judgment, and the excellent literary style dis-
played in this work cannot be too highly praised. It stands quite alone of
its class in this department.”— Boston Post.
“Mr Prescott was carried away by his vivid imagination, and errs in ex-
cess. Mr Morgan errs in the opposite direction. Mr Bancroft avoids both
extremes. Without such preliminary work as that which has been done by
Mr Bancroft, a history would be impossible.— Edinburgh Review.
“ The manner in which you have sifted and weighed the testimony, derived
as it is from various and sometimes contradictory sources; the penetration
and impartiality you have displayed in discarding whatever is erroneous or
doubtful, and accepting that only which is well authenticated —would be cred-
itable in a judicial investigation.”— J. Ross Browne.
“Never was a large library more thoroughly ransacked or more completely
laid under tribute by a writer.”— The Nation.
“When Mr Bancroft expresses opinions of his own, or discourses on the
bearing and significance of the observations of others, he performs the part


of the enlightened critic with much shrewdness and modesty.” —London
Telegraph.
“Every reader must admire the single-heartedness with which he devotes
himself to the investigation of facts. His volumes are really a marvel ot
research and discrimination. Although he does not conceal his consciousness
of a mission, he shows no trace of the credulity with which specialists are
apt to pursue the inquiries to which they have devoted their lives. His sound
judgment is no less apparent on the pages of his work than his indefatigable
diligence and supreme self-devotedness. No one but an enthusiast could
grapple with such a task, but his enthusiasm is without weakness, and is in-
spired by the pure love of knowledge, not by the caprices of sentiment.
Hence it is of the quality demanded for the successful accomplishment of one
of the foremost literary enterprises of the day.” —Nevj York Tribune.
“ What good sense, painstaking labor, and honesty in purpose can hope to
achieve, Mr Bancroft has accomplished.” —London Standard.
“Nothing seems to have been too minute to escape his eyes.” —Boston
Transcript.
“The history of literature does not contain many examples of a grander
literary purpose, a more thorough preparation, or a more successful achieve-
ment.”—Boston Congregatiofalist.
THE WORK.
“One of the most notable in our literature.” —Literary World.
“I am finding your collection of facts very valuable for my own more
immediate ends in writing the Principles of Sociology. ” —Herbert Spencer.
“The wonder and admiration of all literary men; and will be a lasting
monument of the indomitable energy and perseverance of a man who is de-
voting the best part of his life to enrich the literature of the world by giving
to it a correct history of this hitherto almost unknown and incomprehensible
part of the globe.”— J. M. Hamilton.
“Magnificent work.” —Charles Darwin.
“A solid one.” —Max Muller.
“Exceedingly interesting and important.” —Thomas Carlyle.
“One of the noblest literary enterprises of our day.” —John G. Whittier.
“ The project seems, now, to have been no less well considered than daring.
Especial good judgment has been shown in balancing conflicting authorities,
and in drawing a conclusion from disagreeing witnesses. Mooted questions
are discussed with such a fulness of information as to compel assent to the
conclusions cautiously drawn.” —New York Post-Nation.
“No one has yet attempted, and it is not too much to say that no one is
likely to attempt, to compete with him in work on such colossal plans, or
carried through with such Napoleonic enterprise. The resources at his com-
mand, the employment of men, and the expenditure of money, time, labor,
scholarship, and far-reaching investigation, are beyond anything ever known,
except in the audacious plan on which this work is conducted.” —New York
Independent.
1 * For giving unity and harmony to the plan by which a chaotic mass of
material was moulded into history, the author has earned the thanks of his
countrymen. ’’—Popular Science Monthly.
“Mr Bancroft’s work is well known in England. A list of those interested
in it would be identical with a list of those interested in ethnological science.”
—Sir John Lubbock.
“ His achievements are amazing. Every American ought to have Mr Ban-
croft’s volumes.” —Francis Parkman, LL, D.
“'The work is all well done. The author’s style is clear and nervous; his
temper calm and judicial. Mr Bancroft has apparently narrated facts as he
found them, and passed judgment with every intent to be just, fair, and dis
passionate. ” —Boston Pilot■


“ His style has a simple dignity which cannot fail to impress the reader, and
make him feel that besides knowledge and patience, it has that crowning
excellence which comes from the command of fitting words. ” — Chicago Dial.
“The continuous publication of such a work is a literary event, so unpre-
cedented and important, that no record or summary of the signal incidents
of the time can omit it. ”•— George William Curtis (in Harper s Weekly).
“As a history of the western half of North America, it covers the whole
subject so completely as to preclude any future attempt to rival it. ”—Balti-
more Sun.
I “ Mr Bancroft stands conspicuous among the few men who have been will-
ing to give up money-getting for literary research—to devote their fortunes,
as well their time, to the cause of letters.”— New York Commercial Advertiser.
‘ ‘ Each volume gives evidence of the completeness of the material used, and
exhibits the clear and interesting style of the author.”— The Australasian.
“Graphic and vivid chapters appear throughout every volume of this long
procession; and the skill with which material points are made salient, and
immaterial facts subordinated, is worthy of high praise.”— The Century. •
“A monument of literary and historical industry.”— A. R. Spofford.
“It is simply fascinating.”— Clarence King.
“An interesting work, conveying great profit and instruction.”— Sir John
Luhhock.
“It is a production of almost incredible labor, of excellent arrangement,
and admirable execution, everywhere betraying the union of quiet enthusiasm
and sound judgment which have been exercised in its preparation.”— George
Ripley.
“Of surpassing interest, and of a value great and constantly increasing.”
Hartford Courant.
“Interests readers of every class.”— Christian Union.
“A very valuable addition to the history of the American continent.”
Boston Advertiser.
“ A monument that will cause his name to be remembered ages after he has
ceased to be in the flesh.”— The Guardian.
“It is safe to say that there has not occurred in the literary history of the
United States a more piquant surprise. ” — Scribner s Monthly.
“The work forms one of the most valuable contributions of modem times,
and should have an honored place in every well-selected library.”— Journal
of Science.
‘ * His completed work will be reckoned among the most precious treasures
of our literature. ” — Literary World.
“Your work has taught me a great many things. It needs no nraise from
me. It will be consulted and read centuries after you are gone/’— Jno. W.
Draper.
“ It is worthy of special attention by the historical student and the general
reader.”— Boston Globe.
“A more interesting book has seldom been put in our hands, containing a
mine of information of which we confess we were utterly ignorant. ” — Land
and Water, London.
“A fascinating tale.”— Vallejo Chronicle.
“The book contains a wealth of information, and its interest is quite that
«f an entrancing romance, notwithstanding the severely accurate manner in
which the author deals with his subject.”— Miltvaukee Sentinel.
“The plan sketched is a magnificent one, and a substantial contribution
will be made to the realized knowledge of the world.”— Family Treasury,
London.
“The history of this book, as well as its contents, is of public interest.”
The Academy, London.


“The most unique and extensive literary enterprise ever undertaken in any
country by a single private individual.”— Buffalo Advertiser
“Beyond all ordinary forms of praise.”— San Francisco Chronicle,
“It is certainly a worthy scheme, and is being carried out most conscien-
tiously.”—London Spectator.
“It is a labor the value of which will be more clearly seen as time goes
by.”— Baltimore Gazette.
“The chapter which Prescott devotes, in his Conquest of Mexico, to the
manners and customs of the Aztecs, is the most attractive in his attractive
book, and that has hitherto been the best source of information upon the
matter, within reach of the general English reader; but it is now thrown
into the shade, at least so far as comprehensiveness of treatment is concerned,
by Mr Bancroft’s labors.”— Alta California.
“ Ademas del merito incontestable de la obra, hay otro muy grande en las
notas, y el libro ofrece nueva utilidad como tabla general de las cosas de
America. No ha querido V. presentar solamente el resultado de sus inmensas
investigaciones, sino que tambien ha querido dar a otros los medios de tratar
las mismas materias, bajo diferente punto de vista. — Joaquin Garcia Icaz-
halceta.
“ A clearer and more truthful picture has never yet been produced.”—Lon-
don News.
PERSONAL.
“No tribute can be too great to the industry and research of the author.”
British Quarterly Review.
“Mr Bancroft’s manner is calculated to give us confidence. — London Satur-
day Review.
“Mr Bancroft’s motto is ‘Thorough.’ His mind is of the German cast.”
Charles Nordhoff.
“Mr Bancroft is the historian for whom we have all been looking, and we
may count ourselves fortunate in finding him so worthy of his task. '—The
Galaxy.
“To Mr Bancroft we tender cordial congratulations, with assurances of
our sincere appreciation of the ability, candor, and research which charac-
terize every step in the progress of his great work. ” — New 1 ork Independent.
“He has done more than any public society would have done for fifty
years to come, and what perhaps no society could do at any later period. ’ —
P. B. Avenj.
“We question whether it'has ever fallen to the lot of one man to conduct
so successfully so colossal a literary enterprise.”— Boston Journal.
“Won the praise of Herbert Spencer and Sir Arthur Helps in England,
and that of all interested in the subject in that country, and of very many in
Germany and France. The praise was well deserved. — Philadelphia (razette.
“I am glad to see your work welcomed in Europe as well as in your own
country. In the universality of your researches you occupy a field of the
deepest interest to the world, and without a rival. — Georye Bancroft.
“The projector of such an enterprise can have no sordid motive; a very
limited endowment of sagacity may perceive the futility of pecuniary return
awaiting work of this character.”— The Examiner.
“What a godsend such a devotee would have been for the Atlantic coast
a hundred years ago !” Wendell Phillips.
“lam amazed at the extent and minuteness of your researches. William
Cullen Bryant.
“What strikes me most in it is the exceeding fairness with which he treats
the researches and the theories of other inquirers into subjects akin to his
own.”— Sir Arthur Helps.
“Children yet unborn in the Golden State of the Pacific will rise up and


call him blessed, who has left them such a rich inheritance.”— Santa Crm
Sentinel.
“You have done yourself and your State great honor.”— Samuel L. M
Barlow.
“I am amazed at your courage and perseverance in working your way
through such a chaparral of authorities as you quote. Your labor is im-
mense.”—Henry W. Longfellow.
“ ‘God bless such workers ! ’ says Charles D. Warner, and we heartily say
the same,”— Literary Renietv.
“The Macaulay of the West.”— Wendell Phillips.
LATER NOTICES.
“ One is carried along from the very first page by an impetuosity which is
at once charming and irresistible. The interest is immediately awakened,
the attention promptly fixed. There is something in the dash and flow which
in itself attracts and excites The present volume is a marvel of indus-
try and hard work. The material collected, the authorities consulted, the
skill with which all have been collected and arranged, and the attractiveness
of style in which the whole has been presented to the public, merit the high-
est praise. The narrative abounds in incidents of exciting interest and facts
of great importance —social, historical, and political; rendering this latest
literary achievement of Mr Bancroft a work attractive alike to the general
reader, the historian, the statesman, and the sociologist. ” — London Morning
Post.
“ We hardly know which to admire most—the marvellous patience and per-
severance of the author, or the scholarly learning and just and discriminating
judgment which is displayed. The style is one that should be followed by
historians. It is clear and forcible, and the manner in which he has chroni-
cled the events is masterly. ” — Liverpool A Ihion and Telephone.
“ We are bound to offer our tribute to the author for the enormous indus-
try indicated, and for the style in which the work is being carried through. ”
—Glasgow Herald.
“ His style is at once vigorous and suave; descending now with Hume into
the profundities of philosophic thought; now soaring with Ruskin into the
realms of poetic fancy, or breaking forth frequently with the unmistakable
brilliancy of genius. He shows ability in depicting the beauties of nature,
and in portraying character and motive. Nor does he fail in the subtleties
of sarcasm; and in the use of classic allusions he shows a prudence admira-
bly distinct from the affectation of mere sippers at the Pierian fountains.
Tnough precise like Gibbon, he avoids his formality; though massive, he
rounds his acute stateliness. America may well be proud of her western his-
torian, who must take his place with the foremost of the age.”— Sacramento
Record- U nion.
“His research, no less than his vivid and graceful style, has extorted the
admiration of Mr Lecky and Mr Herbert Spencer; and the present volume
bears abundant traces both of his laborious collection of materials, and of his
power of using them in the construction of a narrative of fascinating inter-
est.”—London Daily Hews.
“The vivid narrative flows on with astonishing ease and power. There is
not a dull page in the book.”— The Continent.
“ Y our method of study is absolutely the only way of accomplishing the
vast undertaking which you have entered upon—one of the most remarkable
in literary history. The example of wealth successfully devoted to a high
intellectual object will lie a benefit to the whole country; and the throwing
of so much enterprise and energy into such a channel will go far to remove one
of the stigmas of our American civilization. ” — Francis Parkman.
•“ Mr Bancroft is a remarkable man. His volumes are rich and attractive,
and crammed full of good learning. It cannot be read in haste, particularly
if one wishes to get at the substance of the notes as he goes along, which have


so much real historical meat in them. The Columbus portion I have enjoyed
thoroughly. It seems to me the author’s aim is truth, and not eulogy. Hav-
ing previously studied somewhat the subject of the early maps, I was partic-
ularly interested in his long note on that important His criticisms
on those writers who had previously gone over his groanrt, or a portion of it,
seem fair and generous. The introduction to this book is a marvellous piece
of generalization.”— Charles Dean, LL.D.
“ The advance volume you sent me has been eagerly examined, and proves
more than I dared to hope—full of interesting facts, well marshalled, the nar-
rative well sustained, and the basis of profound, exhaustive knowledge of the
whole ground apparent everywhere. ” Wendell Phillips. * •
“Probably there is nothing in the world which exactly corresponds in
value, in interest, in abundance, and in completeness, with this priceless
library. Both hemispheres have been searched for treasures to fill it, and
with such results that there is no country on the globe for whose early his-
tory such ample material has now been brought together as for that of Cali-
fornia. The Native Races gave Mr Bancroft at once a distinguished position
as an investigator, and it is not too much to say that his additions to our pre-
vious knowlege of the civilization which the Spaniards found on the Pacific
Coast were so important and so interesting that they seemed like disclosures.
He is now recognized as an authority of the first rank. Mr Bancroft has had
access to a multitude of documents which were unknown to the earlier his-
torian, and has followed a method much more searching afid precise than
suited Irving’s temperament. As a consequence, we have a narrative which
is practically new, abounding in picturesque detail, and presenting the tragi-
cal romance of discovery and conquest with a particularity and vividness it
has never possessed in any previous record. The story is well constructed,
and in spite of the profusion of incidents, it is clear, it is interesting, and it
is animated. Of the writer’s sincere regard for the truth there cannot be a
doubt. To the history proper he prefixes a brilliant introductory chapter
upon Spanish character and civilization at the period of the conquest; and
this is followed by the story of Columbus, and an exhaustive and admirable
summary of geographical knowledge and discovery from the earliest record
to the year 1540. We might copy specimen pages almost at random without
danger of doing Mr Bancroft injustice, for he is never dull.”— New York
Tribune. * f
“As Bacon took the co-ordination of all knowledge for his province, so
Mr Hubert H. Bancroft has taken the co-ordination of all western North
American history for the task-book of his literary ambition. Designing to
present a series of full and accurate histories of the Pacific States of North
America from their discovery and settlement by Europeans down to the
present time, he preluded that great -uidertaking by the publication of his
magniC cent volumes on the Native h aces of those States—-a work which, on
its first appearance a few years ago, commanded for its author the highest
applause in mouths of the wisest censure, and which will ever remain as a
monument to the writer’s intelligence and industry.”— New York Herald.
“The narrative, while never sacrificing photographic exactness to vivid
coloring, or cold fact to brilliancy, is of absorbing interest, and reads like one
tong romance. ” — Syracuse Herald.
“He does not stand much in awe of traditional reputations, and seems
determined to state frankly the facts as he finds them, and never hesitates to
express his own conclusions, The author’s brilliant and picturesque narration
will attract readers, and his outspoken positions will attract the critics. ”
Hartford Courant.
‘ ‘ Hubert H. Bancroft is getting to be noted alike as a careful, industrious
historian, and a collector of very valuable books and manuscripts. The com-
prehensive scope and detail of his work are both unusual. His new book is a
marvel of painstaking research and accuracy. ” — Philadelphia Times. //
Mr Bancroft has pursued a most scholarly method in the arrangement oi
his work. He is conscientious and sagacious in his balancing of authorities.


and his frequent classical allusions show a deep study of ancient and modern
authors.”— S . F. Post.
“He is the Herbert Spencer of historians. His diligence in collecting data,
his painstaking in arrangement, his accuracy of statement, as well as the
vastness of Ids undertakings, contribute to give him a place among historians
similar to that occupied by Mr Spencer among sociologists. His style is
energetic, strong, and picturesque. His judgments are justs; his conclusions
follow from the facts, and his narrative is almost invariably of unflagging
interest. Not only do the American people and the historical student owe
to the author a large debt of gratitude for this work, which one not possessed
of enthusiasm and historical genius, as well as patience, would never have
undertaken, but many governments of Europe, whose explorers set foot on
the Pacific Coast, should feel the obligations under which they are placed. ”
Boston Journal.
“Open the book at random, and interesting matter greets your eye. The
style is good, and the pages fairly glisten with incidents. Not a dull page
between those covers—young and old will delight in it. The contents are
fresh and new; not even Prescott can claim more homage from the reader
than should be given Mr Bancroft for his noble beginning of a noble en-
deavor to be truthful and captivating at the same time. — Pittsburg Telegraph.
“I take pleasure in calling your attention to Mr Hubert H. Bancroft’s
History of the Pacific States. The volumes already issued, as indeed the greater
part of the work, treat of times and events of great interest to the Catholic
world. I am assured that five out of the seven volumes on California will be
devoted to tlie history of the country under Missionary regime, nine tenths
of which has never appeared in print, being drawn from government and
archiepiscopal archives, and from private and wholly original sources. The
histories of Central America and Mexico are altogether of Catholic countries,
societies, and institutions. It has been carefully noted in the volumes already
in print that the distinguished author has treated all subjects bearing on
church history or religion with both great ability and candor, which
guarantees the assurance that as a History of the Pacific States it will compare
favorably with the best literary productions of the kind. I intend to enrich
my diocesan library with this interesting work, as I should deem it incom-
plete without it.” + J. S. ALEMANY, A. S. F.
“His methods of writing history are nothing less than royal./ Judged
purely and simply as a literary performance, there is the highest praise to be
awarded to this history of Central America. Too much praise cannot be
given for his candor, his spirit of equity, and love of truth. The book grows
more and more interesting until the final page. The work, as a whole, is
superb, and calls for genuine enthusiasm. We are proud that such an under-
taking has arisen in this land—an undertaking which will surely add no less
glory to our literary history than Prescott’s or Irving’s immortal work. ” —■
Philadelphia Press.
“Of the thoroughness of his research, the indefatigableness of his spirit,
the enthusiasm of his temper, the honesty of his mind, the independence and
candor of his judgment, there can be no question.”— Literary World.
“This work is so thoroughly that of a man possessed of his subject, anxious
to read it in all its lights, to search out its sources, and trace its hearings,
that it will not fail to captivate the general reader, as well as arrest the
attention of the scholar, who will be interested in the presence some of the
heroes of history make in the unqualified light turned upon them.”— Albany
Times.
“A shining current of history streams through the pages. For hundreds
of pages this book burns with the infernal record of religious crime. The
historian writes through it with his pen afire; the reader shudders through it,
his heart sick and his eyes ablaze. While this book lives, the memory of the
hapless Indian and his unequalled wrongs can never die out of the conscious-
ness of mankind. The style is, upon the whole, admirable. It is vivid and
truthful as expressive of the idea. Much of it touches a high eloquence.


Pictures stand out sometimes, each from a single felicitous word. The his-
torian frequently suggests the picturesque groupings of Carlyle without any
of his outlandish dressing of words. You see the thing which is sought to be
presented, and the eye is not too much caught by the pigments. Some-
times the long oar-sweep of words is exchanged for a fine sententiousness.
Thus, ‘ Discipline begotten by necessity engenders strength; which, fattened
by luxury, swells to weakness; ’ and the analysis of the Castilian, from which
we have just quoted, is throughout as cool and clear a chapter of scholarly
exposition as it has been our good fortune to see for many a day.”— S. F.
Bulletin.
“For the intellectual and social elevation of California, Mr 11. H. Bancroft,
in his historical labor, has essayed to do what only the generations that arc
to be will fully appreciate, but which, in its aim, its methods, its material,
its workmanship, is worthy of unqualified praise.”— Charles Dana Barrows.
■<“ Never, I am sure, was a'great literary enterprise undertaken with such
prodigal and comprehensive auxiliaries.”— E. B. Haskell, Editor Boston Herald.
“Your work is well done, and it will be to you a monument far more
honorable and more enduring than could be constructed by the hand of art
from material substances.”— James A. Waymire.
‘ ‘ I regard your representation of the degree of culture attained by the
Aztecs and Mayas as entirely correct, and hope that the facts presented by
you will assist in defeating the absurd theories proclaimed by Morgan and his
followers. ” — Dr Charles Rau.
“My researches have led me over much of the field you treat about in your
published volumes, and I can testify personally to the extent and accuracy
of your investigations. Your views as to Maya and Aztec civilization are
correct beyond all question, and cannot be disputed by any unprejudiced
student who will go over the evidence in their favor.”— D. G. Brinton.
“I believe Mr Bancroft to be the most systematic literateur in this country,
and that his industry is incomparable. The history which he is writing is
one of great interest to the general reader and of greater value to every
student, whether he be merely an ethnologist or a general historian. ” — J. W.
Buel. j
“Seven or eight years ago Mr Hubert H. Bancroft, of San Francisco, sur-
prised the reading world with his Native Races oj the Pacific States, wherein
he gave astonishing glimpses into an antiquity rivalling that of Egypt, and
disclosed the little-thought-of fact, that what is called the New World is,
quite as likely as not, the old one, ethnologically as well as geologically. That
work was regarded as a marvel of research, and justly so, in comparison with
most works in the historic field, and had the further credit of investing
a naturally dry theme with a singularly living interest. This was at once
accepted as a standard work, and its author thought to have fixed himself
among the first historic writers of the day. But the work of collecting ma-
terial relating to the Pacific States of North American went on after the
completion of that work, until the author has now collected a library of more
than thirty-five thousand volumes, all relating to that region, and he has pro-
jected and begun a historical work of colossal proportions. So far as is
known, business methods, as they may be called, have never been applied on
so complete a scale, to the preparation of such a work. The result is marvel-
lous—marvellous in respect to the amount of labor which one man is thus
enabled to accomplish within a given time. The value of the history, consid-
ered as a whole, depends upon the master-mind which directs the whole —upon
its capacity to group facts and generalize from them. This breadth, vigor,
and clearness of mental grasp, Mr Bancroft has in an eminent degree. For
the first time, the story of the beginnings of Spanish occupation of America
is put into a connected and lucidly arranged form in the English tongue. A
large portion of the cited authorities has never hitherto been known to the
world. Bancroft has unearthed old state and ecclesiastical manuscripts,
of whose existence all traces had been lost, and has thrown a fiood of light
upon subjects which have seemed forever obscured. This is notably so in two


or three points. For example, it has always seemed a most extraordinary
th ng that Columbus should meet with the failures which attended his coloni-
zation enterprises, and the repeated neglects and abuses of those in power, if
lie was indeed the ready-to-be-canonized saint that Irving, for instance, paints
him. Mr Bancroft makes the matter clear. With judicial fairness he shows
the weak as well as the strong points of the man’s character, and one sees
clearly how the very characteristics that lead to his success as a navigator and
discoverer totally unfitted him to be either soldier or politician; and, com-
bined with unquestionably unjust treatment, made the latter part of his life
full of almost, or quite, insane delusions. Among the most interesting fea-
tures of the work are the copious bibliographical foot-notes, many of them
containing criticisms, nearly always bold, original, acute, of Irving, Prescott,
and other authors; but criticism which, however fearless and incisive, is
always frank and good-tempered. It would be a pleasure to follow the begin-
ning of this colossal undertaking further in detail, but it is impracticable
here. vThe day will come when the beginnings of the history of the vast em-
pire, yet in its babyhood, on our Pacific slope, will be studied more curiously
than that of any other part of the world, and no other work can ever hope to
rival that of Mr Bancroft as the standard authority. It presents evidence
of wide and patient research; it is generalized with remarkable breadth of
view; it is clear in statement, lucid in arrangement, and last, but by no means
least, it is pervaded with a flavor of living, breathing interest in its author,
which makes it interesting to the reader. In fine, the completed work, fin-
ished on the scale of this opening volume, will be worthy to take rank with
the very best of modern historical works, with points of superiority to nearly
all of them.” —Chicago Times.
“So vast is the field opened up by such a plan that one would doubt the
ability of a single man to do more than skirt its borders; but Mr Bancroft
has proved in his previous work that he has reduced the writing of history to
an exact science. Endowed with large means, with unusual executive abili-
ties which enable him to direct and make use of the labor of a large corps of
intelligent assistants, he is really in a position enjoyed by few literary work-
ers. flle is enabled to do more in one year than the ordinary historian can do
in a decade. Mr Bancroft has an eminently practical way of looking at his-
tory. There is no effort made to bolster up a man or a creed, as we find in
Macaulay and Froude; there is absolutely none of that ingenious work which
has been aptly called ‘ historical whitewashing. ’ The historian seems to be
free from all prejudice, free from partisan bias and rancor. Greater scope
will be given in subsequent volumes to this admirable method of impartial
criticism; but instances of it are not lacking here, and they are an earnest of
the spirit in which this work will be written.
* “Especially worthy of careful reading are the notes on Columbus, and on
the credibility of the early chroniclers. In the former he makes a keen anal-
ysis of the defects of Irving and Prescott, showing that each was a special
JHto pleader, sacrificing the truth of history to the hero he was placing on a
pedestal. The author pays a generous tribute to their work, but he shows
» that it is not history in the best sense of the word. ”—S. F. Chronicle.
“In exposing the mistakes of his predecessors, Mr Bancroft combines im-
partiality of spirit and soundness of judgment with thoroughness of research,
so that his opinions, generally, will probably be accepted by scholars as
final.”— S. F. Alta.
“The conscientious and intelligent care in the treatment of his subject
gives the best of auguries for the value of the work. The conspicuous ab-
sence of hero-worship, in the treatment of his characters, is another peculiarity
of the work. Mr Bancroft’s style is marked by a charming grace and
rhythm. -.lt not infrequently presents long-sustained examples of sentential
structure, modelled and polished by the severest rules of the schools, and it
sometimes pours itself along with a natural force and ruggedness, now and
then rising to the height of grandeur. But its generic quality is found in a
straightforward directness which seems to ignore art, but which is, in reality,
f * *' Mb-


“The volumes thus far issued commend themselves to the historical student
and the literary critic for their deep research, their conscientious and pains-
taking handling of details, and for their grace of style.”— Los Angeles Daily
Times.
“This is a most stupendous undertaking; but Mr Bancroft seems to be
adequately equipped for it, as well in the material he has brought together as
in the intelligence, industry, and enthusiasm with which he prosecutes his
work.”— Washington Evening Star.
“ His style is always clear and concise, often graphic and picturesque, with-
out attempting sensational effects. His power of analyzing events, as well as
characters, cannot be denied; and his ability of constructing a consecutive
narrative out of a chaos of incoherent material betrays unusual literary skill.
—.New York Times.
“The work has no parallel in literature.” — Henry Ward Beecher.
“As author of The Native Races of the Pacific States, Mr Bancroft has
already established his reputation as one of the most learned and industrious
historians of the present day. But comprehehsive in scope and exhaustive in
treatment as that work certainly was, it formed, after all, little more than a
general introduction to the magnificent scheme of which we have here a first
instalment. Should the writer be spared to complete this stupendous under-
taking, as briefly set forth in the preface, he will have accomplished probably
the most colossal literary achievement of the nineteenth century.”'— The Lon-
don Academy
■ “He has treated his subject intelligently as well as exhaustively, and every
evidence is given that these histories will be the most valuable for practical
use of any in the English language. ” — New Haven Palladium.
“While the history is complete and brief, and picturesque and engaging-—’
because brief—it is more: it describes the people as a whole and the countr
how the one lived and how the other looked. There are also pen-pictures c i
the principal men, which are so faithfully drawn that one feels sure ’
would recognize Cortes or know Montezuma should he meet them on the streei
and know them so thoroughly that the very method of approaching them
would come as second nature. This is history in its most perfect form, where
there is given not only a correct detail of events, but a description of the men
who brought them about, and an account of the people whom they affected.
No wider difference in this respect is found than between the methods of Mr
H. H. Bancroft and Mr George Bancroft. Both give us the fairest and ripest
historical fruits, but the first named scatters along the path of learning also
the blossoms of life.”— Rochester Herald .
“In this, the fourth volume of the History of the Pacific States, Mr Hubert
H. Bancroft gives fresh evidence of those qualities which have secured for him
a place as unique as it is prominent among the historians of the period. V.
see signs of the same marvellous industry, the same painstaking care, tlm
same minute attention to detail, the same scrupulous regard for truth, ai
the same fidelity to certain great controlling principles. In the volume before
us the author labors under some disadvantages which he has not hitherto very
largely experienced. Up to the present, almost, he has been on what might
be called virgin soil, so far at least as English literature was concerned. Here,
however, he is on well-trodden ground. It was no easy matter to give fresh
interest to a story which had been told before by such writers as Prescott and
Arthur Helps. It is no small praise to Mr Bancroft to say that in these cir-
cumstances he’has produced a really fresh, instructive, and highly enjoyable
book. Mr Bancroft has, perhaps, a firmer grasp of his subject than either;
and the present volume has all the attractions which belong to it as a related
part of a grander theme.”— New York Herald.
“The style is admirable, pure English, clear, flexible, picturesque, and ho»
mogeneous. The story is well told.’ Washington Sunday Herald.
24
Bancroft’s works.
