

'Veth
c~l if Religious pamP.
NEW EDITION. —THIRTY-FIRST THOUS.
Box I
THE COMING BA i i Ml
APPALLING NATIONAL CONVULSIONS
EXPECTED FROM SCRIPTURE PROPHECY, BETWEEN
1866 AND 1875:
Being the approximate period of the re-established Nationality of the Jews by the confirming
of a Seven-years’ Covenant between them and Napoleon, about seven years before the Arma-
geddon Battle—the Resurrection of the Righteous, and the Ascension of 144,000 watchful
Christians, about two years and from four to six weeks after the Covenant—accompanying
Great Religious Revivals—the Great Tribulation and world-wide Persecution of Protestant
Christians, and universal dominion of the Romanist Church and Napoleon for the latter three
and a-half years of the seven years—resulting terrific convulsions in England and America—
ultimate destruction of Antichrist and the ungodly by the descent of Christ with his saints at
Armageddon —ensuing Millennium of a thousand years.
WITH PROPHETIC VIEWS
Of the Rev. E. Bickersteth, J. Hooper, E. Wiuthrop, E. A. Purdon, J. H. Frere, G. S. Faber,
Viscount Mandeville, W. Cuninghame, Sir Isaac Newton, &c.
M. BAXTER, Author of “ Coming Wonders,” &c.
ARMIES OS 1 HORSEMEN MARCHING TO THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON.
MELBOURNE:
OPPOSITE CORNER TO POST OFFICE.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


THE YEAR-DAY FULFILMENT OF DANIEL AND REVELATION,
During the last “ seven times,” Dan. iv. 16 for 2520 year-days,) and 75 years (or 1335 1250 years.)—Dan. xii. 7, 12.
B.C. The 2520 years, or “seven times” (Lev. xxvi.; Dan. iv.,) the duration of the punishment of the Jews,
g, hy the dominance of the four successive Gentile Empires of Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece and Rome, the
» £ four beasts and four parts of the Image (Dan. ii. vii.) have a primary and secondary fulfilment; (1) from
o 722 b.c. to 1798 a.d. : and (2) from 647 b.c. to 1873 a.d. —(1,) About 722 b.c. the ten tribes of Israel
50 under Hosea, were all carried captive by Shalmaneser into Assyria, 2 Kings xviii.; and in 1793-8 a.d.,
c the European Revolutions introduced changes that have paved the way for the restoration of the Jews.
S (2.) From about 647 b.c., the period of Nebuchadnezzar’s birth and the close of the reign of Manasseh
eh their first kiug taken captive by the Assyrians, we may date the commencing captivity of the remaining
h two tribes of Judah, and thus the full Jewish restoration should be about 1873-4.
rH ** The 2500 years, or Jubilee of Jubilees (fifty periods of fifty years,) began about 627 b.c., 18th year of
“ Josiah (2 Chron. xxxv. 35,) probably the last Jubilee observed, and end about 1873 a.d.
The 2300 years (Dan. viii. 14) primarily began on the first day of 457 b.c. (Artaxerxes’ 7th year,) when
Ezra went up to restore the sacrifices (Ez. vii. 9,) and ended (as predicted 9 years before by Bickersteth
ivuiiun, v-iiv uuviiuvvo in, J auu cuucu j iituivutu v j uciuit uj iiuiivciUJ-l
and Miller) on the last day of 1843, which, according to Jewish reckoning, was March 20, 1844. On
o March 21, 1844, the Turkish Sultan granted liberty for religious worship in Turkey; the Jews have been
w returning to Palestine ever since. The 2300 have a secondary fulfilment from 427 b.c., when Nehemiah
£ had completely restored the sacrifices (Neh. xiii. 6.) until 1873, the full Jewish restoration.
g The 490 years, or 70 weeks of years (Dan. ix. 24,) commenced about 457 b.c. when the 2300 years began.
“ Unto Messiah the Prince,” when John the Baptist or Christ began their ministry in a.d. 27, there were
_ 69 weeks or 483 years, after which Messiah was cut off and Jerusalem destroyed.
» The ASCENSION of the Manchild (Rev. xii. 5) in its year-day fulfilment was the ascension of Christ
£ 09 at the period a.d. 29-33, whom the Dragon had sought to devour as soon as he was born (Mat. ii. 16,) and
o who (with his saints, Rev. ii. 27) is to rule all nations with a rod of iron (Rev. xix. 15; Ps. ii. 9.)
” The 70th week will begin 7 years before this Gentile dispensation ends, by (ver. 26) “the Prince that
o shall come” (Napoleon) making a seven-years’ Covenant with the Jews. Dan. ix. 27.
| Satan’s downfall (Rev. xii. 9) had its year-day fulfilment in the downfall of Paganism in 323.
Eh Seal 1 (33 to 323.) The Christian Church Militant in its primitive zeal and purity. Rev. vi. 1, 2.
J Trumpet 1. Northern hailstorm of Gothic invasions upon the Roman Empire from 250 to 365.
Seal 2 (323 to 533) Discord and Corruption in the visible Church after it was nationalised.
~ § Trump 2 (363 to 412) Renewed violent barbarian irruptions, and the sack of Rome. Rev. viii. 8.
Trump 3 (412 to 476) Poisoning of channels of instruction by heretical teachers, Nestorius, &c.
Trump 4. Extinction of Western Emperorship in 473, or eclipse of Eastern Empire 476 to 612.
o ; —— i
co The 1260 years and the 1290 and 1335 years begin here.—Dan, xii.
Seal 3 Spiritual famine & The Papal Antichrist during 1260 years (Dan. vii. 25, xii. 7; The tw
S corruption of Church aftei Rev. xi. 2,3; xii. 6, xiii. 5) prefigures the Personal Antichrist Testaments
533-8. (Napoleon) during 1260 literal days. The greater part of Reve- the two sym-
, J n be 3 t ° e T, S e f;5 lation and Daniel is fulfilled, first in year-days, and then again in boh « ; ™ tne . s :
with Mahommed’s preach- of the yeai>*day fulfilment, only on the scale of a day instead of a m sackcloth
ing. This Saracen Woe, oi y ear ; . The Pope s chief power lasted 1260 years, from 533-8, when ( un der great
Mahommedan wars of con- Justinian made him Head of all the Churches until 1793-8, when restrictions)
quest lasted twice 5 prophe- his temporal power received its death-blow, at the French Revo- during the
tic months, (Rev. ix. 5-10) lution. The 75 years (1335-1260,) from 1793-8 to 1868-73, is 1260 years of
or 300 years from 636 to 936. the period of the Papacy’s final consumption under the year-day Papal domin-
Trumpet 6 began in 1063,7 Vials. But after years from Napoleon’s Restoration of the an c y* 1 11
Seal 4. wh e n the ,j ewg> the Romish Church led by him will massacre Protestants JV93-8 4es-
Spiritual Turks crossed aU Christendom for 1260 literal-days, and then both perish ‘ r °y ed , at the
co des o 1 ation the Euphrates . ~, c A , -r, . o mi •• 7 i rrench Revo-
S 0 f Church This at the Battle of Armageddon. Key. xix.; 2 Thess. n.; Zech. lution the
from 1073 Woe continued XlV> “great earth -
CO
X
o
CD
CO
ft
C
a
a
Eh
K
H
CO
- “great earth-
period quake,” Rev.
e. 1877 ix. 13; vi.
12,) in which
> 1438 dur- twice a year J
ig the hot- and monthan
Rev. x. 6, describes the Reformation in 1517, at w’hich p
an angel declares “ there will be 360 years no longer,” i.e.
will not be reached before this dispensation ends.
test Papal (Rev. ix. 15),
persecution or 780 years,
Seal 5. until 1843—4,
14 38 t ©reaching its
The 7 Heads of the Beast (Rev. xvii. 10, 11) denote 7 “Kings,”
or forms of government over the Roman Empire: (1,) Kings;
(2,) Consuls; (3,) Decemvirs; (4,) Dictators; (5,) Tribunes; (6,)
the Roman Emperorship, (b.c. 28 to a.d. 1806); (7,) The
“the tenth
part of the
city (France)
fell,” and
1739. The height in 1453.
Church al- “ The 3rd part”
“7000 men
unurcn ai- ineorapari ~ , , t , non/? 4. iok /cm men
most extir-means prohab- Na P° dynasty under Napoleon 1. 1806 to 1815; (Bth, 0 f names
pated cries ly the territory or 7th Healed Head,) the Napoleon dynasty under Napoleon ill. ( many of the
for ven - of the Third or 1852 to 1873.—The name Louis Napoleon Bonaparte con- nobility) were
geance. Grecian Empire tains the No. 666, in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.—Rev. xiii. 18. slain.”
o
co
co
ft
o
w
3
Seal 6 (1793 —8 to 1868) opens with the French Revolution. Then 144,000 wise virgins are sealed,
Primary termination of the 2520 years, and 1260 years. (7 times and
3J times.)
The 7 Vials (Rev. xvi.) began in 1792-3, 5 years before the las) 75 years. The Ist caused the outbreak of anarchy and atheism
among the Papists. The 2nd (1793-4 ) caused terrific bloodshed during the reign of Terror. The 3rd (1795) c irrupted the chan-
nels of education. The 4th (1802) made the despotic Bmnaparie a scourge to the nations. The sth (1815) brought upon France
defeat and disappointment. The 6lh (1823 8 when the 1230-i ended) began to destroy the Turkish Empire, and will end
with the FIRST ASCENSION of 144,Qu0 Christians (I 'Thess. iv.; Rev.’ iii, 10; xiv. 4,) about or soon after 1868 and two years
and 3 to 5 weeks after the Jewish Covenant. The 7th comsists of the 3 1-2 years’ great tribulation, ending with the SECOND
ASCENSION about 7 years and 2£ months after the Cowenant (Matt. xxiv. 31,) and is parallel with 7th Trumpet and 7th Seal,
about 1868 to 1873. Then the Battle of Armageddon, thee unrepentant are slain, Christ descends and Millennium begins.


THE LITERAL-DAY FULFILMENT OF DANIEL AND REVELATION,
During the Last Seven Years, Dan. ix. 27, (or 2520 days,) and 75 Days, (or 1335 1260 days,) Dan. xii. 7,12.
ijTms Table of the events of the final crisis of seven years and 2£ months, (i.e . 75 days) will begin with
fa Seven Years’ Covenant between “the Prince that shall come” (Louis Napoleon) and many
i 4(of the Jews, (Daniel ix. 26,27; xi. 22,23,) and will end with the descent of Christ upon Mount
jg at the Battle of Armageddon (Zech. xiv. 4; Rev. xix. 19.) By the established law of pro-
n 7'phetic interpretation, a month is always reckoned to contain 30 days, and a year to contain 12 months
« Bor 360 days. (Compare Gen. vii. 11,24, yiii. 4; Rev. xii, 6,14; xiii. 5.)
£jq The Covenant will cause great sensation and widespread preaching of the Second Advent midnight
-10 The covenant win cause great sensation anu wiuespieau. preaeumg ui tnc oeuouu ziuveiit miuuignt
11 cry, (Matt. xxv. 6) and the throes of controversy and divisions in the church militant. (Rev. xii. 2.)
l?| The 2300 days (Dan.' viii. 14) i.e. six years, four months, and twenty days, begin with the full restora-
Jition of tne daily sacrifice at Jerusalem between 9 and 10 months after the date of the Covenant,
o'tion Oi tne uauy saoimoe au uaaicm uomiccu c/ mu.irao uium Utiuo Ui vurguauu,
a g and end with the complete cleansing of the sanctuary by the Lord’s descent at Armageddon,
s tj In about 1 or 2 years after the Covenant Napoleon is to attack the King of the South (Egypt) and
* ® rout his armies, but in a second later expedition is to be turned back by the ships of Kittim. In a
§ 7 third attack, he will overrun Egypt about the midst of these 7 years (Dan. xi. 25 to 42.)
§ 8 During this first 34 years of the 7 years Napoleon is to form a Conoress of Sovereigns, and gradually
®lO divide the Roman Empire territory* into ten kingdoms—namely England, France, Spain, Italy, with
li Southern Austria, Algeria, Tripoli, Egypt, Greece, Syria, and Northern Turkey—which ten democratic-
—idespotic kings will rule during the latter 34 years (Rev. xvii. 17; Dan. ii. 41.)
2 During these first two years the complete drying up of the mystic Euphrates or overthrow of the Turkish
6 3 Empire will occur ; also Syria made an independent nation. Year-day Vial 6.
g 4 The ASCENSION of the Manchild or translated body of 144,000 Wise Virgins at Christ’s Advent
K r. Hie Auvuil OXU XM OI lilt) mauuuuu Ul J-l-r, \J\JW TIWC V UJJIUS ciu VIIIISU i 5 AUVCUt
* 6in the air, and resurrection of the righteous, occur about two years and from three to five weeks after the
« 7 Covenant (Rev. xii. 5; xiv. 1-6; iii. 10; Matt. xxv. 10; 1 Thess, iv. 16.) The year-day 7th Seal, 7th
3 g Trumpet, and 7th Vial commence here with Christ’s coming, and continue about 5 years.
H io Seal 1.- —Great Revival next 10 months among Christians left on earth and new converts. Three
11 messages preached by them and probably also by persons from heaven. (Rev. vi. 2; xiv. 6, 11.)
-r Trump I.—Storms of hail, blood, and fire burning np all grass within final 4 months of third year.
2 Satan’s downfall to earth at beginning of Seal 2 brings on the Tribulation (Rev. xii. 7-13.)
a 8 Seal 2.—Universal sanguinary warfare for 7 months, beginning with 12th month of third year,
a 5 Trump 2.—3rd of sea becomes blood, and 3rd of fish and ships perish in months 1 and 2of year 4.
6 Trump 3.—3rd of fresh waters become bitter and kill many in 3rd and 4th months of 4th year.
£ 7 Trump 4.—Literal eclipse of third part of sun, moon and stars in sth and 6th months of 4th year,
a 9 Tlv ini ist of the week cf 7 years, fit. beginning of the 1260, 1290, fit 1335 days.—Dan. xii.
-P I/) ——
~ n 1 n A • 1 C 1 ,1 IO J rnu„ 4 ii
11 Seal 3. —A period of dreadful famine for 18 months from midst of fourth year. The two witnesses,
l2 Trump. 5 begins in the On the Ist day of 7th month of 4th year, Napoleon hav-Elijah (Mai. iv.)
1 midst of 9th month of 4th ing previously encompassed Jerusalem with his armies and another pro-
|year, when the bottom-(Luke xxi. 20; Ezek. xxxviii.) has his image, the abo-phet, visit the earth
« 4;less pit will be opened & ruination of desolation, (Matt. xxiv.; Mark xiii.; Dan. xi. and preach clothed
w 5 emit a great smoke. The Rev. xiii. 15; 2 Thess. ii. 4) set up in the Jewish in sackcloth, dur-
m JlWae ot literal iocusts tor Temple. Then ensues the SJ years of GREiT TRI-ing this three and
I SSote (Dam -ii. 25; xii. 7; ix- 27; a-half years. Rev.
f* io L, ev i x 5 Rev. xi. 2,3; xn. b, 14; xm. 5; Matt. xxiv. 10, 21; Mark xi. If any man hurts
11 Trumpet 6 Dan. xii. 1,) in which Napoleon (the healed them, fire proceeds
l '2 Seal 4. A pe-'the woe of* Deast) receives from Satan great authority out of their mouth
2riod of greatd es t r oyingand “power over all kindreds tend tongues and nations, and slays him. They
. 3 mortality &h ors emen, and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, have power to shut
< 1 pestilence &'who slay the whose names are not written in the book of life,” and heaven that it rain
DPVQAP.ni'.IAD Rtvl Tlfl.Tf. nf li rt c-1, ull molro rum* .rifli fliQ C!Oib+a find AWAvdAmQ -fßrrvv, 4- -P/vr* lUiu
pn g persecution, j3rd part of he shall “make war with the saints and overcome them not for this three
a 7 during all.men during f or forty-two months.” (Rev. xiii. 1—8.) Atheism, idol-and a-half years.
h q y e . ar -"" a year and atryj and massacre will reign supreme, and Christendom At its end they will
»10 J l, from become like a hell. Tens of thousands of Christians be killed, and after
living all 7t U hll2Lm S onth will be beheaded for refusing to worship Napoleon’s lying dead for three
•• year perse-'of sth year ima S e or receive his mark, which the Romish church and a-half days,
2cution slac-Rev. ix. 15. * anc l Pontiff the two horned figure, will everywhere will be raised up
s 3kens, and enforce (Rev. xiii. 11-18; xx. 4) especially in the ten and ascend to hea-
£ J Retribution kingdoms, England, France, Spain, &c. (Rev. xvii. 12.) ven. A great earth-
" (j approaches. After the 34 years Napoleon gathers all nations to quake then occurs,
§ 7 A great Revival begins in Armageddon, and with the Pontiff there perishes (Dan. and 7000 men slain.
x 9 3rd mo. of 7th year Rev x. xi. 45 ; Zech. xiv.; Rev. xix. 19.
alO Seal 6 (neatly the last 80 days.) A great earthquake and darkness. Then 144,000 Jews are
M ll sealed. -
2nd of the 7 years, Dan. ix 27, and 3£ years, Dan vii. 25, xii, Rev. xi. 2,3, &.<
The 7 Vials (Rev. xvi.) begin 5 days before the last 75 days. The first, torments Napoleon’s worshippers with grievous
sores. The second, (Is' day) turns all saltwater into blood. The third, (2nd day) turns all fresh water into blood. The
fourth. (10th day) makes the sun scorch men with fire. The fifth, (22nd day) covers France with darkness. The sixth (80th
p rt day, when the 1290 days end) begins to dry np the literal Euphrates. The seventh, (70th day) brings the last crushing strokes
Figment. Thk Second Ascension of living saints (Matt. xxiv. 31; Rev. vii. 9 ; xiv. 16,) including 144,000 Jews occurs
(with the 7th Trumpet and 7th Seal) 4 or 5 days before the Lord descends about the 1335th day, on Mount Olivet, at the
Battle of Armageddon.—(Zech. xiv.) The ungodly are themslain, the Jews and heathen converted, the Devil chained, and the
Millennium commences. (Rev. xx.; Is. ixvi.)


B. C 457 or 455 —
The going forth of the commandment
to restore and build Jerusalem.—
Dan. ix. 24.
(Ezra vii., Nehemiah ii.)
Seventy weeks {shabua,
weeks of years- Gen. xxix. k<
27) are determined (or cut $
CD
off ) upon thy people and 2
upon thy holy city, to fin-
ish the transgression, and
to make an end of sins, and —
Dan. ix. 25.
to make reconciliation for
Know therefore, and understand,
(or, cover over) iniquity,
and to bring in everlast-
mandment to restore and to build
ing righteousness, and to
Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the
seal up (i. e. ratify by ful-
filment) the vision and
prophecy, and to anoint kJ
the Most Holy (place not $
Ci
Prince, shall be seven weeks and
d
CD
CD
threescore and two weeks; the street
shall be built again, and the wall
even in troublous times.
H
g
g
person, i. e. the Holy of 3
Holies.)
TJX
tel
Messiah cut off in
A. D. 29 or 33.
A. D. 27 or 29 —
Dan. ix. 26.
►3
t >
Ana ate tlffgg|g8F8 9fid two
i
. b a ? g. 2 p .
weeks (not necessarily immediately
§ b- r f g. i s ~
after, but indefinitely, a short time
tel
■ b * § • S 5 ■
after,) shall Messiah be cut off, but
<i
• | g- r a § R | ?
not for himself, and the people of the
tel
. f a a "
Prince that shall come , (the Homans,
Kj
o sr & S et:
the nation of Antichrist that shall
come : 1 Jn. ii. 18,) shall destroy the
• % § ® a- s g k •
city and the sanctuary, and the end
4
02 i CD . VCD O
thereof shall be with a flood, and
tel
unto the end of the war desolations
are determined.
W
pc
Louis Napoleon ) —
—
Dan. ix. 27.
makes the covenant, f w
um-
And he (Napoleon III. the Anti-
*<
clirist “the Prince that shall come,”)
shall confirm a (not the) covenant
His image set up )
with many for one week ; and in the
midst of the week he shall cause the
in the temple, 1 p
CD
sacrifice and the oblation to cease,
gy>-
and for the overspreading of abomi-
fcO Kj
nations he shall make it desolate,
P
He perishes at {? 3
even until the consummation, and
that determined shall be poured
Christ’s descent * —
—
upon the desolator.
N.B.—The above-mentioned periods of 2,300, 1,333), 1,290, 1,260, and 360 days have a double fulfilment—
both year-day and literal-day—in common with the greater part of Daniel and Revelation. And although
fulfilled typically as years according to the precedent in Numbers xiv. 31, Ezek. iv. 6, yet their chief fulfilment
is as literal-days during the final seven years following- the seven years’ Covenant. (Dan. ix. 27.) Another
precedent for this is the “ seven times” (Dan. iv. 23,) which has been fulfilled not only as seven years, during
Nebuchadnezzar’s madness, but also as 2,520 years of dlemented heathenism and apostacy of the four’Gentile
Empires typified by the gold, silver, brass, and iron orf Nebuchadnezzar’s image—namely, the Babylonian,
Medo-Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires—from aborat 617 8.0. to 1873-5 A.D.


THE COMING BATTLE.
“ And he (the Emperor) shall confirm a covenant with many for one week (seven years,) and in the midst of the week, Tie
shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate,
even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolator.” —Dan. ix. 27.
“ Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people
of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman: if when he seeth the sword come upon the land,
he blow the trumpet, and warn the people; then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warn-
ing, if the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head. He heard the sound of the trumpet,
and took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul. But if tha
watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and
take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the Watchman’s
hand."— -Ezek. xxxiii. 2-6.
Thb existing aspect of the world is undeniably unnatural and anomalous. The stream of
events is rushing impetuously into new and unexpected channels, like a foaming torrent
that has overtopped its banks. Indications symptomatic of some impending catastrophe are
discoverable on every side, like the whispered mutterings of an approaching thunderstorm,
or the hoarse subterranean rumblings that portend a volcanic eruption.®
“We are living in times when the Christian and the Infidel, the Statesman and the
Divine, seem to agree in the expectation that some great crisis is at hand. The public
mind, both at home and abroad, is held in the calm of a feverish suspense. New and
strange blasphemies are coming to the birth, the foundations of the State are loosing, and
the Church of God is beginning to be beset and assailed on every side.
“ Amid these thick clouds, all eyes are fixed with an eager gaze upon the dark and coming
future. But who shall unravel its mysteries? Who can decipher its solemn roll of fate ?
Who can pierce with steady eye into the depths of past history and read there, as in a
mirror, the judgment or mercy in store for after generations ? Who can expound the
strange dream of this fleeting shadowy world, or unlock to the faith of the Church the royal
treasure-house of the good things to come ? It is here that the wisdom of the world stands
rebuked, and its idols are all mute and silent. The research of its historians here proves
futile and ineffectual; the policy of its statesmen is baffled and confounded. The future
continues veiled from every worldly eye in deepest mystery; and every effort of human
pride to decipher the solemn handwriting proves utterly abortive.
“ Divine prophecy is the only light that can remove this impenetrable darkness. There
God himself reveals to His own servants the great outlines of His providence, and enables
them, by patient search, to ttace through the past and the future the grandeur and the
majesty of His high counsels of love. Here nature, providence, and grace are all combined
for their comfort and instruction in the faith in glorious harmony. In two short books of
Scripture, all nature is laid under contribution for rich and varied emblems whereby to
express the mighty course of God’s providence through two thousand years, and the
mysteries of redemption therein contained. There to the diligent search and patient study
of the humble and devout Christian, it spreads before his eyes in one vast expanse a landscape
of wondrous grandeur and surpassing beauty, and whose horizon is fringed with the bright
and dawning glories of eternity.”
a The first edition of this pamphlet was published in 1860, before the American war had broken out. Some addi-
tional emendations are introduced in the fifth edition. The extracts given from other writers are necessarily abbreviated
in some cases. FULL LIBERTY IS GIVEN TO ANY ONE IN GREAT BRITAIN, AMERICA, OR ELSE-
WHERE, TO REPRINT OR REPUBLISH PART OR THE WHOLE OF THIS WORK. Postscript in January,
1366. —It is exceedingly important during the present postal facilities for spreading information, before they are greatly
impeded by approaching wars and revolutions, to send this pamphlet on “The Coming Battle,” or the Threepenny
Abridgement of the “ Napoleon Treatise.” to ministers, especially in country places and distant colonies where such
information is not easily attainable. With this view any sums of money expressly sent for the Gratis Circulation of
these prophetic works, and addressed to the Publisher, Mr. William Macintosh, 24 Paternoster Row, London, England,
will be expended in sending these publications by post to ministers according to the printed ministerial lists of the
different denominations, as far as such contributions may enable. Similar contributions for such gratis circulation
among ministers in the American United States, will be received and thus applied by Messrs. Claxton and Co., 606
Chestnut-street, Philadelphia, U.S. Any communications for the Author, who at present is in England, will reach him
at either of those addresses. N.B.—lt is the distinct view of this treatise that the precise year of Christ’s second Coming
cannot be positively discovered, until the seven-years’ Covenant between Napoleon and the Jews shall first have been
publicly made. And it evidently has not yet been made.


But so narrowminded are most persons, that instead of aspiring to stand upon the obser-
vatory of prophecy, and with the telescope of Revelation to gaze on the enchanting scenes
of futurity, they commonly entertain the popular fallacy that it is impossible to discover the
time when the Millennium, and the day of judgment,*-and the Second Coming of Christ will
commence; and to this end they sometimes quote the passage in Mark xiii. 32, “ Of that
day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the
Son, but the Father.” It is manifest, however, that persons are guilty of the sin of
unwarrantably adding to the words of God (Rev. xxii. 18,) who explain this text to prohibit
the knowledge of the month, or year, or general season of Christ’s advent, inasmuch as the
passage only specifies “ the day and hour” to be unknown. The slightest consideration also
shows that this statement referred entirely to the period at which it was uttered, and could
not be intended to relate to the advanced period of time at which we are now living. It is
also obvious that those words were spoken in the present tense, and could not fairly have
reference to the time in which we are now living. It was not said, “No man shall know,”
but simply, “No man knoweth,’’ and, moreover, it was added, “ Not even the Son.”
Surely no one dare assert that the Son of Man does not now know the day and hour of His
own second advent, since He has ascended up to the right hand of the Father in heaven ;
and, therefore, it is evident that the application of those words was entirely limited to the
time when the Son of Man was on the earth in an unglorifled state, and cannot extend to
the present period, seeing that it cannot now be the case that not even the Son knows the
day or hour. Furthermore, the Book of Revelation was given in Patmos to St. John
sixty years after Christ’s ascension, and was bestowed by the Father for the express purpose
of foreshowing “ the things which must shortly come to pass,” and “the things which
shall be hereafter.” (Rev. i. 1-10.) Consequently we now have very much more in-
formation as to future events than was given at the time when it was said, “ No man
knoweth the day or the hour.’’ Indeed, prior to the day of Pentecost, it was distinctly
declared to the disciples, “It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the
Father hath put in His power ” —it was, however, added, “ But ye shall receive power
after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you ’’ (Acts i. 8,) and this power to know the
times and seasons began to be bestowed at Pentecost by the Holy Spirit, whose office it is
to “ show us things to come ” (Acts ii.; John xvi. 13), and by whose teaching the Church
is to increase in the knowledge of the prophecies towards the time of the end, when the
words shall be unsealed and unclosed. (Dan. xii. 4,9.) Various portions of Scripture
distinctly intimate that although hypocrites and worldlings will be overtaken unawares by
the Day of the Lord, yet, that, as the approach of summer is ascertainable from the
budding of the fig tree, so, when certain predicted events come to pass, watchful Christians
will be enabled by discerning such signs of the times to lift up their heads, knowing that
the Lord’s second coming is nigh, even at the doors. The Apocalypse furnishes a mar-
vellously exact map or picture history® of all the leading events of the Gentile dispen-
sation, between the first and second advent of Christ, Standard year-day expositors
universally admit that at least six seals, six trumpets, and six vials have been entirely or
very nearly fulfilled in their year-day accomplishment, and thus we are living on the eve of
the yehr-day seventh seal, seventh trumpet, and seventh vial, which are closely connected
with the beginning of the Millennium. The great landmark, however, to be watched for is
the SEVEN YEARS’ covenant, which, according to the last verse of the ninth of Daniel,
is to be made between Napoleon and the Jews before the consummation and millennium.
a The following is a brief explanation of the prophetic dates(l) The 6000 years from the Creation end about a.d.
1873-5. The computations of these who have most thoroughly studied the chronology of this date, such as Fynes Clinton,
Eevs. J. Scott, 11. C. Shimeall, B. Saville, C. Bowen, Drs. Seiss, Mahan, Flower, Purdon, W. C. Thurman, J. V. Himes,
•fee., all terminate it between 1862 and 1875. The Nativity of Christ was about the year 4126, annomundi, which, added
to 1874 5, makes up the 6000 years. Ussher, according to whose chronology the Nativity was in 4004, omitted to reckon
nearly 130 years in the time of the Judges. It was a general belief among the Jews and the Fathers that the millennium
wonhl commence with the personal coming of Christ, 6000 years after the Creation. (2) The 2520 years is “ the seven
times ” mentioned in Dan iv. 16, and Lev. xxvi. 18. during which the Jews were to be chastised for their unfaithfulness,
and have their kingly power transferred to the four Gentile Monarchies. A time means a Jewish year of 360 days, which,
by taking a day fpr a year, as in Numb. xiv. 34, Ezek. iv. 6, represent 360 years. The 2520 years commencing in 647 b-c.,
at the captivity under Manasseh, and at the time of Nebuchadnezzar’s birth, will terminate in 1873 5, as the period of the
full restoration to Palestine of the Jews that are spared at Christ’s Advent. (3) The 2500 years is a period of 50 times 50
years, ending with a Jubilee of Jubilees. It commences about 627 b.c., at the time of the great Passover in Josiah’s 18th
year (2 Chron. xxxv.), when the last Jubilee seems to have been kept, and ends in 1873 5. when the next Jubilee will be
celebrated at Christ’s Coming. (4) The 2300 years in Dan. viii., 13, 14, commence primarily in 457 b.c., at Ezra’s
restoration of the sacrifices (Ez. viij, and secondarily in 427 b c., at Nehemiah’s completed renewal of the sacrifices
fNeh. xiii,l, and thus bring us to 1843-8 as the commencement, and to 1873-5 as the completion of the cleansing of the
sanctuary of the Holy Land by the destruction of Mnhommedanism and the full restoration of Israel. (5,)
('6.) . / 7,) The 1385, 1290, and 1260 years in Dan. xii. 7, 11, 12, have a common commencement in a.d. 533-8, when, the
temp .ral power of Popery was first established by Justinian's Code. They end respectively in 1793 8, 1823-8, and 1873-5.
Tim temporal .power of the Pope was broken at the French Revolution. 1794-8; in 1824 8 the Mystic Euphrates or
Turkish Empire began to dry up under the sixth Vial, precursory to Babylon’s overthrow; and in 1873 5 the time of
millennial, blessings arrives. There is also a secondary fulfilment of the 1260 years from 606-13 to 1866 73. (8) The
360 years in Rev. x. 6, is denoted by the phrase, a time, or year. Hence, there shall be a time no longer means, there shall
be 360 years no longer from the Reformation in 1517, which Rev. x. describes, until the End,


(Amos iii. 7; Matt. xxiv. 32-43; John xv. 15 ; 2 Peter i. 19; 1 Thess. y. 4 ; Key. iii., vi.
yiii., xvi., &c.)
It is a notable fact that the period from 1866 to 1875 is the only epoch that has ever been
fixed upon by the general consent of so large a number as more than a hundred standard
prophetic interpreters as the time of the coming of Christ and beginning of the millennium.
There may have been other periods designated by a few individual writers of no great
reliability, but the prevailing opinion among the numerous writers on prophetic chronology,
that have arisen since the great prophetic epoch of the French revolution in 1793-8. has been
in favour of 1866 to 1875 as the convergent ending of the prophetic dates and septenaries—
more particular reference being generally made to 1866-68. a As there have, probably,
never been altogether more than a few hundred treatises published upon prophetic chron-
ology, it is a mark-worthy circumstance thus to find more than one hundred of them agree-
ing upon a particular time for the end of this dispensation.
TEN SIGNS OF THE TIMES.
The signs of the times are very admonitory of the approaching end of this dispensa-
tion, and convergentiy meet and commingle in the present epoch in a manner in which they
never met or commingled previously. They may be summed up under ten leading
divisions.
I. The present world-wide preaching of the Gospel. Since the great era of the French
Kevolution of 1792-8, nearly all the numerous Home and Foreign Missionary and Bible and
Tract Societies of Protestant Christendom have been established, and the Scriptures have
been translated into upwards of 200 languages, whereas prior to 1792 they were not printed
in more than 50 More progress has been made in diffusing the Gospel during
the last 70 years, than within the previous 1700 years. The marvellous revival of evangelical
religion in Great Britain and America, under the labours of Whitefield, Wesley, and the
Methodists, during the half-century preceding the epoch of 1792, greatly prepared the way
for these missionary movements. The heralds of the Cross of Christ have now carried the
message of salvation from Greenland’s icy mountains to India’s coral strand, and have
penetrated into the interior of China and the heart of Africa, and landed on the shores of
Japan. The Gospel is, however, yet to have by far its widest proclamation in this age during
the interval of a year and a-half between the ascension of the 144,000 wise virgins to the
heavens, and the subsequent final 3| years of Antichrist’s great Persecution; for a body of
preachers denoted by the angel in Rev. xiv. 6, will then be sent forth to preach the ever-
lasting Gospel, to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, with the special
announcement superadded that the closing “ hour of God’s judgment is then come.’’ Thus
will be fully and finally accomplished the prediction of the Faithful and True Witness in
Matt. xxiv. 14, “ This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come.’’ Its proclamation is not to convert
the world previous to the end; on the contrary, when the Son of man comes, people in
general will be found to be as wicked as they were in the days of Noah and of Lot; and the
armies of the nations will be assembled to fight against the King of kings at Armageddon.
(Luke xvii. 27, 28; xviii. 8; Rev. xvi. 14, xix, 19.) Although by the preached Gospel,
“ God visits the Gentiles to take out a people for His name,’’ yet the majority of mankind
will reject the testimony, and “ wax worse and worse in the perilous times of the last days,’’
until “the Tabernacle of David is built again,” and the Jews are fully restored to Palestine
at and after the Lord’s second advent, and then “ the residue of men and all the Gentiles ”
who survive the battle of Armageddon “ will seek after the Lord,” and become for the
most part really Christianised during the subsequent millennium. (Acts xv. 14-17; 2
Tim. iii.; Isa. Ixvi.; Zech. xiv.)
11. The loud-sounding proclamation of the nearness of our Lord’s second advent by the
raising of the midnight cry, “Behold, the bridegroom oometh,” is a sign specially predicted
in the Prophecies to accompany the approaching time of the end. In Dan. xii. 4, it was
said, “ O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end ; many
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased ;” or, as the Hebrew texts implies,
“many shall sedulously scrutinise and pore over these words, and the understanding of
them shall be increased.’’ This has begun to be fulfilled of late years in the publication of
numerous treatises on prophecy, a but that midnight cry will not be fully raised until the
return of the Jews. It was also foretold in Matt. xxv. 6, in the Parable of the Ten Virgins,
a There are two monthly prophetic periodicals, the “ Rainbow,” 6d„ and “The Prophetic Times,” 4d„ at W. Macin-
tosh’s, Paternoster-row; also Purdou’s monthly “Last Vials,” 2d. Other publications are —the author’s “Louis Na-
poleon, the Destined Monarch of the World, foreshown to confirm a seven years’ covenant with the Jews seven years
before the end, and to become the Personal Antichrist, &c,” with many extracts from expositors. 400 pages, 2s. 6d., or


that shortly before the Lord’s advent, and in the midst of the midnight darkness of the
Church’s neglectful ignorance of His second advent prophecies, some preachers shall so
loudly raise the midnight cry, “ Behold, the bridegroom cometh,’’ that all the virgins or
Christians, even the foolish as well as the wise, shall arise and be stirred to search and
inquire into this subject. No such tremendous excitement has been yet awakened on the
question, but when Louis Napoleon shall soon have made the seven years’ covenant with
the Jews, these subjects will be much more widely agitated, although even now the
testimony is beginning to be raised in many places.
111. Revivals of religion. Before great judgments are brought on any nation, God
frequently causes special religious warnings to be given to it; just as the Jewish nation was
favoured with the preaching of Ezekiel and Jeremiah before their subjugation by the king
of Babylon, and with the ministry of John the Baptist and the apostles, before the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. Hence America was graciously visited by an unparalleled
revival in 1857, and for some years previously enjoyed special outpourings of the Holy
Spirit, particularly in connection with the preaching of revivalists, such as Caughey, Finney,
the Palmers and others, and is thus being blessed with high privileges before the great
tribulation comes. The North of Ireland has been the scene of a marvellous revival in
1859, issuing in the conversion and salvation of many souls preparatory to the universal
massacre of Protestants in Antichrist’s approaching persecution. And in Great Britain
during the last few years many Churches have been greatly quickened, prayer meetings
multiplied, and numerous revival preachers, such as H. G. Guinness, Reginald Radoliffe,
Brownlow North, E. P. Hammond, Richard Weaver, and others have been raised up.
The deeply important work of open-air and street preaching is also extensively carried on;
and upwards of a hundred thousand persons are probably reached every week by the
spoken and printed sermons of the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon.a A higher standard of Christian
devotedness and increased faith in the Lord Jesus is also being attained by many; as, for
example, in the instance of George Muller, of Bristol, who, in answer to faith and prayer alone,
hasduring the last thirty years received and expended more than a quarter of amillion pounds
sterling in the various departments of the Lord’s work, and principally on the Ashleydown
Orphan Houses, b in which more than a thousand orphans are at present maintained, and
he hopes to increase them by two thousand. Somewhat similar faith has been manifested
in Germany by Pastors Gossner, Harms, and Wichern, as related in F. Stevenson’s book,
41 Praying and Working.”
IV. The development of rapid intercommunication throughout the earth and the spread
of education and knowledge is a striking feature of these last days. This is a necessary
preparation for the universal reign of the individual Antichrist during his predicted three
and a-half years, because otherwise, without these modern agencies of swift locomotion and
transmission of intelligence, there would not be sufficient time for one man within so short
a period to have complete power over all Christendom, and to gather all nations to
Jerusalem to the battle of Armageddon. (Zech. xiv. 11; Dan. vii. 25; Rev. xiii. 5.) And
it is only by the present means for diffusing knowledge by the application of steam to
printing presses, and by the telegraph, that sufficient information could be disseminated to
cause all the ungodly throughout Christendom within three and a-half years to renounce
their former religions, and to embrace the new religion of worshipping Napoleon the
Antichrist, as their god. (Rev. xiii. 7, 8 ; 2 Thess. ii.) Within only the last thirty years,
railways, steam-vesseft, and telegraphs have been brought into general use, and by means of
them, astonishing changes have been introduced into the social, commercial, and military
movements and operations of mankind. The internal resources of countries have become
largely developed, and the nations are drawn more compactly together, and, as it were,
within speaking distance of each other. The prophet Nahum, in his vision of Christ’s
coming to judgment, most plainly describes the swift running of railway carriages on their
errand of conveying military hosts to the battle-fields of that day : “ The chariots shall be
with flaming torches in the day of his preparation. The chariots shall rage in the streets,
they shall justle one against another in the broadways ; they shall seem like torches, they
shall run like lightnings.” (Nahum ii. 3.) By the invention of telegraphs the difficulty is
obviated that used to be felt in relation to the prophecy that “ they that dwell on earth”
shall hear of the death of the two personal witnesses in Rev. xi., and exult over it for three
an abridgment of it at 3d.; also, the forthcoming work, “ Coming Wonders,” with 20 illustrations, 300 pages, Bs. 6d.
Also, Dr. Seiss’ “Last Times,” sd„ at Macintosh’s; Dr. Leask’s “ Happy Years at Hand;” W. Trotter’s“ Plain Papers
on Prophetic Subjects,” 3d., and “ Eight Lectures,” Is. 6d. “ The Achill Missionary Herald,” 6d. monthly, by Rev. Mr.
Nangle, Skreen, Ballisodare, Ireland, has good prophetic articles. (Note to sth edition, November, 1864.)
The Rev. C. H. Spurgeon’s two sermons against Baptismal Regeneration have conjointly sold in England to the
amount of a quarter of a million copies. These, as well as all his weekly sermons, are published for a penny each, at
Alabaster and Passmore’s, Paternoster-row, London. (Note to sth edition, November, 1864.)
bThis remarkable work of faith is described fully in “The Lord’s Dealings with George Muller,” in two volumes,
at 3s. 6d,, and 2s. 6d., and the annual reports of the Ashleydown Orphan Houses, at 6d,at Nisbet’s. An abridged edition
is published at Gould and Lincoln’s, Boston, called •* The Life of Trust.”


and a-half literal days, which would have been too short a period for the news to have been
carried through all Europe without telegraphic communication. Furthermore, the very
perfection to which manufactories, and art and sciences, such as astronomy, geolo°y,
zoology, chemistry, geography, medicine, surgery, application of electricity, &c., are now-
brought, tends to lift up the heart of the ungodly, and to ripen them for the fascinating
deceptions of the coming Antichrist. The historian Alison has suggestively said, “ Great
consequences must inevitably result from this prodigiously enhanced rapidity of communica-
tion, but it is hard to say whether the consequences will be for good or for evil. Is not the
unexampled rapidity with which Europe took fire in 1848 (with revolution from the Paris
outbreak) a decisive proof that the increased rapidity in the communication of thought
among the nations tends to_ convert society into a huge powder magazine, liable to blow up
on the first spark falling into it?’’ Thus, for example,,a Romanist rebellion in Ireland
(which Fenianism seems to be preparing) might soon communicate itself to the large finglish
cities in the shape of fearful mob riots on the part of the Irish Romanists, who swarm in
those cities.
V. Existing symptoms of the approaching political re-establishment of the Jewish
nationality in Palestine, which will chiefly commence with a seven years’ covenant between
them and the Final Franco-Roman King, about seven years before the millennium, “ when
the Lord shall build up Zion, He shall appear in His glory.” (Ps. cii. 16 ; Dan, ix. 27,
Tin. 14, xi. 24; Ezek._ xxxviii ; Isa. xviii., Ixvi. ; Rev. xvi- 12.) This will merely be a par-
tial and political Jewish restoration, as their universal return and conversion to Christ will
not be until the millennium.
VI. The drying-up of the Euphrates, or dissolution of the Turkish Empire, under the
year day fulfilment of the sixth vial from 1828 to 1868, in order that the return to Judea
of the Jewish kings from the East may be prepared. (Rev xvi. 12; Dan. xi. 40, 41.)
VII. The going forth irom the dragon, beast, and false prophet, of the three unclean,
miracle-working, frog-like spirits of Antichristian infidelity (especially as developed in
spiritualism,) and revolutionary lawlessness (identical in elfect with the democratic-des-
potic Napoleonic spirit,) and Jesuitical intrigue, to leaven the nations preparatorily with
their subtle influence, and thus “ to gather the kings of the earth and of the whole world
to the war of that great day of God Almighty.” (Rev. xvi. 13, 14 ; 2 Tim. iii.)
VIII. Manifest preparation of this general gathering of all nations to a universal war, as
shown by their troubled political state, and by the increase of standing armies and powerful
navies, and the invention of the most deadly instruments of destruction. (Joel. iii. 9, 10;
Zech, xvi. 2 ; Ezek. xxxviii. 4; Dan. xii. 1; Matt. xxiv. 7, 21, &c.)
IX. Rapidly progressing formation of the whole territorial extent of the old Roman
Empire into exactly ten-horn kingdoms, which will in the main he Great Britain, France,
Spain, Italy with Sub-Danubian, Austria, Algeria, Egypt, Greece, Syria, Constantinopolitan
Turkey, and Tripoli with Tunis; and also the progressing introduction of clay-iron, or
democratic-despotic political constitutions into each of these ten-toe kingdoms. The way
is being paved for these changes by Greece and Egypt becoming separate and independent
nations in 1822 and 1840, and by the unification of Italy in 1860, and by the annexing of
Savoy and Nice to France in 1860, preparatory to the entire absorption of Switzerland
within the extended boundaries of France, Italy, and Austria. (Rev. xvii. 'l2-14; Dan.
ii. 33, 41, viii. 22, 33.)
X. Growing development of Louis Napoleon into the last Universal King’s character and
position of supremacy over the ten-horn kingdoms and the world at large,a to which various
prophecies (stated hereafter in this treatise) indicate his future attainment. As our Lord’s
return to the earth is to happen in this Roman-Imperial king’s lifetime, and as Louis
Napoleon’s existence at the furthest limit of 70 years would not extend beyond 1878,
therefore the Son of Man’s return cannot be expected to be many years distant. (Rev.
xiii, xvii., xix. 19., 2 Thess. ii. 1, &c.) More than forty writers consider Napoleon 111. to
be the revived seventh-eighth, or Last Head of the Roman Empire.
LOUIS NAPOLEON THE FUTURE GREAT UNIVERSAL KING.
The reasons for this may be briefly reviewed under five heads, and they show that he will
eventually become the Last Head of the Roman Empire, soon after he has made a seven
years’ covenant with the Jews.®
a The evidences on this point are much more fully set forth in the author’s treatise, “ Louis Napoleon, Destined
Monarch of the World,” 416 pages (35.) with 15 full-page striking pictures, at W. Macintosh’s, London, or one dollar at
R. Brinkerhoff’s, 48 Fulton Street, New York, U.S. Also an abridgement of it at threepence, or fifteen cents. He is
preparing lor the press, “Coming Wonders” (35.), with sixteen other full-page pictures. Other books more or less on
the Napoleonic Prophecies are—a valuable prophetic pamphlet on “The Emperor Napoleon,” by the Rev. W. B. Moffett
(6d., 64 pages); “ Earth’s Eventide,” by the Rev. J. Gregory (45.); “ The Napoleon Dynasty, and the Church of Christ”
(4d.); and “Glimpses and Songs of the Coming Kingdom” (45.), by the Rev. E, Nangle; “ Resurrection of Napoleon”


First, Louis Napoleon is restoring to life the Napoleon power, or seventh head of the
Homan Empire ; and in Kev. xiii. the person who restores and heals of its deadly wound
the seventh Head of the Beast, or Roman Empire, is predicted for forty-two months after-
ward “TO MAKE WAR WITH THE SAINTS AND OVERCOME THEM, AND
POWER WAS GIVEN HIM OVER ALL NATIONS;” in fact, to become the last great
Universal King, who is also called by some writers the Personal Antichrist. (Rev. xiii. 3, 5,7.)
The first six heads of the seven-headed Beast in Rev. xiii., and xvii. 10, are generally admitted
to have been (1) kings, (2) consuls, (3) decemvirs, (4) dictators, (5) tribunes, (6) the Roman
Emperorship. History show's that some European sovereign always maintained the title
of Roman Emperor until 1806 ; then that title was abolished, and the sixth head having
thus come to an end, the seventh head arose in the Napoleon power or dynasty under
Napoleon 1., which had possession of Rome from 1806 to 1815, but w'hich was “ wounded to
death ” at the battle of Waterloo in 1815, and now is being gradually “ healed of its deadly
wound ”by Louis Napoleon. To the wonder of everybody, the Napoleon headship over
Europe, which was demolished at Waterloo, is now being re-established in fulfilment of
Rev. xiii. 3: “ I saw one of the heads wounded to death, and the deadly ivound w T as healed,
and all the world wondered after the Wild Beast.’’ Although Louis Napoleon is only a
head of the Wild Beast, or Roman Empire, yet he is also called the Wild Beast itself,
because he is the personified embodiment of it. In this representative position he is “the
Wild Beast that w'as, and is not, and yet is.” (Rev. xvii. 8, 11.) The Wild Beast, or
Homan Empire, “w T as ” under Napoleon 1., and “ was not” under Napoleon 11., and “yet
is’’ under Napoleon 111. It was predicted by Faber, Gauntlett, Frere, Irving, and others,
shortly after the fall of Napoleon I. at Waterloo, in 1815, that according to these prophecies
another Napoleonic Emperor must arise in France before 1866, and become the Last Great
Head of the Nations, to lead them to the battle of Armageddon; and now, behold, their
prediction is being accomplished in the rise of Napoleon HI.
Secondly, the name of Louis Napoleon in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, contains 666, which
is foretold in Rev. xiii. 18 to be the number of the Wild Beast’s name. Louis in Latin is
Ludovicus, and L. 50 + u 5 d 500 + «o+»s+il+e 100 + u 5 + s 0 = 666.
Again the Greek dative of Napoleon is Ncra-oXenm, and N 50 + a 1 + tt 80 + o 70 + A 30
+ e 5 + 070 + «<5O+T 300 + i 10 = 666. It is in this inscriptive form of the dative
case that Napoleon’s name is to be written on temples, shrines, and his worshippers’ hands
and foreheads. (Rev. xiii. 16, 17 ; Acts xvii. 28.) A permissible Greek form for Louis
Napoleon Ams NaTroAeop, also gives 666 as the sum of its letters. Furthermore, in Hebrew,
the words Louis Napoleon Buonaparte to-iMßtoti Asr3 D'tb make up altogether 666. There
clearly appears also to be a radical identity between the words Napoleon and Apollyon , or
Apoleon in one of its Greek forms—the predicted name of the last great Antichrist in Re v.
ix. 11, and the prefixed letter N is a contraction for the Greek mi, verily , truly. Thus,
Napoleon is the abbreviation of Ncu AnoXeov , truly Apollyon.
Thirdly. The prediction concerning the healed seventh head of the Wild Beast, in Rev.
xiii. 8. 7, that after its deadly wound was healed “ power should be given it over all
nations,’’ is obviously beginning to be fulfilled in Napoleon 111., who is not only restoring to
life the Napoleon headship over Europe, which was “ wounded to death ’’ at Waterloo, but
is also more and more gaining ascendancy over the nations to an extent that no one could
formerly have supposed possible. But his power at present is merely in its infancy. He is
to make the nearest approach to obtaining a universal empire that the world has ever wit-
nessed. A point will be reached in his career when he will possess paramount influence in
the affairs of every nation. More especially the prophecy that “the ten horns shall give
their power and strength to him ” is clearly advancing to its accomplishment (Rev. xvii. 13,
(4d.); and “ Signs of the Times” (4d.), by Arthur A. Rees; some of the monthly numbers of Purdon’s “Last Vials”
(2d. a month); the last chapter of Volume 11. of Beale’s “ Armageddon,” in three volumes at £3 sterling—very expensive;
Dr. Seiss “ Last Times” (55.); “ Prophetic Times,” in fourpenny numbers. All at W. Macintosh’s, 24 Paternoster-row,
London. —Note added September, 1865.
it will be strange if Louis Napoleon’s desire and intention to become, like another Caesar, the head over a revived
Roman Empire, and to have it divided into ten Kingdoms (which he is predicted In Kev. xvii. 12, hereafter to do,) is not
hinted at in his forthcoming life of Julius Caesar. At anyrate its maps will show how much of the British Empire he
includes within the original Roman Empire, and over which, therefore, it will be his destiny to become supreme. If,
like most historians, he does not include Ireland in the Roman Empire, it will show his design to promote its
separation from England, (The maps including England will not appear until the issue of the second or third volumes
of Julius Ctesar’s Life.)
a This Hebrew spelling of the words Louis Napoleon Buonaparte (which, of course, is written from right to left)
has been carefully drawn up by Mr. E. R. Hodges, a rabbinical and Hebrew scholar, and teacher of Syriac, Chaldaio,
Greek, Italian, and other languages, at Bristol, England, and for twenty-five years a Hebrew student. Other Hebrew
linguists, such as Mr. G. Lederer, of 12 St. George’s Place, New York, U.S., editor of the “Israelite Indeed,” and of a
monthly periodical, also affirm those words to contain 666 in Hebrew, which language, however, has two “ t’s,” and
different ways of expressing the English vowels, therefore these words can be written in Hebrew in several different
ways. It is sufficient for the absolute requirements of prophecy for Antichrist’s name to contain 666 in Latin or
Greek. The above-mentioned Hebrew letters making 666 are — lamed , vau, yod, samelc, nun aleph, pe, lamed, nun, heth,
vau, min, aleph, pe, aleph, resh, teth. (Note added in February, 1865.) Dr. Croly, Monod, T. Rock, and others, consider
apoleon to be identical with Apollyon.


IMPENDING OCCURRENCES AND THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON* 11
17); for these ten-horn kingdoms, which in their complete development at the midst of the
hnal seven years, beginning with the Jewish covenant, will mainly be England, France,
bpam, Italy, with Southern Austria, Algeria, Tripoli, Egypt, Syria, Greece, and Northern
.turkey, are already more or less under the basilisk spell of his ascendant influence.
fourthly. The unrelaxing hold upon the Roman capital, which Napoleon lias from the
outset asiduously maintained, is essentially accordant with his growing assumption of
neadship over the Koman Empire; and as long as Rome stands, it may, notwithstanding all
rumours and promises to the contrary, be expected to remain virtually in his hands. 'The
S vk mate * la * su pp°rt he has also extended to the Roman Pontiff and Church coincides
with the prefiguration of the secular Roman empire or scarlet Wild Beast under its final
Napoleonic head, carrying the scarlet woman in Rev. xvii. , Napoleon and the Pope, the
respective political and ecclesiastical heads of the Roman empire are again shown in Rev.
xm. as the ten-horned and two-horned beings, having unitedly dominion everywhere during
the hnal forty-two months. The predominance of Napoleon will be the predominance of
power° mlSil ° llUrC “’ actm S un der his command, and stripped of its independent temporal
. Fifthly. Daniel’s predictions that the last Great Destroyer should be a king of fierce and
inscrutable countenance, understanding dark sentences, and by his policy causing craft to
prosper in Ins hand and destroying many by peace, and at his outset a vile person, agree
thus far with Louis Napoleon’s well-known peculiar antecedents, and appearance, and
subtie character, and palpably disingenuous asseveration that “the empire is peace.” His
additionally predicted career as a wonderful destroyer will not begin until the final crisis.
(Dan. vni. 23, 26, xi. 21 ) His ambitious projects with regard to the North of Africa and
Fgjpt and Syria also agree thus far with the prophecy that eventually “ the Ethiopians
and the Libyans shall be at his steps,” and that “ the king of the south” (Egypt) and
‘ yij! . ? t!e nort h” (Syria) shall be overcome by him. (Dan. xi. 21-45.)
This view as to Louis Napoleon being the seventh-eighth and last head of the Roman
Lmpue, destined to perish at the Battle of Armageddon, is maintained in the prophetic
treatises concerning him, published about 1853, by the Revs. M. Whittemore, C. J.
Goodhart, A. A. Rees, L. P. Mercier,R. A. Purdon, W. Morshead, J. C. Chase, and by J.
H. Trere and James Yerner; also by Edward Flower, E. Taunton, R. Beale, Alexander
Porter, in 1856-7 ; and by the Rev. Edward Nangle, Major Phillips, T. Rock, T. Stephen,
E. Linen, haul Foskett, in 1859-60, and subsequently by the Revs. Dr. Seiss, J. Gregory.
G. 1 rookman, Samuel Garrett, W. B. Moffett, Dr. Mason, Dr. Robinson and others—
amounting altogether to more than thirty treatises maintaining that view. Let everyone
then with such predicted prospects of approaching judgments be led to pray
eainestly to God to forgive their sins fbr the sake of the Lord Jesus, and to sanctify them
by bis Holy Spirit, so that they may flee from the wrath which is to come, and escape being
soon cast with the unconverted into the lake of fire burning with brimstone.*
IMPENDING OCCURRENCES AND THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON.
Various prophecies seem to show that the course of events issuing in the conflict of
Armageddon will be as follows a
About seven years before the Consummation culminates in the final great Battle,
Napoleon will have confirmed a seven-years’ COVENANT with many Jews, and will most
piobably hold a CONGRESS of nations about the time. The object of the Covenant will
be to afford facilities for the peaceable resettlement of Jewish immigrants in Palestine, and
of protecting them in the restoration of their temple, and of their daily sacrifices which are
predicted, to be re-established between nine and ten months after the Covenant, and at the
distance of two thousand three hundred literal days before the cleansing of the sanctuary at
the millennium.& ibis is set forth in the eighth and ninth chapters of Daniel; and in the
middle of the subsequent eleventh chapter, it is indicated that about a year or two after the
Covenant, a violent invading assault upon the Sovereign of Egypt, the prophetic king of
the south, will be successfully made by Napoleon ;c and the Turkish empire will also fall at
this period. cl Meanwhile a great sensation and increased study of prophecy, and revived
* John iii. 16, 3 ; vi. 37; Matthew xi. 28 ; Rom. v. vi. viii. x. 13; Gal. ii 16; Eph.ii. 8; Rev. xx. Ps. li.
r> l^ie IS *- of this pamphlet was published, in 1860, the following description of these events and of the
nattle, has been considerably enlarged by the Rev. M. Baxter, in this fifth edition in the early part of 18i!5. This fol-
lowing descriptive programme would be suitable for republicaiion anywhere as a tract by itself, and anyone (as for
instance m b ranee,) objecting to the distinct mention of Napoleon in it, might reprint it with the term Antichrist or the
trophetxc King, or the Universal King, substituted in the place of his name throughout.
__ _ an 14, ix. 22, 23. Isaiah Ixvi. 1,2. More than fifty expositors, such as E. Bickersteth, Sir E. Denny,
Molyneaux, 1 regelles, Judge Strange, Guinness, etc., have shown in their treatises, that Daniel’s seventieth week is the
Hnal seven years of this dispensation, and is to begin with a covenant with the Jews. Extracts from them are given in
more fully o> Louis Napoleon the destined monarch of the world,” in which book these coming events are described
c Dan. xi. 21-28. d Year-day, Rev. xvi. 12.


preaching of Christ’s approaching return,® having been caused by the commenced
restoration of the Jews there will presently take place the first act or crisis in Messiah’s
Advent, namely the resurrection of all deceased saints, and their removal to the heavens,
together with 144,000 living watchful Christians, in the FIRST ASCENSION, about two
years and from three to six weeks after the Covenant. 6 This event will probably be
accompanied by a loud noise and temporary glare in the skies o and will be followed by an
unparalleled, widespread, religious revival among the foolish virgins, who are the
unwatchful and backsliding Christians left behind, and also by the preaching of the Gospel
for a witness to all nations, far more extensively than ever before—even angels or glorified
saints from heaven apparently helping to proclaim everywhere the testimony, “ Fear God
and give glory to Him, for the hour of his judgment is come.” Many sinners will thus be
led to pray earnestly to God for forgiveness of their iniquities, through the merits and
atoning blood of the Lord Jesus, and will become savingly converted. _ This revival will
continue for about ten months after the First Ascension, and will constitute the fulfilment
of the first seal, during which the Church militant is represented as a white horse, full of
overcoming faith and revival zeal; and then the following seven months intervening belore
the three and a-half years’ final persecution will be the period of the second seal, when
peace shall be taken from the earth and people everywhere begin to kill one another, and
the Christian Church on earth will become like a red horse suffused with bloodshed.*!
During all this time considerable numbers of Jews will continue to emigrate with their
wealth to Jud®a, but according to the thirty-ninth Chapter of some few months
before the midst of the seven years, an evil thought will come into the mind of Napoleon
the prophetic Gog of Ezekiel—and he will announce his determination to lead his armed
hosts against the inhabitants of Palestine, to take their gold and silver and cattle and goods
for a prey and for a spoil. e To this proceeding a nation prophetically described as Sheba
and Dedan and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, and which is
understood by various expositors to signify the maritime commercial and colonising nation
of Great Britain, will demur and remonstrate with the Imperial aggressor in deprecation of
bis projected expedition. The expostulation is, however, tacitly predicted to prove
unavailing, and the remonstrating nation must itself at that period in common with the rest
of the civilised world, speedily fall under the Napoleonic universal despot, because there is
to be given to him (as the Roman Empire’s seventh head healed of its AVaterloo wound
“ power over all nations’’ during the subsequent final forty-two months or three and a-half
years./
During several months, however, before the commencement of the final three and a-half
years, and while the before mentioned second seal is being fulfilled, and Napoleon prep aring
and carrying into effect this great invasion of Palestine with a vast confederacy of the leading
a Rev. xii. 2; Matthew xxv, 6,7, 8, 9.
6 1 Thess. iv. 16,17; 1 Cor. xv. SI, 82. Rev. xii. 6, xiv. 1-6; Luke xvil. 28; Matt. xxiv. 37,45; Luke xxi. 28, 86; Rev.
iii. 10; v. Matt. xxv. 10.
c A shout and lightning flash. 1 Thess. iv. 16; Matt. xxiv. 27. The foolish virgins are only shut out of the door of
the First Ascension, but not necessarily of the later Second Ascension. Although Christ in the character or a bride-
groom says to them in that parable, “ I know you not,” because they have not the watchful spirit of the bride discerning
the signs of the times, yet at the same time he may know them as their Saviour, Mediator, and Sanctifier. He does not
say to them, “ Depart ye cursed,” as is said to the wicked at a subsequent period [in that chapter. See also extract at the
end of this pamphlet.
d Rev. xiv. 6-11; vi. 2, Matt. xxiv. 14, xxv. 11. The angel in Rev. xiv. 6. seems to represent a company of glorified
sainted sons of men, because the seven angel-messengers in Rev. xiv. must all be homogeneous, that is, of the same kind
or sort; and the fourth or centre one of the seven in verse 14, is evidently the glorified Son of Man, our elder brother.
Acts xiii. 38; John iii. 16; Matthew xi. 28 ; 1 John i. 9, ii. 2; Matt. vii. 7.
e It is most important to observe the distinction between the Antichristian king’s two separate expeditions against
Jerusalem, the one just before, and the other just after his three and a half years of universal power and persecution—
the first expedition for plunder and depredation, “to take a great spoil” (Ezek. xxxviii. 1-16; Luke xxi. 20-24;
Dan xi. 40-43, while the people are living in prosperity, peace and plenty, just previous to the three and a-half years of
Great Tribulation in which they are afterwards to be led into captivity and made desolate and the abomination setup in
their temple (Dan. xii. 7-11 ; Rev. xi. 2; Matt. xxiv. 15 21)—the second expedition for revenge and murderous exter-
mination “to destroy and utterly make away many,” (Dan. xi. 44, 45 ; Psalm Ixxxiii. 4 ; Ezek. xxxviii. 18-23) when he
is smarting under the six literal vial plagues at the end of his three and a-half years and, therefore, gathers all his
armies to Armageddon (Rev xvi. 14-16.) There is an implied, though not expressed, interval of three-and a half years
between verses 16 and 18 of Ezek. xxxviii. (just like the 18 centuries between verses 9 and 10 in Zech. ix.)
f Rev. xiii. 3,5, 7 ; Dan. vii. 25; Ezekiel xxxviii. If England is the prophetic Tarshish, her overthrow is thereby
additionally foretold. “ For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every
one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, ami upon all the ships of Tarshish.” (Isaiah ii. 12-16.) “ Howl ye
ships of Tarshish for your strength is laid waste. Pass over to Tarsbish. Howl ye inhabitants of the isle.” (Isaiah
xxxiii. 1-14.) In this case the ultimate ruin of her navy is apparently to be caused chiefly by furious gales and storms.
“Thou hreakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.” (Ps. xlviii. 7) The coming national judgments will be
justly retributive for the heartless selfishness and neglect of the poor by the majority of the upper classes. It seems
from Isaiah xviii. 1,2, that the prophetic Tarshish or modern maritime nation is probably to help to carry back some
Jews to Palestine at their partial restoration by the Napoleonic Antichrist at the commencement of the seven years of
the covenant-Aveek; and also again at their complete millennial restoration by Christ (Isaiah lx. 9.) after Antichrist’s
destruction at the close of that seven years, when England and other nations will be delivered from Antichrist’s three
and a half years’ despotic rule.


armies of Christendom, there will be various wonderful events accomplished. Satan, who
is now the prince of the power of the air, will then with all his angels be driven down en-
tirely to the earth ; and their demonising power and raging among mankind being thereby
extraordinarily increased, will be the prime cause of the subsequent great persecution for
three and a-half years.® The first four literal-day trumpets will also be introduced by ter-
rific thunder and lightning, and an earthquake, and will startle the world by bringing
down hail and fire mingled with blood, and burning up all green grass, and turning a third
part of the sea into blood, and making poisonously bitter a third part of the fresh waters,
and darkening a third part of the sun, moon, and stars. 6 Furthermore, Napoleon, having
previously introduced his troops into Egypt and Syria, which by this time will be made in-
dependent nations, will overcome all their opposition, and constitute them two of his ten-
horn kingdoms.c ENGLAND, another of the ten-horn kingdoms, lying inside the boun-
daries of the Roman Empire, must by this period have become governmentally separate
from Ireland, which is outside the boundaries of the Roman Empire; and through the
subtle conspiracies of Romanists and democratic revolutionists will, as well as the
GREATER PART OP AMERICA, BE FALLING UNDER NAPOLEON AND THE ROMISH POWBR.d All
the nations lying within the limits of the original Roman Empire having been cast into the
crucible of revolutionary disorganisation, will now emerge in the form of exactly TEN
KINGDOMS represented by the ten horns of the Wild Beast, and the ten toes of Nebu-
chadnezzar’s image. These ten kingdoms will substantially be Engand; France extended
to the Rhine and Danube; Spain, with Portugal; Italy, with sub-Danubian Austria ; Al-
geria-five in the Western Roman Empire; and Greece; Northern Turkey; Syria;
Egypt; and Tripoli, with Tunis—five in the Eastern Roman Empire. Ten democratic-
monarchic kings, presignified by the ten clay-iron toes of the image, will be elected to
reign over them for the semi-septennial term of three and a-half years, commencing in the
midst of the seven years of the Jewish covenant-week ; and they will unanimously give
their power and strength to Napoleon as their Presiding Head,e and thus elevate him to a
height of power greater than that of C»sar, Charlemagne, or the first Bonaparte.
By this time the midst of the seven years will be reached, and the Nebuchadnezzar-
like Napoleon having encompassed Jerusalem with his armies will capture that city, and,
notwithstanding his previous seven years’ covenant with the Jews, will cause their sacrifices
to cease, and lead forth many of them info captivity among the nations, and place his image,
the abomination of desolation, in their temple, and even himself proceed to sit there, as the
predicted Man of Sin, “ showing himself that he is God.”/ It appears also that a similar
imperial image will be commanded to be set up in almost every town,city, and village through-
out the abovementioned ten kingdoms of the Roman Empire countries, comprising, of course,
England, and in other parts of professing Christendom, including America, especially wher-
ever there are many Romanists.# Liberty of commerce will be granted to none but such
as have imprinted on their forehead or right hand one or more of the names of Louis Na-
poleon h (apparently either in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew) or the mystic number 666, which
his names singly or conjointly contain as the sum total of their letters in those three lan-
guages. Bands of furious zealots, instigated by demon influence, will be commanded to
search out and bring to the test every individual, both small and great, and to put to death
those who will not worship the image, or receive the mark of this modern Mahomet. It is
probable that the superhuman Satanic power and skill, which is to be permitted to be exer-
cised in his behalf, may find one form of its development in the invention and construction
of such inconceivably destructive missiles and engines of warfare as to make resistance to
his armed hosts almost entirely utterly hopeless. i The consequent reign of infidelity, linked
with despotism, will be far more wide-spread and desolating than the Reign of Terror in
France in 1793, j and will be characterised by far more daring avowals of impiety and blas-
phemy than were ever reached in the days of Voltaire and Robespierre. Their atheism
stopped short at the national rejection of the worship of God, but the atheism that will sig-
a Rev. xii. 7 to 13 ; Ephes. ii. 2. yi.l2.
b Rev. viii.; Luke xxi. 25 ; Joel ii. 30, i. 19.
c Dan. xi. 2343, viii. 22, 23.
d Power is to be given to the two wild-beasts in Rev. xiii. 7, over all nations.
e Rev. xvii. 12, 13; xiii. 1; Dan. ii. 42.
/Dan, ix. 27; xi. 31, 40, 41; xii. 7-12. Matt. xxiv. 15-22. Mark xiii. 14-20. Luke xxi. 20-25. 2 .Thess. n,
3-10. Ezekiel xxxviii. 15,16. Zecb. xiv. 1, 2.
g See Rev. xiii. throughout. < t .
7i This explicit and distinct mention of Louis Napoleon was written in this pamphlet in the first edition in 1860,
Notwithstanding constant rumours of his not being likely to live long, he is now as well as ever, and may confidently
be expected to live to fulfil these prophecies. (July, 1865.)
i Since this remark was written in 1860, Napoleon is said to have had vessels like battering-rams, and also explosive
infernal machines constructed, by which any ships,- such as the English ironclad men-of-war, can with certainty be
sunk or blown-up or destroyed. Guns have also been invented that can pierce the ironclads.
j lathe yeai’-day fulfilment of Revelation, the French Revolution of 1793 is only called “a great earthquake;
but the world-wide Revolution of the seventh year-day vi«l during the final four or five years js called “an earthquaka
such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great.” (Rev. xi. 13; xvi. 18.)


nalise the period of the three and a-half years’ Napoleonic persecution will proceed to the
assertion and establishment of the worship of man in the person of the Emperor.a This will
most likely first be commenced by some of the Jews beginning to hail him as their Messiah.
When the Christian witnesses are thus martyred for three and a-half years the Herod of
infidelity and the Pilate of superstition will be made friends, although they may previously
at times have been at enmity between themselves, and the latter will command persons to
exclaim regarding the former, “It is the voice of a god, and not of a man. "b The impe-
rial Jehu, driving furiously in the chariot of universal subjugation, will, indeed, destroy
the temporal power of the ecclesiastical Jezebel, and strip her of her costly trappings and
accumulated riches, yet there will remain the skeleton framework, consisting of the Romish
ecclesiastics headed by the Pontiff, and constituting a Jesuit association of powerful influence,
to compel mankind to worship the Bonapartean Baal. It will then be found that the
Balaam of the Vatican will become a potent ally of the democratic-despotic Balak.
These marvellous deeds of the Pope and Napoleon during the future three and a-half years
of terrible tribulation are described in nearly the following words in the thirteenth and
seventeenth chapters of Revelation,
The Roman-Imperial world, having become divided among exactly ten democratic kings,
who shall give their power and strength to Napoleon as their Feudal Head, the Napo-
leonic Empire, which was the seventh headship over the Roman Empire from 1806 to
1815, but which was wounded to death at Waterloo, will thus at last be completely healed
of its deadly Waterloo- wound, and thereupon all the ungodly world is to wonder, and in
the delirium of its admiration to worship the Evil Spirit, who will invisibly have caused
this power and vast authority to be given to Napoleon, and even to worship Napoleon him-
self, exclaiming, ‘‘ Who is like unto him, who is able to make war with him ?’’ And there
is to be given to him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and power to con-
tinue as the Supreme Head of the ten vassal kings for forty-ttvo months ; in other words,
for three and a-half years. And it is to be given to him to make war with true Christians
and to overcome them, and they shall be given into his hands for three and a-half years,
and he shall wear them out.c And power is to be given him oyer all kindreds, and
TONGUES, AND NATIONS, AND ALL THAT DWELL UPON THE EARTH SHALL WORSHIP HIM, ex-
cept those whose names have been written from the foundation of the world in the
Lamb’s book of Life. At this time the patience and faith of true Christians will be tried
to the very utmost. The worship of Napoleon is to be universally promoted by the
Pontiff and Romish ecclesiastics (represented by the two-horned figure,) who will be on such
intimate terms of alliance with Napoleon as to exercise all his power in his presence, and
to cause the earth and them which dwell therein to worship him as one raised from the
dead, because he will be the living personification of the resurrected Napoleonic Empire,
healed of its deadly Waterloo wound. The Pontiff will likewise become possessed of
miraculous power, so as to do great wonders, and to make fire come down from heaven on
the earth in the sight of men; and he will deceive them that dwell on the earth by the
miracles which he shall have power to do in the sight of Napoleon, saying to them that
dwell on the earth that they should make an image to Napoleon as a resurrection man, be-
cause he will be the living embodiment of the Napoleonic Empire, which had the wound at
Waterloo, by the sword of military violence, and yet is again raised to life. And the Pontiff
is to have porver to give life unto the image of Napoleon so that the image shall speak, and
to cause that as many as will not worship the image of Napoleon shall he killed. And the
Roman Pontiff and priesthood will cause all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receive a mark in their right hand or in their forehead, that no man may buy or
sell save he that has the mark, which will be either the name of Napoleon or the
number of his name, 666. Any person who shall then worship Napoleon or his image, or
receive his mark in their forehead or hand, is denounced from heaven in the fourteenth
chapter of Revelation as guilty of an unpardonable sin, and doomed to be tormented with
fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels and of the Lamb. And the smoke of
their torment is to ascend up for ever and ever .d
These latter three and a-half years of the seven years Will he the period spoken of in the
last chapter of Daniel as “THE TIME OE TROUBLE, such as never was since there was
a nation even unto that same time,’’ continuing for three and a-hall times, or years, after the
idolatrous abomination of desolation is set up; e and it will also be the period predicted
a Rev. xiii. 8,15; Dan. xi. 36, 37, the desire of women means the same ns the desire of nations : namely, Christ, the
promised Messiah, to give birth to whom was the earnest desire of Jewish women.
b Rev. xiii. 15.
c Dan. vii. 25 ; xii. 7; xi. 2,3; xii. 6,14, speak of the same three and a-half years. A time means a year , just as
teven times in Dan. iv. 32, meant seven years.
d This paragraph is a literal recital of Revelation xiii.
e The periods of 1290 and 1335 literal days mentioned in that same last chapter of Daniel are respectively thirty
days and seventy-five days longer than the 1260 days or three and a-half years. This additional interval of seventy-five


by our Lord in the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew in the words “ When ye therefore
shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy
place ; then let them which be in Judaea, flee to the mountains, for then shall be GREAT
TRIBULATION such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor
ever shall be ; and except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved ;
and woe unto them that are with child and to them which give suck in those days.”«
This will also be the time of desolation foretold in the twenty-fourth chapter of Isaiah and
the twenty-fifth of Jeremiah, “ Behold the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it
waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. And it
shall be as with the people so with the priest, as with the servant so with his master, as
with the maid so with her mistress, as with the buyer so with the seller, as with the lender
so with the borrower, as with the taker of usury so with the giver of usury to him. The
land shall be utterly emptied and utterly spoiled, for the Lord hath spoken this word.
The curse hath devoured the earth and they that dwell therein are desolate, therefore the
inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left. The mirth of tablets ceaseth, the
noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth. ihe city of confusion is
broken down, every house is shut up that no man may come in. There is a crying for
wine in the streets, all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone. The earth shall reel
to and fro like a drunkard; and it shall come to pass in that day the Lord shall punish the
hosts of the high ones that are on high (the evil spirits,) and the kings of the earth upon
the earth, and they shall be shut up in the prison (of the bottomless pit).” “ A noise shall
come even to the ends of the earth, for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations, He
will plead with all flesh ; He will give them that are wicked to the sword. Thus saith the
Lord of Hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind
shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that
day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth ; they shall not be
lamented, neither gathered nor buried, they shall be ordure upon the ground.”
Throughout all this period of three and a-half years, the Two AVitnesses clothed in sack-
cloth (probably Elias and another) will bear testimony, as predicted in the eleventh of
Revelation, and preach upon the earth and have power to smite it with plagues, and to turn
waters into blood, and to shut heaven, so that it may not rain during those three and-a half
years If any man attempts to hurt them he is to be slain by fire breathed from their
mouth. But at the end of this period Antichrist is to kill them, and after their dead bodies
have lain unburied in the streets of the great city for three and a-half days, and been
spitefully gazed upon by the exultant multitudes, they are to be raised up and ascend to
heaven in a cloud. At the same hour an earthquake will cause the tenth part of the city
to fall, and destroy seven thousand men of distinguished names.
This final crisis of three and a-half years will also be the period of the literal fulfilment
of the third, fourth, and fifth seals in the sixth chapter of Revelation ; the third seal during
the commencing year and a-half being a time of mighty famines; the fourth seal during the
followin'!- year being a period when death and hell, prefigured as seated upon a pale horse,
will have power given them over the fourth part of the earth to kill with the sword, and
with hunger, and with pestilence, and with the beasts of the earth ; and the fifth seal during
the next final year, being a time of continued martyrdom of the myriads of Christians that
are to be slain by command of the AVild Beast and False Prophet, and also the season of
approaching retribution. The fifth and sixth trumpets will likewise be accomplished during
the same crisis ; the fifth trumpet beginning about three and a half months after the com-
mencement of the three and a-half years, will cause swarms of supernatural scorpion locustsS
to come out of the bottomless pit, and, without at all injuring the grass or trees, to continue
for five months to torment with their stings those who have not the seal of God on their
forehead so as to drive them to seek for death, but death shall flee from them. The sixth
days or two and a half months, is therefore generally considered the short period of Antichrist a overthrow by the
ovseration of the seven last vial-plagues of Rev. xvi., after his 1060 days’ universal reign and dominion, 'these periods of
1260 109 1 and 1335 days, have all been typically fulfilled, as 1060, 109 ), aud 1335 years, with regard to the Papal Anti-
christ—-the typical forerunner of the future Napoleonic Personal Antichrist.
a The siege and destruction of Jerusalem in a.d. 70 by Titus was undoubtedly a remarkable typo and representation
of the coming siege and desolation of Jerusalem by Napoleon, but was evidently not the real and complete accomplish-
ment of this prediction in Matt. xxiv. 15; Mark xiii. 14; Luke xxi. 20; because at Titus’s destruction of Jerusalem the
idol or abomination of desolation, foretold in Daniel xii,, was certainly not set up for three and a-half times, i three
and a half years in the temple, because that temple was burnt down at the end of the siege, as the Romans were entering
Jerusalem ’ also there was then no tribulation such as was not from the beginning of the world, and worse therefore
than the Flood so that scarcely any flesh—any man, woman, or child-was saved; for indeed, the-destruction of Jeru-
salem bv Titus brought no tribulation whatever upon the world at large, and was quite local and not universal. Moreover
Christ is to come in the clouds with his angels immediately after this predicted tribulation (Matt. xxiv. 29,) and as he did
not come then, the tribulation certainly cannot have taken place at that time.
b These locusts will probably be evil spirits assuming that form, like Satan appeared as a serpent to Eye. It seems
from Rev ix 11 that Napoleon will exercise magic or talismanic command over them, probably through spiritualism or
sorcery, somewhat as the Indian serpent charmers exercise mysterious control over the most venomous reptiles.
Common locusts have no king. (Prov. xxx. 37.)


trumpet, beginning about a year and six months after the commencement of the three and
a-half years, will cause two myriads of myriads of lion-headed horses and demon horsemen
with breastplates of fire and jacinth and brimstone to come up near the Euphrates from the
bottomless pit, and, led by four evil angels, to go forth during ttiirteen months, slaying the
third part of mankind, probably 200 or 300 million, by fire and smoke and brimstone
breathed out of the mouths of the horses, which will also have tails like serpents, injuring
people.® At the close of these thirteen months of unparalleled slaughter, there will be,
according to the tenth of Revelation, a considerable religious revival, or Protestant Reforma-
tion, in many parts of Europe, particularly in England, Germany, and Switzerland, just as
at the Reformation formerly under Wickliffe, Luther, and Calvin, although most people will
still remain impenitent. A large company of Christians will escape these various tribulations
and massacres, by remaining hidden during the three and a-half years in a wilderness, and
being there miraculously fed, as described in the twelfth of Revelation.
Thus the Pentecostal Revival, and the subsequent persecution of 1260 prophetic days,
and the Crusades, and the Reformation, will be acted over again within the final 1870 days,
just as they have historically been acted within 1870 years ; there being a double fulfilment
of Revelation, first within 1870 year-days, and secondly within 1870 literal-days.
Immediately at the close of the three and a half years, during which this great tribula-
tion and persecution is to continue, there will be a great earthquake and brief darkening of
the constellations; and the sign of the Son of Man will begin to appear. 6 Napoleon will
then also become indescribably exasperated and troubled with “ tidings out of the East and
out of the North,’’ apparently relating to the discovered approach to Jerusalem from the
north-east of Asia of the “Kings from the East,” or lost ten tribes of the Jews, who will be
led by Providential guidance— probably by the sign of the Son of Man—to march back from
their remote Asiatic retreat, where they have been hidden for so many centuries, and to
cross over the literally dried-up river Euphrates, in order to take possession® of their ancient
home in Palestine, At the same time, most likely, symptoms of disaffection among those of
the other two tribes that have already been partially restored by Napoleon to Palestine, will
be reported. d The wrath of this Wilful King will be still further kindled by the miraculous
resurrection of the two slaughtered witnesses a few days previously, and of the consequent
repentance of the affrighted spectators, and their unanimous ascription of glory and worship
to the God of heaven instead of to himself.® His anger will moreover be inflamed by the
dreadful plagues of grievous sores, and the rivers and sea becoming as blood, and the
scorching of the sun and subsequent thick darkness, produced by the first five vials in their
literal-day fulfilment,/ during the month subsequent to the three and a-half years.
Perceiving, then, that some desperate exploit must be accomplished in order to retrieve
his waning reputation, and to re-assert his endangered supremacy, he will issue an urgent and
imperative summons to his satrap princes in every land to assemble such an overwhelming
and invincible array of military forces, as to make of Jerusalem and of the Jews a signal
monument of his terrible vengeance, by sweeping from the face of the earth every Israelitish
man, woman, and child, and razing to its lowest foundations their metropolitan city.y Among
his numerous battalions summoned to this war of extermination will be found the military
hosts of the ten vassal kings of the revived Roman Empire, and contingents and auxiliaries
from divers regions of Asia, Africa, and America ; for “miracle-working spirits shall go forth
to the kings of the earth and of THE WHOLE WORLD, to gather them together to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty—into a place called in the Hebrew tongue ARMA-
GEDDON.’T Breathing out threatenings and slaughter, and resolved in his fury to destroy
and utterly to make away many, this second Sennacherib will go forth with irresistible im-
petuosity, and pressing onwards will “ plant the tabernacles of his tents between the two seas
(the Mediterranean and the Dead Sea) upon the glorious holy mountain,” little recking that
a In the prophetic vision the horses appeared to breathe fire and smoke and brimstone, because of the muskets fired
by the riders over their heads, and appeared to have serpent like tails that had heads that hurt, because of the serpent-
shaped cannon with fire breathing mouths which the artillery horses drag at their heels. Thus the use ot gunpowder
and cannon was prophetically described fourteen centuries before their invention. The words “ prepared for an hour,
and a day, and a month, and a year,” are more correctly rendered “prepared against the hour of temptation, and against
the day of judgment for a month and a year.” In the Greek “ two hundred thousand thousand ”is simply “ two myriads
of myriads” (Rev. ix. 15,16,) meaning perhaps simply two vast armies.
b Rev. vi. 12; xi. 13. Matt. xxiv. 29. Joel ii. 31.
c Dan. xi. 44. Literal-day Rev.xvi. 12. Isaiah xlii. 15; xliv. 27; 1. 2; xi. 15,16 ; xix. 23. Zech. x. 11. Matt. ii. 12.
d Zech. x. 3 ; xii. 5. 6; xiv. 14. e Rev. xi. 7-14.
/ Rev. xvi. The seven vialsjhave their year-day fulfilment during the final 75 years, and their literal-day fulfilment
during the final 75 days—the excess of the 1335 over the 1260 days. (Dan.xii. 7,12.) The literal-day sixth vial continues
for forty days, and is the period of preparation for the battle of Armageddon which occurs during the subsequent five
days of the literal-day seventh vial. (See the Diagrams.)
g Daniel xi. 44. Psalm Ixxxiii. 4. Ezekiel xxxix. 2. Zechariah xii. 2,3. Joel iii.
h Revelation xvi. 18,14, 16 ; xvii. 13, 14; xix. 19.


he is here speedily to “ come to his end, none helping him.” a Gazing with sullen pride
upon the massive legions of his mighty men of war, he will doubtless begin in anticipa-
tion to exult over victory as within his grasp ; when lo! a dense darkness will unex-
pectedly supervene.h and presently the midnight gloom be as suddenly succeeded by the
preternatural dazzling appearance of the Lord Jesus and the heavenly hosts coming in
the clouds. Bright angels will also be seen in rapid flight descending and taking up to
the heavens in the SECOND ASCENSION the great multitude of all true Christians
then surviving on the earth, including 144,000 converted Jews.c So far from trembling at
these visible tokens of impending retribution, the latter-day Pharaoh will become more
hardened in his determination to struggle to the very last against the people and the power
of the Most High. No longer purposing simply to fight against human foes such as the
Jews, he now deliberately resolves to “ stand up against the Prince of Princes,” and to
“make war with the Lamb,” their Divine Messiah, whom he perceives to be descending to
contest with him the sovereignty of the globe. d An interval of two or three days is then
indicated to ensue ; whilst human apostasy reaches its most daring climax in Antichrist, with
his armies preparing personally to oppose and resist the descent of Christ and his armies to
the earth ; another Goliah in very deed entering the lists against the Son of David : the
Man of Sin challenging to combat the God of Heaven : the creature offering battle to his
Creator. Thus the Antichristian hosts stand marshalled in heaven-defying desperation with
a lurid phosphoric glare reflected upon their ghastly countenances from above, when un-
expectedly a frightful tumult arises from all quarters of their camp. A confusion as con-
founding as that of Babel is heard on every side. The mutual hatreds and jealousies that
have long been fermenting among the various sections of the heterogeneous and ill-assorted
troops will have burst forth in a tempest of irrepressible fury. “Every man’s sword will
he against his fellow.’’ Syrians, Turks, Greeks, Egyptians, English, French, Spaniards,
Italians, Germans, Lybians, Russians, all will be mingled in one chaotic, fierce, and san-
guinary conflict of mutual slaughter. “ Every horse will be smitten with blindness, and
his rider with madness.” The cavalry soldiers changed in a moment into raging maniacs,
and mounted upon plirenzied steeds, rendered unmanagable by instantaneous deprivation
of sight, e will naturally discharge their firearms, and unsheath their swords with savage
ferocity against their fellow-companions on the right hand and on the left, as if contending
with their most mortal foe. The battle-field will speedily resemble immense shambles
swimming in blood, and bestrewn with reeking masses of palpitating flesh, according to the
prediction “ that the blood shall come up even unto the horses’ bridles by the space of a thou-
sand and six hundred furlongs.’’/ The carnage will be most terribly appalling. Gushing
torrents of the purple tide of life will flow profusely over the grassy plain, like the bub-
bling cataracts of the antediluvian inundation, when the fountains of the great deep were
broken up. In strange unison with the war-whoops and din of strife will be heard
the shrill scream of the eagle, the wild cry of the vulture, and the hoarse croak of the
raven, as dense swarms of birds of prey wheel overhead, and expectantly contemplate this
transition of the flower of earth’s armies into food for the fowls of the air and beasts of the
field. And lions and tigers and leopards will hasten from their mountain lairs to regale
upon the unwonted feasts Nor will the sword alone devour the vast majority of these
warriors, that are predicted then to meet their doom. Great hailstones, each weighing a
hundredweight, and fire and brimstone, will also be rained down upon many of the horror-
stricken combatants, and an earthquake greater than ever before known will violently
shake the globe from its centre to its circumference, casting down the cities of the nations,
and every wall to the ground, and imparting to Megiddo’s plains a spasmodic shudder,
by which, in many places, hundreds may be engulfed like feorah, Dathan, and Abiram,
in the yawning chasm. And the flesh of many of them “ shall consume away, whilst they
stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongues
shall consume away in their mouths.’A Meanwhile the Imperial Antichrist, gazing upon
the scene with emotions of the deepest dismay, like those of his famed ancestor at Water-
loo, when the line of the Old Guard wavered and broke, is suddenly seized by the celestial
executioners of the judgment written, and together with his inseparable companion, the
a Daniel xi, 45. 2 Kings xix. 21 to 81.
b Joel iii. Ito 15. Ezekiel xxxii. Ito 8. Isaiah xiii. 4to 10.
g Mark xiii, 26. Matthew xxiv, 31. Lnke xxi. 27. Rev. i. 7.; vii. 9. literal-day Rev. xi. 15,18.; xiv. 15,16.; xvi. 15
Daniel vii. 13. In the literal-day fulfilment of Revelation during the five years between the First and Second Ascensions
at Christ’s Second Advent, the 144,000 in Rev. vii. are entirely Jews caught up in the Second Ascension after the three
and a-half year’s persecution, but the 144,000 in Rev. xiv. are not stated to be Jews at all, but are the Wise Virgins (verse
4, see also Matt, xxv.) and are evidently caught up in the First Ascension before the three and a-half year’s persecution.
Thus the 144,000 in Rev. vii. are totally distinct from those in Rev. xiv. d Daniel viii. 25. Rev. xvii. 14. ; xix. 19.
e The 7th seal, 7th trumpet, and 7th vial in their year-day fulfilment, last during the final five years, and therefore in
their literal-day fulfilment extend over the final five days. The 7th seal mentioned in Rev. viii. 1. is fully describe
throughout Rev xix.
f Ezekiel xxxviii. 21. Zechariah xii. 4.; xiv. 13. Rev. xiv. 20.
g Ezek. xxxix. 17. Rev. xix. 17. Ezek. xxix. 5.
h Rev. xvi. 21.18; xi. 19. Ezek. xxxviii. 20, 22. Zech. xiv. 12.


Roman Pontiff, hurled headlong, and precipitated amye into the flaming lake of Topheta
Thus will these two confederate political and ecclesiastical heads of the apostate Roman Empire
descend into the lake of fire in their bodies without dying many centuries before Satan
or the resurrected wicked are cast into it ; just as Enoch and Elijah have ascended to heaven
in their bodies, without dying, many centuries before the resurrection of the righteous.
But although two out of the three persons of the Antichristian Trinity of the Dragon, the
Wild Beast and the False Prophet, then sink down side by side into everlasting burnings,
yet the first of them—Satan the Dragon —will at that time undergo a different fate, by
being bound with a great chain, and condemned to spend the Millennium separately in the
bottomless pit—there to brood in gnawing despair over the ignominious discomfiture of his
nefarious plots.S
At the closing crisis of the above-mentioned Battle of Armageddon the Lord Jesus, having
visibly descended upon Mount Olivet with all his saints, who had previously been caught up
in the first and second Ascensions, and having in the greatness of his strength rent asunder
that ancient mountain, from its summit to its base, will be looked upon and acknowledged
by the beleagured Jews in Jerusalem, with deep contrition for their past unbelief, as the
promised Messiah whom their forefathers wickedly pierced. And becoming then suddenly
converted according to the typical example of the Apostle Paul, by the personal manifesta-
tion of the long rejected Saviour, they will afterwards preach the Gospel of
Christ to those who are left alive among the Gentile Comparatively few survivors
will be found anywhere except among the heathen, for at this crisis the incorrigible and
unrepentant will be cut off by devouring fire being sent upon them. But even some of the
combatants at Armageddon will be spared in the general slaughter, and converted and sent
as missionaries to the unevangelised communities afar off, and will be instrumental in per-
suading them to “ cast their idols to the moles and to the bats,” and to bow down and
worship before Jesus only. Simultaneously the dispersed Jews, wheresoever found, will
be brought in triumph to Jerusalem as a present to the Lord of Hosts. cl The herculean
task of burying the slain that fall at Armageddon will occupy the Jews for seven months,
and they will not finish the work of burning all the wood lound amid the wreck and frag-
mentary ruins of the battlefield until the end of seven years. Jerusalem will become the
earth’s millennial metropolis, to which multitudes from every nation will make annual pil-
grimages, and Rome, the long established centre of the world’s apostacy, will, by a volcanic
earthquake, be rendered a permanent lake of sulphureous flames, in which the Antichris-
tian leaders will apparently be placed during the millennium, as visible monuments of the
enkindled wrath of the Anointed Lamb, The few remaining inhabitants of the earth will
rapidly increase and multiply during the ten centuries of the millennium under the govern-
ment of the Lord Jesus and the glorified saints, who will come down from day to day from
the Heavenly Jerusalem visibly to reign over them, and “ the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.” e
THE MILLENNIUM.
The condition of the earth at the commencement of the Millennium of a thousand years,
spoken of in the twentieth of Revelation,<*is also described in the twenty-fourth of Isaiah.
“ The inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.’’/ The few unconverted that
are thus left and spared after the two ascensions of the righteous will become for the most
part truly converted, and constitute the nucleus of the new population that will speedily
refill the entire globe. As the general conflagration depicted by St. Peter g does not take
place until the end of these thousand years of the Day of the Lord, the state of so-
ciety and of the nations during that period will be somewhat the same as now, ex-
cept that instead of “ the whole world lying in wickedness’’ as at present, it will then
come to pass that “the earth will be full of the knowledge ol the Lord as the waters
cover the sea,’’A and Christ shall have “the heathen for his inheritance, and the utter-
most parts of the earth for his possession i and “the idols he shall utterly abolish
“ he shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth j “for all nations shall come and worship before him k and there shall be given
to the Son of Man “ dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all people and nations and
languages should serve him and “ the kingdom, and dominion, and greatness of the king-
dom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High; ’ I
a Rev. xix. 20. Isaiah xiv. 22.; xxx. 27 to 33. Dan. vii. 11.; viii. 25.; xi. 45. 2 Thess. ii. 8.
5 Rev. xx. Ito 3. Isaiah xxiv. 21, 22.
c Zech. xiv. 4; xii. 9, 10; Jude 14 ; Isaiah ii. 3 ; Ixiii. 1; Ixi. 6; xi 9,10 j lx. 3,11.
d Ezekiel xxxix. 6; Isaiah Ixvi. 16, 19, 20; ii. 20; Dan. vii. 27 ; Zech. ix. 10; Rom. xi. 15 ; Isaiah lx. 9.
e Ezekiel xxvix. 9, Iz; Isaiah li. 2,3, lx. 14; Micah iv. I; Zech. xiv. 16; Rev. xviii.; xix. 3; Isaiah, Ixvi. 23, 24;
Psl. ii. 12 ; Rev. xx.; xxi.; Ezek. xl. to xlviii.; Isaiah xi. 9.
f Ezek. xxxix. 6; Isaiah xxiv. G ; Ixvi. 16 ; Jude 15 ; 2 Thess. i, 8. g 2 Peter iii. 10. h 1 John v. 19; Isaiah xi. J ;
a i Psalms ii. 8. j Isaiah ii. 18 ; Zech. ix. 10; Psalms Ixxii. 8. k Rev. xv. 4, xi. 15, xx.; Psalms Ixxxvi. 9, Ixvi. 3, 4
1 Dan. vii. 14, 27, ii. 44


and u they shall reign with Christ on the earth for a thousand years, a People will
then cease to maintain standing armies, or formidable navies : for they shall beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks ; nation shall not lilt up
sword against nation ; neither shall they learn war any more ; but they shall sit every man
under his vine, and under his fig-tree, and none shall make them afraid.’ b The fertility ot
the soil will be greatly increased :g “ the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose.
Venomous reptiles will become innocuous, and the beasts of prey will lose their savage
natures ; and the lion and bear shall graze peaceably beside the flocks and herds ; “the wolf
and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock. Mankind
will, however, still continue subject to death, which does not cease until alter the Millen-
nium ; but patriarchal length of life will specially be allotted to the Jews, for amongst them
u the child shall die a hundred years old,” and u their days shall be as the days of a tree, e
All the Jews surviving Antichrist’s persecution will have been restored to Palestine, and
will become all righteous and truly converted, and shall all know the Lord from the least
even unto the greatest;”/ as will also a very large proportion of the Gentiles.
According to the fourteenth of Zechariah, there will, however, always remain among the
Gentiles some feigned and insincere converts to Christianity, coercively ruled by Messiah
u with a rod of iron,” and sometimes insubordinately refusing to attend the annual feast ot
tabernacles at Jerusalem, to which multitudes from every nation will make yearly pilgrim-
ages; and at last after the millennium, these feigned converts will break out into the Gog
and Magog rebellion.# Nevertheless, if only half of the millennial population shall be
truly righteous, there shall then be a greater number of righteous persons on the earth in
one generation than there have been altogether in all the past two hundred generations,
because at present there are not estimated to be more than three or four millions truly
godly Christians among the existing thirteen hundred million inhabitants of this globe; and
indeed a thousand million are supposed to be heathen who never heard of salvation through
Jesus Christ. Moreover, instead of merely thirteen hundred million, this earth is capable
of containing, and very likely will then contain, at least a hundred times that number of
inhabitants.A At that time the twelve tribes of Israel will re-occupy Palestine, which will
be divided afresh among them, and enlarged from the Mediterranean and the Nile to the
Euphrates and Persian Gulf.i The earthly Jerusalem, together with a new Jewish temple,
will be rebuilt on a scale of unapproached magnificence, as described in the last nine
chapters of Ezekiel, and in the latter part of Isaiah; and will be nine miles square, or
eighteen thousand measures, that is, about thirty-six ftiiles a in circumference j The heavenly
Jerusalem, the abode of the beatified saints of the First Resurrection, also have
descended from God, and have been placed in the aerial skies within sight of this earth; it
is described in the twenty-first of Revelation as being a cubical structure and twelve
thousand furlongs, that is, fifteen hundred miles square, or altogether six thousand miles in
circumference. ... ,
Then the successive generations of the mortal and unglorified inhabitants of the earth
will be reigned over by the Lord Jesus, and His glorified saints, who will not indeed per-
manently dwell during the whole day and night upon the terrestrial planet, which is a mere
speck compared with the vast extent of the entire universe; but who will descend upon
daily visits from their eternal home in the heavenly Jerusalem, to exercise governmental
jurisdiction over the nations of the millennial earth; and thus the heavenly hosts will always
be visibly descending and ascending between heaven and earth as prefigured in the vision of
Jacob’s ladder ;/r and Christ and His immortal saints will be seen moving among mortal
people on earth, just as at the transfiguration scene, which was a typical picture ot the Son
of Man coming ip His millennial kingdom. l All the innumerable worlds contained within
the limits of the whole creation will equally be subjected to the dominion of these glorified
saints of the First Resurrection, who constitute the bride, the Lamb’s wife; for they are
a Rev. xx. 6, v. 10. b Micah iv. 3,4; Isaiah ii. 4 ; Hosea ii. 18 ; Psalms x. 4, vi. 9 ; Zech iii. 10.
c Isaiah xxxv., xxx. 2,3, Iv. 13; Joel iii. 18; Amos ix. 13; Psalms Ixvii. 7.
d Isaiah xi. 6,7, 8; Ixv. 25; Ezek.xxxiv.2s: Hus. ii. 18. e Rev. xx. 14; Isaiah Ixv. 20, 22. ,
/ Isaiah lx. 21; Jerem. xxxi. 31-34, xxxii. 36-44, xxxiii. 7 16; Ezek. xi. 17-20, xxvih. 25, 26, xxxiv. 13, 26, 2b.
xxxvi. 24-28, <vc., and in the minor prophets. A
g Psalms ii. 9; Rev. xix. 15: Zech. xiv. 16-19, viii. 20, 22; Isaiah ii. 1,3, Ixvi. 23; Rev. xx. 8,9. ylhis second
rebellion of the Magog nations is plainly after the millennium, but their first insurrection, described in Ezek. xxxym.,
is at the Armageddon war before the millennium. . ~ ,
h This earth is eight thousand miles in diameter, and contains two hundred million square miles of surface, ot wmcn
only sixty million square miles are dry land; hence there are 38.400 million acres of land, at 640 acres to a square mile.
And if we reckon that three-fourths of this land surface will he cultivated, there will be three-fourths of 38,400 million
acres —that is, 28,800 million acres—under cultivation; and then, computing an acre of soil of millennial fertility to
produce every year enough food for seven persons, there would be thus sufficient food annually for seven tunes 28,800
million persons ; that is, just about 200,000 million persons, which would be 150 times greater number than the present
population of 13,00.0 million people. ...
i Gen. xv. 18 ; Ex. xxiii. 31; Deut, xi. 24; Josh. i. 4; Ezek. xlvii. 13—21, xlviii. j Ezek. xlvm. 30.
k Dan. vii. 14, 27; Hev. v. 10, xx. 6 j Gen. xxviii. 12. . _.
I Matt. xvii. 1. Peter and James and John did not see death until they saw the Son of Man coming in ±iis
kingdom typically at His transfiguration.—2 Peter i. 16.


kings and priests, and joint heirs with Him who is Heir of all things. As Christ, the Head
of the Church, is exalted far above all principalities and powers; so they who become His
glorified members will similarly be exalted with Him. They will govern the countless ranks
and orders of angels. Each saint who is raised or translated at Christ’s second coming will
not only reign over the earth during the millennium, but will afterwards probably rule
over a kingdom of angelic subjects of vaster extent than the greatest of terrestrial
empires.
At the end of the millennium, the diurnal visits of the Lord Jesus and His heavenly saints
to the earth will suddenly be discontinued, because they are only to reign over it in its
millennial state for exactly a thousand years and no longer: and the nations and society
having previously somewhat degenerated, and being thus suddenly released from the
restraint of such a powerful and beneficent government, will forthwith fall into a condition
of confusion and anarchy. The devil being at the same time unchained and “ loosed for a
little season ” from his imprisonment in the bottomless pit, will “go out to deceive the
nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together
to battle, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they go up on the breadth
of the earth, and compass the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city (the earthly
Jerusalem); and fire comes down from God out of heaven, and devours them. And the
devil that deceived them is cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the
false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever,”
The immediate sequel of the destruction of the rebel nations of Magog at the end of the
millennium is the Second Resurrection and[ Judgment of the wicked dead before the great
White Throne, and the creation of a new heaven and a new earth in place of the first heaven
and first earth, which pass away—as described by the Apostle John at the conclusion of his
prophetic vision. “ And I saw a great white throne, and Him that sat on it, from whose
face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. And I saw
the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened, and another book
was opened, which is the Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they
were judged, every man according to his works. And death and hell were cast into the
lake of fire. This is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in the Book
of life was cast into the lake of fire. »And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first
neaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.”«
TWO ASCENSIONS OF CHEISTIANS AT CHRIST'S SECOND ADVENT, AND
THE RETURN OF THE JEWS, AND THE GREAT TRIBULATION.
It is very evident from various passages of Scripture that the personal second coming
of Christ will take place just before the millennium of a thousand years, during which
Satan is to be bound, the successive generations living on this earth also then consisting for
the most part of converted persons. (Rev. xx. 4, xi. 15-19 ; 2 Thess. ii. 8; Matt. xxiv.
9—31; Mark xiii, 24-27; Luke xxi. 27 ; Dan. vii. 14, xii. 1,2, 12, 13 ; Zech. xiv. 4;
Isa. Ixvi., &c.)
But while it is thus manifest that Christ’s second advent is peb-millennial, it is also
most important especially to notice that that advent will not be accomplished in just a few
hours, but the period during which it will be taking place will occupy about five years ;
because it will be transacted in two stages by our Lord, Jirst, descending into the air midway
between the highest heavens and this earth, to translate thither to Himself the resurrected
saints and 144,000 Christian believers in his impending advent about TWO YEARS AND
FROM THREE TO FIVE WEEKS after the Seven-years’Covenant between Napoleon
and the Jews ; b and secondly , after remaining there for an interval of about five years; c
a Rev. xx. 11 to xxi. 1. The prophetic narrative being brought down to the end of Rev. xxi. 1, comes to a full
stop, and returns back again to the period of the pre-millennial second coming of Christ, parallel with Rev. xix. 7. for
the heavenly Jerusalem evidently descends at the mari’iage of the Lamb before the millennium, from the highest
heaven within sight of the earth, and thenceforth remains visibly suspended in the air, so that the spared nations of
the millennial earth walk in the light of it (Rev. xxi. 24.) Thus an entirely new and distinct prophetic vision is
described from Rev. xxi. 2 to xxii. 15, the whole description being of the interior state of this heavenly new Jerusalem,
and of the glorified resurrection saints within it, and not at all of the mortal unglorified people in the millennial
earth. The new Jerusalem is nowhere stated to descend actually upon this earth, and being a square city larger than
Europe itself, could never be expected to be poised upon, and in contact with, this globe.
b 1 Thess. iv. 16; Matt. xxv. 1-10; Rev. xii. 5, xiv. 1-5. Because the year-day fulfilment of the seals, trumpets
and other prophecies regarding the 1260 days in Revelation, continues between 1835 to 1850 years from a.d. 29-33 to the
end in a.d. 1873-5; therefore the redoubled literal-day fulfilment of those same prophecies will continue between 1835 to
1850 days (that is, five years and from five to seven weeks) before the end of the crisis. But the vision of the twenty-four
crowned elders in Rev. iv. v. shows that the first stage in Christ’s advent and the resurrection and ascension of saints
occurs just before the real ultimate literal-day fulfilment of those seals, trumpets, &c , and consequently just before the
final five years, and from five to seven weeks, that is to say, about TWO YEA.RS AND FROM THREE TO FIVE
WEEKS after the covenant. This is also shown by the year-day and literal day fulfilments of the prophecy about the
man child in Rev. xii. 5. (See the diagrams.)
c This interval consists of the latter half-week of Daniel’s 70th week, or three and a-half years’ great persecution


then again translating upward to Himself another Elijah-company of Christians, and forth-
with descending upon the very surface of the earth at Mount Olivet to destroy the in-
corrigible at Armageddon. (Zech. xiv. 4; Matt. xxiv. 29.) The following testimonies from
Ounninghame, Winthrop, Bickersteth, Purdon, and Hooper on this point are valuable.
The late eminent William Cuninghame of Lainshaw, who was one of the most
widely-known interpreters of the general period of 1868 as the expected time of Christ’s
advent, speaks fully of the distinction between the two stages in the advent, in the third
edition of his work on the Apocalypse, published in London in 1832. He remarks that in
the former editions of his work he had not perceived the difference in point of time between
our Lord’s future advent in the air, and His descent to this earth in the day of Armageddon,
but that he now saw that Christ’s advent in the air to take to the heavens the wise virgins
would be at a considerable interval before His descent on Mount Olivet. With many other
writers he regarded the French revolution of 1793 as the commencement of the final seventy-
five years of the year-day 1,335 years, and as the starting-point of the year-day fulfilment
of the seven vials of God’s wrath. (Dan. xii. 12, Rev. xvi.) In his view “that French
Revolution was but the beginning of woes ; it was an earthquake, and Europe has too easily
flattered herself that its effects had spent themselves in the overthrow of Napoleon. Yes,
Europe has thus flattered herself, but not so the writers on prophecy.” In regard to the
events to be expected as the crisis of 1867-8 draws nigh, he says :
“ Amidst this commixture of dread and alarm, and these groanings of distressed nations,
and fond whisperings of ‘ peace, peace,’ suddenly as the blaze of forked lightning, unex-
pectedly as the fall of the trap upon the ensnared animal, and as the dark and concealed
approach of the midnight thief, a voice like that of ten thousand thunders shall burst on
the ears of the astonished inhabitants of the earth. It is the voice of the Archangel. It is
the trump of God. It is the descent of the Son of God. He oometh —He cometh to judge the
earth. His dead saints spring from the dust—His living saints, in a moment, in the twink-
ling of an eye, are changed, and both together are rapt up far above the clouds, to meet
Him (1 Thess. iv. 17,) long before He is seen by the inhabitants of the earth. This I con-
ceive is the great event that we are to look for. It seems to me we have entered into that
period of awful expectation, during which the Church is likened to the ten virgins.
“ At the same time that the saints are caught up to meet the Lord, the whirlwind of
wrath shall go forth against the Roman earth—the political heavens shall pass away as a
scroll—the war of Armageddon shall commence, and, in its awful progress, it shall make
the world a wilderness. It may probably begin as an intestine war of the nations against
themselves, tearing to pieces every kingdom and state, and establishing, first a fierce
democracy on the ruins of monarchical rule, ending at length in military despotism. It is
during these awful and bloody struggles that the Roman earth shall be moulded info that
great confederacy of the ten-horn kingdoms (Rev. xvii. 13,) which is to perish in battle
against the Lamb and His celestial hosts. This confederacy shall be headed by Lucifer,
son of the morning, the Assyrian of Isaiah, who shall range under his military feoffship all
the regal powers of the Western empire.
“ Now, as these events must occupy a considerable interval of years, and as our Lord
comes to the air and takes His saints before the war of Armageddon, I must conclude that
a long interval will elapse between His first appearance above the clouds (1 Thess. iv. 17)
and the descent mentioned in Zech. xiv. 4,5, and Rev. xix. ll.a
“ During the whole of this interval the glorified Church shall be with our Lord in the
air. If it be asked whether, while one complex series of events is to be going forward upon
earth, all preparatory to the great catastrophe of the treading of the wine-press, any parallel
series is to be proceeding in the church above, preparatory to the glorious antithesis of that
catastrophe, namely, the descent of the New Jerusalem, the city of our God, and the estab-
lishment of our Lord’s kingdom, I answer, that though it becomes us to use reverential
caution in prying into these high mysteries of the kingdom, yet it does appear to me
that we are not left altogether without light in the Scriptures on these points.
(Dan. ix. 27, vii. 25, xii. 7 ; Rev. xi. 2,3, xii. 6,14, xiii. 5), with a preceding period of a year and a half of warning. This
five years is the time of duration of the year-day seventh seal, seventh trumpet, and seventh vial, which begin with the
first stage of Christ’s advent. Also it is clear, that as the year-day manchild (Christ) was caught up in ad. 29 33, about
500 years before the year-day 1,260 days of the Papal Antichrist began, so the literal day manchild (the wise virgins) will
be caught up about 5 )0 days before the literal-day 1,260 days of the Infidel Antichrist begin, that is, about a year and a-
half before the Infidel three and a-half years begin ; in other words, about five years before the end. (Rev. xii. 5.)
a Cuninghame considered from Micah ii. 12,13, and vii- 15,17, compared with Ezek. xx. 33-37, that many of the
Jews will be led back through the wilderness, where, they will be sifted by God’s judicial dealings, and then brought to
Jerusalem, just before the battle of Armageddon, at which time Christ will visibly appear to succour them from their
foes, and will be recognised and owned by them as their Messiah. ''Zech. xii. .10, xiv. 5.) Such Jews will apparently be
some of the lost ten tribes that are now living in the north-west of Asia, and who are to return over the literally dried-up
river Euphrates to Jerusalem just at the time of the battle of Armageddon. They are distinct from those of the other
two tribes of Judah, many of whom will be restored to Palestine seven years and two and a half months before the
millennium, by a seven years’ covenant between them and Napoleon. (Dan. ix. 27.)


When the raised and changed saints are caught up to meet our Lord above the clouds,
we conceive of this immense multitude as standing in one mass of celestial bodies, shining
with resplendent glory, reflected as it were from the irradiation of the divine effulgence of
their common Lord. There remains yet to be effected the marshalling of these heavenly
armies in their various orders and degrees of glory and dominion. Of this comely and
glorious array, in which the saints shall descend with our Lord, when He treads the wine-
press, we have the type in the marshalling of the hosts of Israel, in Numbers i. and ii. But
this marshalling of the saints in their various degrees of glory supposes a previous judgment
according to works, since this is absolutely necessary thereunto. See Rom. xiv. 10-13,
A Lor. v. 10, and sundry other passages of Scripture, but especially the parable of the
pounds, in which the judgment according to works is placed immediately after our Lord
receives the kingdom. (Luke xix. 13-15.)_ (Now the extreme particularity of this judg-
ment, which is for the vindication of the divine justice and impartiality in the eyes of all
intelligent creation seems to demand a considerable interval. Next, as I conceive, to this
judgment of the glorified church, follows the marriage, Rev. xix. 7. There is also the
solemn investiture of our Lord in the kingdom, on which occasion He adds to the Stephanos ,
crown, which He wears in chap. xiv. 14; the diademata polla, many diadems , with which
He comes forth in the day of the treading of the wine-press, chap. xix. 12. All these
events do, in their relation to the divine attributes of power and omniscience, require, indeed,
only a moment of time ; but in their relation to the capacities of the creature, for whose
instruction and manifestation of the divine glory they are intended, they require a con-
siderable lapse of time.
“I remark, in the next place, that the interval between the Exodus of Israel from
rl'gyPL ar (d their entrance into Canaan, appears to be in many respects a type of the interval
between the rapture of the glorified Church out of the mystic Egypt (Rev. xi. 8) into the
air to meet the Lord, and her subsequent descent with Him. Israel, after passing through
the Red Sea, was, as it were, buried in seclusion from the world in the solitudes of Sinai,
and there received the institutions of Moses. In like manner, I apprehend, when our Lord
first comes into the air, the saints being rapt up, the sensible signs of his presence shall
be withdrawn. Shrouded and enshrined in celestial light, wholly inaccessible to mortal
eyes, our Lord shall, with His saints, direct all the movements of the storm of wrath ; and
after the children of men shall have recovered from their first sensations of horror and
dismay, occasioned by the voice of the Archangel, they shall, like Pharaoh, be judicially
hardened; and, deceived by the devil, they shall gather themselves to the battle of the
Ureat i)ay, altogether insensible against whom they are fighting.
In this sanctuary of unseen and celestial light, the glorified Church may probably
receive from her Lord the institutions of His kingdom in tha new earth, and may thus be
prepared to fill her high office of subordinate and yet conjunct dominion and priestly minis-
trations in the age to come* And as the Hebrew Church received from Moses when in the
wilderness the book of Genesis, containing the history of creation, and of the world and
the Church, down to the end of the patriarchal age, it seems agreeable to this analogy that
the glorified Church should, along with the institutions of the age to come, receive, while
with her Lord in the air, a full record of all the past mysteries of Creation, Providence,
and Redemption—without which it does not appear that the saints can possess the necessary
qualifications for administering the affairs of the kingdom.
“I feel also inclined to believe that during the whole of this period when the Lord shall
be with His glorified saints in the air, a part of the Church shall be left in the midst of the
great tribulation to form the nucleus of the innumerable company of palm-bearers from all
nations and kindreds and tongues, who are gathered to the Lord just before the concluding
act of wrath (Rev. vii. 9-17) ; and that by this portion of the Church the word shall be
preached with great power and effect among the nations, so that the ministration of the
angel having the everlasting Gospel (Rev. xiv. 6) shall continue during the whole of the
period now under consideration, and until the white-robed, palm-bearing saints are brought
out of the great tribulation. Indeed, without a powerful preaching of the Gospel within
this period, it is not easy to conceive how so vast a multitude couid wash their robes and
make them white in the blood of the Lamb.
‘‘ Even a century ago the necessity of the great preaching of the Gospel before the
end was thus discerned by Sir Isaac Newton, in his observations on Daniel and the
Apocalypse. He said, ‘The Gospel must be preached to all nations before the great tribu-
lation and the end of the world. The palm-bearing multitude which come out of the great
tribulation cannot he made innumerable out of all nations, unless they be made so by the
preaching of the Gospel before that tribulation comes. An angel must fly through the
midst of heaven with the everlasting Gospel to preach to all nations before* Babylon falls
and the Son of man reaps His harvest. 1 ’ (Tlev. vii. 9-17, xiv. 6, 15; Matt. xxiv. 14.)
U 1 conceive the 144,000 sealed ones in Rev. xiv. 1-5 to represent that portion of the


Church of God which shall, when the Lord appears in the air, be caught up along with the
raised saints to meet Him. They are the same as the five wise virgins of the parable in
Matt, xxv., who took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
“ Those who shall be saved when Christ appears comprehend two bodies. First, the
144,000 sealed ones who are to be caught up to meet the Lord, and are not to be touched
by the last great tribulation. Secondly, the white-robed palm-bearing multitude, who come
out of the great tribulation, and therefore must for a time be left in it. The last will
probably consist chiefly of new converts from the heathen, who not having previously had
the light of the Gospel, will not, like the nominally Christian nations, be chargeable with
the guilt of rejecting it. Thus the 144,000 sealed ones and the palm-bearers are distinct
bodies, and they stand in the same relation to each other as the loaves of the firstfruits of
the harvest to the harvest itself. (Lev. xxiii. 17.) Accordingly, when the sealed ones are
first brought on the prophetic scene (Rev. xiv. 1-5), they are expressly said to be the
firstfruits STiaPxn to God and the Lamb, while at a subsequent period and in a distinct part
of the vision (v. 14-16) the Son of man is revealed with His sharp sickle to reap the har-
vest of the earth. This act I apprehend to be the same with the gathering of the palm-
hearers out of the great tribulation.
“ The 144,000 sealed ones are therefore that eminently faithful part of the professing
Church which shall be counted worthy of escaping the things which shall come to pass, and
standing before the Son of Man. (Luke xxi. 36.) They shall not be touched by the last
storm of wrath. Being changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye (1 Cor. xv. 51,
52), they shall, along with the raised saints, be caught up to meet the Lord in the air. (1
Thess. iv. 17.) The palm-bearers or the harvest are another portion of the professing
Church, who, not being counted worthy of that special glory and happiness, shall for a
season be left in the great tribulation ; and having been purified in the furnace, shall, per-
haps, with great multitudes (especially among the heathen nations), who at the same period
may have turned to God and cried for mercy, be at length brought out of it. They shall
not, indeed, inherit the same transcendent glory as the sealed ones , but they are, along with
them, to keep the feast of tabernacles at the commencement of the age to come, when God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.’’
FOREMOST in the list of those who in the course of the last half-century have firmly
and distinctly maintained that the close of this economy, ushered in by the second advent
of Christ, was predicted in Scripture to take place about the years 1867-68, the name of
the Rev. E. Biokersteth, Rector of Watton, England, stands pre-eminently conspicuous.
As the author of many devotional works, comprising “ The Scripture Help,” “ The
Christian Student,” “ Treatises on Prayer and the Lord’s Supper,” and as one of the prin-
cipal promoters of the Evangelical Alliance and the leading Episcopal Societies in
England, this divine is known in America, as well as in Great Britain.
So early as in the year 1835 he stated this important view regarding the second advent,
in a work entitled, “ The Practical Guide to the Prophecies.” The dates upon the inter-
pretation of which this view is grounded are given at the end of this pamphlet. The
following description of the events which jot lie before the Church is compiled from his
“ Restoration of the Jews” and “ Guide to the Prophecies.”
“ There is one part of the duty of the Church which has hitherto been little
regarded. From the extraordinary peace which God has given to the world, a period of
quiet clearly predicted before the last troubles (1 Thess. v. 2,3; Rev. vii. 1,) Christians
have not had their attention directed, as the earlier Church had, to the duty and privilege
of suffering for Christ.
“ But as the predicted trials are manifestly drawing nearer, Christians should be led to
prepare and be ready for them, that they may be enabled to withstand every temptation,
and become the largest blessings in those trials to their country, their fellow-Christians,
and their fellow-men.
“ The people op Israel shall in these troubles be restored to their own
LAND. On this the Prophet Daniel, xii. 1, is explicit. In the midst of the trials, when the
enemy is coming in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him.
(Isa. lix. 19.) The Jews shall be remarkably restored; and this itself will be as an ensign
lifted up on the mountains, and as the blowing of a trumpet to all the inhabitants of the
world and dwellers upon the earth. (Isa. xviii.) There are two stages in their restoration;
the first A GRADUAL AND PREPARATORY RESTORATION in a self-righteous and persecuting
state (Isa. xxvii. 12; Ixvi. 1, 10,) liberalising and infidel (Ezek. xx. 32, 33) and
anticipating their peace and health as come. (Jer. viii. 15; Isa. Ixvi. 3.) This is the
* Louis Napoleon’s proposal of a European Congress, although rejected in 1863 by England, must nevertheless be
carried out; and his seven years’ covenant with the Jews will probably be made by him as head of such a Congress,
(Note to sth edition, November, 1864.)


signal to the nations that the mystery of God is ahont to finish. On this restoration the
last dregs ot_ their hitter Jewish tribulation are drunk up by the nation through the
unprovoked jealousy, hatred, and confederacy of the Gentile nations waging war against
them, (Ezek. xxxYin. and xxix.; Zech. xiii. 8,9; xiy. 1,2.) And at length their
Messiah and Deliverer appears for them. (Rev. xix.) The full and glorious re-
SJ ’?'o^ TION °* lB 011 the return of our Lord, after this preparatory restoration.
. t? Th ® situation of God’s children in these last trials. We have an account
m Revelation of the 144,000 sealed and preserved from the last judgments, as appears from
ix., compared with Revelation. In several of the parables we have a similar
distinction In that of the ten virgins, the wise virgins having oil in their vessels and
ready for then-lord, enter in with Him to the marriage. In that of the servants waiting,
the taithlul and wise servants, giving meat to the household in due season, is pronounced
blessed and rewarded; and our Lord ‘will appear the second time without sin unto
salvation to those who love His appearing.’ (Heb. xi. 26 ; Matt. xxiv. 45; xxv.) These
form the firstfrmts unto God and the Lamh. They will be completely delivered from all
the evil ot the days of the great tribulation (Is. xxvi. 20; Matt, xxv 10;) and preserved in
that season ot temptation, which shall come upon all the world. (Rev. iii. 10.) Among
professors of religion there are, however, vast numbers in an intermediate and very
dangerous state ; the lukewarm of Laodieea; the foolish virgins of the parable; the many
whose love waxes cold because iniquity abounds. They are little to be distinguished
outwardly from decided Christians; they associate with them, they profess, perhaps, the
same doctrines; they think they are right, that they are 1 rich, increased with goods and
have need of nothing, and yet continuing in this state they will assuredly be left in the
terrors of the GREAT TRIBULATION. May all such ‘be zealous and repent.’ ”
“ Just before Daniel’s time of blessedness there is a period of half a week, which is
mentioned in Dan. ix. 27, for the infidel persecution, from which the Philadelphian Church
is saved (Rev. ni. 10), but the Laodicean part left in it to be purified, and to be the last
gathering of the Church to the marriage supper, a
“In Dan ix. 21 we have the 70th week at the close of the times of the Gentiles, when
the people of Israel are again taken into covenant. This week is to be divided into two
parts. The character of the first'half-week seems to be set out (Isa. Ixvi 1,3,) where the
Jews are represented as in a self-righteous spirit, rebuilding the temple and offering sacrifices;
and the character of the second half, or dividing of the week, answers to Isaiah Ixvi.
4-6, where they are represented as under the terror of the infidel Antichrist, who causes
the sacrifice to cease; and at the close is the consummation, in the destruction of that
Antichrist, as set before us, Isa. x. 23, 25; Thess. ii. 8.”
The images, figures, and descriptions of this Gentile Tribulation are some of the most
awful passages in the prophetical writings. The restraints now upon the wicked will be
removed by the overthrow of Governments, as in the Reign of Terror, in 1793. The
kingdoms of this world shall make open war against our Lord Christ. Rev. xvi. 14 ;
xvu. 14; xix. 19.
“ The day of tribulation will be the day of large conversion to Christ. We have
many explicit statements that the time of these judgments will be the time of extended
conversion of souls. A great multitude comes out of this Great Tribulation. (Rev. vii.
9, 14.) And just after it is mentioned in Daniel the most glowing promise is given to
those successful in labours for the spiritual good of others. (Dan. xii. 1,3; Isaiah xxvi.
9 ; Luke xiv. 23.)
“ The character and situation of the wicked under these trials is also brought
before us. Ihere are those who will remain unconverted under these unequalled exhi-
bitions .of grace on the one hand, and judgment on the other. As Luther once said, ‘ I be-
lieve it will come to pass that the greater and clearer the light of the Gospel is the more
wicked the world will be.’ Their character will become more and more desperately wicked
(1 Tim. iii. 13,) and this wickedness more manifest to all. (Rev. xix. 19,) Even now, after
their hardness and impenitent heart , they treasure up to themselves wrath against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. It appears clear that the
tribulation of the seventh vial serves to separate men into their respective classes, and no^
a This paragraph is takenfrom Bickersteth’s remarks on the chronological date 666, from which chapter also the
following important paragraph on the futurity of Daniel’s 7uth week is taken. He also showed in his “ Guide to the
Prophecies, that id the yertr-day fulfilment the dates of 2520, 2300, 1335 amt 1260 years ended about, or soon after 1868
r a “; lv 23 » vn }- 14 > Z l }- 12 > 7 5 & ev * xii 6 .) and ,liat “ there shall be a lime no longer,” in Llev. x. 6, means there shall
ne 360 years no longer from the Reformation in 1517 until the consummation. He said (page 184)
. “ even * s > the appearance of our Lord and the first resurrection of the saints, would in this view take place
within 360 years from the Reformation in 1517, that is, before 1877.
“If these periods be correctly commenced, they point out that within the next thirty years the Jews shall be
restored, the .Turkish empire shall perish, the time of great tribulation will take place, our Lord Jesus will return to our
eaith, the saints shall be raised, Popery shall fall, and the time of full blessedness and the kingdoms of this world
becoming Christ’s kingdom shall have arrived.” (Seventh edition in 1841.)


finally to destroy the wicked. When the great hail out of heaven falls upon the wicked,
they do hut blaspheme Ood because of the plague of the hail. (Rev. xvi. 21.) It is the very
mark of Antichrist, with his many followers, to deny that Jesus is coming (epxoysvov) in the
flesh. (2 John 7.) Thus Pharaoh in Egypt grew more hardened with each successive
judgment, till his last overthrow. They will go on to make war with the Lamb and His
followers; and probably will reduce the people of Christ to such extremities as to make,
as we have noticed, their faith ready to fail, and their hope to faint. Their continued
impunity, and the prolonged absence of the Lord, produces entire unbelief of His return
at all in the world (2 Peter iii. 4;) and the excess of suffering, and the delay of Divine
vengeance on the wicked, causes despondency in God’s people. Hence our Lord says,—
Shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him, though He bear
long with them ? I tell you that He will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son
of man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth f (Luke xviii. 7,8.)
Arm yourselves with the mind of Christ about suffering. To be like Him is the
glory of a Christian. He foresaw, with perfect distinctness and foreknowledge, all the
bitter cup which He had to taste. He knew His sorrows beforehand, far more distinctly
than we can possibly know any sufferings through which we have to go, and yet He with-
held not Himself from His overwhelming baptism, and was only straitened till it was
accomplished. Amidst all temptations, from friends and from foes, from the world and the
devil, and from those infirmities of our nature, with the feeling of which He was touched,
—look at the invincible firmness, patience, meekness, gentleness, love, and faithfulness of
our Divine Lord. Truly, we must look much to Jesus, if we would be armed with His
mind. He will give us His Spirit; He will strengthen us with His grace. He will impart
to us His mind.
“ Now gather Scriptural truth, which may be as oil in our lamps for the day of
necessity. A man unacquainted with all that God has foretold in His Word of events
yet to come, and expecting things only to go on as they have done, must be taken unawares
by them (Luke xxi. 34), and so wholly unprepared. While he who has attended to God’s
warnings, and treasured up all His gracious statements of what has to take place, will not
be taken by surprise, but will be found ready and provided against the evil day. The
prepared Christian, who remembers what Christ has beforehand told him, will be able,
amidst all the unusual shakings and convulsions of that day, and the terrors of his fellow-
men, to lift up his head. He knows the end of the Lord, he sees his redemption and that
of the whole earth approaching, and with this hope he can be full of confidence, peace,
and joy.
“ Ask for grace to be bold in the confession of truth. This did the Apostles,
and they were heard. (Acts iv. 29.) True it is this boldness will expose us to ridicule and
bitter hatred of evil men; true it is even Christians may blame us, and they of our own
household think we carry matters much too far; true it is we may have thereby to suffer
and be shamefully entreated, even though we had the wisdom, love, and humility of Paul,
yet still let us be bold in our God, to speak the Gospel of God with much contention. Oh !
how great a grace is given to a Christian, when he is enabled to look on the praise of man
as a small thing, and one to be despised when put in competition with the praise of God;
and with large love to all, with humility, and patience, and simplicity of mind to seek only
God’s approval. This will give us real boldness, as it did to Peter and John before all the
rulers of the Jews (Acts iv. 13, 19,) and so make us large blessings to His Church. The
hope of the Redeemer’s return is peculiarly calculated to embolden and strengthen even
the timid and weak believer faithfully to confess present and needful truth.
“Be diligent in seeking to save souls. The words of our Saviour should especially
now be our purpose and guide day by day. I must work the works of Him that sent me,
while it is day; the night cometh when no man can work. As long as lam in the world, I
am the light of the world. Soon the present opportunities of spreading Divine truth,
freedom, and liberty of action, and means of reaching all quarters of the earth, as far as
regards the exertions of the children of God, may be greatly impeded or wholly taken from
us. Soon we may be despoiled of the many advantages we now have for doing good to the
bodies and souls of men; but if we now scatter the seed it may he harrowed in, even in those
days, and ultimately bring a glorious harvest, in which we shall for ever rejoice. He that
winneth souls is wise. Let this be the wisdom which we choose and prefer.” _
The late Rev. E. Winthrop, Episcopal minister, of St. Paul’s Church, Cincinnati, thus
describes the two stages or manifestations in the advent, in his “ Second Advent Lectures ”
(1843,) p. 163
■‘We gather from the prophecies of the Old aild New Testaments that the- order of events
will he something like this; —The trumpet of the Archangel sounds, the dead in
Hhrist are raised from their graves, the living saints who have a part in the first resurrec-
tion are caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. The judg-
ment of the saints or the assigning to each his appropriate reward and portion in the king-


dom takes place while they are all in the clouds, and, as we think, far heyoud the ken of
mortals in the flesh. As this judgment is not for the satisfaction of God Himself, but to
vindicate His doings in the eyes of others, this trial or judgment of the saints, and render-
ing to each according to his works, must occupy, it would seem, a considerable portion of
time, and may perhaps take up several years. We do not say positively that it will, but
only that it may. The wicked, who at first were startled and terrified, seeing that all things'
now return toi a season to somewhat the same condition as before, become more hardened
than ever. But in a moment when they least expect it, and when those of the Jews who
have returned to Jerusalem seem just on the point of destruction, Messiah and His saints
marshalled in their respective ranks, each having his appropriate work assigned him'
descend in visible glory. The great battle of Armageddon then takes place, subsequent, as
the reader will perceive, to the rapture into the air of the living saints.
the Beast and the False Prophet, as we read in Itcv, xix., with all their wicked con-
federacy, are gathered together to engage in battle array against the warrior horseman and
the aimies that followed him out of heaven; in other words, as the context shows, they are
assembled together against Messiah, the King, and His glorified saints. The result is that
the Beast and the False Prophet are cast alive, body and soul, into the lake of fire, and the
remnant slain with the sword of the warrior horseman. From this summary of events it
will be seen that if a considerable portion of time may elapse between the resurrection’ of
the samts and their descent with the Lord to the Mount of Olives at the battle of Arma-
geddon, the objection is obviated as to the possibility of Christ’s coming at any time
For while the judgment of the saints is taking place in the air, there may be a restora-
tion of part of the Jewish people to Palestine, and a gathering of all nations to Jerusalem
(Zech. xiv. 1;) the revelation of the personal Antichrist may also perhaps take place between
these two manifestations of Christ at His second Advent. Christ may come at any moment.
Watch, therefore, and pray always. It is quite probable that the generation now Irvin 0 *
(1843,) or at least a portion of it, may see our Lord’s prophecy completely fulfilled bv
His second advent in glory.” J J
The Rev. Mb. Purdon, the able author of “ The Last Vials,” (published monthly at
. btevenson Patemoster-row,) and an acute interpeter of the prophecies regarding the
infidel Antichrist, thus graphically delineates the two stages of Christ’s coming, and their
accompanying events;—
“ The coming of the Lord is divided, as we have often said, into two stages. He first
descends from the highest heavens into the 1 air,’ and there He continues for a length of
time, amounting perhaps to several years. After a certain number of years He descends
from the air into the earth, ‘ and His feet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, which is by
Jerusalem, on the east.’ (Zech. xiv.) The word ‘ air,’ which is used by St. Paul in the
Thessalonians, must not be understood of the atmosphere of the earth. The earth’s atmo-
sphere, made up of a respirable fluid, reaches hardly fifty miles above the surface. It is by
no means to be supposed that the Lord will approach so near the earth in the first stage of
His descent. Philosophy has proved that there is a thin and imperceptible fluid which
spreads out through the whole region of the stars; so fine that it cannot even absorb the
light which travels from the sun to the earth, 100,000,000 of miles, and producing no effect
except upon the light of the stars, after a progress of millions of millions of miles? Yet this
refined fluid is ‘ air ’as strictly as our own atmosphere. It is no more than a kind of atmospheric
air infinitely rarefied. But it is not, we may suppose, the atmosphere of the highest heavens •
consequently, when the Lord descends from the highest heavens towards the earth, He will
descend into the ‘ air not into the air of the earth, but into the ‘ air ’of the stellar uni-
verse—and His distance from our world may be as great as the distance of the most remote
star, though less than that of the heaven of heavens. In the Ist of Thessalonians St. Paul
tells us what is to take place when the Lord descends into the air. ‘ The dead in Christ
shall rise first: then we who are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them
in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air : and so shall we ever be with the Lord.’ At the
first moment of fhe Lord’s descent the departed saints shall rise from the grave. By some
secret power their bodies shall be extracted from the dust and raised up again more alive
than ever. We need not suppose any disruption of the grave—any mark left upon the
surface of the ground—to indicate that the resurrection has taken place. The grass may
grow, the tombstone may remain undisturbed, yet the body which lay beneath may have
risen again. The world at large may be unconscious of any resurrection. ‘ Here lieth the
body, may be engraven upon the tomb, when that body may be far away among the stars.
Divine power may work its miracles without deigning to admit the ungodly to its
councils. The dead bodies of the saints may pass from the scene of death as invisibly as
an exhalation from the sea under the Tower of the mid-day sun.
.“ ‘ The dead in Christ shall rise first.’ From this we may conclude that ALL the departed
saints shall rise at the first resurrection, which is therefore called the Resurrection of the


Just. But only 144,000 living saints, who are watching for, and believing in, the speedy
personal coming and reign of Christ, will he caught up in this first rapture.
“ Other unwatchful, though real Christians, will be left behind to pass through the 3i
years Great Tribulation. (Rev. hi. 14-22 ; xii. 6-17; xiii. 5-8; xiv. 12.)
“ What will be the world’s condition when Christ has taken away those saints ? It will
be that which is represented by the parable:— ‘ The last state of that man shall be worse
than the first.’ When those saints have been removed they will ascend into the ‘ air’ to
meet the Lord. They will remain with the Lord in the heavenly places until the time
when He shall descend upon the Mount of Olives. But the heavenly places are now
occupied by the devil and his army (see Eph. vi.;) the armies of Satan are encamped on the
azure fields of the skies, like an army of men encamped upon a plain. The devil will be
attacked by Michael and his angels, and will be driven by force of arms from the he avenly
places, neither shall ‘ their place be found any more in heaven.’ Then the Great Dragon
shall be cast out into the earth, and his angels shall be cast out with him. ‘Therefore
rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of
the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that
he hath but a short time.’ (See Rev. xii. throughout.)
“ While these great events take their course in the heavens, what will be the condition of
the earth ? Astonishment and dismay at first, and hardened impiety at last, will overspread
the world. When the morning comes, tens of thousands will be missing—vanished alto-
gether, without leaving a trace behind!—one taken and another left! All other thoughts
will be overwhelmed; all other conversation will cease. The disappearance of those saints
will occupy every mind. The public journals will be filled with intelligence, poured in from
all sides, of this miraculous vanishing of thousands. Error, misunderstanding, and dismay
will fill the hearts of those who are left behind. Yet a glimmering suspicion of the real
fact will arise in a few. No doubt the removal of the Virgins will be a most powerful
means for awakening those who constitute the woman’s seed, after the Wise Virgins shall
be gone. No exhortation, no miracle, has ever been so effectual as the rapture of the Living
Saints will prove, in ‘ turning the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just.’
Then the war will break forth in heaven—the true Miltonic war, which the poet has so
presumptuously anticipated. We may suppose that clouds and darkness, and thunder in
the atmosphere, will indicate to the world the tremendous conflict in the skies. We may
suppose that the elements will be shaken, when even heaven itself will shake throughout its
‘everlasting frame.’ The battle is won! The devil and his armies are driven headlong
from the skies. They rush down into the earth, like a discomfited host, and fill the whole
atmosphere of the planets. The earth becomes peopled with demons, not only formidable
by their strength and numbers, but by their implacable rage. Knowing that their time
is short, they will compensate for its brevity by a sevenfold effort. ‘ Woe to the inhabiters
of the earth and of the sea! ’ Many a one who now scoffs at these awful truths will then
—too late—upbraid his own heart, and wish that he could exchange places with the meanest
of the translated saints ! Then all will be compelled to own that the least in the kino-dom
of heaven is greater than the greatest upon earth. To such it will be a terrible surprise
when ‘ one shall be taken and the other left;’ when the war of angels shall shake the
heavens, and Satan and his armies shall be driven into the earth to glut their rage upon man-
kind. Then, indeed, the sleeping congregations will awake. They will turn round upon
their faithless ministers, and upbraid them with their faithlessness. They will cry out in
their anguish, ‘ Woe unto me! The treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea,
the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.’ The treacherous dealers are the
Gospel ministers who have suppressed the solemn truth of Christ’s Second Appearing and
Millennium Kingdom, and have set up their own feeble voice in place of the thunders of
the Messiah.
“As soon as Babylon the Great—apostate Christendom having its centre in Rome has
been destroyed, and before the fall of the Beast and the False Prophet at Armageddon, a
mighty event is to take place in heaven, — the Marriage of the Lamb. (Rev. xix. 2,' 3
V:) ‘ And her smoke rose up for over and ever ;’ ‘ Let us rejoice and be glad, and give
honour to Him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife hath made herself
ready.’ The connection is self-evident. The smoke of Great Babylon, that European Go-
morrah, ascending from the earth, mingles with the golden clouds which encompass
the gold-veiled bride. The terrible judgments of the earth are contrasted with the reful-
£ent serenity of heaven. Just as the world begins to perish the saints begin to reio-n.
ong before this time the Wise Virgins have been removed from the earth. Their re-
moval is to take place before the first seal, and before the 3| years’ reign of Antichrist.
But the Bride is not completed at the removal of those saints. There are confessors and
martyrs; all those who have been beheaded for the witness of Jesus, ‘and which have not
worshipped the Wild Beast (i.e., the Infidel Antichrist,) neither his image, neither have re-
ceived his mark in their foreheads, or in their hands !’ all these are to be embodied with


those saints, and to complete the Bride. Until these martyrs and confessors have been
taken up from the earth the Bride or Church is not complete. But when all have been
taken up (after the 3| years,) and united with those who went before, then the Bride is com-
pleted, and there is no more delay. The seventh vial has then been poured out; and Great
Babylon has been destroyed; but the Antichrist and his armies are still in full strength,
collected together at the siege of Jerusalem; the war between heaven and earth is still
raging; the Jews are still under the wrath of God when the marriage of the Lamb takes
place. It is not, as one might think, in a time of peace that this event occurs, but in a
time of deadly war and indescribable terrors. Strange time for so joyful event; But the
marriage is in heaven, not upon earth. Par above in the azure sky, in the golden fields,
in the soft and lovely light from the face of God, above the blood-stained earth above the
sun itself, in the pure unsullied air, the marriage of the Lamb takes place. Above the
thick black smoke of apostate Christendom, above the ruins of all human pride, above the
eagle’s flight and the terrific mountain cliffs, the saints in their glorious bodies shall stand
in unimpaired serenity. As the Bride of the Lamb they are gifted with his attributes—
glory, immortality, and light. With the purity and swiftness of the sunbeams, with the
force of lightning, with an inward spirit as perfect as. the body, they stand in the centre of
celestial life, the brightest objects of that world of brightness. Angels themselves must
give precedence to the Bride, and yield up to her the inmost circle around the throne.
There in the place of honour in heaven stands the Church before the throne of the Lamb,
as a bride standing at the altar.
“ Taking the multitude of which the Church and Bride may be composed, God then
takes in His hand the golden city, the New Jerusalem, in that hand which holds the hea-
vens, and lets it gently descend over the multitudes of the Church, like a veil of golden
network over a bride upon her marriage day ; and with that golden veil lie covers and
envelopes all the millions of the Church; the veil descends to the feet like that of an Eas-
tern bride, and nothing but the veil is seen. A multitude of persons, but a single veil for
all, and so the diversity or persons is changed into a unity of aspect. The millions of the
Church are thus brought forward as one individual Bride under the encircling veil of the
golden city.
“The ceremony is finished, the marriage is completed; and those whom God hath joined
together shall no man and no created thing be able to put asunder.
“ When the marriage of the Lamb has taken place it is followed by a banquet the most
magnificent, we may be assured, that even heaven itself has ever seen. It is called the
1 Marriage Supper of the Lamb.’ (Rev. xix.) What a feast will that be! Imagine all the
splendours of Eastern kings, of Imperial Rome, of over-civilised Europe, and what are they
when compared with the splendours of the marriage of the Lamb p Those present at the
august and imposing ceremonial tread on gold; the foundations of the banqueting-room are
jewels beyond price; the gates are pearls ; the light of the banqueting-rooni is the light of
God’s countenance ! the wine is made in heaven; the fruits are gathered from the ‘ Tree of
Life;’ Omnipotence and perfection prepare the feast; the King of Glory assumes His
brightest aspect. The splendours of earthly monarchs are but the crumbs that fall from
that celestial table—but the fragments of the feast in heaven. The splendours of this sup-
per can neither be imagined nor described, nor its divine music, nor its celestial conversa-
tion. The golden harps shall be strung, and the immeasurable vault of heaven shall be
filled with the melodious voice of glorified millions—a voice as perfect as their beauty; and
a song shall be raised which shall pierce the clouds, and bring back harmony even to the
earth: ‘ Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotenth reigneth!’
“ When this wondrous feast has ended another scene of a far different kind shall follow.
The Lord and his glorified Church will go forth at the head of His armies to tread down
the wicked as ashes, and to suppress the reign of evil for ever, and to slay the armies of
Antichrist with irresistible force.” (Rev. xix.)
The Rev. J. Hooper, rector of Albury, England, who held to 1868 as the approximate
time of Christ’s coming, thus speaks of the nature of that event in a work published in
1847:—“In Revelation xiv. we have the reaping of the first-fruits,’ and ‘the harvest,’
and ‘the vintage.’ The first-fruits are represented as God’s people gathered to Him-
self, the ‘ sealed ones,’ who escape the judgments. After the gathering of the ‘ first-
fruits’ comes the ‘ harvest,’ probably that great multitude which no man could num-
ber, mentioned in Revelation vii., which John beheld gathered unto God after the
‘ sealed ones,’ and which came out of ‘ great tribulation.’ The words in the original
are very emphatic, and mean literally the great tribulation, the' great. This can be
none other than that unparalleled tribulation of the last days during the reign of
Antichrist. As the Jordan overfloweth its banks all the time of harvest, so will ‘the
harvest of the earth’ be reaped during the overflowing tribulations which will cover
all Christendom, rising up and overflowing even unto the neck. The harvest is clearly
an event subsequent to the gathering of the first-fruits. And after the harvest there


■will follow another event symbolised by ‘ the vintage,’ an act of most terrible judgment
on the nations of Christendom. Those who watch and pray shall escape the judgments
coming on the earth. Such a promise is positively given by our Lord in the epistle to the
Philadelphian Church. (Rev. iii. 10.) ‘ Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I
will also keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world to try
them that dwell upon the earth.’ The sealed ones, who escape the great tribulation, the
144,000 who stand with the Lamb on Mount Zion, Rev. xiv., are called the first-fruits unto
God and the Lamb, in contradistinction to the innumerable multitude who are symbolised
by the harvest. This harvest is reaped during the reign of Antichrist, when the Son
of Man appears in a cloud, the first-fruits having been previously gathered to the Lord.”
PROSPECTS IN EUROPE AND AMERICA.
England has just cause for apprehension a. Her military weakness was not exaggerated
by Sir Charles Napier when he said, “ Were France and Russia allied against us, the
Queen’s throne would not be worth six months’ purchase.” Immense sums have been
spent by Napoleon upon the harbour and fortress of Cherbourg, which is described by the
French as the eye to watch and the hand to strike England. The English Channel is
converted, by the invention of steam vessels, into a mere river; and from all that prophecy
reveals as to the character and aims of Napoleon, no opportunity of transporting his
armies across it, with the prospect of a successful result, is likely to be neglected. Some
retributive judgment is sure to descend upon England, if it be only for her conduct
toward China. Nearly half-a-million Chinese die annually poisoned by opium, illegally
forced into their country, and which brings to the Indian Government an annual revenue
of 25,000,000 dollars. The 50,000,000 dollars that have already been spent over the
Chinese war, had better have been reserved to relieve the poverty that will soon prevail
among her operatives. For, when the American Union is dissolved by the secession of the
the Southern States, the exports of cotton are likely to be diminished by the outbreak of
hostilities and servile insurrections. As this disruption may occur speedily, perhaps even
before 1861, England must soon feel the effects in want of employment among one-fifth of
her population, who are engaged in cotton manufactures. Even an endeavour on Napo-
leon’s part to subjugate England, could not but cause great loss of life, and transmit
sorrow and mourning to many an English household. Whether or not Antichrist sets up
his image, and carries on his persecution in England, there is reason to fear that the
American Continent at least will not enjoy entire exemption from this evil. Spiritualism,
which is unquestionably the latter-day exhibition of Satanic power predicted in Matt,
xxiv. 24, and 2 Thess. ii. 9, to accompany the infidel apostacy, has had its chief rise in
America, and is said to have materially infected one million out of the thirty million in the
United States. The Antichrist’s system of delusion, by which he will institute and
establish the worship of his image, will be a fuller development of spiritualism. As soon
as he throws off the mask under which he is now concealed, and reveals himself in his full-
grown proportions, a considerable number will be found on American shores prepared, by
the instructions of the mediums, to acknowledge his blasphemous pretensions, and accept
him as their spiritual head. Their ranks will be swelled by many of the Papists, who will
follow the example of their co-religionists in Europe. It is probable, too, that unforeseen
political complications may arise, and events take such a turn, as to bring across the ocean
some of Napoleon’s 600,000 French soldiers, and give them a foothold on American soil.
The interference of France was sought and obtained in the last American war, and the
precedent may be followed in the conflagration of intestine warfare which seems likely soon
I o rage with uncontrollable fury.a
a An Appendix on “ Menacing Perils in England and America,” added in 1865 to the author’s treatise on “ Louis
Napoleon the Destined Monarch of the World” (400 pages, 2s. 6d.,) treats of England’s perils under six heads:—l. The
comparative diminutiveness of the British army and navy in proportion to the vast extent of its empire and its commerce
as contrasted with the armies and navies of other great nations. 2. The portentous number of Romanists, chiefly Irish*
in the British standing army, amounting to nearly one-third of its total force. 3. England’s dependence on foreign
nations for nearly ONE-THIRD of her supply of bread, and the hazardous magnitude of her import and export trade
which, although in time of peace a source of strength and prosperity, yet, in case of her going to war with America*
France, or Germany, would become a source of disastrous weakness and ruin. 4. England’s loss of the cordial co-opera-
tion and support of her former great allies, Russia, Prussia, and Austria, and her similar alienation of the other leading
nations, leaving her without a single ally in the inevitably approaching wars. 5. The revived Irish agitation against the
British Government, especially developing in Fenianism. 6. 'lL’he alienation between the higher and lower classes of
English society, and the growing clamour of the latter for politicual reform.
China, being so grievously injured by the Britishoplum tmde with it, has an especial claim for Christian Missionary
eff.rt. While India's two hundred millions have five hundred amd twenty Christian Missionaries, China’s four hundred
millions have only about one hundred Missionaries. There are-, about three thousand native Christian converts in China
at present. An important treatise is sold at 6d,, at Nisbet’®, Berner’s street, London, called “China; its Spiritual
Need and Claims,” by the Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, 30 Coburn-sltreet, Bow-road, Loudon, who receives contributions for
the “ China Inland Mission” an undenominational society, maiintained in entire dependence on the Lord. A valuable
illustrated Missionary paper is now published monthly for threte half pence at Partridge’s.
6 The whole of this paragraph was written in 1860, in the (first edition of this pamphlet, and has since been verified
by the American war breaking out in 1861, and lasting to April}, 1865, and by Napoleon’s seizure of Mexico. Notwith-
standing the present peace, France and Mexico may soon be expiected to make a crushing attack upon the United States
The only hope is that it may be deferred for a short time. (Notte to the new edition, Jan., 1866.)


In the midst of these coming scenes of desolation, which none can contemplate without
horror, there will he unparalleled revivals of religion, especially among the nations not
included in Christendom. The Gospel-seed that has been sown among the heathen in
India, China, Africa, and elsewhere, will issue in an unconceivably abundant harvest. At
the resurrection and first translation before the three and a-half years, “ hour of
temptation,”a all converted persons constituting the Philadelphian first-fruits will he
removed from the earth. Some texts h make it appear that those converted persons, who
are not looking for the speedy personal advent of Christ, will be left behind until the
second translation, and though a further opportunity of glorifying God in the fire of
tribulation which will thus be afforded them, this advantage will be more than counter-
balanced by their exclusion from the inmost circle of glory which is assigned solely to the
saints of the first translation or ascension. When, however, the 144,000 first-fruit living
saints are thus removed, it is evident that conversions must take place with a rapidity, and
to an extent, hitherto unknown, in order to produce within a little more than three and
a-half years the multitude of saints who are translated at the end of that time,e and who
are so numerous as to be called a harvest d in comparison with the living subjects of the
first translation, who are only called the first sheaf, or first-fruits.e As a harvest is, at
least, from one to three hundred times as great as its first sheaf or first-fruits, and as
exactly 144,000 living persons constitute the first-fruits in the first translation, this gives
between fifteen and fifty million persons as the harvest in the second translation, who will
be converted principally among the heathen during the final five years between the first
and second translations. Let all who wish to have a hand in sowing the seed that will
issue in this glorious harvest of souls at once contribute to the Foreign Missionary
Societies to the utmost of their ability, that during the short period that remains as many
copies of the Word of God as possible may be sent out to supply the urgent demand that
will arise for them during the coming revivals of religion. Dr. Judson’s remarks on the
duty of missionary contribution are striking; he says, “Surely, if any sin will lie with
crushing weight on the trembling, shrinking soul when grim death draws near, —if any
sin will clothe the face of the final Judge with an angry frown, withering up the last hope of
the condemned, it is the sin of turning a deaf ear to the plaintive cry of millions of immortal
beings, who, by their darkness and misery, cry night and day, ‘ Come to our rescue, ye
sons and daughters of America : come and save us, for we are sinking into hell.’ ” While
a thousand million heathen are thus sinking into hell, no true Christian will spend the
smallest sum in unnecessary luxuries, but will give all that can be spared to the Foreign
Missionary Societies, through which the Gospel can be made known to those who otherwise
must hopelessly perish/
There is also urgent necessity in these critical times for more open-air preaching in the
streets and public places of towns and villages, and for a much wider distribution of tracts.
Earnest Christians should always carry about tracts with them, and embrace every
opportunity of giving them to the unconverted. Pointedly-written prophetic tracts and
books should be extensively circulated. There is much need for evangelists to travel about,
preaching prophetic and other Gospel truth in every place. True Christians should also
separate themselves more from the pleasure-loving luxurious carnal world, and spend at
least an hour or two every day in meditation upon the Scriptures and prayful communion
with the Lord Jesus, and should devote themselves to diffusing Gospel truth, and visiting,
instructing and relieving the poorer classes.^
a Rev. iii. 10 , xii. 5,6; xiv. 1-5 ; Luke xiv. 22 ; Matt. xxv. 10; 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17; 1 Cor. xv. 52.
6 2 Tim. iv. 8 ; Heb. ix. 28 ; Matt. xxv. 12. The foolish virgins are pious but vmwatchful Christians.
c Rev. viii. 9-17. d Rev. xiv. xv. e Rev. xiv. 4.
/ God’s Word has not left us without bright hopes in the very midst of the impending judgments. In the beautiful
emblem given to Noah, he was told, It shall come to pass when I bring a cloud over the earth that the bow shall be seen in
the cloud. As we see in the parallel of the Jewish dispensation, the richest ingathering out of that nation to Christ
was just before those judgments which cut them off as a nation from the visible Church; the fullest measure of true
conversion with which the nation was blessed being very probably from the ministry of the Baptist to the fall of Jeru-
salem, so may we from various intimations of God’s Word hope that it will be in the last days of the Gentile dispen-
sation. This seems intimated with regard to Christendom by messengers, in the parable of the great supper, going at
the supper time to the streets and lanes of the city to bring in the poor . the maimed, the halt, and the blind. So our
Lord, in comparing the kingdom of heaven to the seed, tells us there is first the blade, then the ear; after that the full
corn in the ear; and when the fruit is brought forth immediately he putielh in the sickle, because the harvest is come.
We seem here to have another intimation of a full harvest in the end. The prediction in Rev. vii. 9-14 brings this
vast harvest yet to be GATHERED within the time of the great tribulation. It is so like our God, and we see it so
remarkably in His dealings with His Church, to make grace abound even in the time of abounding iniquity, that we
may entertain Scriptural and cheering hopes of large conversions to God before, and even dming, these awful judg-
ments. When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, —Bickersteth, on
the Prophecies, l-uke xiv. 23; Mark iv. 29 ; Rev.; Isaiah xxvi. 9; Daniel xi. 33; xii. 3.
g A remarkable work of conversion, and of much blessing among the neglected classes, by Mr. William Carter, at
Victoria Hall, Union-street, South London, who, in sole dependence on the Lord, maintains 250 persons in a Refuge
there, is described in the “Power of Truth; or, Results of Theatre Preaching.” (Is., at Partridge’s, Paternoster-row
where numerous moderate-priced excellent tracts are also sold.) One pound’s worth of good ordinary tracts may now
be obtained for 7s. 6d., on certain conditions, for distribution, at the Religious Tract Society, Paternoster-row—not,
however, prophetic tracts.


When the seven-years’ covenant is made, it is evident as regards Christians who really
believe that within three and a-half years afterwards the great tribulation and persecution
will begin, in which they must necessarily lose at least all their property, if not their lives,
they will in common consistency dispose of, and devote to benevolent and religious purposes,
all their landed and personal property, save and except what is necessary for the subsistence
of themselves and those dependent on them during the brief interval before that tribu-
lation.
Let us, in these times, plead more earnestly on behalf of the dark places of the earth,
and pray a for a larger outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon all members of the Christian
Church. Let each examine himself whether he be in the faith. It is of the first importance
for every one to ascertain whether they have been horn again, for, “ Except a man is bom
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”J Ho human being ever has escaped, or ever can
escape, eternal damnation, except by becoming born again, or, in other words, by being
converted. This momentous change is not produced by baptism, or by a mere refomla-
tion of conduct, or by living a decent, moral, respectable life. There are thousands,
who are excellent outward Christians, attending services, receiving the Sacrament, main-
taining family worship, and fully believing every article of Christian faith, who are yet not
bora again, and consequently will be cast into hell unless they undergo this change. In
cases where this inward transformation has been effected, those who have experienced it
will take a real delight in constantly meditating upon the Scriptures, in frequently engaging
in secret and social prayer, and in personally labouring to make known the Gospel to others by
such means as visiting the sick and destitute, giving religious instruction in schools for the poor,
distributing tracts, and warning their unconverted friends of the necessity of becoming con -
verted. Those who desire to become born again must be convinced that they are, by nature
and by practice, utterly sinful and corrupt, heirs of wrath, born under a curse, and with the
sentence of condemnation to eternal perdition registered against them in heaven; but that
God has given His Son to die in their room and in their stead, and now offers a full and
free pardon and eternal happiness to all who believe on Him, and surrender themselves,
body, soul, and spirit, to His service, and pray earnestly, in the name of Jesus, for pardon
and for a new heart until they feel they are answered. When the sinner is truly con-
verted, he feels that he has undergone a startling and indiscribable change, as if he
was in a new world; old things are passed away, and he has become a new creature in
Christ Jesus. From that moment he is inalienably possessed of eternal salvation, and
all his sins, future as well as past, are completely blotted out. Those who have once been
converted can never afterwards become unconverted or perish.c None shall ever enter
into the regions of the lost who have once been born again. Let those who have not yet
attained to this momentous change no longer resist the tender invitations of the Saviour
who has died for them, and who earnestly desires that they would diligently pray to Him
for the bestowment of this new heart. Let such persevere in secret prayer, in all places
and under all circumstances (for no special place or posture is essential to this,) until they
feel and know that they have become born again. Let them do this, remembering that
Jesus is willing to listen to the most guilty and depraved, and is abundantly able to trans-
form them from slaves of Satan into children of God. Every living person is included in
the promise, “ Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.” “ God se loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not His Son into the world to condemn
the wmrld, but that the world through Him might be saved. He that believeth on Him is
not condemned; but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not be-
lieved in the name of the only begotten Son of God. He that believeth on the Son hath
everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abideth on him.”d. “ The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give His life a ransom for many.”e “ Through this Man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by Him all that believe are justified from all things from which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses.’y “In whom we have redemption through
His blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His graoe.”y
The late earl of Carlisle, formerly Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, who was well known in
literary and diplomatic circles, recently stated in a treatise on the Book of Daniel, that we
are on the eve of stupendous events, and on the verge of the close of this dispensation; it
is not likely, as Dr. Gumming remarks, that he would make this statement except under a
deep conviction of its truth; and such a testimony to the correctness of the views advanced
a From those who may derive spiritual light or edification from these pages the author would request for himself
their intercessory supplications, and for the Divine blessing to attend the circulalion of his prophetic treatises. Eph. i.
15-23; iii. 14-21; Col. i. 9-11.
5 John iii. 3. c Phil. 1. 6; Jer. iii. 14 ; 1 John v. 4; John v. 24. -
d John iii. 16-IS, 35. e Matt xx. 2C. /Acts xir. 3?. g Eph. 5. 6.


by numerous expositors coming from so high a quarter, should tend to make the most infidel
believe that there is solid ground for investigation and research in these sacred and in-
teresting subjects of study. This nobleman also expresses himself as thoroughly convinced
that we are now living at the epoch of the mystical drying-up of the Euphrates or decay
of the Turkish Empire, which in the sixteenth of Revelation is predicted to take place
just before the coming of Christ and the consummation.
Viscount Mandeville has published a work under the title of “ Horae Hebraicse,” contain-
ing an inquiry into the nature, extent, and duration of the Messiah’s kingdom, which he
considers will be set up at the commencement, and not at the end, of the millennial 1,000
years. This belief, taken in conjunction with the high probability of the 1,000 years
beginning very soon, leads to the conclusion that the establishment of the Davidic kingdom
is immediately at hand. The opposite post-millennial view which supposes the conversion of
the world before Christ comes, completely excludes the possibility of obeying the oft-
repeated command, Watch, for in the present time of abounding iniquity, how can any one
expect the personal advent of Christ, who believes it cannot happen until a thousand years
after the world has been converted.
The late Duke of Manchester considered that the 2,300 days in Dan. viii. 14, in its year-
day fulfilment would end not later than 1877, as the end of the times of the Gentiles.
APPENDIX ADDED IN JANUARY, 1866.
Since the first edition of this treatise on the “ Coming Battle ” was published in 1860, subsequent
events have remarkably confirmed some of its fore-statements. The war between the Northern and
Southern United States continuing from April, 1861, to May, 1865, has been one of the manifestations
of the three wonder-working spirits of evil preparing and gathering the nations to the Armageddon
conflict (Rev. xvi. 14;) it has given an opportunity for the establishment of Napoleon’s dominion over
Mexico, which in course of time may be expected to develope into the expansion of his supremacy over
the Southern States and then the Northern States, because “power is to be given him over all kindreds
and tongues and nations.” (Rev. xiii. 7.) That great civil war has likewise caused, collaterally, such
alienation between Britain and the United States as to hinder their future cordial co-operation, in which,
as Protestant nations, they should unite against the Romanist nations -thus paving the way for their
accelerated ruin. This alienation is further promoted by the formidable growth of the Fenian organisa-
tion, which, under-estimated as it may be by shallow observers, nevertheless bids fair not only to intro-
duce scenes of revolution and desolation into Canada and Ireland, and then into Great Britain, but also
to give the Romanists a preponderating influence in the United States. The Fenian movement 4s a
remarkable sign of the times in accordance with the predictions of prophecy, that Ireland, being outside
the Roman Empire, must very soon be separated from England, which is inside the Roman Empire. In
this connection, it is an ominous fact that nearly one-third of the British standing army consists of Irish
Romanists. The existing and the threatening disturbances in the British Empire, both at home and
abroad, render its opposition to Napoleon’s project of a European Congress much less practicable than
heretofore, and being one of the ten-horn kingdoms of the Roman Empire, it must be expected soon to
give its power and strength to Napoleon as the Presiding Head of an International Congress (Rev.
xvii. 12, 13.) The death of Lord Palmerston has removed an influential opponent to that European
Congress scheme, and has also opened the way for further extension of the suffrage and political reform,
thus facilitating the introduction of the clay-iron or democratic-despotic governmental element into Eng-
land, as one of the ten-toe kingdoms of Nebuchadnezzar’s prophetic image. (Dan. ii. 42.) The versa-
tility of the modern Imperial Nebuchadnezzar has been strikingly shown by his skilfully composed
proclamations addressed to the Mohammedans during his tour through Algeria in 1865—furnishing an
indication of the policy with which he will presently render himself supreme throughout the Eastern
world. His predicted public covenant with many of the Jews for seven years has evidently not yet
been confirmed, but When it shall be made, there will then only be seven years and two and a-half
months to elapse before the Battle of Armageddon and the Millennium. (Dan. ix. 27; xii. 7,12.) The
Jewish sacrifices will be restored between eight and ten months after the Covenant, and the ascension
of the 144,000 watchful Christians will be about two years and from three to five weeks after that
Covenant, and the great persecution will begin in the midst of the seven years of that Covenant-week.
The Battle of Armageddon cannot be earlier than 1873, nor later than 1876.
During the next two or three years, Protestants will be safer in Britain than in Ireland, in which
country a great rebellion and massacre and Sepoy-like mutiny is impending. War between France and
the United States seems also not far distant.
EERGUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
