



mt
,
J . -■
V ■ •; ' :V*V’ ‘‘ , ■ \ , % ,)' ’$? * 1 ' " , t *\ • . V -•* A V,
j
.
■
.
'■'■ ,;•> . ■ . ■ •■' ■ -v.'' :•'■ ; / ■ *K.'-h ‘
r, - *' ( <■ v* - *<v Sty' '=
jBLs■•:■'. :*$%*&
’
- ' ■ . : j ,-J i : + ,-


■ 77 : -: 77:7V'- : ■ ■■ 7>7':V:'-7',7 >- : *■ 7.-W ,: ; v 7>' V Vv /" 7 ; '• 777777-.■;.. : ;v■’:>; * 77 . 7' 7
* 'j fv"' ~ ’* *i £ J <7 l| J 7* *V> 'I | ' Si ? * -v ij ;» "*• v |
>•, - r-si. --. ■ ■ .. ;■ ■-■ ■!■•: ■ 'll / ■- - ; ....,-,- 0 .h„ •■ , ‘, vi -■ ■• , ■. : - i .-, ■ - ; ; ■ .■!.; - , ;. ’* ’- ■, - ..- - - ■-,•■ V -;■'. ?■,- - ■ ;■'■; r.-_ . - : 1
mmm s ? •i u <ip ill# w *• *',v ’ rs .s' / *4 >/; *v IPI i > i » •* *4 N
fr swpl (t< >% f y -5 ? O .] ' , -" " J,. ,, |
' *** z V 1 a' 1 ' jJ>7 f • f , - r \ , 'j 1 ’* "’> v'* < v$ ' r v '*■*■■' j* V’ 'f * ' » >• "'i ’ v
1 ■/ ■■ ■; V. .-'
- r ■■-■■.;■■ 1
; . - i v
■ • v v; v .
y ~ t . * >, " ' 7^ '-% v . 7 7* - f 7 . 7 v ' J . -k ( \ 7 -
: . -! .,' *\ '''i-V 1 ' S' :-U Vl-‘ Vv-X.'-'‘' * } 1''- » ' .:%;*' ‘ r .v >v ; :^ - \.,- '■ \ y,./ •''7.0, {,, i.. ’,v.''y. >:i:< '• v ‘ ” ” *'; - 1 ,T '{“ V- \' ; i: j
■
S i 1 S 7, 7’ I III p S -ri< • ' 1® V / ‘ m -
\fe§ .' 7 v * - ■ *‘~ u ' v'!i ' . 7.* ' >' y - * - . %-» . 1 f Sdi'f'i ’ 1 '1 ' ■
..■-!: '. !' ; V' ;-!
pi: $
if '
*>
j
,' A


w' ■irwwrnmnirrititmmBg-itTr- r
jmjt&m® *£m?m
THE
DEED OF SETTLEMENT
OF THE
JOINT STOCK COMPANY,
THE
15, tuft of Vm Dirmrit'o fifing
PRINTED BY MURRAY & MACDOOGALL.
ELIZABETH STREET,
1830.


F0645-.
0 AUG 1938
i fVfinfn IV rail Ur- > . / *3
-nv / (
J Ji'i // “f
DEED ofr SETTLEMENT.
|j"• * ? -. ‘.■ , H , fi: ■ ; f - ‘ ■ I, . ; j ) )
« 4 •H i i > / 1 ! ' i~'< :t*i r - ; ! ’ ' t • i
3TO {ill to U)l)om ?f)ror Presents shall come, the
Tevenil persons whose names and seals are hereunto ’respectively subscribed
and set send Greeting’. ?l
fc&tfjrrrn# it was deemed expedient in the year of our Lord One thousand
Eight hundred and Twenty three, to establish a company in Van Diemen’s Land,
for the purpose of discounting* and issuing of Notes and Bills, and for transacting
other business connected with a banking establishment, which said company was
on the First day of January, in the year of our Lord One thousand Eight hundred
and Twenty four, by letters patent under the hand of Major General Sir Thomas
Brisbane, Knight, the late Governor of New South Wales and its dependencies,
and under the great seal of the said Colony, incorporated by the name of “ The
Bank of Van Diemen’s Land.” &ntr a capital stock of forty thou-
sand Spanish dollars, equal to eight thousand six hundred and sixty six pounds
thirteen shillings and fourpeiice sterling, was created under the said letters patent
by two hundred shares of the value of two hundred Spanish dollars each, equal to p reanib]erecU ., no .
forty three pounds six shillings and eight pence sterling. g|nu tofifrfas doubts origmai chaf.
have arisen as to the power of the said late Governor of New South Wales, to in* cr *
corporate any persons whatever by letters patent ; but it being necessary for the
promotion and advancement of the agricultural trade and commerce of the colony
of Van Diemens Land, that the before mentioned banking establishment should be
continued, as well for the purpose of discount, the issuing of notes and bills, and
lending monies on securities and cash account Si receiving monies on deposit ac-
counts, and the safe custody of monies and securities for monies, bull ton, treasure,
jewels, plate, and other articles of value not liable to spoil or Waste, as for transact-
ing and negociating all such other matters and things as have heretofore been done
by the said original bank, or as are usually done and performed in any way relating
to the ordinary business of banking, or as may hereafter be found advisable, it hath
been determined to remodel the same and increase the capital thereof, and also to
establish such bank as a joint stock company in the manner hereinafter mentioned.
the several parties whose names are mentioned in the first r
schedule hereunder written are respectively shareholders in the hank so established
by the said letters patent as aforesaid, and are possessed in their own right of the
number of shares mentioned in the first column set opposite to their respective
names, and have paid thereon the several sums of money set forth in the second


column, and which several sums of money the said several parties hereto so men-
tioned in the said first schedule do hereby agree to appropriate in or in aid of the
purchase of shares in the company hereby agreed to be established, and to take the
number of shares mentioned and set forth in the third column opposite to their said
respective names, gjnu UJljnrao the several other parties whose names are men-
tioned in the second schedule hereunder written have consented and agreed to co-
B«rk remodelled, operate with the parties whose names are so mentioned and set forth in the first
schedule in the establishment of the said hank, by raising a joint stock or capital of
VI ibOeach, Cfjirtp 2Tf)OUOanU tfounti* sterling, in shares of fifty pounds each, and carrying on
such hank under the name and designation of “ The Bank of Van Diemen’s Land,”
subject to the regulations and conditions hereinafter contained. ££l|rrttls the
said several parties hereto whose names are mentioned in the said second schedule
f . . hereunder written, have, at or before the time of their severally executing these
rupiiaL rau,n^tl,c presents, paid into the ha mis of the cashier of the said company the sum of Twelve
pounds Jen shillings sterling upon each and every share of fifty pounds so taken
and subscribed for by the said several last mentioned parties respectively, being
twenty five pounds per centum on such shares, it being intended that no more than
twenty five pounds per centum shall he immediately payable on each share, and
that the remaining seventy five pounds per centum on every such share shall he se-
cured by the promisory notes of the proprietor thereof. |srrffor? as well the
parties whose names are mentioned in the first schedule hereunder written, as also
the parties whose names- are mentioned in the second schedule hereunder written,
have in order to secure the due payment of the remainder of their respective pro-
portions of the said capital stock of thirty thousand pounds, given their several pro-
missory notes to the managing director -of the said company for the amount of the
remaining proportions due from them respectively on the several shares so taken by
them ip the sard company, payable at three, six and nine months from the first day
of January in the year one thousand eight hundred and twenty eight, on which
clay such notes are dated. ycoto tfirrrfor* tfiffre Presents fillitiir** that the seve-
ral persons whose names and seals are hereunto subscribed and set, being the parties
whose names are mentioned in the said first and second schedules hereunder writ-
ten, in consideration of the premises and of the special trust and confidence they
leave and repose in each other, and as well for their mutual benefit and advantage as
for the promotion of agriculture, trade and commerce within the Colony of Van 1) ie-
men’s Land, tio and each and every of them fcot!) hereby for himself, herself, and
themselves respectively, and for his her and their respective heirs, executors and
administrators, covenant promise and agree to and with the others and other of them
respectively, and their and his and her respective executors administrators and
assigns in manner following. That is to say : —-
. I.—fj&at they the said several parties whose names and seals are hereunto suh-
scribed and set, shall and will become copartners in the said capital stock of thirty
thousand pounds as bankers, according and in proportion to the number and amount
of the shares mentioned and expressed against their respective names and seals here-
unto subscribed and set, for the term of seven years from the first day of January, in
the year one thousand eight hundred and twenty eight, under the name and designa-
tion of “ The Bank of Van Diemen's Land,” upon the terms and subject to the
conditions and provisoes hereinafter expressed.
Cud,wherethebu- IT—£s*l the business of the said copartnership shall he carried on at Hobart
enfis shall be car- Town in the said Island, and also w hen and if the same shall hereafter be deemed
advisable at Launceston or such other part or parts of the said Island as may be
determined upon in that behalf, as hereinafter expressed, by establishing a branch
of the said bank, or an agent or agents for tire said company.


Hl.—the rights and interests of the proprietors in the capital stock and the s r j t ?ntfr«u «i
profits to arise therefrom shall be according and in proportion to the number and p^i 1 " 610 "-
amount of the shares of such proprietors respectively in the same stock and pro-
fits. ,
IV. —an&at all shares of and in the said capital stock shall he transferable and Shftr< ., thH , n , e
assignable by the person or persons respectively entitled thereto, and shall and tnuiyVct ruble,
may be accordingly assigned and transferred to any other person or persons and so
over again by him her or them as fully and effectually as any other property is by
law assignable, so as such assignments and transfers respectively he made in writing
under the terms and conditions hereinafter expressed, and he duly entered and re-
gistered in a book to be, kept for that purpose at tire house in which the business of
the said .Ikank shall be carried on at Hobart Town; but until such assignment of
transfer shall. be so entered and registered, no assignee of a proprietor shall be en-
titled to vote in the concerns of the company-.
V. —cijat every share, of a deceased proprietor shall vest in the person entitled ;
thereto as a legatee or otherwise, so and in such manner in all respects as to .give
the owner thereof the same rights and privileges as the deceased had therein ; but
not so as to, give the owner a right of voting until he or she shall have registered as
aforesaid the will, letters of.administration, or such other deed as may shew his or
her title thereto, and have executed these presents.; it being the intention that, as
Audi in the event of, a transfer or assignment of shares in the life time of the pro-
prietor, as of shares accruing to persons as legatees or,otherwise after the death
of a proprietor, the lawful owner for the time being,shall, upon complying with
the provisions of this deed and .executing, aUo tine same, enjoy all the privileges of.
original shareholders..
VI. —Cf)at .should any , proprietor of life said capital‘stock" be desirous-of pay ing Proprietors
up the instalments on the shares held by him or her in such capital* stock prior to ’oVthVh
the same instalments becoming due as aforesaid, or a portion of any or either of such sllart ‘ , ‘*
instalments, such.proprietor .shall be,at liberty so to do and shall be entitled to share
pro rata in the then next general half yearly division and dividend of profits and
proceeds, provided • always that in the. event of any such proprietor paying a pro-
portion only of his or her instalment,, the sum so paid shall jiot be less than five
pounds upon or in respect of each .share..
Adi.—Cfjat if.any.shareholder, shall fail to pay., the fulf amount secured by.any 7,1, » N ’° divi,!f " l
or either of the promissory notes before referred to after one month’s previous 110- wliolmve not paid
tice so to do, such failure shall work, an immediate suspension in payment of the
dividend or profit then accrued and which may afterwards accrue upon the amount
already paid up to and until .the amount secured by such notes respectively shall
be fully paid.
\ lll.—Chat dm affairs ot the said bank shall be managed by seven directors, B>h,
Avho shall be chosen, by ballot from .the body of proprietors in manner hereinafter ofthe t,auk *
mentioned, one of whom shall also he chosen by the proprietors to act as managing
director at such salary and under such restrictions as may be agreed upon from time
to time by the proprietors at a general meeting.
IX. —Chat there shall be a president, which president shall be chosen annually by on. evident and
the directors from time to time from amongst their own body, who is to preside at ,li *“ iuliei *
all meetings of the directors and at all yearly, half yearly, or other general meetings
of the proprietors, and in case of the absence of such president, then the managing
director, or in case of his absence, then one other of the saitl directors present at
any such meeting shall be forthwith chosen at every such meeting to preside and
act as president for the time being.
X. —-Cljat a board of directors shall be held twice in every week, at the house ion., Directors au a


(0)
(licit' Julies. where the business of the snid company shall be carried on in Hobart Town,
namely, on Tuesdays and Tridays, or on such other days as may be thought conve-
nient.
thun\hree directors
Xl.—Ctjat not less than three directors shall at any time form a b*oard.
tun. a board. Xll.—cijat such board of directors do advise with and instruct the managing
12,h, Duties of on. director as to the duties of his office, which office shall from time to time he regu-
jt a f mg’director. i a f e( { and governed by such board of directors.
,3,l.,President to Xlll.—Cljilt at every meeting of directors, as also at every meeting of share-
liave acasliiif' rote holders, the president or managing director or such other director as shall preside
Procre din , said meeting,-shall have a casting as well as a deliberative vote,
o t dlrf-ciors*!©"be XlV.—the proceedings of every meeting of directors as also of the share*
recorded. holders shall be regularly taken and entered in a book to be kept for that purpose
only, and when so entered, be signed by the president or or other direc-
tors who may have presided at the same meeting.
J'rHi ’ XV.— JTfjiit the president or managing director or any two of the other directors
!vl. ( .ri.tois, B i.ow shall be at liberty to call a special general meeting of the proprietors at any time
they may I think proper, either by circular in case of emergency, or by advertisement
in some or one of the public papers, provided such circular or advertisement be de-
livered or published at least twenty one days prior to the time appointed for such
.meeting to take place.
iuiii. Ditto. XVI. —Cljat the directors or a majority of them shall on having a requisition
addressed to them arid delivered to the cashier, signed by at least six of the propri-
etors holding three shares each in the said capital stock, or by any ten of the pro-
prietors entitled to vote at general meetings, expressing therein the particular© bject
of such meeting, convene a special.general meeting of the proprietors as soon there-
after as circumstances will admit, such “special general meeting to be nevertheless
advertised in some or one of the public papers in manner hereinbefore mentioned;
but if such directors refuse or fail to convene such meeting within seven days after
the delivery of the requisition, then such, proprietors shall be at liberty to do so of
their own accord.
it.ii, Cashier. no person shaUTe eligible to hold the office of cashier or teller of
the said company unless he shall he bona tide possessed in his own right of live
shares in the capital stock of the said company, nor shall any stipendary officer of
the bank, excepMhe managing director, be eligible to hold the office at director so
long as he may continue.in his office.
Direct™ X.YII I.—Cfj at the board of directors shall be at liberty from time time to‘suspend
’to suspend, such officers, tellers, agents, clerks and servants, and to nominate and appoint others
;in their stead (save and except the managing director), and to hire •suchhouses and
offices in Hobart Town ami elsew here, and to purchase such books,furniture, uten-
sils, and other articles as they may consider necessary for the business and affairs
of the said company, subject nevertheless to the approval of the proprietors at the
next genera 1 meeting.
Mb, fwnfthe XlX.—neither the cashier, tellers, agent, accountant, nr any other of-
*h U iUlir Tt fficers of the said company (save and except the managing director), shall enter into
(iilector lo I •» \ . 1 . /Y , , » n i I
be ja trade. any*other ’business-or .employment, and Sllmi officers respectively shall on demand
give security to the satisfaction of the directors for the tailhfnl discharge ot their
respective duties.
20,1,, Ejection of XX.—.rijat the cashier and all other officers shall be elected by the proprre-
uSicus, tors, who, except the managing director, shall continue in their respective offi-
ces pennanently until by death, resignation, or removal, it shall become necessary
to appoint others in their stead, and that such cashier and other officers do receive
such compensation for their services as may from time to time be settled and agreed


iiT "
upon l»y u majority of votes at a general meeting of the proprietors, and which
salaries are to he paid quarterly.
XXI. CfUil a board of directors shall at all times have the power of making 2K»J*i»«,w
all such bye laws rules and regulations, not repugnant to the general rules and
regulations "herein contained, as they may think necessary for the future conduct
government and management of the affairs of the said company, which bye laws
rules and regulations may be repealed or altered at any general or special gene-
ral meeting of the shareholders (but without prejudice to any intermediate acts),
and shall not afterwards be re-established except by a like general or special ge-
neral meeting of shareholders.
XXII, —arfiat the board of directors shall have the entire management and con- . n . t .
. . . , . . ° . i-ii "2nd, Directors u»
froul of the discounting branch of the said bank, and ol lending monies on bills, havethixM.tirecon-
notes, bonds, rnortages, and other securities, and the buying and selling of bullion, Sen foreign*,
gold and silver, and such coin or monies as they may consider necessary for car- nicut *
lying on the business of the said company, or as they may think advisable and ad-
vantageous for the general interests of the said company, and shall also have the
entire direction and management of calling in, receiving and enforcing payment of
all monies due and owing to the said company, either on securities or in any other
manner or way whatsoever, and that no other person whatever shall enter into any
engagement by bill or otherwise, on behalf of the said company, except the direc-
tors for the time being, or a board of them, shall find it necessary to require the
same.
XXIII. —®f)4t the board of directors shall settle and determine in whose name 23riI> Directum
or names all securities that may be required to be entered into by and on behalf of
the said Company, or by or on behalf of any person or persons transacting or a»« bank,
negociating any matter or business whatsoever with the said company shall be
taken and given, and by whom, and in what manner and form, and for what
amount, the several notes and bills of the said company shall be drawn, signed, gi-
ven and issued, with power to alter and vary the same as they shall see occasion.
XXIV. —Ojal Walter Angus Bethune, Esquire, George Frederick Read, Esquire, 24iJ| N , nmpf
Charles M‘Lachlan, Esquire, David Lord, Esquire, Anthony Eenn Kemp, Esquire, fir»t director*.
Gamaliel Butler, Esquire, and John Bell, Esquire, who have been duly elected by
the shareholders, shall be the first directors of the said bank, and that Anthony
Eenn Kemp, Esquire, who hath been chosen by the same directors from amongst
themselves, shall be the president of such directors.
XXV. —Oja! George Frederick Read, Esquire, who hath been so chosen by the 250,, ]„t managing-
proprietors, shall be the first managing director. director.
XXVI. Chat ? fhc said seven first directors shall continue in office for the term „. n .. .
1 „ , , . vGtn, Dn ration in
of one year, to be computed from the first day ol January, in the year one thousand office oiiir«uim>
eight hundred and twenty eight, to the thirty first day of December in the said y ear,
both day's inclusive, or until another or others shall be elected or chosen in the
roomeof such as may happen to resign, die, or become incapable of acting, or dis-
qualified to act.
XXV I i. — Cfiat on the first day of January, in the year one thousand eight bun- 2711,, n ow director,
dred and twenty nine, three of the said first seven directors to be determined by lot b ,oout '
among themselves at anytime previous to the first day of December preceding,
-shall go out of office, and on the first day of January, in the year one thousand
eight hundred and thirty, the remainder of the said seven directors so first chosen
as aforesaid, shall also go out of office.
XX VIII.— cijat on the first day of January in every subsequent year, the senior unto,
directors for the time being shall retire, so that no director shall continue in office
fora longer period than two years, unless re-elected.


XXIX. nothing herein contained shall be taken t ot construed to prevent
gibio forle'eiec.’ an y director going out of office as aforesaid, from being immediately re-elected as
t,oa * a director, but who shall then be considered a junior director, provided he be duly
qualified as next hereinafter mentioned.
XXX. —Cfjat no proprietor shall be qualified for election as a director, or be en-
tw!dir?ctors! callyin titled to offer himself as a candidate for that office, unless he shall be the bona fide
holder in his own right of at least five shares.
XXXI. —tJTfpit no director shall hold his said office longer than he may be pos-
-3l»*, Directors to sessed of at least five shares in the said capital stock, but that immediately on any
hold o shares. director parting with his said five shares, or reducing his shares to less than five, be
shall thereupon cease to be such director, and another duly qualified as,aforesaid
for the direction shall be forthwith elected a director in his stead.
XXXI I.— if any director for the time being shall die, resign, or become in-
35ncj, ni ectors capable or disqualified to act, a special general meeting of the Company shall he
HiMiuAiifjintfioga speedily convened by the remaining directors of the said Company, or a board of
such directors, for the purpose of electing another duly qualified proprietor as a di-
rector, who, upon being elected, shall hold the said office for such time and times,
and with the like powers and authorities as the person or persons so dying, having-
resigned, or become disqualified or incapable to act, could and would have done if
he had remained in office.
XXXlil„ ct , at ifa vacancy should, occur in the direction, after the month of
tw* October in the first or any other year, the vacancy shall not be supplied until the
sunned. day for the annual election of directors, anything to the contrary notwithstanding.
XXXIV. —>n case of the death, resignation, incapacity, or disqualification
of any or either of the directors for the time being, or of the death, resigna'ion, re-
34ih,Arrnn5remf>nu moval, or suspension of any cashier. accountant, teller,.clerk or other officer of the
duefiJl»“i h ottce"/ sa * bank already appointed, or hereafter to be appointed for the managing,, con-
ducting, and carrying on the affairs of the said Bank, all the books, accounts,
vouchers, writings and papers relating to the said bank or its affairs, which shall be
or have been possessed by such deceased, resigning, incapacitated or disqualified di-
rector or by the deceased, resigning, removed, or suspended officer or bis executors or
administrators, shall be immediately delivered up to the directors for the time being,
to be by them placed in the hands of the officer or officers in titled to the charge care
custody and keeping thereof.
XXXV. —gqjat all general meetings for the election of directors, except in the
35a, when dirtc-event of a vacancy by death, resignation, incapacity, or disqualification, shall be
to,s elected. held on the first Monday in the month of December, in each year.
XXXVI. —Cfiat such proprietors as intend to offer themselves as candidates for
the direction, either at a time of a general election* or on the death, resignation, in-
ro*r*d!rectio« capacity, or disqualification of a director, shall signify the same in writing to the
notice. board of directors through the cashier, at least seven days previous to the day ap-
pointed for the election of directors.
XXXVII. —cijat the books of account (which with all vouchers, correspondence*
and writings relating to the bank and its affairs, shall be kept by such officers, and
j
how and when to b« thirtieth day of June, and the thirty first day ot Decembei, in each yeas, and an
•p tZ't 10 pro “ abstract of the balance sheet attested by a majority of the directors, shall be sub-
mitted to the proprietors at the then next half yearly general meeting of the proprie-
tors, to be convened by the board of directors within one month after the thirtieth
day of June, and thirty first day of December, in each year, and if such abstract shall
not be fully approved of by the proprietors at such general meeting, an auditing
committee of not less than three and not more than five of the proprietors, shall be


chosen by and from the hotly of proprietors entitled to vote, to examine into the
same, ami make their report to the proprietors thereon.
XXXV 111. - djat the first dividend shall be declared at the general half yearly S9th, nirirffnrfs,
meeting of the proprietors, to be held on the first Monday in the month of August, when dec!ar,d *
in the year one thousand eight hundred and twenty eight, and alter that time a di-
vidend shall be made and declared every six months, namely, at the general half
yearly meeting of proprietors, to be holden in the first Monday in the months ol
February and August, in each and every year.
XXX X.—accordingly, a general half yearly meeting of the proprietors, for
the purpose of declaring a dividend, and for the transaction and dispatch of busi- 39th, Ditto,
ness generally, shall be held on the first Monday in the months of February and
August, in each and every year, which general half yearly meetings shall be pub-
licly advertized or made known by the directors, or a board of them, to every pro-
prietor, at least twenty one days before the time of such general meeting taking-
place.
XL.—STjjat the dividend declared at such half yearly general meetings respec-
tively, shall be payable to the proprietors on demand, at any time after the expira- i 1 eu *
tion of seven days from the day the same may be declared.
XU.—CfivTt proprietors holding bona fide in their own right less than three shares
shall be entitled to give one vote only That proprietors holding bona fide in their iin, Scale of rotes,
own right, three shares and less than five shares,.shall be entitled to give two votes
only. That proprietors holding bona fide in their own right, five shares and less
than seven shares, shall be entitled to give three votes only. That proprietors hold-
ing bona fide in their own right, seven shares and less than ten thares, shall be enti-
tled to give four votes only. That proprietors holding bona fide in their own right,
ten shares and less than twenty shares, shall be entitled to give five votes only.
And that proprietors holding bona fide in their own right, twenty shares, shall be
entitled on all matters and questions whatsoever, to give eight votes; but no pro-
prietor shall be entitled to give more than eight votes, notwithstanding he or she
may be the holder of more than twenty shares.
XLll.—JTfjat every proprietor having a right to vote, shall be at liberty, if absent
from ,any meeting of the shareholders, to signify and give his or her vote or votes
through the medium ,of any .other proprietor, who may have a right of voting, ex- bj n so»j?' tofr#te
cept the managing director, and tire stipendiary officers of the bank respectively, by
a written document, appointing such other proprietor as proxy for that purpose, or
specifically to the same effect, and which document shall be produced by the pro-
prietor so appointed as such proxy, before he or she be permitted to vote as the
proxy or appointee of the absent proprietor, except such persons legally authorized
by power of attorney, representing proprietors absent from the colony.
XL 111. —if any proprietor shall become debtor to the bank hereby constitu-
ted, or to any person or persons for the use or 011 the account of the said bank,
either as an individual or as a partner with any other body or person or persons, 431 a, SWe« not
or shall , be under engagements of any description to the said bank, excepting al- pm'lSors'.rc in!
ways that part of the share or shares which may not have been called for by the di- debtedtolheb! * nk .
rectors, and for which the assignee and representative of every shareholder will
become liable, it shall be lawful for the said company to retain the share or shares
belonging to such proprietor, and the dividend interest and profits thereof, and to
refuse to enter or register an assignment or any other transfer of the same share or
shares, or any other document relating thereto, until such proprietor shall have fully
paid and satisfied such debt as shall be then due to the said company, or to any
person or persons for the use of the same, and until he or she shall have relieved the
said company from all engagements which may have been entered into tor or on ac-


count of him or heir respectively, which debt and engagements are hereby declared
to be a lien upon the stock and profits of such proprietor or proprietors in preference
to and to have and take priority of all other creditors of such proprietor, and ail the
creditors of the company or firm in or of which he or she may be a partner, and to
his her and their assigness appointees and nominees respectively.
T v . —glnn in order that the said company may be enabled to pay and relieve
sham of pro- the same out Oi the stock and profits belonging to every such last mentioned propri-
e^banV"ii«>w to be et()l ’> 'the directors for the time being, or a board of such directors, shall be at liber-
disposed «r. ty to sell by public auction, when, where, and in what manner they may think lit,
the share or shares belonging to every such proprietor, and to retain the dividends,
interest, and profits thereof, and-apply the net proceeds in payment of the said
debts, and in satisfaction of the said engagements, and all incidental expences, un-
less such proprietor shall, within the space ot ninety days after a written demand or
reqnisilion made to him or her by the managing director or cashier, fully pay such
■debts, and satisfy such engagements as last aforesaid, and the said company shall
be accountable to him or her for the surplus, after making such application and re-
ceiving from him or her a discharge of all claims against the said company.
X LV.—UrcUiffiti u‘U)aps that in the event of any sale being about to take place
of any share or shares which may be or become liable to sale as last aforesaid, the
proprietor or proprietors of such share or shares respectively, shall and may, upon
coming forward before the time appointed for such sale, and relieving the same
4&. 1 !,.Ditt0, share or shares from all claims and liabilities .attaching thereto, or to him her or
them, as the owner or owners thereof, and fully paying off and discharging all such
debts and engagements as aforesaid, and satisfying all expences incurred on his her
or their account or accounts with the said bank, and discharging all expences incurr-
-ed on his her or their account or accounts by reason of such share or shares, or
otherwise, together with all interest due thereon, prevent and stop such sale, and
shall thereupon be permitted to hold such share or shares, and he and continue such
proprietor or proprietors thereof, any thing herein contained to the contrary not-
withstanding.
4«ii, shmeiioitSprs XJLVl.—Cfjat if any person whose name is inserted in either of the schedules to
executethpdefd these presents, shall fail to execute these presents within three calender months
t< tJ " is “ lJ from the first day of January, in4he year one thousand eight hundred and twenty
eight, except such persons as may be absent from the colony, who shall be allowed
a further period of fifteen months to execute the same, the persons so failing shall
not from and after the expiration of such respective periods as aforesaid, he consi-
dered a shareholder; but the share or shares expressed in and by either of such
schedules, to have been taken fey him or her, shall thereupon and thereafter be held
by the directors for the general benefit of the other proprietors, which directors arc
hereby empowered to sell the said share or shares, when, and as they may think fit,
tlie purchaser or purchasers of which share or shares, shall thenceforth be deemed in
all respects as the original proprietor or proprietors of the same share or shares.
47jb, ‘ poce XLVII—if any shareholder be legally declared an insolvent, he orshe shall
“!ulw Wld ' rs iu ’ thenceforth cease to be a partner of the said company, and should any director or
the cashier or accountant of the company happen to be legally declared an insol-
vent, he shall from thenceforth be ineligible to fill his office, but without prejudice to
the beneficial rights of every such propiielor, cashier, or accountant, and to any act
that such director, cashier, or accountant, may with the permission or authority of
the board of directors, perform or do before his office be tilled up, and also without
prejudice to bis re-election or re-appointment, if it should be deemed advisable to
reinstate or restore him to office.


(11)
XLVIII. —sTsat no proprietor of the said capital stock shall be answerable to the 4Stb Vfnvrietort
v - * - , . . •dciu i rwjmnufj
Other proprietors ol the said stock, beyond die amount oi ins or her own particular iiahi. o»ij n» the
interest therein,, nor beyond the amount of the number ot snares of die said stock u t “ toflD *‘ r,,u
thai may be held by him or her, nor shall any proprietor be liable to dn other proprie-
tors for any calls,losses, or demands in respect to such shares, after he or she shall
have regularly assigned and transferred his or her share or shares, and the assign-
ment or transfer thereof shall be duly entered and registered.
XLlX.— 3T|)at if it should appear to a full board of directors advisable to dis- 49lhP<)wer , 0 41i _
solve the copartnership, extend the term, or increase the capital thereof, it. shall be <«i« u* i>.»iun-
lawful for them to convene a special general meeting of shareholders to consider of
the same, which meeting shall have power to dissolve the copartnership, extend
the term, or increase the capital thereof, in such way and manner in all respects as
it may think tit, and the resolutions carried at such meeting shall bind every pur-
chaser or proprietor in the said establishment, any thing to the contrary thereof not-
withstanding.
L.—Ctjat no agent or agency, branch bank or office, shall be established or created
at Launceston or elsewhere, without (he authority of a special general meeting of b “ w lobees,ablisl '-
shareholders, duly convened, for the express purpose of taking into consideration,
the propriety of the establishment or creation thereof.
Ll.— t&iyat this deed, and all byelaws, books, accounts, vouchers, documents and 51st> This
writings, belonging to the said bank, shall be open to the inspection and perusal of &«n i>y«* law*, &c.
- i i'i ° 1 . * 1 open to all Mlmie-
every shareholder at ad the general and hair yearly general meetings, as also at ail bolder* for peru-
the special general meetings of the shareholders, and such information given on su, ‘
those occasions by the directors, cashier, accountant tellers and clerks, of the said
bank, as shall he required in regard thereto.
Lb.—Cfjitt the shareholders respectively shall save harmless, and keep indemni-
fied the .present and future directors lespecff-veiy, and every other person who hath 52nd, Directors
been or maybe employed or entrusted by or with the authority of such present or by p,a *
future directors in any of the affairs of the said bank for all costs, charges, and ex-
Pences incurred, paid, or sustained by reason of any lawful act done by them or
any or either of them in behalf of the concern, or by reason of their or any or ei-
ther of their names being used as trustees, directors, agents, or in any other matter
whatsoever connected with the said bank, or the affairs thereof.
L . 11Cljat as speedily as it can be effected after the dissolution of the said co-
partnership by expiration <ff the said term or. otherwise, the buildings and other U po'n
saleable property of the said company, shall be sold to the best advantage, and
that an account in writing of the partnership monies, securities, debts, property,
and effects, after payment of all just demands, shall be made by the directors for
the time being, and so soon as possible (he net surplus shall be fairly divided amongst
the several shareholders, according to their respective interests in the said partner-
ship property, such account and valuation being first approved of by a general meet-
ing of the proprietors, specially convened for that purpose, and which said approved
account and valuation shall be conclusive and binding upon every proprietor.
Sr whereof, the several parties to these presents have hereunto set
their respective hands aid seals, at Hobart Town, in the Island of Van lemen’s
Land, this first day of <»nuary, in the year of our Lord, One thousand Eight hun-
dred and Twenty eight.
Murray & Wacdougalj, I'm leu, Elizabeth Street.


■ , ,
i4
- '■ ' <.
' ■[%> . ?>';]
-•>#•?j >d. oi oitb;ii ud -fWmtjc . i Jb;<U *ioij /iaii *io uml \.i UIa\ , ■< ak$
iirsirf ‘ i'jyit/i ui io /.,;. •>( *pof
•• .ai
f luui baiaias v inb od ‘kmwii 'ioicturiJ -to . ..srn
• ., ;fc ,. f . t * lb >' kf/;ei /be <•••!('Jv.-iib to fciiiO<i Uu) ti oi — . jffr
• - •'■' • ■ ];».-• < ji jo iTiib iiiii';! io bii'ijxa ,
B • v iii 1 V# v
Gl!<5
a io
j ;dJ
,' -•;? : vMi do bifji { d‘>)b L f, ;, '£ —JJ
'-Ol )J yn --uittimillli
<; ‘it '0‘JV* ... „■ -.;-
9(it . £
\ r L
Li hit.
. i:. Jlii
omlf ■ hfi>* Ji< ■ >a-»*••; i od f. baft;. r Jr^3
v -,. iw;■■•:• ..j'j *10 ]•■_>■*( V:.;3 od VO'Iii 'I0-; f£|Mra|
b flj '|<> ... .; ;
i Vi.fi V - - • o'! /-'I , ; ,!»•.. -O'f
*t<> ’ ) ,!:• »->:• 9:lj > ; IS ; 1 w. U.» *1901 - O *
iiu- V-tilJ ui *fO ; -j; i) . iV. jo tfujl,-
. , i :; 9 ■ ■ • ■■ ' 1 • 1 V 1 ’ ’
• ij-toJ I .. •oil 'it- ..V vd c-jio.•;•!••>• * o W
f<J bUbHfii .
if (]:<; <'I9UjV Sj (joL Jo ■ oi ioifO93G:,$C'
J&fij. Me,. Id %>ii$ baity-.
;-: .Iqia* J'Ul fil’ ti!di&*o(} H : -MB' »£• i< !i fl ' ;
, ouf»‘op;'*; . - ui dnooot; t .t* Oj$fcV
iqtjR Jr-s'fii doiitiiiiii/ Ihuj Jfloo'JOG dt>l»* /(Jioqoio ( d4|-
a /iaoq iiiq lei/ *i(fi l> hiovuo* $fUmq« oil?
,; • •■■ ;
Jr )>'>iq 05 ' ifiifeij dG9i9sl7/ i'.ZT-' i
.. , . ■ ■ [ ■ >■■• ' • ■ : :' ' ■ ! ' i>1 *' ■ v
Ally .} bii-G o3'd>
Wi: .To i ;; , . .• i /ii t i
T lmju ho'isJtio v U*l> on itmTi it) uooi&n
iHOJoo'ub to fcliiDJ tut j; oj
’■ bianco oj gvjblodo iw £ftiteoni Itnoucg b;j .. •
.-a-. bnoJxo ■ iii vvlofertb ei tov/o<| *r . -.41
ijrffl" m f 'So‘>i-) 4 .'; bniqii'j ij i‘i
-•is: . / r x•. \‘ * buid tluif* %n:r UrboiTioo tat iioio-n ri o.bl ,ui- J*jil /too J
-tOlTlotnofij Oflj UJ •-
••* , ' . : J m ' * ' • -*i ii.
' WA»rftiE ,{; boJimo.io boikildtitao odit/ifid dorwnd tu J vj-.r. ou ji. v T- — A
wiik |(j ‘.niiooni bnout/<. iiuooqa jx' din vJ f >U.:u 'ulr Juotftiv/ t 'mi!7/s)b9 to Xiot.mo. j )
iiciJxi'it,bianco oJm tm nd/>J ;o . ... t oih -ids no r. ovi •u:ii
O J , u m * 4
Jr** i fife odi io -v i ||
- ~,t. r ...j- ■ ■ • on; - b ,*••••■?• •. ■
* j .1 ■ » •; ( .. :
,
< I il ■•:- ■ j . .
ij w. evil' oil jii; jji oi’iw m> bi9l 11 <■;*. n n l o> ..lit* oflJ # jj> )o Us (..)Is-ij.--.;
, . . a. i J, o . •.' < •!'. ‘ ;i. <
cj a:! hat r * ..l‘.mm
' . nr;-. ‘ ( n! : ■ ?oi:
*l9" id {(!.(. TC 'KOUi
T9iiUiJ It i
••* o {iiii.2 orb o xn >i: !ui-nob
.ini ... j. ...j;
1 . Jilt
t . ,- . ■ *i' ;n
•lot >,i<‘!'J9Tib >H t v<f ohiiti
3 s. :: Ir i ; /i , '.r'i v
•*i )i; ; In* fi fii •. >. i >•>
-to .1 ■{•■( 1-: !?‘i ■ f
Ire /an i(j« t i -id -t •>{ i
'*-ami 3th v.i 1 :r?; ■ eft*)




