

THE LANDSCAPES OF
PENLEIGH BOYD


In the possession of
Reginald Purbrick, Esq
Melbourne.
Hush of Dawn


THE LANDSCAPES OF
PENLEIGH BOYD
WITH BIOGRAPHY BY
JAMES MACDONALD.
FOREWORD BY HUGH
GRANT ADAM. M.A.
PUBLISHED BY ALEXANDER McCUBBIN
152 ELIZABETH STREET. MELBOURNE


LIST OF PLATES
Plate I. ( Frontispiece) ... Hush of Dawn
Plate II The Canoe
Plate 111 Queen Street
Plate IV ’ The Langorous Sea
Plate V .. ... Silver Morning
Plate VI The Wattle Gatherers
Plate VII Haystacks, Evening
Plate VIII Morning, Portsea
Plate IX Grey Gums
Plate X Morning Light
Plate XI The Iron Bridge


FOREWORD
BY HUGH GRANT ADAM, M.A.
AT the Royal Academy banquet this year, Prince Albert
told the greatest artists in England that they could
not employ their time and talents better than in
painting signs for country roads. “ I feel sure, 1 ’ he said,
“ that many of my comrade motorists would welcome the
revival of the village sign or emblem lettered and con-
spiciously displayed—a welcome guide to a visitor in a
strange land. As in (he past so to-day, the name of many
a village would offer scope for the wit and humor of the
artist.’’ Royalty is privileged to say what it pleases, even
to the Royal Academy. But when an estimable citizen
of Melbourne, speaking at the opening of a local art ex-
hibition, mildly suggested that the artists would make their
pictures more interesting if they stuck a few more figures
in the foreground, he was straightaway damned for a
Philistine in one hundred and fifty studios. To the critic,
whose duty it is to stand between the artist and the
public, attempting the sometimes puzzling task of explaining
the one to the other, these plaintive appeals are a
challenge and a commission. For when all is said and
done, the end of all art is to pleasure and instruct the
public.
It is not true that the public always likes the worst.
The public likes what it understands. It is the part of the
artist, if he has emotions and ideas that he believes worth


translating, to translate them into language that the public
can understand. It is easy to make crude ideas and
cheap emotions plain; that is why so many understand-
able, and therefore popular pictures are artistically cheap
and crude. The finer ideas and deeper emotions are
difficult to translate into paint, as they are difficult to
translate into words or music. If we had better artists we
would have a higher standard of public taste. So let the
artist not despise the public because he cannot make him-
self intelligible to it.
This is a golden hour in Australian art because artists
and public are in understanding one with the other. There
is no pose or affectation on either side. Our painters are
sincerely trying to put their meaning into the simplest forms
of paint and the public is honestly seeking for the revela-
tion of beauty. It is a high tribute to the genius of our
artists and to the taste of our public that the best and
most popular form of art in Australia is landscape painting,
for it requires the highest skill of the artist to express
himself in terms of the beauty of Nature and it requires
the capacity for appreciation to read his meaning.
Because there is that skill and because there is that
appreciation in Australia to-day, our landscape painters
have been able to work with a fearless play of individual-
ity—Streeton with his new romanticism built upon a
foundation of passionate realism; Milder striking chords
of color; Heyson with his symphonies of sunlight;
Blamire Young playing dexterous, syncopated runs; and


Penleigh Boyd with his pure, clear, emotional notes of
atmosphere and color.
“ Comparisons,” as Dogberry might say, ‘’are odorous,”
but Boyd, I think, will yet stand with Streeton as the
greatest of our Australian landscape painters. Much of
his greatness lies in the promise of his youth, but in what
he has already achieved he has made a universality of
appeal that destroys all need to seek for special graces.
The critic does not examine his technique any more than
he would examine the grammar of Galsworthy. The
picture is itself the emotion. The manner of its achieve-
ment is for schoolmen to wrangle over. Boyd paints the
hush of beauty as it lies on sea and sky and hill. His
genius makes his emotion plain. For him, at any rate,
there is no need to woo the public pleasure by painting
emblematic signposts or by peppering his foregrounds with
figures.


In the possession of
Major S, G. Love,
Melbourne.
The Canoe


In the possession of
R. D. Elliott, Esq.,
Melbourne,
Queen Street


In the possession of
D. G. Lumsden, Esq.
Melbourne.
The Langorous Sea


In the possession of
Dr. Chas, Player,
Melbourne.
Silver Morning


In the possession of
W. R. Grimwade, Esq.,
Melbourne.
The Wattle Gatherers


In the possession of
Henry James, Esq.
Haystacks, Evening


In The possession of
Merson Cooper, Esq,,
Melbourne,
Morning, Portsea


In the possession
Raymond Wallis,
Melbourne.
Grey Gums


In the possession of
Frank Stuart, Esq.,
Melbourne.
Morning Light


In the possession of
Gayfield Shaw, Esq.,
Sydney.
The Iron Bridge


The Landscapes of Penleigh Boyd
PENLEIGH Boyd was born in 1890, so, at the present
time, he is just 30 years of age. Artistically, he has
completed his period of youth, the period that puts en-
thusiasms to the test and determines which of them
shall be cherished, and which abandoned. This is really the
most critical period in a painter’s career, for upon its decisions
the whole character of his subsequent work depends. From
it onward he either falls to pieces or concentrates to express
the convictions he has arrived at until, advanced with each
fresh product of his brush, he approaches to where he may,
unconsciously, without doubts or misgivings, play with his
medium and extemporise to his heart’s content.
Boyd’s parents were painters of merit, and as a little boy
he busied himself in copying their sketches.
In 1905, at the age of fifteen, he entered the Melbourne
National Gallery Drawing School, and began diligently to
learn how to express form. There he remained for four years,
under the late Fred. McCubbin and L. Bernard Hall.
Out of school hours, landscape interested and occupied
him, and this interest continued to grow until it predomin-
ated.
The fetters of school discipline and their restrictions (em-
phasised by contrast with the freedom of his holiday excur-
sions into landscape) began to chafe, and decided him in leav-
ing the school. This occurred in 1909, and he marked his year
of independence by exhibiting in the Guildhall a collection of


his paintings; a successful venture which encouraged him to
repeat the experiment in the following year. An equal suc-
cess followed, and immediately after its close he sailed for
England. He was now twenty. Arriving in England, he fol-
lowed precedent and rented a studio in Chelsea. There he
stayed for three months, then migrated to Amersham in Sur-
rey, which he left to go to St, Ives. A three months sojourn
there, during which he painted the large picture “Springtime,”
hung in the Royal Academy of ign, completed his stay in
England.
Paris now became his home. He took a studio in the
Boulevard Arago, where for a neighbour he had the late E. P.
Fox, a sound and accomplished painter, by whose friendly
and useful criticism Boyd greatly benefitted. In this respect
he is only one of many Australians whom this kindly, gifted
artist so freely and unobtrusively helped from out his large
store of knowledge and experience. For five or six months
Boyd worked, sketching in the parks, streets and gardens of
Paris. He also attended the classes at the Academic Colarossi
and came into contact with the modern French School repre-
sented by Menard, Simon, Blanche, Le Sidaner and La
Touche, whose attitude as a whole very much attracted him.
Later, his admiration was somewhat qualified, but he still
finds much tq commend in the general attitude of this group.
In 1912 he married Miss Edith Gerard Anderson, daugh-
ter of the late J. G. Anderson, 1.5.0., of Brisbane, This lady
was also at that time studying art in Paris, and 'after their
marriage they visited Chartres, where they stayed for one
month, Mentone, Rome, Florence and Venice. This tour ac


counted for a large number of water-color sketches, as varied
as the latitudes and localities visited. When it ended, Boyd
and his wife returned to Paris, and from there went to Lon-
don. A month there completed a two years absence from
Australia, and in March, 1913, he returned home. Apart from
the impression already cited, that the modern Frenchmen had
made on him, Boyd was little affected by his tour, and in the
light of later growth and increased knowledge, this, except
as a stimulus, was still further modified. He had worked well
and after getting back to Melbourne he exhibited a selection
of his accumulated work—about seventy pictures. The buy-
ing public acquired most of these, which were chiefly water-
colors. He now found 1 himself artistically at a loose-end, and
for some months indulged only in desultory sketching. He
went to live at Yarra Glen, where he stayed until he went to
Canberra to paint a landscape portrait of the Federal Capital.
This canvas was bought by the Government, and now hangs
in the Queen’s Hall at the Federal House of Parliament. Back
again at Yarra Glen he painted until May, 1914. Then by car
he drove overland again to Sydney, where he held a very suc-
cessful show of sixty canvases. July found him back from
Sydney, and soon after, the Great War had broken on the
world. He now took a house at Warrandyte, on the Yarra,
x 6 miles from Melbourne, and greatly liking the place, built
a home there, his present residence. A few months later he
enlisted and toward the latter end of 1915 was on active ser-
vice with the A.I.F.
In September, 1917, after 17 months in France, ne was
badly gassed and evacuated to England. He was kept there


for five months, was boarded for return to Australia, and ar-
rived home in March, 1918. After his discharge he re-settled
at Warrandyte, and with the exception of painting excursions
to Malmsbury, Portsea and Sydney, has ever since stayed
there. Working hard from March to November he showed
again at the end of igxß, and again twelve months later, the
igig exhibition being in conjunction with W. B. Mclnnes.
At the annual exhibition of the Australian Art Association
he showed a large canvas entitled “The Breath of Spring,”
representing masses of wattle in bloom, overhanging a river
bank. This picture inspired a lot of discussion and was bought
from the artist by the Melbourne National Gallery. Re-
established at Warrandyte, isolated from the beaten track of
all but Sunday motorists, Boyd realised that his scattered,
unformulated thoughts of pre-war days had now become more
or less focussed and given him a new outlook; an outlook
which has the appearance of being permanent, though it is
bound, if ever so little, as time goes on, to be qualified by un-
foreseen happenings, and the natural growth of a man’s mind.
Shortly before leaving London he learnt to get great and sat-
isfactory pleasure from the Turner of the “Dunstanborough
Castle” and “Walton Bridges” period, Their detached se-
renity and calm very likely appealed to Boyd the more as
being the very converse of what he had recently been through;
but beyond that it is certain that, war or no war, his predilec-
tion was this way. After all, “this titanic struggle” affected
Nature not as much as a sprained wrist would a human being.
Sirius, Arcturus, Canopus wink in the stellar spaces not as
brightly as a diamond on the black velvet tray of a gem mer


chant, yet, the wind of their displacing rush would snufi out
the blaze of the sun as a hurricane a rushlight. All the devas-
tating occurrences of this and other times and places leave
Nature unruffled; immune from fret and vexation, At least
this is how it appears to Boyd, for Nature is as varied as there
are beings to see her. To him her first and outstanding attri-
bute (and she has all the attributes all the sons of men can
perceive in her or conceive of her, and more) is her noble
tranquillity, her indifference, if you like; her implied promise,
when storms arc roaring, of present relapse into serenity:
both calm and storm being, like ourselves, only parts and
manifestations of her character. It is not that he is unaware
that Nature possesses and exhibits both turbulent and violent
attributes, but his artistic, mind (selective as all artistic minds
must be), automatically acts as a preferential mirror, seeing
in and reflecting of Nature that which boat pleases him. In
the mind of the settled artist, his idiosyncrasy consistently
works and influences his choice of subject and his method of
presenting it. With justifiable and enthusiastic bias, he sees
the attribute he admires in everything which his senses ap-
prehend, whether natural object, sound or scent; thought or
sculptured form or painted picture, He inevitably is intent
on getting a response to his spiritual predilection, on discover-
ing in Nature or Art some affinity to those preferences in his
own nature which Art has fed and caused to grow. There
will be several of these, hut they will be graded, and one of
them will overshadow all the rest. It really amounts, in
Boyd’s case, to this: that he sees, and will concede nothing of
vulgarity in Nature and for the very good reason that he either


refuses by instinct or is unable by nature to endow her with
any. It might have been that he could see in Nature only the
active of her infinitely many sides; that the trait dominant
in his own character was that which could only be stirred by
recognising in Nature its like; for that is what happens. But
he has little of suddenness in him, and his chief characteristic
—imperturbability—when it calls to Nature for response, is
answered by her in a quiet and sedate and dignified voice.
This quality it was in the old masters which impressed Boyd,
and he noticed that it depended not at all on subject, though
it was obvious that certain ones lent themselves more directly
to a favourable profession of belief than others. It is as if
they in effect said: “In our pictures we can only effectively
show you one mood or a passion at a time; but so that you
shall be able the better to value it, we imply that behind and
surrounding this local and temporary phase, reposes, imper-
turbable, Nature herself, for whom Time and Place are non-
existant, and of whom these moods are but ultra-microscopic
parts.” Yet it is through such manifestations that man is able
though in ever so puny a way, to build up whatever idea he
may have of visible Nature; for to him she is not expressive
if not moody. It is only then that to him she becomes intellig-
ible and significant, just as a face, to become meaningful, re-
quires to exhibit the changes of expression that react from
emotions. But all this play hints at the big storehouse from
which it was drawn; an illimitable, undepletable treasury.
One might, for fair example, gaze at the “Last Judgment” of
Tintoretto, realising its present convulsive energy, but at the
same time being fully aware that behind all of this, there was


maintained an all-pervading, all-containing Nirvanic condition,
of which only a fraction at a time was depictable or conceiv-
able, but of which a conception was only in such a way pos-
sible. That, it would seem to be, is Boyd’s attitude; and he
confesses that, in order to give it any chance of reasonable
presentation by him he must create within the four sides of
his canvas a, little world, scaled so as to permit of his operat-
ing there as if the bonds and restrictions enforced by Art did
not exist. Technically this has to be done, to avoid disaster;
for the natural scale of light and shade values is so great that
pigment cannot compass it. When it is realised that black in
sunlight is higher in tone than white in shadow, the impos-
sibility is patent of accomplishing any representational illusion
by paint, unless a compromise is unconditionally agreed to,
and a scale adopted whose compass is so limited by the artist
as within its bounds to yield the results best calculated to lay
bare his motif. This he must do, for with his material he can
no more vie with the natural scale (arching as it does from the
brilliance of snow in mid-day sunlight to the depth of darkness
of a coal mine shaft in the shadow side of a hill) than play
marbles with the stars. Always the artist has to admonish him-
self that he has to accomplish his task with a light and shade
scale essentially no more extended than the difference between
these letter types now being read and the paper on which they
are printed. The artist’s task is making bricks without straw
and, of these bricks, building some resplendent, enduring
moral edifice, moral because so, he establishes a canon of com-
parison; his Beauty and the philosopher’s Truth being one
and the same thing, between whom and Ugliness a whole


world of difference exists. Thus he fixes a base from which
human estimates of right and wrong may be formed, and
solutions arrived at of right lines of conduct, in a world where
fallible mortals are perplexed and disturbed by the riddles
of Life.
Boyd then, places great importance on the establishing of
the limits of his artistic keyboard, and once having fixed on
them, scrupulously keeps within them; not only for the reason
that thereby he simplifies his operations, but because trespass
beyond them would defeat his aim of creating a world apart
from our own multiplex sphere of action and defeat congruity.
Each new theme requires a new key, so that the contemplated
scale will allow of no crowding out in some part of important
notes of tone. This applies both to water-color and oil-color
painting, in which this painter is equally accomplished.
For decoration, as such, he has no sympathy, but believes
in just so much of it,in a picture as the natural original re-
veals for truthful representation by the painter. Any deliber-
ate attempt to regularise or arrange for conventional decora-
tive ends he looks upon as impertinent. His own pictures are
selected so that the natural objects composing them are
"found” on the canvas so as to exhibit them to the best advan-
tage. This is done by any user of a camera, but with a ground
glass to help him, and it is the biggest concession towards mak-
ing a picture decorative that Boyd will allow. For the unscru-
pulous flattener of form he has no esteem. In oil he works
directly, usually painting “premier coup” and disturbing his
colour as little as possible. Once his first impasto is dry he uses
thin colour to fi'nish. To get fineness of texture, such as a


smooth and subtly graded sky demands, his practice is to
scrape the first painting flush with his canvas in such a way as
to level up all textile inequalities and prepare a smooth surface
of solid paint on which closer gradations may be realised. This
method accounts for the absence of gaps in his tonal scale.
The deliberate marking off of the boundaries within which
he proposes to operate virtually defines for him the difficulty
limitsi of his task. From the outset he dispenses with every-
thing outside of his preconception of his finished picture, just
as one might cross off from a list things not wanted for a spe-
cific purpose. This at once simplifies the plan of campaign,
'for, by contracting his field he is free to pay fuller attention to
the contents of it. Optically, it really means that he works
from a wide angle of vision not only perspectively, but chro-
matically. In respect of system Boyd is a careful strategist
who mapq out his scheme and confines his operations to defi-
nite, chosen limits, within which he puts as much matter as his
taste and judgment permit. When it comes to the actual
painting, he is in no two moods as to what he wants, but ready
to put down in the most direct way what he has at the beginn-
ing worked out as being requisite eventually to embody his im-
pression. Not that this is done of malice aforethought, coldly
and analytically, but, from being the conscious plan of a
serious student, it has become a spontaneous plan of attack,
subconsciously arrived at with the contemplation of each
fresh subject. All of his work has the appearance of having
been painted in the artist’s mind before he ever took his
palette and brushes in hand; and, as a consequence his attack
is delivered in positive, certain fashion, and restricted to essen


tials. By this method leakage of technical vigour is lessened,
and his conception stated briefly and with the maximum of
freshness. Few of Boyd’s paintings have the air of tiredness
inseparable from the work of those who approach their bare
canvases with no decision in their minds, but with a vague
hope of fluking, as they work, something that will look pro-
found. They make up their minds on nothing, whereas he
habitually makes up his and works with concentration to de-
pict the outcome of his deliberations. Largely, this is ar-
rived at by first making small studies from Nature and from
them making bigger paintings in the studio. On the small
ones experiments can be made and conclusions thrashed out,
on which the essentials to be observed in the wider field to be
covered, are fixed.
About the roads and over the hilly paddocks of Warran-
dyte, up and down the river banks, loaded in season with
heaping yellow blossoms, Boyd wanders looking for subjects.
Living there all the year round he sees the year swing full
circle; and this witnessing of the four phase procession un-
doubtedly reinforces his conviction of the permanence and im-
manence of Nature, of her superiority to any of the multitudes
of actions or appearances by which she manifests herself to
human beings. Her illimitability, her inexhaustiveness in sub-
ject matter, impress him and make him (on that score) the
most enterprising painter in Australia. Her stability, that
attribute which most of all colours his view of her, he pro-
claims by inference, when he paints any on© of her transient
phases. A hill in morning light, seen against the sun; two
gumtrees crowning a gusty rise, staying their slender stems


against the bending wind; the squandered gold of the loaded
wattle, swung above the flowing, dusky water; the shallow
crystal overlap of the still, transparent sea on creamy sands:
all these he, depicts so that from them a hint may be derived
of the appearance of that unity which may never be seen by
us, or indeed comprehended, but in some such way. These are
the glimpses that should make us less forlorn, and to anyone
who endeavours to impart them to us by fixing them so that
at leisure we can study them, we must surely be indebted. It
cannot be a little thing for a man so to arrest and visualise a
mood, an enchanted moment, that others may ponder it and
consult it when they will. No matter how imperfectly he may
achieve it, no matter how little he may capture of the gleam; if
he can but snare so much as will stimulate the viewer to a re-
collection of ,what aforetime moved him, the artist has done
good work. Difference of media counts for nothing; the great
artists in any of them are akin. The great artists are also the
greatest technicians, for they, more than lesser men, must ex-
perimentally test the very limits of their media. These tests
too, must be more exhaustive than those of lesser men, for
the subjects the bigger imaginations project will demand that
much more be extracted from the material employed to express,
them, than others would expect.
Boyd’s manner of saying what he has to say is business-
like and devoid of sentimentality. Probably he argues that
the intrinsic beauty, or worth of his motif, will not be the worse
for literal handling; and, if this be so he is good company, for
there never was an interpreter of beauty of thought, sight or
sound whose endeavour was not to get as close to that beauty


as he possibly could, without any impertinent, deliberately
self-revealing asides. Usually these sentimentalists indulge
in self analysis in their works, and needlessly explain them-
selves, from a fear that their work will not sufficiently tell
what fine, sensitive fellows they are; facts on which few but
themselves wish to be enlightened. In Boyd’s work there is
no suggestion of this. On the contrary, he is perhaps a little
too solicitous about hiding or detaching himself, so that some-
times his work seems to say:—“Don’t think I was moved by
what inspired this, or that it made me in the least feel emo-
tional.” He does this because he is young; but that he is
young and does this is a good thing; for it argues restraint,
and he who restrains himself usually does so because he has
something pent up in him, something worth keeping back.
Later, when his growth demands it, and fuller measure is
required, he will have it to give, and will give generously.


ANNOUNCEMENT
DECORATION GALLERIES, being the sole Victorian
representatives for Mr. Penleigh Boyd, are in a
position to offer collectors the best examples of his
art.
The pictures reproduced in this book were all selected
from the Penleigh Boyd exhibition held at their Galleries
during late September, 1920.
An additional Gallery, solely for the display of Aus-
tralian etched work, will be opened during February next.
An ever-changing collection of works by the following
leading Australian artists is always on view:—
Penleigh Boyd Hans Heysen J. Cumbrae Stewart
Elliott Gru’ner W. B, Mclnnes M. J. MacNally
Harold Herbert Lionel Lindsay Howard Ashton
Percy Leason J. R. Eldershaw Bruce Robertson
Blamire Young James R. Jackson David Barker
John Shirlow Muir Auld Fred Campbell
H. R. Gallop Percy Lindsay Lloyd Rees
Albert Collins Norman Lindsay Sydney Ure-Smith
DECORATION GALLERIES
289 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
(Entrance through Decoration Co's. Rooms)


Wholly set up and printed in
Australia by Messrs. Taylor & Son,
10 Russell Place, Melbourne.
Three - color plates by Globe
Engraving Co., Temple Court
Place, Melbourne,
