

St. John's Presbyterian Church
THE
Presbyterian Church
BY
PROFESSOR RENTOUL,
M.A., D.D.
1895




THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
By the Right Rev. the Moderator of the General
Assembly,
PROFESSOR RENTOUL, M.A., D.D.
I CHOOSE to be a member and minister of the Great
Spiritual Brotherhood called the Presbyterian
Church, within the Catholic Church of God, —in
the first place, I suppose, because I was born
within it, and nurtured amidst its ennobling memories.
In the second place—after full thought, and after
experience of God's work in many lands, and of the
necessary defects which cling to all modes of Church
organisation, —the Presbyterian Church approves itself
to my conscience and judgment as the best nursery of*
faith and life and character. I honour and gladly
recognise all the Churches which hold “the living Head
Christ Jesus.” Amongst these living Churches of
Christ, the Presbyterian Church seems to me, on the
whole, the most Scriptural, the most brotherly, the best
fitted to make a people of Christ frt e, earnest, intelli-
gent, and liberal. I notice also that the other Churches,
in our modern day, are borrowing more and more from
the features of Presbyterianism,—its popular Assembly
representative-system, its presence and equal voice of
the laity in Church courts, its spiritual of the
IVlinistry, the congregational right of its people (in
keeping with the interest and faith of the Church
as a whole) to elect their own Ministers and Spiritual
leaders, and its princip’e of a common fund for the
support of the Ministry. By such a fund, while each
congregation is at liberty to give to its own Minister
according to its affluence or ability, and according to
his ability, yet the Ministers of struggling Churches!,
who would otherwise receiye inadequate support, have
their ministerial income lifted nearer to a platform of


PROFESSOR RENTOUL, M.A., D.D




equality. Thus, in the Presbyterian Church, there is
avoided that shameful feature which has marked somo
parts of Christendom, where one Minister of Christ gets
a vast yearly sum, and the hardest-worked Ministers in
the country or in the cities’ dingier places receive only
a miserable pittance. The Presbyterian principle of
Ministerial Support is at present winning the assent of
Church leaders of all kinds as the wise and brotherly
method, —the one best fitted to carry an intelligent
Church life, with an educated and decently supported
ministry, into the poorer districts of the country.
I will take, in order, some of the main reasons which
appeal to my judgment, as winning my allegiance to the
Presbyterian Church.
/. It nurtured me, and my foiefatliers ; and for it
they suffered and dared. Heredity means much in
every department of life. In spiritual life its influence
is incalculable. To any intelligent, spiritually-minded
man who knows what the history of the great Presby-
terian Church has been, ever since the morning of the
Reformation, it is impossible to abandon, or turn the
back upon, this splendid spiritual lineage.
11. As a student of Scripture and of Early Church
History, I am led to the creed and the organisation of
Presbyterianism. As the name implies, it seeks to keep
close to the Early Christian Church of the Apostolic
day, and of the first half of the second century. Pitt,
the great Earl of Chatham, expressed this forcibly in a
memorable sentence of a memorable speech : —“ The
Presbyterians cling more closely to the College of
(Galilaean) fisheimen than to the College of Cardinals :
tLey contend for a Scriptural faith and a Scriptural
woiship.” As Professor Sanday, of Oxford, frankly
says—(if we except the peculiar activity of the Apostles
themselves, whose office was necessarily a special and
temporary one, and who could have no successors) the
Church of the .Apostles’ day was undoubtedly Presby-
terian.
This can be seen by any unbiassed student of the New
Testament. The Early Christian Church’s organisation


arose upon the model of the Jewish popular synagogue-
worship, with its Synedrion or council of elders
(presbyters) attached, to each synagogue (or ‘ congrega-
tion ’) and the brotherhood of these synagogues repre-
sented in a larger court of appeal of “ the elders and
brethren.” St. James called the Christian Church by
this name “ synagogue.”
I need not spend time in proving what is now
admitted by the vast majority of eminent New Testa-
ment scholars of all schools, that, in the Apostolic
Church, the stated ministry or office-bearers consisted of
two kinds, and two kinds only, viz., of “ presbyters ”
(which is the Greek term for the Hebrew word meaning
“ Elders ”) and of “ deacons.” These deacons, it is
admitted by all, were a new and special order appointed
by the growing Church of Jesus to look after the needs
of the Church’s widowed, orphaned, and poor. The
Presbyters or Elders, on the other hand, were the
Church’s spiritual teachers and “ overseers,” attending
to the ministry of the “word and teaching,” and to the
spiritual discipline of the believing people.
In the purely Gentile Churches, -where the meaning
of the word “presbyter,” or “elder,” was not so well
understood, the word “ episcopos'' (translated in our
English Bible by the term “ bishop ”) was used as its
equivalent. The “ presbyters ” and the “ bishops ” were
exactly the same persons ; and in each congregation of
any size there were several “ bishops ” or “ presbyters.”
The people elected the “bishops.” The “council of
presbyters ” ordained them.
This is evident in many passages of the New Testa-
ment. I will point to only two. In Acts xx. 17-28,
the Apostle Paul addresses the elders (presbyters) of
Ephesus, and calls them “Episcopons” (bishops)—
Take heed unto yourselves and to all the flock in the
which the Holy Spirit hath made you bishops (over-
seers) to shepherd the Church of God.” And in
Tit. i. 5-7, St. Paul says—“ Appoint elders (presbyters)
in every city . . .for the bishop (episcopos) must


be blameless, as God’s steward.” These passages, says
Bishop Lightfoot, prove that in the New Testament the
words “bishop’' and ‘•presbyter” “are synonymous,”
and mean “the same office.” Even Canon Gore, the
High Churchman, confesses that in the first century
“ the Presbyters and the Episcopi were in fact the same
persons.”
Furthermore, it was the Council of Elders (presbyters)
to whom belonged the function of ordaining the Church’s
ministers. Even when an apostle was present at the
appointment of ministers he took part only as one elder
amongst the elders. Thus, though the Apostle Paul
took part in the ordination of Timothy, he did so only
as a member of “the presbytery.” Timothy was set
apart to his ministry “ by the laying on of the hands of
the Presbytery.” And so the Apostle Peter writes :
“ The elders (presbyters) among you I exhort, who am
a fellow-elder.” (1 Pet. v. i.)
Bishop Lightfoot has proven that this Apostolic
oustom of Presbyterial ordination continued in some
regions of Christendom for several centuries, and only
gradually did it give way before the growth of prelacy.
He quotes Jerome’s authoritative declaration in the fourth
oentury :—“ Before factions were introduced into religion
by the prompting of the devil—the Churches were
governed by a Council of Elders (presbyters.)” The
truth of this verdict of Jerome, says Lightfoot, could
not be denied. “In the succeeding ages Bishops and
Popes accepted it without question.”
111. At the Reformation, when men discarded the
growth of medisevalism and of Priesthood in the
ministry, and searched in the New Testament itself for
the model of the New Testament Church, Protestant
Europe in general restored the Presbyterian system of
the Church’s organisation. Only in a few Protestant
countries, where the royal power and prerogative gave a
special bent to the Reformation movement, was the
Presbyter form of the Church's ministry and organisa-
tion not adopted. Thus the Reformed Church, in almost
all lands save England, took the Presbyterian form of


Church government. And the Lutheran Church of
Germany, though contrasted with the Reformed Church
in a Lw minor points of doctrine and administration, is
practically Presbyterian. It holds the Priesthood of all
believers, the equality of the clergy (or ministers), and
the union of ministers and laymen in Church Courts for
the Government of the Church. In common with the
Presbyterian Church (strictly so-called) the Lutheran
Church also discarded prelacy and the figment of
Apostolic succession as mediaeval after-growth, and as
perilous to the true spiritual succession of the believing
Church of God. The Presbyterian Church thus in-
cludes the majority of National Churches of the Pro-
testant countries of Europe as well as many of the I ree'
Churches throughout Protestant Christendom. The
Huguenot Church of France, with its tragic story of
valour and martyrdom, the Waldenses of Italy, the
Church of Switzerland, both National and Free, the-
Church of Holland with its glorious assertion of Free-
dom, the Reformed Church of Germany and the Rhine
land, the Protestant Churches of Bohemia and Hun-
gary, are Presbyterian. In Scotland the National and
Free Churches, including over 80 per cent, of the popu-
lation, are Presbyterian. In Ulster Presbyterianism is
the most living spiritual power. In all the British
Colonies it spreads. Of the United States of America
I will speak lower down.
Even in England, where the Reformers were them-
selves bishops, and adopted the diocesan Episcopal form,
of Church Government, they, without exception, re-
cognised the Presbyterian Church as a truly Scriptural
Church with a truly Apostolic Ministry. In the earliest
and best epoch of the Puritan age Presbyterianism was
adopted as the one National Church of the Three King-
doms. In the dark day of the return of Charles 11. and the
Stuart despotism to power, the Act of Uniformity drove
from their parishes over 2,000 of the best of England’s
clergy, men like Richard Baxter and the rest of
the heroic band. The great majority of these were
Presbyterian. By a series of cruel and repressive
measures Puriianism was trodden under, the Presby-


teries forbidden to meet, and thus by degrees in England
Presbyterianism was ousted for the time, and the great
mass of Presbyterian people became gradually Con-
gregationalists. The late Dr. Pope, aod other Wes-
leyan scholars, have said with much truth that modern
Wesleyanism in England is the old Puritan Presby-
terianism rising up again with what is practically a
Presbyterian Church Government, but with a somewhat
altered doctrinal aspect.
IV. The Presbyterian Church affirms the true
spiritual Continuity of the Church. All Churches that
hold by the living faith in Christ, and manifest Dim in
the Christian life, our Church regards as possessing the
true succession. Hence the Presbyterian Church has
always been the most Catholic of the Reformation
Churches. Zwingli held out the right hand to Luther,
Calvin, who was constantly consulted by the English
Reformers, wrote to Cranmer that he “ would gladly
cross five seas to bring about the unity of the Reformed
Church of GodJ’ The Presbyterian Church runs no
dividing lines across its grave-yards : it has no different
compartments in “ God’s Acre.” It makes no distinc-
tion, such as “ clergymen and ministers of other denomi-
nations.” It recognises the ministerial status of the
ministers of all the Churches. Thus, while the British
Queen worships, during half the year in the National
(Presbyterian) Church of Scotland, and the Emperor of
Germany and the Ruler of Holland worship in the
Presbyterian Church all the year, the Presbyterian
Church does not affect any special claim to be the only
true Church of God, or to have a ministry more valid
than that of the other Churches.
V. In Christian creed, also, the Presbyterian Church
recognises continuity with the past of God’s Universal
Church. It rescues the living central creed of the
Apostolic day, and of the earliest Christian centuries,
from the false accretions which priestly growth had
gathered round it. The Reformation, as Calvin,
Zwingli, and Knox taught, was a returning to Christ.
To mark this continuity of the central faith the Presby-


terian Church accepts the so-called “ Apostles’ Creed,”
and the “ Nicene Creed,” (which affirms God’s Father-
head. and sets forth our Lord’s Deity and Saviourliood,
and the power of the Holy Spirit, and the Unity of the
Catholic or Universal Church, consisting of those in
whom the Spirit dwells), as expressive generally of the
central substance of the Christian faith. But the
Scriptures are for Presbyterians the only Supreme
Creed, “ the only authoritative Rule of faith and prac-
tice.” As, however, the Scriptures are large, and men
come asking for a short statement of what Christians
believe, Presbyterians feel that the Church of God is
bound in common honesty to set forth the chief sub-
stance of the Christian faith, in a brief form of creed.
They protest, however, against all “ damnatory clauses”
and all claim of infallibility pertaining to a creed. They
affirm the right and duty of God’s Church to restate
its creed from time to time in language such as men
can understand, always on the basis of the Word of
God. And always the living Christ is the centre of
the Church’s creed.
VI. In most of the English-speaking lands the sub-
ordinate statement of the Presbyterian Church’s Creed
is, the “ Confession of Faith.” This famous declaration
of the Christian Faith was drawn up in Westminster
Abbey in the noblest epoch of the Puritan age by the
representative ministers and laymen of the Church of
England, the Church of Scotland, and the English
Congregationalists. The late Dean Stanley, whose
Essay on this great Creed was his last writing, says it
is superior to all other statements of the Christian
Creed in two particulars. 1. The warmth and love
with which it sets forth the beauty and human tender-
ness of Christ; —“ In whom it pleased the Father that
all fulness should dwell to the end that being holy,
harmless, undefiled, and full of grace and truth, He
might be thoroughly furnished to execute the office of a
Mediator and Surety,” &c. The creed then goes on to
give a wondrously beautiful description of Christ’s life,
and dying love, and victory over sin and death. In
contrast, says Dean Stanley, with the dry statement jo-


the Nicene or Apostles’ or Athanasian Creed, this thrill-
ing earnestness of the Westminster Confession of
Faith gives us the very living heart of Christianity.
2. The Confession of Faith is the only great Creed
which asserts the freedom of the human will." “God
alone is lord of the conscience and hath left it free”—
is the trumpet-note of freedom sounded in the Creed of
Presbyterianism. It has been asserted that ‘ liberty of
Conscience,” and “ the freedom of the human will
were first affirmed by some of the later and smaller
sects. This is a blunder due to ignorance. As the
historian Motley, and Macaulay, and others have
proven, the principle of Freedom of Conscience arises
necessarily out of the Reformation principle. “It was
first formally asserted and set forth by the Presbyterian
Church of Holland.” William 111. of Orange, who
finally got it recognised in England, owed it to his
Presbyterian up-bringing.
VII. In its relation to Man's Salvation the Presbyterian
faith is that of the New Testament, of St. Paul, of Augus-
tine, of the Reformation. In this it is identical with
the Articles of the Church of England, bin it discards
“Baptismal regeneration.” It was Calvin and Piesby-
terianism that first destroyed and flung away the awful
theory that Baptism is necessary to salvation. The
Presbyterian faith, on this matter, briefly put is :
Salvation is by Grace of God, in His fatherly love for
the sinful. God, out of His free unmerited grace,
accepts and acquits the sinner who casts himself on that
grace offered to him in the atoning love and obedience
and sacrifice of Jesus Chiist, Gods Son. In Keeping
with this great Reformation doctrine of “ Justification
by Faith ” the Presbyterian Church holds (as Scbaff
says) “a mild Calvinism ,” which asserts “the
Sovereignty of God’s Grace in Salvation in keeping
with the freedom of man's will,” and with the need of
a Divine atonement made for man the Sinful, and
regeneration for man whom Sin has made spiritually
blinded and disabled. As against the cold and wither-
ing assertion of man’s own sufficiency, made by
“ Unitarianism,” the Presbyterian Creed, in common


with the Catholic Church of God, affirms the need of
a Redemption and a Holy Spirit.
In the modern setting of the Presbyterian Church
Creed, it is expressed thus : —the doctrine of Election
of Salvation and of the Sovereignty of God’s grace “is
held in connection with the truth that God is not the
author of sin. and that the liberty of second causes and
of man's will is not taken away; and, further, that God
is not willing that any should perish but that all should
come to repentance, and, that He has, in Ihs love, pro-
vided a salvation sufficient for all, adapted to all, and
offered to all in the Gospel.'' It is this union of the
doctrine of God’s sovereignty and grace, with man s
freedom which has given a distinct tone to Presbyterian
character and manhood, an 1 has made it, as even a
hostile historian confesses, “ the most valuable element
in national life.”
VIII. In common with the vo : ce of Christendom,
the Presbyterian Church declares that while there is “ a
Church spiritual and invisible,” of which God alone can
judge, the “ visible Church ” consists of “ all believers
and their children." Presbyterians hold “ believer-
baptism.” That is, they hold that Baptism is the
declarative “sign ” of membership in the visible Church
of God, and “ a seal ” to those who truly believe, of
membership in the Church “ invisible and spiritual.”
Therefore, they administer Baptism to the “ children of
believers." It is a declaration that they are not Satan’s
children, but are in “ God’s family,” unless by their
own after wilful acts they reject that family relation-
ship. The Presbyterian Church holds this view on the
certain ground of Scripture, of proselyte baptism in
God’s Old Testament Church, of the example of Christ,
who recognised children as belonging to the Church,
and of the early Apostolic age, in which chi'dren were
certainly baptised. The Presbyterian Church, also, in
Calvin’s words, regards it as immaterial whether the
mode of baptism be “affusion,” or “sprinkling,” or
“immersion.” But they protest against the necessity
of immersion (1) as unscriptural, (2) as contrary to


the custom of the Apostolic Church, (3) as contra-
dicted by the discoveries in the “ Catacombs,” which
show us that children were baptised, and that it was
not usually by “ immersion ; ” and (4) as contradicted
by Bible phraseology, which pictures to us always the
spiritual cleansing as a “ pouring ” or “ sprinkling ”
as the mode of cleansing from “consciousness of sin,”
and “ washing of the body as with pure water.” In
Palestine and the East, washing by immersion is un-
known. Moreover, the early Baptists in Germany and
England did not practise it.
IX. Presbyterianism appeals to me because of the
noble manhood and womanhood it produces. Where in
all the Reformation Churches can one find such heroie
figures as Luther; Zwingli; Calvin; Bucer; Melancthon;
William the Silent; John Knox; Coligny, “the noble
and beautiful Huguenots ;” Arnold, the Waldensian;
the Covenanters; Richard Baxter and Calamy, and the
first era of Puritanism?—“ of whom the world was not
worthy.” More than all other Churches, the Presbyterian
Church has been “ pale with martyrdoms; ” has testified
its faith in Christ “ by a heroism beautiful and strange ”
“I am proud to belong to this heroic Church,” —said
the late heroic Emperor Fred. 111. of Germany,—“its
martyrs are in every land ! ”
In the modern age, the same spirit marks its pro-
gress. “ The Presbyterian Church,” —said the late Pro-
fessor Dorner, of Berlin, —“is the muscular system of
Christianity. Wherever the call is to dare and do for
truth, this Church is in the van.” This fact is seen
even in the recent “ Totalisator ” fiasco. While other
Churches hung back hesitating, it was the Presbyterian
Church that “ rained a snowstorm of petitions ” on
the astonished Parliament, and changed the destiny of
our colony.
X. —ln the United States of America this is remark-
ably seen. The Presbyterian Church is not, numerically,
the largest in that republic. The statistics are:
Methodists, 3,950,000 ; Baptists, 3,400,000 ; Presby-
terians, 2,150,000; Protestant Episcopal (Anglican),


400,000. But the astonishing thing is that, in influence,
in character , in national and public weight of manhood,
the Presbyterian Church outweighs all others. The
greatest American journal,—the New York Herald , —
lately growled : —“ These Presbyterians are still running
the United States of America.” It is Dr. Parkhurst,
the Presbyterian clergyman, of New York, who has
recently beaten the “ Tammany ring,” and cleansed
the municipalities of New York and Chicago. At least
half the Presidents of the United States have been
Presbyterian. Men like Abraham Lincoln, General
Harrison, Grover Cleveland, &c., show the stamp with
which Presbyterianism has impressed America. Of
President Harrison’s Cabinet all but one were Presby-
terians ! Of Grover Cleveland’s all but three ! And
these Presbyterians are Christians.
XI. I respect the Presbyterian Church because of its
generosity. Canon Robertson, in his “ Tables, ” has
proven that the Presbyterian Church is the most
generous of the Churches. In particular, its aver-
age of ministerial stipend is far higher than that of
any other Church. A Church’s spirit may be tested
just by this ! So, Dr. Martineau, the eminent Unitarian,
has recently said, —“ The Presbyterian Church has pre-
sented to the world an example of Church organisation
the most brotherly, the most beneficent, the most Chris-
tian.” And Dr. Maclaren, of Manchester, the eminent
Baptist preacher, says : “ In Church Government I am
a Presbyterian.” 'lhe Presbyterian Church, as it de-
mands an educated and decently supported ministry,
has spread somewhat more slowly, in new lands like
America, than some other forms of Church life. But
its power is that, wherever it comes, it builds up an
abiding character in the people. “The only hope for
the Negro race in ihe Southern States,” said recently
President Biddle (the most intelligent educated Negro
in the South) is that the Presbyterian Church should
seize hold of them, and give them something of its
solidity of thought and character .”
XII. The Presbyterian Church is preeminently a


Missionary Church. Professor Lindsay, at the recent
General Assembly of tlie Free Church of Scotland,,
said :—“ More than a fourth part of all the missionary
labour and danger of the Protestant Church of God falls
to the lot of the Presbyterian Church.” He was not
including in this what is done by the Lutherans.
XIII. In numbers, I need not say, the Presbyterian
Church is by far the largest Protestant Church in
Christendom. Including the Lutheran Church, it em-
braces more than a half of all Protestantism. Excluding
Lutheranism, the Reformed Presbyterian Church em-
braces some 30,000,000 adherents. But I must warn
readers against' the exaggerated “statistics ” usually
given in Church “ Year Books.” “ Statistics can prove
anything”—alas ! The highest authorities, viz., Behm
and Wagner , set down all Protestants at 130,000,000.
Very well—when, according to the same tables, Pres-
byterians (Reformed) are given at 30,000,000, and
Lutherans (Presbyterian) at 40,000,1)00, it behoves other
denominations to be modest in stating their statistics.
XI V. I write all this with a sense of shame. If, as
a recent Australian Handbook asserts, of the (nominally)
400,000 “ Anglicans ” in Victoria only 60,000 “ go to-
Church,” and if, out of 172,000 “Presbyterians,” only
70,000 “ go to Church,” and if the same state of things
is true, proportionately as regards all the Churches, then
it becomes us, instead of glorjing in our respective
Church organisations —to take to our selves “shame
and confusion of face ” because of our unworthiness, our
egotism, our loyalty to our respective “denominations,”
rather than our loyalty to Christ. It was loyalty to
Christ that made the self-forgetful trueness of St. Paul,
and of the Reformation, and of all that has been beau-
tiful and brave in Presbyterianism.
Christian Cnion Office, 14 Sturt Street, Ballarat.




