

CjStmbag dfmStiofc :
AN ADDRESS
Delivered in St. John's Church, Launceston,
Sunday morning, March 13, 1887.
hv CANON BROWNRIGG.
,TOGETHER WITH
A REPRINT OF LETTERS BY ARCHDEACON
HALES AND REPLIES BY CANON BROWNRIGG,
AND AN ARTICLE .ON THE SUNDAY QUESTION
PUBLISHED IN'THE LAUNCESTON EXAMINER ,
MARCH 9th, 1887.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
LAUNCESTON ;
“EXAMINER” AND “TASMANIAN” OFFICE.




Cj u Smibiii) Question :
AN ADDRESS
Delivered in. St. John’s Church, Launceston,
Sunday morning, March 13, 1887.
By CANON BROWNRIGG.
TOGETHER WITH
A REPRINT OF LETTERS BY ARCHDEACON
HALES AND REPLIES BY CANON BROWNRIGG,
AND AN ARTICLE ON THE SUNDAY QUESTION
PUBLISHED IN THE LAUNCESTON EXAMINER ,
MARCH 9th, 1887.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
LAUNCESTON:
“EXAMINER” AND “TASMANIAN” OFFICE.
fTJfcf




THE SUNDAY QUESTION
[Reprinted from the Launceston Examiner .]
Observance of the Sabbath .
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —Not many months ago in the papers of this town
letters on the question of the Sabbath frequently appeared. At
last night’s meeting the Sabbatarian views were placed before
the public in a different fashion.
Of course if a man thinks that the Christian Sunday is the
Jewish Sabbath he has a right to hold his opinion, and in all law-
ful ways to persuade others to agree with him.
One thing I do not think he has a right to do, and that is to
assume that every Christian must agree with him, and that those
who disagee are hardly Christians. He has a right to think it
and to prove it, but not to take it as a matter about which there
can be no dispute. And if the majority of Christians, or even a
respectable minority, differ from him he is hardly justified in
calling upon the law and its officers to enforce his views upon
them. I like a quiet Sunday as well as anyone, and I equally
like people to go to church, but I also like Christianity to be
dealt fairly with. I think the Sabbatarian party do not act fairly.
They misrepresent the question, and take it upon themselves to
speak in the name of the whole church.
Now I reject all the texts produced in favour of the Sabbath.
They had authority over the ancient Jewish Church, they have
none over me. The Church of England, to which half Tasmania
professes to belong, never adopted the Jewish Sabbath. The
church of the east and west from the days of our Lord never
adopted it. St. Paul rejected it in very strong language. Some
Christian sects in later days may indeed acknowledge it, and they
strive to impose their novel and narrow views on the majority.


The Christian Sunday is a totally different matter. It is like
confirmation, a rule and practice of the Church resting on the
authority of the Church, to be observed in a reasonable way by
those who are good churchmen. The nation has adopted it, and
a great blessing it is to weary toilers by brain and hand. It
contributes, I believe, an orderly spirit to the community, and
secures a rest which, by its action, saves the nation from much
discontent and disquiet. It gives an opportunity to Christians
which is most valuable, but it ought not to be made an instrument
of unnecessary tyranny to coerce the nation into the mode of
spending the Sunday. I should like all the people of Laun-
ceston to go every Sunday without fail to Trinity Church, or St.
John’s, or St. Paul’s ; but if some prefer the Tabernacle, or the
Temple, or the Salvation Army building, or an excursion by rail-
way or steamer, I regret their decision, but I should not think of
asking for the help of the law to alter it. All that a statesman
can fairly consider is this : What does the public order and con-
venience demand? What is it necessary that a man shall be com-
pelled to do for the sake of these two great necessities of the
nation P Rest is an absolute necessity for workers. Unless a
stated time is sanctioned, a national rest would be difficult,
perhaps impossible. So that a legalised Sunday rest is a national
benefit.
To this as to every other rule there must be exceptions, and
those exceptions are not to be curtailed by puritanical teaching,
thrusting aside Hew Testament teaching, but by the good sense
and good taste of those who have to do with the matter.
In the case of the licensed victuallers, I think they ought not
to be forbidden to sell for a short time on Sundays, unless it is very
certain that disorders in the streets would ensue. As excessive
duties cause smuggling, so excessive prohibition may increase
the evil we all deplore, and add to it the two greater evils of false-
hood and hypocrisy.
If a man has money enough to keep stimulants in his house
for use on Sunday, and to vary the monotony of town life by an
excursion into the country during the week, it is hardly fair to
stop another from enjoying the same advantages in the only way
possible to him.
In conclusion, I hope the authorities will force no man to
work on the Sunday against his will, but if he is willing to work
that they will pay him well, and give him his rest on another
day ; and that we, who value Christianity, will try to make people
understand that in its purity it cannot be an instrument of
oppression, but the strongest support of true freedom which the
earth has ever seen.
Yours, etc.,
F. HALES.
March 4.


The Sunday Question
THE views of Archdeacon Hales on the above subject, which
appeared in our last issue, have been the theme of considerable
comment and some misunderstanding. We notice, however, chat
a few months ago a leading London religious periodical, the
Nonconformist and Independent, evoked a storm of protest from
various correspondents expressing an opinion, in reply to a
Somersetshire farmer, that it was lawful and proper to gather in
a harvest on the Sabbath under certain stated circumstances. Mr.
O. Hill, secretary to the Lord’s Day Lest Association, wrote very
strongly in condemnation of this opinion, contending the Christian
Sabbath was not a secular institution, but “ a divine gift appointed
by God when He ‘ blessed the seventh day and sanctified it.’ To
sanctify is to make holy, to set apart for a holy purpose. It is the
Lord’s Day—God’s day. If the Sunday is a ‘ secular day of rest,'
then it is nothing more than a bank holiday.”
In answer to Mr. Hill’s letter, the editor of the Nonconformist,
after quoting the exact words of the command for the Jewish
Sabbath, as contained in the 20th chapter of Exodus, says : —This
is a command which is specific to the Jewish nation, and cannot
be—at all events, is not —observed in our day. For we do not
rest from labour in that sense, and, as Jesus Christ has told us,
works of necessity are perfectly justifiable on that day, and He
rebuked the Pharisees for their hypocrisy in the matter and told
them that “ the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the
Sabbath.” To keep the Sabbath in the Jewish sense we ought to
allow our “ manservants and maidservants” entire rest ; to
forswear all locomotion, such as cabs, tram cars, and railways,
whether to go to places of worship or elsewhere. How many are
there who go, for instance, to Mr. Spurgeon’s that break the
Sabbath in this sense ? Therefore we repeat that it is not
possible, in our day, to “ keep holy the Sabbath day” as enjoined
by the fourth commandment. We do not propose on the present
occasion to argue at any length a question on which elaborate
treatises have been written, but will only deal with the point
whether the Jewish Sabbath was re-enacted by our Lord. As to
the view set forth in our last number, we arc in good company.
The subject was discussed at considerable length by the chairman
of the Congregational Union in his address to the May Assembly.
After quoting facts and passages of Scripture which distinguish


the Lord’s Day from the Sabbath of the Jews, the Rev. Edward
White goes on to say—in a passage which, though not short, is
well worthy of being quoted at length—" Never once is the Lord’s
Day spoken of in the New Testament as the Sabbath which was
‘ made for man.’ Never once were Gentile Christians exhorted to
remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, nor instructed in the
alleged change of the day, or of the consecrated hours, —a strange
omission, if this were not a later invention. Never once did the
apostles entangle the memorial of the foundation fact of Christ’s
resurrection to life everlasting with a Sabbatical speculation of
which such men as Mr. Henry Rogers, Archbishop Whately, or
Dr. Hessey could say that ‘ there was not a syllable of evidence
for it.’ The observation of the Sabbath was not enumerated
among those * necessary things ’ enforced upon the Gentile
believers in the decree of the Council of Jerusalem ; much less
was the first day of the week declared by those Apostolic Jews to
be the ‘ Christian Sabbath.’ Finally, when Jewish teachers had
attempted to enforce the holiness of special ‘ days and weeks and
times and years ’ on the Colossian Churches, St. Paul straitly
charges them— ‘ Let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in
respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath
Days : which are a shadow of things to come ; but the body is of
Christ” (Col. ii. 16,17). Further, as has been shown by Whately,
Hessey, and by Henry Rogers, we find no single reference in the
remains of primitive antiquity (no, not in the recently recovered
Didache, or Doctrine of the Apostles, of the first century) to any
belief answering to that assumption of some modern Protestants
respecting the Sabbatic obligation of the Lord’s Day. There is
no evidence that the Gentile slaves who formed so large a fraction
of the early Church even abstained from labour on the Lord’s
Day, or, as Coleridge observes, incurred martyrdom for refusing
to work, as they would have done if they had pleaded the
obligation of Sabbath rest from their duties. It was only in the
time of Constantine, nearly three centuries after the crucifixion,
that Christianity became strong enough to influence the government
to the beneficent legislation which encouraged abstinence from
labour on the Sunday. In his Decree, in a.d. 321, Constantine,
using only pagan language, says : ‘Let all the magistrates and all
the city population rest, and the functions of all who are engaged
in the arts cease, on the venerable day of the Sun. Nevertheless,
those dwelling in country districts may freely and lawfully attend
to the claims of agriculture—since it often happens that another
day will not be so fit for sowing grain or planting vines—that the
blessings granted by Heaven’s bounty may not be lost by neglecting
the proper moment of securing them.’ ‘lt is then plain,’ says Mr.
Henry Rogers, ‘ that though its purpose and object be analogous,
the Lord’s Day is discriminated from the Sabbath by many marked
characteristics which make it a different institution. The day is


different, yet no mention of a transfer. The death penalties of
the law appear no longer, and are replaced by no others. The
observance of the Lord’s Day is not prescribed by express statute
at all, even to Christians, much less to non-Christians. It is not
made compulsory, as the Jewish Sabbath so expressly was.
Instead of appealing to a rigid demand of law, it presents itself
as a privilege of grateful love and spontaneous reverence. And
wherefore ? Because *we are not under law, but under grace.'
Under the Gospel, though set times for rest and worship are
needed, there is no such thing as the intrinsic holiness of portions
of time or space. To the instructed spiritual man lawful work is
as holy as worship. Both are Divine service. Divine service
‘begins at eleven o’clock and seven o’clock’ on Sunday only to the
man who does not really serve God at all. The whole week is the
Sabbath. Nothing is common or unclean. Piety consists in a
diffusion of the Sabbatic spirit, the merciful and restful temper,
through the whole of the week. Many persons who will not now
ride in town or country in any conveyance on any part of Sunday,
for fear of ‘ Sabbath-breaking,’ are quite willing to acquiesce
quietly in a conductor working sixteen hours a day on the other
six, or in a young shop-girl standing daily till she is nearly dead
with fatigue. Among some Christians it looks as if certain beliefs
are maintained for the special benefit of unbelievers ; but popular
unconcern for Christianity is encouraged by these misbeliefs, with
the baseless nature of which men are now well acquainted.
Christianity would have prospered much better in the world if it
had not been for its legal defences, both in doctrine and policy.”
With the chairman of the Congregational Union—or, rather,
with the Apostle Paul —we hold that all times and seasons are
equally sacred to the Christian, and that every Christian ought to
feel the privilege of having a distinct period for rest and spiritual
refreshment on the Lord’s Day. We should have thought it
must be obvious when we spoke of “a secular day of rest” that
the meaning was not that Sunday should not be valued for its
religious opportunities, but that it has become, by custom and
legislation, a day of national abstinence from work, which, being
of inestimable value, we ought jealously to guard.
Mr. Hill seems to us to ride off on generalities. We did not
advocate Sunday harvesting as a rule. The case in point was
specific—where the crop was lying sodden on the ground after
long-continued rain, and the first fine day happened to be a
Sunday. To save the harvest on such an emergency seems to us
strictly analogous to the work of necessity approved by our
Saviour. There might then have been, or might be, tens of
thousands of acres of corn ready to be gathered in—the food of
thousands of people—on a given Sunday after continuous wet
weather. Yet these precious crops must not be touched, according
to Mr. Hill. Is not this being in bondage to the letter, which St.


Paul condemns ? Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath Day ?
What analogy is there between such a case and Sunday trading
for individual profit ? As Mr. White says elsewhere in the same
address—“ This important law of the seventh day Sabbath from
evening to evening nowhere reappears in the system of Christ and
His Apostles as a portion of the new moral code for His followers
among the Gentiles. Not once do the Apostles repeat the Mosaic
command—Eemember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.” If this
be true, Mr. Hill’s contention falls to the ground.
[From the Launceston Examiner, March 9,]
The Sunday Question.
“ The Sahhath was made for man.” —Mark ii. 27.
ONE effect of a tempest as it beats upon the sturdy oak is to
cause the tree to take a firmer hold of the ground, and so
be enabled the better to withstand the brunt of future storms.
So likewise is it with long-established and well-founded beliefs
when assailed by new and strange theories; for such assaults
stimulate us to examine afresh the foundations of those beliefs, with
this result, that the old faiths “once delivered to the saints” become
more deeply rooted in the heart and affections of believers ; and
such a result, while it does not justify or lessen the evil of assailing
the truth, illustrates the facts, of which the assurance cannot be
too great, that man “ can do nothing (successfully) against the
truth,” and that truth must ultimately prevail.
These reflections have been suggested by certain views which of
late have been publicly expressed adversely to the Sunday question—
a question which is now agitating the public mind—and a question,
moreover, which demands the most serious consideration, so important
s the Sabbatic institution in its bearing upon our physical, social,
olitical, moral, and religious life.
Under a deep sense of the gravity of the occasion, I would offer
a few plain words on the Sunday question ; and the first matter I
propose to consider, I would state in these terms; —


IS THERE SUCH AN INSTITUTION AS THE CHRISTIAN SUNDAY ?
In the judgment of some such a question may be deemed
superfluous, but it appears to me to be one which may be reasonably
asked, since unsettling statements about the Christian Sunday are
in circulation. Here are some samples from the pen of the Eev.
Edward White in his May address as chairman of the Congregational
Union in England. That writer says : —“ Never once is the Lord’s
Day spoken of in the New Testament as the Sabbath which was
f made for man; ’ never once were Gentile Christians exhorted to
remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; . . . . the observation
of the Sabbath was not enumerated among those f necessary things ’
enforced upon the Gentile believers in the decree of the Council of
Jerusalem ; much less was the first day of the week declared by those
apostolic Jews to be the Christian Sabbath,” and even the authority
of St. Paul is quoted as though he were condemning the observance
of the Christian Sunday.
The particulars here set forth I shall presently review, but in
the meanwhile I would ask you to bear in mind distinctly, that the
essence of the Sabbath question is not “ whether the Jewish Sabbath
was re-enacted by our Lord,” (for no intelligent Sabbatarian, that
I am aware of, contends that the Sabbath in its special “Jewish”
aspect is binding upon Christians) —nor is it a question of mere
names— e.g., “ Sabbath,” “ Sunday,” “ Lord’s Day,” or “ first day of
the week;” but this: Is there any one day in especial binding upon
mankind to he observed as a day of rest and worship? There either
is, or there is not, such a day, and I propose the question with the
ulterior object of raising the enquiry whether, if there be such an
institution as the Christian Sunday, there are, or there are not,
obligations peculiar to such an institution P
Now, somehow or another (I will not here explain how) as a
matter of fact there is such a day, and though, of those who have
heard of that day, some may call it by one name and others by
other names, it is generally acknowledged that there is one day in
seven which should be specially observed as a day of worship and
of rest from worldly toils.
As then the Christian Sunday is a fact —too patent to need any
formal proof— its existence should he accounted for, and hence the
next question I would consider is this :
WHAT IS THE ORIGIN OF THE CHRISTIAN SUNDAY, AND ON WHAT
AUTHORITY DOES THAT INSTITUTION REST ?
In respect of its origin, as the Christian Sunday is of the nature
of a “rest” day, it is reasonable to found its origin in that “rest”


of which mention is made in the oldest book extant, viz,, the
Bible. In Genesis, chap, ii., and verses 2 and 3, we read—“ And
on the seventh day God ended His work which He had made; and
He rested on the seventh day from all His work which He had
made; and God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because
that in it He had rested from all His work which God created and
made.” We have here evidently the origin of the “rest,” which
is one characteristic of the Christian Sunday, and he would be
unreasonable who would suggest even a doubt to the contrary on
this point.
At a later date this same idea of “ rest ” appears in the fourth
commandment, when on Mount Sinai the Hebrews were commanded
on the “ seventh ” day, which was called “ the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God,” not to do “ any work.”
The attempt has, indeed, been made to prove (but unsuccessfully)
that no Sabbath was observed until the giving of the law on Sinai,
but there is ample proof adducible that periods of time divided
into sevens were recognised not only by the Hebrews, but also by
other nations who were not likely to have borrowed such divisions
from the Hebrews; and respecting those “ seventh ” days, the most
obvious and reasonable conclusion is this — that they were Sabbatic
or “rest” days. And he must, I think, be indeed dull of comprehension
who fails to perceive the direct connection between the fourth
commandment and the “ rest ” instituted of God after the six days’
creation. The fact, therefore, of the direct connection between the
fourth commandment and the original institution of the Sabbath
plainly enough proves that the observance of one day in seven as a
day of “ rest ” cannot be properly regarded as an exclusively or
essentially “Jewish” institution.
Now in respect of the Christian Sunday, it may here be remarked
that the observance of one day in seven as a day distinctive in its
character from the other days of the week, is manifestly the spirit of
the fourth commandment; and it is, therefore, most reasonable to
affirm that if from any cause justifying a change in the day, the
“first” day of the week, instead of the “seventh,” be observed as a
day of worship and rest, that the spirit of the fourth commandment
is properly regarded.
We may hence trace up our Christian Sunday through the fourth
commandment directly to the original institution of the Sabbath as
related by Moses.
Now, as it does not admit of question that the fourth commandment
s of Divine authority (being one of the ten which God gave), the


conclusion is inevitable that the Christian Sunday as an institution,
in accordance with the spirit of the fourth commandment, rests upon
Divine authority; and this conclusion is rendered still more forcible
and irresistible on the ground that the command to observe one day
in seven as a day of rest and worship never did originate with man.
The Christian Sunday, therefore, in respect both of its origin and
authority, is not a human hut a Divine institution. “The Sabbath was
made fob man,” not by man, and “ made for man ” by Divine
appointment!
The Christian Sunday being a fact, and an institution Divine in
its origin and authority, the next question I would consider is this: —
HOW HAS IT COME TO BE THE CASE THAT THE “ EIEST ” DAT OF THE
WEEK, AND NOT THE “ SEVENTH,” IS THE DAT OBSEETED AS THE
CHEISTIAN SUNDAY?
The most probable and reasonable answer by common consent
given to this question is that the change was made in honour of
our Lord’s resurrection from the dead. But in the address I have
already alluded to as from the chairman of the Congregational
Union—an address remarkable rather for its wild and misleading
assertiveness than for scholarly solidity, in the portions I have seen—
this answer is practically condemned ; for that reverend chairman
says —“ Never once did the Apostles entangle the memorial of the
foundation fact of Christ’s resurrection to life everlasting with a
Sabbatical speculation, of which such men as Mr. Henry Eogers,
Archbishop Whately, or Dr. Hessy could say, ‘ There was not a
syllable of evidence for it.’ ”
This style of assertiveness, which takes the place of argument,
is pre-eminently unsatisfactory because misleading. It proceeds upon
the gratuitous assumption that there ought to have been made some
special notification of the change of day. But evidence is at hand
that the Apostles knew of and recognised the change. The Acts of
the Apostles cannot be attentively read without the evidence being
clear that the “ first day of the week,” and not the “ seventh,”
was observed by the primitive church in apostolic times, and the
change must therefore have been known to, and was doubtless
approved of, by the Apostles.
Further, in the Eevelation St. John speaks of being “in the
spirit on the Lord’s day.” This cannot possibly mean the
“seventh’’day of the week (the Jewish Sabbath), but the “first
day of the week ” (our Sunday), and here the “ first day of the


week ” (onr Sunday) is called the “ Lord’s day,” because it was, as
St. Mark shows, the day on which our Lord rose from the dead. This
again, be it remembered, was the day (and in honour of Christ’s
resurrection) that was observed as the Sunday by the primitive
Christians in the days of the Apostles. The early Christian fathers —
some of whom were contemporaries with the Apostles—bear their
witness to this effect. St. Barnabas says :—“ We celebrate with
gladness the eighth day [to distinguish it from the Jewish c seventh. ’
day, and to define it as of the day after the seventh—or the * first day
of the week’ —the f Lord’s day’], because on that day Jesus rose
from the dead.” To like effect St. Ignatius and Clement of
Alexandria, And Justyn Martyr, who lived within about fifty
years after this time, says, “On Sunday we all held our joint
meeting; for the first day is that on which God having removed
darkness and chaos made the world, and Jesus Christ our Saviour
rose from the dead.” .
It is now a fair and reasonable conclusion from all this that the
change of the day from the “ seventh ” to the “ first ” day of the
week was known to and was observed by the Apostles, and that
the said change was made in honour of Christ’s resurrection from
the dead. The inference, therefore, that the chairman of the
Congregational Union would have us draw, as against the “ first
day of the week ” being regarded as the Christian Sunday because
not so declared in express terms, falls to the ground, for really
there was no need of any formal announcement upon a subject about
which no question or doubt ever appears to have existed in
apostolic times.
Having seen how directly connected is our Christian Sunday
with the spirit of the fourth commandment and the original
Sabbatic institution long anterior to the existence of the Jewish
people, the question I would now more fully consider is this :
IS THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT BINDING UPON MANKIND OR UPON
THE JEWISH PEOPLE ONLY P
According to the deliverance of the chairman in the address
under notice, the fourth commandment is binding upon Jews only.
He says, “ Never once were Gentile Christians exhorted to remember
the Sabbath day to keep it holy.” Here is another sample of wild
assertiveness. The chairman does not tell us what he means by the
“ Sabbath” —whether the “ Jewish” Sabbath (the “seventh” day of
the week) or the Christian Sunday (the “first” day of the week).
If he means the former, it is not likely that Gentile Christians


would be exhorted to keep that day (Saturday) holy; but if the
latter, what need was there of any repeated expression of the
Divine mind on that point, when it was only natural that Gentile
Christians, who had never been taught by Christ or His apostles
that the fourth commandment had been repealed, should consider
that command (except in its exclusively “ Jewish” applications
which I shall presently indicate) still as truly in force as any other
of the nine commandments ? I would contend that the absence of
any specific, fresh exhortation to Gentile believers to “remember
the Sabbath day to keep it holy”—and coupled with the absence
of any hint or intimation that the fourth commandment had been
repealed presents a considerable argument in favour of the
conclusion that the principles of the fourth commandment are to
be regarded as still in force.
But to show how weak it is to argue from a negative, I could
say by way of illustration—“ Never once were Gentile Christians
exhorted in express terms not to make to themselves any graven
image; ” but should I be justified in concluding thereupon that
the command had been repealed which forbids the making of a
“ graven image ”to worship it ? Assuredly not. Idolatry is as
much forbidden to Gentile Christians as ever it was to the Jews,
even though to the former it had never been said afresh in express
terms, “ Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image.” Hence,
by parity of reasoning, and from the very nature of the thing, it
may be properly held that the holy observance of the “Lord’s
day”—the Christian Sunday —is still really the Divine will, even
though it has not been said anew, “ Eemember the Sabbath day to
keep it holy; ” unless, indeed, it can be plainly shown that it is
rather in accordance with the Divine will that the Lord’s day should
not be kept holy; and the burden of proof rests upon those who
contend for that view.
Now I boldly maintain that the fourth commandment—as part of
a moral, and not a mere ceremonial law—is as much binding upon
Gentile Christians—upon mankind—as is any one of the other nine.
Where do we find in Scripture that the fourth Commandment has
been repealed ? Nowhere ! The change of day from the “seventh”
to the “first,” in respect of Christians, (for the reason already
given, justifying that change) was but a change of the day, and not
an abrogation of the fourth commandment. Christ certainly added
a “ new commandment,” but He never repealed any one of the ten
which form the Decalogue. No doubt all that was essentially and


exclusively “ Jewish” in the fourth commandment is not binding on
mankind ; such, for instance, as observing the “ seventh ” day, and
those details in respect of Sabbath observance which were enjoined
solely upon the Hebrews in the Levitical code ; but as being part of
a moral and not a mere ceremonial law, it may be repeated that
the essence and spirit of the fourth commandment is binding upon
mankind !
If, however, the fourth commandment, in its spirit, is not binding
upon mankind, then why should it be continually rehearsed in our
public services, and the response be given, “ Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts to keep this law ” P The fact is, there
are nine commandments only or there are (the original) ten; and
if ten (unless we are to cut out the fourth and manipulate some
other of the nine commandments by dividing it into two to make
up “ ten,”) then is the fourth commandment in its spirit required
to be observed by mankind.
I now proceed to the next question, which is this :
DID ST, PAUL EVER CONDEMN THE OBSERVANCE OP THE LORD’S DAY,
OR TEACH, OR EVEN HINT, THAT IT SHOULD NOT BE KEPT HOLY ?
We have been told that “ St. Paul rejected it in strong language.”
The writer of that statement has not, however, made it clear what
Sabbath institution it was that St, Paul rejected. If it be the
“ Jewish ” Sabbath, as not binding upon Gentile Christians, then
no one, that I know of, doubts that St. Paul rejected that institution.
But if it be the Christian Sunday, then I confidently reply—“ so did
not Paul! ”
Now, the misapplied text which is quoted as though St. Paul
condemns the observance of the Christian Sunday is the following :
“Let no man judge you in meat, or drink, or in respect of a holy
day, or of the new moons, or of the Sabbath days.” (Col. ii. 16.)
Upon reading this one is tempted to ask, —Gan the critical faculty
of any one be so defective or perverted that he could seriously
appeal to this passage as condemning the observance of the Christian
Sunday ? We shall neither misunderstand St. Paul nor misapply
his language in this place if we duly consider what gave rise to it,
and this may be briefly stated. Jewish teachers sought to enforce
upon Gentile Christians “ Jewish ” observances, and would “ judge ”
or condemn those who would not observe them. Among those
observances mention is made of “ Sabbaths,” — not the Sabbath —
for in the original the article the does not appear—it is simply


“Sabbaths.” “The Sabbaths” —as the Eight Eeverend Daniel
Wilson, sometime Bishop of Calcutta, remarks—“ (that is those of
Mosaical institution as the Sabbath of every seven years, and that
of each fifty) are joined in the plural number with the new moons,
as in Isaiah —‘ Your new moons and Sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies I cannot away with/ to mark that the Apostle intended
the ceremonial ones only. The primeval observation of the one
weekly day of rest after each six days of labour ordained in Paradise
before the fall, stood on quite different grounds from these, and
formed an integral part of the moral law.”
It is, therefore, with regard to all abrogated Jewish ceremonies,
and to the essentially legal spirit of the old dispensation, that the
Apostle counsels, “ let no one assume to sit in judgment on you, or to
condemn you, or to enforce them on your consciences as necessary
to complete the salvation of Christ.” To affirm, then, or even to
suggest that St. Paul condemns the sacred observance of the Christian
Sunday, or to claim his authority for such a purpose, would be
monstrous ; and such a charge, I verily believe, St. Paul would have
justly resented with righteous indignation.
Before touching, as I propose, very briefly on the subject of
“ Sunday observance,” I would say a word or two in reply to the
objections to observing the Christian Sunday apparently sought to
be established in the address I have been reviewing. It is stated
in these terms —“Never once is the Lord’s Day spoken of in the
New Testament as the f Sabbath which was made for man/” and
again, that “ the observance of the Sabbath Day was not enumerated
among those f necessary things ’ enforced upon the Gentile believers
in the decree of the Council of Jerusalem.”
In reference to the former of these trifling objections I would
remark that the “ Lord’s day ” could not, for an obvious reason,
have been recognised as an institution under that name until after
Christ’s resurrection, but as it was anticipated (as has been shown)
within the limits of the fourth commandment, it was essentially the
Sabbath which was “made for man” in a far wider sense than could
be reasonably maintained of the “ Jewish ” Sabbath, for, observe,
Jesus did not say “the Sabbath was made for Jews,” but “for
man ” (i.e., mankind), and this necessarily requires the Sabbath to
be understood in the widest sense possible, and this must therefore
include our Christian Sunday. It will surely not be contended that
there is no Sabbath made for mankind but for Jews only, I take
our Lord’s words in their strictest and simplest sense to mean that


the Sabbatic institution was designed for man, and therefore
includes the Christian Sunday.
Now, as to the objection “ that the observance of the Sabbath
was not enumerated among the f necessary things ’ enforced upon
the Gentile believers in the decree of the Council of Jerusalem/’
One feels surprised that any sensible person could expect or attempt
to found upon this an argument against observing the Christian
Sunday. Just consider for a moment the occasion of that Council
meeting. It was but a single question, namely, that of “circumcision,”
about which Paul and Barnabas were required to consult the
apostles and elders at Jerusalem. Judging however by the answer
returned, it would appear that other questions, but solely of a
“ Jewish ” nature, were considered, and four things only are
mentioned in the decree as “ necessary things.” But to infer from
the absence of any allusion to the Sabbath, that Gentile Christians
need not observe the Christian Sunday, I should characterize as
trifling with sacred things. Let us apply this style of argument to
other commandments of the Decalogue, and its fallaciousness will
be manifest. I would ask, “ was it not also a * necessary thing ’ that
Gentile Christians should abstain from f stealing,’ and from bearing
f false witness,’ and from coveting? Yet these things are “not
enumerated among those * necessary things ’ enforced upon the
Gentile believers in the decree of the Council of Jerusalem; ” but
would any sane person conclude from that fact that Gentile Christians
are at liberty to disregard those commandments of the moral law ?
Clearly not. Neither, therefore, is it logical or reasonable to
conclude from there being no mention of Sabbath observance
among the few “ necessary things ” indicated in the Jerusalem
Council’s decree, that Gentile believers are at liberty to disregard
the fourth commandment.
I come now, in conclusion, to consider (and I can do so here
only briefly) the question of Sunday observance, and enquire—
IN WHAT MANNER MAT THE CHRISTIAN SUNDAY BE LAWFULLY
OBSERVED ?
The answer to this question we must find in the provisions of the
fourth commandment, interpreted in the light of the Christian
dispensation. It will be reasonable to say that the two principal
requirements designed to be secured by that commandment should
be duly respected, namely. Best and Worship. On this ground,
Sunday trading should be condemned, one of its effects being that


it interferes with that physical “ rest ”so needful for man; and I
now declare my personal and public protest against Sunday trading
as being a violation of the fourth commandment. On this ground,
also, Sunday excursions should be condemned ; and I now declare my
personal and public protest against Sunday excursion trains, and
Sunday excursion steamers, as demoralising in their tendency, and
as not only despoiling the Sunday of its characteristic “ rest/’ but
also as unfitting the soul for that public worship of God which is
properly required of all, in accordance with the apostolic injunction,
“ not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together as the manner
of some is.” (Heb. x. 25.)
I am, of course, well aware that such protests will account for
nothing with many, but in bearing my testimony against Sabbath
desecration, I deliver my own soul in this matter.
I am well aware of the pleas on which Sunday trading and
Sunday pleasure excursions are sought to be justified by some;
but I perceive in those specious pleas or pretexts how easy it is
to justify oneself in any course one secretly wishes to follow, for “ the
heart is deceitful above all things.” If the principles of certain
persons in reference to the Christian Sunday are to prevail we shall
soon have no Sunday at all. It is partly in view of these principles
that I proposed for consideration the question—“ Is there such an
institution as the Christian Sunday P ” Those of whom I speak
urge that we are “not under law but under grace,” and hence
would infer that we are “lawless ;” but they either forget, or know
not, that though the “ law” as a condemning power, or as the
meritorious means of procuring eternal life, is at an end under the
Christian dispensation, believers are still under the law to Christ,
for the moral law is binding upon them as the rule of life. It
appears to me that what is sought under the names of “ love ” and
“ grace ” is not so deservedly called “ liberty ” as “ licence,” and that
under those words “ love ” and “ grace ” some conceal the most
dangerous Antinomianism or lawlessness of spirit.
But if now lam asked the question—“ What may be lawfully
done on the Sabbath Day ? ” I would reply “ The fourth
commandment interpreted in the light of the Christian dispensation
permits works of piety, necessity, or charity to be done on the Lord’s
Day, and the New Testament furnishes examples of this liberty. It
would, therefore, be certainly lawful to do good on the Sabbath Day,
to save life, and to preserve property from destruction when in
immediate danger—as, for example, from fire or flood; but to spend


the Sunday either in worldly business or in worldly amusement is,
I do not hesitate to say it, an outrageous breach of the fourth
commandment. If I should speak my mind openly on this subject
I must declare my belief that the root of all desire to make the
Sunday a day of trading or of pleasure excursions is, in a word,
worldliness. If rebellion against God were henceforth to be unknown
in the world, we should hear no more about Sabbath desecration,
for every heart would be loyal towards God. Only let that true
love to God, which a deep sense of our obligation to Christ for
His redeeming work begets, prevail—only let that love for God
which is shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit fill and fire
the soul —only let our highest aim be to glorify God, and to live
here for the life to come, —then will God’s holy day not be regarded
as though it were a weariness to the flesh, but as a day when the
toils of life may be lawfully set aside, and God be honoured, and
worshipped, and praised in the public ordinances of grace.
Brethren, let me remind you that upon each one of you there
rests a measure of responsibility in respect of Sabbath observance.
It is within your power either to encourage or to discourage it.
Let, then, your influence be on God’s side in this matter. By all
legitimate means do what you can to check and put down the spirit
of lawlessness which shamelessly manifests itself in respect of
Sabbath observance, for assuredly our national and private welfare
and the honour and glory of God are inseparably bound up in our
remembering “ the Sabbath day to keep it holy ” !
NOTES
ON GENESIS 11. 2, 3.
Respecting Genesis ii., v. 2,3, Bishop Tomline thus writes: —“It appears
from Gen. ii. 3, that God ‘blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,’ and
thus ordained that every seventh day, or one day in seven, should be
exempted from the ordinary cares and business of the world, and more im-
mediately dedicated to religious uses and the service of God. This ordi-
nance, which from the nature of its origin must necessarily be binding on
all mankind, was [repeated as one of the Ten Commandments given on
Mount Sinai, which our Lord expressly declared to be of perpetual obliga-
tion —Matt, v., 17 —19. The strict observance of the seventh day or
Sabbath was enforced upon the Jewish nation by peculiar commands,
adapted to the general tenor of institutions designed to separate them
from the rest of the world, and declared to be founded in circumstances
peculiar to that people—Deut. v. 15. These positive injunctions, designed
to commemorate their deliverance from Egyptian bondage, which was ‘ a
shadow of things to come ’ (Col. ii. 17), were of a temporary nature, and
ceased to be binding on them when the Jewish law was abrogated by the


coming of the Messiah; and the Saviour of the world having risen from the
dead on the first day of the week, that day was then appointed to be set
apart for the purpose of religious worship, according to the original insti-
tution at the creation, to commemorate the emancipation of all mankind
from the power of sin and death. The sacred writers do not mention that
the Apostles received any express direction to make this change in the day
which had been so long appropriated to the service of God; but as we know
that they acted by inspiration on all occasions where religious doctrines or
duties were concerned, it is impossible to doubt their authority on this
point; and indeed this change seems clearly to have been sanctioned by the
appearance of Christ in the midst of them when they were assembled
together (John xx. 19), and by the descent of the Holy Ghost, both on the
first day of the week. It is difficult to imagine circumstances more strik-
ingly calculated to prove the universal and perpetual obligation of devoting
the seventh day, or one day in seven, as ‘ holy unto the Lord,’ and the
abolition of the Jewish ritual by the establishment of Christianity.”
Dr. Harold Browne, Bishop of Ely, thus writes in the Speaker’s Com-
mentary : —“ The simple meaning of the text is by far the most probable,
viz.—That God having divided His own great work into six portions,
assigned a special sacredness to the seventh, on which that work became
complete; and that having called man into being, He ordained him for
labour, but yet in love and mercy appointed that one-seventh of his time
should be given to rest and to the religious service of his Maker. This
truth is repeated in the fourth commandment (Exod. xx. 11), though
there was a second and special reason why the Jews should observe the
Sabbath Day (Deut. v. 15); and very probably the special day of the
seven, which became the Jewish Sabbath, was the very day on which the
Lord brought them out of the house of bondage, and gave them rest from
the slavery of Egypt.”
Bishop Wilson says—“ As the neglect of this law brought in idolatry
and infidelity, so the breach of it has ever since been punished most remark-
ably by a judicial hardness of heart, forgetfulness of God, and exemplary
judgments, as numberless offenders have confessed.”
ON exodus xx.
In reference to the ten commandments in this chapter the Eev. S.
Clarke, in the Speaker’s Commentary, thus writes“lt is to be observed
that the Decalogue in respect to its subject matter does not set forth what
is local and temporary, or peculiar to a single nation. Its two tables are a
standing declaration of the true relation between morality and religion
for all nations and ages. The fourth commandment is, in its principle, no
exception to this. The Decalogue belonged to the Israelites, not because
the truths expressed in it were exclusively theirs, but because it was re-
vealed to them in a special manner (see Exodus xx. 2). The breadth of
meaning, which rightly belongs to it, may be compared to that of the Lord’s
Prayer, which, though it was especially given by Christ to His followers
for their own use, contains nothing unsuitable for any believer in one
God.”
ON ACTS XX. 7 —“ UPON THE FIRST DAY OP THE WEEK.”
Dr. Whitby writes : —“ We have here a clear proof that the first Chris-
tians were accustomed to keep holy the first day of the week as a day
appointed for religious worship, for the words are ‘ when the disciples
came together,’ as a matter of ordinary custom, not as if they went on an
extraordinary occasion.”
ON REV. I. 10—“ THE LORD’S DAY.”
Lawman writes : —“ The Christian Sabbath, on which the Church used
to assemble for religious worship—Acts xx. 7.”


DID THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CHURCH KNOW OF AND RECOGNISE THE
“LORD’S ” DAT AS SUNDAY p
Beyond a doubt it did. Though I have no access now to the complete
works of the early Christian fathers I possess extracts from their works.
Of the genuineness and authenticity of the said extracts I have no reason
to he distrustful. In the “address,” herewith given, I have quoted the
words of St. Barnabas and of Justyn Martyr in proof of the question above
proposed. To the “ Lord’s day” Pliny doubtless refers when he says, “ the
Christians on a fixed day before dawn meet and sing a hymn to Christ as
God.” Tertullian says—“ On the Lord’s day we deem it wrong to fast,”
Tertullian also, disputing against the heretic Marcion, who affirmed that
Christ came among others to destroy the Sabbath, answered that “it
became Him who has hallowed the Sabbath as Creator to hallow it still
more by His beneficent work as Redeemer;” In an admirable work on the
“ Sabbath Question,” by the Rev. James Macgregor (author of the articles
“ Hegel” and “ Jacobi” in the Encyclopaedia Britannica) that author writes
(and here, I say, let those who can refute it do so) —“ In the age of Councils
it is notorious that the Church had come to regard the Lord’s day as the
Christian Sabbath. From Constantine the Great the chains of witnesses
stretch back to Ignatius and Clemens Romanus, contemporaries of the
Apostles. Their testimony is in breadth co-extensive with the then existing
Christendom and civilization. Clement of Rome, Dionysius of Corinth,
Pliny in Bithynia, Ignatius of Antioch, Justyn Martyr of Syria, Clement
and Origen, and Peter of Alexandria, and Tertullian, and Cyprian of
Carthage. Those ‘ lights shining in a dark place’ shine all around the
horizon of the Roman world ; there is not a region, hardly an important
church, that does not in the scanty remains of the primitive Christian
literature, furnish some testimony, direct or circumstantial, to the fact
that the Jewish Sabbath has been antiquated by the Saviour’s death, and
the Lord’s Day has been observed from the beginning of New Testament
Church history.”
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, — I have no intention of entering upon so unsatisfactory a
course as a newspaper controversy, especially as I hope to he able
to place the subject of the Sunday or Lord’s Day before the
public either by publishing a paper or in some other fashion : but
I think it well to make a few remarks on Canon Brownrigg’s
letter.
I may here express my approval of your sub-leader of
Wednesday last, which I read with pleasure on my return from
the country.
Canon Brownrigg read my letter “ with surprise and pain; ”
natural enough in the case of one who considers he is an
Anglo-Israelite, and is concerned for the honour of his nation’s
law. But lam a mere Gentile Christian, a follower of Christ and
St. Paul, and not of Moses, except where Christ and St. Paul
have adopted him ; and I like to have my faith built, not on
imaginary history, nor on the arguments of fancy, but on something
more prosaic and solid.
Canon Brownrigg, contrary to the abundant testimonies of
ancient church history, which have evidently escaped his notice,


speaks of a “ day called the Sabbath, Sunday, or Lord’s Day.”
If he is right, then he comes under the condemnation of St. Paul,
who calls it “ a weak and beggarly element,” and adds that he is
“ afraid of those who turn back to it, lest he has bestowed labour
upon them in vain.”
The distinction between the Sabbath and the Sunday is carefully
expressed in a multitude of passages in the early Christian writers.
Has Canon Brownrigg ever read them ? He says, “if he reads his
Bible aright,”, etc. May I remark that it is not merely necessary
for a teacher to read his Bible, but also to read about his Bible,
its history, and also its text criticism. He does not appear to
know that the existence of the Sabbath cannot be traced before
the time of Moses, and he appears to overlook the fact that a
reason, relating to the Jews only, is given for its observance. His
reference to Gen. ii. 3 shows him to know nothing of the critical
questions that must be clearly answered before he can use it as he
wishes to do.
I should like the interpretation of Bible passages by clergymen
to be occasionally subjected to such an examination by able, and
at the same time reverent, lawyers as they employ in a court of
justice when enquiring into the meaning of some document, only I
am afraid few of us would come brilliantly out of it.
Canon Brownrigg asks me how I read the fourth commandment
in church : to which I reply, just in the same way as I read other
parts of the Old Testament.
Yesterday he and I read at the evening service—“ Let their
eyes be blinded, that they see not,” “ Let them fall from one
wickedness to another, and not come into Thy righteousness,”
“ Let them be wiped out of the book of the living.” I cannot
believe those to be his real sentiments against his enemies, and
yet he reads them. .No doubt there is an explanation.
Canon Brownrigg professes to write in the interests of all that is
good. lam sure he wishes to do so ; but with St. Paul I should
prefer to write in the interests of the “true :” the true must be
good. In searching for the good first one has no guide, and so
good people often keep truth in the background, if they have it;
or if they are ignorant, do not think it worth while to look for it.
My apology for having put forward my views in an unusual
place is that certain gentlemen, assuming that they had all truth
and good on their side, made what I conceive an unnecessary and
unreasonable assault on the freedom of others, and threatened to
invoke the authority of Parliament to enforce what I, with many
others, conceived to be neither based on truth nor conducive to the
well-being of the community.
Yours, etc.,
F. HALES.


TO THE EDITOE.
Sie, —I thought it not improbable that Archdeacon Hales would
“make a few remarks ” on my letter of the 7th instant, and not
improbable also that those “ remarks ” would exhibit more of
animus than of argument, and in neither of these respects have I
cause for surprise.
To discuss the Anglo-Israel question with one who, from his not
having much knowledge of the subject, is not competent to express
an opinion thereupon, would be useless ; but as I did not write as
an “Anglo-Israelite,” the Archdeacon gains nothing in defence of
his opinions respecting the “ Sunday question” by his reference
to my Anglo-Israelism; nor must we be drawn aside from the
special subject—the Sunday question—by other questions such
as “Anglo-Israelism,” however important it may be, and the
“Imprecatory Psalms,” concerning which latter, as the Arch-
deacon says, “no doubt there is an explanation.”
The Archdeacon’s affirmation respecting himself, that he is “ a
follower of Christ, and St. Paul, not of Moses—except where
Christ and St. Paul have adopted him I conscientiously affirm
of myself also (the Archdeacon’s insinuation to the contrary
notwithstanding); but it remains yet to be seen of which of us
this is more strictly the case in the matter of the “Sunday question.”
Perhaps he will allow me to say it, that the Archdeacon appears
to be in much confusion as to “ the abundant testimonies of
ancient church history,” if he imagines he can produce anything
from such source against the historical fact that there was such a
day called “Sunday,” or “the Lord’s Day,” which day is now
frequently called “ Sabbath ” by those who do not mean thereby
the “ Jewish ” Sabbath, but the Christian Sunday. But if J,
according to the Archdeacon, come “ under the condemnation of
St. Paul ” because I speak of a day as the “ Lord’s day ” (which
“day” I confidently maintain St. Paul never characterised as “ a
weak and beggarly element”), then St. John the Divine is under
the “ like condemnation,” for he has ventured to say that he “was
in the spirit on the Lord’s day ” ( i.e ., the Sunday). But why will
the Archdeacon persistently employ St. Paul’s allusions to
“Jewish ” ceremonies or “ Jewish ” observances, as though the
Apostle were speaking about the Christian Sunday, or were
teaching that there is no Sunday (now frequently called
“Sabbath” without meaning the “Jewish” Sabbath) for “Gentile
Christians ”to observe ? This is a fertile source of confusion, of
which evidence accumulates in the Archdeacon’s letter. And
here is another example : —The Archdeacon says “ the distinction
between the Sabbath and the Sunday is carefully expressed in a
multitude of passages in the early Christian writers.” bfo one
doubts that there is a “ distinction between the Sabbath [i.e., the
Jewish] and the Sunday.” This, however, is not the question at
issue. But even here, from the Archdeacon’s own statement, let


it be observed that, as “ early Christian writers ” distinguish
between the “ Sabbath ” ( i.e ., “ Jewish ”) and “ Sunday ” (which
proves that such a day was known to them under the title of
“Sunday”), my statement can hardly be, as the Archdeacon
would represent, “ contrary to the abundant testimonies of ancient
church history,” when I speak of a day still called by some
“ Sabbath” (not meaning “Jewish”), by others “ Sunday,” and by
others, again, “ Lord’s day.”
I quite agree with the Archdeacon “ that it is not merely
necessary for a teacher to read his Bible” (yet I interject the
remark that he should nevertheless “ read it aright ”), but also to
“ read about his Bible, its history, and also its text criticism ; ”
and I trust lam not quite uninformed upon these matters. But I
am certainly not aware, as the Archdeacon rightly thinks, “ that
the existence of the Sabbath cannot be traced before the time of
Moses.” My copy of the Bible tells me of the “ existence” of the
Sabbath long before the time of Moses (see Genesis ii., verses
2 and 3), and I am compelled to believe this to be the truth on
that point until the “critical questions,” which appear to influence
the Archdeacon’s teaching more than the simple text itself, can be
shown to be of such an overwhelming character as to put it
beyond all reasonable doubt that the Scripture under notice is a
mistake, and, therefore, that God did not institute the Sabbath
after the six days’ creation.
And perhaps, when the Archdeacon reads my address on the
“ Sunday question” (if he will bestow upon it a glance or two), he
will find that I am not unaware that the attempt has been made
(but unsuccessfully, as the Bishop of Ely notes in the “ Speaker’s
Commentary,”) to prove that there was no trace of the Sabbath
before the giving of the law on Sinai. JSTor have I overlooked
“ the fact,” even if I have not specially referred to it, “ that a
reason relating to the Jews only is given for its observance but
while I am quite aware of the “ reason relating to the Jews only,”
I do not overlook another fact, equally patent—that there is in
the same commandment a reason (of which I would remind the
Archdeacon) for the observance of the Sabbath {i.e., Sunday)
which has not to do with “ Jews only,” but with Gentiles also;
and of course any reason which relates “ to the Jews only” I do
not apply to Gentiles.
It might, perhaps, be an advantage were “ the interpretation of
Bible passages by clergymen to be occasionally subjected to
examination by able, and at the same time reverent, lawyers,” as
the Archdeacon suggests ; but I would venture the opinion,
without intending it offensively, that the fear which the Arch-
deacon expresses, “ that few of us would come brilliantly out of
it,” would probably be realised in reference to himself, were his
“Sunday question” teaching the subject of such examination.
I would now remark that in my view the Archdeacon’s
explanation as to how he reads “the fourth commandment in


33 r P
6i6Lio
F 7S°l^
THE SUNDAY QUESTION.
church,” namely, “in the same way that he reads other parts of
the Old Testament ” (doubtless inclusive of the remaining nine
commandments), is neither very clear nor very satisfactory. We
are left to decide whether this means in a merely formal and
pointless manner—or, as applicable “to the Jews onty”— o r, with
mental reservation—or, without believing them : I would hope,
however, not in this last manner, for unbelief of “ Moses’ ”
writings was represented by our Lord as one cause of infidelity
among those who rejected Him. (John v. 46, 47.)
I have to thank the Archdeacon for giving me credit for, at
least, one good thing, namely, that he knows I wish, as I profess,
“to write in the interests of all that is good;” but he really gives
me credit also for more than I think he" intended when (in allusion
to himself) he adds—-“ But, with St. Paul, I should prefer to write
in the interests of the ‘ true : ’ the true must be good.” If then
“the true must be good,” I fail to perceive how it can be
otherwise than that the “ good ” must be “true” also, since a
“good” evil or a “ good ” untrue would be a contradiction in
terms ; and therefore in writing “in the interests of all that is
good,” I claim also to have been writing (“with St. Paul ”) “in
the interests of the true.”
As the Archdeacon hopes “to be able to place the subject of
the Sunday or Lord’s Day before the public, either by publishing
a paper or in some other fashion,” we may yet discover whether
he is able, from “ the abundant testimonies of ancient church
history,” or from “the multitude of passages in the early Christian
writers ” (he has thus abundant material to draw from), to show
(not that the “Jewish” Sabbath is obsolete in respect of Christians,
which is not the subject of doubt or debate, but) that the Christian
Sunday was unknown in apostolic times ; that the “ Lord’s Day ”
was unknown in those times as the Christian Sunday ; that in
apostolic times the Christian Church used not to observe in a
strictly restful and religious manner one day in seven—that one
day being “ the first day of the week,” also called “ Sunday,” and
also called “ the Lord’s Day,” and still called by some “ Sabbath.”
We shall further hope to discover what these “ critical questions”
are, which yet “ must be clearly answered ” before the words in
Genesis ii., and verses 2 and 3, are to be received as meaning
precisely what they say. The “ Speaker’s Commentary” professes
to be the result of the latest and profoundest criticism, and I find
nothing there to lead me to suppose that Genesis ii., verses 2 and 3,
should be either amended or obliterated, or to question the truth
they so simply and obviously declare.
Apologising for the unavoidable length of my letter, I would
merely add that no one will read the Archdeacon’s publication
with more attention and interest than will, Yours, etc.,
M. BLAKE BEOWHEIGG.
St. John’s Parsonage, March 14th, 1887.
