

The NEW
LONE
PINE
of A B C
SHOWCARD and
TICKETWRITING
by C.Milnes.


THE NEW
a b c of SHOWCARD
& TICKETWRITING
, 4*^
l JH'nnouncinq
by C.Milnes.
THE MOST PKDCTICPL BOOK OF
ITS HIND EVEB PUBLISHED
v^i Ajcruii CUfifiatfefa. /cCeaA. eic..
Ml | #\
% «■*
FDR THE BEGINNER an TRRDE5MRN




An Apology ..
On account of the many varied colored cards
appearing on some of the Half Tone Plates the
maximum contrast of the original cards is
somewhat missing.
All cards were reproduced in their natural state
straight from the stores they had done service
in, without any re-touching whatever.


Forword
tf]T In compiling this book my thoughts go back to the time when Card Writing first began to
interest me: that would be almost 20 years ago. . . . The essential things the student of those
days missed I have tried to emphasize most forcibly. Going back 20 years, I don’t think I am
far wrong in saying that Ticket Writing as a profession was then in its infancy: it certainly
was as regards the quality of work turned out compared with that of to-day. Why, a few
years ago words on a piece of cardboard were good enough for the average store: no thought
was given to the selling power, the colour scheme, or the link-up with the goods displayed.
Things have changed since then.
tfjT A more intellectual outlook is slowly creeping into our best stores: they are realizing that the
shop window is their best salesman and the showcard is the most important thing in the
window because it is there for every passer-by to read, to hold them, to impress them, and
eventually get them inside: that being so, every effort should be made to teach and inspire
the Cardwriter to reach greater heights by sympathetic cohesion and understanding; give him
sufficient time to do his work thoroughly, as it should be done; that perpetual harassing to get
a week’s work done in two or three days is very depressing, it leaves no alternative but to
rush through the work irrespective of how it is done, as long as it is done on time—something
is wrong with the store management that is constantly in a desperate hurry for its cards. . . .
JT] In conclusion, I must draw your attention to the absolute necessity of using only the best
□J materials; to economise on cheap surfaced board, paints you have mixed yourself, or brushes
of an inferior quality—to put it crudely—is penny wise and pound foolish.
C. MILNES.


Introductory
One frecjltmeJi KtCuj fiend dififiicuE&n -nt, ciettinq
ine "FEEL"oj filum,, ’ifitdPty coilect '
pteEiuie "do enJaie czn even JithoAe
CoHJ&uti pkictcce -Tvc& oeebcoi*e dififiieudu.
-JJorvt- Ee IMe oul jjkend an ide &/ft 7* '
Ct(d/u>up/v"pou naif qed aStJhelcEfed
ait dfueE, Jud Keep on fMacticUip s- JucceAj
co?u& ijOuA zvcuj .
J'teudeJn&n. J) -an*, /kJte Tois o&cut muck
nnoudkckfe pom ~tde mcuvp pne
Kotem dutmiuted Up oui fedr zoidefa! .
C. Milnes.


Beginners
MY ADVICE TO YOU IS :
Study and practise the strokes on the newsprint until you have acquired a certain
amount of uniformity and swing; this applies also to your Pen Practice Strokes.
Keep on the Single Stroke Alphabets until you have mastered same; don't make the
mistake of jumping to the advanced types before you are able to do the single stroke
work efficiently. . . You will find this book is compiled in a progressive way; the
first pages are elementary, gradually progressing to the more finished descriptive
types. Concentrate on the early pages, for here is the most important part of your
learning. . . .
Being a believer in the old Chinese adage that “a picture is worth a thousand
words,” I have not gone into minor details or burdened you with pages and pages
of type; each page, I hope, you will find clear and to the point. The many Cards
reproduced have all done service and were not specially written for this book; they
are the work of our leading writers; each one has a distinctive style in both layout
and lettering. Study them thoroughly, then try some original layout of your own.
To be a first-class writer you must be creative and not merely a copyist.


HOLDING the BRUSH
NOTE...
almost perpendicular
slope this qives better
control ...
brush should be held firmhj but not
lightly between forefinqer and thumb same as
Pen or Pencil. The points of contact are bottom
of little flnqer and hand, and hairs of brush .
Ifeep brush ai almost a perpendicular anqle
with finqers almost touchincj the hair, this
Cjives better control. ~ltse a full arm move-
ment movmq the arm from the elbow and not
onlu from the wrist.
ROUND. FLAT.
The two types
of Ticketumt-
ing Brushes :
Round & Flat
Ferrule.
Jit or stand fairly erect with your work right in front of uou, reaching to
right or left is a mistake .... fTJbr the beqinner 1 advocate aMS Round
Ferrule Chisel Edge Brush, that is for the Practice Strokes, a smaller and a
larger size to be used when the student has progressed sufficiently
KOLLING the BMJSH
Held at an anqte of 45° circles or curves have definite
thick and thm strokes __ a slioht turn of the brush, is
necessaru to give an even thickness to these curves
Constant practice is essentia! before any proficiency is acquired


News print is excellent for practice work. A combination of these strokes form the Single Stroke Lower Case Alphabet.


SINGLE STROKE LOWER CASE
From this elementary type the more finished styles are evolved.


SINGLE STROKE CAPITALS & on the SLOPE ...
Writing on the slope gives you more speed.


SINGLE STROKE
with SERI FS...
The Serif gives lettering a more finished appearance.


Sinqle Stroke. SERIF on slant...
A speedy type for Store work.


Swing around with plenty of this practice, it puts dash into your Script.


Script SINGLE STROKE
Just ordinary handwriting with a brush. The above is the basic principle of all types of Script lettering.


"CAPITALS "
SINGLE STROKE Script.
Just Plata capitals. Each letter could be done in one or two other styles; a 10, of liberty is allowed, as there are no given measurements to Scrip, lettering.


Swing around with above without any retouching.


THICKENED - FINISHED-Script...
For descriptive wording or feature words, thicken down strokes and also thicken the thins slightly; this gives a substantial looking word.


Snappy Single Stroke-Pen or Brush.
Just a little different to the ordinary Single Stroke.


Smart Single Stroke with Square finish. and Round finish.
One of the best and most easily executed types; it is an ideal every-day type. Turn abruptly on finishes as “n,” “m,” “h,” etc.


A Professional type of Single Stroke „
A slightly modified type, with a few tradesman touches here and there.


A TEXT TYPE


PLAIN BLOCK
Square, round or pointed Serifs can be added if desired.


“DO YOU MAKE THESE MISTAKES"?
Illustrating a few common errors In spacing, between letters .


BOLD BLOCK
A solid, legible Poster type.


SQUflhE BLOCK TYPE


MODERN BLOCK
(LONE PINE)
Suitable only as a feature word on a card, or for name over shop front fitted on modernistic lines.


ROMAN
Slightly modified Roman. One of the oldest yet best types in use; never out of date and never will be.


EASTERN TYPE
Gives the atmosphere of the East; use only as a feature word.


Three distinct types.


Lessone on Layout and Spacing
The above examples are plain Store Cards, but the same principles apply to the most descriptive cards.


Use your own wording on the above simple Grocery Tickets.


Practice Strokes for
CHISEL and ROUND PENS...
First practice strokes for Pen Lettering.


Plain Pen Lettering, chisel pen
From the above elementary alphabet all fancy types are evolved.


4 Different Pen Alghabe ts


Various Styles, Using the ROUND PEN
The round nib gives you an even thickness, as plate shows.


SHAPED PRICE TICKETS


Card Shapes
These shapes can be altered to fit your particular wording.


POSTERS AND WINDOW STICKERS
The extra angles, circles, etc., in different colours can be stuck on separately; this is much easier than painting same.


Cards by A. Taylor.


Descriptive Cards by Miss B. J. Scott.


Cards by N. Smith.


Cards by C. Milnes.
See page 77]


Scrolls by A. Taylor.


Plain Selling Cards by C. Milnes.


Cards with cut-out illustrations by Miss B. J. Scott.


Silk Screen examples by L. R. Leake.


Scrolls by Allan Warren.


Descriptive Cards by Miss B. J. Scott and C. Milnes.


WORDS conveyinq the impression
[See page 77


Fine Descriptive Cards from “Farmers.”


Large Cards by A. Taylor.


Christmas Cards by C. Milnes.


Christmas Cards by N. Smith.


Store Cards by A. Taylor.


More Silk Screen designs by L. R. Leake.


Good Plain Cards featuring the square type lettering, by N. Smith.


Large Display Cards by C. Milnes.


Chiet Cardwriters
in Departmental Stores should have a thorough knowledge
of Letter Types, Colour Harmony, be original and able to introduce
novel ideas to the special window cards which appear at certain times of
the year. . . . When the type of window is explained to him, it is his job to
see the right sort of card will do most justice to the display. . . . He should
not be domineered over by managers of respective departments, window-
dressers or even store directors; they may understand their jobs, but know
little of the cardwriters. Leave it to him, it’s then his responsibility; if he
fails then a more capable man is required. ... If you are in the happy
position of having a “first-class” cardwriter, treat him well or you 11 lose
him. ... A London store staff superintendent informed me that his firm had
little difficulty in filling a manager’s or buyer’s position, but to get a first-
class” cardwriter was a difficult proposition.
Remember that a showcard is your best salesman; every potential customer
will gaze upon it intently; see it is well written and upholds the prestige and
good name of the goods and the store it represents. . . .
CARDS AND
TICKETS
should be written to
conform to the goods they
are advertising. . . . Articles
of a solid or heavy nature
would need a strong type of
lettering, and the reverse for
light or dainty materials. . . .
How odd a card would look
in a window of ladies under-
wear or cosmetics written in a
heavy block square serif type;
the same can be said of an
ironmongery window of ham-
mers, axes, etc., with a de-
scriptive card executed in fine
italics or light Roman types.
Hence, make the letter types
conform to the goods dis-
played.


Spring Scrolls by A. Taylor.


More Silk Screen work by L. R. Leake.


Card examples by C. Milnes.


Cards by J. Sharp.
Cards by E. Shaw.


Layout..
Although scores of pages could be written on this very important subject,
in a few lines its principles can be explained. . . . Layout is the setting out
of your wording on the card to make it easily read, pleasing, and attractive
to the reader. Balance and spacing are the most important items of a
showcard—that means you don’t have to fill your card from top to bottom
with lettering. Don’t have heavy masses of wording on any particular part
of card (except it be the optical centre); a heavy mass on the top or base
results in an unbalanced card, therefore we must distribute the wording to
form a pleasing design.
Briefly this is how it is done: Your wording is divided up into sentences
and the sentences to form panels, and the panels to form a pleasing design.
Have a distinct space between each panel and quite a wide margin on the
sides, top, and most space at the base of card; of course, your feature
wording would be emphasized by using a bolder type, also price, if any.
. . . Do not resort to “freakish’’ or so-called “Modernistic’’ types, or layouts
that are contorted; remember legibility comes first. The card that reads
with a continuity from top to base with feature words emphasized without
the reader having to twist his or her head to an acute angle before same
can be understood, is the best and most serviceable.
COLOR........
Colour is a study in itself. Its application to Showcard and Ticket Writing
differs somewhat from the painter in fine Art.
The cardwriter aims at strong contrasts, endeavouring at the same time to
achieve a certain amount of harmony. . . .
The colour schemes given on page 77 are strong in contrasts, and if
practised will give the reader a fairly good knowledge of colour as applied
to Card Writing. ... In other words, keep to harmony for borders and
decorations, and strong contrasts for wording.
A plain example would be: A dark green card, wording in white and yellow,
border in a lighter shade of green.


More Cards by A. Taylor.


Autumn Cards and others by C. Milnes.


More Parchment Scrolls by Allan Warren.


Good varieties by N. Smith.


Fine examples submitted by J. W. Rule.


Descriptive Cards by C. Milnes.


Fine examples from L. R. Leake.


Cards by A. Taylor.


Large Descriptive Cards by A. Taylor.


Spring Cards by C. Milnes.


Descriptive Cards from “Farmers.”




VARIETY IN FIGURES etc, etc.




Colour Contrasts on Various Coloured Boards
WHITE BOARD
Any deep colors will contrast on White, such as Red,
Blue, Green, Brown, Violet, etc.
Care must be taken with decorations —these should be
toned down considerably. A light grey is the ideal tone
for lining or borders —it can be livened by the addition
of a touch of color, viz.: Blue Grey, Yellow Grey, etc., etc.
Use only One Primary Color on White Board and feature
this. Your smaller lettering can be done in Black, Dark
Green, Brown, or any other deep shade.
Orange and Yellow lettering should never be used on
White—it is much too insipid. As a finishing line or a
thin border it would be permissible.
BLACK BOARD
The strongest contrast on Black would be Yellow, White
or Orange.
If you are writing only one or two words and your
lettering is going to be on the big side, use either Yellow
or Orange in preference to White. White on Black, although
a strong contrast, looks very morbid; whereas the Yellow
or Orange, besides being contrasting and legible, is much
more pleasing to the eye.
I again advocate the use of only one Primary as your
feature —Yellow for main lettering and just a touch of
Blue in White to make a tint for your smaller wording;
a touch of Yellow will give you a nice Cream Color, or
a touch of Green makes a softness much preferred to the
straight-out White. Be very careful you do not put too
much color in your White when mixing tints.
Never use Reds, Blues or Dark Greens for lettering on
Black surface. These can be used for lining, decoration
or borders, according to your color scheme.
YELLOW BOARD
Yellow being a bright color, we must apply an opposite
color to contrast.
Black is the popular tone on Yellow. A very deep Blue
or Brown or Maroon will suffice for your lettering.
Decorations and borders can be done in Orange, Cream,
even White can be used for line borders, etc., although
care must be taken not to have too much White on card,
as White and Yellow are an insipid combination.
As a simple color scheme stick to Black lettering with
Orange decoration.
RED BOARD
White would be the strongest contrast on Red; avoid
Greens and Blues.
Tints look quite nice, but be careful you do not get
them too deep—Orange and Black are good colors for
decoration, lining, etc Yellow can be used as feature
wording as well as White. Red being a brilliant color,
it is difficult to find many harmonious schemes to work
on same, but if you stick to, say. Yellow and White for
lettering, with Orange or Black for borders, linings, etc.,
you will not be far out for legibility and harmony.
BROWN BOARD
Here we have an ideal background for light tints, also
White and Yellow.
A good color scheme on Dark Brown would be—feature
wording in Cream, with very deep Brown block shadow,
smaller lettering either White or very Light Green tint,
with, perhaps, a price in Yellow with shadow of deep Brown.
The lining and border could be done in the same deep
Brown, or a Dark Maroon.
Never use Blues, Reds or Greens on this colored board.
Orange can be used discriminately, as a lining, border,
or light decoration, but should not be used in mass form.
DARK GREEN BOARD
A more pleasant ground than a Dark Green cannot be
found. Soft and restful it will take any tints, whilst Yellow
and White are good combinations for your feature wording.
Smaller lettering can be done in White or tints of Cream,
Blue, Green (very light), whilst decoration borders, etc.,
Mauve or Deep Blue, or a Green made darker than the card
could be used.
Never do lettering in Blue, Red or Orange.
A good combination would be: Feature wording in a very
Light Green tint, smaller wording in White and Cream, with
Dark Blue or Dark Green for lining and border.
BLUE BOARD
A Dark Blue ground will be an easy medium to work on,
practically all tints are ideal on Blue.
Yellow and White makes a strong contrast for your feature
lettering and if the Blue is deep, Orange would be permissible.
Lavender, Violet, Cerise, with just a touch of White, is
ideal for decoration, linings, borders, etc., or Black makes a
good substitute if you wish to keep the Card more subdued.
Never use Green or Red for lettering on Blue ground.
MEDIUM OR BETWEEN COLORS
If you choose a medium colored Board, a background that
is neither light nor dark, you are certainly making more
work for yourself.
A dark color will not have the contrast on this ground,
and a light tint will not be half as effective; therefore keep
to the above-mentioned color schemes and a successful
result is assured. If you are compelled to work on a
between color, decide whether a dark color or almost a
White will give the strongest contrast. To show your
feature word or words more forcibly, an outline on same
may be necessary. If you have decided on a dark letter,
a thin outline in ! White or a light tint would be quite
effective; or, if you decide on a White or light tint colored
letter, outline this in a dark color.
Only when you have no option should a medium colored Board
be used, as outlining words takes a lot of valuable time, and
the legibility of your smaller wording is greatly curtailed.
The half-dozen schemes I have given you (White and
Yellow excluded) are meant for dark colored Cards —Dark
Brown, Dark Green, Dark Blue, Dark Red and Black.


(T" -
wHE contributing writers, whose names appear below, I wish to
thank for their splendid examples kindly loaned. I am sure the
reader joins with me in deep appreciation of their generosity in helping
to raise the standard of present-day Show-card Writing, as well as
making the lot of the beginner a little easier. On each page the
individual name of the writer is shown all Alphabets, Lettering,
Suggestions, Card Designs and Book Covers, etc., are by yours truly,
C. MILNES.
Contributing Writers:
L. R. LEAKE. N. SMITH, A. TAYLOR, J. W. RULE,
ALLAN WARREN, E. SHAW, J. SHARP, FARMERS Sydney
Miss B. J. SCOTT.,,
The Ruskin Press, 123
Latrobe Street, Melbourne








