

The New Improved
"Digger” Winch
(Trade Mark)
PATENTED
GRUBBING
MACHINE
N.S.W. 4QPNT& 4
buzacot# g$tn&
7-11 MARKpt •?$
*'***
Made in Australia by
Quick Manufacturing Co.
Engineers
75 Penders Street - Thornbury Victoria
Wellman & Co., 597 High Street, St. Kilda.


FOR YOUR INFORMATION!
The “DIGGER” Winch Tree and Stump Pul I »er is a patented machine spe-
cially designed to enable the farmer to clear his land in a quicker and more
profitable way. Its great power makes it possible for him to uproot trees
and stumps in a few minutes, which would otherwise take hours to dig out.
Thousands of these machines are in successful use throughout the Common-
wealth, New Zealand, Africa, the Straits Settlements, England and other
parts of the world, and all men knowing the machine agree that land clearing
with the “DIGGER” Winch can be done much more readily and cheaply than
by the old-fashioned slow methods hitherto in use. Attention is directed to
the opinions of satisfied users published in this booklet.
In the dim and distant past, the Ancients were content to cultivate their
land with the crudest of implements, the use of which to-day would court
derision and lead to bankruptcy.
The present-day successful farmer has made vast progress in all his
methods; nevertheless in the matter of clearing land there are still thousands
of men delaying their success by wasting their time and energies in slowly
and laboriously digging out trees and stumps just as the ancients were com-
pelled to do.
The purpose of this booklet is to show the man who desires success on
the land that it is possible for him to improve his methods of clearing, and
so enable him to bring his holding into cultivation in one season profitably,
instead of having to waste years of his life over the work.
As cleared land is the basis upon which a farmer’s success or failure
depends, the quicker you can clear your land the more assured is your suc-
cess. By clearing your land with the improved “DIGGER” Winch you increase
its value far beyond the cost to you of the work, and, in addition to this gain,
the first year’s crop will return you more than your outlay for clearing.
A wise man informed his sons that he had left them much gold hidden
under the stumps and trees in his land. The boys thereupon promptly
searched for the fortune. They purchased a “DIGGER” Winch and quickly
grubbed out every tree and stump in their eagerness to find the money. In
the next season they realised what their father had meant. The clearing
work they did enabled them to unlock the vast wealth of their land that
had hitherto been hidden from their vision behind a barrier of useless stumps
and trees.
The same opportunity is open to you. Let a “DIGGER” Winch quickly
pull the heavy lid off your storehouse of wealth which lies concealed just
below the surface of your uncleared land.
The idea of pulling trees with a machine originated many years ago. The
idea is good, but the difficulties of designing a successful winch with stability
that would properly function under practical working conditions in the Aus-
tralian bush, caused slow progress to be made in its general adoption by the
Man on the Land.
The practical working conditions encountered when pulling trees in the
bush presents a special set of engineering problems involving stability which
do not exist when hoisting loads as with an ordinary winch. Nevertheless,
owing to the absence of a better principle to work upon, engineers had no
alternative but to make use of an ordinary winch idea as a tree-puller. This
was wrong. Such machines are far too heavy clumsy and difficult to handle
in the bush. They cause much damage to the wire cables, and require a lot
of practical skill in working to get results.
A better understanding of the practical working difficulties will be rea-
lised on reference to the diagrams herewith illustrating the broad principle
as embodied in ordinary types of ti'ee and stump-pulling machines.
In the three diagrams, the letter “A” indicates a cable attached to an
anchorage stump or tree, and hooked to the frame of the machine. The
machine is provided with a drum upon which the Pulling Rope “P” is wound.
This rope. “P,” is attached to the tree or stump that is being pulled. The
lever or Handle “H” is for the purpose of rotating the drum.
A little reflection will make it plain to the reader that if there is a
strain on the rope “P” it must always pull in-to line with the Anchor Rope,
“A” When the rope “P” is just commencing to wind on the drum the
machine will cant over to a certain degree as shown In Figure One. As the
rope continues to wind on the drum, the machine gradually alters its angle
of cant.
In Figure Two, the rope “P” is shown wound to the centre of the drum
and the Anchor Hope “A” pulling In line with it causes the machine to assume
an upright pos-ition.
Up to this stage the rope “P” as it wound on the drum packed Itself
tight against its coils causing a chafing and an interlocking of the strands
of the cable which soon breaks the wires of same, leaving the rope full of
splinters of broken wire, which makes -it unpleasant to handle, besides
weakening the rope. In the position as shown in Figure Two the drum may
take one turn and immediately thereafter a condition as shown in Figure
Three is reached, where it will be seen that the machine becomes again un-
balanced causing the colls of rope to wind wide apart and, if rotation is
continued, the rope will wind over the flanges of the drum.


MADE IN AUSTRALIA BY
QUICK Manufacturing Co.
ENGINEERS
75 Penders Street, Thornbury = Victoria
When it is borne in mind that the load
amounts to many tons, it will be understood
what a difficult job it is to force the rope to
wdnd_ true and evenly on an unstable drum
floating - on ropes. It is quite a different prob-
lem to that of a drum held steadfast on a firm
foundation, such as in elevators, cranes, etc.
It will also be understood why all drurn-tvpe
tree-pullers must be so heavily framed and
braced in order to resist the enormous racking
and distorting effect of the unbalanced stresses.
In addition to the foregoing there is another
Fig. 1.
fault with this style of machine which makes it most difficult to oper-
ate.
hen power is applied to the lever in the various positions as illustrated
the machine will tend to twist around or turn over on the ropes “P” and “A,”
as indicated by the arrows.
It will be observed in Figure One that the direction of twist is reversed
to that in Figure Two owing to the different positions of the lever. This is
the cause of that troublesome dancing about of the machine when the lever
is operated. The machine has no stability. It will not sit steadily on the
ropes and, therefore, becomes very difficult and exhausting for a* man to
apply his power to the lever.
Theie are still further serious faults common to all drum-type tree-
pulleis. One Particular is the resulting damage caused to the wire cable
through allowing it to mount in a second or
third layer on the drum. This fault is due to the
fact that not sufficient drum space or length is
provided for a reasonable amount of haul. If the
drum were made longer it would involve larger
and stiffen framing and the machine would be-
come far too heavy and clumsv to move by man
power. Even with the Inadequate length of drum
as a f present used in tree-pulling machines (just
sufficient for about 8 ft. of rope on the first
Fig. 2.
V l6 excessive weight is most objectionable, amounting to several hun-
dreds ot pounds. Such machines are often referred to as “Man Killers.”
M hen the wire cable is allowed to mount, the machine immediatelv loses
Average, and becomes harder for the man to work. The* heavy
Pulling cable on the topmost layer causes a crushing effect on
lerloußly affecte Its length. S mUCh damage by «. which
Attempts have been made to induce the cable to wind evenly on the drum
by providing grooves upon same. But the ropes will not follow the groove
except when under strain unless held in place by an extra man. Before a
strain can be produced the grooves are already quite filled with the slack of
the rope, and has mounted. From this it will be seen that the grooves do not
give any advantages on the short drum of a tree-pulling machine.
When a tree suddenly yields to the pull all the
ropes momentarily become slack. The natural
spring" of the wire cable immeddately causes the
coils to become loose, disordered and tangled on
the drum. This must be rectified before a sec-
ond strain can be put on the tree to pull it down.
All such mishaps involve delay, annoyance,
trouble and extra work, which has the effect of
.slowing up the job.
All the objectionable features indicated in
the foregoing exist in all other tree-pulling
machines at present on the market and it was
Fig. 3.
with the object of overcoming- all such faults that our new invention was
produced, u e achieved our object by dispensing with the clumsy and heavy
W1 j l ng dru _ m - together with all its inherent faults and absence of stability
and have adopted a unique scientific combination which marks a new and
pronounced advance an the design of modern grubbing machinery.
The registered trade mark “DIGGER.” together with the patent Numbers
and our name and address will be found upon the castings of the genuine
machine, and are a guarantee of quality. Purchasers are warned against
accepting others.


Pulling a gum tree on Mr. Hodson's property, Warrandyte, Vic.
For High Speed and Hard Service the
"DIGGER” WINCH Stands Alone
This illustration shows the machine at work on a 4 ft. green gum tree,
which was pulled out in six minutes; whereas if it was grubbed by hand It
would have taken fully a day to do. It will be observed that the Machine
floats on the ropes about the level of a man’s waist. The operator at the end
of the lever is five feet away from the line of pull, and is in the best position,
for applying his power. Wearisome walking to and fro is avoided, as the man
can throw his full weight into the work without moving his feet from their
set position.
A novel scientific feature of the “DIGGER” Winch is the fact that no rope
accumulates on the machine during pulling, and consequently there is no
trouble with any untrue winding on of said rope.
The pull of the ropes is always through the exact centre of the “DIGGER.”
Winch, and therefore it is always in perfect balance. In other words, there is
no tendency for the machine to want to cant and give trouble through the
ropes winding out of line and mounting over the flanges of the winding drum.
Further, as the power of the lever >is equally applied to each side of the
machine there is no tendency for the machine to twist in such a way as to
force the lever up into the air or down to the ground, or, in other words, to
dance on the ropes and wrestle with the operator.


The "DIGGER” Winch is easily carried.
The simplicity of operation of the “DIGGER” Winch is easy to understand
toy inspection of the opposite illustration. The handle is bolted to the Machine,
and never gives trouble by slipping off, and the machine can be thrown on
■either side to operate at. In fact, it can be worked in any position.
Apart from its great strength and power, the outstanding feature of the
“DIGGER” Winch is its wonderful lightness, and in this respect it has no
rival in the world.
This extraordinary lightness has been attained by making use of a scien-
tific discovery, for which we have secured world-wide patents, which allows
us to dispence with the heavy winding drum and the heavy framing usually
■employed in Winches. The “DIGGER” Winch works on quite a new and dif-
ferent principle to all other grubbing machines.
The wonderful lightness of the “DIGGER” Winch gives it the great ad-
vantage of allowing of its being easily carried without assistance over all ob-
structions where it would be most difficult to handle a heavier machine.
The above illustration is typical of the conditions met with after a few
hours’ work at clearing. The ground scon becomes encumbered with obstruc-
tions in the form of fallen timber, and is full of ruts and holes where the
trees have been grubbed. Imagine trying to wheel a heavy machine about
under these conditions! It can’t be done.
All practical men declare that this feature of lightness is a most impor-
tant factor in making the work of land clearing with a “DIGGER” Winch
much cheaper, easier and quicker, as they do not have to clear tracks through


Pulling trees at Tyabb, Victoria.
the fallen timber to transport, the machine from one anchorage to another, and
in hill country this valuable feature is even more appreciated.
Everybody will admit that a heavy machine quickly exhausts a man and
makes him slow up on the job. No part of the “DIGGER” Winch outfit is too
heavy for easy and quick handling by one man.
The “DIGGER” Winch is not an awkward-shaped or clumsy machine to
handle and carry. This is just as important as lightness.
All the ropes are in convenient lengths, and light to handle. There are
no loose Pins, Hooks Bolts or Shackles to get lost in the grass. Everything
is designed to give the Minimum of Trouble and Labor and the Maximum of
Speed.
The power of the machine is so
great, and it works so easily, that
the man operating it finds it at
first difficult to believe that such
a big strain is being registered
with so little effort. On test pulls
it has been demonstrated that it is
capable of breaking, in a clean,
straight-out pull, a new 2i/4 in.
Steel Wire Cable of the best Brit-
ish make.
As a precaution against break-
ing the rope we always advise that
not more than two men should
operate the “DIGGER” Winch.
When the load becomes too heavy
for two men it is time to cut a
root of the tree being pulled.
The framework of the machine
and snatchblocks is made of steel
accurately machined. All the wear-
ing parts are deeply case-hardened,
and designed to wear for years.
All other metal parts subjected
to strains are carefully heat
treated to toughen the fibres so as
to ensure the maximum strength.
150 feet of high-grade Flexible
Steel Wire Cable -is supplied with
each machine. This cable is the
best British manufacture, and is
Galvanised to preserve it against
rusting, and so ensure that it shall
give long service.
Tree feeling the strain.


The "DIGGER WINCH” is Symbolical of the A.I.F.
It is small in magnitude, but great in power
A few strokes of the lever and out she comes.
Note how steadfast the machine rides. It is always in stable equilibrium.
No root cutting—pulled out in three minutes.


The “DIGGER” Winch Magnifies
Your Force
The illustrations on this and the opposite page should give the reader
some convincing idea of the remarkable combination of lightness and strength
of the “DIGGER” Winch. Its mobility, handiness and lightness can be under-
stood when an infant just three years of age can wheel it about. The boy
is not as tall as a garden fork. In his pretty little baby lisp, he will gravely
inform you that the machine is his “Good-oh Scooter.”
In contrast to the foregoing, the wonderful pulling power and strength
of the machine can be judged by the other illustrations, which show one of
the largest and heaviest objects ever moved on land in Australia.
Owing to the risk of fire the British Imperial Oil Co, at their Bulk Oil
Installation at Newport, near Melbourne, now build their huge storage tanks
many hundreds of yards away from those full of Shell Motor Spirit. One
“DIGGER" Winch with two men on the lever Is then employed to pull these
large and heavy objects into position. These tanks are ;>0 feet high and
250 feet in circumference. They are built of heavy boiler plate and weigh
over 200 tons.
Owing to the huge bulk of the tank in contrast to the diminutive pro-
portions of the “DIGGER” Winch, it is not possible to distinguish the machine
in the photograph below. The wire cable can just about be seen around the
tank. A close-up photograph of the machine is therefore shown on the oppo-
site page with the two men working it.
In comparison to its great pulling power the “DIGGER” Winch is the
smallest and lightest tree-pulling machine in the world, and for that reason
it can be worked much faster and easier than all others.


The “DIGGER” Winch is composed of a few pounds of the best of materials
combined with a little science. It is a toy to look at but a giant for work.


Australian Patent Numbers, 6525/18, 33411/19. Further Patents applied for.
Patented throughout the World.
"DIGGER” STANDARD EQUIPMENT
(1, 2. and o’). —Winch with 5 ft. handle and rope take-up attached; com-
bined weight only GO lbs.
Pull Rope (D). —120 feet high-grade flexible steel cable, 184 inch circum-
ference with Butterfly Swivel (30). and Stop (9) attached.
Anchor Rope (A), 15ft. High Grade Flexible Steel Cable, 2\i inch circum-
ference. with open socket (6) and Steel Hook (5) attached.
Tree Rope (8).—15 feet High-Grade Flexible Steel Cable, 2% inch circum-
ference, with Stop (8), Butterfly Swivel (7), and Hook (4) attached.
(C) and (E), —Snatch Blocks of special design adapted for fitting to
Butterfly Swivels (7) and (10) whezi ropes are in position.
The radius of action of the standard equipment as described above is ap-
proximately 85 feet. This has been found to suit the majority of purchasers
and only in rare instances is more rope requested for ‘working a greater
radius. Extra lengths of rope may be always had at an extra cost. (See op-
posite page.)
SNATCH BLOCK
Patent Application No. 6603/27.
The Snatch Blocks are designed for strength
and lightness and speed in manipulation. The rope
cannot get out of the groove on the sheave, as the
guards effectively guide it in. Therefore no time
is ever lost or the rope ever damaged by it getting
off the sheave.
A simple and quick method of coupling to the
snatch block is provided by the Butterfly Swivel
and this swivel allows you to take out any twist
in the ropes without having to uncouple every-
thing:.
An Annular oil cavity is cut in the bore of the
Sheave, and a special case-hardened Steel Bush is
provided to take all the wear of this bearing. This
can be cheaply replaced when worn.


IMPROVED HOOK
In the ordinary style of hook many
of the wires usually break just where
the rope enters the hook through the
sharpness of the bend when placed
around anything of small diameter.
Our special hook is designed with
the object of avoiding this defect.
Much of the bend is in the hook, and
the web at the side holds the hook sufficiently away from the tree to allow
of the rope entering the socket of the hook without a sharp set in the rope.
The instruction diagram clearly illustrates this.
Special Fittings
The wire rope fittings sup-
plied with the “DIGGER”
Winch can be attached with-
out the aid of special tools.
After first cutting out about
four (4) inches of the central
hemp core, insert the wire
rope into the taper socket of
the fitting. The taper wedge, composed of an alloy of soft metals, is now
inserted in the middle of the wires, and the rope is pulled back into the
tapered socket of the fitting. The wedge should be inserted until it is em-
bedded about one (1) inch below the ends of the wires. The wires and the
wedge are then pulled in by setting the machine up and pulling a load. Under
the load the wires will pull in about one inch, carrying the taper wedge with
them. The wedge conforms to the shape of its wire bed, and finally holds the
rope securely.
Extra Tree Ropes
If a greater reach is required than is
provided fop by the Standard Equipment, we
supply extra Tree ropes cut to any length
required, fitted with a hook on one end.
The other end is provided with a big link,
together with a butterfly swivel. The big
link allows of coupling to the hook of the
standard tret.- rope and the butterfly swivel
allows of coupling to the
standard snatch block.
To do this the bag link is
just slipped along the
rope as Illustrated. It
will be seen that these
fittings permit of any
number of tree ropes be-
ing coupled together.
Also, each of them can be
coupled to the snatcn
block. We recommend
30 ft. as a convenient
length for an extra tree
rope. This, in conjunc-
tion with the standard
13 ft. tree rope, allows
the convenience of 3
combinations of
rope to be marie—i.e., 1.3
ft., 30 ft. and 43 ft.
The Scrub Sling
When pulling very small stuff
we recommend as an extra the
Scrub Sling, as illustrated herewith.
30 feet is the usual length re-
quested.


Regarding Wire Rope
When wire rope is made to work on the winding drum of the ordinary
tree-puller damage to the ropes results very soon. Tne first evidence of this
uamage is usually indicated by the operator having- his hands torn by the
wire splinters on the rope. These splinters are broken wire—-every time a.
wire breaks the strength of the rope is reduced.
The first cause of broken wires in the rope is usually the result of the
inter-locking action of the strands when winding in coils against each other
upon the winding drum. The second cause of broken wires is the result of
allowing the rope to mount and wind upon Itself. The top layer of wire rope
being under heavy strain crushes and distorts the rope of the bottom layer.
The cruel evidence of this is a flattened rope with many broken wires.
After about one week of hard work under the above conditions, the
strength of the rope is gone. It is therefore the practice with rival machines
to use rope very much heavier than is necessary, in order to allow for the
considerable reduction in strength which results from the rough treatment on
the drum that the rope gets in practical tree-pulling work.
A wire rope with broken wires and splinters cannot be handled by the
operator with the same speed and confidence that he could handle a per-
fectly sound rope.
The “DIGGER” Winch is so designed that the above-mentioned causes of
damage to the rope are effectively overcome. We dispense with the winding
drum, which Is the cause of all the trouble. In place of the winding drum, the
“DIGGER” Winch is provided with a ratchet pulley, upon which only one-
half turn of rope can be accommodated. This ratchet pulley is provided with
a soi't metai liner of lead for the wire rope to work upon. The lead conforms
to the true shape of the rope, thus supporting it In a perfectly ideal manner,
at the same time taking all the wear, and thus preserving the strength and
life of t.he rope. The “DIGGER” Winch can therefore be equipped with a
very much lighter rope, and maintain its full working strength for years in
practical tree-pulling work.
The perfectly sound rope, preserved by the lead liner of the “DIGGER”
Winch, can always be handled by the operator with much greater speed and
confidence than is possible with the otherwise damaged rope usually met with
on rival tree-pulling machines.
The lead liner eventually wears out. but it can easily be renewed in the
bush. Instructions for renewing the lead liner are given and Illustrated
hereu ndcr.
Directions for Relining the
Ratchet Wheel
A leather strap is included with the equipment
supplied with every machine sold.
First remove all old lead and dirt remaining’ in
the groove. Place leather strap around the groove,
passing the end of the said strap through the wire
loop in the other end, g-ently pulling the strap taut,
eare being taken to see that the strap lies evenly
in the groove round the ratchet wheel. It will now
be observed that there is a space of about % in.
between the strap and the bottom of the groove.
Melt about l 1 lbs. of lead, in a jam tin (or other
suitable vessel) over an open fire. hour lead
through loop in the strap as rapidly as possible
until the space round the drum is quite full. Then
remove strap. If this operation has been properly
performed a complete and even ring' of lead will
be on the wheel. The machine is now ready for
work. The leather strap can be used repeatedly.
The lead liner usually wears long enough to clear
more than 10 acres. Some men have cleared 100
acres without re-leading the machine.


the groove of the Take-up as illus-
trated. Lead the tail end of the ins'dc
coil of rope out under the lug (G) as
shown. Now pull on tail end of inside
coil of rope so that both coils sit
snugly in between the flanges ol the
groo v e.
The illustration shows the ropes
coiled loosely on the device to explain
its working. In practice the rope sits
tight down between the flanges of the
groove.
Seventh. — Tighten up all the slack-
ness in the ropes by gripping the Rope
(D) by both hands at the position
(T) in diagram, and pulling strongly
in the direction indicated by the ar-
row. It is important in this operation
that the ropes be made as tight as pos-
sible by hand before commencing to
work the lever of the machine, particu-
larly if the rope is too greasy and in-
clined to slip when new.
Eighth.. —Operate Handle (2) back-
wards and forwards which wall cause
Pulley (E) to travel towards Pulley
(C) and a great strain will be produced
and the tree or stump uprooted.
CAUTION. —Local Droceedings will be taken against anyone using this layout of
Ropes and Pulleys except with the GENUINE "DIGGER" WINCH. Patent No.
6525/18.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR WORKING
Sixth. —The Take-up. Lead the
Pulling Rope (D) under the Jug (F).
then makr two loose coils, one in-
side the other, and place it around
block, and as indicated by the ar-
rows; it is first lead around pul-
ley (O) around the ratchet wheel,
and then around pulley (E) and
back to the Take-up (3) on Winch.
Fifth. —At this stage the Pawls
(P) should be unhooked from (II)
and allowed to eng'age the ratchet
teeth, and the Pulley (E) should be
as near to Take-up (3) as possible.
First. — Hi ft the two pawls (P.P.) clear
of the ratchet teeth of the Winch and se-
cure them by the two Pawl-Hooks (H.H.).
This leaves the ratchet wheel free for ad-
justing' the ropes.
Second. —Hook the Anchor Rope “A” by
means of the hook (, r >) low down on the
tree or stump that is to act as the anchor-
age, care being taken that the rope “A”
leads straight on to the side of the stump,
as shown in the diagram (this avoids a
damaging' set or bend in the rope wln-re
hook catches it.) The open socket (G) on
the other end of Anchor rope is placed be-
tween the frame of machine and
pin (S) inserted.
Third. — Hook Tree Rope (13)
as high as possible by moans of
hook (4) on tree or stump that
is to be pulled, care being taken
that the rope (B) leads straight
on to the side of the tree or
stump as shown in the diagram
(this avoids a damaging set or
bend in the rope where hook
catches it). Attach rope (B) to
one of the snatch blocks by
means of Butterfly Swivel (7).
Fourth. — By means of Butter-
fly Swivel (10) the Rope (D) is
attached to the other snatch


QUICK Manufacturing Co.
75 Penders Street, Thornbury - Victoria
HORSE POWER
For light and faster pulling work, a horse may be used with the
“DIGGER” Winch equipment. His force will be multiplied four times by
arranging for him to pull on the tail end of the pulling rope (D) instead of
attaching it to the take-up.
Before commencing the pull in this case, the Snatch Block (E) must be
close to Snatch Block (C), just the reverse of that when working the machine
by man power.
REVERSE METHOD OF USING "DIGGER" WINCH.
Many men use the “DIGGER” Winch in the manner shown in the diagram.
This enables the operator to be quite close to his work and saves a great deal
of time and exertion in walking up and down the length of the cables. The
machine is quite light and easy to move to the next slump to be pulled.
WARNING !
The registered trade mark “DIGGER,” together with the Patent Numbers
8525/18 13,411/19, will be found plainly east upon the Hope Take-up, also upon
the wheel and pulleys of the machines we manufacture. Purchasers are
warned against accepting other machines and are advised to purchase only
through our Authorised Agents or Direct from us.
We have been compelled to Issue this warning in order to protect buyers
as well as the good reputation of the Genuine “DIGGER” Winch, as many
farmers have recently complained to us that they have been deceived into
buying machines which are imitation Digger Winches. These Imitation
machines have proved most unsatisfactory and dangerous. They can be
recognised by the absence of the Trade Mark and Patent Numbers being cast
upon the castings of the machine and pulleys.
We shall take legal proceedings against all those whom w<- have proof
of having infringed our patents or illegally made use of our Trade Mark.
GUARANTEE.
We GUARANTEE the “DIGGER” WINCH for a period of Twelve Months
against any break of parts due to defective material which, if returned to us
freight paid, we will replace free of charge.
This Guarantee does not apply to the Ropes, which we do not manufac-
ture. The rope is supplied to us by one of the best British manufacturers,
and is constructed in accordance with the standards of the BRITISH
ADMIRALTY.
TESTIMONIALS.
We believe that the opinion of the practical user of a machine is more
convincing than all the claims of the manufacturer. We have received thou-
sands of TESTIMONIALS from many parts of the WORLD, but submit just
a few from different parts of AUSTRALASIA. Perhaps you may know some
of the writers.


TESTIMONIALS FROM GIPPSLAND
Where the Big Victorian Timber Grows
The Winch is giving- the greatest satisfaction, being a splendid machine,
not only for pulling trees but for shifting big logs and stumps outof the way.
We are pulling' big red gum trees with the little “DIGGER” W inch. It js
getting a great advertisement where we are working- on the Bairnsdale to
►Sale Road.
(Signed) H. J. CAHTLEDIIE Contractor, Ingle St., Sale, Victoria.
Dear Sirs —T am thoroughly satisfied with the machine. It is a great
boon to a man on a rough place, for the tree she will not pull It is not worth
while taking down. But up to the present T have pulled everything from G in.
to 4 ft. G in., green and dry. I might inform you that I know where to place
machines for next winter. " 1 don’t like recommending anything unless 1 prove
it genuine. I sent the Roads Board overseer a fortnig-ht ago for one, and 1
think you need not fear welfare for your patent in this district. Now I
understand it properly, and know its stability, I would only be too glad to
recommend, as well as instruct and show any person in need of a machine.
(Signed) A. FOSTER, Sea View Inverloch, Victoria.
Dear Sirs, —Just a line to let you know how the “DIGGER” is doing with
me. I am more than satisfied with it. No doubt it is a marvellous machine.
1 can safely say it is the best for this district. I have pulled box stumps 214
feet with it and roiled a log 29 feet in circumference and ;.i0 feet long up the
side of a hill 1 in e. The machine Is very easy to work and very light to
handle.
(Signed) R. GRANGE, Carrajung South, South Gippsland, Vic.
Dear Sirs. —As 1 promised when T bought one of your "DIGGER” Winches
1 would after a good trial, let you know if I was satisfied with it.
Well, I can tell you that IT HAS PAID FOR ISELF LONG AGO. People
who have seen it for the first time considered it a toy. till I showed them the
slumps I had pulled out, and they were astonished that the machine is so
powerful. Mv two lads, one 18 and the other 17, work it, and I am more than
satisfied w-ith it.
(Signed) R. BUTLER. Somme Farm, Longwarry, Victoria.
The machine is working well. —R. S. NAPIER, Tennyson Street, Orbost,
Victoria.
I find the “DIGGER” Winch up to expectation.—S. C. NIPPE, Glengarry,
Victoria.
Re “DIGGER” Winch, which I got from you some months ago. lam more
than pleased with it; it is a splendid turn-out after using other machines. I
am sorry that I did not know of your machine before, as it would have saved
us a lot of time and labor. There is no hard work with a “DIGGER.” Al-
though the ground is now considered really too dry here for pulling, the
machine makes no bones about it.
(Signed) R. DOWTON, McArthur Street, Sale, Victoria.


Further Testimonials from Victoria
I Pulled 80 Large Green Trees a day
Dear Sirs.—It might interest vou to know that I am able to accomplish
more work with the “DIGGER” WINCH single-handed than formerly required
the services of two men working with a well-known tree-pulling machine of
another make. I have alreadv cleared a considerable area of heavily timbered
land on a steep hillside with the little “DIGGER” WINCH 1 purchased from
you some time ago. The machine is working - well and I am more than satis-
fied with it. 1 am using a casting line for pulling big limber. I fastened on
to a swamp gum sound right through; the ground was very hard, and the
tree broke off six feet from the ground. It was eighteen inches in diameter
at the break. (Some power that!) I have pulled eighty (80) large green
trees a day with it.
(Signed) P. HODSON. Warrandyte. Victoria.
Green gum tree grubbed without any root cutting by Mr. O. Norman, of Epsom.
We have pleasure in adding- our testimony in reg'ard to the value of the
“DIGdRR" Winch for tree and stump grubbing - .
We are professional tree removal contractors with a lifelong - experience
of the work. We have owned and used every make of grubbing - machine on
the market. Ft is our business policy to always have the most up-to-date and
best plant procurable, as we must be capable of undertaking any class of
work at a competitive price.
A few years ago we added one “DIGGER” Winch to our plant. We
quickly realised that it paid us much better than any other machine we had.
We thereupon sold all our other machines and replaced them with “DIGGER”
Winches.
After some years of work with the “DIGGER” Winch we are satisfied
that it has many advantages over others.
(Signed) T. SNEYD & SON, 18 Bidy Street, Windsor. Victoria.
You may make any use of my name and letter that you wish, as the
machine is something really good. The more I use the “DIGGER” Winch the
better I like it. I have pulled some of the largest trees in this district with
it. The machine is just what is required in a rough place like this, as other
methods at clearing are too slow and costly.
(Signed) G. E. FORD. Port Campbell. Victoria.
I had a trial of the “DIGGER” Winch, and was thoroughly satisfied with
it. It is easy to handle, easy to rig and its power is undoubted.
(Signed) J. TANNER. Mount Egerton. Victoria.


Dear Sirs —You can use mv name in any way you like in connection with
vour patent “DIGGER” WINCH Grubbing Machine, as 1 am sure there was
never anvthing so good put on the market. 1 am more than pleased with the
machine/ It is so easily handled, and if I were not working it myself 1 would
never have believed it capable of shifting the stuff that it will. Me are hav-
ing a very dry time up here, and the green stumps I am pulling are not Jess
than 18 inches, and a good many are over 2 feet in diameter. They are not
more than 3 feet high, so vou can understand from this that the leverage is
mighty small, yet the “DIGGER” Grubber takes out more of these stumps
in a dav than seven men and a horse.
(Signed) A. C. MASON, Maude Street. Shepparton, Victoria.
Dear Sirs, —We are more than satisfied w r ith the “DIGGER” Winch lor
tree-pulling and stump-grubbing. We have used other makes of tree-pullers,
but yours is far ahead of them. One man easily operates a “DIGGER. Its
lightness and portability from one anchorage to another is a great factor >in
its favor, and above all other grubbing winches we have tried. Getting the
slack in quickly and easily, the “DIGGER” is the foremost. Those who use
tree-pullers know w'hat getting the slack up means after hooking to a tree.
At present we are using a “DIGGER” in hard, dry ground successfully. A
■neighbour has tried two makes of tree-pullers, and after picking a tree for a
test walked away disgusted with his own machines when the little “DIGGER”
brought the tree down in six minutes from time of hooking to anchor. W e
advise anyone who has timber to grub to get a “DIGGER” Winch. The ma-
chine is not a man killer while on the lever or when moving about from one
anchorage to another.
(Signed) BARETTE & GARDNER, Zanderdale, via Byrneside, \ ic.
For Erecting
Preston, Victoria.
Dear Sirs,
1 enclose photograph showing our
large new Cupola Furnace weighing
€ tons, being erected. A “Digger”
Winch was used to do this job.
A boy 13 years of age worked the
"“Digger” Winch, and pulled the
Furnace steadily into position with-
cut an effort.
The little Winch can certainly de-
velop an enormous force.
Yours faithfully,
A. McLAREN, Ironfounder.
Machinery erecting.
We are pleased to add our testimonial to your already long- list as to the
capabilities of the “DIGGER” WINCH, which is a great boon to anyone want-
ing to clear land of BIG TIMBER. We certify that large trees, green or dry,
can be uprooted with little exertion in a very short time by ONE MAN with
the “DIGGER” WINCH.
(Signed) E. M. PRICE & SON, Farmers. Eversley, Victoria.
Dear Sirs, —I desire to inform you that the “DIGGER” WINCH I pur-
chased from you a few months ago has been a highly profitable investment
for me. 1 am only able to use it at week ends on my property at Kinglake,
nevertheless I have cleared 14 acres in less time and with less exertion than
it would have taken me to have cleared two acres by hand. On a speed test
my two lads, working under my directions have pulled as many as 30 stumps
in one hour. If I thought I could not replace the machine I would not accept
£l5O for it. In my opinion, if a man with land to clear has not the available
cash to purchase a “DIGGER” WINCH, it would certainly pay him to borrow
it. even at a big interest, as the machine will repay him in the first month,
.and after that it will net him handsome profits.
(Signed) H. JACKSON, cr. High and Raglan Sts., Preston. Vic.


I have been using the “DIGGER” Gyubber which I purchased from youi
nearly three years ago. and I am more than pleased with the amount of work
I can do with same. I can honestly say that my boy can pull any tree on
the place with the machine, green or dry. and the size does not count. I have
no fault to find with the “DIGGER,” as it is just a perfect machine for tree-
pulling.
(Signed) J. W. ADAMS, Killawarra, via Vic.
I purchased one of your “DIG-
GER” Winches through the local
agent. It is quite satisfactory, be-
ing- very easily moved about, which,
is a great thing to be considered,,
since I have to work unassisted. I
am very pleased with the W r inch. I
have hauled out trees four feet in.
diameter. Of course I cut the sur-
face roots; but the saving in time,
temper and labor in looking for the
elusive tap root is enormous. It
easily reduces the time taken by
one .half, probably considerably
more.
(Signed) R. B. STOCKS,
Cranbourne, Victoria..
Stump pulling at Cranbourne.
After having the “DIGGER” Winch in working for some time I am.
pleased to say that I am very satisfied with it. Being so light and easy to-
handle 1 can use it by myself for pulling. . I have pulled a number of trees
from 2 feet to feet through. If anyone in this district wishes to purchase
a “DIGGER” Winch, and would like to see it working, I would be pleased to-
show them if you refer them to me.
(Signed) A. L. WEBB, Lyndhurst, Victoria.
After three months’ trial of the “DIGGER” Wanch Tree and Stump Grub-
bing Machine 1 desire to inform you that it comes up to every expectation. I
have been using it continually in green timber 3 ft. in diameter, and it has.
never yet failed to answer every test that has been put upon it. ■
(Signed) F. W. BUDDEN, “The Homestead,” Wandin, Victoria.
We are highly pleased with the machine, and wonder at the immense-
strength that it develops in so quick a time and can honestly say that it com-
pletely outclasses the other machine we were using.
; (Signed) MRS. E. FINCH & SON. Fenton’s Creek, via Wedderburn, Vic..
NEW ZEALAND REPORTS
1 have much pleasure in informing- you that I purchased one of your
“DIGGER” WINCH Stump and Tree-Pulling Machines, and after 6 months’
work with the machine I can say with the greatest confidence that it is the
most wonderful machine for its weight that I have ever seen, and I have seen
nearly every other make at work; and this one to my idea, stands out on its-
own. You may make what use you like of this.
(Signed) WILLIAM INGLEY, Farmer,
Raetihi Hoad, Okahune, via Wellington, N.Z.
I have pleasure in reporting successful results with the “DIGGER”
Winch in the Mahoe district, Taranaki, where I have put the machine to some-
very severe tests on rata and rimu stumps and all wh» have seen the-
“DIGGER” Winch at work are satisfied with it.
(Signed) G. H. EMMET, Mt. Smart Rd., Onehunga, N.Z.


TESTIMONIALS
FROM THE MALLEE
Average Earnings over Six Months, £16 per week
Dear Sirs. —The Wire Hope Model “DIGGER” Winch with which you fur-
nished me just on six months ago, is still doing excellent service. It h_as been
working continuously all the time, and has pulled the timber on acres.
The Umber has been mallee bellar, and sandalwood. Very heavy bellar and
mallee was pulled easily and cleanly. This timber was a very severe test for
any make of machine.
The quality and quantity of the timber pulled by me with the “DIGGER”
Winch may best be judged by the prices given for same, which are as follows:
(a) 20 acres at £5 per acre; (b) 10 acres at £7 per acre; (c) 25 acres at £lO
per acre. This gives a total of £420 already earned in six months without a
breakage.
I have just secured a fresh contract with the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission of 40 acres at £lO per acre.
In my opinion the “DIGGER” stands alone for Speed, Strength and
Mobility, and fully justifies its name in all that -is claimed for it.
(Signed) M. G. NIPPE, Redcllffs, Victoria.
I am keeping the “DIGGER” Winch forwarded to me. It is very satis-
factory. I will give you a testimonial later on, if required.
(Signed) J. P. ELWOOD, Duddo Wells, via Gowkngie. Victoria.
The machine is going good. You can refer anyone to us for our personal
opinion. A good few have come from the Fruit Settlement to see it. Every-
one is satisfied that it beats other larger machines. There is one man work-
ing near us with a big machine of another make, but he can’t do much with it.
There are three of us on this job at Tooleybuc, N.S.W.. and we have al-
ready cleared 80 chains of road, one chain wide, also burned everything up.
We can truthfully say that the “DIGGER” Winch Is all that you claim and
represent it to be.
The ground here is very hard now, as there has been no rain for eight
months. This job is thick malle and large pines.
GAVIN BROWN. JOHN LAWES, G. R. BROWN, Contractors,
Swan Hill, Victoria.
The “DIGGER” Winch which I purchased from you a lew months ago has
given me the greatest satisfaction. The timber which I have been pulling
was an excellent test for any machine. Everyone who saw me working mar-
velled at the speed and power which could be developed by the Digger Winch.
(Signed) GEO. BULL, Red Cliffs. Victoria.
TESTIMONIALS FROM TASMANIA
I am enclosing- a photograph of
one of the big stumps which I pulled
with the “DIGGER” Winch. This
stump was pulled without any roots
being cut or the removal of any
earth from same. The size of the
stump is 5 ft. in diameter, and when
out the roots projected 9 ft. high.
WALTER KOHL.
Pyengana, Tasmania.
T received the “DIGGER” Winch in good order, and am finding- it most
useful _
(Signed) D. S. McEACHRAN, Upper Calder, Via Wynyard, Tas.


TESTIMONIALS FROM N.S.W.
The “DIGGER” Winch is doing- splendid work. It is an excellent and
powerful winch, and does all its makers represent it to. Any person who
wishes to see it at work can come here and satisfy himself by notifying- me
in advance. There is a big- future ahead for it.
(Signed) FRED. ST. LEDGER, Kenilworth, Bowral, N.S.AV.
Dear Sirs, —We received the “DIGGER” Winch safely, and it has given
us the greatest satisfaction, and has proved itself to be everything that it is
claimed to be. In fact, we would not think of clearing land without one
again. Ton can use this as a reference if you please, and anyone wanting any
Information about the “DIGGER” Winch will only require to write us.
(Signed) PECK BROS.,
Kanowna Nurseries, Narara, via Gosford, N.S.W.
Dear Sirs, —I have just pulled three acres of timber with my "DIGGER”
Winch. The more I use it the better I like it. I have pulled trees with at on
my own. and people that have watched could feel the roots breaking in the
ground fully eight feet from the butt. When 1 first saw the “DIGGER”
Winch I could not believe the thing capable of doing the great work that it
does, but I have .no fear or doubt now, and I would never be without one.
(Signed) H. S. CADWELL, Kenthurst. N.S.W.
At first sight the “DIGGER” Winch was all-round condemned as a toy.
I found it a handy sort of toy, as it pulled out everything 1 hooked it on to,
so it will do me.
(Signed) AMBROSE EGAN, “Tyrell.” Miandetta, via Tottenham, N.S.W.
1 have had one of your machines for three years. I have tested it well.
If you would like a testimonial I would give one willingly.
(Signed) G. A. GLEN, Wagga Road, Coolamon, N.S.W.
Up to the present the “DIGGER” Winch justifies its name.
(Signed) W. SOMERVIBBE, Ebley St., Waverley, N.S.AV.
I am pleased with the “DIGGER” AVinch. —E. KIRKEY, Wyee, N.S.W.
I bought a “DIGGER” Winch from you some years ago, and I have done
some wonderful pulls with it.
(Signed) LEWIS McIVER, Mt. Neryla. Moss Vale, N.S.W.
I received machine 0.K.. and have given it a very fair trial.
(Signed) A. GHERSI, Wamberal, via Gosford, N.S.W.
I have been using your “DIGGER” AVinch. and find it an excellent
machine.
(Signed) 1.. MAC SMITH. Boree Cabonne, Bornenore, N.S.W.
I have pleasure in acknowledging receipt of the “DIGGER” Winch
machine, and beg to state that it is proving very satisfactory. Many of my
friends have come along to see it working. There is no doubt the machine is
a great saving both in time and labor, and I am very pleased with the result.
(Signed) CHARLES T. FLACK, Orchard Hd., Beecroft, N.S.W.
You are quite at liberty to use my name as a recommendation for the
“DIGGER” Winch, as 1 am very pleased Avith the amount of work I can do
with mine.
(Signed) HARRY LOVELL. Oakdale, via Camden, N.S.AV.


One of the trees pulled on the property of Mr. Slaney, of Mooroodue.
1 am pleased to say that the machine is doing 1 her work well. She is a
little bonza, and I know it too well when I have a tree to grub, as occasion-
ally happens, when too far away to find an anchorage. Onr class of grubbing
is a very severe test on a machine, as the stuff has all been rung, has suck-
ered up again, having a solid root system, and the branches (suckers) not
being strong enough to hold against the roots. Therefore 1 have to take the
tree very low down, seldom being able to get more than 18 inches off the
ground, and frequently the anchor gives before the tree. BUT THEY ALL*
COME OUT. The whole thing is so simple. 1 had everything at my finger-
tips in no time.
I really think that once two or three machines are at work there should
be a good sale for them here, as they are decidedly the thing, and nearly
everyone has more or less use for them. The work that mine is doing at pre-
sent -is advertisement enough for anything. Stumps burnt level with the
ground, and which would otherwise take quite a lot of firing, are yanked out
by the roots, and when out that way one is never afraid of ever hitting them
with a plough or other implement. In other words, when they are out of
the ground I know where they are. I have now been over one hundred acres
and it’s still going strong.
I went to see a r-ival machine at work to-day. It is worked by a horse,
I think so much of my “DIGGER” Winch that I wouldn't swap. 1 would back
myself to get over more country in a day than he can with his.
(Signed) D. J. GRANT. Erigolia, N.S.W.
The “DIGGER” Winch came to hand safely. It is entirely satisfactory,
and does the work which the catalogue says it will.
(Signed) GORDON E. CROSS, Gosford, N.S.W.
The “DIGGER” Winch arrived in good order. I have given it a good
trial, and it works very well.
(Signed) THOMAS H. HEATHWOOD. Lavlngton, via Albury, N.S.W.
Just a line to inform you that I received the “DIGGER” Winch and am
/ery much satisfied with it. I have pulled trees down over 18 Inches through,
and never touched a root. I pulled them out without any trouble, leaving a
hole over 2 feet deep in the ground.
(Signed) A. M. SPENCER. Molong, N.S.W.


TESTIMONIALS FROM QUEENSLAND
1 am more than satisfied with the “DIGGER” WINCH. 1 gave a display
its capabilities to a number of other settlers here, and four of them are
thinking- of getting one each. At the trial I fastened on to a tree fully 3 feet
through, and in nine minutes It was lying- on the ground.
Another thing, the machine is the best we have tried for root running.
In this class of work it enables a man to accomplish more work in one day
than three men in three days. There is room for forty or more of these
winches up here if settlers only knew the value of them.
(Signed) W. WEBBER Block 176, Soldiers’ Settlement.
Dear Sirs, — \ our “DIGGER” Winch to hand. We have given it an excep-
tional trial, which proved more than satisfactorv. The clearers up here were
at first sceptical regarding the pulling strength of the Winch, but after
hooking it on to an old giant stump, the way the winch pulled it out was
really wonderful.
(Signed) PAUL ELLWOOD, Stanthorpe, Queensland.
We have the best tree-pulling machine in the district in the “DIGGER”
WINCH. To-day we pulled in short time a ti-tree three feet in diameter,
also a Morton Bay 3 ft. 8 in. In diameter. The ti-tree had sixteen roots, the
smallest of which was about four inches thick and the largest about sixteen
inches. Both were green trees.
I may mention that a number of farmers have been around to see the
“DIGGER” at work, and all of them have a good word for it, and I am sure
you will be doing more business here in the near future.
(Signed) STEWART RANSOM, Minchans, Ayr Line, Qld.
We have given the “WINCH” every kind of job here during the last few
months, and put it to some pretty severe tests, and I must say I am very
pleased with it indeed; it has been an enormous help to me. I don’t know
what I should have done without it. I am pulling nearly all green timber,
with some pretty big stuff among it, and the winch has certainly more than
halved our work. In the very hard and dry soil we have here it is necessary
to give it some assistance and we make a practice of cutting and removing
all roots on the side of the tree next to the winch, and with the bigger trees,
digging the soil out to a depth of 18 inches or 2 feet, which makes a clear
way for the tree to come forward into when we start pulling. As a rule we
do not need to do more except roll a log in front for the tree to pitch over,
thus tearing all roots clear. We find that when a good-sized log or stump
is not quite handy, laying a stick, say six inches through across two others
has an equally satisfactory result, and can be easily and quicklv done. As
one works with the “DIGGER” WINCH one picks up various little devices
for time and labor-saving until things go automatically. My winch shows
little signs of the wear and tear it has had to endure. I would certainly
recommend anyone with timber to clear to invest in a “DIGGER” "WINCH.
(Signed) T. H. LTVESAT, Moggill, via Indooroopilly, Qld.
Everything was very satisfactory inasmuch as the Winch proved to be
very powerful, and m my opinion is the best I have ever tried and in mv long
career in the bush I have used five different machines for tree-pulling so I
know something of the subject.
(Signed) ALEX. GORDON. Mt. Gravatt, Qld.
with f6et ' and S '° t g °° d results - l am very pleased
(Signed) A. BRIDIKIN, Wamuran, Qld.
I make bold to state that in my opinion there is nothing as good on the
market at the present, and 1 am well satisfied. The “DIGGER” Winch is such
a radical departure from all other machines. The simplicity of design and
lightness of build make it very easy to get on with. I had her working in
ten minutes after unrolling it.
I have pulled eight acres with my “DIGGER” Winch, and there was some
very ugly stuff to deal with, but what would not come out by the roots if I
kept on pulling, the machine would snap like a carrot.
(Signed) W. N. SANDERSON, Beverley. Qld.


TESTIMONIALS FROM W.A.
Dear Sirs. —We have this day. November 11th 1 920 given a trial on Mr.
■S. F. Morrell’s property at Burges Siding -in the Eastern Districts, with the
Wire Rope Type “DIGGER” WINCH. Before going into details we would like
to state that the ground, owing to the hot and dry weather experienced during
the last two months, was as hard as rock, being unable to get the point of
-a pick in. Tree No. I.—Diameter 18 inches. Green York Gum. the toughest
and hardest timber possible to get in this country. This was pulled down in
ten minutes, breaking the tree off level with the ground. Tree No. 2. —Dia-
meter 2 feet. G inches. This took a longer time, but was pulled out bv the
roots, bringing with it big boulders, earth and clods. Tree No. 3.—Dead
White Gum, 2 feet diameter, no top; came easily. Tree No. 4. Diameter 1j
inches, broke off 2 feet G inches from the ground. We also pulled several
others. We wish to state that our next trial will be probablv after the rains
•commence, but we are anxious to see what the winch would do under the
-above conditions. Those present were surprised at the results, and we
herewith enclose a copy of signed testimonials by prominent farmers and
Road Board secretaries in the district, all satisfied, including ourselves.
(Signed) WILLIAM SANDOVER & CO., Hay St.. Perth, W.A.
Burges Siding, W.A., Nov. 11th, 1920.
We the undersigned, were present at a demonstration held by William
handover & Co. on the property of Mr. S. P. Morrell, Burges Siding, of the
“DIGGER” WINCH Tree-Pulling Machine, and at the above trial fully agreed
that it is the best one-man tree-puller invented. It will answer all reason-
able tests, and will handle 2 feet to 2 feet 6 inch trees with marvellous
rapidity. This new invention is built on scientific lines, and is a marvel of
lightness and power. Mr. C. Endersby, being an old clearing contractor and
farmer, stated it is the best and handiest machine he has seen.
(Signed) C. ENDERSBY, W. ENDERSBY, A. L. COOK, J. G. COOK, A. G.
COOK, S. CRAWFORD, A. GRIGSON, J. E. SPARKER, S. P.
MORRELL, J. ENDERSBY, E. PEACOCK, H. C. GENTLE, G.
ENDERSBY, M. S. GENTLE, N. CRAWFORD.
Re the “DIGGER” Winch, I may say that I am really pleased with it,
and consider it money well spent. I have pulled trees —gums—out of the
solid clay up to 4 ft. in diameter. A 3 ft. thick stick is no trouble to it. It is
•everything it is claimed to be.
(Signed) S. GOWLAND, Hamel, W.A.
I am very pleased with the “DIGGER.” It is giving me every satisfac-
tion. and I find it a most satisfactory tree-puller for trees up to 3 feet in
•diameter.
(Signed) J. INGLISS, Boyup Brook, W.A.
I have found the “DIGGER” WINCH very good for the pulling of large
trees up to 3 feet in diameter. 1 have had a very interesting snapshot taken of
the work I am doing with the Winch, and when they are printed I will send
one along. Nearly every day I have had persons watching operations, and I
believe it would be possible to sell several in this district by giving a demon-
stration.
(Signed) M. A. BUTTERLY, Boyup Brook, W.A.
The “DIGGER” WINCH honestly is one of the finest tree-pulling machines
that 1 have ever seen. She pulled everything we hooked her to.
(Signed) J. B. SHARPE, Hamel Farm, Houndain, W.A.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The little “DIGGER” "Winch is indispensable on my property. It plays
havoc with the trees. It is a little wonder as a time and labor-saver.
(Signed) H. BOHME, Balhannah, S.A.


MADE IN AUSTRALIA BY .
QUICK Manufacturing Co.
ENGINEERS
75 PENDERS STREET, THORNBURY, VICTORIA
Telephone Northcote 490
The “Digger” Winch is used extensively by
The Federal and State Governments
OFFICIAL APPROVAL.
Queensland Forest Service, Forests Office, Brisbane. Qld.
Our representative, Mr. Weatherhead, at Benarkin, reports favourably on
the “DIGGER” WINCH supplied to him.
(Signed) E. H. T. SWAIN, Director of Forests.
FURTHER OFFICIAL APPROVAL.
North Wonthaggi, Victoria.
I received the “DIGGEft” WINCH Tree and Stump Pulling Machine all
right, and in good order. I am well satisfied with it. 1 find it does its work
very satisfactorily.
(Signed) INSPECTOR W. DODMAIDE (Country Roads Board).
PRESS REPORT.
Interesting Tree Pulling Demonstration
Christmas Hills was the scene of a tree-pulling- demonstration on Satur-
day, 20th ult., which created quite a stir in the surrounding districts. The out-
standing feature in this demonstration, which was of special interest to the
owners of timbered land, was the extreme lightness and low cost of the.
machine used. Unlike the cumbersome and expensive contrivances of various
makes that have been in use up to the present, this miniature machine (which
is called the “Digger” Winch), though equally powerful, «was carried with
ease by a youth from tree to tree. Trees —both grey box and stringy bark —
were uprooted in swift succession on the hard rocky hillside, at an. average
time of four to six minutes per tree, without any previous grubbing or loosen-
ing of roots. It was clear also, to every practical man, that these trees could
have been pulled down in half the time had it been winter instead of summer.
All present were convinced that the “Digger” Winch has ushered in a new
era in the clearing of timbered land, which must particularly appeal to the.
small holder, whom it would never pay to buy the ordinary machine, requiring
a horse and cart to move it and a couple of men to work it. He is first con-
fronted with the high cost of labor, and then with the’ difficulty of obtaining
labor that is satisfactory at any price. To be able to secure a tree or stump-
grubbing machine that can be handled rapidly by one man, at half the cost of
other machines is, therefore, a matter of very practical interest to him.
The inventor. Mr. A. A. Quick, is to be congratulated on having produced
a machine which stands altogether In a class by itself. This has been
achieved through his discovery of a new principle in mechanical combination,
which is the secret of its marvellous effectiveness. It weighs only 60 lbs. /
To have predicted three or four years ago that a “Forest Devil” this .
weight, of an effective working type, would be produced, would have been to
have courted derision. It would have been regarded by the bushman as so
much pure romance.
(“The Healesville and Yarra Glen Guardian,” April 10th, 1920.)
