

THE BALLARAT
(VIA LINTON)
To Gampeidown Railway
THE DIRECT ROUTE
FROM THE CENTRAL AND NORTHERN MARKETS OF VICTORIA TO THE
GREAT PRODUCING AREAS OF THE SOUTH-WEST,
STATISTICAL INFORMATION, EXTRACTS FROM SPEECHES,
PAPERS, &c„ AND PLAN SHOWING THE IMPORTANCE
AND DIRECTNESS OF THE ROUTE,
PREPARED UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF THE
Ciimptrtmfort (Brim* ton fopt.
Printed at the “Chronicle” Office, Camperdown.


IfIILWAY EXTENSION FROM CA)[PEpOffN
TO BALLARAT ¥IA LINTON.
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF POPULATION LANns
s v r toT matbd
RAILWAY Lira SEBVED BY THE PEOPOSED
Population
40,000
Live Stock (sheep, cattle, pigs, a*.) ... 1>600 ,000
Total Value of Improvements ~. fi 7 , 8 00,000
Annual Value
• £447,000
Revenue
£61,300
Area of Shires, sq. miles .. „
3,800
Produce, total tonnae-e
72,000
Area Lana cultivated, acres... ... eoooo
he above figure* refer * , he
„ d a „ rlute;
md Port Pairy, and the To*u of Warroambool.


)
h
THE BALLARAT TO CABPERDOffN RAILWAY,
Arguments in Brief.
The construction of the proposed line would develop a trade
in timber, lime, live stock, dairy produce, agricultural produce,
fruit, fish, dec. It would give to the residents of Ballarat, Cres-
wick, Maryborough, Sandhurst, Echuca, and intermediate towns,
the means of reaching by the most direct route the seaboard at
Port Campbell, Warrnambool, Port Fairy, (fee., during the summer
months.
Particulars of Probable Traffic.
Timber. —The timber resources of the Heytesbury Forest
are, doubtless, well known. Its value has been publicly attested
to by the Hon. H. Gore, M.L.C., and other gentlemen con-
nected with the mining interests of Ballarat and district. The
railway line from Camperdown to Curdie’s River will intersect
this magnificent forest, and the construction of the Linton to
Camperdown railway would enable the timber to be conveyed to
Ballarat direct, if required there for mining or other purposes. The
forest country itself would be more quickly developed, as selec-
tors would have a market opened up to them for timber, and
would thus be enabled to clear their lands with profit to them-
selves and to the State.
Lime.— Practically inexhaustible supplies of lime could be
drawn from Curdie’s River along the direct route to Ballarat for
the use of farmers as a fertilising agent, and for the gas com-
panies, as well as for other purposes. The cost would be cheaper
to the purchasers than the existing supplies.
Live Stock.— The pastures of the Camperdown, Terang,
and Warrnambool districts are noted for their magnificent pro-
perties for fattening stock. The bulk of the fat stock from this
district at one time found its way to ballarat across country, but


the extension of the railway system f rom Geelong diverted the
t Ball “f M f oU [ ae - The Hne would restore
the traffic to Ballarat, and make it what it was formerly recos
wLi^:: hiei market for the produ ° e an
Te 4! lrz^ b ‘ r r "°" d
Th” 0*” d' T“"“ °' “* d * ir} ' 1 «4»1 ”44™”
The Cemperdown district, «e<l the co„„l„ nortb ‘
h.v, tec.,, to lh . win (he J
There is a general desire among theproducers to have direct railway
cheese, and other dairy produce, together with potatoes &c
n the greatly-coveted markets of Ballarat, Sandhurst,
&o hence the strong agitation at Warrnambool and other centres
n favor of the Linton to Camperdown railway line The Z
ages to the business people of Ballarat, t 7 l>e gained by the'
encouragement of this increased trade, are sufficiently obvious no
the Tall b6 P° inted to the producers o
the Ballarat district, that the crops around Camperdown wLr
ambool, Ac., are from five to eight weeks earlier Ln their own
t^e^^yte^ury^orest 1 ' 0 su 77
large, barely exceeds the local demand. Largely
however, are being annually set apart for orchards and a f ’
p::; s oTLioi elapse r re the
confiTll 611 * fishlng / r ° Unds - A large and profitable trade, lis
of the lie 7 ZiZnIZt d cllZlZ7 B ** ** C ° nStrUCtion
rt -


bribed termed > have been often de-
The Intervening Country.
sS=ssS»w.t=
quarters regarding , h . ,„. 1% of the w betTO^L “ J"J
amper ° wn . j t may not be generally known that the bulk of
X! “v" srr," ••%■« **
g °° d gmZing C ° Thousands Nacres north'of 777
producers to compete in the markets with growers blessed with
greater facilities for transit. The oninion of !
farmer-a thoroughly reliable autho^l£ £
in thlst S plainr h ? h d aShadSe T aI yCarS ’ eXperience of farming
P . amS ’ 1 desire > as far as lam able, to correct ™
erroneous impression which T Vtiaw -i dl *
the W It J . 1 PreVails as t 0 the of
he land. It is generally supposed that the plains north of
u5.,.., for „„„ ,J “«
Th„ I know to be a most unfounded imps™, as £ar ,‘s l£
Stn.au. TiC
she Manor, Koort Koortnong, and Chocolyn. lam certain
r:r.t::iL p, r there 7
be found in the eolc„y. Uutr“h,“ s Cd"l
settlement took pl.ee ou pl . in ., „„
gmm gro for the .. rrou ud ing d iMricl . of
which continued for ser.ral pears. It be asked by person!
who have not given the matter much attention-How Hit, it Z


“: i'% “‘“,r z***" r f ' -
n.rth OT dittrici, t he „JJ^
£ r*Tr of ‘ h9 Ji ” 10 ™
1 north, lhe «•
T farmiog
take the Western THafmVf mcneisea, and it will
through not getting a
SSSSS-S
.od^‘?"‘ I,n " Proprieteh “ d^i”'<i«.wLia te ntionrf
Judged by its AdYocates.
.dvo.?«tr.t"itsr^?inv irongir
“■»- ?*** »<> rorso^rj;™-
considered to be the line that will ■ 18
ner to the markets of Centra] and Northern Yktorif’The greTt
Prtd....g of „ ath . WM , , aJ a,. h itherto ' 2X
;r^r,”r- lliter " ter " d °* Wi “—* «» Heytesbury
orest. Proof of this is glV en in the published reports of public
meetings Ac, which have been held in support of the line and
the resolutions bearing on the subject will be found inthe Append!
The Rival Routes Compared.
The advocates of the Linton-Camperdown line are aware
that another connection is proposed, viz., f rom Scarsdale to Colac
“ ® eeac “ nd ondlt - Such a line cannot offer similar induce-
ments to those put forward on behalf of the Oamperdown junc-
tion, and for one very good reason-that the distance from Colac


to Geelong being about 20 miles less than the estimated distance
from Colac to Ballarat, Geelong would continue to be what it is
to a large extent at present, the chief, almost sole, market of
Colac and district. On the other hand, Camperdown is distant
from Geelong 1 8 j miles, and from Ballarat it would be
under 70 miles, so that by the Camperdown junction the
stream of traffic from the west would be turned into Ballarat just
at the point at which it could be profitably diverted. In the case
of the Colac junction, Ballarat would have to compete with
Geelong market, and give the latter a severe handicap of about
20 miles. By adopting the Linton-Camperdown route, the handi-
cap would be rather the other way. There is a direct railway
line from Camperdown into the Heytesbury Forest, terminating
for the present at Curdie’s liiver, from which plentiful supplies of
all kinds of timber (mining, fencing, fuel, &c.) may be drawn to
Ballarat. There is no such line from Colac, the nearest forest
railway starting from Birregurra, twelve miles east of Colac, on
the Geelong line. The Camperdown junction is nearer by Uni ty
miles to the very choicest portions of the Western District, whence
are sent the fat cattle, which realise the highest prices in the
metropolitan and other markets. Mount Noorat, Glenormiston,
Keilambete, Marida Yallock, all noted for the richness of their
pastures, lie west of Camperdown. The consumers of Ballarat
and district at present largely draw their supplies of butter,
cheese, haras, bacon, Ac., from Cobden, Terang, Garvoc, Panmure,’
Koroit, Warrnambool, Port Fairy, all of which prosperous centres
lie south and west of Camperdown. These supplies will, no
doubt, be largely increased by establishing direct railway commu-
nication, but that direct communication cannot be obtained by
running a line from Beeac to Scarsdale. The bulk of the pro-
ducing area lies south and west of Camperdown, and it
seems monstrous there should even be a proposition to drag the
produce thirty miles round to Colac when a line can be more con-
veniently constructed from Camperdown to Linton. It might
rather be asked, and with greater reason, that the live stock, pro-
duce, <fec., which Colac may have to spare, after supplying
Geelong, should be sent round to Ballarat by way of Camperdown.
In the case of the Camperdown junction, there are 40,000 people
to be considered ; in the case of Colac, not more than 5,000 or
6,000, who have not at present the coveted connection with Bal-
larat. Reference to the accompanying plan, and a comparison


the
Actual and Approximate Distances.
p PRESENT RAILWAY ROUTE
... 134ai](i
Koroit ” ” - 178 „
xvoroic ’ ~
Port Fairy ” "' I®7 „
198 „
p , OOLAC TO BALLARAT
Caraperdown («« Colac) to Ballarat ' , nn ,
Warrnambool mi^
ff n lii
100 miles.
Koroit ” "■ 144
jvororc >)
Port Fairy ” 1 53 »
” ” 164 „
THE DIRECT ROUTE
Camperdowu to Ballarat (savi
nr.... . , , . ' •>> ... 70 rv.;i=
* - vv x®**//
Warrnambool («« Camperdowu) to Ballarat Z
Koroit "* Jl * n
Port Fairy ” ” " i 23 »
IW „


APPENDIX.
rZrZZ ■** Member * of Parliament and other,
SemionLeanZ i n‘ ™ C 'f rB £ n ’ organised by the Camperdown Railway
Jhxtension League, to Curdle s River and Port Campbell, in February, 188 J.
The Chief Secretary’s Views.
J h ® Hon - A - Deakin, at Port Campbell, at the end of the
hrst day s journey, said that, to him, the business of Ballarat and
Port Campbell seemed to be on parallel lines. The people of
Ballarat possessed great influence, and he thought he could con-
gratulate the League that they had, or would secure, the co-
operation of that city.
Railway requirements having been brought under notice at
Curdles River by the settlers, Mr. Deakin, in reply, stated he
had listened and observed, and would be enabled to tell his col-
leagues the result of these observations. The district through
which he, with the other members of the party, was now travel-
ling was almost a terra incognita to Ballarat and the colony, but
from what they had seen, it contained large tracts of the richest
quality of land. It appeared certain that the district would never
attain its proper position until it had railway connection with the
markets of the colony.
At a banquet given at Cobden on the return journey Mr
A. Deakin proposed the toast of their Hosts, the Camperdown
Railway Extension League. He remarked that they might talk
about the difficulties of the excursion, but he never had gone and
never hoped to go on such a pleasant trip again. The journey
had afforded him not only pleasure, but it had given him a large
amount of information which might prove not alone of value to
the district, but of use to the whole country. He hoped to be a
faithful reporter to his colleagues, so that they should be enabled
to determine what should be done concerning the means of
improving communication with the forest. He hoped to be able
to do for the population more than he had taken upon himself to
promise to do.


Mr. Russell, M.L.A.
a me “ber of the
m the dark on any question Wb ° tbat be had v °ted
visited Ballarat on Railway’ " Val de P utati °ns had
cillors to refrain from action +-i !! advised hls Mother coun-
ation to go upon He no r had SOme definite inform-
ih? “ «*->
"*”? Filets, and also to He foot Hutto T ‘ at ° md l °‘ l *
to get out to .end Hei, p„dnc t 0 £“•» unable
asleep over the matter of rail a . Th y must not fall
in the Heytesbury eXt^ nsi ° n ' The claim of the selector
in the district that which would Mt claim - The 7 had
selves, but which would enrich th ° n j ° f advanta ge to them-
that with the «ul^^ B 2r iK ?? Ie ? Balkwt He believed
of props could be obtained 15s oiXs & n *&
they cost at present. He believed it to
miner m Ballarat to srive hi. „ interest of every
Scarsdale to Camperdown H UPP to the extension from
»ight. The speaE enWefu p rn\f T d t 0 *
around Camperdown and nni H 6 beauty . of the scenery
straight through from' Ballarat ° Ut that with the ra ilway
week or so at CampeTdfwn a d ' • S pr ° fitaW > s P- d *
the coast. P n dminng lts and then go on to
The Views of Two Mayors.
had "rd o Lto^“"lX7viTt , “ i ‘ ,: ~“ I ' r0m ' ri “ t **r
»unt h.ve „dl„y oon. m Licai;ri”tt. ,h * lthed “i r “‘
capacity on behalf of the n f ln an offi cml
their duty to assist I f * b.
Camperdown, and in regard to to
sound. He hoped on Se next o "“f* * ha ™ no Certain
travel by rail, at least as far liTCaIL d t 0 the forest to
deserved to be helped, and if any Sele ° tOrS
Council. Th, country '™» "■« City
boutifu, one. Tbe peep,. of C.urperdoL .nd”di “l*


rest assured that they had the hearty sympathy of the people of
Ballarat, and would also have their hearty support.” (Cheers).
Mayor Ferguson (Ballarat East) referred to the time, about
four months ago, when Messrs. Scott and Walls came together to
ask assistance for the railway from Scarsdale to Camperdown.
They had made certain statements which he now found from
inspection to have, if anything, been under the mark. They had
gone through the forest and found most, or all, of their allegations
regarding the timber to be true. They had seen in the forest, props ,
poppet-legs, and timber, sufficient to supply the Ballarat requirements
for many years to come. They had gone on again to Port
Campbell, which he thought in time would be a grand watering
place. As for the railway between Ballarat and Camperdown,
he would assist with all his heart in forwar ding it. He saw men
in the forest working hard with soil that would grow anything,
yet there was no market for their produce. If it was true what
Mr. Callaway had said of himself, it must be true of the other
selectors in the forest. If he were a Minister of the Crown he
would assist them in getting their railway; if he were a member
of Parliament he would assist their representatives in bringing
about the desired object; as he was but the Mayor of Ballarat
East, he could only say that he would assist them to get their
railway, lie would not come again to the district until he could
do so by means of the railway.
Prominent Citizens Speak.
Mr. James Oddie, J.P., remarked that in his opinion, whenever
the railway extension from Scarsdale would be made, it would be
by way of Camperdown. He pointed out that if the line went
from Ballarat to Camperdown, it would pass through large estates.
By so doing the value of the estates would be greatly increased.
He knew large estates about Ballarat that had been similarly
increased in value from 255. to 30s. per acre. He suggested that
the people of Camperdown should put their heads together, and
get these owners of property to contribute at least one-half of the
enhanced value of the land to the cost of the line. There was
likely to be a conflict between the two districts, and as both
would work hard he threw out the hint for the Camperdown
people to act upon. He thanked the League for their kindness •
and for the information he was able to obtain, and when the time


came he would throw in his aid in getting the line from Ballarat
to Camperdown, and would work hard in their interests. He
SSL ln T ff WayS in going through rich
. r ‘ a^ dH ““* J P -> Sieved that they had in the forest
the timber which Ballarat would shortly require, and the sooner
the railway line was constructed the better would it be for all
WhlTtL h rdl h ;:° UldaSBiStth - ingetting
What they had that day seen fully confirmed all the statements
r de ,. y MeS . SrS - Scott and Wal]s * Ballarat. He fully believed
that the great resources of this rich district would be of great
benefit to the colony at large. g *
The late lamented Cr. F. M. Olaxton stated that during his
steeplechase journey through the forest, driven by Mr. Mattoews
all toe * Wa ? Ufßcient tim ber in the forest suitable for
rlilwav Tk a * f ° r many years t 0 corae - But the
HeS Tr n 6 reqmredfor other Purposes than the timber.
from W kf to be the natUml C6ntre ° f the - h ole district
from Warrnambool, and he was of the opinion that the direct line
to Camperdown would be supported by all in Ballarat There
-as no doubt that their Colac friends would be disappointed hut
ZZ^ZT^Z lh9 ““ peo ' ,le h ™ -
ontent with their Geelong connection, which not even a direct
ne to Ballarat could, he thought, take from them. (Cheers).
The Miners’ and Mine-owners’
Representatives.
Mr. Henry Gore, J.P., President of the Mine-owners’ Asso
ciation stated he had taken part in the excursion for the purpose
of the quality of the timber in the forest. He dif
fered from other speakers with regard to the timber traffic He
ZrLizr*, B ’S“ b " 7 t °** •*** »p toa.
stmin on the forests near Ballarat, and also assist in competition
The more competition there was. the better for trade Re tad
2::: “ f ° rests and and he could congratulate
POP 6 of the district in having suitable timber for all minim?
purpose their forest . Th . tinber wu


as that in the Otway forest, but big timber when fallen proved
expensive to work. Regarding the price of timber, at Creswick,
recently, £72 were paid for four poppet-legs, each 85ft. in length,
and the spars were not good at that. (A voice—“We will sup-
ply you with them, over 100 ft., at a quarter the cost,”)
Mr. George Williams, President of the Miners’ Association,
stated that he could offer nothing new, having spoken at the joint
meeting of the two Councils in Ballarat in support of Camperdown.
He had been in the district before, though not in their immediate
neighbourhood. At first he had supported the Colac extension,
but the information he subsequently received led him to support
Camperdown. He was glad to find that the information with
which he had been supplied had been fully borne out by what had
been seen during the trip. He was pleased to notice that others
had come to regard this as the district which should have direct
railway communication with Ballarat. He and Mr. Gore spoke
not merely in the interests of Ballarat, but in those of the whole
colony. Regarding Port Campbell as a seaside resort, he believed
that with railway communication not only would they have
occasional excursions, but there would be weekly excursions from
Ballarat. The Miners’ Association were to have one next month
to Queenscliff, to which numbers probably would go. The mem-
bers did not care much about going to Queenscliff. In Ballarat a
combined excursion could be formed to Port Campbell, in which
fully 5000 people would take part.
What Ballarat East Thought and Said.
Cr. Scott (Ballarat East) stated that the Mayor of the town
had spoken on its behalf, and whatever he had said he had
authority for so doing. It had been arranged for the Mayors of
the city and town to express their intentions as to the future at
the meeting held that evening. The speaker had been unaware
of the resources of the district until the time when the Camper-
down League sent to Ballarat one of the most important and
intelligent deputations it had ever been his lot to hear. He
pointed out that Ballarat was a large market, having upwards of
45,000 consumers ; yet up to the present time there was no direct
communication with this rich district. They had been unawai-e
of the vast resources of the district. To reach Camperdown they


The Produce TtZllelTwLTVTt " ilWBy *° get to Jt '
by sea to Melbourne bv rail th* Warrnamb ° ol a "d thence
tt.o,„ nh7> l^T *o^
Itej. wanted in th „ * rf ‘ “' P<»pl« faervrf to gel ,11
settlers had no comm, ■ * Way communication. The
colony. He hoped **“ markets of the
*“ their objects had been attai.S W ”' d »P »”«
Gobden to Port Campbell.
when p f ro thS L 'f eV Vkited the Strict
down with Port Campbell ** ° P ° Se lne to connect Camper-
wrote—“ It is ,„rttoll“ f T°“ hi ” eCO ”' , “ o “- He then
that will be of such general h cT " another ]ine in the bUI
does enormous areas of anl dhT * b ' S ° ne ’ °P eni “S U P aa it
Mm. Of nita6k /m . ’* ”*
to say nothing of giving f ac iHH PH t T ’ J 9 P ur P oS ™,
whole of its course fcf “*! 1 large Potion along the
country consists of high range! h to market The
with broad valleys, covered S ’ “ te " ected
bloodwood, dogwood ferns naf h™ 6 Under S rowt h of musk,
toil bei„ e 0, fnceedln'^;:'' 6 “ ,P> -
district, from an agricultural point ef '• ’ u ! progress of the
“ d ",‘ b “®“®t transit Cities, it l7
Sr? :z —- w —> r*
You find, on enquiry that the fti g general and nicel 7 kept,
their prospects, and sanguine with at” WeH Satisfied wit h
in the course of anothef ten’
there will be no land to d tbey bve to see it,
The ? i„d of o.ltlm'jo* ** «•
10 tons. . . . ManvrfTt V? 3)8 per acre > and potatoes
by permanent creeks present interSected
• • • To its other advantage £! n ***”**-
attraction as a wateringnl« PP g > + *- C pb ® has to add
watering-place, its two-mile beach, its fishing in


the bay, Port Campbell, and Gellibrand and Curdle Rivers, and
its surrounding scenerj, having brought an influx of visitors that
taxed the accommodation of the place to its utmost.”
Mr. Robert Watson, Engineer-in-Chief of Victorian Rail-
ways, when giving evidence at the bar of the Legislative Council
on 15th November, 1882, said the Camperdown to Port Campbell
line (a continuation of the proposed direct line) “ goes through a
great deal of forest country, and country of a rich and fertile
character.”
Mr. Wm. Ferguson, when giving evidence before the same
tribunal, said he was much struck with the extent of fine land
there (Port Campbell) suitable for many purposes. “As a fruit-
growing district there is not any in the colony equal to it. There
is no better hop-growing country than within ten miles of Port
Campbell. The olive and the fig might also be cultivated there, and
also some varieties of the vine. There is also some good, sound
timber there. There is a great deal of country available for
selectors there. There is much timber suitable for mining pur-
poses in this district. For ten miles out of Port Campbell the
country is very much like the Drouin and Warragul country.”
Co-operation from the West.
As previously stated, the Western towns—Port Fairy,
Koroit, and Warrnambool—have spoken strongly in favor of the
Linton to Camperdown connection as the line that will give them
direct communication with the markets of Ballarat and Central
and Northern Victoria. Messrs. Walls and Neylon, delegates
from the Camperdown Railway Extension League, met with a
reception at the three towns, as the subjoined con-
densed reports will show :
WARRNAMBOOL MEETING,
The Warrnambool Standard reports that a large and repre-
sentative gathering of gentlemen assembled in the office of the
Villiers and Heytesbury Agricultural Association on Tuesday,
morning, May 22nd, for the purpose of meeting the delegates
(Messrs. Walls and Neylon) from the Camperdown Railway
Extension League. The local municipalities and institutions
were largely represented, and several influential residents in the


Or J W were also present. The Mayor of Warrnambool.
Or. J. Ward, was voted to the chair. The following gentlemen
s rongly urged the construction of the line :-The Mayor of the
Wn ; the President of the shire (Cr. W. Allan) ; Crs. King and
Harm, of the Town Council; Crs. Rutledge and John Lee. of
m" 7™ mboolS 5 lr \ CoUncil ; Mr - Wm - Anderson, M.L.A.,
hr tt ! 7’ al l ' Am ° ng the advan toges pointed out
were ** f ° ll<>W construction of the line
V? ° Pen UP the markets of BaUara *. Maryborough
the ntl; R ° ther krge C6ntreS
The Mto r of T gIVe K an ,°PP ortunit y * coming to the seaside.
6 Mayor of Warrnambool moved and the PresifW
-ire seconded “ That this meeting i. o, .I.°
l™ of rmi„y ,„ m C.mperdown
essential, and pledges itself to urge for its construction.’’-Carried
Cr. King moved, and Cr. Hyland seconded!
noitd tf/ mflUential de P Utation be formed and ap-
pointed,-first, to secure the assignee of Ballarat, and then to
wait upon the Minister of, Railways with the revest that t
r! I m "t Linto ? amperdoWn be includ « d the next
mousTy ' tmm and debates to be fixed.’’-Carried unani-
PORT FAIRY MEETING.
(Held Mat 21, 1888.)
™ «-
Vken strongly in support of the line, Mr. Barit mmd™
KOROIT MEETING.
(Held May'22, 1888.)
The Mayor of the Borough (Cr. Duffus) presided and them
* large attendance of representative gentlemen. Messrs W
Anderson, M.LA, the Mayor, Crs. Crow, and MeTW fc
President of the Shire of Belfast tt i. ■ ’ the
gentlemen, spoke strongly £tpptri of
moved, and Cr. Midgley seconded— “ That th ‘ , ! May ° r
nr, of opinion that the eo.strnetion of . lin'e^W.fZt


Camperdown to Linton would greatly benefit this district; and
promise to support any action it might be advisable to take to
insure its inclusion in the next Railway Bill.” Carried unani-
mously.
Co-operation of the Ballarat Councils.
BALLARAT CITY COUNCIL.
(Monday, May 28.)
A letter was received from the Camperdown Railway
League, asking for the active co-operation of the Council in
securing railway extension from Linton on to Camperdown.
Mr. W. H. Uren, M.L.A., attended as a deputation, and spoke
in support of the route. Cr. Shoppee moved that the support
asked for be granted. It would be a great acquisition to the
prosperity of Ballarat if the line was made. Cr. Salter seconded
the motion. While supporting the Colac line, he had no hesita-
tion m saying that this one was more desirable than the Colac
one, and would tap very valuable country. Cr. Hickman said he
had great pleasure in supporting the motion, and believed the
Council were unanimous in the matter. In a recent trip, they
had seen enough to convince them that it would be a very
valuable line. Crs. Little and Cooke having spoken in favor of
the line, the motion was carried unanimously.
BALLARAT TOWN COUNCIL.
(Friday, June 1.)
A letter was read from the secretary of the Camperdown
Railway Extension League, asking the Council to support rail-
way extension from Linton to Camperdown. It was moved by
Cr. Elsworth, seconded by Cr. Walker, and carried unani-
mously, that the Council heartily support the said line, and
use their best influence on behalf of that route. The Parlia-
mentary representatives (who are councillors) were requested to
cordially assist the League. Several councillors testified from
personal observation and experience as to the benefits which would
accrue to the Ballarat district from the proposed extension, and
the invaluable resources of the Camperdown district.


Opinions of the Press.
( Warrnambool Standard, May 19. J
We are pleased to see that agitation has been resumed for
railway connection between this district and Ballarat via Lintons.
. . . Warrnambool is to be asked to co-operate with Camper-
down in the agitation to obtain an extension of the line from
Lintons to that town, in order that the Western District may be in
immediate touch with Ballarat. We can fully pledge our people
to support a line so palpably advantageous to this district. The
Town Council have already given in their adherence to the project,
having been represented at a conference at Ballarat on the subject
some years ago. At that time, opinion was somewhat divided in
Ballarat as to the best point of junction—Colac or Camperdown.
The reasons against junctioning at Colac were so cogent as to be
absolutely convincing, and we believe no difference of opinion
now exists in that city, both east and west being in favor of
coming as closely into contact with the Western District as possible.
The immense advantage to the Western District in having railway
communication with Ballarat lies in the fact that we are brought
into direct contact with a large mass of people who are consumers
of the products of this district. The connection with Camper-
down brings the mining city into contact with the Heytesbury
Forest, the railway through which will be constructed in the course
of two years. A double boon will thus be conferred. The heavily,
timbered forest lands will be made available to the great mining
centre, whilst the unfortunate selectors in that region will possess
some inducement to clear their holdings when the timber they fell
may be transmuted into the current coin of the realm. From a
decentralising point of view, the connection with Ballarat must
prove of eminent service. It is a good thing to have a large
entrepot established away from Melbourne, and Ballarat’s
acquaintance with the some 40,000 people in the Western District,
all producers and consumers, should tend to enhadce the trade of
the inland city. The residents of Ballarat and its neighbourhood
will, no doubt, when they have the opportunity to do so by rail,
pay visits to the Western seaboard, and enjoy its cooler
atmosphere during the summer months. There are numbers of
circumstances, mutually advantageous, in favor of supporting
such a line, and we trust to see every encouragement given to the
delegates who come here from Camperdown on Tuesday. The


town and shire councils of Warrnambool, Koroit, Port Fairy, and
Belfast, and the various agricultural societies in the district,
should all lend their countenance and hearty support to the pro-
posed connection. The unanimous co operation of this district,
together with the strong influence of the Ballarat members, should
not only secure a permanent survey of the proposed line at once,
but a distinct promise from the Minister that the line shall occupy
a prominent position in the schedules of the next Railway Bill.
(Ballarat Evening Post, May 30.)
A well-timed effort, and one we believe that will not onlv meet
with a large measure of influential support throughout this and
other districts interested, but also lead to a successful issue, is
just now being renewed, namely, to have a direct line of railway
constructed from Linton to Camperdown, Prior to the bringing
in of the last Railway Bill, it will be remembered strong agita-
tions were formed by rival claimants to have a line constructed
from Ballarat to the Western District—the one to Colac via
Scarsdale, and theother to Camperdown via Linton—and each party
adduced facts and flgures of sufficient weight and importance to
establish a fair amount of attention and consideration, enough to
have flying surveys made (one finished, and the other nearly so)
of each of the suggested routes. While, however, either of the
proposed lines would prove beneficial, it goes without saying that
by far the greater area of country and by far the larger number
of people would be benefited by the line of railway from Linton
to Camperdown. As shown by actual fact, the whole of the
Western District on every side, from Camperdown to beyond
Warrnambool—the very heart of the colony so to speak as to
agricultural and pastoral pursuits, rich enough in resources to
maintain almost a limitless population, now very large and
steadily increasing—would, by means of rail by the last-mentioned
route, be brought into much closer contact commercially and
otherwise, with nearly one-half of the population of Victoria.
. . . The adoption of this route from Camperdown to Linton
would of course be detrimental to Colac and its extensive and
fertile district, embracing also its magnificent forest country, so
far as securing closer railway connection with Ballarat and the
north and north-eastern districts; but, without prejudice, we
consider, that although the Colac interest may consider itself
(and doubtless is) fully entitled to have its proposed line carried


into effect, the people of Camperdown and the 50,000 persons in
all on that side of the Western District have much more right
by virtue of good and substantial reasons—to have their interests
first attended to, supposing the time not yet ripe enough to have
both the proposed lines introduced into the next Railway Bill.
That both lines will some day be constructed there is little doubt;
but meanwhile the question seems to be which shall first claim
attention, and first be an accomplished fact. We unhesitatingly
say, from knowledge of the general surroundings and the facts
adduced, that the question admits of no doubt which is the most
important line of the two. The line from Camperdown to Linton
would connect by a lesser distance of about 30 miles—as com-
pared with a line from Colac—the whole of the immense district
stretching west, including the intermediate country from the
coast line to Ballarat, and, as a consequence, thence, by this lesser
distance, to other large centres of population further north and
north-east. A great gap, which now completely cuts off the
Western District producers and consumers from a large area of
the colony, would be bridged over—a benefit alike to both sides
of the country, embracing a population of something like
200,000 persons. There can be no reasonable objection on the
part of the Government to accede to the request for constructing
the lailway line from Linton to Camperdown, whatever may be
their intention with regard to the line from Scarsdale to
Colac; and if a strong and widespread wish is required to be
pressed to hasten their determination, this will be forthcoming
from all the centres of population in the Western District in-
terested as well as from Ballarat and further afield. Influential
meetings have recently been held at Warrnambool, Port Fairy,
Koroit, and other Western District centres, at all of which it was
unanimously resolved to support the proposed line from- Camper-
down to Linton, and at the meeting of the City Council
on Monday, that body was asked and unanimously agreed
to co-operate in like manner. With such consension of opinion
and weight of unanswerable facts to be brought forward, nothing
remains for the Government but to accede to the request, which
will shortly be made to have the line of railway from Linton to
Camperdown not only included in the next Railway Bill, but
constructed at the earliest possible opportunity.
Printed at the “ Chronicle” Office, Camperdown.








