

Compiled by direction of the Premier of New South Wales
I (Hon. W. A. Holman).
The
New South Wales
Handbook
for
Returned Soldiers
and Sailors
ISSUED AT
The A.I.F. FURLOUGH (State Privileges) BUREAU,
Rawson Chambers, Pitt Street, Sydney.
SYDNEY: W. A. GULLICK. GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
58001






PLAN OF VICTORIA BARRACKS-




.. The ..
New South Wales Handbook
.. for ..
Returned Soldiers and Sailors
Containing Information for the Guidance
of Members of the Australian Imperial
Force and of the Royal Australian Navy
upon their return to New South Wales.
NOTE.
Throughout this book the term
“ Returned Soldier ” includes
Soldiers, Sailors, and Nurses
Sydney:
W. A. Guluck, Government Printer.
5001 1919.


Contents
PAGE.
Foreword i
I Arrival at Sydney 3
For Sick and Wounded 5
II While on Furlough 6
Travelling Concessions ... ... ... ... 7
111 After Discharge 9
IV (a) Land Settlement for Soldiers 13
(6) Irrigation Settlements 23
V N.S.W. Government Savings Bank 26
VI Australian Repatriation Scheme 28
VII Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League 33
APPENDICES :
A. —Map of Soldier Settlement Lands and Reference
Tables ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 38
B. —Soldier Settlement Statistics ... ... ... 40
C. —Government Labour Exchanges 45
D. —Repatriation Local Committees . 45
E. —Miscellaneous ... ... ... ... ... 47


Photo]
ANZAC BUFFET-THE FAMOUS “VICTORY" CAR LEADS THE PROCESSION [Svrfn-n- Mail
INTO THE BUFFET GROUNDS.


Photo ]
ANZAC BUFFET—“ WITH LONGING EYES AND LOVING HEARTS.”
[Sydney' XT ail


Photo ]
TRANSPORT “ KILDONAN CASTLE” GOING ALONGSIDE WOOLLOOMOOLOO WHARF.
[Sydney Mail


FOREWORD,
E purpose of this book is to place before soldiers
and sailors a compilation of information which
it is thought will be useful to them when they
return to New South Wales after years of service
abroad — when the time arrives at which they have to think
seriously about settling down once more to civil occupations and
resuming their duties as good citizens of the State.
Strictly military affairs are the business of the Federal Govern-
ment and are not within the scope of this publication; but the
National Government and people of New South Wales are now,
as they have been throughout the war, desirous of helping, so far
as it may be in their power, to make the home-coming pleasurable
and the future smooth.
In the following pages, therefore, an endeavour is made to explain
the provision of privileges to be enjoyed during furlough prior to
discharge, and to indicate arrangements made for the future —in
other words, to tell the soldier where to go for what he requires.
58001 A


THE
New South Wales Handbook
FOR
Returned Soldiers and Sailors.
I. —Arrival at Sydney.
Upon arrival in Sydney Harbour each troopship is boarded by
officers of the District Military Staff, who make known the arrange-
ments for disembarkation, and issue (when necessary) leave passes
for the period between landing and attendance before the Medical
Board, preliminary to furlough and discharge.
The disembarkation takes place at No. i wharf, Woolloomooloo
Bay, where the troops are met and welcomed by the District
Military Commandant and a member of the National Government
representing the people of New South Wales, as well as by a squad
of V.A.D.’s with flowers and cigarettes.
Motor cars, provided and driven by private owners, under a Red
Cross organisation, are in waiting to take the soldiers to the
rendezvous of their friends at the Anzac Buffet.
Detachments arriving by train are similarly met at the Rail-
way Station and welcomed.
Anzac Buffet.
The Buffet is a spacious enclosure in the Domain, which was
provided and equipped with necessary buildings, &c., by the State
Government early in the war for the reception of soldiers returning
from abroad. It is the recognised rendezvous to which relatives
are admitted upon presentation of tickets issued by the Military
authorities. Light refreshments are provided and served by
ladies of the Voluntary Aid Detachments under the direction of
Miss Evans, whose name is now familiar to all soldiers who have
returned and friends who have met them at the Buffet.
Two relatives of each soldier, if they reside outside the metro-
politan area, are granted by the State Government free first-class
return railway tickets to Sydney to enable them to meet the home-
coming troops. These tickets are issued upon the application of


the registered next-of-kin, the application form being sent out (by
arrangement) from the Base Records Office, Melbourne, with an
official notice that 'the soldier has embarked for home. Should the
next-of-kin reside within 34 miles of Sydney he or she may nominate
one relative (or a near friend) whose home is in the country to
receive the railway concession, the object being to so provide that
each soldier may receive a personal welcome by two of those nearest
and dearest to him, and that such persons, if their homes are far
away, shall not be debarred by the cost of travelling. By this
means every soldier is on an equal plane as regards his welcome
home—whether his friends live in or near to Sydney or at the
border-limits of the State. This concession was started in con-
nection with the special furlough granted before the armistice to
1 9 1 4 Anzacs, and, then, for those soldiers only; but when the
great demobilisation was entered upon the system was extended to
apply to all officers and others returning.
After meeting their friends at the Anzac Buffet the soldiers are
at liberty until such time as they may have been directed to attend
the Medical Board.
Long Service Furlough.
Each soldier is, after disembarkation, given by the Defence
Department a furlough at the rate of seven and a half days for
each six months he has been away from Sydney, and for that
period is allowed a special sustenance of 3s. a day (paid in advance).
If ordered into hospital, or required to attend later for medicai
or surgical care, the furlough does not commence until after dis-
charge from the “ Invalid ” list. (See Page 5.)
The foregoing does not, of course, apply to those who took long
service furlough before returning to Australia.
Discharge.
Since demobilisation commenced it has been the custom to issue
discharge certificates as soon after disembarkation as possible, but
the discharge bears the date of the expiration of furlough, thus
enabling the soldier to get away to his home in the country,’ or to
resume civil employment as early as he may desire without the
necessity of again presenting himself before the Military authorities.
In the past this business was undertaken at the office of the
Staff Officer for Invalids and Returned Soldiers at Victoria Barracks,
but for the greater convenience of all concerned, a large building
is now being erected outside the Anzac Buffet, so that the soldier
may be passed by the Medical Board and given his long-leave pass
and discharge with greater expedition, and before he leaves the
Buffet with his friends.


Pay Adjustment.
It is understood that the Military Pay Department undertakes
to adjust accounts, and within a few days of arrival to lodge 75 per
cent, of deferred pay to the soldier’s credit at the Commonwealth
Bank.
The Head Office of the Bank is at the corner of Pitt and Moore
streets, opposite the General Post Office.
For the Sick and Wounded.
Between arrival in their home State and the date of their
discharge the sick or wounded soldiers are under the care of the
various military hospitals. In addition to the medical or surgical
care there are, however, supplementary benefits.
Amelioration Committee.
The Amelioration Committee, established to administer the
“ Australia Day ” Fund, has its head office at Challis House (oppo-
site the General Post Office, in Martin Place) and branches at
No. 4 General Hospital, Randwick; 5 Watt Street, Newcastle;
and the Court House, Broken Hill.
The Amelioration Committee makes up the pay of each sick or
wounded soldier (or sailor) to a “ living wage ” until he is discharged
from the service.
Men desirous of receiving benefits from this fund should apply
personally (or by letter if they reside in the country) three days
after disembarkation. Payments are made each fortnight. Non-
commissioned Officers, who are not married, are not eligible.
Red Cross Homes.
The Red Cross Society, continuing its good work into the after-
war period, conducts Nursing and Convalescent Homes for
returned Soldiers at suitable centres in the country.
Travelling Concessions.
The travelling concessions available for “ invalids ” before and
after discharge from hospital will be found in other portions of
this book.


II. —While on Furlough
Comprehensive arrangements have been made by the National
Government and others for the comfort and convenience of soldiers
while they are on leave in New South Wales.
The State Government provides free first-class railway travelling
and tramway passes during the full period of leave (see page 7).
The Red Cross provides homes at Rose Hall, Forbes-street (near
William-street), Darlinghurst, and at Richmond Terrace, facing the
Domain, where soldiers who have not any friends, or who require
temporary accommodation, are welcomed.
The Royal Naval House, in Grosvenor-street, near the comer
of George-street, is available for the reception and entertainment
of sailors while on shore leave.
At The Soldiers' Welcome, at the corner of Bathurst and George
streets, a number of patriotic ladies have established a restaurant
and lounge for returned soldiers.
The Soldiers’ Club in George-street, between King and Market
streets, is a meeting place for returned men and a popular rendezvous-
The Y.M.C.A. is as ready to help soldiers at home as it was at
the front, and has established naval and military club rooms
especially for their reception. The Y.M.C.A. building is in Pitt-
street, near the corner of Bathurst-street.
The Imperial Service Club (officers) is established in Elizabeth-
street, near Hunter-street.
The Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League has rooms in
Macdonell House, Pitt-street, and has a club in connection with its
operations (see page 33). The rooms occupied by the League were
fitted up and completely furnished by the State Government, by
whom the rent and cost of cleaning, as well as postage expenses,
are paid. Executive officers of the League are granted free railway
passes to enable them to organise in the country and to attend
meetings in other States.


Railway Tickets and Tram Passes.
The New South Wales National Government has established a
Furlough (Privileges) Bureau at Rawson Chambers, opposite the
Railway Station in Pitt-street, Sydney, and provides free travelling
on the State Railways and Trams until.the date of the soldier’s
discharge, and continues such privileges, in certain conditions, after
discharge.
The scale of travelling privileges is as follows :
On disembarkation —
A first-class return railway ticket to home in the country.
A first-class periodical railway ticket for duration of leave
between Sydney and home station within 34 miles.
A tramway pass for the duration of leave for all city and North
Sydney lines, or for Newcastle lines.
During leave —
First-class return railway tickets for such journeys within the
State as the soldier may desire to make.
A first-class return Interstate railway ticket to enable a soldier
to visit parents or legal next-of-kin in another State. (In
the case of Victoria, the journey must be commenced
within fourteen days from the beginning of leave.)
Application for railway and tramway privileges must be made to
the Government Representative at the Furlough Bureau, and in
every case the military leave pass must be produced.
When travelling on State Government concession tickets beyond
the 34 miles’ radius, uniform must be worn.
Leave passes must be produced whenever required by railway
or tramway officials.
While on “ Invalid ” Leave Pass.
Suburban periodical railway tickets and tram passes are issued
at the Bureau to soldiers who are on “ invalid ” pass, upon presen-
tation of warrants obtainable at the Military Hospitals. It should
BE CLEARLY UNDERSTOOD BY ALL RANKS THAT THE BUREAU IS NOT
PERMITTED TO ISSUE TICKETS TO “ INVALIDS ” WITHOUT THE
Hospital Warrant.
Soldiers’ Wives.
Soldiers who have married while abroad, and who are accom-
panied by their wives when they return, are granted a free pass
to home in the country upon presentation at the Bureau of a warrant
for the wife issued by the Repatriation Department.


Extension of Furlough Travelling Privileges.
When a soldier on furlough is unable to complete, within the
date of his furlough, a journey for which a privilege ticket has been
issued at the Bureau, such ticket may be made available until a
date not more than one month after the expiration of leave. To
obtain this additional concession application must be made, in
writing, to the Government Representative at the Bureau, and
reasons given for the request.
Value of Concessions already granted.
The Furlough Bureau at Rawson Chambers was opened by the
State Government in November, 1918, as a central information
office, and for the issue of travelling concessions for 1914 Anzacs
who came home under the arrangements made before the Armistice
for men with four years’ service abroad to enjoy two months special
leave in Australia.
When the demobilisation of the A.I.F. was entered upon, it was
decided to extend the travelling privileges to all returning troops,
and up to 30th April, 1919, the records of the Bureau showed that
the concessions so far granted meant a saving to soldiers of £44.°°°
in railway and tramway fares, and of £15,000 to relatives who
came from the country to meet them. More than 23,000 long-
distance railway orders were issued to soldiers on furlough in the
six months.


III. —After Discharge.
The object of the privileges granted to returned soldiers during
their furlough is to assist them in having an enjoyable time after
the strenuous experiences of war, and to permit of them travelling
to the country to see their friends or for business purposes, before
they finally sever their connection with the army.
It is, however, the earnest hope of- the Government, and all who
have the future welfare of Australian soldiers at heart, that men
will not forget in the excitement of home-coming and in the enjoy-
ment of their well-earned holiday, that their military pay will
cease on the date of their discharge.
In other words, those who have to seek civil employment are
urged to avail themselves of the furlough period by preparing for
their occupation in the immediate future. In this the State and
Federal Governments ach help so far as it is in the power of
Governments to do so.
For the Maimed and Blind.
The State Government assists maimed or blind returned soldiers
to travel to and from their homes when in employment,. or when
attending classes to learn occupations suitable to their condition,
by issuing railway tickets or tramway passes without < xpense to
the man. This is done under an arrangement made by the Re-
patriation Department, to whom application should be made at
the offices in Chalmers-street, Sydney (opposite Prince Alfred
Park).
At Christmas time, first-class railway passes (including sleeping
berths) are issued to each blind soldier, and a guide for journeys as
far as Melbourne or Brisbane. A similar concession is made at
Easter for journeys up to ioo miles.
Employment.
The resources of the State Government Labour Exchanges and
of the Federal Repatriation Department are at the service of
returned soldiers to assist them in obtaining suitable employment,
and the State Government has been consistent and untiring in its
endeavours to impress upon employers the policy of “ preference
to returned soldiers ” in all walks of life, and this principle has been
and is being observed in the Public Service.


The National Government has, moreover, decided to place before
Parliament, in its next session, a Bill to give effect to the “ prefer-
ence ” policy.
A schedule of State Labour Exchanges and a resume of the
objects and undertakings of the Repatriation Department will be
found on pages 45 and 28 respectively.
Government Employees.
The New South Wales Government has kept open the positions
of all those who were in its employ when they enlisted, and has
paid the difference between State and Military pay when the
foriher was the greater.
Recreation leave to which they would have been entitled had
they not enlisted has been allowed to accumulate, and will be
granted to them when they resume their former positions.
The foregoing provisions have been extended to meet the case of
soldiers who have remained in Europe for service with the Army
of Occupation.
Training and Instruction.
Returned soldiers desiring instruction in agriculture receive free
tuition at the Hawkesbury Agricultural College, Wollongbar
Experimental Farm, and Leeton Tobacco Farm. Training in
special trades is provided at the Sydney Technical College under an
arrangement made with the Commonwealth Government through
the Repatriation Department. Bursaries to the Primary, Secondary,
and Technical State Schools are granted to children of incapacitated
or deceased soldiers.
Proceeding to Employment in the Country.
Returned soldiers proceeding to emplo3unent for distances over
25 miles are issued tickets at half the ordinary single fare upon
presentation of a certificate from the Repatriation Department.
Their wives, families, and effects are carried free.
Other Railway Concessions.
Returned soldiers under hospital treatment, after discharge, and
requiring to travel by rail on leave, are carried at single fare for
the double journey upon presentation of a certificate from the
hospital authorities.
Returned soldiers travelling to Red Cross Nursing and Con-
valescent Homes in the country, and returning to Sydney, are
allowed tickets at five-eighths of the ordinary single fare upon
presentation of a Red Cross certificate. The charge for the tickets
is debited to the Red Cross Society.


Returned soldiers wishing to inspect land with a view to settle-
ment are given one free return railway pass.
Returned soldiers who are successful applicants for blocks of
land, when journeying to take up such land, may obtain railway
tickets for themselves, families, and effects at half ordinary rates.
Land Settlement.
(For details see pages 13 to 25.)
Large areas of Crown lands have been set apart for settling
soldiers upon small holdings, and many estates have been resumed
by the Government for soldiers’ settlement; and for the benefit of
those who wish to “go on the land,’’ but are not sufficiently ex-
perienced to do so, special arrangements for practical training have
been made.
The intention of the scheme is to make it possible for a man, by
intelligence and industry, to establish himself as a landholder, and
to make for himself and his family a good home and a good living.
Up to 31st March, 1919, the total area available for returned
soldiers’ settlement was 1,422,004 acres, and large additional areas
were then in progress of being made available (see map at end of
book). At the same date 1,255 soldiers had been settled under the
Returned Soldiers’ Settlement Act.
Provision is to be made to settle 8,600 returned soldiers, and of
this number the Minister for Lands has directed that provision shall
be made to place 3,500 men during 1919. (See Schedules at end
of book.)
The following statement shows the expenditure on account of
returned soldiers to the 31st March, 1919, under the following
heads :—
Advances to Returned Soldier Settlers
188,700
Acquisition of land under Crown Lands Act
119,923
Acquisition of land under Closer Settlement Act
830,952
Acquisition of land under Closer Settlement Promotion Act
Subdivision and improvement (including purchase of imple-
7 I >543
ments, stock, &c.) of Crown acquired lands
Purchase of sheep (including “ share ” sheep)
Purchase of cattle (including “share” cows)...
280,078
54,662
19,022
£1,564,880
Warning to Intending Settlers.
Returned Soldiers who contemplate taking up Land
AND WHO WISH FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE SOLDIER
Settlement Scheme are strongly advised to consult the
Director of Soldier Settlements, or the Repatriation
Department, before committing themselves in Private
Transactions.


ADVANTAGES PROVIDED BY THE STATE FOR RETURNED SOLDIER SETTLERS:
Tenure.
Concessions allowed to Ordinary Settlers.
Extra Concessions allowed to Returned Soldiers.
Homestead Farm ...
ist five years free of rent if the amount of
it is spent in improvements.
£625 advance, if the area is a living area, for house, improve-
ments, stock, &c., at low rate of interest, commencing at
per cent, and rising yearly by £ per cent, to a maximum
Crown Lease
ist year free of rent if amount of it is spent
in improvements.
► of'5| per cent.
Railway concessions of half rates for furniture, stock, &c.,
in settlers’ possession before allotment of land, and half
Suburban Holding
Settlement Purchase.
rates for all items purchased out of advance.
Soldiers’ Group Purchase.
Group Purchase compared
with Settlement Pur-
Deposit, 6 per cent, or 6| per cent, of
capital value.
No deposit.
chase.
ist Instalment, 6 per cent, or 6| per cent,
of capital value payable twelve months
after confirmation.
Suspension of instalments. Payment of
not more than two instalments can be
Instalment same as settlement purchase.
ist and 2nd instalments may be suspended, and 3rd also
provided improvements to the value of the three instalments
suspended, but extra improvements to
the value of the instalments must be
added within twelve months after post-
ponement is granted.
Financial Assistance—Nil.
Advice—Nil.
have been effected, in addition to improvements effected
out of advance. Also, there is a general power of suspension
of any instalment.
Financial assistance, also, sheep or cattle loaned on
shares.
Railway concessions as above.
Advice—Practical men available for advice and assistance
without fee.


IV (a). —Land for Soldiers.
The N.S.W. Government Scheme.
(See also Appendices on pages 38 to 44.)
The following is a complete statement of the general principles
governing the settlement of returned soldiers.
Intending settlers are advised to study this and to apply, as
directed, for further particulars. This should be done while in
Sydney on furlough, so that valuable time may not be lost.
Caution to Intending Settlers .
An intending Settler should ask for and obtain complete
INFORMATION AS TO REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS AFFECT-
ING the Tenure under which he proposes to take up
Land.
He should satisfy himself that he is thoroughly acquainted with
what he is to receive and the obligations and responsibilities he is
undertaking.
He should carefully read each document he is required to sign and
know what he is contracting to do.
If he says at a later date that he “ did not know this,” or “ thought
it meant something else,” he will cause annoyance and possible loss
to himself; waste his own and other people’s time; and have
himself only to blame.
The Returned Soldiers’ Settlement Branch of the Department of
Lands was established to facilitate business with soldiers, and the
Minister for Lands appeals to applicants to reciprocate by taking
all possible precautions and so helping the Department.
[The Office is at the Bridge-street entrance of the Lands
Department.]
Definition of “ Discharged Soldier
" Discharged Soldier ” is defined in the Returned Soldiers’
Settlement Act as :
(«) any person who being or having been 1 a resident in the
Commonwealth of Australia enlisted as a member of the
naval or military forces of the Commonwealth for service
outside the said Commonwealth, or enlisted in the United
Kingdom, or in any of his Majesty’s dominions for service
in His Majesty’s naval or military forces, and has served
in such forces in the present war outside the Common-
wealth ;


(b) any person who being or having been resident in the said
Commonwealth enlisted in the naval or military forces of
the said Commonwealth for active service abroad in the
present war, but whose service was confined to the said
Commonwealth, and who, in the opinion of a classifi-
cation committee, was unable, through circumstances
not within his own control, to serve abroad as aforesaid;
and in either such case —
(c) has received his discharge, and is resident in the Common-
wealth.
The Minister may extend the above definition to include any
person who, not being or having been resident in the said Common-
wealth, enlisted as a member of the naval or military forces of the
United Kingdom or of any of His Majesty’s dominions, and has
served in such forces in the said war outside the country where he
enlisted, and has received his discharge, and is resident in the
Commonwealth.
Provided that the above definition shall not include any person
whose discharge from service was due to misconduct or incapacity
resulting from his own default.
Qualification Certificate.
A discharged soldier who desires to become an applicant must
make a request for a Qualification Certificate entitling him to
apply for land.
The obtaining of this Certificate is the first thing necessary.
Two forms (Nos. i and 2) are to be signed. The question asked
in Form No. 1 should be accurately answered with full information,
and the applicant’s signature witnessed by a Justice of the Peace,
Commissioner for Affidavits, Notary Public or Crown Land Agent.
Form No. 2 should be signed in blank, the signature being
properly witnessed.
Both these forms must be lodged with, or forwarded to the
Department, and must be accompanied by the soldier’s discharge,
which will be returned to him after inspection.
Upon the information then supplied the application will, without
delay, be investigated by a Classification Committee, and if a
certificate be granted, the holder of it will be in a position to make
an application for available land.
Applications on behalf of Soldiers and Sailors on Active
Service.
A parent or other relative, or any person, may make application
on behalf of a soldier or sailor on active service abroad with the
Australian Imperial Forces, or with any other naval or military
force raised in the Commonwealth by the Minister for Defence.


The consent of the Minister is necessary before the application is
made for the land, and in order to obtain this consent the person
applying must hold a power of attorney, or other documentary
evidence, that he is authorised to apply on behalf of the soldier or
sailor on active service.
In the event of the death of a soldier or sailor before entering
into occupation, or of his inability or unwillingness to occupy and
work the holding within such period after his discharge as the
Minister may deem reasonable, or if in the opinion of the Minister
the soldier or sailor has become disqualified to make an application
under the Returned Soldiers’ Settlement Acts, the holding will be
forfeited.
On forfeiture, the Minister may grant tenant right in improve-
ments to the person he considers most entitled.
Forms of Tenure.
Land is made available under one or other of the following
tenures :
1. Homestead Fakm.
2. Crown Lease.
3. Returned Soldiers’ Special Holding.
4. Suburban Holdings.
5. Group Purchase.
In addition, a discharged soldier may obtain land under the
provisions of the Closer Settlement Acts which have been amended
to allow one (instead of three) or more discharged soldiers to apply
for land to be brought under the Act. (See page 17.)
1. HOMESTEAD FARM
Tenure. —Lease in perpetuity.
Residence. —Five years, to be commenced within six months
after confirmation.
Annual Rent. —2J per cent, on the notified capital value,
payable half-yearly in advance.
Re-appraisement of capital value is made at end of
first twenty-five years, and every twenty years after.
The holder may apply for appraisement within five
years after confirmation.
Improvement in lieu of Rent.—Rent need not be paid for
first five years, if an amount is spent in each year equal to
the annual rent upon permanent, fixed and substantial
improvements, the same, except boundary fencing, being
in addition to the improvements required by the con-
ditions of the farm.


2. CROWN LEASE
Tenure.— Lease for forty-five years.
Residence.— Same as Homestead Farm.
Annual Rent.— per cent, on the notified capital value,
payable yearly in advance. Minimum rental is £1 per
annum.
Re-appraisement of capital value is made at end of
fifteen years and thirty years from commencement.
The holder may apply for appraisement within five
years after confirmation.
Improvements in lieu of Rent.— Rent for the first year will
be remitted if the lessee expends a sum equal to the rent
for that year in improvements, the same, except boundary
fencing, being in addition to the improvements required
by the conditions of the lease.
3. RETURNED SOLDIERS’ SPECIAL HOLDING
Land may be set apart either by way of sale or lease, under such
conditions as may be determined.
If by way of lease, the conditions will, in general, be similar to
those of Homestead Farms.
Application may be made to purchase the land, subject to the
recommendation of Land Board and approval by the Minister.
The capital value will be appraised, and it must be paid by fifteen
equal annual instalments with 2\ per cent, interest added.
If set apart by way of sale, the conditions will be notified, and
in most instances will be very similar to those of Group Purchases.
4. SUBURBAN HOLDINGS
Tenure.— Lease in perpetuity.
Residence.— Five years, to be commenced within six months
after confirmation.
Annual Rent.— per cent, on the notified capital value,
payable half-yearly in advance. Re-appraisement at end
of every twenty years.
The holder may apply for appraisement within five
years after confirmation.
5. GROUP PURCHASE
These are mainly on estates purchased by the Crown.
Each estate will be subdivided into home maintenance areas.
Farms for orchards (principally prunes and tropical fruits),
poultry, wheat, pigs, dairying, vineyards, and mixed farming will
be made available from time to time. Grazing areas of Crown
Lands will be made available by notification in the Government
Gazette under Homestead Farm or Crown Lease tenure.


A careful selection will be made from the applications received,
and blocks will be allotted only to those who appear to have a
reasonable prospect of success.
The Minister retains the right, up to the time of confirmation, to
remove from the settlement any person considered to be unsatis-
factory, and any person so removed will not be entitled to com-
pensation.
Tenure. —A freehold title will be given after all conditions
have been fulfilled and payment made of all moneys due
to the Crown.
Residence. —Rive years, less the period of any residence
performed before the date of confirmation.
Purchase Money.— Usually the instalment is 6 per cent, of
the total purchase money, and of this instalment 5 per
cent, on the outstanding balance is taken as interest.
First payment is due twelve months after confirmation.
The terms of payment extend over thirty-eight years.
Power is given to suspend payment of the first two
instalments, and also the third instalment provided
improvements to the value of the three instalments have
been effected by the holder in addition to improvements
effected out of moneys advanced by the Crown.
Fencing. —Boundaries to be fenced with an approved fence
• within three years from confirmation.
Settlement Purchases.
The Closer Settlement Acts provide for one or more qualified
discharged soldiers purchasing privately-owned land upon terms
approved by the Minister for Lands. This approval having been
obtained, the intending settler is required to pay the first instal-
ment of the purchase money, either 6 per cent, or 6£ per cent, of
the purchase price, the balance being provided by the Government
and repaid (capital and interest) by annual instalments. The land
is occupied as a “ Settlement Purchase,” the conditions attaching
to which are that the purchaser shall perform five years’ residence
thereon, commencing within twelve months after the purchase;
improvements- equal in value to 10 per cent, of the capital value
must be effected within two years, 15 per cent, within five years,
and 25 per cent, within ten years from the commencement of the
purchase; improvements on the land at the date of selection will
be credited when calculating the foregoing percentages.
These provisions apply only to the land and permanent im-
provements on it. If it is desired to purchase any stock, tools, or
implements already on the holding, it may only be done out of the
money available for financial assistance —see under the heading
” Financial Assistance.”


The maximum value for land and improvements is £2,500, but
in special cases this may be increased to £3,000.
Share Farming or Leasing Private Lands.
As a means of increasing settlement, and for the purpose of
assisting those men who desire to settle in special localities, the
provision of financial assistance may be directed to assist them in
the event of their taking up a holding as a share-farm or on a lease-
hold basis. The conditions must be equitable to the settler, and
must be submitted to the Department for approval before anj
financial assistance will be granted. The advance is available for
the encouragement of this form of rural occupation (not for struc-
tural improvements), and each case will be considered on its merits.
Settlement on Irrigation Areas.
Discharged soldiers desirous of obtaining farms on Government
irrigation areas should secure separate pamphlets, setting forth the
conditions fully, from the Water Conservation and Irrigation
Commission, 39 Hunter-street, Sydney. (See page 23).
Western Lands.
Areas will be made available from time to time in the Western
Division, full particulars of which may be obtained from the Secre-
tary to the Western Lands Commission, 279 George-street, Sydney.
Financial Assistance.
1. An advance to an approved amount not exceeding £625 is
available for every soldier-settler on a home maintenance area, for
the following purposes :
(a) The clearing, fencing, draining, water supply, and general
improvement of the said land;
(&) the purchase of implements, stock, seed, plants, and such
other things as may be deemed necessary to satisfactorily
occupy and develop the land; or
(c) the erection of buildings on land owned by such soldier or
held by him under lease from the Crown or the Water
Conservation and Irrigation Commission.
2. Advances will not be made on areas which are not considered
to be sufficient for home maintenance.
3. An advance cannot be made for furniture or household effects,
nor for deposits to apply for land, nor for camp equipment.


4. Money will be advanced up to an approved amount, not exceed-
ing £625, for seed, stock, tools, and implements to share farmers,
and to lessees of private lands whose leases have a term of not less
than five years. In each case the share farming agreement or
lease must be produced for inspection and approval. An advance
will not be made to share farmers or lessees of private lands for
buildings or improvements.
5. Before an application for an advance can be considered, a
settler must state in detail what his requirements are, giving an
estimate of cost in each case, and must also give particulars of the
contemplated line of development. Each application will be con-
sidered on its merits, and, if approved, the applicant will be in-
formed in writing of the items in respect of which the advance will
be made. No advances will be made for items outside the approval.
6. Advances for improvements will be made when the work is
finished, or, if desired, progress payments may be obtained. Ad-
vances will be made for improvements effected by a settler in the
same way as if the work had been done by contract or hiied labour.
Advances will be made for materials when required.
7. Payments in respect of advances will only be made upon the
certificate of a person nominated by the Department, or the local
Repatriation Committee, stating that work to the value of the
advance has been done, or, in the case of implements, stock, &c.,
that the proposed purchase is fair and reasonable. Settlers may
arrange personally with the nominee for inspection, &c., when a
certificate is required.
8. In every case in which a certificate is sought, the Depart-
mental letter approving of the advance must be produced for the
information of the Government nominee or local Repatriation
Committee.
9. When selecting stock, plant, or implements for the purchase
of which an advance is sought, settlers will obtain an offer of what
they require and submit it to the Government nominee or local
Repatriation Committee, who will give a certificate of value and a
description of the various items. When a proposed purchase of
implements is to be made from a known reputable company or
firm the certificate will not be required, but settlers should (after
showing the Departmental letter of approval for the advance)
obtain a pro forma invoice upon which the Department will arrange
with the company or firm for the required payment. Each certi-
ficate must be accompanied by a written statement signed by the
settler that he has received the articles, &c.
10. Plant or implements which are the subject of an advance
must be purchased outright.
11. Before an advance may be made for stock, the settler must be
in residence on his holding, which must be sufficiently fenced to
provide a paddock for the stock, and there must be a satisfactory
water supply.


12. In the matter of stock (other than horses), advances will be
made for breeding stock only. Security will be taken not only
upon the stock, but also upon all its progeny, none oj which may be
disposed oj without the consent oj the Department. Such consent
may be conditional, and before entering into negotiations for sale,
settlers should, as a preliminary, notify the Department that they
contemplate selling (stating full particulars of the stock), and
ascertain whether and to what extent consent will be given.
REPAYMENT OF ADVANCE.
The terms of repayment are usually as follows :
House, Water Supply, Fencing, and other permanent
improvements. —By payments extended over twenty-
five years (first five years’ interest only to be paid).
Tools, Stock and Implements. —By payments extended over
six years (interest only to be paid at end of first year).
Seeds, Plants, Trees, &c. —Usually in one year.
Interest on advances is fixed by the Act as “ Not exceeding 3!
per cent, for the first year, 4 per cent, for the second year, and so
on, the rate increasing by not more than one-half per cent, for each
subsequent year until the rate determined by the Minister (in
accordance with the Act) has been reached.” The maximum rate
has been fixed at 5! per cent.
Sustenance.
By arrangement with the Department of Repatriation, and on
the recommendation of the Director of Soldiers’ Settlements,
sustenance may be obtained for a period not exceeding six months
in the first two years of occupation, if the circumstances so warrant.
The rates allowed are as follows :
For a single man —£l per week (inclusive of pension).
For a married man —£l 10s. per week, and 2s. 6d. per week for
each child up to four, under the age of 16 years (inclusive
of pensions).
Sustenance is also payable by the Department of Lands for
varying terms on certain Group Settlements (e.g., poultry farms,
orchards, market gardens). Inquiry should be made, and definite
information obtained as to the extent of the sustenance allowed.
Training Farms.
Training farms have been established at :
Grantham Stud Poultry Farm, Seven Hills.—For training in
poultry farming.
Glen Innes Nursery.—For training in general horticulture.


By arrangement with the Department of Agriculture, certain
colleges and farms are available for training of intending settlers.
Sustenance during training will be provided at the following
rates :—•
Soldier without dependents
£
2
s.
2
d:
o per week
Soldier and wife
2
12
o
Soldier, wife and one child
2
15
6
Soldier, wife and two children
2
19
o ,,
Soldier, wife and three children ...
3
2
6
Soldier, wife and four or more
CHILDREN
3
6
o
These rates are inclusive of pensions, if any.
These rates may possibly be altered from time to time. Appli-
cants must satisfy themselves of the rate of sustenance payable
before entering upon training.
Where board, or board with lodging is provided, the value of it
will be determined and deductions from sustenance allowance made
accordingly.
Sheep, Cattle, and Dairy Share Farming.
On Group Settlements only, where the advance of £625 is not
sufficient to stock the land after making necessary improvements
and providing implements, &c., sheep, cattle, or dairy stock may
be allotted on shares to a limited extent at the following rates :
SHEEP.
From the yearly profits the Minister will deduct :
(a) 6 per cent, of the said profits.
(b) Interest at the rate of 6 per cent, per annum on the value
of the animals supplied by him during the year, and on
all sums of money expended by him in any way whatever
on, or in connection with the share scheme.
(c) 4 per cent, of the nett profits for costs of supervising working
and control.
(d) The sum of 3s. per sheep, which is the estimated deprecia-
tion.
The settler will be entitled at the yearly adjustment of accounts
to the balance of the nett profits, and to all the lambs.


CATTLE.
From the yearly profits the Minister will deduct :
(a) 6 per cent, of the nett profits.
(b) Interest at the rate of 6 per cent, per annum on the value
of the animals supplied, and on all sums of money ex-
pended by him in any way whatever on or in connection
with the share scheme.
(c) 4 per cent, of the nett profits for cost of supervising, work-
ing and control.
(d) The sum of £i ios. per head per annum, which is the
estimated depreciation.
The settler will be entitled at the yearly adjustment of accounts
to the balance of the nett profits, and to all the calves.
DAIRY CATTLE.
The settler will pay the sum of £i ios. per cow per year, and will
be entitled to half the calves.
Railway Concessions.
Soldiers travelling to inspect land proposed to be taken up under
the Returned Soldiers' Settlement Act will be carried free on one
return journey only, second class tickets being issued on presenta-
tion at the booking-office of the approved certificate from the
Department of Lands.
Soldiers, who are successful applicants for blocks of land, will,
with their families and such belongings (including live-stock) as
were in their possession immediately prior to taking up the land
the live-stock not to be more than sufficient for the land required—
be carried at half the ordinary fares and rates when journeying by
rail to take up their residence on such land. The concession will
be subject to the production of certificate from the Department of
Lands, and will not be allowed unless travel is made within six
months after respective holdings have been granted to applicants.
Crown Lana Agents.
Discharged soldiers who desire to avail themselves of the pro-
vision made for them by the Government of New South Wales, and
who, residing in the country, have not transacted their business at
the Returned Soldiers’ Settlement Branch of the. Lands Depart-
ment when passing through Sydney on their way home, should
consult the Crown Land Agent for the District in which they wish
to settle, or in the town nearest to their place of residence.


Crown Land Agents are established throughout New South Wales,
in the following cities and towns :
Albury.
Armidale.
Balranald.
Barmedman.
Bathurst.
Bega.
Bellingen.
Bingara.
Bombala.
Bourke.
Braidwood.
Brewarrina.
Broken Hill.
Burrowa.
Carcoar.
Casino.
Cobar.
CONDOBOLIN.
COOMA.
COONABARABRAN.
COONAMBLE.
COOTAMUNDRA.
COROWA.
COWRA.
Deniliquin.
Dubbo.
Dunedoo.
Dungog.
Eden.
Forbes.
Glen Innes.
Gosford.
Goulburn.
Grafton.
Grenfell.
Gundagai.
Gunnedah.
Gunning.
Hay.
Hillston.
Inverell.
Kempsey.
Kiama.
Lismore.
Lithgow.
Maitland.
Milton.
Molong.
Moree.
Moruya.
Moss Vale.
Mudgee.
Murrurundi.
Murwillumbah.
Muswellbrook.
Narrabri.
Narrandera.
Newcastle.
Nowra.
Nyngan.
Orange.
Parkes.
Parramatta.
Penrith.
Picton.
Port Macquarie.
Queanbeyan.
Rylstone.
Scone.
Singleton.
Stroud.
Tamworth.
Taree.
Temora.
Tenterfield.
Tumbarumba.
Tumut.
Urana.
Wagga Wagga.
Walgett.
Walcha.
Warialda.
Warren.
Wellington.
Wentworth.
Windsor.
Wilcannia.
Wollongong.
Wyalong.
Yass.
Young.
IV (b). —Irrigation Settlements.
Further Concessions to Soldiers.
The conditions authorised and imposed by the Returned Soldiers’
Settlement Act apply also to settlement on the irrigated areas
controlled by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission.
The Commissioners have made special arrangements, involving
valuable concessions, to meet the requirements of returned Soldiers,
but, as the scheme is as yet only in its initial stages, amendments


in detail may from time to time be necessary, and intending settlers
are advised to keep in touch with the officers of the Commission,
and to obtain from them exact particulars of the proposals.
The Head Office of the Commission is at 39 Hunter-street (near
Castlereagh-street), Sydney.
For Men Without Capital.
Land has been specially reserved for Returned Soldiers on the
Mirrool Irrigation Area, in close proximity to the town of Griffith,
394 miles by rail from Sydney.
The terms appeal particularly to soldiers who have very little
or no capital to invest- but who are anxious to “ make good.”
It is therefore provided that, in such cases, the soldier without
means shall be eligible for a farm after performing —
( a) not less than three months' satisfactory work on the
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area; or
( b) a period of training at a Government Experimental Farm,
such period being fixed according to circumstances.
The work referred to may comprise clearing, ploughing, grading,
construction of irrigation ditches, tank sinking, fencing, and such
other work as may be found necessary.
While so employed the men will be provided with sleeping
accommodation and meals (for which a charge of, at present not
exceeding, 255. a week will be made).
Award rates will be paid for the work done.
For Men With Capital.
Returned Soldiers, possessed of what is deemed by the Com-
missioners to be sufficient capital of their own, will be eligible to
apply for any farm which is not within the area set apart for
soldiers applying under the conditions set out in the preceding
paragraph.
These farms will be under Perpetual Lease tenure within the
meaning of the Crown Lands Consolidation Act, 1913. Annual
rent and water rates will be chaiged, and these and other terms
and conditions will be announced by notice in the Government
Gazette.
Financial Help.
The terms of the Returned Soldiers’ Settlement Acts applying
to the grant of an advance not exceeding £625 apply also to
settlement on the Irrigation Areas. (See pages 18 to 20.)
An additional advance (at a fixed rate of 5 per cent, interest)
will in certain cases be granted by the Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commissioners to help the soldier-settler to bring his
farm to a proper stage of productiveness.


Sustenance Allowance.
Upon a settler entering into occupation of his farm he may be
granted by the Repatriation Department a sustenance allowance
for a period not exceeding six months in the first two' years of
occupation. The amount allowed by the Repatriation Department
may be supplemented by the Commission in the form of a cash
advance against the value of the settler’s labour on his farm, but
such advance will form part of his indebteaness and will be
repayable.
The special advances made by the Commissioners may be
continued for such periods as may be deemed necessary to enable
the farm to become reasonably productive. It is anticipated that
they will become unnecessary after five years in the case of fruit
farms, and after two years in the case of dairy farms.
The principles governing these advances are the same as are
explained under the general Land Settlement Scheme (see page 18),
but all intended settlers should obtain full particulars by applying
to either the Head Office of the Commission or to the local offices
at Leeton and Griffith.
System of Repayment.
All payments for rent and water rates or repayments for any
advances whatsoever will be suspended in the case of fruit farms
for five years, and in the case of dairy farms for two years from
the date of granting.
At the expiration of such respective periods, the total indebted-
ness to the Commission and the Crown, with interest thereon at
the rates stated in foregoing paragraphs, will be consolidated, and
will then become repayable to the Commission in forty equalised
semi-annual instalments covering principal and interest.
Any settler will be allowed to liquidate the whole or any portion
of his indebtedness at any time, or to utilise any capital he may
possess, or of which he may become possessed, in the further
development of his block as he may desire.
Simultaneously with the granting of the farm, the settler will be
required, as security in return for the assistance rendered him, to
execute a mortgage over his farm and any improvements thereon
in favour of the Commission, and also a lien, stock mortgage, or
hire-purchase agreement in respect of crops, stock, or plant.


V. —What the N.S.W. Government
Savings Bank will do.
1. The Government Savings Bank of New South Wales (Head
Office, ii Moore-street, Sydney), makes advances from the
Advance Department of the Bank on the security of any of the
following tenures :
(a) Freeholds.
( b ) i. Conditional purchases, with or without associated con-
ditional leases.
2. Homestead grants.
3. Homestead selections.
4. Settlement leases.
5. Settlement purchases.
6. Conditional purchase leases.
7. Additional conditional purchase leases.
8. Special conditional purchase leases.
9. Crown leases.
10. Homestead farm leases.
11. Irrigation farm leases (as defined by the Crown Lands
Act).
12. Holdings that have been converted into any of the fore-
going tenures under the Crown Lands (Amendment)
Act, 1908, the Crown Lands (Amendment) Act, 1912,
or any amendment or consolidation thereof.
2. Under the Bank Act the maximum sum that may be loaned
from the Advance Department is £ 2,000 and the minimum £SO.
At the present time, however, applications for loans in excess of
£750 are not being considered.
3. The amount that will be advanced on freehold or certificated
conditional purchases and associated conditional lease land will
not exceed two-thirds of the Bank’s value of the security, while on
the other tenures mentioned above, the advance will not exceed
three-fourths of the Bank's value of the improvements, or two-
thirds of the sale value of the security.
4. The present rate of interest is per cent., and is only charged
to the borrower from the date the advance is made.
5. Loans on the security of any of the tenures mentioned in
Clause 1 may be repaid by half-yearly instalments, including
principal and interest, within a period not exceeding thirty-one


years. If the security embraces Crown leasehold land having a
currency of less than thirty-one years, the period fixed for the
repayment of the loan will be reduced accordingly.
6. Loans on the security of freehold or certificated conditional
purchases may be repaid by half-yearly instalments as mentioned
above, or, at the expiration of a fixed term not exceeding'five and a
half years, during which interest only is payable half-yearly, and
then by half-yearly instalments, including principal and interest,
extending over a term not exceeding thirty-one years from the
expiration of the fixed term.
7. All moneys due to the Crown (including the total amount
outstanding in respect of improvements and survey fees) will be
deducted from any advance made, but the balance required to
convert conditional purchases into freehold will not be deducted.
Amounts due to the Pastures Protection Boards for netting, and
rates, and to Municipal or Shire Councils or the Federal Land Tax
Commissioner, as well as amounts owing on privately effected
improvements, will be deducted from advances made.
8. A borrower may repay the whole of his loan on any date that
an instalment or interest-payment falls due, or he may on any such
date pay £$ or any multiple of £5 in excess of the usual instalment
or interest-payment, and any amount so repaid will be placed to a
special account carrying interest at the same rate as the mortgage.
9. Applications for loans must be made on the Bank’s form, and
should be accompanied by a map showing clearly by heavy lines
the boundaries of the land offered as security, and the necessary
valuation fee, which will be as follows :
Where the holding offered as security is situated—
£
s.
d.
Within 5 miles of a railway station or shipping
port in New South Wales ...
2
10
0
Over 5 miles, but not exceeding io miles from
such station or port
3
0
0
Over io miles, but not exceeding 20 miles
from such station or port ...
4
0
0
And over 20 miles from such station or port ...
5
0
0
io. In the event of a subsequent application in respect of the
same security being lodged by the same applicant, half of the above
valuation fees only will be charged, provided that the security is
subject to a loan from the Bank at the date of inspection.
n. Forms of application, with explanatory leaflets giving all
particulars of the conditions under which advances are made, may
be obtained at the Head Office of the Bank, n Moore-street, Sydney,
or at any Branch, or the office of any Crown Land Agent.


VI. —Australian Repatriation
Scheme.
The Commonwealth Government, through its Repatriation Depart-
ment, undertakes the duty of finding employment for soldiers after
their discharge from military service, and of finding a new vocation
for those who require it.
The Department claims to have formulated and put into operation
a scheme which “ will enable the soldier, in a great number of
cases, to repair the economic loss which service to his country has
entailed, and which will hasten his social restoration.”
The work of the Department is classified under the headings
of :
Employment,
Vocational training,
Medical attention,
General assistance,
but it is pointed out that “ the scheme consists of a set of Statu-
tory Regulations which prescribe the limits of the help that can be
given, and which define the circumstances under which an applicant
is eligible for assistance.”
The following summary of the operations of the Department will
serve as a general indication of what is provided for the returned
soldier, but those directly concerned should apply to the Depart-
ment for detailed information.
Employment.
The Department undertakes to provide suitable employment
for those who are able to follow their previous or some similar
occupation, and to pay sustenance until such opportunities are pre-
sented.
When an opportunity for suitable employment is presented to an
applicant he must, failing some good reason, avail himself of it.
Until that opportunity is presented, however, each applicant is
entitled to sustenance under the following scale :
(a) A soldier without dependants, a weekly income (inclusive
of pension) of £2 2s.


A soldier with a wife, a weekly income (inclusive of their
combined pensions) of £2 12s.
(c) A soldier with a wife and one child, a weekly income
(inclusive of their combined pensions) of £2 15s. 6d.
(d) A soldier with a wife and two children, a weekly income
(inclusive of their combined pensions) of £2 19s. ‘
(e) A soldier with a wife and three children, a weekly income
(inclusive of their combined pensions) of £3 2s. 6d.
(/) A soldier with a wife and four children, a weekly income
(inclusive of the pensions payable to the soldier, his wife
and four children) of £3 6s.
A widower with children is entitled to the same sustenance
allowance as if his wife were living. A soldier who upon his dis-
charge is not on account of ill-health, capable of immediately
resuming his former occupation, is, also, during the period of his
convalescence, entitled to assistance under this scale.
Vocational Training.
If a man is prevented by wounds or illness, which are the result
of war service, from going back to the kind of job he was formerly
engaged in, the Department takes him in hand and finds out what
useful branch of industry he can be trained for. The soldier i«
consulted upon the choice of his new calling.
A man who is but slightly incapacitated may be trained in an
ordinary workshop or factory, or he may be given a short intensive
course of instruction at a special Technical School.
Should a soldier be placed in a workshop or factory he is
guaranteed (inclusive of his pension) the minimum wage of the
industry in which he is being trained, but should he be placed in a
technical school he is paid, during his instruction, sustenance under
the scale quoted m reference to employment.
Special provision is made for a soldier whose incapacity while
permitting him to perform some useful labour, is so severe that it
Wl !i P re I clude hlm from ever entirely earning his own living He
will if he so desires, be trained in a National Workshop and after-
wards remain in such institution as a regular employee
Other more or less minor features of the scheme are dealt with
under this heading. Training of apprentices is one of these An
apprentice whose indentures were interrupted by enlistment will be
enabled to finish his apprenticeship, and during the completion of
his indentures he will be paid sustenance at a rate which will brins
his income up to the wages of a journeyman in the particular in-
dustry in which he is being trained.


Medical Treatment and General Assistance.
Surgical Aids and Medical Treatment are available to soldiers
whose war injuries necessitate them. A scheme is being put into
operation whereby medical officers will be appointed to local areas
throughout the Commonwealth, and every case demanding medical
care and attention will receive it.
Should a discharged soldier, owing to the recurrence at any
time of injuries or illness arising from active service, require hospital
of other medical treatment, this will be provided, and he will be
paid sustenance under the scale previously set out.
Fares to and from hospital and travelling expenses are paid.
A married soldier incapacitated to the extent of being unable to
engage in his usual employment, or a soldier who prior to enlistment
was dependent on a business which he owned and conducted, may
be advanced up to £l5O to purchase a business, plant, or stock, to
enable him to re-establish himself.
The scheme also provides for :
Relief from onerous mortgages.
Educational grants.
Equipment with tools of trade.
Free passages to and from the Commonwealth to incapacitated
soldiers, their wives and children, and other specified
applicants.
Grants for furniture.
Homes for Married Men.
A scheme providing for advances to enable men now married,
or who subsequently marry, to acquire homes on most liberal
terms, is now in operation, and forms of application may be
obtained at the Departmental Offices.
Care of the Seriously Incapacitated.
Soldiers who are so seriously incapacitated that they are not in a
position to provide for themselves, and widows and orphans, are
the special care of the Department. For the total and permanently
incapacitated a living allowance on the following scale is paid :
Soldier, unmarried
(inclusive of pension)
Per week,
s. d.
42 0
Soldier and wife
,,
60
0
,, and
I child ,,
... 63
6
2 children ,,
... 67
0
y>
3
... 70
6
t 9
4
... 74
0
9 9
5 ,, or more ,,
... 77
6


Alternative provision is made for those who are no longer able
to assist themselves by the establishment of hostels, where the
inmates may spend their days ’midst pleasant surroundings, and
be assured of skilled attention. Hostels have already been secured
in Sydney and Melbourne, and others will be established in other
capital cities.
For widows with children a living allowance on the following
scale is provided :
Widow, without children (inclusive of pension)
Per week,
s. d.
42 0
Widow with i child ,,
... 51 0
,, 2 children ,,
... 54 6
>. 3 „
58 0
„ 4 „
61 6
,, 5 ,, or more ,,
64 6
Provision is also made for the assistance of dependent mothers,
and of incapacitated dependent fathers of deceased soldiers, and it
is desirable that those concerned should apply to the Department
for full information.
Land Settlement.
The Department, in co-operation with the State Governments,
renders assistance to the man who desires and is qualified to settle
upon the land.
The New South Wales scheme is explained in Part IV of this
book.
Travelling A llowances .
In certain cases travelling allowances are available to applicants.
Where an applicant has to travel in order to obtain medical
treatment or surgical aids, his fare, and 7s. 6d. per day when
travelling by land, and 3s. per day when travelling by sea, is paid
by the Department.
Where a soldier is being sent to employment his fare to his
destination is paid; and where he is about to enter into occupation
of land or of a business, or has obtained employment in a particular
locality in which he desires to make his home, the Department will
pay such fares and freights as are necessary for the transference of
himself, his family, and a reasonable amount of household belong-
ings, to the locality.


Where to Apply.
Every soldier who requires the assistance of the Department
should make application as early as possible.
Applications should be made personally to the branch of the
Department in the capital city of the State in which applicant
resides, or to local Committees in the Country.
In the event of a soldier leaving the capital city for his home in
the country before lodging an application, he should then apply
to the nearest Repatriation Local Committee. These Local
Committees have been created in various parts of the Commonwealth,
and the headquarters of such an organisation is, as a rule, in the
principal centre of each local government area, such as a munici-
pality, shire, district council, or roads board.
A list of the Committees in New South Wales is published at the
end of this book (Appendix D, page 45).


V II—The Returned Sailors and Soldiers'
Imperial League of Australia*
Patrons:
Admiral Sir JOHN R. JELLICOE
R.N., G.C.8., 0.M., G.C.V.O.
Gen. Sir WILLIAM R. BIRDWOOD
K.C.5.1., K.C.M.G., C. 8., C.1.E., D.S.O.
President:
W. K. BOLTON.
General Secretary :
W. HENDERSON.
Headquarters:
Nos. 14 and 15, Third Floor,
STOCK EXCHANGE BUILDING
COLLINS STREET,
MELBOURNE.
New South Wales Branch and
Club Rooms :
MACDONELL HOUSE,
315-321, PITT STREET,
SYDNEY.
President:
R. N. TEECE.
Secretary:
A. G. POTTER.
AIMS AND OBJECTS.
To protect the interests and forward the welfare of Members and their
dependants and the dependants of fallen Comrades.
To perpetuate in the civil life of the community the principles for which
we have fought.
To promote social intercourse among Members.
To obtain by united action that which each separate Branch, or
individual Members thereof, would have more difficulty in obtaining in
its or their separate capacity.
The League is National (in the broad, and not in the political,’’’sense),
and is non-partisan and non-sectarian. The League is officially recognised
by the Government.
How the League is Governed.
The Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League of Australia was
formed on the 6th June, 1916. Prior to this an informal conference of one
delegate each from South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland, and
Victoria had met to discuss the formation. Since the 6th June, 1916
Congress met on nth September, 1916, at Brisbane; Ist March, 1917, at
Sydney; and Ist March, 1918, at Hobart.
At the first Congress, held at Brisbane, delegates representing South
Australia, Victoria, Tasmania, and Queensland were present and affiliated
Members representing New South Wales, not then affiliated, were also there.
New South Wales was affiliated prior to the first Sydney Congress, and since
then all the States, save Western Australia, have been represented at
Congress.
■ ! •.! 1:, 1
58001 B


Since the Congress at Hobart in March, 1918, the Western Australian
Branch has been formed and is now affiliated with the League. At the
Executive Meeting held in August, 1918, at the Central Office of the League,
all the States of the Commonwealth were directly represented for the first
time.
The Administrative Head Office is governed by a Central Executive,
consisting of one member elected by each State Branch, the President the
Hon. Treasurer, with a General Secretary, who is a paid permanent official,
at the Headquarters of the League, in Stock Exchange Buildings Colhns-
street, Melbourne. This Executive meets at intervals throughout the year,
and transacts the general business of the League m the interim between the
Annual Meetings of Congress. Congress meets once a year at such capital
city as is selected by the previous Congress. Each State Branch may send
delegates to Congress to represent the State. Congress alter or add
to the rules and by-laws, and generally transact all the Federal busines
of the League, and is the final arbiter between a Branch or Sub-Branch and
its Members. The Constitution Rules and By-laws of the League are capable
of alteration and extension as therein provided.
One Branch of the League has been formed in each State—and within
the State, Sub-Branches under the government of the State Branch. District
or Sub-Branches have been formed, and are being further established, as
occasion demands. The Branches may make their own rules and by-laws
so long as the same are not in conflict with the constitution, rules, and
bv-laws of the central body, and generally manage, and are responsible for
their own affairs. Each Branch pays a capitation fee of is. per member
to the Central Executive for the expenses of the Head Office. The
membership fee is 10s. per annum, which includes the Badge of Membership.
The government of the Branches and Sub-Branches is vested in Committees
elected at General Meetings of Members, with President, Vice-President
Secretary, and Treasurer. There are also various Sub-Committees in tne
capitals' formed from the larger Committee for specific duties.
LIST OF SUB-BRANCHES IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
T OWN.
Secretary.
Address.
Bankstown
Newcastle ...
... T. Murphy
... P. W. Vercoe
. Soldiers’ Settlement.
. Anzac Memorial Institute.
Lithgow
Kurri Kurri
... G. R. Mackley ..
. Post Office.
... S. G. Wiggington..
. Cessnock-street.
Inverell ...
... C. E. Clarke
. Post Office.
Wollongong
... S. B. Wells
. c/o J. J. Kelly, Post Office.
Manly
... Sergt. Muncaster ..
. The Corso.
Richmond ...
... C. A. Pryke
. Post Office.
Grenfell ...
... J. Goodman
. Estate Agent, Main-street.
Young
... R. M. Macadam ..
. c/o Tresillean & Dun, Auctioneers.
Narrandera
... H. L. Tepper
. East-street.
Tam worth ...
... T. J. Treloar, jr. ..
. Tamworth Post Office.
Armidale
... A. P. Mills
. Post Office.
Glen Innes
... E. O’Donnell
. Glen Innes.
Quirindi
... I. A. Corbett
. Post Office.
Hay
... R. D. Ferguson ..
. Post Office.
Maitland
... H. L. Ryan
. 14 Victoria-street.
Parramatta
... W. W. Farlow
. Union-street.
Singleton ...
... R. L. Bailey
.. Recruiting Office.
Bathurst
... Rev. B. Ball
.. “ The Rectory.”
Rockdale
... R. D. Cox
.. Argyle-street, Arncliffe.
Leichhardt
... F. Noakes
.. 35 Ramsey-street, Haberfield.


Town. Secretary. Address.
Katoomba ... ... L. J. Bogus ... “ Linlithgow,” Merriwa-street.
Penrith ... ... A. Costello ... “ Lemongrove,” Penrith.
North Shore Line ... R. Dunlop ... “ Cesca,” Mowbray-road, Artarmon
Coonabarabran ... J. Cochrane ... c o Bank of N.S.W.
Coolah ... ... A. E. Jamieson ... Oban Estate.
Bingara ... ... J. Bryant ... Maitland-street.
Cessnock ... ... A. E. Shillham ... Cessnock.
Gladesville ... W. Knight ... Great North Road.
Wyalong and A. B. Greelman ... Post Office, West Wyalong.
West Wyalong.
Albury ... ... E. J. Snell ... c/o Dalgety & Co., Albury.
Queanbeyan ... R. J. Everson ... Queanbeyan.
Monaro ... ... T. Relph ... ... Court House, Cooma.
Hastings River ... A. F. Bonner ... Post Office, Wauchope.
Gunnedah and Dis... C. A. Kentwell ... Sandford Hall, Gunnedah.
Warialda ... ... F. R. Newman ... Warialda.
Gilgandra ... ... J. Christie... ... Post Office.
Coonamble ... N. Cunningham ... Post Office.
Parkes ... ... W. G. Carey ... Post Office.
Manilla ... ... B. V. Clarke ... Manilla.
Dubbo ... ... W. J. Aldridge ... Bourke-street, Newtown Dubbo.
Forbes ... ... T. E. Drane ... 3 “ The Terrace,” Sherrif-street.
Cootamundra ... W. Stutchbury ... Council Chambers.
Nambucca River ... J. Malian Bowraville.
Condobolin ... E. Reynolds ... Post Office.
Kiama ... ... J. S. Eades ... Jerrara Public School.
North Sydney ... G. Simons ... ... “ Lilard,” Yeo-street, Neutral Bay.
Bellingen River ... N. F. Goulding ... Public School.
West Wallsend ... J. Williams ... Wilson-street, West Wallsend.
Wagga F. Trimble ... Govt. Savings Bank, Wagga.
Manning River ... H. Barber ... Taree, Post Office Box 70.
Merriwa W. Hackett ... Merriwa.
Tenterfield ... A. Watt ... ... “ Warrenfels,” Tenterfield.
Petersham ... ... A. J. S. Baker ... 10 Crystal-street, Petersham.
Bulli-Woonona ... T. C. Harwood ... Bulli.
Uralla ... ... W. G. Nixon ... “ Maroubra,” John-street, Uralla.
Kempsey ... ... W. E. Smith ... Kempsey Post Office.
Tumut ... ... M. Colyer ... ... Post Office, Tumut.
Temora ... ... A. H. Carson ... Royal Exchange Hotel.
Corrimal ... ... R. P. Hindmarsh “ The Grange,” Corrimal.
Weston ... ... J. T. Balsdon ... Post Office, Weston.
Mosman ... ... W. H. Hannam ... Torrington.
Bega ... ... W. C. Godfrey ... Post Office, Bega.
Barmedman ... A. G. Griffiths ... Post Office, Barmedman.
Orange ... ... M. Stewart ... Town Hall, Orange.
Greta ... ... H. Mitchison ... High-street, Greta.
Muswellbrook ... H. G. Rootham ... Foley-street.
Walgett ... ... F. Nicholas ... Imperial Hotel, Walgett.
Peak Hill ... ... S. W. Broadfoot ... Box, Post Office.
Austinmer and W. G. Dowell ... Thirroul Post Office.
Thirroul.
Cowra ... ... D. J. Toovey ... Cowra Post Office.
Wellington ... G. Wilkins ... Wellington Post Office.
Dorrigo R. S. Vincent ... Dorrigo.
Portland ... ... R. T. Walker ... Futh-street, Portland.
Moree ... ... C. R. Rogers ... Moree Post Office.


Appendices.
Appendix A. —Map of New South Wales, showing lands set apart
for Returned Soldiers, with reference tables.
B. —Statistical tables explanatory of the New South
Wales Scheme for the Settlement of Returned
Soldiers.
C. —Schedule of Government Labour Exchanges in
New South Wales.
D. —List of Repatriation Local Committees in New
South Wales, with names of Secretaries.
E. Statement showing some of the directions in which
the New South Wales Government and Public have
rendered service to Soldiers since 1914.


Appendix A.
REFERENCE TO ILLUSTRATIVE MAP SHOWING LANDS
SET APART BY GAZETTAL FOR RETURNED SOLDIERS.
Red Circle %
Reference
Number.
Number of
Blocks.
Total Area.
Acres.
Reference
Number.
Number of
Blocks.
Total Area.
Acres.
I
17
1.75 >
39
36
28,485
2
56
2,860
4°
6
31.772
3
19
4.721
41
19
72,639
4
60
7.342
42
41
47,983
5
26
16,904
43
16
17.331
6
9
2,862
44
16
32,810
7
19
5. 0 89
45
86
102,041
8
9
17
45
6,696
2,920
46
47
30
11
35,797
3,016
IO
12
5.847
48
13
17.336
ii
22
13.378
49
2 °
39,979'
12
56
12,470
50
18
897
13
15
28,468
5i
45
8,346
14
14
31.372
52
17
1,231
15
20
43.098
53
23
1,487
l6
10
18,914
54
39
i,35i
17
10
17.357
55
15
1,027
18
23
511
56
9
1,217
19
25
6,653
57
29
16,726
20
25
1,348
58
28
6,180'
21
10
423
59
49
11.397
22
7
2,229
60
20
2,063
23
12
2,727
61
8
4,625
24
16
2,359
62
19
1,409
25
9
3,888
63
46
5,840
26
26
256
64
10
47-559
27
16
414
65
36
23,226
28
40
3,625
66
23
3.953
29
204
907
67
4
656
3°
79
514
68
4
2,945
31
49
848
69
11
15,750
3 2
73
2,155
7°
7
22,520
33
38
1,946
7i
24
36,018
34
9
1,357
72
15
3,228
35
12
5.730
73
8
3,166
36
78
8,096
74
14
637
37
28
20,131
75
5
21,893
38
19
22,310
76
15
2,076


N* truth 1X443. V
Compiled, Drown and Printed at the Department of Lands, Sydney N S W ,1919


LANDS PURCHASED BY THE CROWN, AND MADE AVAIL-
ABLE FOR SOLDIERS’ GROUP SETTLEMENT.
Blue Circle #
Reference
Number.
Number of
Blocks.
Total Area.
Acres.
Reference
Number.
Number of
Blocks.
Total Area.
Acres.
I
II
386
12
28
835
2
21
13
9
5,802
3
41
948
14
12
Il6
4
6o
2.485
15
59
533
5
5 2
30,262
16
26
17,909
6
43
8,8lO
17
1
122
7
17
4.750
18
28
12,007
8
33
19,102
19
36
28,000
9
32
I3,66l
20
63
3.190
IO
22
13,698
21
40
23.422
ii
49
32,304
22
34
12,442
ESTATES ACQUIRED FOR SOLDIERS’ SETTLEMENT, BUT
NOT MADE AVAILABLE.
Blue Open Circle, thus O
O NiflMjH
oo oo vo invo o
OW N't 0000 00 10
10 w & rC.
M
O (1)0 O O O® N
'ftOO'HOO M
M
« irct >r>vO O'
fOrocorocococooo
VO O O O O O O O O
O (OOOO O' N O
voooMO»NOt^>no
uS N Ov t}- m m m
MM M
OJ M IT) H O Tf O
H N M H fO t
CO »0 vD O' O h
NNNNNNN(OfO


Appendix B.
SETTLEMENT OF RETURNED
Schedule i.—
Nature of Settlement .
Settlers.
Advances.
Established to December, 1918
No.
(/) 1,100
£
687,500
1919-
Crown Lands
Closer Settlement Acts ... ...
Irrigation area (1st 500 settlers) ...
Intensive Farming ... ... ... ...
850
600
500
1.550
531.250
375.000
312,500
(a) 1,723,710
Totals for 1919
3.500
2,942,460
1920 —
New Railways—
Barmedman-Rankin Springs
Griffith-Hillston ...
Coonabaxabran, near Baradine
Binnaway-Werris Creek
Gilmore-Batlow ...
Tarana-Oberon
418
464
310
130
”3
65
261,250
290,000
193.750
81,250
70.625
40.625
Total ...
1,500
937.500
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area —
Yanco-Griffith Railway ...
2nd 500 Settlers ... ... ...
3rd 500 Settlers ...
500
500
312,500
312,500
Total ... ... ...
1,000
625,000
Intensive Farming ...
1,000
(a) 1,112,100
Further Public Works and development of areas
(roads, bridges, &c.) ...
500
312,500
Totals for 1920
4.500
2,987,100
Grand Totals
8,600
6,617,060
(a) The figure represents the entire amount under the head of
“ advances,” required to establish the settlers on group settle-
ments, inclusive of the cost of all improvements and maintenance
during the unproductive period, together with sustenance until the
settlers become self-supporting. Sustenance for this purpose is an
advance to maintain the settler and family, if any, during the
unproductive period, and is repayable by the settler as soon as
his holding becomes productive.
( b) An area of 229,450 acres of alienated land that would be opened
up by the construction of this line is under notice of acquisition
up till 28th November, 1919, all or any portion of which could be
resumed if required for purposes of soldier settlement.


Appendix B.
SOLDIERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES
Estimated Expenditure.
Resumptions .
Puhlic Works.
Group
Settlements.
Administra-
tion, and
Equipment .
Totals.
Crown
Lands.
Alienated
Lands.
Railways,
&c.
Irrigation
Works.
£
£
£
£
£
£
687,500
...
Debentures
592,740
...
(d) 150,000
158,715
531,250
375,000
462,500
2.475.165
...
592,740
150,000
158,715
3,843,915
72,434
57,500
18,334
19,000
(c)
(C)
Nil.
Nil.
Nil.
(*)
Nil.
45,000
205,629
162.750
231.750
434,988
64.635
141,702
...
539,313
510,250
443,834
535,238
135.260
227,327
167,268
45,ooo
1,241,454
Nil.
2,391,222
85,000
187,157
(d) 275,000
(d) ( e ) 665,000
...
187,157
587,500
1,062,500
Nil.
85,000
187,157
940,000
...
1.837.157
382,400
...
... 102,400
1,596,900
...
37 i <389
683,889
167,268
512,400
1,800,000
940,000
102,400
6,509,168
167,268
1,105,140
1,800,000
1,090,000
261,115
11,040,583
(c) This does not mean that no Crown lands would be opened up by
the construction of these lines. It merely indicates that such lands
are not held under long term leases, and that no compensations
would, therefore, be involved in setting them apart for soldier
settlement.
(d) For construction of subsidiary channels, roads, bridges, and
general developmental works.
(e) Includes for enlargement of Main Canal.
{/) The number of returned soldiers placed on the land to March 31,
1919, in New South Wales, was 1,250.


Appendix
THE SETTLEMENT OF RETURNED
Schedule No, 2. —Distribution of Expenditure
The following is the manner in which it is estimated the
the attached statement, would be
Items.
Purposes.
Settlers.
1919.
No.
£
Already Established
•
••
1,100
687,500
1919
Settlers.
Intensive Farming...
... Advances
978,617
Resumptions ...
►
L55°<
592,740
(a) Administration
99,895
Crown Lands
... Advances
•
•
850
340,000
Closer Settlement Acts
... Advances
•
•
600
240,000
Irrigation Area
... Advances
1
5° 0< )
200,000
Works
J
L
150,000
1920
Settlers.
New Railways
... Advances
1
1,500*
Resumptions ...
J
l
Irrigation Area
... Advances
...
Works...
i,ooo<
30,000
Resumptions ...
-
...
Intensive Farming
... Advances
-\
r
Resumptions ...
>
i,ooo<
...
(a) Administration
„
...
Further Public Works
... Advances
••
500
Totals
••
•
8,600
3,318,752
(a) The expenditure under this head includes the cost of local admini-
stration and supervision and the necessary equipment for the Group
Settlements, such as bacon factories, prune evaporators, manager’s
residence, vehicles, &c., for which provision must, of course, be
made, together with a general store for each settlement, but is
exclusive of Head Office Administration.


B ( contd .).
SOLDIERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
(other than for Railway Construction).
expenditure (other than for Railway Construction) set out in
distributed over the years 1919 to 1925.
1920.
1921.
1922.
1923.
1924.
1925.
Total.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
...
...
...
...
...
687,500
505.159
129,361
36,108
37.232
37.233
1,723,710
...
...
...
...
...
592,740
2 7.574
7> I 94
18,707
2,673
2,672
158,715
191,250
...
...
...
...
531.250
135.000
...
...
...
...
375,000
112,500
...
...
...
312,500
...
...
...
...
150,000
6oo,coo
337.500
...
...
937,500
212,268
...
...
...
...
212,268
400,000
225,000
...
...
625,000
360,000
400,000
150,000
...
...
...
940,000
85,000
...
...
...
...
85,000
631.377
325.909
83,460
23,300
24,022
24,032
1,112,100
382,400
...
...
...
...
382,400
64.450
17,790
4,640
12,070
1.73°
1,720
102,400
200,000
112,500
...
...
...
312,500
3,906,978
1.555,254
292,915
75.275
65,657
25.752
9,240,583
TOTAL EXPENDITURE.
To the above total should be added the amount set apart for Railway
Construction in the attached statement, viz., £1,800,000, as follows :
Total shown above ... ... ... ... £0.240,583
Railway expenditure ... ... ... ... 1,800,000
Grand Total ...£11,040,583


Appendix B. (. contd .). SETTLEMENT OF RETURNED SOLDIERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Schedule 3. — Particulars of Public Works to be undertaken to make land available for settlement.
Description and Locality.
Length.
Amount
required.
Proposed
Date of
Commencement .
Estimated
Duration.
Estimated
Number of Men to
be Employed.
Number of
Holdings
to be
made
available.
Amount required for
Resumptions.
Crown
Lands.
Alienated
Lands.
Railways.
Binnaway-Werris Creek ...
Gilmore-Batlow
Barmedman-Rankin Springs
Coonabarabran towards Burren Junction
Griffith-Hillston
Tar ana-Ober on
Further Public Works and development
of areas ...
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area.
Railway, Yanco-Griffith
Widening of Main Canal, construction of
subsidiary channels and general develop-
mental works
Totals
miles.
88
16
54*
50
46*
20
L
434.968
64.635
205,629
231.750
162.750
141,702
37G389
(a)
(c)
(a)
(«)
(«)
(a)
(a)
ic)
Work in hand
months.
36
12
30
36
30
20
-
(b)
(b)
(b)
(b )
(b)
(b)
(b)
3 00 now employed
400 by end of
1919,500-600 in
1920 and 1921,
400 in 1922.
(<*)
I30
”3
418
310
464
65
500
19,000
72.434
18,334
57.500
i
45.ooo
85,000
1,612,823
187,157
1,090,000
18-24
45 -
2,000
► 1,500
...
...
...
...
3.500
(e)
(a) Actual construction could be commenced at an early date.
( b) It is estimated that on these lines over 2,000 men could be employed very soon after commencement of operations.
(c) These railways have not yet been authorised by Parliament, and the date of commencement must, therefore, be
deferred until such authorisation shall have been obtained.
(d) These numbers will be considerably affected by the percentage of the soldiers employed, who will apply for, and be
allotted farms. (See page Bof accompanying pamphlet issued by the Water Conservation & Irrigation Commission.)
(e) As shown in Schedule No. 1, a further amount of will be required for resumption of estates to be
subdivided for intensive farming.


Appendix C.
N.S.W. Government Labour Exchanges.
CENTRAL LABOUR EXCHANGE:
For Rural and Domestic Workers, Clerks, Shop Assistants, &c. :
76 Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
For Returned Soldiers, Artisans, Mechanics, their Helpers and
Assistants : —Rawson Chambers, 491 Pitt-street, Sydney.
For Waterside Office for Labourers and Navvies :—132 George-
street North, Circular Quay.
BALMAIN EXCHANGE :—302 Darling-street, Balmain.
COUNTRY BRANCHES:—
Broken Hill —Exchange Buildings, Argent-street.
Goulburn — Montague-street.
Lismorb — Molesworth-street.
Orange— 10 Lord’s Place.
Newcastle — Inglis Building, King-street.
Tamworth —Peel-street.
Wagga Wagga— Court House.
Wollongong— Market-street.
Appendix D.
LIST OF REPATRIATION LOCAL COMMITTEES IN N.S.W.
The following is a complete list of the Repatriation Local Committees in New
South Wales. Soldiers residing in the suburbs of Sydney, or in the country,
should inquire for the Secretary of the Local Committee, from whom all necessary
infoimation may be obtained. (The letter M means “Municipality,” S “Shire.”)
Group i. REDFERN, DARLINGTON, and
GLEBE.
Group 2. PADDINGTON, VAUCLUSE,
WOOLLAHRA, WAVERLEY, and
RANDWICK.
Group 3. ALEXANDRIA, WATERLOO,
MASCOT, and BOTANY.
Group 4. NEWTOWN, ERSKINEVILLE,
and St. PETERS.
Group 5. DRUMMOYNE, ANNANDALE,
LEICHHARDT, BALMAIN, and FIVE
DOCK-
Group 6. PETERSHAM and MARRICKVILLE.
Group 7. ASHFIELD, BURWOOD,
STRATHFIELD, CONCORD, HOME-
BUSH, and ENFIELD.
Group 8. ROCKDALE, KOGARAH, BEX-
LEY, and HURSTVILLE.
Group 9. CANTERBURY and BANKS-
TOWN.
Group 10. PARRAMATTA, DUNDAS, CAR-
LINGFORD, RYDALMERE, and ER-
MINGTON.
Group 11. GRANVILLE, AUBURN, LID-
COMBE, and GUILDFORD.
Group 12, PROSPECT, SHERWOOD, and
MERRYLANDS M.; Part of BLACK-
TOWN S.
Group 13. RYDE, HUNTER’S HILL, EAST-
WOOD, and GLADESVILLE.
Group 14. NORTH SYDNEY (including
Neutral Bay), WILLOUGHBY, and LANE
COVE.
Group 15.
Group 16. St. MARY’S, PENRITH, and
CASTLEREAGH.
Group 17. WINDSOR and RICHMOND.
Group 18. WOLLONGONG, NORTH ILLA-
WARRA, and CENTRAL ILLAWARRA
MUNICIPALITIES.
Group 19. KIAMA, GERRINGONG, JAM-
BEROO, and SHELL-HARBOUR.
Group 20. NOWRA, BERRY, BROUGHTON
VALE, and SHOALHAVEN.
Group 21. LAKE MACQUARIE S„ NEW-
CASTLE, NELSON’S, BAY, MERE-
WETHER.
Group 22. LIVERPOOL, SMITHFIELD,
FAIRFIELD, CABRAMATTA, and CAN-
LEY VALE.
Abercrombie and turon s. (inclusive
of Bathurst M.).
ADJUNBILLY S. (inclusive of Gundagai M.J.
AMAROO S. (inclusive of Molong M.).
APSLEY S. (inclusive of Walcha M.).
BALRANALD M. and surrounding district.
ASHFORD S.
BERRIGAN S.
BANNOCKBURN and McINTRYE S. (in-
clusive of Inverell M.).


BARRABA S. (inclusive of Barraba M.).
BELLINGEN S.
BIBBENLUKE S. (inclusive of Bombala M.).
BLAXLAND S (inclusive of Lithgow M.).
BOLWARRA S. (inclusive of West Maitland M.).
BOOMI and BOOLOOROO S. (inclusive of
Moree M.).
BOREE S.
BOGAN S. (inclusive of Nyngan M.).
BOURKE M.
BLACKTOWN S.
BLUE MOUNTAINS S. (inclusive of Munici-
pality of Katoomba).
BLAND S. (inclusive of Wyalong M.).
BULLI S. (inclusive of Municipalities of Helens-
burgh, Clifton, Scarborough, Stanwell Park,
Thirroul, Austinmer, Bulli, Woonona, and
any other District within the Shire of
Bulli).
BURRANGONG S. (inclusive of Young M.).
BYRON S. (inclusive of Mullumbimby M.).
CAMBEWARRA S.
CANOBLAS S. (inc lusive of Orange M.).
CARRATHOOL SHIRE, CARRATHOOL
MUNICIPALITY.
CLYDE S. and Municipality of Ulladulla.
CESSNOCK S. (inclusive of Greta M.).
COBAR M.
COBBORAH S.
COCKBURN S. (inclusive of Tamworth).
CAMDEN and CAMPBELLTOWN M.
COLO S.
COOLAMON S.
COPMANHURST S. (inclusive ofiGrafton M.).
COONABARABRAN S.
COREEN S.
CROOKWELL S.
COOLAH S.
CULCAIRN S. (inclusive of Culcairn M.).
CARGELLIGO and CUBALONG DISTRICT.
DEMONDRILLE S. (inclusive of Murrum-
burrah) M.
DORRIGO S.
DUMARESQ S. (inclusive of Armidale and
Hillgrove M.).
ERINA S.
EUROBODALLA S.
GADARA S. (inclusive of Tumut M.).
GILGANDRA S.
GOOBANG S. (inclusive of Parkes M.).
GOODRADIGBEE S. and Municipality of Yass
GOSTWYCK S. (inclusive of Uralla M.)
GUNNING S.
Town of GUNBAR and part of the Carrathool S.
GUNDURIMBA S.
GLOUCESTER S.
GUYRA S.
GWYDIR S. and the Municipality of Bingara.
HARWOOD S. (inclusive of Maclean M.).
HOLBROOK S.
HASTINGS S. (inclusive of Municipality of Port
part of Carrathool S.
HORNSBY S.
HUME S. (inclusive of Albury M.).
IMLAY S. (inclusive of Bega M.).
ILLABO S. (inclusive of Junee M.).
JEMALONG S. (inclusive of Forbes M.).
JINDALEE S. (inclusive of Cootamundra M.).
KU-RING-GAI S. (inclusive of Gordon, Wah-
roonga, Pymble, and Killara M.).
KYOGLE S.
Part of LACHLAN S. (inclusive of Con-
dobolin M.).
LIVERPOOL PLAINS S. (inclusive of Gunne-
dah M.).
LOCKHART S
LYNDHURST S. (inclusive of Blayney and
Carcoar M.).
LISMORE M.
MACLEAY S. (inclusive of Kempsey M.).
MACQUARIE S. (inclusive of Wellington M.).
MONARO and DALGETY S. (inclusive of
Cooma M.).
MANDOWA S. (inclusive of Manilla M.).
“ B ” Riding of MANNING S. (inclusive of
Wingham M.).
“ A ” and “ C ” Ridings of MANNING S. and
Municipality of Taree.
MARTHAGUY S. (inclusive of Warren M.).
MEROO S. and MUDGEE and CUDGEGONG M.
MERRIWA S.
MITCHELL and KYEAMBA S. (inclusive of
Wagga M.).
MURRUNGAL S. (inclusive of Boorowa M.).
MURRUMBIDGEE S. (inclusive of Darlington
Point M.).
MOSMAN M.
MULWARREE S. (inclusive of Goulburn M.).
MUSWELLBROOK M.
NUMBULLA S. (inclusive of Bega M.).
MURRUMBIDGEE IRRIGATION AREA (in-
clusive of Leeton and Griffith M.)
NAMBUCCA S.
NAMOI S. (inclusive of Narrabri M.).
NARRABURRA S. (inclusive of Temora M.).
NUNDLE S.
NATTAI S. (inclusive of Bowral and Mitta-
gong M.).
NEPEAN S.
OBERON S.
ORARA and NYMBOIDA S. (inclusive of
Ulmarra and South Grafton M.).
PEAK HILL Municipality only.
PEEL S.
PATRICK PLAINS S. (inclusive of Singleton M.)
PORT STEPHENS S. (inclusive of Raymond
Terrace M.).
RYLSTONE S.
SEVERN S. (inclusive of Glen Innes M.).
STROUD S.
SUTHERLAND M.
TALBRAGAR S. (inclusive of Dubbo M.).
TALLANGANDA S. (inclusive of Braidwood
M.)
TAMARANG S.
TERANIA S.
TUMBARUMBA S.
TENTERFIELD S.
TIMBREBONGIE S. (inclusive of Narromine M.)
TOMKI S. (inclusive of Casino M.).
TWEED S. (inclusive of Murwillumbah M.).
TAROO S. (inclusive of East Maitland M.).
TINTENBAR S. (inclusive of Ballina M.).
URANA S.
UPPER HUNTER S. (inclusive of Scone M.).
WALLENDBEEN M.
WAKOOL S.
WARADGERY S. and Municipality of Hay.
WALGETT S.
WALLAROBBA S.
WARRAH S. (inclusive of Murrurundi M.).
WAUGOOLA S.
WEDDIN S. (inclusive of Grenfell M.).
WENTWORTH M. (inclusive of the Curlwaa
Irrigation Area).
WINDOURAN S. (inclusive of Deniliquin M.).
WINGADEE S. (inclusive of Coonamble M.).
WILCANNIA M. and surrounding District.
WINGECARRIBEE S. (inclusive of Moss Vale
M.).
WOLLONDILLY S. (inclusive of Picton M.).
WOODBURN S. (inclusive of Coraki M.).
WUNNAMURRA S.
WYALDRA S. (inclusive of Gulgong M.).
YALLAROI S. (inclusive of Warialda M.).
YANCO S. (Barellan-Mirrool Local Cammittee).
Part of YANCO S. and NARRANDERA M.
YARROWLUMLA S. (inclusive of Queanbeyan
M.).


Appendix E.
During the War and After.
Further Miscellaneous Efforts to Provide Assistance to Soldiers.
Since the very early days of the war, the State Government has closely
watched the interests of soldiers who enlisted in New South Wales. All
matters of purely State concern have been carefully attended to, and
where the responsibility has rested with the Government of the Common
wealth, the State Government has always cordially co-operated so far as it
was possible to do so.
For the benefit of those who, by reason of their absence at the war, have
not been able to keep in touch with what was going on in their home State,
the following Summary of what has been done by the Government (in addition
to what is explained in the earlier pages of this book) will be useful and
informative :
Land Settlement and Housing.
Homes have been provided for permanently incapacitated soldiers and
widows of soldiers. (This responsibility has lately been taken over by the
Commonwealth.)
Homes are also provided for the dependent widowed mothers of soldiers.
Roads, bridges, and other works have been constructed with a view to
making lands available for soldiers.
Implements, stock, &c., have been purchased to enable returned soldier
settlers to get a good start.
Extension of time is granted in respect of instalments due on lands held
by soldiers.
Liberal concessions are allowed soldier farmers in respect of improvements
required to be effected.
Soldier farmers were allowed to sub-let or lease while absent on active
service.
Stores, fodder, and superphosphates are advanced to returned soldiers
who have been adversely affected by the drought.
Advances are made in excess of the amount approved by the Common-
wealth to enable soldier settlers to purchase sheep, cattle, seed, plant, &c.
Conditions of residence were waived during the period of active service.
Crown grants were made of land required in suburban and country dis-
tricts for the erection of homes by the Voluntary Workers’ Association.
Stamp Duty, Fees, &c.
Estates of soldiers are freed from payment of stamp duty under conditions
laid down in the Probate Duties (War Exemptions) Act, 1915. Up to 28th
February, 1919, the total amount of duty foregone in this connection was
£i75,435-
Common law mortgages, stock mortgages, and liens on crops and wool to
secure advances made to returned soldiers, are exempted from stamp duty.
Stamp duty has been waived on documents relating to transfer of property
donated to the Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund, and on the papers
connected with the purchase of the Consumptive Home at Wentworth Falls
by the Red Cross Society.
Stamp duty has been waived on documents to secure loans advanced to
returned soldiers from the Australian Returned Soldiers’ Fund.
Transfers of land for homes for wounded soldiers are exempt from stamp duty.
Assignments of leases and transfers of businesses executed by certain
members of the Expeditionary Forces have been exempted from stamp duty.
Fees are waived on application for probate and administration of deceased
soldiers’ estates, the gross value of which does not exceed
Fees were waived in verification of information furnished in applications for
separation allowances.


Certified copies of the registration of deaths of soldiers may be obtained
without payment of fees.
Dealings in which returned soldiers or war widows are parties or benefi-
ciaries, and which require to be registered, are exempted from payment of the
ordinary fees.
Receipts issued by the various patriotic funds, the Red Cross Society, and
the Battalion Comforts Funds, have been exempted from the payment of
stamp duty.
Services Rendered by the Public Trustee.
The Public Trustee has drawn up, free of charge, 3,000 wills and powers
of attorney for soldiers embarking on Active Service, and generally assisted
them in many other ways in the adjustment of their affairs.
Up to the end of March, 1919, the Public Trustee had administered estates
of approximately 5,000 soldiers, half of them without charge and the others
on payment only of out-of-pocket expenses.
The Public Trustee has acted as trustee and received funds by voluntary
subscription for the assurance of recruits with dependents.
He has assured nearly 2,000 soldiers and assisted dependents in the invest-
ment of the insurance money on the death of the assured.
He has acted as trustee of numerous Voluntary Workers’ Associations.
He has acted in conjunction with the Administrative Headquarters,
London, to protect the interests of the next of-kin of deceased soldiers resid-
ing in England.
Although the Public Trustee is not administering the estates of all deceased
soldiers free of charge, he is prepared to waive or reduce his commission
where the beneficiary or beneficiaries were wholly or partly dependent on
the deceased soldier.
Returned Soldiers’ Memorial.
The Government has undertaken to subsidise, £ for £, the street collections
made in 1916 for the erection of an Anzac Memorial. It also bore the cost
of printing in connection with the Memorial.
A grant of was made to the funds of the Sailors’ and Soldiers' Imperial
League in connection with the collections on “ Anzac Memorial Day,” 1918.
Services to War Workers’ Organisations.
Rooms have been provided in Government-owned buildings, free of rent,
for the accommodation of the various Comforts Funds and for War Workers.
The Government has paid the rent of the offices occupied by the Voluntary
Workers’ Association.
The Government has provided the V.W.A. with a staff, postage stamps
and tram tickets.
The Government has erected, free of cost, stalls and tents required by
various organisations of war workers on patriotic days.
The French-Australian League of Help has been assisted by the provision
of rail tickets to enable tours to be undertaken of country districts in aid
of the fund.
Monetary assistance has been granted to funds established for the relief of
distress in Allied countries.
Special grants of subsidies have been made to Patriotic Funds, Red Cross
Society, War Chest Fund, Soldiers’ Entertainment Fund, and other funds of
a like nature.
The State Government provided offices and staff for the State War Council,
and carried out the whole of the work until the establishment of the Repat-
riation Department.
The Government met the whole of the administrative expense of the
Australia Day Fund, and therefore made available a further sum of
for distribution to the Red Cross Society and the Amelioration Committee.
Goods and parcels consigned to military hospitals and to various War
Relief Funds have been carried free on the railways.
