

THE,
UHZaVTATXON
AND
arewell
Of the unhappy Convicts who
were sentenced to transporta-
tion at the Summer Assizes,
182!$, now lying in Newcastle-
Gaol.
Good people pay attention, and listen to the doleful tale,
Of these unhappy convicts now lying in Newcastle Gaol,
All for to be transported, and banished from their friends and
home
And to Yandieman’s Land must go, their sorrows there foxy to
bemoan.
It is for Robert Barnes, his fate I here do first lament,
For leaving of his wife and family in sorrow and great dis-
content ;
For killing Nicholas Whitfield, although in passion it was done,
He is banished from his home, to his country never more to
come.
George Carr next, aged 23, just in the prime and bloom of
years, .
For stealing of a silver watch, he now must go for 14 years,
Unto a transport island, far, far away beyond the sea,
Where he has no relations to mitigate his misery.
Then on comes Mary Wilson, before transported 7 years ;
She now must go for all her life, which leaves her friends in
bitter tears:
For taking twenty three shillings from the person of Andrew
'Scott,
She now becomes a fugitive ; hard indeed then is her lot.
Then Anthony Young does now come on, who thought of all
things he’d get free ;
But he and young Ralph Pearson are now transported by
McGee:
For his hat, knife, and tobacco box, pray lend attention and
give ear,
Besides they did abuse him and put him into bodily fear,
Margaret Stewart and Murphy, they robbed a man upon the
Moor, ‘
And gave the piey to Maundle, thinking themserves for to Be-
cur e.
But proved it was against them, and nothing else could them
avail;
They must go for 14 years said his lordship Baron Littledale.
Now all you that do hear of the sentence these poor creatures
go t,
I pray you will take warning lest some day it may be your lot,
To commit any error that deprives you of your liberty,
And leave your friends to languish in grief and sad misery.
It should be a strict warning to think that out of only nine.
There is seven banished to hardship in a distant foreign clime,
Where nothing hut hard labour and hunger they’ll endure,
And spend their days in chains, their is no consolation to pro-
cure.
So now young men and women unto these Words I pray attend,
The subject keep in memory, lest it does be tlie latter end
Of you to fall in wickedness, or perpetrate such robbery,
As we have now committed, which sends us from our country.
You youth whom folly leads astray, your vain pursuits
Retreat in time while yet you may shun ruin and despair;
Nor in, your wicked counsel boast of honours sacred name,
The wicked are to honour lost, and only known to shame,
jfll bounteous Lord, unto thy hands our minds are reconciled*
O ! protect our rslations dear, make them for ever thine;
Farewell, farewell, relations dear, to you we hid adieu ;
Mry our sad fate a warning be, to all that hear our doom*
Busted for the Publisher, by Kay and Simpson,
