

Cbc Supreme Literary gift.
£. 6. tucker.




THE SUPREME LITERARY GIFT
T. G. TUCKER, LITT. D.
Professor of Classical Literature in the University of Melbourne.


Any proceeds from the sale of this
Brochure will he presented to the Children's
Hospital Bazaar Fund, (Melbourne and East
Melbourne Stall.)


The Supreme Literary Gift.
*t ■*&
vs* v 5 *
WHEN we have been readingsome transcendent
passage in one of the world’s masterpieces
we experience that mental sensation which
Longinus declares to be the test of true sublimity,
to wit, our mind “undergoes a kind of proud
elation and delight, as if it had itself begotten the
thing we read.’’ We are disposed by such
literature very much as we are disposed by the
Cathedral of Cologne or before the Aphrodite of
Melos. Things like these exert a sort of over-
mastering power upon us. Our craving for
perfection, for ideal beauty, is for once wholly
gratified. Our spirit glows with an intense and
complete satisfaction. It would build itself a
tabernacle on the spot, for it recognises that it is
good to be there. We do not analyse, we do not
criticise, we simply deliver over our souls to a
proud elation and delight. Nay, at the moment


when we are in the midst of such spontaneous and
exquisite enjoyment, we should, in all likelihood,
resent any attempt to make us realise exactly why
this particular creation of art so fills up our souls
down to the last cranny of satisfaction, while
another stops short of that supreme effect.
And yet, afterwards, when we are meditating
upon this strange potency of a poem or a building
or a statue, or when we are trying to communicate
to others the feeling of its charm, do we not find
ourselves importunately asking wherein lies the
secret of great art ? And, in the case of literature,
we think it at such times no desecration of our
delight to put a passage of Shakspere or of Milton
beside a passage of Homer, of Aeschylus, or of
Dante, an essay of Lamb beside a chapter of Heine,
a lyric of Burns by one of Shelley, and to seek for
some common measure of their excellence.
Suppose that, in these more reflective moments,
we can come near to some explanation ; suppose
we can realise what it is that these supreme writers
alone achieve ; then, when we read again, the very
perfection of their achivement springs forward and
comes home to us with a still keener delight. We


feel all we felt before, but we enjoy it more,
because we understand in some degree why we feel
it. Say what we will, we are never really content
with an admiration which cannot render to itself a
reason. What are all the thousand works of
literary criticism called forth by, unless it be by
that perpetual question which nags for an answer
in all intelligent minds, the question “ What is the
gift which, behind all mere diction, behind all
cadence and rhythm and rhyme, behind all mere
lucidity, behind all mere intellect, and behind all
variety of subject matter, makes writing everlastingly
fresh, admirable, a thing of beauty and a joy for
j >
ever r
Alas ! we cannot, indeed, necessarily hope to
get that gift into our own power because we can
perceive it in the great masters. According to the
Apostle “ Every good gift and every perfect gift is
from above, and cometh down from the Father of
lights.” “ Their vigour is of the fire and their origin
is celestial” says the pagan. The caelestis origo
is unpurchasable. Nevertheless, even for the
ordinary being who aspires himself to write, there
is this practical benefit to be derived from an


insight into the truth —that he will know in what
the supreme gift does consist. He will not delude
himself into fancying that it means merely gram-
matical accuracy, or a command of words, or tricks
of phrase, or a faculty for rhyming, or logical
precision, or any of those other commonplace
qualities and dexterities which are almost uni-
versally attainable.
He will at least aim at the right thing, and,
even if he fails, his work will be all the higher for
that aim.
I do not propose to speak in general of great
books, but only of great literature. Literature
proper is not simply writing. You may tell in
writing the most important and unimpeachable
truths concerning science and history, concerning
nature and man, without being in the least literary.
You may argue and teach and describe in books
which are of immense vogue and repute, without
pretending to be a figure in literature. But, on the
other hand, you may be very wrong ; logically,
scientifically, historically, ethically altogether
wrong ; and yet you may exercise an irresistible


literary fascination over your own generation and
all that follow. Charles Lamb speaks disdainfully
of books which are no books, things in books’
clothing. He had in mind Adam Smith’s Wealth
of Nations , essays on population, treatises on moral
philosophy, and so forth. He meant that such
works are works, but no literature. Mill’s Logic ,
geographical descriptions, guidebooks, the Origin
of Species , whatever may be the value of such
volumes for thought or knowledge, they are not
literature. There is only one test to apply to such
books as those. If their statements are true, if
their reasoning is accurate, if their exposition is
clear, such works are good of their kind.
Nevertheless, it is scarcely literary judgment
which judges them. You might as well apply
“ architectural” criticism to our rows of tin-roofed
cottages or to the average warehouse or wool-store
or tram-shed. These are buildings, but they are
not architecture.
Meanwhile Herodotus, with all his superstitions,
his credulity and mistakes; Plato, with all his
blunders in elementary logic ; Homer, with all his
naive ignorance of science and the wide world ;


Dante, despite his cramped outlook ; Milton, in
spite of his perverse theologising—these and their
like are, and will always be, literature. No matter
if Carlyle’s French Revolution be in reality as far
from the literal truth as the work of Froude, yet
Carlyle and Froude are literature, along with
Herodotus and Livy and Froissart, while the most
scrupulously exact of chronicles may be but books.
The charm of supreme literature is independent
of its date or country. The current literary taste
varies, we know, at different periods and in different
places. There are successive fashions and schools
of literature and literary principle —an Attic, an
Alexandrian, an Augustan, a Renaissance Italian,
an Elizabethan, a Louis Quatorze, a Queen Anne,
a nineteenth century Romantic. And yet from
each and all of these there will stand out one or
two writers, sometimes more, whom we have
enthroned in the literary Pantheon, and whose
place there among the gods seems only to grow
the more assured as time goes on.
Now, what is it that is left, the common
residuum , to all these literary masters ; to Homer,
Sappho, Aeschylus, Plato, Theocritus, Juvenal ;


to Dante, Chaucer, Shakspere, Moliere ; to Goethe,
Shelley, Victor Hugo, Carlyle, in spite of all their
manifest differences in subject and style, in ideas
and ideals, in range of thought and knowledge ?
When we have got behind all the varying and
often contradictory criticism of their several
epochs ; when we have stripped away the
characteristics which mark a special era ; what is
there essentially and everlastingly good —in the true
sense “ classic ” —in virtue of which these particular
writers renew for themselves with every generation
the suffrages of understanding humanity? If there
is a “survival of the fittest” anywhere, it is
assuredly in art, and especially in the art of
literature. Seeing then that writer is so unlike to
writer, both in what he says and the way in which
he says it, what is that cardinal literary virtue, that
quintessential x, in virtue of which both alike are
masters in their craft ?
The answer is very elusive. Let us seek it,
in the Socratic spirit, together.
But first let me remind you that, in order to
find the answer, the seeker must possess both


literary cultivation and also breadth of mind. Unless
we have read widely in literature of many sorts
and kinds ; unless we have developed a generous
catholicity of taste and appreciation, a manysidedness
of sympathy and interest ; unless we have corrected
our natural idiosyncrasies by what Matthew Arnold,
after Goethe, calls a “ harmonious expansion of all
our powers,” w T e cannot see clearly ; we cannot
distinguish between the impressions which we derive
from literary power and art, and the impressions
which we derive from something else to which w T e
happen to be partial, but which is quite irrelevant
to the question. Anyone who belongs to a
particular “ school,” whether of style or thought;
anyone who approaches literature with a spirit
overweighted by political bias, scientific bias, or
religious bias, is disqualified. He cannot hope to
stand equally away from, or equally near to, Homer,
Dante, Shakspere and Goethe, and, after setting
aside their elements of disagreement, distinguish
and admire that which is definitively and for ever
admirable in their creations. Do we lack sympathy
with the tragic feeling? Do we shrink from it?
Then w~e can be no iudges of tragic art, of King


Lear or the Oedipus. Have we no sense of
humour, or only a gross and vulgar sense ol humour ?
Then we can be no judges of the writings of
Cervantes or of Sterne. Are we incapable of
ardent idealism ? Then we cannot be just to
Shelley. Is a capacity for profound reverence and
adoration not ours ? Then we must not claim to
sav the last word on Dante. The uncongenial
subject prevents us from feeling with the writer,
and we therefore fancy a defect of literary power
or charm in him, while the defect is all the time in
ourselves. We will, for the moment, suppose
ourselves to be the ideal critics. And let us first
see what the supreme literary gift is not.
We may admit that, in all literature which the
world will not willingly let die, there must be
expressed something worth expressing. The
matter must be, in some way, of interest. But it
appears to signify little how it interests. It may
be enlightening, elevating, or inspiriting : it maybe
profoundly touching: it may be of a fine or gracious
sentiment or fancy : it may be startling : it may be
simply entertaining. Some people, peihaps,


remembering certain French and other fiction,
would say that it may even be deliberately wicked.
That Ido not believe. On the contrary, it is much
to the credit of a world which is declared to be so
rotten with original sin, that deliberately wicked
writing finds so little lasting favour with it. It
does gladly let such writing die, however well
written. Interest fails, and admiration of the literary
skill is speedily swallowed up in disgust. More-
over it is seldom that the true possessor of the
supreme literary gift turns it to base ends.
Consummate literature, we have admitted, must
be interesting. It would be truer to say that the
possessor of the supreme literary gift will make his
matter interest us, however light or serious, how-
ever literal or imaginative, it may be. But, when
once of interest, the matter may be anything you
will.
The supreme literary gift, for example, does
not imply profundity or originality of thought.
Homer and Chaucer are not deep thinkers, nor
is Herodotus or Virgil, Burns, Keats, or Tenny-
son. There need be nothing philosophically
epoch-making about a literary creation which is


destined to be immortal. Nor yet does the
supreme literary gift necessarily imply extra-
ordinary depth of emotion. Of the writers just
named Burns and Keats perhaps have this capacity,
but the rest—including Tennyson —reveal little of
it. We do not find burning passion to be a distinct
feature in Plato, in Milton, in Goethe, or in
Matthew Arnold, while it is emphatic in Sappho,
in Byron, and in Shelley. Again, the supreme
literary gift does not imply any special expression
of truth or instruction, moral, religious or other.
Homer and Dante cannot both be right. If Homer
is right, then Dante is lamentably wrong ; and if
Dante is right, Goethe is unforgivably wrong.
Wordsworth cannot be harmonised with Shelley.
Milton was a Puritan, Keats a neo-pagan. In the
domain of literal and historical truth what becomes
of Gullivers Travels , or Scott’s novels, or, for the
matter of that, Paradise Lost f
All this is self-evident. Yet, if we do not ask
our superlative writers to be heaven-sent teachers,
to be prophets, to be discoverers, what do we ask
of them ? Is it to write in a particular style, in a
given lucid style, a given figurative style, or a given


dignified style ? Nay, it is only very mediocre
writers who could obey such precepts. Every
supreme writer has his own style, inalienable and
inimitable, which is as much a part of him as his
own soul, the look in his eyes, or his tones of voice.
Bethink yourselves of Carlyle, how his abrupt,
crabbed, but withal sinewy and picturesque prose
compares with the pure crystalline sentences of
Cardinal Newman, and how these again compare
with the quaintly and pathetically humorous chat,
the idealised chat, of Charles Lamb. Think how
easy it is to recognise a line of Shakspere, of
Milton, or of Wordsworth, almost by the ear ; how
audibly they are stamped with the character of
their creator. There are, in fact, exactly as many
styles as there are superlative writers. Indeed this
individuality of style is the outward and visible sign
of their inward and spiritual literary gift, which is
the gift to express — oneself.
Then what does the superlative writer do ?
The fact is that literature in the proper sense is an
art, as much an art as painting or sculpture or
music. The supreme masters in literature are


artists, and the consensus of the world, though
unconsciously, comes to judge them simply as such
—not as thinkers or teachers, sages or prophets.
They are artists.
And what is the province of art? After all
the definitions and discussions are exhausted, we
are, I believe, brought down to one solid answer,
the answer of Goethe, “ art is only the giving of
shape and form.” That is to say, the object of ait,
whether in words or colours or shapes or sounds, is
simply to give expression to a conception, to a
thought, a feeling, an imagined picture which
exists in the mind of the artist. His aim is to
communicate it truly, wholly, perfectly to the
minds of his fellow men,'by one of the only two
possible channels. By means of art mind can
communicate itself to mind either through the
eyes or through the ears ; by spoken words and
music through the ears, by painting and sciuptuie
and written words through the eyes.
I need not dwell upon the thought what a
wonderful thing this communication is, whereby
the pictures and feelings existing in one brain aie
flashed upon another brain. Nor need I elaborate


the point that this communication is rarely absolute,
rarely even adequate. To make people understand,
even those who know us best, how difficult that is !
The Greek sculptor Praxiteles conceives a
human form of perfect beauty, posed in an attitude
of perfect grace, wearing an expression of perfect
charm and serenity. It exists but as a picture in
his brain ; but he takes marble and hews it and
chisels it till there stands visible and unmistakable
before us his very conception. He has given body
and form to his imagination. Perfect artist as he is,
he communicates with absolute exactness his mental
picture to all the world of them who behold his work.
The Italian painter Raphael conceives a woman
of infinite loveliness and purity and tenderness to
represent the mother of Christ. How are we to
be sharers in that conception ? He takes brushes
and paint, and there grows upon his canvas the
Sistine Madonna, that picture of such mystic
potency, which to see at Dresden is never to forget.
He stamps upon our minds the very image and the
very feeling which were upon his own.
The great musician hears imaginary sounds
and harmonies within his brain, proceeding from or


accompanying emotions of divers kinds. He
forthwith, by arrangements and combinations of
musical notes, their times and qualities, communi-
cates to us also those sounds and harmonies ; he
reproduces in us those same emotions.
Do not say that it is the function of an artist to
communicate to us beautiful things or ugly things,
things graceful or things profound, things of pleasure
or things of grief. Say rather, simply, it is his
function, as artist, to communicate —perfectly,
absolutely —whatsoever he seeks to communicate,
in its form, with its feeling, in its mood ; the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of his
conception and its atmosphere. No doubt the
thing of beauty, the profound thing, the thing of
joy, is most delightful for the spectator to
contemplate 5 to the artist himself it is apt to be
most inspiring, and therefore art seems to be
concerned mainly with beauty and joy. But that
is the only reason. As artist, his function is simply
to body forth, and present to other minds, whatever
he conceives, and he is consummate artist just in
proportion as he secures that end.


Now take the literary artist. He in his turn
conceives a thought, or picture of the imagination
or fancy. A feeling may come over him with a
gentle grace, a subtle influence, an overmastering
passion. A mood —a state of soul—may colour all
his view, tinging it with some haunting melancholy
or irradiating his whole world till it seems a
Paradise. How is he to communicate to us this
thought, this picture, this fancy, the grace and
subtlety and passion, the precise hues of his mood
for sombreness or radiancy ? Well, he takes words,
and by selecting them, by combining them, by
harmonising them with a master’s hand, he sets
before us certain magic phrases wrought into a
song, an ode, an elegy, or whatsoever form of
creation is most apt and true, and he makes us see
just what he sees and feel just what he feels,
printing it all upon our own brains and hearts.
In this then must lie the essence of the literary,
gift- —in the power of a writer to express himself, to
communicate vividly, without mistiness of contents
or outline, his own spirit and vision. I repeat that
it is irrelevant whether what he sees and feels be
beautiful or not, joyful or not, profound or not,


even true or not. Nor does it matter either what
his style may be. He is a master in the art of
writing when he can make his own mind, so to
speak, entirely visible or audible to us, when he can
express what his inward eye beholds in such terms
that we can behold it in the same shape and in the
same light —if, for example, when he sees a thing
in “the light which never was on sea or land, the
consecration and the poet’s dream , he can make us
also see it in that faery light.
This is no such easy thing. The fact that
there are a hundred thousand words in the English
dictionary does not make it easier. It is not those
who know the most words that can necessarily best
express themselves. Neither is it true that, because
feeling is real, it can therefore speak. “ Out of the
fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh ” has no
such sense as that. Many and many a fine thought
is lost to the world, and all the value of many a
deep emotion, because he who thinks 01 feels
cannot voice himself, any more than you or I can
necessarily take a brush and paint, like Turnei, the
unspeakable glories of a sunset which our eyes and
souls can nevertheless appreciate to the very full.


“ What makes a poet ?” says Goethe, and he replies,
“A heart brimful of some noble passion.” No
doubt the noble passion must be there before a
man can be a poet, but equally beyond doubt the
passion alone cannot make him one. To say that
a heart full of the ardour of religion, of love, of
hope, of sorrow or joy, can always express its
ardour, is an assertion against which thousands of
poor, inarticulate human beings would rise in
protest. It is simply contrary to experience. There
is many a man and woman besides Wordsworth to
whom “ the meanest flower that blows can give
thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears but,
unlike Wordsworth, no sooner do these less gifted
men and women attempt to express one such
thought and impart it to others, than lo ! the subtle
thought evades them and is gone. They can give
it no embodiment in language. Their attempt
ends in words which they know to be obscure,
cold, trivial, hopelessly ineffectual.
How unevenly distributed is this power of


expression ! Let us begin as low in the scale of
verbal art as you choose. Let two observers
chance to see some previously unknown plant,
with novel leaf and flower and perfume. If they
could paint the leaf and flower, well and good ; but
ask each separately to communicate to you in
words a mental picture of that plant. Observe
how, with equal education in the matter of language,
the one will describe you the forms and colours
and fragrance in apt and expressive terms and
comparisons, which seem to paint it before your
eyes. The other plods and halts and fails, and
leaves no clear or even interesting impression. If
to the one the flower is just red and pointed, to the
other it is, perhaps, a tongue of flame. The one
has but literal facts to tell, the other is full of
imagination and similitude.
Take a step higher. Have you seen and heard
the lark, and studied his movements and his song
aloft in the sky of Europe? Can you express
simply what you then saw and heard, so that all
who have witnessed the same can see and feel it
over again ? How many words would you take,


and how vivid might your picture be ? Then
compare your effort with Shelley’s famous
Higher still and higher
From the earth thou springest,
Like a cloud of fire ;
The blue deep thou wingest,
And singing still doth soar, and soaring ever singest.
In the golden lightning
Of the sunken sun,
O’er which clouds are bright’ning,
Thou dost float and run,
Like an unbodied joy whose race is just begun !
Another step, and we come to a region no
longer of outward description, but of thought, of
feeling, of delicate fancy, of soaring imagination.
I suppose thousands upon thousands of persons
possessed of what our great-grandfathers used to
call “ sensibility,” have felt at eventide, when alone
in certain spots, a kind of subduing awe, as if some
great spirit-existence pervading all nature were
laying a solemn hush upon the world. In various
degrees one here and one there can express that
feeling, but how many can express it as simply and


yet effectually as Wordsworth does :
It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
The holy time is quiet as a nun
Breathless with adoration ; the broad sun
Is sinking down in its tranquility;
The gentleness of heaven broods o’er the sea :
Listen ! the mighty Being is awake,
And doth with his eternal motion make
A sound like thunder—everlastingly !
To express and body forth : there is room for
the manifestation of this prime literary gift in all
sorts of subjects. It may be shown in a fable of
Aesop, in Robinson Crusoe , in a children s story,
in Mark Twain’s boyish experiences on the
Mississippi, in a Barrackroom Ballad of Rudyard
Kipling, in Thackeray’s Esmond , in Shelley’s Ode
to a Skylark , in either a comedy of Shakspere or
his Hamlet , in a sonnet of Dante’s Vita Nuova
or in his Inferno. Aesop s communication of his
point of view is final. So is Defoe s communication
of mental pictures. So is Mark Twain’s of that
Mississippi pilotage. So is Kipling’s in his Drums
of the Fore and Aft , or his Mandalay. These men


are all admirable literary artists in their own
domains. Each fulfils all that is demanded of his
art. If we could keep this fact clearly before
us, our judgments of writers might be more
discriminating. Do we think Kipling possessed of
an extraordinary degree of the literary gift ? Who
could think otherwise, seeing that he can effect
exactly what he sets out to effect by means of
words ? His scenes and his thoughts —such as they
are —start forth living before us. But do we then
think a Kipling proved equal to a Shakspere in
sheer excellence of his gift? That is another
question. There is no such proof. And why not?
Because the things which Shakspere realises and
expresses demand powers of realisation and
expression more far-reaching and more subtle than
are required by those things to which a Kipling
gives shape and form. In Shakspere are multitudes
of deep and rare reflections, vivid imaginings,
penetrations of sympathy and insight, and all so
clearly crystallised, with such apparent ease, that
they become ours at once, as if they were natural
to us. His communication of the most subtle
states of mind is complete. But in a Kipling we


cannot pretend that there is infinite subtlety and
elusiveness, that there is a cosmic condensing of
a whole nebula of spiritual experience. His task
was less hard.
And what then of Homer ? Can we call his
task a difficult one ? Is he, too, full of infinitely
delicate or far-reaching thoughts and feelings?
No. But his aim is to reproduce all the freshness
and breeziness of a fresh and breezy atmosphere,
to make us live again amid all that simple whole-
some strenuousness of the childhood of the western
world. That, too, is exceedingly elusive, and almost
impossible to catch —immeasurably more difficult
than all those coarsely, if strenuously, marked
characteristics of the British soldier and other
bold figures on the canvas of Kipling.
That, I believe, is the right attitude to assume,
when we endeavour to measure the literary power
of one writer against that of another if we must
do such a thing at all. It is not the morality 01
non-morality, the importance or non-importance,
the beauty or ugliness, inherent in what is said,
which determine the degree of the literary gift. It
is rather the relative elusiveness of the thing said,


the difficulty of surrounding it, of condensing it,
of giving it perfect body, and communicating it in
that body. And that is why it is an error to put,
let us say Gray, in the foremost rank of literary
artists. How well he does this thing ! But was it,
after all, so transcendently difficult to do ?
The vaguer, the deeper, the more compre-
hensive, the subtler the thought or feeling or
fancy, the greater demand is there upon the literary
power. One can say no more. It is as in sculpture,
which finds it infinitely easier to give embodiment
to straining muscles and an agonised face than to
carve a statue in perfect restful beauty and with a
countenance of benign and strong tranquillity.
Ask a hundred people to write about the
spring—simply to describe it with its sights
and sounds and odours —and most of them can
perform the task more or less well. Ask them to
bring home the physical and emotional influence of
spring, and many of those who feel that influence
most keenly will give up the task. And then
comes Chaucer with his few touches, his blissful
briddes ” and “fressche flowres,” and tells us how


“full is my heart of revel and solace,” and behold !
the passage breathes to the reader s heart the very
spirit of youth and springtide.
A simple statement of a simple fact calls for
no “ literary ” gift. A description of externals
demands some, but not often a great, degree of it.
A thought or feeling, which is suggested by the
fact or object, may require either little or much,
in proportion as the thought or feeling is fine and
fugitive. But a mood induced by the thought or
feeling generally demands the gift in its highest
degree. “ A primrose by the river’s brim,” whether
“ a yellow primrose ’tis to him,” or a dicotyledon,
may be outwardly described more and less well ,
but we require for that purpose only the rudiments
of literary prose. But, next, there is the pure and
appealing beauty of the flower , and that evokes
gathering recognitions of the beauty of nature and
its grace to us. Then upon this there steals a
feeling of exhilaration in the glad and gay
atmosphere of the reawakening world , and this,
again, may open into a whole vista of recollections
far back from childhood ; and so the result may be
one of many moods. We have all this time been


brought up a sort of gradient of literary difficulty ;
and he is the supreme of supreme literary artists
who can body forth the most subtle of all these
thoughts and moods.
Let me illustrate. Take for the purpose of
contrast this passage of purely external description
from Cowper :
Forth goes the woodman, leaving unconcerned
The cheerful haunts of man, to wield the axe
And drive the wedge in yonder forest drear,
From morn to eve his solitary task.
Shaggy and lean and shrewd, with pointed ears
And tail cropped short, half lurcher and half cur,
His dog attends him. Close behind his heel
Now creeps he slow, and now with many a frisk,
Wide-scampering, snatches up the drifted snow
With ivory teeth, or ploughs it with his snout:
Then shakes his powdered coat and barks for joy—
and so forth. There you have clear and faithful
observation, clearly and faithfully reproduced. I
do not want to depreciate the amount of literary
skill necessary for putting those right words in
their right places. Nevertheless I cannot bring
myself to think it particularly remarkable. The
picture is distinct, but it is of the eye alone ; it


involves nothing in the way of imagination, nothing
in the way of subtle feeling blending with the sight
in the brain of the writer. Next take a stanza from
Matthew Arnold’s Thyrsis :
So, some tempestuous morn in early June,
When the year’s primal burst of bloom is o’er,
Before the roses and the longest day
When garden walks and all the grassy floor
With blossoms red and white of fallen May
And chestnut flowers are strewn —
So have I heard the cuckoo’s parting cry,
From the wet field, through the vext garden trees,
Come with the volleying rain and tossing breeze :
« The bloom is gone, and with the bloom go J.”
Now to me that passage expresses something
immeasurably more difficult of expiession. The
whole tone of the environment is reproduced in a
few touches. We not only realise the scene, but
we also feel in its description the same mood of
subtle pensiveness, with its flavour of melancholy,
in which the writer saw and felt it. For mysell I
know that the passage brings back to me, exactly
and perfectly, not only a mental picture, but also a
frame of mind, which I can recognise across the
years which now separate me from those English


“ garden walks and all the grassy floor ” strewn
with “ blossoms red and white of fallen May and
chestnut flowers.”
If you have never experienced precisely that
frame of mind, you cannot, of course, appreciate
the literary power, any more than you can appreciate
Shelley’s all-exquisite
The One remains, the many change and pass ;
Heaven’s light for ever shines, earth’s shadows fly ;
Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,
Stains the white radiance of eternity,
Until Death tramples it to fragments—
unless you have pondered the mystery of life and
eternity somewhat as he had done..
Yes ! that must be premised all through. You
must have had your own mood of profound world-
weariness, before you can appreciate the utter
completeness of the cry of Beatrice Cenci :
“ Sweet Heaven, forgive weak thoughts! If there should be
No God, no Heaven, no Earth, in the void world,
The wide, gray, lampless, deep, unpeopled world !”


The highest attainment then of literary power
is the “ exquisite expression of exquisite —that is to
say, rarely intense or subtle —impressions.” The
language, said Wordsworth, should be the incar-
nation of the thought.” The highest gift of the
writer is to make his words and their combinations
not clever, not dazzling, not merely lucid, but to
make them, by their meanings, their associations,
and their musical effects, exactly reproduce what
he thinks and sees and feels, just in the special
light in which he thinks and sees and feels it.
This involves, of course, a perpetual struggle
between thought and language. Language is for
ever striving to overtake thought and feeling.
Browning indeed may say
“ Perceptions whole, like that he sought
To clothe, reject so pure a work of thought
As language.”
But in this we must not acquiesce. Browning
himself, indeed, however immense his range of
sympathies, however extraordinary his- dramatic
insight, falls far short in the purely literary gift. He
is not a master of language as Shakspere was or as
Tennyson was. Extremist votaries of Browning are


accustomed to say either that he is not obscure at
all, or else that his obscurities are inseparable from
the thoughts. We must not admit this latter plea
until we are prepared to call Isaiah and Shakspere
shallower than Browning.
The transcendent literary artist is always
compelling language to express what it had seemed
incapable of expressing. Indeed the “ advance of
literature ” often means no more than a greater
degree of success in giving recognisable shape to
the hitherto vague and elusive, in communicating
what was supposed to be incommunicable. Often,
when we say that such and such a writer gives us
“ new glimpses,” or “ opens up new thoughts,” it
only means that he has discovered how to express
such thoughts, so that we can realise and recognise
them. He is not an inventor, but a revealer.
And the highest revealer is the great poet.
Poetry is language and music. Musicians tell us
that music is intended to impart what language
cannot express —something unspeakably more
delicate, more subtle, emotionally more powerful
or more tranquillising. But music must not aim
at too much. It cannot really describe action or


define thoughts ; it can only translate feelings and
moods into sounds. Now just as music is always
advancing, always endeavouring to fulfil more
perfectly the functions of art —which are, as I have
said, to communicate the spirit of one human being
to his fellows —so language also is ever struggling
to enlarge its powers and to do what musicians
tell us music alone can do. Language, too, must
translate feelings and moods, but into words. It
in a sense invades the region of music. And herein
lies the justification —the necessity —for poetry,
or for a prose which is virtually poetry in its
language and movement and imagination. Poetry,
in that broad sense, must always be the literary
form for the expression of that which is most
difficult to express, I mean of anything which is
pervaded by a rare exaltation and passion of feeling,
or by a delicate grace and charm.
Some people pretend to think that poetry is a
wholly artificial thing ; that it is merely a pleasing
trick, when it is not an irritating trick, with
language. Well, alas !it is quite natural that many
stern spirits should be irritated by verses ; for it is


entirely true that nine-tenths of what is being, or
has been, written in verse might better have been
written in prose, or rather not written at all. The
young author, and, for the matter of that, the old
author, who thinks that he has a perfect right to
choose between the verse form and the prose form
simply according as he can versify or not, is
grievously in the wrong. There is no more
justification for, say, a purely didactic poem or
descriptive poem that there is for the rhyming
which begins somebody’s treatise on optics with
these egregious words :
When parallel rays
Come opposite ways
And fall upon opposite sides
Everything depends upon the nature of that which
a man has to say.
What are the external marks of poetry as
distinct from real prose ? These : the choice of
words of a special emotional or pictorial force,
combined with musical cadences, rhythm, and
sometimes rhyme. And why are these employed ?
To tickle the ear? By no means. It is simply
because they are most effective agents in that


communication of his mood and spirit which is the
aim of the artist. When a mere fact has to be
stated, there is no defence for verse, unless as an
aid to memory, just as we say
Thirty days hath September,
April, June and November.
When a thing can be said just as well in prose,
there is no excuse for not putting it in prose.
That axiom should kill off half our amateur poets
and rid the world of a nuisance. On the other
hand, when a thought or a feeling is to be com-
municated from a mind profoundly stirred, exalted,
filled with fervour, or from a mind tingling with
exquisite perceptions, then there can be no true and
full communication to another mind, unless that
mind also is stirred, exalted or made to tingle.
Music can so dispose that other mind. So too can
language ; for, under the influence of poetry of
perfect sound, we find stealing over us, thanks
largely to the sound, a mood which could never
result from prose ; and so our minds are polarised
to feel the actual thing expressed exactly as the
writer feels it, to see it exactly as he sees it.
Verse-poetry, therefore, is no idle invention. It


has its sound philosophical basis; and, where
poetry is really demanded by the subject, it is part
and parcel of the supreme literary gift to wed the
music of the verse so aptly to the thought, that the
communication from soul to soul is utterly complete.
Is verse a mere convention ? Let us see.
Does anyone pretend that his spirit would be just
as much moved by the mere sense of this passage
of Tennyson, if it were stripped of its verse form
and turned into prose :
Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean,
Tears from the depths of some divine despair
Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,
In looking on the happy autumn fields,
And thinking of the days that are no more.
Dear as remember’d kisses after death,
And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feign d
On lips that are for others; deep as love,
Deep as first love, and wild with all regret;
O Death in Life, the days that are no more.
If he does, let us not envy him his powers of
perception or sensation.


Would you feel for Coleridge just the same
mood of sympathy, if he told you his sad case in
prose, as when he writes :
A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief,
Which finds no natural outlet, no relief,
In word or sigh or tear.
Listen once more to this :
Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers,
Ere the sorrow comes with years ?
They are leaning their young heads against their mothers
And that cannot stop their tears.
The young lambs are bleating in the meadows ;
The young birds are chirping in the nest;
The young fawns are playing with the shadows ;
The young flowers are blowing toward the west
But the young, young children, O my brothers,
They are weeping bitterly !
They are weeping in the playtime of the others,
In the country of the free.
Verily I believe a few of these stanzas of Elizabeth
Barrett Browning have more effect in moving the
average human soul than forty prose sermons and
a hundred prose tracts. And why ? Because they
express, not mere thoughts, not mere arguments,
but a mood, a disposition, a soul.


Verse-poetry can never die. It is for evermore
inseparable from the art of communicating the spirit
in words.
The supreme literary gift then is the power to
embody even the most subtle conception in a
communicable shape. And is this a mere knack,
with which brain-power has little or nothing to do ?
Not so. Observe what the task implies on the
part of the writer, over and above his perfect
control of words.
It implies, to wit, that he shall first realise
those conceptions luminously to himself. Before
he can utter them, his brain must have grasped
them, formed a vivid picture of them. Most of us,
when we become aware of a fancy or a feeling
within ourselves, are unable to get it into focus.
The power of undergoing a deep emotion, of
thinking a far-reaching thought, of experiencing
a keen sensation, is, I assert, by no means rare in
the world. But as soon as we begin to look
steadfastly at it and try to realise to ourselves
exactly what it is like and what it means ; when we
ask ourselves, “ what precisely is it I am thinking


and feeling?” it evades us, it begins to break up
and fade away, like a phantom or like mist. It is
as when we think of someone’s face, filled with a
certain expression. The face starts out before our
mind’s eye, and for a moment we see it well and
truly. But for most of us, unless we are painters,
or possess the gift which might make us painters, it
is impossible to keep that face, with that expression,
steadily before our inward vision. As we gaze
upon it, it changes and passes into a blur and
refuses to be held.
But the mental retina of the great painter can
hold such things as he has seen till he transfers
them to the canvas ; so can the brain of the great
masters who paint for us in words, till they embody
them in delicate prose or exquisite poetry. The
lack of power to express often comes of a lack of
this power to realise ; and that power, I believe, is
what is meant by “ the vision and the faculty
divine,” and by “shaping imagination,” and by
other phrases which get so bandied to and fro that
the world almost ceases to attach any meaning to
them at all.


I remember some years ago, in an essay on
Literary Judgment , asserting that the quality which
chiefly distinguished the immortal works from the
transient was sincerity, single-heartedness, reality
of intention and love ot the work for the work’s
sake. That was only a partial view of the truth.
It is right in a measure, since that sincerity, that
absence of make-believe, in the literary creation
is a prime necessity ; but it is not sufficient. It is,
indeed, a prime necessity, because it means that
the superlative writer must write at first hand of
things genuinely conceived and realised by his very
self. It is, indeed, a prime necessity, because you
cannot conjure up vividly and hold in steady view
the communicable picture of your feeling or your
thought, unless you feel it or think it with all your
own being. But the sincerity is only a pre-supposed
condition. The supreme literary quality is the
power to realise the picture and so body forth the
thing thought or felt. The great dramatic genius,
for example, first realises a character and his
thoughts and feelings, and then, identifying himself
with that character, gives them expression. When
Homer imagines Odysseus descending to the nether


world and meeting there the shades of heroes
whom he had known at Troy, his Odysseus accosts
this one or that and receives answer as befits the
person. But to Ajax, son of Telamon, Odysseus
had indirectly done a wrong, and caused his
suicide, and, when the ghost of Ajax appears,
Odysseus speaks to it gentle and soothing words of
explanation and self-defence. And what does that
proud injured Ajax reply ? Well, on Homer’s
brain the picture is very vivid. His brain becomes
practically the brain of the very Ajax, and the
continuation shows it : “So I spake, but he
answered me not a word, and passed on to Erebus
alter the other spirits of the departed dead.” That
silence of Ajax is truer than the most scathing of
speeches.
So is it with Shakspere. He sees his characters
and realises their sensations so vividly that his
brain and feelings become the brain and feelings of
his creations ; and thus only does his Lear say with
such perfect naturalness, “ Pray you, undo this
button.” Hence, too, all the distinctness of
character in his lifelike men and women, be it
Hamlet or Falstaff, Cordelia or Lady Macbeth.


“ Imagination,” “ the shaping gift of imagin-
ation,” is this power of first presenting a thing to
your own brain with luminousness. For once
etymology lends real aid. Imaginatio is “ the
making of pictures.” It is inseparable from the
power of perfect expression.
Why did the people of Verona whisper of
Dante, “ Yonder is the man who has been in Hell ?”
Simply because of this power. Dante saw the
place of torment in his imagination, not as any of
us might see it, vaguely terrible, but clear in every
dread and horrid detail. And, having so seen it,
he lends to that seeing the gift of expression, and
with a few simple verbs and nouns and plain
forceful similes he makes his readers see what he
had seen. So did it come about that he was
regarded as the man who had actually “ been in
Hell.” How far does Milton stand below him in
this imaginative vision ! Milton, too, describes an
Inferno, but it lacks the convincingness of one who
has seen it for himself. We could never say that
Milton was the man who had “ been in Hell.”
What is the special power of Carlyle in his
dealings with history ? It is the power of


summoning up visions of the past, standing out
clear to the last particular, as if lightning illu-
minated them against the background of the ages.
I do not know whether any better definition of
imagination can be given than that of Ruskin in his
Modern Painters. “ Imagination is the power of
seeing anything we describe as if it were real, so
that, looking at it as we describe, points may strike
us which will give a vividness to the description
that would not have occurred to vague memory, or
been easily borrowed from the expressions of other
writers.” Ido not say we can necessarily describe
a thing because we so see it, but I do say that we
cannot describe it unless we so see it. Therefore
the supreme literary gift of communicating exactly
what we think and feel, exactly as we think and
feel it, involves no mere control of language, but,
therewith, an imaginative brain to realise con-
ceptions as vivid pictures. To combine these
powers is to be a genius of great rarity.
In one part of the Inferno of Dante it rains
fire. To say that much would be enough for the
ordinary writer. But Dante not only sees fire
falling ; he sees exactly how it falls, and the


picture in his mind becomes the picture in ours,
when he simply says that it fell silently, steadily
“as fall broad flakes of snow when winds are
still.” Perfectly easy, is it not? Yes, for Dante.
But for the ordinary writer it would have been no
more than “ A rain of fire.” But what manner of
rain, O thou ordinary and inadequate writer? We
do not, indeed, want scorching rhetoric and verse
piled on verse. We want the “inevitable” word,
the simple and the homecoming, the Dantesque.
Byron now and again exhibits the power. Mazeppa
is bound naked on the wild horse, and
The skies spun like a mighty wheel,
I saw the trees like drunkards reel,
And a slight flash sprang o’er my eyes,
Which saw no further
With the consummate literary artists the
picture, whether it be of a real scene, an imagined
scene, or a feeling, is given in few but effective
strokes. And it is so given simply because they
see it all so distinctly. As Longinus says of
Sappho’s famous ode of passion, the supreme writer
seizes upon the essential and salient features,


combines them, and trusts to your and my
imagination to supply the rest. When a writer
welters in words and lines, when he elaborates
touch upon touch, you may be sure that he is
trying to fill the picture into his imagination,
instead of being possessed by an imagination which
determines the picture.
In the Ancient Mariner Coleridge describes
the passing of the spectral ship :
The western wave was all aflame,
The day was well-nigh done !
Almost upon the western wave
Rested the broad bright Sun ;
When that strange shape drove suddenly
Betwixt us and the Sun.
And straight the Sun was fleck’d with bars,
(Heaven’s Mother send us grace !)
As if through a dungeon-grate he peer’d
With broad and burning face.
Are those her ribs through which the Sun
Did peer, as through a grate ?
And is that Woman all her crew ?
Is that a Death ? and are there two ?
Is Death that Woman’s mate ?


and then
The Sun’s rim dips; the stars rush out;
At one stride comes the dark ;
With far-heard whisper, o’er the sea,
Off shot the sceptre-bark.
For my own part those words make me see it all
fully, vividly. Ido not merely behold the scene ;
I feel the peculiar awe of the narrator. Can you
doubt that Coleridge saw this in his brain exactly
as if it were real ?
When Keats in his mind’s eye saw Madeline
praying under that Gothic window which was so
“innumerable of stains and splendid dyes’ he
beheld the scene as if he were positively on the spot
to paint it. And how does he paint it ? What an
opportunity for the display of pictorial technique
in words ! But Keats is not thinking of that.
One does not really perceive a myriad little details
at such a time. You never do actually see all the
things which you would describe if you sat down
to think details out one by one. If you had really
fixed your eyes on the kneeling Madeline, as
Porphyro did on that eve of St. Agnes, you could


not also be taking an inventory of the particulars
in the situation. The inferior writer forgets this,
because he is writing from his wits, and not, as
Keats wrote, from the spontaneous picture of
imagination. What Keats sees is this :
“ Full on this casement shone the wintry moon,
And threw warm gules on Madeline’s fair breast,
As down she knelt for Heaven’s grace and boon;
Rose-bloom fell on her hands, together prest,
And on her silver cross fair amethyst,
And on her hair a glory, like a saint.”
That is all, and it is enough. A kneeling figure,
the wintry moon, and some few of the colours of
the glass, described as they fall upon what you
would really note, the head and breast and the
clasped hands. What would not a Rossetti have
done with such material !
These are descriptions. It is the same with
emotions. “ Pray you, undo this button.” The
supreme writer does not tear passion rhetorically
to pieces. He does not elaborate it till he fritters
it, away. He condenses it all into the poignant cry


which goes straight from heart to heart. What in
the circumstances could Burns have said more final
than
Had we never loved sae kindly,
Had we never loved sae blindly,
Never met and never parted,
We had ne’er been broken-hearted.
I know that there are people who cannot see
that these four simple lines are the consummate
expression of a vast range of feeling. We can
only pray that Heaven will some day be merciful
to them.
One word more seems necessary to be said.
How can we tell when a writer is succeeding in his
effort to communicate, to body forth, what he
seeks to body forth ? Simply by our own complete
apprehension, by the universal humanity in us, by
the fact that we keenly recognise that such and
such a sensation is one in which we have at least
shared, but which we have never known how to


express. We realise how it has been brought over
us by loneliness, mountain solitude, a sunset, great
heights, stormy seas, music, sorrow, love, the sound
of distant bells, calm evenings, summer and the
perfume of the flowers, fine characters, heroic
deeds and a thousand other causes, within us and
without ; and, when the supreme writer voices it
for us, whatever it may be, we feel and know it at
once for the final and the perfect.
If that test is not sufficient, I know no other.


/Hbelbouvne:
The Atlas Press (E. Newlands), Block Place.
1900




