

7V\» S *2,
|j CIk Scandinavians in
|| = Australasia. =
By JENS LYNG, Lieutenant n the Dani»h Army.
||||| late Editor of tfie Scandinavian Journal “ Men”
Author of “ Emigrantnoveller og Skttser” “ Mod erne Vikinget” &c
' tooethkr with
p n Reuicu) of Scandinavian RIstorp
llli By O. N. NELSON, Dr. Ph., USA.
///j) MELBOURNE ;
I igoj.


Danish Export Trading Co.
HENRY OLSEN, Manager.
513 Flinders St., Melbourne.


What does he want


TUBORG
LAGER BEER.
That’s what he wanted
SOLE IMPORTERS FOR AUSTRALIA
P. W. HEYMAN.
k TH£ RIALTO”, MELBOURNE.
SOLE AGENTS FOR VICTORIA :
JOHN CONNELL & CO. Prop. Ltd.,
578 Bourke Street, Melbourne.
SOLE AGENTS FOR N.S. WALES I
LUCAS LOCK & CO.,
Bulletin Place. Pitt Street, Sydney.


Hoinenson i Nielson,
BUTTER MANUFACTURERS,
Dairp produce $ Dairp macftinerp
... merchants...
521 TO 527 FLINDERS STREET, AND ROBB'S LANE,
MELBOURNE >•
Sole jfigents in Victoria for the~~
“HARTNETT” Patent Milking Machines, with Patent
Teat Cup Releasers.
“PERFECT” Cream Separators. Cleanest Skimmer
and Simplest Separator in the market.
“PERFECT” Double-action Churns. Butter in Three
Minutes.
“PERFECT” Seamless Steel Cans and Buckets.
“PERFECT” Incubators. A Chicken from each
Fertile Egg,
“NEWTON’S A.8.” Oil Engines. Used by the
British Admiralty.
CREAM RECEIVED DAILY AT OUR CITY AND COUNTRY
FACTORIES.
INVITED.^.


✓—n.
CAICU1UIM3
KRUSE’S^
| FLUID MAGNESIA
Ot_\\\V\\. N « .
vNW
A\\J K SNtt \\\' B5N0 v\>a» J6N\\\ *
'vWM •»» |N*> «f« «N K«^
PK‘ ’ H ERINWWE S 1$ ME, 3
KRUSE’S
fluid ißaancsla
A Remedy for
INDIGESTION, ACIDITY and BILIOUSNESS.
A Safe Aperient for Ladies and Children.
Allays Feverish Conditions due to Vaccination
and Teething of Infants.
Prepared by the Sole Proprietors—
Felton, Qrimwade & Co.,
MELBOURNE
BOSISTO’S
B^s
“ Parrot Brand”
Cucalpptus Oil
For naeumiism. Sprains. Braises- Wounds. Gougns. colds, Sc.
THE CYCLIST’S & ATHLETE’S EMBROCATION.
eaUTION.-flsk for BOSISTO’S *' PARROT BRAND.” and
beware of 6rude Oils, which may be dangerous to use.


HISTORY
Cbc Sranfrinafoians in
0
llnstralasia.
JENS LYNG.
TOGETHER WITH
fi Review oj Scandinavian history,
O. N. Nelson.


I
■
. , /
.
-
i A
■


HOME LONGINGS.
My swag is unfolded, my head at rest,
At the foot of a forest king;
The spur-winged plover has sought her nest.
And is nursing her weary wing.
As my roving thoughts they stray —
Far from the wattle and billabong,
Over the heights of the Dandenong,
Back to the fields where I used to play,
Where the stately beeches sway.
My fancy dwells on those by-gone hours,
With their strange and mystic charm,
And I gather again the blue cornflowers,
That grew on my father’s farm;
And listen to catch the refrain —
Of the Christmas chimes on a frosty mom,
As, pealing, they tell us a King was bom—
But list! ’tis the wild, weird curlew’s strain.
And I am awake again.
Jens Lyng.


.
,
.
'
, •


f Review oJ Scandinavian history:
o. N. NELSON.
This is an age of classification, and mankind has been
divided into different races, or types, of men. But history,
with a few exceptions, deals only with one race —the Caucasian
—because hardly any others have succeeded in becoming civi-
lised. The Hindoos, Persians, Greeks, Latins, Slavonians,
Kelts, and Teutons, all belong to the Indo-European branch of
the great Caucasian race. The English, the Germans, the
Dutch, the Scandinavians, and their descendants in other
countries, are all members of the Teutonic family. It may
seem strange that the theoretical Greek and the practical
Englishman, the fanatical Hindoo and the philosophical Ger-
man, the rude Russian and the polite Frenchman, should all
have, if we go far enough back, a common ancestry. Yet the
resemblance of their languages and their mythologies proves
that they were once one people, who lived together somewhere,
But when or under what circumstances they separated, and
migrated to different countries cannot be determined. But if
the different nations of the Indo-European branch differ
greatly in physical appearance, mental culture, social condi-
tions, religious beliefs, and political attainments, the closest
relationship exists between the different nations of the Teutonic
family. Physically, the Teutons resemble each other; men-
tally, they are equally endowed. The development of the
political history of Sweden is similar to the development of the
political history of England. Blackstone, the father of English
law, and Stjernhbok, the father of Swedish law, agree on many
of the finest points in jurisprudence. Danes, Norwegians,
Swedes, Germans, Dutchmen, and Englishmen have a common


mythology and common superstitions; but it is only the
Scandinavians—Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes—who have,
almost, a common language. The Danes and the Norwegians
write virtually alike, but differ a little in their pronunciation;
nor is it at all difficult for a Swede to understand a Nor-
wegian,, or for a Dane to understand a Swede. All the Scandi-
navian people, with the exception of the Icelanders, understand
each other’s languages.
When and under what circumstances the Scandinavians
first came to their northern homes has always been a matter
of dispute among scholars. Different theories have been advo-
cated. Learned men have maintained that the human race
first saw daylight in the Land of the Midnight Sun, and that
the Paradise of the Bible was located near Upsala, Sweden.
The Icelandic sages claim that Odin, the god 'and king of
the Teutons taught his people the art of writing and the
science of war, and led them out of Asia, through Russia, and
colonised the Scandinavian countries. It is only one hundred
and fifty years since a noted scientist endeavoured to prove
that the greatest part of the North could not have been in-
habited at the time of the birth of Christ, because most of the
land there was then covered with water. Others again assert
that Scandinavia has been the cradle of the Indo-European
branch of the human race, A well-known Norwegian-American
educator and author says: “ There is a strong probability that
their (the Scandinavian tribes) invasion of the countries which
they now inhabit must have taken place during the second cen-
tury preceding the Christian era.” But the latest and most
celebrated Scandinavian antiquarians and historians have—by
comparing the old skulls, as found in the graves, with the skulls
of the present people—come to the conclusion that the same
race of people which now inhabit the Scandinavian countries,
have been there for thousands of years, at least, before the
Christian era commenced.
The Scandinavians entered late upon the historical arena.
The Grecian history had begun eight hundred years before


even their existence was known. Grecian literature, philosophy,
and art had flourished centuries before they could write their
own names. The Romans had conquered the fairest part of
the earth, legislated for the world, made good roads through
the whole empire, and civilised a large portion of mankind,
before the Scandinavians occupied houses or fixed habitations,
but wandered through the dense forests as semi-savages. The
French, English, and Germans had been Christianised four
or five hundred years before the Northern people accepted
Catholicism as their national religion, and as late as in the
sixteenth century some of them still worshipped Odin. This
late development, which is no doubt due to the severity of the
climate, and the great separation from the higher civilisation
of the South, must be taken into consideration when we com-
pare the Scandinavians with other nations, and endeavour to
determine the quantity and quality of influence which each
nation has had upon the general history of mankind.
That the Northmen, in spite of their lateness, have had a
great influence, and taken an active part in the world’s busi-
ness, no one can successfully contradict. They have not merely
been savage plunderers and rude conquerors, but also dis-
coverers, civiiisers, and organisers. They assisted in overthrow-
ing the magnificent Roman power, conquered France, enslaved
England, discovered America five hundred years before the
voyage of Columbus, organised the Russian Empire, and
liberated Germany from religious and political thraldom. Of
course, the greater part of their contract with other nations
and their influence upon other people have been accomplished
through war; but war, until recently, has been the mainspring
of nearly all undertakings. The very fact that the Scandi-
navians have, by the might of their swords, crowned and de-
throned foreign rulers; dictated terms to popes and emperors;
fought, both for and against, the liberties of men; and in
many other ways taken an active part in the affairs of the
world, must have had a great influence upon civilisation.
The Scandinavian countries were first referred to in Grecian


literature as early as three hundred years before the birth of
Christ. “ But,” says Geijer, “if the Greek ever knew any-
thing about them, the Roman again forgot them.” But if the
Roman had forgotten them, he was soon to be reminded of
their existence in a forcible and positive manner, for, under
the name of Goths, the Scandinavians became the principal
participants in undermining and destroying the Roman power
in the third, fourth, and fifth centuries of the Christian era.
By a chain of successful conquests; by good management
through very capable and honest men; by establishing public
order, law, and justice; by encouraging literature, science, art,
and the accumulation of wealth, the Roman Empire had, in
the second century of this era, reached a state of greatness,
power, and civilisation which has hardly been equalled, never
surpassed by any nation, either of the ancient or the modem
world.
The Romans, who had at first assailed the domains of the
barbaric Teutons beyond the River Rhine, were in the third
and fourth centuries of this era called upon to defend their
own territories against the invasion of the very same barbarians
whom they had been unable to conquer or subdue. For this
purpose a line of military posts had been established along
the river to protect the Roman citizens against the invading
hordes, being similar to those which the United States keeps
on the western borders to protect the whites from Indian
outrages.
Of the many different tribes, all belonging to the Teutonic
family, who pressed upon the Roman frontier, none were so
powerful or intelligent as the Goths. These Goths dwelt on
both sides of the Baltic Sea, and it is said that those who
joined their kinsmen to participate in the plunder of the Mis-
tress of the World, crossed the sea from the Scandinavian
countries in three ships. But, as later was the case with the
Vikings, they were not formidable in numbers, but in courage,
endurance, and ferocity. These wild men are described as
being very tall, strong, and robust; having white bodies, yellow


hair, broad shoulders, wiry muscles, florid complexion, and
fierce blue eyes that during excitement gleamed with fire and
passion. Physically, they, in general, resembled the people of
the whole Teutonic family of to-day; but, more specifically,
they came nearest to the people who now live in the southern
part of Sweden and on the Danish islands. Little or nothing
is known in regard to the semi-civilisation which they had at-
tained to at the time they first came in contact with the
imperial power, but they probably had reached a fairly high
standard of moral development, and enjoyed some luxuries.
It was with these men, “ Who astonished the nations of
the South by their reckless courage and gigantic stature,” that
the imperial army of Rome had to measure swords. It was
ancient renown against barbaric ferocity, disciplined order
against natural courage, law against anarchy, Christianity
against Odin, Latin against Teuton. The Roman fought by
prescription, his movements were as regular as clockwork. The
Teuton obeyed the commander, but the commander was chosen
for his fitness. If the Teutons could not stand their ground,
their wives and sisters assisted them. The women fought and
screamed with a fierceness never witnessed before or after,
save during the French Revolution. The Romans, feared the
wild yells of the women almost as much as they feared the
swords of their husbands and brothers. Rome was doomed.
It was to no avail that the barbaric warriors were engaged to
defend the Roman territories against barbaric invasion; they,
of course, turned traitors. It delayed, but did not change the
result.
In the latter part of the fifth century of this era a Teutonic
savage sat on the throne at Rome. At about the same time
Spain, France, and in fact all western Europe fell into the
hands of the Northern hordes.
Now an exhibition was made on the grand stage of the
historical theatre that has never, in all the various dramas
of human actions, had its likeness. Side by side, on apparent
social equality, walked the refined Roman—dressed in his toga


—by the rude man from the North —dressed in a goat-skin suit
—his long, yellow hair combed towards the four winds. The
citizen carried centuries of learning in his head, the luxuries
from many countries on his back. He was the poet, the artist,
the statesman, and the philosopher.
The Goth possessed nothing; he only knew how to eat,
drink, and fight. But he carried the sword of state, before
which the proud Roman bowed in humble subjection.
By the fall of Rome, civilisation had been thrust backward
many centuries. Anarchy reigned supreme. Time rolled on;
for centuries the Roman world —yea the world itself—was
hidden in darkness. For this wholesale barbarisation the
Romans themselves were partly responsible. They lacked the
frankness, manliness, honesty, and virtue requisite to preserve
sufficient moral power to govern decently a great state. The
old civilisation which Rome represented had lost its force.
The Roman believed in nothing. Right and wrong were only
relative terms. To him anything which succeeded was right,
everything which failed was wrong. The Romans had become
greatly degenerated, debauchery and licentiousness were the
common practice.
The new race was ignorant, but had strong convictions and
high moral principles. To the Goth falsehood was a great
vice, secret stealing was a cowardly act, for which no torment
was too severe. He robbed openly, he faced his victims boldly.
He was honest and frank, living up to his rude ideas of life.
The Persians, the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans had
their liberties on account of belonging to a powerful, free state.
The Teuton was a free man because he was a man; indi-
viduality was his strongest characteristic.
The native population out-numbered, by far, the invaders,
who, nevertheless, swayed the sceptre of power. In time the
Goths adopted the Christian religion and became somewhat
civilised. The slaves became their master’s instructors. Out of the
Roman confusion rose the modern states. In the eighth and
ninth centuries western Europe had been somewhat organised


and Christianised, only, however, to be thrown into confusion
again by the kinsmen and partly countrymen of the Goths—
namely, the Vikings.
Before the fall of Rome little is known of the history’, cus-
toms, or characteristics of the Scandinavian people; but it is
certain that they were tribes of the great Teutonic family, and
had, probably, not advanced much above the condition of the
semi-civilised races at that time. The Teutons, however, un-
like some people, had the talent to adopt new ideas, to assimi-
late with other people, and to advance. History proves suffi-
ciently that they have been very progressive. The Goths had
been the principal participants in the destruction of Rome,
but the Goths were not exclusively Scandinavians, because part
of the tribe, in all probability, lived in Germany. The
Teutons constituted many tribes, no nationalities existed,
which, however, commenced to develop shortly after the fall
of Rome.
In the seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries
—at the time when the foundation of the European kingdoms
were in process of construction—the inhabitants of the Scan-
dinavian countries became famous as Vikings. But the
Viking practice had been in operation ever since the Teutons
and Romans came in conflict with each other. The Scan-
dinavian Viking age is only a continuation of the barbaric
flood that deluged the classical civilisation. The two may
differ in the particulars, but not in the essentials; it is im-
possible to understand one, without having a clear conception
of the other. “ All wars hang together,” Gustavus Adolphus
used to say.
According to Sars, the Scandinavian Viking age is divided
into three periods; but it might be more correct to say that
there were three kinds of Vikings, as no sharp division, in re-
gard to time, can be made. No one can tell when the age
commenced. Northern Vikings had, no doubt, practised their
trade ever since the Christian era began, and, perhaps, before.
The First Period: A small number of chieftains, or one alone,


would, at irregular times, gather together crews for a few
ships and sail over to England, Ireland, France, or Flanders,
where they would plunder a city or a monastery, and quickly
return home with their booty. The Second Period: An ad-
vance was made, not only in the art of war and military man-
agement, but even in the systematic plan of robbing defence-
less people. Several Vikings club together, take possession of
some exposed point—for example, a small island near the
coast —erect fortifications, and thus control a large extent of
territory. They may remain at one place for years, and forage
the surrounding country according to a regular plan, then pro-
ceed to their native lands. The Third Period: Plundering,
robbing, and piracy have been abandoned. The Vikings came
as conquerors. Their fleets counted from one to five hundred
vessels. Cities were stormed and sacked. They conquered
territories, settled them, and governed them. They treated
with kings and rulers. Of course the third period, during the
ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries, is without comparison
the most important and fascinating, ft has had a very great
influence both upon the Scandinavian countries and abroad.
The Vikings, who had at first occasionally plundered the
western European countries for the sake of pleasure and small
profits, commenced “ Piracy as a trade” on a wholesale scale
in the first part of the ninth century. “ These bold sailors and
admirable foot-soldiers” had made a general and perpetual de-
claration of war on all mankind, but especially on those who
possessed any kind of tangible property that was worth hav-
ing. The seas sw r armed with their sails. The miserable
people along the coasts of the North Sea, who had lately been
Christianised, fled in terror. Priests prayed in vain; “ Deliver
us, O Lord, from the rage of the Northmen.” The world, it
was thought, would soon come to an end. Germany, Holland,
Belgium, England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Spain, and Italy
were all punished with fire and sword, sacked and robbed,
drenched in blood and tears. That time has been called the
heroic age, the age of individualism. Princes had to buy their


freedom in gold and cede their territories to the conquerors.
Paris was besieged, Dublin was taken by storm, and in the very
heart of London, not far from the celebrated St. Paul’s Cathe-
dral, have been found skeletons of old Northern warriors.
Many scattered Scandinavian settlements were made in
foreign countries during these terrible times. The Northern
people intermarried and mixed with the native population. In
a comparatively short time the fierce pirates became
Christianised and civilised, giving new vigour and energy to
the degenerated people of western Europe. Besides the many
smaller settlements, scattered through nearly every European
country, the Norwegians colonised Iceland in the latter part
of the ninth century; the famous Rolf—also a Norwegian,
although several of his followers were Danes and Swedes —
wrested Normandy from the weak French king in the first part
of the tenth century, and the Danes conquered the whole of
England a hundred years later. The colonisation of Iceland,
and the conquest of Normandy and England were the last and
greatest acts of the bloody drama of the Viking age; these
were beneficial to civilisation, and may be said to have pal-
liated the former atrocities of the Northmen. The Icelanders
created a classical literature from which is received the best
information we have in regard to the mythology of the Teutons
in general, and of the Scandinavians in particular; established
a humanitarian, free republic, on the basis of the Northmen’s
conception of a civil government, which lasted for nearly four
hundred years; discovered America five hundred years before
Columbus sailed from Spain, and perhaps his knowledge of
what they had accomplished partly induced him to undertake
the voyage. The followers of Rolf found Normandy in poverty
and distress. In a short time they made it the richest, most
populous, and most civilised province in France, where the
best French language was used. The Normans, being virtually
independent of the French monarch, conquered England in
1066, and founded the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily. Danish
kings reigned over England, as well as in their native coun-


try, of course, for several years, and to-day many English words
laws, and customs are purely Scandinavian. The names of
many cities, lakes, rivers, &c., in France, England, Scotland,
Ireland, and other countries, have a Scandinavian origin.
Several of the greatest noblemen in the western Europe coun-
tries —notably Lord Nelson of England —are descendants of
the Northmen.
During the Viking age the boundary lines between the
Scandinavian countries were not sharply drawn. In fact the
people were at first tribes; then a great number of petty
kingdoms were formed. It was not until the latter part of the
ninth century that the present divisions of the Northern
nationalities were established, and the Scandinavians continued
to speak one and the same language for two or three hundred
years later. Even after the stronger kings had succeeded in
defeating the weaker and adding their territories to their own
dominions,, which resulted in laying the foundation of the pre-
sent Northern powers, it was yet a long time before the pre-
sent boundary lines were established. A large part of southern
Sweden, which is now the richest and most populous portion of
the country, belonged to Denmark, and some of its western
land belonged to Norway. It is, therefore, incorrect to speak
about a Danish conquest or a Norwegian colonisation, for
things were rather mixed up in those days. Yet it is certain
that the Swedes participated less in the destruction, and later
in the upbuilding of the western Europe countries than the
Danes and Norwegians. The Danes confined themselves prin-
cipally to England and France. The Norwegians attended to
Scotland, Ireland, and other northern islands. The Swedes,,
being closed out from the North Sea, went east, where they
founded the Russian Empire in the middle of the ninth cen-
tury, and served in large numbers in the imperial army at Con-
stantinople.
The descendants of the Swedish founders of Russia ruled
that country until the sixteenth century. In certain parts of


Switzerland the people claim, at least they did half a century
ago* that they are descendants of the Swedes.
What were the causes which produced the Viking age? The
answer is:
First —Although there is every reason to believe that the
Scandinavian countries were a great deal less populous than
at present; yet, being poorly tilled, and one man often hav-
ing children by several women, there were more people than
could be supported. Some had to seek their fortune in foreign
countries. Frequently a father was compelled to drive all his
sons away from home to make their own living, save one who
inherited his estate.
Second—The religion, the desire for adventure, and the
spirit of the times, induced many to leave their native coun-
tries to court dangers and turn the wheel of fortune in foreign
lands. It was believed that only those > who died a violent
•death were entitled in the next life to associate with the gods
in Valhalla. It was considered a high honour to have fought
successfully in foreign countries. Young princes received their
first education on board of a war vessel. In a short time the
Viking business became a fashion.
Third—The love for freedom and the passion for inde-
pendence, or the strong individuality, induced many to leave
the North rather than submit to a superior, which they were
especially called upon to do during the latter part of the
period when the stronger kings at home subdued the weaker.
But at the bottom it was essentially a question of economy.
Men’s religion often coincides with their business interests, and
that was sometimes the case with the Vikings, for several of
them believed a great more in their own strength than in the
powers of the gods.
We must not look at the Vikings through the glasses of
the twentieth century, or judge them according to the stan-
dard of modem civilisation, but examine them in accordance
with the spirit of the times, and measure them by the in-
fluence their deeds have had upon general history. They


honestly believed that “ War was the natural condition of
man,” and that a legitimate reason for declaring hostility was,
that those who were attacked had valuable property. After all,
this robbery did not differ much from the English opium war,
the plundering of Denmark and France of their provinces by
the Germans, and the treatment of the Indians, Mexicans, and
Spaniards by the United States. The Northmen were in a kind
of continual state of hostility. The modem wars are so ter-
ribly destructive to life and property that their continuation
for a longer period would annihilate the whole human race. It
is true that modem warfare is conducted on a more systematic
plan, but the struggles of the Vikings were not altogether irre-
gular. For if anyone besides the great noblemen and kings
indulged in the plundering business on a small scale, they were
at once driven off the sea as a set of lawless robbers, whom
the Vikings themselves considered it to be a moral duty to
exterminate. Therefore, according to the spirit of the times,
the operation of the Vikings was a perfectly legitimate, honour-
able, perpetual state of war, limited to certain persons, who
made it their profession for the sake of pleasure and profit.
It must also be remembered that the description of these
fierce outrages has always been recorded by their enemies.
Very often crimes were charged to the Vikings which in
reality were commited by, what may be termed, their camp-
followers, or the worst element of the respective countries in
which the Northmen might happen to be.
In regard to the ultimate results, and the benefits to the
human race which was the consequence of these bloody
times, reference has already been made to the state of affairs
at and after the fall of Rome. The same was the case shortly
after in the western European countries. For as Prof.
Worsaae says, who, perhaps, is the best authority on the his-
tory of the Vikings: “In the first ages Christianity produced
among the people, as was the case in other countries besides
England, a sort of degeneracy and weakness. Instead of the
dire battle of the heathens there were now heard songs and


prayers, which, joined with the constantly increasing refine-
ment, made the people dull and effeminate, so that they will-
ingly bent under the yoke of their masters, both spiritual and
temporal. In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries the
Anglo-Saxons had greatly degenerated from their forefathers.
Relatives sold one another into thraldom; lewdness and un-
godliness had become habitual; and cowardice had increased
to such a degree that, according to the old chroniclers, one
Dane would often put ten Anglo-Saxons to flight. Before such
a people could be conducted to true freedom and greatness it
was necessary that an entirely new vigour should be infused
into the decayed stock. This vigour was derived from the
Scandinavian North, where neither Romans nor any other con-
querors had domineered over the people, but where heathenism
with all its roughness, and all its love of freedom and bravery,
still held absolute sway.
This admirable description of the condition in England
applies, perhaps, with greater truth and force to other western
European peoples; for they are in no small degree indebted
to the old Northmen for whatever freedom, honesty, virtue,
and heroism they now possess. The foundation of the present
European states was laid by our ancestors. Out of the con-
fusion, disorder, and anarchy arose a new civilisation. From
the union of the degenerated western European peoples and
the courageous Scandinavians sprung a new, a better, a nobler,
a manlier race.
During the Viking periods great changes had taken place
at home in the Scandinavian countries. The smaller king-
doms were conquered and united with the larger, thus laying
the foundation of the modern Northern states. The many
wars degraded the Northmen’s honesty and simplicity; foreign
corruption, deceit, and luxury were introduced. The old
religion had lost its force. Many Vikings asserted that they
believed in nothing, save their own strength. The more pru-
dent men did not believe in the old gods. Harold the Fair-
haired, of Norway, acknowledged only one supreme being in


heaven, the creator of the universe and of mankind. The at-
tention of the Roman church had been directed towards the
North by the atrocities of the Vikings, and she sent missionaries
thither. The men who had been a terror to Christendom, and
the savage plunderers of Europe, became sons of Mother
Rome. It is true that they never were very obedient children,
and they took the first opportunity offered to be their own mas-
ters, yet something had been accomplished. The Viking age
ceased, partly because many of the boldest, the bravest, the
most independent, and the most turbulent had settled in foreign
lands; leaving the weak, the cowards, and the contented at
home, who either did not care or did not dare to attack foreign
countries, which were now to a great extent defended by their
former compatriots; partly because the people in the Scan-
dinavian countries bad, at least in name, become Christianised
and bowed to the dictates of a pope, who now opened a new
field for their barbarity, and gave them a new employment for
their swords—namely, the crusades; partly because at home
the internal disputes, conflicts of principles, and the struggles
connected with the formation of new states, kept the Northmen
busy with their own affairs.
From the eleventh to the sixteenth century Catholicism
swayed the religious faith of the North. There was, consider-
ing the times, a great deal of advance and contact with the
more highly civilised nations of the South; yet rude, savage
manners were in general practice, and Odin, in many places,
was still worshipped. During the greater part of the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries Denmark, Norway, and Sweden were
united under one government. But their history is merely a
record of internal strife, war, and bloodshed. Denmark, which by
means of its superior civilisation was the acknowledged leader,
became the seat of the government, but the unwise and cruel
Danish kings created, by their bloody acts, a hatred be-
tween the Scandinavian people, which even the time between
then and now has been unable to eradicate. Guided by popu-
lar leaders the Swedish peasants rebelled successfully twice.


and Sweden separated forever from Denmark in 1521, while
Norway for about four hundred years remained virtually a pro-
vince of Denmark.
Ever since the first part of the sixteenth century Lutherism
has been the national religion of the Scandinavian countries,
and a hundred years later the famous Gustavus Adolphus be-
came the prime defender of Protestantism, intellectual free-
dom, and German liberty. The rebellions of the common
people of Sweden in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, dur-
ing the Kalmar Union, gained for them a great influence and
a confidence in their own strength which they have never since
ceased to exercise upon the national affairs. In Denmark, on
the contrary, the peasants became almost slaves of the great
landowners. But since 1849 the Danes have virtually enjoyed
full universal male suffrage, which none of the other two
Northern countries possess. Yet the king of Denmark has a
greater power than the kings of Sweden and Norway; conse-
quently the people of the former country have, in reality, less
political rights than those of the two latter. In Norway nature
has divided the country into great valleys; each valley man-
aged its ow r n local affairs; the common people knew and cared
nothing about the Danish rulers or the doings of the world,
and retained their personal independence. In Denmark and
Sweden, feudalism, aristocracy, and patriotism became more
general than in Norway. It is only in this century that the
Norwegians have in any sense indicated a desire for nationalisa-
tion; since 1814, however —when a very liberal constitution
was adopted, and Norway was separated from Denmark and
joined with Sweden —they have, perhaps, had a stronger
national spirit, and certainly possessed more political freedom
than either of the other two Northern people.
The most prominent of the characteristics of the Viking
was his strong individuality. His love for freedom, his desire
for personal independence, amounted to a passion. He would
endure the rigid climate of the north, the burning sun of the
south. He would sleep beneath no other roof than the arch


of heaven, use bark for bread, drink rain-water as a bever-
age, make the forest his habitation, and have the wild beasts
for his companions. But he would never give up one inch of
his rights as a free man. The people of the classical countries
were free men, because they belonged to a powerful and free
state; they boasted of their citizenship. The Northman was
a free man because he was a man, he boasted of himself and
the deeds he performed. The same passion for freedom has
run through the whole Scandinavian race from the earliest
time to the present day. A great portion of the Vikings left
their native lands because they refused to submit to a superior
chief. No king or ruler has been able, for any length of
time, to be the absolute master of the Scandinavian people.
No foreign nation has been powerful enough to subjugate
them. Sweden and Denmark have dethroned their obstinate
monarchs, Norway dared to draw the sword against Europe
and demand national independence. The Scandinavians were
the last people who submitted to the Catholic yoke; they were
the first to cast it off. To-day the Swedish-Norwegian and
Danish kings have as little authority and power as any rulers
in Christendom. To be free and independent has always been
the greatest ambition of every true Northman.
The second characteristic feature of our savage ancestors
is courage. Bravery, however, sometimes turned into a fierce-
ness that could hardly be distinguished from insanity. War
was their profession. They hunted men as well as wild beasts,
but preferred men who possessed some kind of valuable pro-
perty. “For they deemed it a disgrace to acquire by sweat
what they might obtain by blood.” And whether we wander
with the Goths when they plunder and destroy Rome, or sail
with the Danes and Norwegians when they dethrone English
kings and humble proud French monarchs, or live in the camps
of the Swedes when Gustavus Adolphus and Charles the
Twelfth dictate terms to popes and emperors, or accompany
the Northern immigrants when they clear the dense forests of
Wisconsin and subdue the wild prairies of Dakota, we find that


they all excelled in endurance, heroism, and courage. In fact
the Scandinavian warriors have been so noted for their fear-
lessness that they have conquered by the very terror of their
names. Honour on earth and salvation in heaven, joy in this
life and happiness in the next, could only, according to their
religion, be gained by physical, brutal prowess. Their doc-
trine was that only the brave warriors who died a violent death
were in the next life entitled to associate with the gods, fight
in the celestial abode, enjoy the companionship of young
maids, drink wine, and eat pork.
Stubbornness, firmness, and determination are qualities
which the follower of Odin has been largely blessed with. To
him no defeat was final. Failure meant only delay. He over-
came all opposition, conquered every obstacle, defied every
difficulty. Mountains, oceans, deserts, rivers, must not hinder
his purpose. Charles the Twelfth during his childhood examined
two plans. Under one plan, which showed how the Turks
had taken a town in Hungary from the emperor, were written
these words : “ The Lord hath given it to me, and the Lord hath
taken it from me; blessed be the name of the Lord.” After
the young prince had read this, he wrote under the other plan,
which showed how the Swedes had taken Riga about a century
before: “ The Lord hath given it to me, and the devil shall not
take it from me.” Charle* the Twelfth was a good repre-
sentative of Scandinavian stubbornness.”
Besides being independent, stubborn, and courageous the
old Viking was, on the whole, honest and truthful, but terribly
revengeful. Mercy seldom entered his harsh breast. He
never forgave an offence. “He has a sense of honour which
led him to sacrifice his life rather than his word.” A promise
once given, either to a friend or an enemy, had to be carried
out unconditionally. Yet deception and cunning might be
practised in war, but the highest honour was bestowed upon
those who were open and frank towards their enemies, kind
and merciful towards the weak and those who sought protec-
tion. Deception and cunning they never tolerated among each


other. One of the noblest characteristics of the Northman was
the brotherly union which he entered into with a friend or
antagonist whom he could not conquer or subdue. This union,
which was the most sacred that could be entered into, was
effected by opening each other’s veins, mixing their blood, and
taking an oath that they would share each other’s joy and sor-
row in this life, and revenge each other’s death.
Hospitality was an essential part of the Northmen’s religion.
There was a kind of unwritten social law which compelled
every person to entertain, to' the best of his ability, the time
not being limited, and free of charge, anyone, either his best
friend or his worst enemy, who should ask or be in need
thereof. And no guest needed to fear to be molested or im-
posed upon. This custom of hospitality is yet to a great ex-
tent practised in the rural districts of the Scandinavian'
countries.
The Northmen had a higher respect for women than most
heathen nations. It is true that they bought their wives of
their fathers-in-law. The Romans sometimes stole their wives.
But after the bargain had been once made the women were
generally treated with respect and dignity, and their place in
the house was that of free beings, not slaves. The men were
attached to home and family, and, of course, enjoyed the wine
and the feast.
It is true that civilisation has changed their manners, cus-
toms, mode of thinking, ideas of right and wrong, and to some
extent even their appearance. Yet at bottom the Scan-
dinavians of to-day are the same as their ancestors were a
thousand years ago. “ Civilisation,” says Carlyle, “is only a
wrappage through which the savage nature bursts infernal as-
ever.”


IN MEMORY OF OUR FATHERS.
That father had the strength to do
The exploits he has done;
His battles for the good and true,
The victories which he won;
These give me strength my wars to wage,
And honest hopes inspire.
It is a goodly heritage
To have a noble sire.
A better man was never seen
Beneath these mundane skies;
And, as his sword, his tongue was keen,
And tipped with counsels wise.
No adverse lot could cast him down,
Or cause him to complain ;
He smiled at fickle Fortune’s frown,
And laughed at wounds and pain.
He taught the Frenchman chivalry,
And set his soul on fire';
The Englishman to love the sea,
And wake the tuneful lyre.
A captain he in days of yore,
Who led in every land;
From Scotland to Messina’s shore
His sons assumed command.
My father died, as die we must,
And left to us his hoard,
Which, though we trod it in the dust,
In part may be restored.
At times I grope as in a dream,
The while I toil and wait;
So little I, perhaps, may seem,
Because he was so great.
Our fields are fertile as before,
Our slopes are green to-day,
And there is found along the shore
No ice to bar our way.
Our mountain peaks still cleave the air,
We have the same blue sky,
And, as of old, we bravely dare
Press on to do or die.
0. VINJE.


♦
.
’


£he Scandinavians in Australasia:
JENS LYNG.
As the world of birds for convenience sake is divided into the
three sections —home birds, migrating birds, and emigrating
birds, mankind may be classified in the three analogous groups
•home people, sailors, and emigrants.
The home people are rooted to the place where they are
born and brought up; here their sweet dreams of love are
realised or shattered; here their lives’ deeds are wrought; and
here their weary limbs are laid at rest alongside those of their
ancestors.
The sailors leave home at certain seasons—in the North
when the glow of the spring sun has cleared the ice-bound
fords and bays, and at other places when shipping trade is brisk
and wages high. A great number of the sailors may uninter-
ruptedly roam about for years, but the majority will at times
return to their place of birth, to the girls they left behind them
(or, may be, wives), eventually settling down in their native
land altogether.
Not so with those who by force of nature have been inocu-
lated with the traits of the roaming birds. They fix their
abode wherever food is plentiful. Their homes may with equal
right be said to be “ nowhere and anywhere.” Their cradles,
perhaps, were rocked in the icy North, whilst their wom-out
bodies may be laid at rest under the sighing winds of the
boundless prairies of the United States, the barren steppes of
Siberia, in the woods of Canada or Argentina, or at the root
of an Australian gum tree.


To draw a distinct line between the above-mentioned groups
of people may, however, at times be difficult, not everyone by
circumstances being allowed to act in accordance with his true
nature; but in spite of this the difference is evident enough.
The above theory when applied to the Danes, Norwegians,
and Swedes proves remarkably true. Going back as far as the
Viking age we find one section of the people seeking their hap-
piness in a quiet and peaceful domestic life, charmed by the
melodious sounds of the western winds as they sigh through
the branches of the homely oak; others, whose aspirations
turned to the sea; and a third section, who, being out of touch
with the social conditions in their native land, or for other rea-
sons, left in order to settle down in foreign, parts.
We have seen how the Vikings settled down in Russia,
England, France, Italy, and other places. The emigration,
however, stopped together with that glorious chapter of nor-
thern history. Internal quarrels, followed by incessant wars,
brought about by the many pretenders to the three thrones, re-
duced the population and weakened their energy, and a fresh
exodus of Scandinavians did not take place in any degree worth
mentioning before the first half of the nineteenth century.
The new emigration turned towards America, the know r-
ledge of which country at that time had become more intimate
and general.
Greenland and America had originally been discovered by
Norwegians who had previously settled down in Iceland. In
both places settlements were founded, but while those in Green-
land lasted for about 400 years, the attempts to colonise
America failed, and as time passed the occurrence was in part
forgotten.
Columbus, after visiting Iceland in 1477, from where he made
his first cruise westward, rediscovered America in 1492. In his
track a host of European adventurers followed, who in the new
continent found a vast field for their unfettered energy, and
through whom the wealth of America commenced to be known
in Europe. Later on, wearied and persecuted followers of new


religious ideas sought a home in the far west, where freedom
of conscience and liberty of thought could be obtained, thereby
paving the road for a greater influx of emigrants.
We have in the foregoing touched on the various reasons
for emigration in general —(i) over-population; (2) a desire for
material betterment or adventures; and (3) religious or politi-
cal oppression, all of which causes in larger or smaller degree
have been at work in promoting emigration from Scandinavia..
In olden time the Northmen cleared the path themselves, and
the exodus took the shape of conquests, accompanied by migra-
tion, whilst in the nineteenth century they have left in ones
and twos, and followed the lead of others.
The emigrants from Europe have for various reasons princi-
pally gone to America, and as for the Scandinavians they have
in the United States been traced as far back as 1633. In
the beginning of the eighteenth century Gustaf Adolphus con-
templated a great Swedish settlement in America, the realisation
of which was, however, partly frustrated by his untimely death
on the battlefield of Liitzen. His successor, Axel Oxenstjema,
took up the plan, but on a much smaller scale. A stretch of
land was bought from the Red Indians, and a Swedish settle-
ment, called “ New Sweden,” founded on the Delaware River
in 1738, though only to last for seventeen years, when it was
overpowered by the Dutch, A few stragglers from the north
continued traversing the Atlantic Ocean in search of adven-
tures, but not till 1825 and the following years did Scandi-
navians in greater number settle down in the United States.
Since then the yearly contribution of the Northern race has
gradually increased, till it reached its climax in 1882, when
no less than 107,000 Swedes,, Norwegians, and Danes emigrated
to America. To-day three million people born in Scandinavia
or of Scandinavian parents reside in the United States; 25
per cent, of the whole race live in America, or of Norwegians
33 per cent., of Swedes 20 to 25 per cent., and of Danes about
16 per cent.


As far as Australia is concerned, Scandinavians can be
“traced back to the very discovery of the continent.
When Capt. Cook, in 1768, made ready to enter upon his
first voyage to the South Seas in order to observe the transit
of Venus and to attempt further discoveries, he was joined
by the English scientist, Joseph Banks. Mr. Banks, who had
considerable private means, determined to spare no expense
in the execution of his plan ; he engaged Dr. Solander to ac-
company him on the voyage. This gentleman, by birth a
Swede, was educated under the celebrated Linnaeus, from
whom he brought letters of recommendation into England, and
his merits being soon known, he obtained an appointment in
the British Museum. Such a companion Mr, Banks considered
as an acquisition of no small importance, and to his great
satisfaction the event abundantly proved that he was not mis-
taken.*
Dr. Solander, whose enthusiasm for natural science ren-
dered him a valuable member of the expedition, appears to
have acted as medical attendant on board. In the published
account of Cook’s travels his name is mentioned as often as
that of Joseph Banks, and every now and again the great
navigator expresses himself in the following words:—Mr.
Banks, Dr. Solander, and myself did so and so.” When after
having dropped anchor at the coast of New South Wales in 1770,
a boat was lowered from “ The Endeavour” in order to effect
a landing, it reads again:—“ Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and
myself got into the boat, accompanied by a number of rowers ; ”
and, again, “ I named the bay Botany Bay from the many
plants found by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander.” We have con-
sequently Capt. Cook’s own word for it that a Scandinavian
put his foot on Australian soil simultaneously with the dis-
coverer himself.
Also in Cook’s second voyage Dr. Solander participated.
The celebrated navigator writes :
“In my second voyage I was accompanied by Mr. Banks
* Captain Cook’s Travels,


and Dr. Solander; the first a gentleman of ample fortune, the-
other an accomplished disciple of Linnaeus, both of them dis-
tinguished in the learned world for their extensive and accurate
knowledge of natural history. These gentlemen,, animated by
the love of science, and by a desire to pursue their inquiries
in the remote regions I was preparing to visit, desired permis-
sion to make the voyage with me. The Admiralty readily com-
plied with a request that promised such advantage to the
republic of letters. They accordingly embarked with me, and
participated in all dangers and sufferings of our tedious and
fatiguing navigation.”
Dr. Solander was bom in 1735, and died in 1782, He has
been honoured by an island on the New Zealand coast and a
cape near Sydney being named after him.
The second Scandinavian recorded in Australia is the
somewhat famous Jorgen Jorgensen.
Born at Copenhagen in 1780, Jorgensen was in 1794 appren-
ticed on an English collier trading between the Baltic and Eng-
land. On this vessel he served for four years, when he left it,
and engaged with a South Sea w : haler, which was going out with
stores to Cape of Good Hope. Here he engaged with an Eng-
lish schooner bound for Algoa Bay with Government stores for
the forces stationed at that place to defend the settlers from
the attacks of the Kaffirs.
On Jorgensen’s return to the Cape he joined the brig
“ Lady Nelson,” a small surveying vessel
der to Capt. Flinders, of the “ Investigator.” They .were under
orders to proceed to the south of Australia and ascertain defi-
nitely whether the straits now called Bass did separate Tas-
mania from the continent, but they were too late in the field,
as Dr. Bass and Captain Flinders had already ascertained the
existence of the supposed passage before the arrival of the
“ Lady Nelson.”
On arriving at Sydney, the “ Lady Nelson” was despatched
to survey Port Phillip, Western Port, Port Dalrymple, and the


Derwent, and afterwards accompanied the “Investigator” on
an expedition to the northern shores of the continent.
In 1803 they again set sail from Sydney to assist in estab-
lishing a settlement on the Derwent. They disembarked their
passengers and stores, and proceeded to Port Phillip, where
Colonel Collins had attempted in vain to form a settlement.
Colonel Collins and his officials were taken on board, together
with the stores and 300 to 400 prisoners. The present site of
Hobart was ultimately selected for a permanent settlement.
They pitched their tents; spades, hoes, saws, and axes were
put in the hands of the convicts, and they commenced clearing
as fast as they could.
Jorgen Jorgensen had by that time been promoted to chief
officer on the “ Lady Nelson,” in which capacity he served for
some time, assisting in several surveying expeditions and in the
founding of Newcastle.
He now left His Majesty’s service, and took charge of a
sealer on a trip to New Zealand waters. Afterwards he was
engaged as chief officer on a whaler on the Derwent, but finding
the venture unprofitable, they proceeded to New Zealand.
While here they had a skirmish with the Maoris, but succeeded
in getting away with a full cargo, and now set sail for London,
taking wth them two' young New Zealand natives.
Although unable to trace other Scandinavian sailors in Aus-
tralian waters at that early time, there is no reason to think
Jorgen Jorgensen should have been the only one.
It is far from impossible that even amongst the unfortu-
nate convicts (the vanguard for the following influx of free and
independent immigrants) Scandinavians were represented.
During the w r ar in 1807-1814 between Britain and Denmark-
Norway, a considerable number of Danes and Norwegians were
brought to England as prisoners, and the fate of Jorgensen
instances that even they were not exempt from being deported.
On Jorgen Jorgensen’s return to his native land Copenhagen
had been bombarded by the British, and the fleet carried away
from fear that it might have been seized by Napoleon, and


used in his struggle against themselves. The Danes did not,
however, consider such possibility justified England in swoop-
ing down on a friendly nation and carrying off her fleet, and
in the prevailing wrath threw in their lot with Napoleon, de-
claring war with Great Britain. By voluntary subscription a
caper fleet was organised. Jorgensen’s father and seven other
merchants in Copenhagen provided a vessel as their contribu-
tion, and presented it to the Crown. It was commissioned,
manned, and armed by the Government, and put under the
command of Jbrgen Jorgensen. Cutting through the ice a
month before it could be expected that any vessel could get
out, he came unaware among the British traders, and cap-
tured eight or nine ships. This success inspired him with fresh
confidence, and relying on his knowledge of the coast, he stood
over to England. Near Flamborough Head he was discovered
by two British men-of-war, the “ Sappho” and the “ Clio,” and
a fight ensued, with the result that Jorgensen had to surrender,
and, together with his crew, were brought to England as.
prisoners of war.
Iceland was at the time cut off from all communication
with the rest of Europe, and threatened with famine, which
caused some English humanitarians, or may be shrewd business
people, to fit out a vessel loaded with provisions, and send it
to Iceland, Jbrgen Jorgensen, who was engaged as leader of
the expedition, soon got rid of the cargo, and hastened back
for two shiploads more. On his second return a vessel with
grain from Denmark had, however, arrived, and the Governor
promptly prohibited the landing of any English goods. In
this difficulty Jorgensen decided to make a coup d’etat, and,
accompanied by a dozen armed men, he secretly entered the
Governor’s house, and brought him as a prisoner back to the
vessel. He next secured the iron chest containing the State
funds, and made himself dictator of the island.
The progress of revolution was summarily arrested by the
unexpected arrival of a British man-of-war. Jorgensen was
brought back to London, and failing to justify his action in


the eyes of the British Government, he was brought before the
Lord Mayor, charged with being an enemy at large without the
King’s license, and with having broken his parole. He got
twelve months’ imprisonment, and—what proved the ruin of
his future life—during that time he made acquaintance with the
evil of gambling. After several years of an eventful career,
twice being employed by the British Government as a foreign
commissioner, the spirit of gambling entirely mastered him, and
debased him to that extent that one day he stood in the dock
to answer to the charge of having disposed of certain furniture
belonging to the lodging house where he resided. He was sen-
tenced to death, but several powerful friends exercising their
influence on his behalf, he was instead transported for life.
In the beginning of the year 1826 Jorgen Jorgensen arrived
in Hobart, one out of 150 convicts. He was appointed to
a clerkship in the Government offices at Hobart, but routine
work of that description did not suit his restless temperament,
and he applied for a transfer to the service of the Van Die-
men’s Land Company, a wealthy corporation, two of whose
London directors had favoured him with letters of recommen-
dation to their principal representative in the colony. The
Government refused his application at first, but eventually con-
sented. He was attached to several parties that had been
organised for the purpose of exploring and opening up the
company’s extensive territory, and his adventures by flood and
field, amongst blacks and bushrangers, constitute not the least
stirring chapter in the history of this extraordinary character.
On returning to civilisation again, we find him editing a
newspaper in the metropolis for a short time, but he soon
returned to the more congenial roving life of the country. On
the nomination of Sir George Arthur, he proceeded to the dis-
trict of Oatlands to take up the joint appointment of constable
in the field police and assistant clerk in the local court. His
district was no less than 150 miles in circumference, and its
scattered inhabitants were terrorised by hostile blacks and san-
guinary white desperadoes. Many of the latter he ran down


and captured, exhibiting conspicuous pluck and perseverance
and a characteristic disregard of danger and difficulty. The
local magistrates were enthusiastic in their praises of his un-
tiring energy and zeal in the pursuit of the outlaws. The Hon.
Thomas Anstey, M.P., chief magistrate of the Oatlands dis-
trict, publicly testified to his “ honesty and fearlessness in the
discharge of arduous duties.” The Hon. M. Forster, M.P.,
declared that he had “ rendered great services to the com-
munity by his successful pursuit of bushrangers,” and several
other justices of the peace bore witness from personal know-
ledge that he had been chiefly instrumental in breaking up
notorious gangs of marauders. Still, all the while he was ren-
dering these valuable services, he was himself nominally a
prisoner, but on opening the “ Government Gazette” one day
he had the satisfaction of seeing that stigma removed by the
official proclamation of his pardon.
Soon afterwards, Sir George Arthur devised his famous, but
futile, scheme for the suppression of the hostile blacks, whose
incessant attacks on the settlers had become a standing menace
to the peace and prosperity of the colony. He called out the
whole available white population, provided them with arms and
ammunition, and established a military cordon right across the
island. His object was to hem the blacks in, and drive them
before him into a narrow-necked peninsula at the south-western
comer of the colony, where they could be easily captured and
removed to an island in Bass Straits that was in every way
suitable for their maintenance. This campaign, known in
colonial history as “ The Black War,” was a colossal and costly
failure. The cunning and agility of the blacks defeated the
superior numbers and organisation of the whites. At the same
time the campaign undoubtedly infused a certain amount of
wholesome fear into the minds of the natives, and paved the
way for their early pacification through the agencies of kind-
ness and philanthropy. Jorgensen was entrusted with a com-
mand in the “ Black War,” and, in reward for his services, re-
ceived a grant of 100 acres of land, with a promise from the


Colonial Secretary that this area would be increased by a fur-
ther free gift if he turned it to good account. By holding out
this inducement the authorities hoped that he would be led to
settle bn the soil, but, with his customary recklessness, no
sooner did he obtain possession of his land than he turned it
into ready money, which speedily took unto itself wings. A
legacy of in money and property, which he received from
relatives in Denmark, slipped through his fingers after a simi-
lar fashion. He added to his thoughtless imprudences by wed-
ding a termagant wife; his latter days were passed in privation
and obscurity, and he closed his extraordinary and eventful
career in Hobart Hospital in the sixty-fifth year of his age.
As to other Scandinavians who arrived at an early date
I have been told of a Danish Jew, by the name of Jacobsen,
who, together with two sisters, landed in Sydney in 1837, and
afterwards carried on an ironmongery business in Pitt-street.
The same Jacobsen had an apprentice, Wilhelm Olsen, bom of
Danish parents in Parramatta. Another Dane, Mr. Berthelsen,
was in the latter end of the forties owner of Bonara cattle
station, near Maryborough, Queensland. No doubt it would
be possible to trace others, but as their number anyhow was
very limited, and none of them are likely to have been of much
consequence, the matter is of no great importance. It might,
however, be mentioned that a good many Scandinavian sailors,
who ran away from their vessels, are known in the forties to
have been employed as wharf labourers at various seaports.
To be able to record a regular and more numerous emigra-
tion of Scandinavians to Australia we must start with the dis-
covery of gold in 1851. Indeed, up till then Australia offered
but very few temptations to attract people from the far distant
north to her shores. Besides, some obstruction seems to have
been laid in their way, and there can be very little doubt that
foreigners in those days were regarded with more suspicion
than at present. A Norwegian sailor by the name of Thores
Thorkelsen, who got shipwrecked on the coast of Victoria in
1844, is said not to have been allowed to remain in the colony


till he had made the authorities believe he was a native of
Heligoland, and consequently a British subject.
If this statement be correct the restriction must later on
have been removed, as a great number of foreign emigrants
arrived in 1851 and the following years. The number of
Scandinavians on the Victorian goldfields in the early part of
the sixties has been estimated at close on 2000, and this figure,
compared with those given in the census of 1871, combined
with the fact that nearly all the early Scandinavians went to
the goldfields, cannot be far short. The Scandinavians in Vic-
toria numbered in 1871 2254, viz.:
Danes ... 1014 —934 men and 80 women.
Swedes ... 845 —816 „ 29 „
Norwegians 395~3 8 9 „ 6 „
As for the other colonies, except New Zealand, no census
was taken prior to 1881 in which the various nationalities
were specified. All non-Britishers were simply put down as
u Foreigners,” but, save New South Wales and may be New
Zealand, the number of Scandinavians outside of Victoria can-
not have reached beyond a few hundreds.
In the seventies and the beginning of the eighties the num-
ber of Scandinavians in Australia was greatly increased through
certain steps taken by the Governments of Queensland and
New Zealand.
Queensland at that time made some strenuous efforts to
advertise the resources and possibilities of the colony in Great
Britain, Ireland, Germany, and the three Scandinavian coun-
tries in order to increase her population through immigration,
and at the same time granting a free passage to desirable
emigrants from the above places. The scheme had the de-
sired effect. Of Scandinavians more than 5000 left their
parental homes on the Danish plains, in the Norwegian val-
leys, or along the turbulent rivers of Sweden, in order to pro-
ceed to Hamburg, from which port sailing vessels chartered
by the Queensland Government carried them over the seas to
their new homes in the unknown and far distant south. After


a voyage which often lasted for eight or nine months, they
were landed in Brisbane, Maryborough, Mackay, Townsville,
or Port Douglas. Here they were received by a Government
official, lodged in depots, and shortly after scattered broadcast
throughout the colony, being principally employed in rural
work or as journeymen in the various townships.
By similar measures of assisted immigration the Scandi-
navian population in New Zealand was greatly increased. The
triangular stretch of land lying between Wellington, New Ply-
mouth, and Napier, and known as the “ Hawke’s Bay District,”
was covered with almost impenetrable forests of heavy timber.
The Government had in vain encouraged some of her own
people to settle down there. The huge forests, however, scared
the most indomitable land-grabber, and the very sight of them
made the heart sink low in the bosom of the stoutest among
the British and Irish races. Under these circumstances the
superintendent of the district, Mr. J. D. Ormond, gave a will-
ing ear to the advice of a Swede by the name of Friberg, then
living in Napier, to introduce some sturdy Scandinavians. The
proposal was forwarded to the Government and accepted, Mr.
Friberg being made a Government Commissioner, and
despatched to Scandinavia, with full power to grant a local
agent for every shipload of emigrants.
Mr. Friberg travelled through the Scandinavian countries,
arriving in Christiana in the early part of the year 1872.
Through rosy and most enticing advertisements, a consider-
able number of applicants were soon secured ; an agreement
signed, which granted to each person 40 acres of land at
£1 per acre and a free passage to New Zealand, the emigrant
paying £S for his board on the ship, the whole amount to be
repaid in small instalments extending over a number of years.
The Norwegian barque “ Hovding,” of Tonsberg, was char-
tered, and sailed out from Christiana on the 28th June, 1872,
carrying 350 men and women on board.
After a speedy journey, the “ Hovding” arrived in Napier


Queensland
... 2,142
New South Wales ...
... 3,190
Vi ctor a
2,207
T as. n
219
South Australia
938
West Australia
... 1,174
New Zealand
... 2,827
on the 15th September, and the immigrants after a few days’
rest in the barracks wandered away to the woods.
The “ Hovding” returned for another contingent of emi-
grants, and left Christiania on her second voyage on the Bth
August, 1873, having on board 209 souls, but henceforth the
Scandinavian emigrants were despatched from London and
Hamburg.
The efforts of the New Zealand Government had borne
fruit; upwards of 4500 young Scandinavians were in a short time
transported to the British island colony in the southern seas,
and soon the echoes of their axes swinging against the giant
trees, mingled with songs of their native land, filled the woods
of the Hawke’s Bay district.
In the nineties a considerable increase of Scandinavians
took place in West Australia, and their number increased from
245 in 1891 to 1494 in 1901, but only a part of them were
new arrivals, the majority being attracted from other Australian
States.
The number of Scandinavians residing in Australia and
New Zealand in 1871 may be estimated at between 4000 and
5000. At the census taken in 1881 they came out considerably
stronger, mustering 14,524, which figure gradually increased
till it reached its climax in 1891, when 21,288 Danes, Nor-
wegians, and Swedes resided under the Southern Cross. Since
then all immigration of Scandinavians to Australia has pretty
well ceased. Several have proceeded to the United States
during the latter years, and the census taken in 1901 shows
a decline of 190 persons from the number recorded ten years
previous.
The census taken in 1901 gives the following figures;
Norwegians and Swedes.
12,697


Danes.
Queensland
••• 3>i5 8
New South Wales ...
... 1,366
Victoria
1,020
Tasmania
i55
South Australia
262
West Australia
320
New Zealand
... '2,120
8,401
Be the Swedes from Finland (recorded as Russians) and
the Danes from Slesvig (recorded as Germans) included, the
total number of Scandinavians in the Australian Common-
wealth and New Zealand will at present range between 22,000
and 25,000, and added to this figure their offspring in first
generation, where both parents are bom in Scandinavia, we
shall not be far short of 50,000.
This number is but small compared with the three mil-
lions in the United States, but surpasses those of Canada and
Argentina as yet. It is, however, not likely to do so very long.
In both these places great facilities are given for desirable
immigrants in the way of free or cheap and highly fertile soil
and partly paid passage, thereby attracting a fair share of the
flow of immigrants, which formerly almost to a man bent to-
wards the United States.
One of the most interesting Scandinavians ever residing in
Australasia is the Danish bishop and ex-Premier, Mr. Monrad.
Monrad was at the head of the Danish Government when
the war with Germany broke out in 1864, and the result, so
fatal to Denmark, rendered him highly unpopular. Several
demonstrations took place outside his residence in Copenhagen,
and to get away from it all, and obtain relief from his own
worry, he finally decided to emigrate. Accompanied by his
wife, two sons, and a daughter, a daughter-in-law, five young
Danes and a Norwegian servant girl, he left his native land in
the midwinter, 1865, and after a short stay in London, pro-
ceeded to New Zealand. Arriving in Wellington, the fugitive


bishop and his little party were received with great sympathy,
and more especially by the Governor, Sir George Grey, to
whom Monrad had brought a letter of introduction from the
English Premier, Lord Russell. On the Governor’s advice,
Monrad selected land on the Manawatu River, near the pre-
sent site of Palmerston North, while his sons became “military
settlers,” later on taking part in the fight against the Maoris.
After a tedious journey in Maori canoes up the Manawatu
River, Monrad got into possession of his New Zealand bush
estate, and, together with his family, went through the mill
as ordinary settlers. For three years he roughed it, when he
returned to Denmark, and in course of time regained in part
his former public position, being reappointed bishop in his
old district, and elected a member of the Parliament. His
sons remained in New Zealand, and the now valuable estate
“ Karere” is still possessed by the Monrad family.
Two of Monrad’s companions to New Zealand met with
sad fates, the one drowning in the Manawatu River while
swimming some horses over, and the other being murdered by
a Maori. A similar fate befell a third Dane and former naval
officer, with whom the bishop came in touch on his arrival in
Wellington. He went to one of the South Sea Islands as
a trader, and was there killed and devoured by the natives.
To reflect at any length over the causes which led so many
of the Northmen to leave their homes in order to settle down
in foreign parts is in this case of no purpose, and it may
suffice to mention as the chief cause—a wish for material bet-
terment, mingled with some inherited traits peculiar to the
Vikings of courting danger and turning the wheel of fortune
abroad.
A couple of generations back the immigration movement
was strongly opposed in the Scandinavian countries, and the
clergy, the school, the press, and the upper classes leagued
together in opposing it. The clergy maintained that to immi-
grate was a sin against the fourth commandment. In the pub-
lic schools it was taught that to emigrate was a crime against
patriotism.


The well-known Norwegian writer, Henrik Wergeland,
wrote:
“ Did ind, hvor Fyrren suser ind
Tor ingen Nidding vandre,
Som har forglemt i trolost Sind
Sit Fcedreland for andre.”
It was, however, all in vain; the movment spread until it
turned quite a fever, and afterwards became almost a fashion,
it being now considered quite natural for young men with
energy and ambition to try their luck in other lands.
For all that, voices are still raised at home against this
wholesale bleeding of the three small Scandinavian nations, it
being maintained that (i) Sweden, Norway, and Denmark are
quite capable of feeding double their present population; (2)
that it is the young, the strong, and the most energetic which
principally leave; and (3) that so few of the bees who fly
away return to the hive with honey gathered abroad. They
stay away; in vain do their parents, their sisters and brothers
raise their hands and wistfully gaze out over the seas; those
who have flown away so seldom come back.
That upwards of 100,000 Scandinavians emigrate every year
is nevertheless a fact, and is likely to be so as long as there
are better chances and wider scope for their energy abroad than
at home; and it cannot be denied that the area of fertile land
in Scandinavia is very limited, nor that most of those who left
have done better for themselves than would have been the case
had they stayed at home.
That but comparatively few have turned towards Australia
is easily explained—the distance is great and the voyage ex-
pensive. From an Australian point of view this may be to
regret', the Scandinavians having a natural love for land.
They have proved themselves excellent agriculturists, and there
can be little doubt that the Commonwealth, with its vast areas
of superior soil, is well adapted for agricultural pursuits.
As to the number of Scandinavians in Australia and New
Zealand settled down on the land I am unable to give any


exact information, but we may in that respect be guided by
records from the United States, where, according to the census
of 1870, 1880, and 1890, 25 per cent, of the Scandinavian
population were engaged in agriculture, and 50 per cent,
laboured at what was called “all classes of work.” It is a
notable fact that 1 out of 4 of every 7 Scandinavian in the United
States engages in agricultural pursuits, while only 1 out of 6
of the native Americans, 1 out of 7 of the Germans, and 1 out
12 of the Irish followed the same profession.
From the same source we get an idea of Avhat class of
people the Scandinavian emigrants chiefly consist. Of those
immigrating to the United States between rBBr and 1890
1 person out of 5914 was a clergyman, 1 out of 5089 a musician,
1 out of 7236 a physician or surgeon, and 1 out of 3074 was
a teacher, while 1 out of every 12 was a skilled labourer, and
one-half of the Scandinavians farmers or servants.
It is partly on account of their great love and fitness for
farming that the Scandinavians have been considered some of
the most desirable immigrants. “It is*” says an American
political economist, “to the Scandinavian immigrants from
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden that the north-western States
are largely indebted for their marvellous development,” while
another Yankee authority writes: —“The Scandinavians have
succeeded where Americans, with better start, failed. They
have acquired farms, and now live in a state of great comfort.
In a certain sense it is the survival of the fittest.”
I shall in the following chapter quote some similar expres-
sions by public men in this country with regard to the Scan-
dinavian immigrants in Australia.


To get an idea of the value of the Scandinavian immigrants in
Australia a few figures may be quoted:
The well-known American political economist Smith in his
book, “ Emigration and Immigration,” estimates that every im-
migrant brings with him between $6B and sxoo. It costs, ac-
cording to the same authority, about $652.50 to bring up a
child in Europe till fifteen years of age. But this estimate
does not represent the real value of men; they are not valued
in dollars and cents, nor in jQ s. d. According to Dr. O. N.
Nelson, in his excellent work on the Scandinavians in America,
every immigrant must represent at least the value of a
slave, which was $BOO to $lOOO before the civil war. Mr.
Smith figures their value out at $875; and assuming each
Scandinavian immigrant has brought with him $75, the total
value comes to $950 (or Be their number in Australia
estimated at 25,000, we find that the Scandinavian countries
have sent, or, rather, permitted to be transferred to Austral-
asia, 50,000 of property in the form of human beings and
what valuables these have brought with them.
As mentioned before, it is often considered to be the
pluckiest, the most intelligent and energetic who emigrate,
Cowards have not the courage, fools not the gumption, and the
reluctant not the energy. This may, however, be a somewhat
rash assertion, and not altogether fair to those who remain at
home. Still, the days are certainly past when emigrants were
looked upon as mere adventurers. General Gordon said:
“It is not Great Britain’s statesmen, but her colonists, that
made the Empireand the splendid work done by the North-
men in America have convinced our people at home that those
who emigrate are made of the very best timber.
As to the Scandinavians in this country, they have proved
themselves as good colonists as their kinsmen in the United
States, and left their footprints on several of the more im-
portant industries.


As farmers and rural labourers they are scattered all
through the country, and, although far from numerous, except
in Queensland and New Zealand, it can safely be said there is
not a district where one or more are not to be found. Still,
where we find one Scandinavian farmer in Victoria, Tasmania,
or New South Wales, we find a dozen in Queensland and New
Zealand, and 100 in the United States. The thrifty and
economic rural classes in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden emi-
grate less in search of adventures than in search of land, and
do not pay to get to the little-known Australia, when they
can get to the United States or Canada for jQ 4, or still less.
Purely Scandinavian settlements have, with one or two ex-
ceptions, only been founded in New Zealand, and even there
they have in time been intermixed with, and gradually out-
numbered by, the English. English language and customs are
now predominant, and the settlements have already lost their
typical Scandinavian features. The same fate has befallen the
small Danish settlement in East Poowong, Victoria, which was
founded by six or seven Danish families in 1878.
In Queensland clusters of Scandinavian farmers are found
near Mackay, Bundaberg, Maryborough, Warwick, and other
places. In the north they are principally engaged in sugar-
growing; in the south in dairy farming.
To get nearer at the services rendered by these hardy
Northmen to their adopted land, we must bear in mind that
nearly every inch of soil they possess has had to be cleared
by the axe. It was wild forest when they took it up; as
luxuriant sugar fields or well-stocked paddocks they leave it
behind.
It has been said that on the evening when the first batch
of Scandinavian immigrants had been left alone in the woods
of Hawke’s Bay several of them shed tears. As the sun rose
on the next morning, and between the thick foliage threw its
golden rays on the little party of home-sick men and women,
they, however, cheered up, and realising there was no other
way out of the misery than over the very stumps of the trees,


they set to work at the Herculean task in front of them, con-
fident in their own strength and trusting in God.
Ere long the limited means brought out from home were
exhausted, and it became apparent that in order to keep the
pot boiling, and square the grocer’s bill, it was necessary to
divide their time between their own selections and that of work-
ing for others, while it was left to the wives and children to
do their best with the woods.
Similar tales of undaunted perseverance can, no doubt, be
recorded about later arrivals of Scandinavians, who, in addi-
tion to the settlement in Norsewood, afterwards founded
settlements in Halcombe, Dannevirke, Mauriceville, Makaretu,
Hasteville, and Inglewood, and also about those who made the
Australian continent their second home. One of the old
Danish settlers in Poowong has told me it took them six weeks
to get through the forest and take possession of their land, al-
though the distance from Melbourne is but about sixty miles.
Quite true, the Scandinavian settlers have not done more,
nor suffered greater hardships, than settlers of other nationals
ties, and when in the case of the Hawke’s Bay district they ac-
tually accomplished what British and Irish settlers shrunk back
from, it might be called a case of necessity. Once there, they
could not get back to their native land, and their ignorance of
the place and of the English language made it difficult for
them to seek permanent employment elsewhere.
As has been mentioned before, 25 per cent, of the Scan-
dinavians in the United States are farmers. There is no reason
to think the percentage should be smaller in Australia, con-
sidering that the majority of those who arrived in Queensland
and New Zealand during the assisted immigration had been
tempted to leave their native land by the very prospect of get-
ting soil of their own, and consequently principally hailed from
the rural districts of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. Be the
25 per cent, accepted as approximately correct, upwards of
6000 Scandinavians in Australia and New Zealand are engaged
in farming, and if we reckon 50 acres as the average size of


their holdings, it means that 300,000 acres of wild and useless
forest has been, or is in the process of being, transformed into
cornfields or grazing paddocks by the Scandinavians.
To this must be added that several have raised themselves
to the very top of agricultural skill, and by bringing their in-
herited talent for rural pursuits to bear in their new homes
have become leading Australian agriculturists. The Danish
settlement in Poowong has often been pointed to as an example
worth following. An old Danish farmer (Mr. Hjorth), in
Coimadai, had once turned his property into quite an experi-
mental farm, and,, according to a statement in one of the agri-
cultural journals, been a blessing to his whole district. An-
other Danish farmer (Mr. Mikkelsen), outside of Bundaberg,
has with only small means irrigated his whole farm,. His in-
genious invention was inspected by a reporter from “The
Queenslander,” and afterwards described in detail, with a foot-
note added, that Mr. Mikkelsen was willing, free of charge, to
instruct anybody how, in a cheap and effective way, to guard
against drought. Mr. Peut, a Danish farmer, in Barcaldine,
Q., was, in the “Dairy and Farm Journal” for February, 1906,
described as having taken the lead in wheat-growing in his dis-
trict, planting in one year twenty-one varieties. Mr. C. P,
Mau, besides being a notable sugar grower, has been the chief
medium in introducing Danish co-operative principles amongst
the farmers around Mackay, himself acting as secretary for a
co-operative association. It was through Danish immigrants
the Victorian Government was made acquainted with the
Danish Land Settlement Act, which Mr, Bent in an improved
shape is adopting for this State.
These are only a few instances picked out of a good many
brought under my notice during my ten years’ editorship of the
“ Scandinavian Journal” in Melbourne.
Still, if Australia has benefited by her Scandinavian
settlers, they in return have benefited by Australia, and many
a man who, had he stayed at home, where fertile soil is scarce,
never would have been possessed of more land than that which


is necessary to plant his worn-out body when he shuffles off
this mortal coil, is to-day a comfortably-situated farmer. When
some years back I visited the Danish settlement in Poowong I
was gratified in finding magnificent homesteads, luxuriant gar-
dens, well-stocked paddocks, and happy families. Similar
cases of progress are reported from the Scandinavian settle-
ments in New Zealand, Queensland, and other places, and the
cases where they have been ruined through drought or disease
among the cattle are exceptions.
Nor have their services been unrecognised by their British
fellow-colonists. In the press, as well as from the platform,
the honour due to them has been given in an ungrudging spirit.
James Bonwick;, in his history of Australia, says: “ The pro-
gress of Australia is in no small degree due to Germans and
Scandinavians, who make admirable colonists,” and the same
words have been echoed by a number of leading Australian
journals.
About the Scandinavians in Queensland, Mr. W. H. Traill
writes in his book, “A Queenly Colony”: “From the Scandi-
navian nations some contingents have been introduced, and al-
though their transference from cold countries to ones of semi-
tropical temperature involves an entire readjustment of all their
ideas so far as agriculture 1 is concerned, they have proved ex-
cellent colonists, have adapted themselves with singular apti-
tude to their novel surroundings, and number strongly among
the prosperous settlers in country localities.”
Lord Glasgow, when on a trip through New Zealand some
years back, spoke in high terms of the sterling qualities of the
Scandinavian settlers, and frankly admitted that the colony was
indebted to the thrifty and sturdy Scandinavians for great areas
of impenetrable forest having been transformed into well-
cultivated farms. When, on the 24th September, 1897, Norse-
wood celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary, the old Norwegian
colonists were the heroes of the day. The procession which
marched through the now flourishing township was headed by
forty of their number, and as a token of esteem they were pre-


sented with the flag of their native land, to be hoisted every
17th May—the Constitution day of Norway.
Also in the development of the Australian butter industry
the Scandinavians have done valuable work.
When we look upon the immense growth of the modern
butter industry, and the perfection to which it has been
brought, it seems almost incredible that the movement started
but twenty-five years ago, and is due to the invention of a most
insignificant-looking machine, the separator.
An ingenious German in Munich appears to have been the
father of the idea that by utilising the centrifugal force it
should be possible to obtain the cream without going through
the old-fashioned, slow, and laborious process of setting and
skimming the milk. He made his first experiments in or about
1864 with a rudely-constructed affair, consisting of two buckets
on a balance. His machine was quite impracticable, but his
idea spread like fire, and set brainy people at work in Ger-
many, Denmark, and Sweden.
In the race for a practical solution of the problem, Den-
mark came in as No. 1, Sweden as No. 2, and Germany as No.
3. In 1878 a Danish inventor (C. L. Nielsen) had constructed
a workable separator, and the following year it was placed on
the market, while Dr. de Laval in Stockholm was still experi-
menting with his.
The butter industry in Denmark was in a few years entirely
revolutionised; co-operative companies crept up like mush-
rooms, and butter-making from being a mere home indus-
try became the work of well-equipped factories. At the insti-
gation of the State, as well as of private people, a number of
young men were educated as dairy experts, and scattered
through the country districts; the increase of the butter export
became quite phenomenal, and ere long Denmark poured but-
ter in thousands of tons on the London market.
While this took place in Denmark, Australia still pursued
the old-fashioned way of making butter, quite contented with


being able to satisfy the local demand. Indeed, the time when
butter was imported to this country, principally from York,
is not so very far back. Quite true, an attempt was made
in 1868 by the late Mr. David Wilson and twenty-three
other dairymen to ship butter to England. The result of this
experiment was, however, disastrous, the butter being sold in
London for axle grease.
It appears that the factory system of making butter had
been tried, and proved successful, in New South Wales prior to
any other Australian State. Victoria was, however, soon to
take the lead.
The first separator (of Scandinavian manufacture) was im-
ported to Victoria in 1884, and installed in Mr. Wilson’s dairy.
It was, however, not till the Centennial International Exhibi-
tion in Melbourne, 1888, that the dairying industry entered
upon that career of prosperity and expansion which has been
its distinguishing characteristic ever since. A number of
De Laval’s separators were exhibited on that occasion, and a
model dairy set at work. “ The Government Dairy,” as it was
called, proved an interesting feature of the exhibition, attract-
ing the attention of many to systematic methods in handling
milk and cream and their manufacture into butter and cheese.
De Laval’s separators found ready sale throughout the coun-
try, and in the adjoining colonies the new movement was
pushed on with the most determined energy, and with so great
a success, that the Commonwealth alone, besides supplying
the local market, in 1905 was able to export butter to the value
of .£2,331,595, realising a price very little short of that paid
for Danish butter.
We shall now see what part the Scandinavian immigrants
have taken in this movement, which in less than two decades
has placed Australasia amongst the foremost butter-producing
countries of the world.
In 1886 or 1887 a young Dane (Emil Hansen) arrived in
Victoria. He was a pupil of Professor Segelcke, the very
gentleman who took the principal lead in modernising the


Danish butter industry. Mr. Hansen brought with him first-
class credentials from his native land, and was moved by high
aspirations, inasmuch as he aspired to the distinguished posi-
tion of Government Dairy Expert of Victoria. He, however,
had a strong rival in Mr David Wilson, who, besides knowing
a great deal of modem butter industry, had the advantage of
being already favourably known by all dairy-interested people
in the State.
According to one statement, Mr. Hansen was offered the
position as manager of the Government dairy establishment in
connection with the exhibition, but for some unknown reason
refused it. This seems hardly credible, and it is more likely
that he competed with Mr. Wilson for the position. However
that may be, Mr. Wilson was appointed, and Mr. Hansen, to-
gether with another Dane, started a dairy produce business in
Melbourne. The firm met with but little success, and soon
went insolvent.
After his defeat as a business man, Mr, Hansen went to
the country on a lecturing trip, probably with the objects of
gaining notoriety as a dairy expert and to pave the way to a
leading position within the dairy world of Victoria. For two
years he travelled about lecturing to the farmers, and induc-
ing them to establish co-operative butter factories after Danish
pattern. The manuscript of one of his lectures, delivered be-
fore a large gathering of dairy-interested people at the Goul-
burn Agricultural Show in February, 1892, is still kept, and
in the possession of Mr. Holdenson, Melbourne.
The lecture indicates a thorough knowledge of modern dairy-
ing, and although the dairy-farmers in Australia at present
undoubtedly know more about this most important industry
than then was the case, parts of it may still be read with
benefit.
Whatever Mr. Hansen's claims to a Government position may
have been, he was disappointed, Mr Wilson being appointed
Government Dairy Expert, thereby obtaining a power and in-
fluence which made it an easy matter for him to keep his rival
at bay.


Mr. Hansen seems to have recognised his second defeat,
and contented himself with the more humble position as mana-
ger of Rochester butter factory and afterwards as manager
of Kyneton butter factor}-. While here his health failed, and
he returned to Melbourne. In 1894 he left Australia for ever,
disappointed and with broken health, and a few years later he
died.
It may be admitted that Emil Hansen’s motive in stirring
the farmers of Victoria up principally was to create a position
for himself, but this does not in any way diminish the services
which it is generally admitted he rendered the country in the
childhood of its butter industry.
Extract from Emil Hansen’s lecture at Goulburn:
. . Dairying has been known ever since the cow
became domesticated. We all know that by shaking cream in
a bottle or billy we get butter. Of later years dairying has
been considerably improved through scientific discoveries, and
seems almost to have reached perfection, although, no doubt,
a good deal has to be learned yet. To be successful in dairy-
ing it is not sufficient to be able to work the latest machinery,
because so many small incidents occur which only man’s brain
can take advantage of, and which it is necessary to study with
keen interest. To carry on dairying on scientific principles
we must know something about cause and effect, and have an
intimate knowledge of bacteriology, of the material used, and
of the various processes to be applied; what in particular is
needed in this colony is a Government dairy school. ....
On my lecturing trip through certain parts of Victoria I have
always impressed on the farmers the desirability of establish-
ing co-operative butter factories, and next to educate themselves
up to such a high standard that they can do their own manage-
ment It has often been discussed what breed of
cattle we ought to go in for, and no doubt this is a most im-
portant question. My advice is, go in for heavy milkers, and
only rear the offspring of heavy milking cows. You must apply
milk-testing. Take once or twice a month the weight of each
cow’s milk, and keep a record for twelve months. You will
thereby find out which cows to keep and which to do away
with. The benefit derived from such means will amply repay
you for the pains taken You must feed your cows
when grass is scarce, and for this purpose ensilage, hay, bran,
turnips, mangold, and carrots can be recommended


Milking must be done carefully, and the last drop taken. The
first milk only contains per cent, of cream, while the last
may contain up to 24 per cent. Immediately after calving the
milk contains but little butter fat, but gradually becomes richer.
The nasty taste of milk and butter is caused by over-feeding
the cows with food rich in moisture, whereby the digestive
organs have got out of order, and can easily be remedied by
feeding the cows on good food and a little dry straw
Dairies and butter factories must be kept airy, dry, and clean,
in order to avoid the butter becoming fishy. Aroma can be
produced with the assistance of certain bacteria; in fact, in
this lies the secret of the superiority and the uniformity of
Danish butter.”
Of other Danish dairy experts who arrived in Victoria at
an early date may be mentioned W. Hansen. Mr. Hansen
landed in 1890, became manager of Thoona butter factory,
near Bendigo, and afterwards in turn managed “Victoria”
creamery, Melbourne, and Euroa butter factory. In 1898 he
went in partnership with Mr. Petersen, of “ Rosenborg” butter
factory, Melbourne, and eventually left Australia for South
Africa in 1900.
Bendix Hansen arrived in 1892, became manager of “Vic-
toria” creamery, and afterwards of Shepparton butter factory.
In 1901 he entered into partnership with Mr. Farral, and
started the “York” butter factory, Melbourne, the business
being enlarged in 1904 by the purchase of “ Macorna” butter
factory.
Several other Danish dairy experts arrived in 1890-1893,
of which may be mentioned a Mr. Petersen, who for a while
managed “ Victoria” creamery, and afterwards was appointed
assistant dairy expert by the New South Wales Government.
It may also be mentioned that during the assisted immigra-
tion to Queensland in 1899-1900, a great number of Danish
and Swedish dairy experts arrived, and were employed as
managers and assistant managers on butter factories all through
the State, and that two or three years back a Dane was ap-
pointed dairy expert by the New Zealand Government.


In addition to the Scandinavian dairy experts who have
acted as managers of butter factories, and at the same time
been instructors to young Australians, there are others who,
although not educated as dairy experts, have in various ways
assisted in promoting this pursuit, and whose names have be-
came associated with the Australian butter industry.
Foremost amongst these may in Victoria be mentioned
Messrs. Holdenson and Nielson. Holdenson and Nielson hail
from the same small village in Jutland, and arrived simultane-
ously in Victoria in the early eighties, neither having reached
the age of majority. After having been through the mill as new
chums, and gained colonial experience in various subordinate
positions, they opened a dairy produce stall in the Eastern
Market in 1886. Three years later they removed their busi-
ness to Flinders-lane, at the same time turning wholesale
dealers. Here they established one of the very first butter
factories in Australia, the cream being obtained from the
country by rail. Being, however, handicapped from lack of
room, and having to some extent benefited by the Government
bonuses, they in 1893 secured larger premises in Flinders-street,
where the factory has been ever since. At present Messrs.
Holdenson and Nielson’s butter factory is the largest in Aus-
tralia, inasmuch as it turns out more butter than any other
single factory, some weeks reaching 70 tons. Besides the fac-
tory in Melbourne, and another in Warragul, acquired at a
later date, the firm conducts an extensive business in cheese,,
bacon, eggs, dairy machinery and utensils, &c.
In 1902 Nielson went to Europe for the sake of his health,
never to return alive. He died at a sanatorium in Switzerland
in the following year, and after his body being cremated, the
ashes were brought to Melbourne and interred in the Kew
Cemetery. Mr. Holdenson has since conducted the business
alone.
As has been brought to light by the Butter Commission,
the Victorian butter industry has been terribly mismanaged in
the past, for which certain firms, who took advantage of the


general muddle, have been made the scapegoats. The fault
in reality lay with the Government, and being an old truth
that the people is the Government, the whole community is to
be blamed. Still, as the Victorian butter industry in spite of
all has made such wonderful progress, there is good reason
to believe that those firms who did well for themselves did still
better for the country in pushing the trade, in always being on
the look-out for new markets, and in introducing up-to-date
dairy machinery. Such is in reality the case, and a firm such
as Holdenson and Nielson,, who, like the other factories con-
ducted by Scandinavians, went through the ordeal of the But-
ter Commission without a stain on their shield, deserves double
credit. Probably no other firm has done so much to capture
the South African trade for Australian producers as Messrs,
Holdenson and Nielson, and it stands to reason that a man
who, like Mr. Holdenson, lands on a foreign shore without
other resources than those within himself, and who in a com-
paratively short time works his way up from a small retail
business to the very lead of the Australian butter industry, pos-
sesses such an extraordinary amount of energy, determination,
foresight, and general business capacity that he, in our time of
keen international competition, becomes a boon to any country.
Of other butter factories and dairy produce businesses in
Victoria started by Danes may be mentioned Goulbum Valley,
in Melbourne, by J, Pedersen, but afterwards sold; “ Rosen-
borg,” by J. Pedersen and W. Hansen, now owned by Pedersen
and Son, and enlarged by the purchase of Youanmite, Welsh-
pool, and Thoona butter factories; and Boolarra butter fac-
tory, by P. W. Heyman, of Copenhagen.
The origin of the last-mentioned factory differs somewhat
from the rest. The other factories have all been started or
purchased by Scandinavians, but these are all Australian citi-
zens, wheras Boolarra was started by Danish capital, and is
owned by a merchant in Denmark. Mr. Heyman, a leading
dairy produce merchant in Denmark, thought it expedient to
supply some of his customers—for instance, those in eastern


Asia —with Australian butter instead of Danish. For that
reason he sent an expert and machinery for packing butter in
tins to Melbourne. Some samples sent in tins from here to
Copehagen proved, however, of inferior quality on its arrival,
and concluding the fault was to be found in the manufacturing,
he decided to make his own butter, and for that reason erected
a butter factory in Boolarra, at the same time securing a first-
class Danish dairy expert Mr. Hartman. The undertaking,
managed by R. Wassard, proved a success, and lately Mr.
Heyman has enlarged his Australian business by the purchase
of Alberton butter factory, while further expansions are con-
templated.
Two or three butter factories outside Victoria have also
been started by Scandinavians; still it is in this State —the
cradle of modem Australian butter industry —they have done
their most valuable work as far as dairying pursuits are con-
cerned.
To follow the doings of the Scandinavians in the far away
New Zealand is somewhat difficult. Still one man stands out
so prominently that he is easily discoveved. The person in
question is the Scandinavian clergyman, Mr. H. M. Ries.
Mr. Ries was bom in Slesvig, and received a theological
education with the object of going to India as a missionary.
His health, however, proved rather delicate for the trying
climate of inner India, and at the same time being offered the
position as minister for the Scandinavian congregation in Norse-
wood, he changed his mind, and emigrated to New Zealand in
1886. The position as shepherd for the little flock did not
prove very remunerative, the Scandinavian settlers not being
too well off; and when in 1888 a fire destroyed a great part
of Norsewood, including the Scandinavian Church and par-
sonage, the situation became so critical that a radical change
was necessary. In a true Christian spirit, Mr. Ries, during this
time of trial, offered to serve his countrymen without salary
on the condition that he be allowed to earn his livelihood in
some other capacity.


After a trip to his native land in 1890, from which he
brought back with him a wife and twenty-four young Danes,
he started on that career of practical work which should prove
such a blessing to the district. Norsewood did not at all thrive
at the time. Then it happened that two Danish dairy experts
arrived. Mr. Ries seized the opportunity, erected on his own
property a butter factory, and, in conjunction with his two com-
patriots, started butter-making on modem principles
The undertaking proved' a great success for the vendors
and a blessing to the whole district, which can be seen from''
the fact that the price for land adjacent to Norsewood com-
menced to rise considerably. The butter factory, towards the
erection of which several people, on the suggestion of Mr. Ries,
had subscribed, appears to have been worked on co-operative
lines. As a more private speculation Mr. Ries bought the
butter milk and started a piggery.
Some disagreement arose between the two dairy experts,
and the one left, Mr. Ries being made manager of the con-
cern, a position he held till some years later a more extensive
company was formed, with the object of enlarging the factory
so as to cope with the continually increasing cream supply.
Mr. Ries,, who has been called “ the father of the butter
industry in the Hawke’s Bay district,” received at that time a
call as minister for the Scandinavian congregation in Danne-
virke, which he accepted, and here also his highly developed
instinct for practical work manifested itself. He became an
enthusiastic farmer, started an extensive business in agricultural
implements, waggons, harness, &c., and received appointments
to various public positions, being finally elected mayor.
That Scandinavian residents in Australasia should have had
some share in the development of the butter industry is but
natural, Denmark being the mother country of modem dairy-
ing; that they also, in no small degree, should assist in the


advancement of the sugar industry is somewhat more remark-
able.
Experiments with growing sugar cane in those parts of Aus-
tralia where the climatic conditions are favourable commenced
very early. Two Quakers who visited the convict settlement
on Brisbane River in 1828 found the cultivated land, where
now Brisbane’s botanical garden is situated, divided into plots
by belts of sugar cane. In 1838 a West Indian sugar planter,
Mr. Mayo, experimented with sugar cane introduced from from
Mauritius. Occasional experiments in growing sugar cane were
afterwards made in various places, but without great success;
in fact, very little is known about them. It was not until the
“Colonial Sugar Refining Company” took the field in 1855
that the Australian sugar industry was taken up in an earnest
and rational spirit, and that it entered on a career of national
importance. To get at the root of this truly magnificent enter-
prise we must start with the arrival in Sydney of a young Dane,
Edward Knox, in the early forties.
Mr. Knox w r as bom in Elsinore in 1819, educated at the
renowned Academy of Sorb, and commercially trained in Den-
mark, Germany, and England. He was thus well prepared to
fight his way abroad, when he embarked for sunny Australia.
Some few years after his arrival in Sydney we find him at the
head of the Commercial Banking Company. In 1855 he took
the lead in the formation of the Colonial Sugar Refining Com-
pany, for which he was made managing director, a position he
held till his death in 1901.
The life history of Mr. Knox is to a great extent the his-
tory of the above company.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company, which is now uni-
versally known by the initials “ C.5.R.,” started with a capital
of Two years after operations had been com-
menced a crisis in the sugar market occurred, which seriously
checked the progress of the young company. In 1869 the
“ C.S.R.” went into the cultivation of cane in New South Wales
on its own account, and mills were erected on the Clarence and


Macleay Rivers, the latter being, however, closed in 1872, the
climate in this district having proved unsuitable for cane grow-
ing. In 1878 the “ C.S.R.” extended its scope of operations,
and cane cultivation on the Tweed River was successfully com-
menced, and in the following year the company reached further
afield by taking steps to start cane growing on the Richmond
River.
During the five years from 1878 to 1883 sugar mills were
either erected or in the course of erection on the Tweed River,
the Richmond River, the Johnston River, and the Herbert
River, besides two sugar mills in Fiji. The operations of the
company were extended to New Zealand, where, in conjunction
with the Victoria Sugar Company (in 1887 absorbed by the
“ C.S.R.”), a refinery was started.
The company had grown a big concern, with a capital of
which figure shows well for the energy and foresight
of the directors, and the confidence of the shareholders in its
management.
An acute crisis in the sugar market in 1884, whereby the
price of sugar fell £lO per ton, was successfully weathered,
and when in 1888 the business of the New Zealand Sugar Com-
pany was gathered in, the capital of the “ C.S.R.” was increased
to New stretches of land have been brought under
cultivation and additional mills erected at various places.
When in 1905 the “ C.S.R.” celebrated its fiftieth anniver-
sary, it possessed refineries in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide,
Brisbane, and Auckland, thirteen sugar mills in New South
Wales, Queensland, and Fiji, 33,000 acres had been planted
with sugar cane by the company, while great quantities of cane
were bought from other growers. Besides procuring work for
an immense staff of people, the company employed 2500 horses
and mules, 34 locomotives, 7200 trucks, 35 steam tugs and
launches, and 264 punts and lighters, while the capital had been
raised to the enormous sum of
To secure the welfare of the employees a benefit society
.and a provident fund has long been established; and it speaks


volumes for the humane spirit in which this huge concern has
been led, that during the fifty years of its existence never once
did a labour conflict arise.
For his services to Australia Edward Knox was knighted
in 1898, and when two years later he celebrated his golden
wedding the 1200 hands employed by the company seized this
opportunity to show their aged and noble-minded chief their
appreciation by presenting him with costly and appropriate
gifts.
After a long life of ceaseless toil, Edward Knox closed his
eyes in January, 1901. The Sydney press were unanimous in
calling him a gentleman in the true sense of the word, a noble-
spirited personality, and a benefactor to Australia. His name
will be honoured as long as sugar cane is grown under the
Southern Cross.
To give Sir Edward Knox the sole credit for the magnifi-
cent success achieved by the “ C.S.R.’’ would be unjust to
others, who in various capacities have laboured assiduously in
the service of the company, but as the chief promoter and
managing director for close on fifty years he naturally became
the leading spirit, and stands out so prominently, that of any
single individual greatest credit is due to’ him. He bore the
brunt of the responsibility, and deserves the lion’s share of the
fame.
The present sub-manager, Mr. W. N. Rothe, a nephew of
Sir Edward Knox, is also a native of Denmark. He entered
the service of the company in 1879, and was in 1902 promoted
to sub-manager.
Of other Danes holding trusted positions in the service of
the “ C.S.R.” may be mentioned Rudolph Helms, manager of
a sugar mill in Queensland; Vilhelm Helms, manager of a
sugar mill in New South Wales; Paul Sylow and L. Beck,
chemical analysts; G. Betzonic, inspector; and H. Moltke,
manager of a sugar plantation in Fiji.
Through the inducement given by the “ C.S.R.’ cane grow-
ing became a paying industry, and has, as far as Queensland


is concerned, for years stood second in importance. I men-
tioned before that the above company bought great quantities
of cane from other'growers. These consist principally of far-
mers, amongst whom a great number are Scandinavians.
It seems strange, and is a striking proof of man’s physical
elasticity, that the same men who once used to tramp through
feet-deep snow, and in the morning had to knock a hole in
inch-thick ice before they could get a wash, should ever be
able to endure the intense heat of semi-tropical Australia.
The Scandinavians in North Queensland have, as pointed out
by Mr Traill, not only stood the climatic change wonderfully
well, but have, with no less degree of adaptability, flung away
occupations of old, and turned sugar growers. From people
who have travelled in those parts of the Commonwealth I have
been told that cane growers of Scandinavian origin are found
by the scores in the Bundaberg and Isis districts, around Chil-
ders and Mackay.
* In addition to what has already been said about the Scan-
dinavians connected with the Australian sugar industry, it may
be mentioned, that a great number of Danes, Swedes, and Nor-
wegians are employed as labourers in the various mills and in
the cane fields. In fact, in the sturdy army of fellow-colonists
which became the bearers of Australia’s sugar industry,
men from Scandinavia have served with distinction in every
imaginable grade—from that of commander-in-chief right down
to the humblest private.
In fruitgrowing also a number of Scandinavians are en-
gaged, and it is with some satisfaction I am able to state that
a leading fruitgrower and owner of the largest nursery within
the Commonwealth and New Zealand (Mr. Nobelius) hails
from the far North.


Mr. C. A, Nobelius was bom in Gefle, Sweden, and arrived
in Victoria at an early age. In 1890, he, with his wife and young
family, settled down in the Emerald district, and out of the
virgin forest cleared a large area on the hill slopes, and started
what has become a nursery of considerable magnitude. At the
present time he has, acording to a paragraph in the “ Age” some
months ago, 100 acres cultivated as a nursery for fruit trees
and 180 acres as a permanent orchard. Altogether on the
nursery land he has nearly a million and a quarter of young
trees, principally apples, pears, plums, peaches, apricots, and
cherries. From small beginnings, Mr. Nobelius has estab-
lished a wide reputation, the young trees from his nursery find-
ing a place in the orchards not only of the Commonwealth and
New Zealand, but of South Africa and America.
On the 17th November, 1905, Mr. Nobelius’ nursery was
inspected by a vice-regal party. At the dinner, provided by
the local member of Parliament, His Excellency the Governor
expressed himself as follows: —“ That day they had seen an
example of what could be done by energy, enterprise, per-
severance, courage, and, above all, integrity. Mr. Nobelius was
known all over Australia as a man who supplied exactly what he
offered to supply. No sample was required. When he saw
that fine nursery, which produced more than all the nurseries
of Australia and New Zealand, they must marvel at what Mr.
Nobelius had done.”
Mr. Frank Madden, a well-known member of the Victorian
State Parliament, in proposing the health of the host and
hostess, said:—“ It required a man with the heart of a lion to
take up land, as Mr. Nobelius had done, far from road and
rail, and subdue the wilderness. He had converted bush and
scrub into a magnificent nursery. He had done more, for the
name of Nobelius was widely known to be synonymous with
that of honesty and absolute truth.” Higher praise could
scarcely be given to any colonist.
In the grand fruit and vine growing district of Mildura Scan-
dinavians have toiled from the veiy beginning, and the names


of Poulsen, Frost, Larsen, and others are well known in the
now flourishing settlement. Mr. Poulsen, a native of Norway,
has long been one of the leading men in the district, and on
several occasions spokesman for his fellow-settlers.
I have mentioned before that the number of Scandinavian
gold diggers in Victoria in the fifties and sixties has been esti-
mated at 2000. Ever since then a great number of Swedes,
Norwegians, and Danes have been engaged in mining, and it
can safely be said there is not a place within Australasia where
mother Earth has been opened in order to secure her treasures —
be it gold, silver, copper, tin, or coal —that Scandinavians have
been absent. When gold was discovered in West Australia
their number rose in a couple of years from 245 to 1494 in that
State. When afterwards it was rumoured that gold had been
found in New Guinea several went there, the majority only to
succumb to the unhealthy climate or the ferocity of the
natives. At the mines in Queensland, New Zealand, New
South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and West Australia we
meet descendents of the hardy, adventurous Norsemen, mostly
as miners or prospectors, occasionally as storekeepers and
lodginghouse keepers. And in the cities we find them as
amateur mining speculators —in most cases spending on the
mines what they earn in other capacities.
The Scandinavians are, when taken as a whole, not a com-
%
mercially gifted people. They are slow in conception, robust
of conscience, clumsy in commercial intercourse; in fact, true
descendants of the old Viking stock, who voluntarily, and
often with success, staked their lives for the sake of gain, but
who in commerce fell utterly short. Therefore w r e find the
Scandinavians in the deep, unhealthy, and often dangerous
mines—never in the lofty, comfortable offices as sharebrokers,
mining directors, and managers. Several made a pile in the
early digging, when diggers possessed their own mines; very
few have made a pile since.


The above traits peculiar to the Scandinavians explain why
almost none hold, or have ever held, leading positions in
mining circles. Quite true, a few companies have been floated
by Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes, but nearly all have failed.
Quite true, too, that the locally well-known Dane, Conrad
Frank, in Castlemaine, has made himself notorious as a com-
pany promoter, and that to him is due the introduction of
dredging for gold in the Castlemaine district, to which, more
than anything else, Castlemaine owes its present prosperity, but
Mr. Frank himself has remained poor. One or two cases I
can mention to the opposite stand so utterly alone that they
support rather than contradict the general rule.
The one was that of a Dane, Mr. Christensen, who once
held a conspicuous place in Melbourne mining circles. The
great wealth he had accumulated through successful mining
speculation had, however, been considerably reduced before his
death a few years ago.
The other, Peter M. Balstrup, died in Launceston on the
Bth December, 1905. On the occasion of his death lengthy
biographies appeared in the local papers, of which the fol-
lowing is an extract:
“ The deceased, who was closely associated with mining in
Tasmania, was a native of Denmark, and arrived in Victoria
when a young man, and immediately embarked in mining, and
gained considerable experience therein. He visited the Temora
goldfields in New South Wales, and with Mr. W. S. Monks,
who is also well known in mining circles, and now proprietor
of the Cornwall Hotel in Cameron-street, came to Tasmania
in 1881. They first visited the East Coast, and were the dis-
coverers of the Argus tin mine on the Wyniford River. The
deceased was subsequently engaged in gold mining at Mount
Victoria, on the East Coast, and in 1885 he sought the mineral
fields of the West, and was connected with the first exploring
party that discovered the Zeehan field. Later on he was con-
nected with the floating of the Crown Lyell, Prince Lyell,
South Tharsis, and the Central Mount Lyell companies. The
deceased of late had been largely interested in the North-
eastern tin mines. He was a director of several companies,
and was also a large shareholder in the Tasmania and Mount


Bischoff mines. Some months ago the deceased was prospect-
ing on the West Coast, and had the misfortune to get
“ bushed.” He spent the whole night wandering about, and
contracted a severe cold. This led to bronchitis, and consump-
tion supervened with fatal results. The news of the death was
received, particularly in mining circles, with profound regret,,
as perhaps no one had done more to foster the industry' in
this State than the deceased. Legitimate “ shows” always had
his warmest support, and his name on the directorate of com-
panies give investors a feeling of confidence. The Launceston
Stock Exchange was closed yesterday afternoon out of respect
to the memory of the deceased,”
Scandinavian artisans are not numerous in Australia, al-
though a few will be found in every fairly sized city, and there
are places in Queensland where they may be said to be well
represented.
The principal reason for their comparative scarcity is that
the United States offers far greater chances for the well-trained
European tradesman than does Australia, and unless special in-
ducement is given in the shape of paid or partly paid passage,
very few dream of turning towards the less known and, from
an artisan’s point of view, less advanced Commonwealth, far,
far south. The few stray ones who come from Scandinavia
are either attracted by near relatives already settled here, or
arrive in consistency with an inherited inclination of Scandi-
navian tradesmen to wander southwards.
When a youth at home has finished his five years appren-
ticeship, during which time he regularly every evening attends
a technical college, he passes a practical test as journeyman.
In order to gain experience and standing amongst his com-
rades, it is now quite a common thing to go abroad for some
years, and he always turns towards the south. A Danish
artisan, for instance, will never turn towards the north to
Sweden or Norway, nor towards the east to Russia, and but
seldom towards the west to England; he will go to Germany.
After having worked in the northern parts for a while, he will
go to the southern provinces, and gradually further on to


Austria, Hungary, and Switzerland, seeking employment as he
proceeds.
In the majority of cases they return home and settle down,
or emigrate to America, after having served their time in the
army; but a few become a sort of wandering knights, who, by
force of habit, keep on steering their course towards the south,
and will consequently eventually end either in South Africa or,
with a slight turn towards the east, in Australia, By the time
they arrive here they have reached an age when most men
entertain a desire of getting a home of their own; they meet
u their fate” —Australia’s bright daughters put an end to their
travels.
It may be a natural consequence of more stable conditions
that tradesmen from the old countries are more thoroughly
trained than are their Australian colleagues. In Europe
people work longer hours for less pay; they take their time
and do things well. In new T countries, like America and Aus-
tralia, there exists a deplorable inclination to “ rush” through
everything; here the chief consideration is quantity, at home
it is quality. This fact explains what to a European seems an
absurdity, that people often change trades—a blacksmith turns
baker, a baker turns butcher, and so on.
For this reason an immigrated tradesman is at first at a
disadvantage in Australia. If he cannot get into his own trade
he is lost (quite opposite to the young colonial, whose fund of
resource is inexhaustible); if he gets employment and can-
not get up speed, he is liable to get the “ sack,” When, on the
other hand, he succeeds in getting up the required speed, with-
out sacrificing skill, he never need fear of swelling the ranks
of the unemployed.
The Scandinavian tradesmen, like the Scandinavians in
general, have, compared with many other races, a conspicuous
gift of shaping after any mould not exactly clashing with the
more deep-rooted traits in their character. Hence Danish,
Norwegian, and Swedish artisans in Australia are as a rule
doing well. By strenuous efforts they get into the way of rush-


ing; they don’t altogether drop the care and accomplishment
acquired in the workshops at home; and, what gives them a
decided advantage over their Australian-bom comrades, whose
minds in less or greater degree are always bent on sport, are
their steady habits, and a natural desire of ever increasing
their efficiency in their particular trade.
This be as it may, the fact remains that you very seldom
find a Scandinavian tradesman in Australia amongst the un-
employed ; and, personally, although a good many years in
this country, and for a considerable time attached to a Scandi-
navian labour bureau, I have scarcely ever met any. Many
have become masters, several of whom have at local and inter-
state exhibitions received special distinction for artistic work-
manship. I remember some years ago having seen an illus-
trated Christmas paper from Queensland, in which the nume-
rous gold, silver, and bronze medals awarded a Danish coach-
builder (Ivar Petersen, of Charters Towers) were reproduced.
A Danish cabinet maker in Brisbane, Peter Thomle, now
photographic artist in Sydney, has also scored medals for his
excellent work. The leading photographer in Queensland, C.
P, Poulsen, is a native of Slesvig, and so on.
A good many Scandinavian carpenters have become
builders and contractors, and are doing well. Mr. Hennings,
a leading contractor in Melbourne, is a striking proof that the
Scandinavians in the building line are able to hold their own.
Two Norwegians, Petersen and Larsen, who in the early
nineties started box making in Melbourne, assisted merely by
a boy, employ to-day forty hands, and several similar suc-
cesses are reported from other parts of the Commonwealth
and New Zealand.
Far more numerous than the artisans are the Scandinavian
sailors. We meet them on the Australian coasters, on the
tramps visiting our ports, on crafts and lighters, on pilot ves-


•sels and tug-boats, in the lighthouses, and on the various
wharfs as labourers.
It is generally admitted that Great Britain and Scandinavia
produce the best sailors. This is by no means accidental; the
very position of these countries must make a great percentage
of their inhabitants familiar with the sea from their very child-
hood, to which is to be added that the British coast popula-
tion, as well as the Scandinavians of to-day, descend in a
straight line from the most daring navigators that ever existed
—the Vikings.
Several hundred years have passed since then, and a time
■came when our forefathers grew quiet, their uncouth ways of
making a living being superseded by a peaceful international
exchange of commodities, and the Vikings, having no talent
for that kind of business, had to make room on the sea for
the Portuguese, the Spanish, and the Dutch. Still the spirit
of old was not dead, and only a great national danger and
a slight turn of the tide was required to stir it into new ac-
tivity. It manifested itself in the destruction of the Spanish
Armada, and afterwards in the successful struggle against the
Dutch and the French for the supremacy on the sea. The
cloak of' the old Viking had fallen on the shoulders of our
luckier British cousins.
For all that, the Scandinavians never ceased being a sea-
faring people. They hunted the whale and the seal, and later
on commenced to make themselves noted as explorers in the
Polar Sea. An attempt to reach India by sailing round north
of America was made by the Danes and Norwegians in 1619.
Alaska and the passage between Asia and America was dis-
covered by a Scandinavian navigator, Vitus Behring, in 1728,
and right down to our own time have they roamed about in
those remote waters. Scandinavians hold the honour of being
the only navigators who ever penetrated through both the
North-eastern and the North-western passage, and names like
Nordenskiold, Fritjof Nansen, Otto Sverdrup, Andree,
Aamundsen, and a great many others, give ample proof of some


-drops of the old Norse blood still running in the veins of
present-day Scandinavians. Even in the exploration of Ant-
arctic regions they have taken a prominent part. A Norwegian
whaling vessel, the “Antarctic,” visited in 1893-1894, Victoria
Land, and mapped out a hitherto unknown stretch of coast
line. The Norwegian explorer, Carsten Borchgrevink, led an
expedition, chiefly comprised of Norwegians, to the same place
in 1898-1900, penetrating further south than any man before
him. A young Norwegian scientist, who died on the trip, is
the only human being laid at rest in that lonely and desolate
land. The Norwegian Consul in Melbourne, H. Gundersen,
some years back equipped and led an expedition to Kergualen
Island and the surrounding waters.
In returning to the nameless multitude of Scandinavian
sailors scattered broadcast all over the world, and in particular
to those in Australian waters, I wish to point out that Nor-
way, Sweden, and Denmark produce more sailors than they
require themselves, while Great Britain and the United States
are short. Hence between 40,000 and 50,000 Scandinavian
sailors are engaged in British ships, and somewhere about
20,000 in the United States. To ascertain their number in
Australia is difficult, and it may suffice to repeat that we find
them everywhere; even by glancing through the list of a
perished crew after a local shipwreck we never fail to note
such familiar names as Carlson, Olsen, Hansen, Petersen, or
at times more uncommon Scandinavian names.
Probably none have been so much abused by stump orators
and shoddy public-house politicians as foreign sailors, and
those of Scandinavian extraction, being in a great majority,
have, as a rule, enjoyed the honour of being specially singled
out. If an Anglo-Saxon sailor is without a ship he will at
once —with an appeal to British patriotism—throw the blame
on the Scandinavian sailor, “who is forcing the old English
Jack Tar out of the British commercial fleet.” If wages in
the local coasters are lowered, it is due to those “ nasty, dirty
foreigners, who by accepting sweating wages are usurping the


Australian coastal trade,” and the unfortunate sailors engaged
in foreign vessels, accidentally chartered by an Australian firm,
are regarded as “ black legs, who can, and are, quite content
to live on the ‘ smell of an oiled rag.’ ”
The accusations are but partly true, and the real cause of
the supposed evil quite omitted. A certain number of British
sailors would under any circumstances at times be disengaged,
and for unfair foreign competition the fault lies in the incon-
sistency of the Australian laws with regard to the carrying of
local goods, as no one has any right to expect that old coun-
tries should be as far advanced in labour legislation as new
ones. At any rate, the crews of such vessels are blameless,
being engaged in Europe under different conditions to those
prevailing here, and engaged for a certain length of time. That
Scandinavian sailors are of more frugal habits than British is
no doubt true, but, after all, the difference is not so great as,
from a Scandinavian point of view, might have been wished
for, frugality being a virtue, not a vice. It is,, of course, false
pride when people, for instance, boast of requiring meat three
times a day, and when in the Crimean War the British refused
to fight before they had had their beefsteak, they proved
inferior soldiers to the French, who would, if requested, fight
on empty stomachs.
It must, however, be borne in mind that in dealing with
sailors and their associates —no matter from which country
they hail —we have to do with a somewhat illiterate class of
people. It cannot be otherwise, being cut off from civilisa-
tion most of tke time, and strangers at every port of call. Quite
true, different religious denominations are making use of every
opportunity to improve the sailors morally, but little or nothing
is done to improve them intellectually. The slander might
therefore be put down to general ignorance, coupled with
jealousy towards a successful competitor. Jealousy between
man and man has existed ever since Cain slew Abel, and is
likely to exist for some time to come. In airing bitterness
towards a person of a different nation one special word may


be used which would sound most ridiculous if applied to a
compatriot. An Englishman, for instance, may call another
Englishman who has done him a supposed injustice a rogue,
a humbug, a dog, and so on, but he cannot call him a “ Dutch-
man” or a “foreigner.” To be a foreigner is in itself no dis-
grace. A foreigner may be as good, or perhaps even better,
than an Englishman, and besides it is not possible for all to
be born at the same small spot; but the matter is easily
mended by chaining a suitable adjective in front of the noun,
for instance, nasty, dirty, or bloody.
To cut it short, the Scandinavian sailors are so numerous
in the British fleet and elsewhere because their services are
required, and if anybody has reasons for complaint it is Nor-
way, Sweden, and Denmark, which countries at great expense
rear skilled sailors, only to assist other nations in the com-
petition for the world’s shipping trade.
The Australian Commonwealth produces very few sailors,
the attention of the people being principally taken up by clear-
ing the forests and founding a local industry; hence they have
to rely on Europeans for manning their ships. And, indeed,
the lot of the seafaring man, irrespective of nationality, is
not to be envied. The hardships are manifold, the risk of
meeting an untimely death great, and the chances for a profit-
able investment of his earnings ever so much smaller than the
opportunities offered for spending them when in port.
As for the Scandinavian sailors in Australian waters, the
majority of them remain poof, and it is a regrettable fact that
a great many of those ending their earthly career out here
are that poverty stricken that they have to be buried at the
expense of the public. A considerable number have become
masters on sailing vessels and small crafts, in which they at
times are part owners; a few have been employed by the
various Governments as lighthouse keepers and masters of pilot
vessels; now and again one is heard of as being captain on
a coasting steamer; while at least one, the Norwegian captain,
Engelhardt Jorgensen, who in 1890 gave a fine exhibition of


Scandinavian seamanship by sailing from London to Mel-
bourne in a lifeboat, “ The Storm King,” is known to have
been harbourmaster. Best of all have those done who left the
sea while still young, and took to the land, many of whom
are now well-to-do farmers.
I have said before that the Scandinavians are not a com-
mercially gifted people, and nothing can be more true when
taken as a whole. It is, for instance, a striking fact that while
the Greeks and Italians to some extent monopolise the fruit,
fish, and oyster trade in Australia, the Germans the wine trade,
and the Irish the liquor vending, the Scandinavians are hardly
represented in any branch of business where goods are sold
over the counter. In the populous Melbourne there was for
years not a single Scandinavian-born grocer, and at the pre-
sent only one. An oyster saloon in Elizabeth-street owned by
a Swede is, on account of its rareness, known to every Scandi-
navian in Victoria. Of Greater Melbourne’s innumerable hotels
only a couple are conducted by Scandinavians; as drapers and
ironmongers they are entirely absent. No doubt several have
given their business ability a practical test, but have failed.
That nevertheless a few Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes
have succeeded as importers may partly be due to having con-
fined themselves principally to Scandinavian products, thereby
entering on a field where they naturally would have a decided
advantage over possible outside competitors. Besides, no rule
is without exceptions—occasionally a keen business man may
be detected even aongst the Scandinavians.
According to the statistics, the imports from the three
Scandinavian countries to Australia in 1905 came to ,£307,336
(Norway £259,419, Sweden £44,692, Denmark £3225), and
the export from Australia to Denmark £142, Norway none,
and Sweden £3. These figures are, however, misleading. There
being no direct shipping line between the countries in ques-


tion, most of the goods from Scandinavia, and vice versa
go in transit through Germany or England, and are often en-
tered as German or English goods, or as Australian goods
destined for these places. A change, which undoubtedly will
promote a more direct trade between Australia and Scandi-
navia, is, however, likely soon to take place, a direct shipping
line having been contemplated by a Swedish syndicate between
Gothenburg and Sydney, and is supposed to start this year.
The principal imports to the Commonwealth and New Zea-
land from Scandinavia are timber, matches, dairy machinery,
pig iron, and preserved fish, while of the numerous articles of
less importance may be mentioned Lux and Primus stoves,
paper, telephone apparati, motors, various dairy utensils,
cocoa, cod liver oil, &c.
Of Australian products sold in Scandinavia by German or
English firms, wool, hides, various metals, wines, and of later
years grain are of most importance.
The export trade from Australia to Sweden, Norway, and
Denmark has hitherto been conducted by firms in England and
Germany, but not so with the goods sent in opposite direction,
which trade is mostly in the hands of Scandinavians residing
here. In fact, the immigrants have been the principal pioneers
in bringing the products of their native land on the Australian
market, as comparatively little has been done by the unbear-
ably slow and conservative firms at home in establishing busi-
ness connections in this out-of-the-way place. And on the
immigrants will, in no small degree, rest a further development.
As the most prominent Scandinavian importers in Mel-
bourne, may be mentioned Otto Romcke, Holdenson and
Nielson, Henry Olsen, P. W. Heyman, Schreuder and Svensen,
and Petersen and Son; in Sydney, Petersen and Boesen, O.
Hellstrom, Marcker, and Gummesen; in New Zealand, Charles
Dahl, Palmerston North.


About Scandinavian professionals, scientists, artists, or
literateurs in Australia very little is to be said; in fact, to
make anything of a show at all it will be necessary to reclaim
from the Germans the share Denmark justly has in the famous
botanist the late Baron von Muller.
Baron Sir Ferdinand von Muller was born in Rostock, Ger-
many, in 1825, where his father w r as a Customs officer. When
eight years old both his parents died from consumption, and
little Ferdinand, together with two sisters, were adopted by his
mother’s people, an old Danish family in the Danish town
Tender. Having finished school, he was apprenticed to a
chemist in Husum (another township in the Danish province
Slesvig), and afterwards he went to the University in Kiel in
order to study medicine. His first experience in botany he
obtained in Denmark by studying and describing the flora of
Western Slesvig.
By birth a German, he became a Dane by naturalisation,
and the Danish sentiments instilled into him in his mother’s
home he preserved till his death. When he spoke of his “ land
of childhood” he spoke of Denmark, and when, with his old-
fashioned solemnity in dealing with royalty, he related inci-
dents connected with “ his sovereign,” it was the Danish King
Christian VIII.
When in 1847 he emigrated to Australia he was not only
a Danish citizen, but Danish in sentiments, which can be seen
from the fact that he, according to a statement by the late G*
Liihmann, the baron’s successor as Government Botanist in
Victoria, always passed himself off as a Dane. In paragraphs
appearing in old Australian journals referring to him, he is
mentioned as a Dane.
In 1864 the combined forces of Prussia and Austria in-
vaded Denmark, and after a hopeless struggle against over-
whelming odds, the latter country had to cede the three duke-
doms, Slesvig, Holsten, and Launborg, to the victors. Baron
von Muller’s “ Land of childhood” became Prussian territory,,
and when shortly afterwards he was created a baron by the


King of Wiirtemburg, a flattery which impressed itself deeply
in his mind, and consequently became a German nobleman, he
once more changed his nationality. Had the future boundary
between Denmark and Germany (as suggested by Lord Palmer-
ston at the conference in London in 1864) been drawn where
Danish and German languages and sentiments meet, Tonder
would have remained under the Danish flag. Dr. Ferdinand
Muller would then most likely not have been made a German
nobleman, and lived and died a Scandinavian.
To mention Baron von Miiller’s name in the same breath
as that of the great Swedish genius Carl Linnaeus would be
most unjust to the latter, but amongst the botanists of a later
date he undoubtedly holds a most conspicuous place, and his
fame may favourably be compared with that of Sir William
Hooker or Sir Joseph Banks. Certain it is that of those scien-
tists who have devoted their lives to the welfare of young
Australia he is by far the most eminent, and stands head and
shoulders over them all.
Scattered efforts had been made by Sir Joseph Banks,
Robert Brown, and others in investigating and describing the
Australian flora. Baron von Muller completed the work barely
commenced, and undertook the laborious task of investigating
—not a patch here and there —but the whole continental flora,
from Cape York to the southernmost point of Tasmania, and
from Fremantle to the shores of the Pacific, classifying, nam-
ing, and describing it. The volumes he published on this sub-
ject number somewhat about two dozen, in addition to which
he made himself deserving of his adopted country by intro-
ducing a great many plants and trees for industrial purposes.
In the early fifties he was appointed Government Botanist
of Victoria, which position he held till his death. In 1896 he
was laid at rest in the St. Kilda Cemetery, honoured by almost
every country in the world for the valuable services rendered
to science and to mankind at large.
The secret to Baron von Muller’s greatness is not so much
to be found in a superior intellect as in an amazing memory.


unlimited energy, and unfettered ambition. He remembered
as if his brain had consisted of a dictionary of Latin names;
he laboured like a Trojan, putting in—even when an old man —
upwards of 120 hours a week; and if at night time his eyes
grew tired he would blow out the light for a few minutes while
giving them a rest, and then start afresh. He denied himself
of every comfort in order to give to others, but more especially
to support his fame in the scientific world.
Thus he became famous, but at the same time poor, and in
more than one respect eccentric. When in monetary difficulty he
would order the sugar in his tea to be reduced, and considered
—even till shortly before his death —the advisability of marry-
ing some heiress, but eventually refrained from the idea for
fear that “ the wife might keep her money like those modem
women are inclined to do.” About two years before his death
his old wooden bed broke down, and being continually short
of cash, the damage was remedied by the support of a tin box
containing his foreign orders and decorations, to the number
of twenty-six, amongst which were two or three grand crosses.
True to Scandinavian customs, his favoured footwear was
wooden clogs, while a long woollen muffler was wound several
times round his neck. He always wore a swallow-tail coat,
and when on one occasion he had contracted a severe cold,
instead of a woollen cap, had donned a tea cosy, he presented
rather a peculiar aspect.
Although it must be admitted the deceased baron was an
all-round man of culture, he was rather shallow outside his
own particular groove. About men like Darwin, Huxley, and
Spencer he knew vers little, and always spoke of them with
scorn. His knowledge of French was most defective. In the
geographical science, a hobby of his, his knowledge was sur-
prisingly limited, and only on Australian and Antarctic ex-
plorations was he anything of an authority.
In recognition of the manifold services the great botanist
rendered Australia, a mount in Victoria, a range in West Aus-
tralia, and a glacier in New Zealand have been named after
him.


After speaking of Baron von Muller, it requires some
courage to write about men of more ordinary stamp, and the
only excuse for doing so is that, while the Scandinavians only
can claim a share in Baron von Muller, the men I am now
going to write about belong to them altogether.
Two young Danes, Harald Jensen and Norman Gough, are
instructors at the University in Sydney, and will probably some
day become professors.
Of medical men only three pure-bred Scandinavians have
practised in Australia —one in Adelaide, one in Melbourne, and
one in Sydney, none of whom ever distinguished himself,
except by rarity. The three put together did not gain half as
much popularity as the Danish herbalist, Herr. Rasmussen.
Only one Scandinavian has entered the legal profession, Mr.
C. F. Nielsen, in Bundaberg, and in the world of music none
ever gained more than local reputation.
An exception from the general rule may the Swedish lady
Agnes Janson be considered. As prima donna in an English
operatic company she visited all the principal towns in the
Commonwealth and New Zealand in 1900 to 1901, and made
herself noted especially for her artistic rendering of the prin-
cipal part in “ Carmen.” In 1905 she received an appointment
as teacher in singing at the Melbourne University. A Danish
lady, Madame Steinhauer, acquired in the nineties some stand-
ing in Melbourne as a concert singer and teacher of music,
and a Danish musician, Mr. Larsen, holds the position as
bandmaster for Brisbane’s military band.
Three or four Scandinavian artists have endeavoured to
make a name for themselves in this for art culture barren
land. One of them, Nikolaj Habbe, arrived in Sydney in the
sixties or seventies, but died ere long, probably from starva-
tion. He had studied at the Royal Academy at Copenhagen,
and was in his native land recognised as a talented portrait
painter. In his adopted country he gained notoriety more by
his eccentric ways than by his art. On one occasion he had
painted the likeness of a well-known society lady in Sydney,


and when she passed some critical remarks he drew his knife,
cut the canvas, while angrily exclaiming: “An ugly woman
like you ought to feel flattered that I consented to paint you
at all.”
Another, Mr. P, Hansen, arrived in Melbourne in the
eighties, and took up decorative art, to which he had been
educated at a technical college in Denmark and at various
places abroad. In the beginning of the nineties he went to
Germany, and studied at the famous Royal Academy of Munich
for three years in order to educate himself in other branches
of art. While here he copied several masterpieces of the old
Dutch painters. His magnificent copy of Rubens’ most re-
nowned picture “ The Day of Judgment” is to be seen at the
public art gallery of this city.
Two Swedish brothers, Fristrom, have, I believe, gained
some local standing as artists in Brisbane. There is yet to
mention that two Danes, Mr. Alexander Habbe and Mr. Hen-
nings, in bygone days made themselves known as theatrical
painters, and more especially Mr. Hennings by introducing
transformation scenes on the stages in Australia. The names
of both gentlemen are still revered in theatrical circles.
Two Danish civil engineers have made Australia their field
of labour. The one, Major Larsen, has for a number of years
been chief draftsman at the Railway Department in Brisbane.
The other, K. L. Rahbek, also a resident of Brisbane, has had
extensive experience in railway building and hydraulic engi-
neering in South America, Siam, and Australia. For his ser-
vices to the Siamese State King Chululongkorn has created
him a knight of “The White Elephant.”
As surveyors none are better known that the two brothers
Tuxen, in Melbourne. They hail from a distinguished old
Danish family, have been in Victoria since the sixties, and,
like several colleagues from the far North, have done good
work in Australia.
Two Danish architects have done well out here, viz., Mr.
West, in Palmerston North, and Mr. C. Hansen, in Albert
Park.


As literary men, about half a dozen Scandinavians have
aspired to popularity. The most productive of them all was
probably the late Valdemar Bannow, a Danish gentleman, who
arrived in Victoria during the early diggings, and in the latter
part of his life did a great deal of writing. Best known of his
works are “ The Emigrants’ Guide,” “ Victoria Socially and
Materially,” and a pamphlet, “ The Solution of the Unem-
ployed Question.”
A Norwegian naturalist, Dr. Lumholtz, who lived amongst
the aboriginals in North Queensland for four years in order
to study the ways and habits of that primitive race, has pub-
lished the results of his researches in an illustrated work
called “ Amongst Cannibals” (translated into English, German,
and French), while a Finnish gentleman, Dr. P. Olsson-SefFer,
has written in Swedish, by agreement with the Governments in
Queensland and Western Australia, books on those States,
with the object of attracting Scandinavian emigrants.
Under the title of “ Missing Friends,” by “ A Danish Immi-
grant,” a book appeared in the Eighties. It deals with immi-
grant life in Queensland, and is written in humorous strain
sprinkled with touching incidents.
A little pamphlet on “A Trip to Norway,” written by R.
W. N. Lind, for years a trusted civil servant in Melbourne,
gives a significant proof of the perfection to which Scandi-
navians at times attain in the English language.
About half a dozen books written in the Scandinavian
language have been published in Melbourne. One, written by
an old colonist, Claus Gronn, describes the merry life on the
Victorian goldfields in the fifties and sixties, in addition to
which it contains some memories from “ Sea and Shore,” more
especially from his native land, Slesvig, now under German
sway. Some parallels drawn between the liberal way in which
Great Britain rules over conquered people, and the harsh treat-
ment meted out by an ever-blowing and vulgar German official-
dom towards the Danes in Slesvig are rather interesting.
Four books written by myself deal principally with life as


lived by Scandinavians in Australia. They have all been
favourably spoken of by papers in the home country, and one,
a sort of history’ of the Northmen settled down at this end of
the world, has in part been reprinted by a publishing firm in
Copenhagen.
Occasionally Scandinavians have gone in for journalism.
A Dane, Mr. Fejlberg, was for some time sub-editor of one
of the big Melbourne dailies, Mr. Lundager is a very able
penman, and has for a number of years been the publisher
and editor of “ Mt. Morgan Argus.” The history of the
Kyabram reform movement was written by a Danish journalist.
Hans Clausen, Melbourne, is a frequent contributor to various
journals, and so on, all of whom apparently write the English
language with the same ease as they do their mother tongue.
Mr. Clausen, especially, bends and twists the language of his
adopted country with a grace and force which many a re-
nowned writer might envy. To show he is possessed of ex-
ceptional talent both as a linguist and writer, below is given
one of his poems,, “ The Hob-Nail Express.” At the same
time, I might mention that the two poems of my own, which
appear in this book, have been translated into English by him.
It may in this connection also be mentioned that the dis-
tinguished Australian poet, Henry Lawson, is a descendant of
the old Norse stock, his father being a Norwegian.
THE HOB-NAIL EXPRESS.
There’s a line without rails,
It has branches galore;
(Only one class prevails
What can heart wish for more).
There’s no charge for excess
By the Hob-Nail Express.
It creeps slowly along,
Does the train with this batter’d
And broken down throng,
Helpless, homeless, and tatter’d
These travellers through stress
By the Hob-Nail Express.


These wandering hosts,
Whom misfortune has caught
In her net, are but ghosts
Of fine fellows who fought
A hard fight—some fought well —
All were beaten and fell.
Then the world showed its teeth,
And the missus went crook;
Sneers or threats lurked beneath
Ev’ry gesture and 100k —
The light fled from her eye,
That was there years gone by.
And their mates when they found
That their luck had run out,
They forgot to call round.
And the neighbours about
Grew more distant each day—
Then their hope died away.
The parson he’ll tell
You, our sins are the cause
Of our ills—“ All is well
With the world and its laws”
He will loudly proclaim—
But it’s lies all the same.
In military circles no Scandinavian in Australia has made
himself much noted. Indeed, the opportunity for Australian
soldiers to distinguish themselves has hardly come yet, and
may it never come. The South African war, being waged
against two small nations, could not reckon on sympathy from
people hailing themselves from small nations, and although
several Scandinavians are enlisted in various military bodies,
more especially in the naval forces, only a lonely three from
Queensland and one or two from West Australia are known to
have gone to the front as members of Australian contingents.
That the Scandinavians, however, will do their duty should
they be called upon to defend their adopted country may be


concluded from the loyal spirit in which their kinsmen in the
United States and South Africa took up arms in hours of dan-
ger. In the civil war in the United States the Scandinavians,
who nearly all reside in the northern states, voluntarily raised
a whole regiment —the Fifteenth Wisconsin —entirely consist-
ing of Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes, besides being numer-
ously represented in all the other regiments, while the brainy
Swedish engineer, John Ericson, set himself to work, and in-
vented his “ Monitor,” which ship played such an important
part in the struggle ; and when the Boer war broke out the
Scandinavians in Transvaal rose almost to a man in defence
of the country which gave them a second home. The Scan-
dinavian contingent was almost annihilated at the fight of
Magersfontein, more than half being left on the battle-field.
The Boer paper, “De Volkstexn,” for 19th December, 1899,
wrote about them :
“In our Dutch edition we give a list of the casualties
which have befallen the Scandinavian corps at the battle of
Scholtznek. From this it will be seen how' much their brave
charge cost in life and wounds. They, the descendants of the
ancient Vikings, worthily emulated the conduct of their for-
bears, and died at their posts rather than escape by flight.
The gallantry of this corps, and their splendid stand, will long
be honoured by the people of this country, for whose inde-
pendence they so nobly sacrificed their lives.”
It may be argued yet as to who was right and who was
wrong in the Boer war, but not as to the duty of the Scan-
dinavians in Transvaal. Their adopted country was in dan-
ger ; it was not for them to “ reason why,” but to stand faith-
fully at her side in the hour of need, and, according to South
African papers, they stood to their duties like men.
As said before, none of the Scandinavians residing in Aus-
tralia have made themselves conspicuous in the military ser-
vice, nearly all belonging to the rank and file. The before-
mentioned Danish civil engineer, V. Larsen, in Brisbane, is
the only commissioned officer, holding the rank of major and
commander of the Brisbane Garrison Artillery. A Dane, Mr.


Jorgensen, who for years had been an active member of the
Victorian Mounted Rangers, gained some notoriety, when on
his death at Elmore,, in 1893, it was found out “he” was a
woman, her Christian name being Johanne. The unfortunate
girl had as a child in South Australia, whither her parents
immigrated, had her face disfigured through the kick of a
horse. Her playmates teased and giggled at her, and when
the time came she had to earn her own living she experienced
great difficulty in getting situations. In her distress the
thought entered her mind that as a man the world would treat
her more leniently. To a woman appearance is almost every-
thing, whereas a man may get on be he as ugly as Mephis-
topheles. Shortly afterwards she made her appearance in Vic-
toria in male attire. Her disfigurement she put down to a
wound she had received in the German-Danish war in 1864, in
which she said she had taken part. After some varied experi-
ences, she entered the Victorian Mounted Rangers, and even-
tually took up a selection in Runnymede, and turned farmer,
herself assisting in clearing and cultivating the land. After a
life too trying for her constitution and slight frame, her health
broke down, and after a short illness death relieved her of her
worldly worry at the age of forty, ’
The Scandinavians who settle in foreign parts soon be-
come naturalised and acquire full citizenship. Their aptitude
for politics and their interest in public life are natural. Be
he Norwegian, Swede, or Dane, he hastened and moved in an
atmosphere electric with independence and individualism.
The Norwegian Constitution, which was adopted in 1814, in
defiance of all Europe, is one of the most democratic in the
world. The Danes are fresh from the constitutional struggle
begun in 1849; the Swedes have had popular representation
since 1866, consequently the Scandinavian immigrants have
had some considerable political education when they arrive.
The ballot and independence are not meaningless terms to


them; the exercise of them is their right, not merely their
privilege. None enters upon the rights and duties of Aus-
tralian citizenship with more enthusiasm or honest intelligent
appreciation of its high privileges. Their political views are
liberal, with a bend towards Radicalism or even Socialism, al-
though in their midst representatives for all political shades
are to be found. Now and again a Scandinavian has gone to
the poll, and at the present two Danes are members of State
Parliaments —Nielson (of the New South Wales Parliament)
and C. F. Nielson (of that in Queensland). C. P. Mau, who
was put up by the farmers in the Mackay district at the last
State election in Queensland, was beaten by but a small
majority, and the same nearness of success had Jacob Cohn
when some years back nominated as a candidate for the Legis-
lative Council of Victoria. At the last Federal election, H.
Lundager, a native of Denmark, was put up for the Senate by
the Queensland Labour Party.
The number of Scandinavians who have been, or still are,
city councillors is quite astonishing. Two are at the present
mayors—H. M. Ries, in Dannevirke, N.Z., elected for third
time; and H. Lundager, Mt. Morgan, elected for second time,
while the mayoral chairs in Palmerston North, Mackay, Banks-
town, Bendigo, Heathcote, Sale, Baimsdale, Eaglehawk,
Hobart, and most likely at several other places have been oc-
cupied by Scandinavians.
To instance the extent to which the Scandinavians are in-
spired with a sense of public duty, and may be of a commendable
desire to distinguish themselves in the eyes of their fellow-
citizens, I wish to point out the public positions at present held
by a couple of them:—Jacob Cohn, president for the Ben-
digo Hospital, the Agricultural Society, and the Art Gallery,
justice of peace, &c., besides having been mayor of Bendigo,
and entrusted with several other positions. As a recognition
of the services rendered to his adopted land the late King of
Denmark created him a Knight of Dannebrog. Mr. Ries,
mayor, justice of peace, member of hospital committee, and of
agricultural society’s committee, trustee of public gardens, &c.


There is one particular phrase which has been applied to
the Scandinavians —and most likely to other foreigners as well
—till it almost has become monotonous. The phrase is,
“ They are law-abiding citizens.” At any Scandinavian gather-
ing, where Australian friends are present, a speech for “ the
land we live in” is usually made, and the gentleman who re-
sponds will invariably, as a return compliment, tell his Scan-
dinavian co-citizens that they are a “ law-abiding lot,” and,
in fact, all round superior colonists. At festive gatherings,
however, people are in a plausible mood, and the meed of
flatteries on such occasions must not be taken too seriously.
At any rate, the somewhat antiquated police magistrate in Mel-
bourne, Mr. Panton, has on more than one occasion told them
quite the opposite.
The truth may be found midway between the two asser-
tions. The Scandinavians in Australia are probably not more
law-abiding than others, and not less. They are, taken as a
whole, strictly honest, but as rowdy as you find people else-
where, and it is, for instance, not at all uncommon that Scan-
dinavian sailors in Australian ports get into scrapes with the
police. They very seldom engage in burglary or any other
criminal dishonesty, and when at times a Scandinavian is
brought before a court the offence will in nine out of ten
cases be acts of violence, now and again provoked by the other
party, and as a rule not of a serious character.
Only four Scandinavians in Australia have been accused
of wilfully taking life, of whom but two suffered capital punish-
ment.
The first one heard of was a Swedish mate on the gold-
fields at Maryborough in 1855. A Norwegian gold digger, Carl
A. Olsen, who in Christiania published his memoirs from the
Victorian mines, tells about the incident as follows:
“ Mr. Robinson, by which name the Swedish mate was
known, had made a pile, and married the daughter of some
Van Diemen’s Land convict. After a while the wife took to
drink, and commenced to carry on with other men. Poor Mr.


Robinson, who was kind-hearted, industrious, and steady, and
by that time had become the happy father of a bright baby
boy, proved too spineless to master the situation. In his de-
spair he—like so many others —looked to that most false and
deceiving friend King Alcohol for relief, and little by little
turned as big a drunkard as his wife. Henceafter husband
and wife drank in common and fought at intervals, with the
fatal result that one dark day when they were indulging in a
free fight, Mrs. Robinson was landed head down in an empty
shaft, breaking her neck. Mr. Robinson was—rightly or
wrongly —accused of wilful murder, found guilty, and shortly
after executed.”
The second was a Danish woman keeping a superior board-
ing house in Sydney, and who, as events proved, was but too
soft-hearted for this wicked world. Some unscrupulous boarder
got the best of her, and, under a plea that he was coming in
for a large amount of money, almost ruined her. He suddenly
disappeared. She traced him, and one day we meet the two
in Melbourne —she wearied and worried and threatening, he
evasive and most likely worried too. Shortly after they were
found in the parlour of some hotel, he shot dead, and she
severely wounded. The general opinion, as impressed on the
public mind by the press, was that she had shot him and after-
wards attempted to commit suicide, this explanation being
supported by the fact that she was the owner of the revolver.
Her version as to it being an attempt of double suicide
was rejected by the jury, and her repute being drawn in doubt
by his relatives —the chief witnesses in the case—she was
found guilty, and only a monster petition being presented to
the Governor saved her from a disgraceful death, the sentence
being commuted to penal servitude for life.
Too late was it brought to light that she was a highiy-
respectable woman, and the essence of kind-heartedness, whose
very nature would be opposed to revenge; too late the late
Valdemar Bannow brought evidences together which, had they
been produced in court, undoubtedly would have secured her


acquittal. The dreadful machinery of justice had moved, and
all attempts, from English and Danes alike, to get her case
reviewed proved fruitless.
It is not my intention to cast a slur on the judicial system
of this country, which no doubt is as perfect as found any-
where, and far superior to the one at present in vogue in
Denmark; but only to vindicate the honour of an unfortunate
woman, who probably became a martyr to the imperfection of
man. Had she succumbed to her wound and her debtor sur-
vived, does anybody doubt that public opinion would have
gone strongly against him, and marked him as the culprit.
Still, one of them certainly must have been guiltless.
The third case was that of a boyish Swedish sailor, who in
Melbourne fell in with some women. In a half-intoxicated
condition they had a scramble, and much to his own surprise
the woman was killed. He got off with six years’ imprison-
ment.
The fourth case happened in the little West Australian
township of Broome last year. A Norwegian saloon-keeper,
together with two natives of Manila, were accused of having
murdered a Jewish commercial traveller after having decoyed
him on board a lugger off shore at night on the pretence that
they had a valuable pearl to sell him. Here he was killed,
and the body thrown in the water. Accused were brought to
Perth, found guilty, and hung.
It is worth recalling this execution in the memory of every
friend of civilisation, as it affords a striking example of the
barbarity of capital punishment, and unfolds a picture which
in more than one way touches the heart of men. We have
before us a man whose innocence certainly must have been
strongly impressed on the mind of his executioners,, still the
judicial machinery rolls on, as though it were cast in iron, and
not composed of flesh and blood. The dreadful “ guilty” has
been pronounced, and the death sentence signed; no power
on earth can stop the iron roller on its way, even the attend-
ing clergyman gets out of gear when the process of destruc-
-6


tion is delayed. The only bright spot in the whole gloomy
affair is the fearlessness in which the Norwegian—like his fore-
fathers of old —faces death, and that in itself is sufficient rea-
son for recalling in detail his tragic end.
The following is a reprint from a report in the “Age” of
the execution:
“ Hagen, the Norwegian, was the first to go to the scaffold.
He left his cell with a calm step and walked to the gallows
without hesitation, accompanied by the Rev. G. O’Halloran,
who conversed with him on the way. Hagen nodded to the
group of pressmen, and then stepped on to the trap doors.
The priest repeated the customary prayers, and then the execu-
tioner took the linen cap and prepared to force it over Hagen’s
head. The condemned man was asked ■if he had anything to
say.
“ 1 Yes,’ he answered quickly. ‘ Let me see.’ The rope was
already round his neck, but no tremor affected his muscles as
he glanced round. During the sensational statement which fol-
lowed he frequently stopped to moisten his lips or to' look at
the reporters. Though he never for a moment lost his co-
herence or nerve, he frequently repeated his phrases, as if to
emphasise points which he wished to impress upon his hearers.
'Gentlemen,’ he said, and his slight Norwegian accent seemed
to lend intensity to his speech, ‘ I shall be done in a few
minutes. I have no excuse for telling lies in my last few
words. Gentlemen, I’m innocent. I have had to' work hard all
my life. I have been a bushman for two years. I was never
a schemed, and it was always my luck to find hard work in
front of me, I have told the authorities I did not wish this
statement to be published, but I have changed my mind at the
last minute. It is my wish that the people of Western Aus-
tralia should know what I can tell of poor man Liebglid. I
was got into a trap through giving information to the police.
Pablo Marquez was frightened of me from the first, and when
I questioned him he thought I knew something, and he de-
livered Liebglid’s bag to the police. Gentlemen, I have not
many minutes to live. I shall drop in a minute, and be dead.
It does not pay to tell lies now. I’m going to another world,
where I shall meet my God. I say again lam innocent.’
There was a halt, and the condemned man moistened his lips.
* I did not do my best to tell of the matter, especially against
these coloured men. I consider Detective Mann worked up
the case against me. The police had not a case, and came to
Broome. Detective Mann worked hard to get up this case,
and to incriminate me. And look at Lucas. He said he saw


me playing paika. He did not. He saw me give to a
Japanese carpenter to play. I am going to die, but Lucas and
Carpia know more of the murder than I do. Carpia is a great
friend of Pablo Marquez."’
“At this stage the Rev. Mr. O’Halloran approached Hagen,
and whispered in his ear. ‘ 1 am not going to say too much,
answered the condemned man, ‘ but I am going to die, and I
want to speak. Gentlemen, I have studied palmistry, and I
always feared something dreadful w r ould happen to me. Carpia
would kill or rob anybody for money. Let anyone look at his
left hand—the line of murder is clear. Anything for money.
That is Carpia.’
“ The chaplain again interrupted Hagen, and whispered to
him. Hagen nodded and said, ‘Very well, sir, I will not say
much more, but lam innocent. I am being hanged for having
helped the police to find the murderer. In a short time I will
face God, and it would not pay me to say I was innocent if I
was guilty. I was disappointed in my solicitor. He did not
call the witnesses I wanted. That is all. I am innocent.’
“ The cap was pulled over Hagen’s eyes, and the rope was
drawn tight. ‘ Put it firmly round my neck. Steady; not too
tight. Gentlemen, lam going; I am ’
“ A jar on the lever, a thud, and Charles Hagen had
expiated his crime or had become a martyr to circumstantial
evidence. He spoke for fully a quarter of an hour. His ora-
tion was eloquent and coherent, and he spoke with force and
conviction, which made a remarkable impression upon his
hearers.”
The two Manila men were to be hung together. Before the
execution took place one of them distinctly admitted being the
murderer —“ Me killed white man; Pablo him give me schooner
for £ 600.” Here the two unfortunate men commenced to
quarrel in their own language. The one made a desperate
effort to save his life by catching the rope above his head,
and in the general confusion that arose the hangman broke
down and cried like a child. The chief warder, who stepped
forward to set matters right, slipped, and was jerked headlong
down the pitch with the two convicts, sustaining severe bruises.
In glancing through the foregoing pages it will be seen that
the Scandinavian residents in Australia, with some degree of


success, have endeavoured to be good colonists. They have,
heart and soul, thrown their lot in with the young Australian
nation; they have shared in the hardships as well as in the
victories of their fellow colonists, and they feel proud of their
Australian citizenship. None will, when abroad, stick up more
for Australia than the Scandinavians, and I have time and
again had cuttings from home papers sent to me in which
immigrants on visit to their native land praise up Australia.
This does not, however, say that they find all and every-
thing perfect, and such things as the existing mania for sport
and gambling, a great deal of narrow religious bigotry, and
the arrogance of certain sections of the clergy have often been
condemned by them.
On the other hand, everybody seems infatuated with the
bright and cheerful spirit of the young Australian, his good-
heartedness and his pluck. The salubrious climate is fre-
quently referred to, and so are the liberal laws under which
the Australians live. New Zealand is justly pictured as “ the
leading country” in political freedom and progressive laws, and
the immigrant will, with unbounded pride, point out that Aus-
tralian men are giving the old world a lesson in fairness, justice,
and chivalry by enfranchising their mothers, wives, and sisters,
and by cutting up the large estates into ordinary farms to be
owned by the people who work them.
I will conclude by making the words of an American writer.
Col. Hans Mattson, mine, only inserting Australia instead of
America:
“ The Scandinavians in Australia feel a certain sense of
ownership in the glorious heritage of Australian soil, with its.
rivers, lakes, mountains, valleys, woods, and prairies, and in all
its noble institutions; and they feel that the blessings which
they enjoy are not theirs by favour or suffrage, but by right;
by moral as well as civil rights. For they took possession of
the wilderness, endured the hardships of the pioneer, con-
tributed their full share towards the grand results accomplished,
and are in mind and heart true and loyal Australian citizens.”'


For the immigrants to develop social intercourse based on
national sentiments, certain conditions must prevail which
bring them in opposition to the people lived amongst. If
there are no racial ties whatsoever between the immigrants
and their fellow-citizens; if their religous creeds are vastly
different; if both sections are blinded by narrow-minded
bigotry; or if their material interests clash, the valley which
separates them becomes deep, and few traverse it. When the
day’s toil is over they retire into two different worlds, and
being in minority, the immigrants will —rightly or wrongly —
have a constant feeling of being suppressed, or at any rate
unfairly treated, their common grievances bind them still
closer together; cements, so to say, all that tends to unite
them in one bond.
In such cases the soil is excellent for the development of
a narrow social intercourse, and be the foreign section at the
same time fairly numerous and command some capital, it is
bound to grow strong in its unity and give trouble. The chil-
dren will be instilled with hatred towards the ruling race, and
in time the once uitlandish body has become a rooted society
within the society—a State within the State.
Hence the risk of letting alien races in. As for immigrants
of kindred races they quickly get absorbed by the main body.
For this reason the Scandinavians have always been con-
sidered some of the most desirable colonists in British posses-
sions. Put an' Englishman and a Scandinavian alongside each
other, and, except for the Englishman having his pants turned
up, you would not be able to tell which is which. Nor do they
differ much in culture, in mode of living, in intellectual aspira-
tions. Their religious creed is one, and their languages that
closely related that a Scandinavian after two months’ stay in


Australia will know sufficient English to take care of himself.
From a political point of view Great Britain and the Scandi-
navian countries may be said to stand or fall together. Russia
has long had designs on Norway and Sweden to get access to
the North Sea, and obtain skilled sailors for her navy. Ger-
many no doubt has a similar design on Denmark in order to
close the Baltic Sea and draw on the Danish sailors for her
navy. But such an alteration of the map of Europe would be
fatal to England.
From an industrial aspect Great Britain and Scandinavia
supply each other’s needs rather than become competitors. In
fact, nothing separates a Britisher and a Scandinavian but
national sentiments. The one loves Sweden, Norway, or Den-
mark, the other England or Scotland. None have fear nor
jealousy of the other; an event like the war in 1807-18x4 can
never recur.
It is this love of the Danish plains, the Norwegian valleys,
the Swedish rivers which brings the Scandinavians in Aus-
tralia in opposition to their fellow-citizens, and upon which
their social intercourse rests. Hence it is not only inoffensive,
but, being based on unselfish love, elevating. Patriotism,
when expressed by home people, has always a narrowing and
selfish tendency, and is easily fanned into jingoism; but by
going abroad and settling amongst a foreign nation it is freed
from its baser elements and elevated into a purer sphere.
From observations made by myself and others, it appears
that those immigrants who are inspired with love for their
native land make the best and most reliable colonists, and that
criminals always come from the section which has become in-
different to the place of their birth. Whether this be cause
and effect or not, the fact remains that what in itself is good
cannot result in evil.
The love of the immigrants towards the place that wit-
nessed their childish joy, and to the people that reared them,
being such an excellent school in unselfishness, it is to be
regretted that circumstances, coupled with some shortcomings


in human nature, do not allow of a more intense social inter-
course amongst the Scandinavians in Australia. They are far
from home, and scattered over a large area. Where a Dane
once spoke about yards he now has to speak about miles;
where a Norwegian from a precipice could overlook the moun-
tain-girt valley in which his whole clan dwells, he now gazes
over endless forests, with a settler hidden away here and there.
Even in the towns the distance between each Scandinavian
family is as a rule great, and although this may be overcome,
it always tends to keep them apart.
The majority marry Australian, British, or Irish girls. The
Scandinavian tongue is consequently shelved; the children
grow up Australians, and the father’s environment becoming
more and more British, he gradually gets denationalised. The
weakest, least enlightened, and least intelligent turn heart and
soul Britishers themselves, ever regretting their foreign birth.
Still, in spite of these and other disadvantages for culti-
vating national sentiment, the majority of the Scandinavians
in Australia have preserved some love for their native land.
Hence societies, clubs, or family circles have risen wherever
they live fairly close together. The main objects of these in-
stitutions are always the same —national and social. Danish,
Norwegian, and Swedish books and journals are provided in
order to keep in touch with northern culture. The Norwegians
celebrate the 17th May, the Danes the sth June, and the
Swedes the birthday of King Oscar, or that of their great hero-
King Gustaf Adolphus; while at intervals socials and picnics
are arranged; good fellowship is fostered, and a bright view
taken of things in general. On special occasions the societies
take the lead in a public way to represent and uphold the
honour of their native country, as, for instance, at the in-
auguration of the Australian Commonwealth. The Scandi-
navians in New South Wales subscribed jQ IOOO towards a free
bed in the Children’s Hospital in Sydney, naming it “ The
Scandinavian Commonwealth Commemoration Cot,” while the
Scandinavians in Melbourne at the opening of the first Federal


Parliament undertook to decorate certain sections of the main
thoroughfare of that city. In 1904 and 1905 the Scandinavian
societies in Melbourne arranged mask balls in the Town Hall
in aid of the “Melbourne Hospital,” the one in 1904 resulting
in a surplus of some eighty odd pounds. As a recognition
four of their number were nominated life governors.
Much more could have been done in the directions men-
tioned if the spirit of unity had been more potent amongst the
Scandinavians in Australia. Compared, for instance, with the
Scotch and Irish, they are anything but clannish; many are
entirely indifferent to national movements, and the fact that
the Northmen, although closely related, belong to three
separate nations makes it difficult for them to pull together.
The societies have never been numerically strong nor pos-
sessed of much means. Only in two cases, those of the now
defunct societies in Ballarat and Charters Towers, has a club
owned its own premises; they either hire a room or two, or
meet once a week in some hotel, moving at intervals. Hence
they are not very stable, and the breaking up of a society and
starting of a new one is quite a common occurrence.
The first Scandinavian society in Australia was formed in
Ballarat in 1857, principally by gold diggers. A site was pur-
chased, and a small hall erected. The club died, however,
ere long, and the property was disposed of. A proposal
brought forward to the effect that a Scandinavian clergyman
be called caused a split amongst the members, never to be
healed, and which eventually proved fatal to the club.
In Melbourne a Scandinavian society was started in or
about the middle of the seventies. Very little is, however,
known about this premature attempt to unite the Swedes, Nor-
wegians, and Danes in Victoria’s metropolis, only that it failed,
and was succeeded by a new society in 1880. This lasted but
two years, and a following one, established in 1882, barely
reached the same age. A last attempt having been made a few
years later to unite the scattered representatives of the three
northern nations in Melbourne in one society also having


failed, a Swedish society was established in 1887, a Danish
in 1889, and a Norwegian in 1900, which clubs, with some
irregularities and reconstructions, fairly well may be said to
be the same as those existing to-day.
In Sydney the first Scandinavian society was formed in
1874, and it lasted for nine years. A friendly society, started
in 1880, only celebrated two birthdays, while a Swedish
society, “Valhalla,” formed in 1877, died in its very infancy.
Another Swedish society, “ Vikingen,” kept afloat from 1883
to 1890, and outlived a Scandinavian “Literary Society,” estab-
lished in 1888, by some months. A new Scandinavian society,
formed in 1890, died two years later. At present two' societies
exist in Sydney —a Danish, established in 1895, and a “ Scan-
dinavian,” established in 1898.
In Brisbane a “Scandinavian” society was formed in 1872,
which at the commencement was conducted as a friendly so-
ciety, with two or three branches, but afterwards turned purely
social. It enjoys the honour of being the oldest yet existing
Scandinavian society in Australia. “ Swedish-Norwegian”
societies started in the same city in 1878 and 1898 never suc-
ceeded, nor did a “Danish” society, started in 1887.
In Wellington the Scandinavians started a club in the early
eighties, and again in 1895, without bringing them to any suc-
cess, whereas a “ Danish” club, established some years ago, is
still prospering.
In Boulder city a “ Scandinavian” society was formed in
1900. *
In addition to the clubs already mentioned, “ Scandinavian”
societies have in days gone by existed in Maryborough (Q.),
Charters Towers, Rockhampton, Newcastle, Adelaide, Port
Adelaide, Perth, and Fremantle; while Scandinavian temper-
ance societies have existed in Melbourne and Boonah (Q.).
The outlook of the Scandinavian societies in Australia is
at present anything but bright. The old members are dying,
the young ones getting old, and none are coming to take their
place. Their children are Australians, to whom the Scandi-


navian countries are as unknown as once was their native land
to their parents. At the present rate of immigration twenty
years hence there will not be a single Scandinavian institution
left in Australia.
When, nevertheless, the Scandinavian societies in Austral-
asia of later years have shown more vitality than before, and
posed as institutions of some stability, it may be due to the
partly successful establishment of a journal in the Scan-
dinavian language, or, more correctly speaking, languages, as
there are some slight differences between Swedish and Danish-
Norwegian, and the “Norden” has been printed in both
tongues, not to cause any jealousy. The former isolated posi-
tion of the individual clubs has been removed, their doings
now being reported and commented upon, and the bond of
unity and good-fellowship in general widened and strengthened.
The first faint attempt to establish a Scandinavian journal
in Australasia was made in the fifties by a Swedish compositor,
Corfitz Crohnquist. After having partly received and partly
been promised support from the Scandinavian gold-diggers
in Ballarat, he launched his little paper in Melbourne, doing
all the work himself, and charging for each copy the fabulous
price of one shilling! As to what he called it, and how long
it existed, nobody knows, which certainly does not speak well
for its success. Nor did fate treat its publisher much better.
After a chequered career, he died in some charitable home in
Melbourne in 1895 utterly destitute.
The next attempt was made in New Zealand in or about
1875. A Norwegian, H. Graff, was the publisher, and the
journal called “ Scandia.” The Scandinavian settlers in New
Zealand were, however, in those days none too well off, and
had hardly taken root yet. The paper did not get the neces-
sary support, and ceased to appear after a few issues.
A Scandinavian paper, to be called “ Den Skandinaviske
Queenslander,” was contemplated by a Dane (Mr. Jensen) in
Brisbane in 1881, but never came to- light.
A little more successful were a Swede (Mr. Franzen) and a


Dane (Mr. Soderberg), who in Sydney launched a Scan-
dinavian journal in 1887, naming it “ Scandinaven. It was
circulated throughout the continent, and should have stood
some chance of final success if the proprietors had been backed
up with capital. As it was, it never survived teething, dying
in its first year of existence.
From 1892-96 a Scandinavian periodical called Ffjem-
landstoner” appeared in Melbourne, and was followed by a
fortnightly journal, “ Norden,” which is still in existence. This
paper was started at my suggestion by a small syndicate or
society, and the editorship entrusted to myself. The object
was to form a connecting link between the widely scattered
Scandinavian residents in Australia and New Zealand, and to
keep them in touch with their native land, by giving extracts
of the news contained in home papers. Little by little the
journal has been supplied with its own printing plant, includ-
ing an up-to-date type-setting machine. It has succeeded in
reaching the most remote places of Australasia and the South
Sea Islands, and has, I believe, done some good by making
the absence from our native land less felt.
“ Norden,” nevertheless, has never been a paying concern,
and has only been kept afloat at a sacrifice. This is partly
due to religious bigotry on the part of a great section of the
Scandinavians and partly to the same adverse circumstances
which have hampered the growth of clubs and societies the
immense distances, the gradual denationalisation of the Scan-
dinavians, and the want of new arrivals to fill in the gaps
caused by general decay.
In 1906 I resigned the position as editor of “Norden,” and
was followed by the highly-cultivated Danish lady, Miss Olga
Clausen.
A couple of short-lived Scandinavian religious papers have
also been published on this side of the globe. One, named
“ Brevduen,” appeared in New Zealand in the seventies, and
another, “ Kirketidenden,” in Melbourne in 1898, the first
published by a Norwegian lay preacher and the last by a
Danish adventurer.


Before relating about the Scandinavian congregations and
religious life in Australasia, a short sketch of the characteristics
of the people themselves may be appropriate, as it to some
extent explains why at some places churches have succeeded
remarkably well, while at others, where the Scandinavians were
fairly numerous, they never even got a footing, or, if they did,
made no progress. Indeed, it will help us to understand their
success, or lack of success, in daily life.
According to an American writer, the Scandinavian has at
bottom a good deal of the same nature as the Anglo-Saxon.
“He is rather cold and taciturn. Southern people even find
a certain kind of brutality in his nature, but they admire his
strength of character. Outward, as well as inward, the Scan-
dinavian and the Anglo-Saxon are probably more alike than
men of other nationalities. It is only when it comes to activity
that the Scandinavians fall back compared with the pushing
and enterprising Anglo-Saxons.”
This difference has not always existed. Energy and ac-
tivity were just as characteristic of the old inhabitants of the
Scandinavian north as they are at present of the English-
speaking race, especially in the greatest period of their history
—that of the Vikings. But the Scandinavians did not keep
up this evolution of force, or they wore it out in incessant in-
ternal strife.
The young Scandinavian of to-day, in looking backwards,
beholds a picture of a race by nature destined to become great,
and play an important part in the world’s history, but which
has wasted away through lack of unity, or of statesmen who
could bring unity about. Instead of the Scandinavians being
one nation, numerous and strong enough to match either
Russia or Germany, as might have been the case, they now


consist of three small petty States, too insignificant to be rec-
koned with in European politics.
This contrast between “what might have been” and the
stem nude reality has greatly influenced the modem Scan-
dinavian, and to some extent made him a philosopher. And
the tendency to “ reflect,” enforced upon him by the history of
his race, has been further stimulated by the nature and cli-
matic conditions of his country. The northern day is short
the greatest part of the year, and does not allow of much out-
door recreation, whilst the twilight and evening are long and
solemn, and invite reflection on life’s many riddles. He be-
comes deep, and still not deep enough to attain any fixed
convictions; he reads a lot, but his reading is one-sided, be-
cause he cannot afford to buy the more expensive instructive
and scientific books, hence he is easily kept under the control
of the clergy, and, especially in the back country, subject to the
influence of the religious waves which at intervals pass over
the country.
It has often been said that the Scandinavians are an en-
lightened people; but they are not, if only it was possible to
compare them with a people which rightly could claim to be
so; 99J per cent, of them can read and write, which certainly
is more than in any other country. They can, in proportion
to their number, point to as many learned and clever men as
the most advanced nations. The farmers can manage their
own numerous co-operative undertakings without any skilled
outside assistance. They have a natural desire for acquiring
knowledge, and they have ample time for doing so in the long
winter evenings, but they have not the books; they lack the
advantage enjoyed by people of bigger nations, where books
are turned out by the ten thousands, and consequently can be
produced at a small cost. When the Australians read an im-
mense quantity of trash, they have no earthly reason for doing
so, for good and instructive books can be got as cheaply,
whereas the Scandinavians in that respect are more to be ex-
cused. Whenever the opportunity is offered for widening


their horizon it is made use of. The average Scandinavian
would not go one mile to witness a football match, but he
would walk two to attend a lecture; and when some years back
a popular scientific weekly was launched in Denmark it ob-
tained 90,000 subscribers in less than twelve, months amongst
a population of two and a-half million people!
A favourite reading of the rural classes in Scandinavia is
accounts of travels, and these,- too, may have something to do
with the heavy emigration. Anyhow, when at the age of
twenty to twenty-five, many of the Scandinavians grow restless,
and shortly after we find them in America, and occasionally
in South Africa or Australia.
A few months after the arrival of the young Scandinavian
he will master the English language sufficiently to read the
daily papers; he next plunges into the fathomless sea of cheap
novels, and will end up with heavy reading. A Scandinavian
out of work in Melbourne can nearly always be found in the
Public Library. He makes acquaintance with Darwin and his
school of natural philosophic writers, his old religious ideas
get shattered, and he will turn Materialist, Pantheist, Agnostic,
or occasionally seek a harbour in Unitarism or Spiritism.
Hence Scandinavian Lutheran congregations have never suc-
ceeded in places like Melbourne, Sydney, or Brisbane, and
only in bush settlements and small outlying townships have the
Scandinavians preserved the old childish faith of their fore-
fathers.
Country people are everywhere more conservative than
town people, but the difference in religious aspect between
the Scandinavians in Australasia settled down in the bush and
those in the largest cities is certainly out of the common, and
not without psychological interest. Those in the towns would
by any clergyman almost to a man be put down as infidels,
whereas those in the bush would delight the heart of the most
fanatical Wesleyan, and still both extremes have the same
causes —depth and honesty of thought. The difference lies in
having, by circumstances more than by choice, been subject to
entirely opposite influences.


The first Scandinavian in Australia to preach the gospel in
his mother tongue was a Swedish clergyman, Peter P, Wideman,
who arrived in Victoria in 1855, and followed up gold digging,
preaching for his countrymen in leisure hours. Wideman lived
a lonely life, mostly working single-handed, and never making
much out of it. He died a poor man near Inglewood, Vic-
toria, in or about 1870.
A partly successful attempt to form a Scandinavian con-
gregation in Melbourne was made by a Danish lay preacher
(Mr. Hansen) in 1859. Mr. Hansen, who preached alternately
in Danish and German, and belonged to a sect called “ Die
alte Lutheranen,” appears to have got a few followers, and,
supported by the then Scandinavian Consul (the late Mr. J.
B. Were), succeeded in 1870 in getting a grant of land from the
Government as a site for a Scandinavian church. The gene-
ral Scandinavian public in Melbourne was, however, antago-
nistic to the whole movement, and as amongst Hansen’s fol-
lowers none were in a position to take on themselves the re-
sponsibilities incurred by the gift, the site was handed back
to the Government. Mr. Hansen died shortly afterwards, and
the Scandinavian section of his congregation dispersed.
A few years later the Norwegian Synod in the United States
took pity on their kinsmen in Australia, and despatched a
minister, Lauritz Carlsen, to 1 Melbourne.
Mr. Carlsen travelled about wherever the Scandinavians
were fairly numerous, and preached the gospel in Melbourne,
Adelaide, Ballarat, Bendigo, Castlemaine, Poowong, and Syd-
ney, but only succeeded in forming a congregation in Mel-
bourne. After some years of fatiguing labour, Mr. Carlsen
returned to America to settle a dispute in his old congregation,
receiving before his departure a call as minister for the con-
gregation in Melbourne.
Years went by; Mr. Carlsen did not return, and as one of
the church elders was going on a trip to Norway, he was em-
powered to call a minister. He had, however, scarcely re-
turned, and the new minister (Soren Pedersen) been installed,


before Mr. Carlsen suddenly appeared, laying claims on the
congregation. The elders refused to recognise him, and after
some heated meetings he left for Sydney. Having here made
a fruitless attempt to form a congregation, he returned to
America for good, working his passage back as a coal-trimmer.
Thanks be to the general prosperity of the country and Mr.
Pedersen’s popularity, the congregation made great progress,
but after the land boom burst hard times fell upon it, and,
being unable to meet the expenses, they were once more left
without a minister.
The difficulty was overcome by accepting a minister from
some Sailors’ Mission in Stockholm, an arrangement still in
vogue, each paying part of his salary.
In 1898 a church in West Melbourne, belonging to an insol-
vent body of Congregationalism, was bought. The congrega-
tion, has, however, gradually dwindled down, and the religious
work is now principally carried on amongst Scandinavian
sailors visiting this city.
Although no Scandinavian congregations ever came into
existence in New South Wales, several attempts were made
from time to time in that direction. A Swedish clergyman from
the United States, during a visit to Australia some years ago,
founded a Sailors’ Mission in Sydney, which is still being
carried on.
In Queensland only one decaying congregation is left out
of half a dozen formed by Scandinavian immigrants, while two
or three empty churches serve as monuments of a vain attempt
to add Lutheranism to the great varieties of religious denomi-
nations of this country.
The one congregation which has weathered the storm is
that started in Brisbane in the early seventies, and of which a
Norwegian clergyman, Mr. Gaustad, then engaged as minister
to a German congregation, is the originator. A minister, Mr.
Sass, was engaged, and a little wooden church erected at a
central place, but afterwards, to get out of financial stress*
removed to one of the suburbs —Kangaroo Point.


Mr. Sass, who received a fixed yearly salary of but £6O,
soon went to New Zealand, where he became the originator of
several Scandinavian congregations. He was followed by a Mr.
Petersen, formerly a missionary in Brazil, and who, after some
years’ stay in Brisbane, was appointed minister to a Danish
congregation in the United States. Mr. Petersen’s successor,
Mr. C. Christensen, received a call after a while from a Scan-
dinavian congregation in Maryborough, but soon turned mis-
sionary amongst the Kanakas, and eventually returned to his
native land, Denmark. A Mr. Larsen, of Christiania, and a
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen, of Copenhagen, were, like their predeces-
sors, starved out. the congregation being too small and poor
to support a clergyman. During the latter years one of the
elders has officiated as clergyman.
In Maryborough a congregation was started in 1878, and a
church erected five years later, with rooms attached for the
dwelling of an unmarried minister. A Danish lay preacher,
Mr. D. Hansen, by profession a cigarmaker, was ordained by
the Scandinavian clergyman in Brisbane, and called as minister.
Unable to live on his salary, he had to fall back on his old
trade, manufacturing the cigars in the parsonage. This, of
course, left an unpleasant odour of tobacco in the church, to
which several members strongly objected, and at the same time
being urged by the German Synod in Queensland to take up
missionary work amongst the Kanakas, Mr. Hansen went to
Mackay. Three years later he returned to Maryborough, and
endeavoured to reorganise the scattered congregation, but
failed, the dilapidated church being eventually sold at public
auction for
The Scandinavian congregation in Mackay was started in
the middle of the seventies at the suggestion of Mr. Gaustad,
himself acting as minister, but afterwards preaching the gospel
for his kinsmen in New Zealand. In conjunction with a Ger-
man Lutheran congregation, a block of land was purchased,
and a church and parsonage erected, the church being used
alternately by the two congregations. After some years of an


uneventful career the Scandinavian congregation dispersed,,
and lots were drawn about the property, the Scandinavians re-
maining the owners of the church. The Germans were allowed
the use of it till a few years later, when it was blown down.
In addition to those already mentioned, Scandinavian con-
gregations have been started and churches erected in Laidley
and Yangan, only, however, to share the fate of the rest. An
attempt made a few years ago by a Danish American clergy-
man to re-establish some of the defunct Scandinavian congre-
gations in Queensland proved utterly hopeless. Of the whole
building nothing but scattered fragments were left, and as
Scandinavian churches in Australia have still more adversaries
to fight than the societies and clubs, they are not likely ever
to be put into shape again.
More successful have the efforts been to organise Scandi-
navian congregations in New Zealand, and the seed originally
sown by Gaustad and Sass has borne manifold fruits. Congre-
gations have been started and churches erected in Halcombe,
Norsewood, Makaretu, Dannevirke, Mauriceville, and Palmer-
ston North. In 1881 the different congregations were united
in a “ Church Covenant/’ and to some extent attached to a
strongly organised religious body in Denmark, Mr. Sass being
appointed leader. On his leaving for home in the early nineties
Mr. Ries succeeded him to the position as head of the Scandi-
navian congregations in New Zealand, in the administration of
which he is assisted by four or five other clergymen. Sunday
schools have been established, and the children taught Scandi-
navian, all religious instruction being given in that language.
The principal reason why Scandinavian Lutheran church
life succeeded in New Zealand to such an extent that
Lutheranism there probably will even outlive the Scandinavian
language while the attempts to establish it in Queensland
failed, is to be sought in the Scandinavian settlers in New Zea-
land living much closer together, and may be are better off. The
chances for a clergyman to make a decent living became
greater, the organising of the scattered forces easier, and the


desire for keeping inclined dissenters away from too intimate
a touch with modern religious ideas within reach.
To the foregoing account of the Scandinavians in Austral-
asia but little is to be added. A time will probably come when
in this remote continent men from the snowy north will only
be found in some of the bigger cities. A few places bearing
Scandinavian names, like Dannevirke, Nbrsewood, Cape
Solander, Denmark River, Dalby, Norseman, &c., will remain
as mementoes, telling future generations about the share the
Scandinavians had in building up sunny, happy Australia.
A number of people will bear typical Scandinavian names
as long as Australasia is inhabited by a white race, although it
will be considerably smaller than would have been the case
had not so many Scandinavians thought it expedient to take
English names. To them will be left, through honest labour
and noble deeds, to do honour to the countries beyond the seas
from which their forefathers came.


The Tramp’s Christmas Song.
Sweet Christmas chimes ! They're wafted o’er the ocean.
From where the snowflakes, like soft winding-sheets,
Cover the slumb’ring earth. With deep emotion
My soul is list’ning to their even beats.
Ding dong ! ding dong ! They speak of hopes now buried ;
Of dreams that once were mine, when all was bright;
And youth, with haughty mien, fell sorrow hurried
From out its sunlit halls into the night.
Ding dong! ding dong! Those dreamy beats grow fainter,
I hear them spell in metre gay and sad,
“ The plans I’ve drawn” —ah ! pride’s a clumsy painter 1
“ The tears I’ve shed”—when tears were all I had.
“ The vows I’ve made” —at eve when sun was setting!
“ The token giv’n” —to dry the tearful cheek.
“ The jovial cups I’ve drank”—at heart regretting
To find the world so strong, and I so weak.
Chime on sweet bells, and do not heed my chiding,
’Tis but half meant —your peals remind me, too,
Of blissful days, when ’neath the thatch abiding
Of that dear childhood’s home, where first I drew
Life’s breath; and where I used to gather
The blood-red poppies from their slender stem:
All that the world can give to me I’d rather
Were left ungiven, than lose my hold of them.
Jens Lyng,


Bamlet in fact and Fiction.




Hamlet in Pact and Fiction.
It is not generally known and should prove of some interest
to the numerous readers and students of English literature
that Shakespeare based his “Hamlet” on certain historical
facts chronicled by the Danish historian, Saxo Grammaticus,
but that the Hamlet immortalised by the illustrious English
dramatist differs in many respects from the Hamlet depicted
to us by the famous historian. Another curious circumstance
is, further, that both the author and the hero of this well-
known drama to some extent is surrounded by a certain amount
of historical dimness. Just as there have been and still are
men of letters among the English-speaking races, who contend
and dispute about Shakespeare as the identical author of all
the literary work ascribed to his name and fame, so there have
been and still are in Denmark (principally) men of letters who
aver that Hamlet (or more correctly Amleth) is either a purely
mythological or a purely historical personage, while others,
again, say that he is partly the one and partly the other. In
giving due weight to the evidence on all sides, the unbiassed
critic would mostly come to the conclusion that there was both
a mythological and historical Hamlet, and that the historical,
for some special reason, was named after the mythological
one. When comparing the dramatised hero with the his-
torical —the Hamlet of Shakespearean fame with the Ambleth
of Danish history —we find that the English dramatist mur-
dered his hero long before his time, inasmuch as Hamlet (ac-
cording to Danish history) impressed his individuality largely


on the pages of history for a number of years after he had
avenged his father’s murder by killing his uncle, and that the
tragedy of his death took place in a quite different way and
under other circumstances than those impressed on our mind
by Shakespeare, who gives us only the 1 first and youthful half
of his career, thus robbing him of the fame he achieved by
subsequent deeds, which were as remarkable and worthy of
being dramatised as those of his earlier years. In support of
this contention let history speak:
In the days of Rbrik, King of Denmark, Gervendill was
Governor of Jutland, and in this office he was succeeded by
his sons Horvendill and Fengo. The former, returning with
glory from a Viking expedition, in which he had defeated
Roller, a pettv king of Norway, obtained the hand of Gerutha,
King Rorik’s daughter, who in due time bore him a son,
Amleth. But Fengo, out of jealousy, murdered Horvendill
with his own hand, and persuaded Gerutha to become his wife,
on the plea that he had committed the crime for no other
reason than to avenge her on a husband by whom she had been
hated and neglected. Amleth, afraid of sharing his father’s
fate, pretends to be imbecile, but there was so much system
in his pretended idiocy, and being of a too truthful character
to demean himself with lies, the explanation obtained from him
as to his words and actions were so pointed that Fengo’s bad
conscience took fright and planned his death. Afraid of being
found out by Amleth’s mother and grandfather, and punished
by them for such an evil deed, he despatched his victim to
England in company with two attendants, carrying with them
runic tablets instructing the king of that country to put him to
death. Amleth surmises the purport of these instructions,
gets hold of the tablets, and secretly alters the inscription on
them, so that the English king is thereby requested to put the
attendants to death and to treat him with honour. This was
accordingly done, the honour offered to and accepted by him
being the hand of the royal princess, and he played his cards
so well that he even managed to wring a considerable quantity


of gold out of the king as compensation for the killing of his
two attendants.
Instead of settling in England, and with his whole being
ever intent on avenging the murder of his father, he returns at
the end of a year to Denmark just as the people are celebrating
his obsequies, Fengo being quite sure that his scheme had suc-
ceeded. During the feast that then follows to celebrate his
safe return, Hamlet (as he now most likely calls himself after
his sojourn among the cockneys) makes the courtiers drink
freely, and then, when they are heavy with wine and sleep, he
pulls down over them the hangings of the hall, fixes these with
wooden hooks, which he had prepared and hardened in the
fire during the time of his pretended idiocy, and then setting
fire to the buildings, leaves the revellers to their fate. He
next proceeds to the royal chamber to take vengeance on Fengo
himself, who falls beneath the stroke of his own sword, for
which Hamlet had substituted his own scabbard-fastened
weapon.
Returning to England for his wife, the hero finds that his
father-in-law and Fengo had been under pledge to each other
that the survivor should avenge the other’s death if it resulted
from violence, and his father-in-law, unwilling to make a direct
attack on his life, sends him to Scotland as a proxy-suitor for
the hand of the terrible queen Hermuthruda, who has put all
previous wooers to death. But Hermuthruda, however, hap-
pens to fall in love with Hamlet, and he returns to England to
upbraid his father-in-law with his treachery. After having
sojourned in England for some time and gained much addi-
tional fame and treasure, he sets his face homewards for good,
and arrives with his two wives, both of Royal descent, and
much retinue, in Jutland, where he established himself as its
king. As such he has to endure the grievous hostility of Vik-
letus, Rorik’s successor whom he finally determines to engage
in a decisive battle, in spite of the strong presentiment, that
he dooms himself to, death by the attempt. This presentiment
is fulfilled, and he perishes, while his widow, Hermuthruda, to


the astonishment of everybody, marries her husband’s slayer
Vikletus.
Thus the true tragedy of Hamlet’s death takes place under
different circumstances, in a different locality, and at a time
much later than what Shakespeare would have us believe. But
the greatest difference between Hamlet in fact and Hamlet in
fiction is, however, to be found in the characteristics of the
two, the former being presented to the mind and enshrined in
the heart of the Danish nation as a hero, brimful of circum-
spection and unusual ingenuity, as ready and quick to act at
a moment’s notice as he is, when required, patient to bide his
time and await his opportunity with dogged determination, a
quick-witted doer equally as much as a long-headed plotter,
while the latter dwindles down to seem very little more than a
mere talker and vacillating dreamer. The tragedy of the
real Hamlet is, further, far more pathetic than that of the
fictitious one, inasmuch as the cup of complete success is
snatched from his lips at the very moment it becomes full to
the brim and when he had every reason and right (of that day)
to expect a long and full enjoyment of it.
Finally, that part of his life which Shakespeare unjustly
obliterates by a fictitious death, is by far the richest in dramati-
cal potentialities by its ever-varying incidents, its ingenious
plots and counter-plots, its heroic achievements and its final
crowning success, suddenly cut short by more than ordinary
pathetic circumstances.
For all these reasons it is to be hoped that there some day
will arise a poet “ like unto Shakespeare,” with the mission and
power to resurrect for us in a powerful drama the Hamlet in
fact as a sequel to and an improvement on the Hamlet in
fiction.
(Translated from “Hver oitende Dag.”)


Soim of the principal Scandinavian Consulates
In Australia.
F. W. Were, Consul-General for Denmark, Melbourne
P. Holdenson, Vice-Consul for Denmark, Melbourne
O. Rsmcke. Consul-General for Norway, Melbourne
H. Gundersen, Vice-Consul for Norway, Melbourne
Count Morner, Consul-General for Sweden, Sydney
O. Pauss, Consul for Norway, Sydney
L. W. Marcker, Consul for Denmark, Sydney
J. D. Consul for Sweden, Melbourne
A. T. Neill, Consul for Sweden, Adelaide.


3 1508 0033369? 6
P6TH (*am im-h-C
MELBOURNE ;
PRINTED AT THE WEST MELBOURNE PRINTING WORKS ,
172 King Street.


■ i.' tk >,a. ~. rv. --s
ITHE following Danish books arc for sale at
“Norden”s office, 227 King St., Melbourne:
‘Erindringer fra So og Land’ (C. BfOUP) 2/6
‘Emigrant Noveller' I. (jBQSlpg) 1/6
do do 11. do 1/6
‘Modernc Vikingcr ’ do 1/6


“VORE
I UDLANDET”,
LKngangsstraede 23 Copenh. K
Denmark. 5/- yearly.
Scandinavian Journal
“NORDEN”
227 King St. Melbourne.
61- yearly.
