

The Adjahdurah Tribe of Aborigines
ON
YORKE’S PENINSULA.
THE GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF
AUSTRALASIA.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH.
By T. M. SUTTON,
Superintendent of Point Pearce Aboriginal Mission Station.
Adelaide:
H. F. LEADER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.
1889.




THE ADJAHDURAH TRIBE OF ABORIGINES ON
YORKE’S PENINSULA: SOME OF THEIR EARLY
CUSTOMS AND TRADITIONS.
BY T. M. SUTTON,
Superintendent Point Pearce Aboriginal Mission Station.
Read July 29 th, 1887.
It is very difficult to get reliable information as to the past
history of the aborigines. The tendency is to mix it up with the
semi-civilised life they have led since the Europeans have been
here. Many even of the oldest have forgotten all about it. My
plan has been to get the first information from two old men or
women, then try two more, get their views on the same subject,
and submit it all to the old people together and a couple of young
men. Some of the latter do not like all the past customs to be
known.
The name of the tribe on Yorke’s Peninsula is Adjahdurah, or
my people. Adjah means my or mine, as adjah-coojmunya my
son, adjah lanna my daughter. One individual of the tribe would
be called Durah. The general name of a native of any trible is
Nepoh. The tribe was also divided into four local divisions, viz.,
Koornarrah (north), Winderah (east), Dilpah (south), Warree
(west). Each local division had its own totems, viz., ghardie
(emu), durantoo (red kangaroo), coynbinya (butter fish), coolallah
(salmon). I only give these totems as a sample ; there were
numbers of others. Men and women of the same totems were
allowed to marry. I have never heard of any other tribe where
this was allowed. I would not accept it at first, until the king
told me that he married a ghardie, he being a ghardie himself, his
grandfather also married a ghardie. A woman takes her husband’s
totem at marriage. They were not allowed to marry blood
relations under pain of death. First cousins are considered equal
to brothers and sisters; foster children were treated as their own.
Betrothal took place in infancy, and the marriage ceremony after
circumcision and other rites performed on the male. At this
ceremony blood being extracted from the candidate he was obliged
to drink some. A humming instrument was used to warn all but
the initiated away. No one was’allowed to see this instrument
under pain of death, unless they were initiated.


Of course this was long ago, the ancient stringency having
grown entirely obsolete. The old king made one, and used it in my
presence. lam not aware that this privilege has been extended
to any other white man in this colony.
The Victorian natives have a similar instrument, and the same
rules are observed it. 1 have heard of a gentleman in
that colony being allowed to see it, but he had to be initiated first.
Without this initiation 1 have been allowed to see both. There is
very little difference in the construction, none at all in the noise
they make.
Cannibalism was unknown in this tribe, neither did they extract
the kidney fat from their enemies, as was the custom of some of
the Australian tribes. Being cut off from other tribes very little
was known of war, consequently their weapons were few. The
tribe was ruled over by a king, with head men selected from each
of the local divisions alluded to above. The kingship was
hereditary. The last king, who died recently, spoke of his grand-
father as occupying that position when he was a boy.
The following legend as to the origin of the tribe was told me
by one of the natives who received it from his father, he being
noted for his good memory. The story was also corroborated by
the king.
The father of the tribe, who was a giant, lived on Wauraltee
Island, where he had always resided, and where he was ultimately
buried. He had a brother in whom was vested power almost
equal to his own. This brother travelled about. Once in his
wanderings down the Peninsula he met a man belonging to another
race, whether black or white “ deponent sayeth not.” They had a
fight. The latter was speared, and his bowels gushed out. His
conquerer then cut him into halves, the severance taking place
just below the arms, and the upper portion he transformed into a
bat (majaja). The bat he dispatched with a message to the
conquered one’s people who were camped on the beach. He
returned and desired the conquerer to go to their camp for a con-
sultation. This he refused to do, but waited until night, and stole
upon them while they slept, setting fire to their camp, and burning
them all to death. The wind arose and blew their ashes away,
which turned into seabirds. These are the present shags, pelicans,
gulls, &c. Previous to this the sea water was fresh. The mark
of the cut in the bat they say can be seen now. The natives will
on no consideration kill them. A spider, it is said, made the
islands. They seem to have no idea how the main land came into
existence,
They believed in a Supreme Being, and in the soul’s existence
after death. When any one dies belonging to Koornarrah (north),
the soul goes away in that direction, and vice versa. The body
used to be kept for several days after death, and the doctor of the
tribe would lie beside it, and profess to hold communication with


the departed soul, from which source he pretended to receive the
secrets of his art. Of course this doctor was a great humbug.
He would put stones and other things into his mouth, and suck
the seat of pain, then eject them, pretending he had extracted
them from the patient’s body. The name a person had while
living was never mentioned after death. Even amongst the
present generation this rule is now observed. A. man would never
speak to his mother-in-law; if he wished to give her anything he
would look another way, and pass it to her with both hands.
Brothers and first cousins would not hold direct conversation with
each other. Certain rules were observed in the division of food,
which perhaps would not be interesting to go into at present. It
is a mistake to suppose that corrobories were got up merely for
dancing and noise. They had a great significance in olden times.
In seasons of drought they had rain corrobories, so likewise when
kangaroos and emus were scarce they had kangaroo and emu
corrobories, &c. A man called the ghureldrie (I suppose
analagous to the poet Laureate of England) made and sang the
songs. He was a very important personage on these occasions.
Messages were sent from place to place by notches cut in a waddie,
rolled in the skin of an animal. I was the bearer of a stick
message once from a native on the station to another on Wauraltee
Island. I was told afterwards the purport of this message. It
was not sent in the orthodox way by being wrapped in a skin, so
I saw the notches, and learned their meaning. No grasstrees
growing on Yorke Peninsula, it was difficult for the natives in
olden times to get fire. The king has told me that he and others
would travel to the Murray to get it when they had lost the fire,
and were never molested by the natives there. The natives
belonging to this tribe had only words to express numbers up to
five, viz., arrigo (one), bulli (two), mungree (three), bulli bulli
(four), yarrabali (five). Some of the northern natives have only
words to express four. Papee is father; adgaah is mother;
doomalah, grandfather; coojmunya, son ; lanna, daughter; cabbie,
water (it is cowie in the north); bardoh, meat; miah, bread—
this would signify in olden times food of any sort except meat.






