

0 2
v -fV g
8 A SERMON, |
8 m
1 jR
' Cs iQfe
o 1 PREACHED ON DECEMBER 17th, 1857, #
6 2
o g : -v.
g AT THE g
8 OPENING OP BROUGHTON CHAPEL, i
<Po U 1 Ui! ill U W-L ifXVV V VA J.XX V V/ 7 O
«bcP
o g
® 8
g MOORE COLLEGE, g
C S
n €g
5 n. s. w. o
O g
© g
6 . g
o g
O g
rigi * \ M
g BY THE g
Si RIGHT RET. THE LORD BISHOP OF SIDNEY, 8
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
r n y 7}
Q /r*




"THE SONS OF THE PROPHETS.”
A SERMON,
PREACHED ON DECEMBER 17ih, 1857,
AT THE
OPENING OF BROUGHTON CHAPEL,
MOORE COLLEGE,
N. S. W.
BY THE
RIGHT REY. THE LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




j Ir&to'f p k
A SERMON.
“ And the sons of the prophet said unto Elisha, Behold now the
place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.”
2. Kings vi. 1.
There is this peculiar interest attached to the prophetical
office of our Lord, that it is the only one which, in the
present dispensation, can be exercised by man.
No altar now receives its victim, no priest on earth can
offer gifts and sacrifices to make the comers thereunto perfect.
The one sacrifice has been slain on Mount Moriah, and He
has ascended into Heaven, who abideth a Priest for ever. An
earthly priesthood has passed away from among men.
Nor have we any King but Jesus. For while we acknow-
ledge that the chief government of all estates in this realm?
whether ecclesiastical or civil, does in all causes appertain to
the Queen’s Majesty, yet is this headship “ next under Christ.”
To Him alone, as Prince of the kings of the earth, do we
absolutely and entirely surrender our judgment and our will.
Into the domain of conscience we can admit no supreme
governor, but the Governor of the whole Earth. On the other
hand, the prophetical office of our Lord is perpetuated by
His own most solemn acts and gracious promises. That the
Apostles might go into all the world and preach and make
disciples, He first called and separated them from the rest of
mankind, and then set them apart for this sacred duty,
breathing upon them in token of their reception of the Holy
Ghost, and blessing them with the comforting assurance that,


while they were engaged in teaching men to do all things
which He had commanded them, He would abide with them
for ever. “ Lo, lam with you always, even unto the end of
the world.” Armed with this power and sustained by this
promise, they went forth everywhere, preaching the word and
bringing men into subjection to the Gospel of Christ. And
to this day the Lord continues his work, by perpetuating in
his Church, an order of faithful men, who shall be able to
teach, to premonish, and to gather out of an evil world, the
goodly company of his elect.
The foundations of this distinction between the prophetical
and the other offices of our Lord, lie in the necessity of our
nature, and in the period of the Divine dispensations under
which we live. When a perfect sacrifice has been offered,
there can no longer be a necessity for another, which, in
addition to its imperfection, may through human perverse-
ness, be regarded as a substitute for the true propitiation for
the sins of men. When the will of God has been revealed
in a perfect code, written so “ plain upon tables that he may
run that readeth it,” nothing but that which is read therein
or may be proved thereby, is to be required of any man that
it should be believed as an article of the faith, or be thought
requisite or necessary for salvation. But it is necessary that
men should be instructed in the meaning of the Royal Law,
and should be taught the true character and value of the
only perfect sacrifice for sin : and therefore God has made
provision for the perpetual exercise of the prophetical office
in His Church.
The subject is one which naturally invites our consideration
to-day, when more extended provision is made for the recep-
tion into this College of young men who are principally
intended for the ministry of the Church of England in this
Colony. In the observations which I may make, I trust
that I shall be able to justify the wisdom of thejbunders of
this College, and I earnestly desire that, while we commemo-


rate their beneficence, we may have grace to follow their
example.
The text makes mention of a company of persons termed
sons of the prophets, who were dwelling together, and who
applied to Elisha, as one in charge of their interests, to
provide additional accommodation for their number. “ The
sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the place
where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.'” The
prophets of the Old Testament and the preachers of the New,
have much in common ; and it is principally in their minis-
terial character that I proceed to speak:—
I. Of the qualifications of the Prophets,
11. Of the means by which those qualifications were
imparted.
“ Prophecy in its most comprehensive sense” has been
defined by Mr. Liddell, in his recent Manual of Sacred
History , as “a declaration or revelation of the mind and
will of God.” In its exercise it may be legislative and
administrative, as well as predictive and didactic. Moses
affords an instance in which all these characteristics are com-
bined. He was king in Jeshurun, the lawgiver as well as
the prophet of the Church, not only inspired to foretell
future events, but commissioned to instruct and govern the
people. To Aaron the priest, the command was given to
“ teach the children of Israel all the statutes spoken by the
hand of Moses.” (Lev. x. 10, 11.) In later times we find
the Levites “ teaching all Israel; ” they are the priests whose
lips keep knowledge as the messengers of the Lord of Hosts,
and at whose mouth the people seek the law. In their case
the priestly was combined with the prophetical office in its
didactic form, but this combination was by no means
essential. Jeremiah and Ezekiel belonged to the family of
the priests; but of the others we know that Daniel was of the
seed royal, like David and David’s Lord; while one of the


herdmen of Tekoa, as in later times the fishermen of
Galilee, proclaimed the purposes of God.
Under the Kings of Israel, the prophets were the ambas-
sadors of the Sovereign Jehovah, to declare to rulers and
people the will of the Most High. They were the pillars of
the Jewish commonwealth; they have been termed “ the
nerves of the body politic.” They sustained the fabric ; their
instructions penetrated the whole mass of the people. The
king and his nobles felt and feared their denunciations ; the
inhabitants of great cities humbled themselves before their
words. “ They enforced obedience to the whole law, moral
and ceremonial, and explained aright the relation of the latter
to the former. The whole tenour of their ministrations served
to raise the people to a higher condition of knowledge, and of
righteousness, and at the same time, pointed men to the times
of the Messiah, and prepared them for His coming.” The
law as given by Moses served chiefly to convince of sin ; the
Prophets were the harbingers of that grace and truth which
came by Jesus Christ. They could speak of the fountain
opened for sin and for uncleanness in which the guilty soul
might wash and be cleansed. They could direct the weary and
heavy laden to One on whom the Father had laid the iniquity
of mankind. The days of the Messiah, were those times of
rest and peace, in which the oppressed should be relieved and
the prisoner be set free. In seasons of distress or captivity,
the Prophets could speak to the people not only of the temporal
deliverance, which the goodness of God would vouchsafe,
but of the glorious triumphs which awaited them, when the
Redeemer should return to Zion.
It has also been observed, and the observation is worthy of
notice, that the Prophets were eminently men of the people,
and of the day in which they lived. They dwelt among their
country-men and were of them. Like our own Latimer,
they prophesied in the kings’ court or in the remote country.
In time of war, in periods of perplexity and danger, in cap-


tivity and banishment, the counsel and sympathy of the
Prophets failed not. Stern in rebuking sin, they were
tender and pathetic in their lamentations over those calamities
which sin had brought upon the daughter of their people.
It would be tedious to dwell upon the various qualifications
necessary for the prophetical office. I will content myself with
this single remark, that without fidelity the Prophet would
have been unfit and unworthy to discharge the duties of so
honorable a calling. The natural fear of man required to be
displaced by that fear of God, which makes every duty a
religious exercise and every state of life a heavenly vocation.
The Prophet was a fenced brazen wall, against which the
people contended in vain so long as he spake only the words
which God might put into his mouth.
In this spirit of fidelity, Samuel, in childhood, withheld not
from Eli aught that the Lord had spoken against his house;
and, in later life, declared to Saul, “ The Lord hath rent from
thee the kingdom of Israel.’ 1 He was faithful, who could ask
Ahab, stained with the blood of Naboth, “Hast thou killed
and also taken possession?” and could predict, “In the place
“where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy
“blood, even thine.” That was a faithful rebuke, which Nathan
administered to the king, “Thou art the man.” That too, was
a salutary warning, which Jeremiah gave to his fellow-servant,
“Seekest thou great things for thyself; seek them not.’ 1
“ Shewing all good fidelity” is one of the chief ministerial
qualifications. A timid Prophet fleeing from his duty because
it is painful or perilous, a selfish Prophet preferring his own
reputation and ease to the salvation of thousands to whom he
might be the messenger of life, a Prophet prophesying smooth
things to the wordly and impenitent, adds treachery to his
timidity and destroys both himself and them that hear him.
11. Passing then from the qualifications necessary for the
prophetical office to the means of imparting them, I observe


that the Prophet must be emphatically “a man of God. 1 ’ No
merely human agency can impart that spiritual character,
which is, before all other qualifications, necessary for the
prophetical office. Nevertheless, God honours and blesses the
means by which spiritual knowledge and life are imparted.
One of the successors of St. Paul owed that wisdom which is
unto salvation, to the instruction received from Lois and
Eunice: and ordinarily it may be the will of God to form the
prophetic character by blessing the means which are used and
fitted to this end.
It is evident that so early as the days of Samuel such
means existed. That Prophet found the commonwealth of
Israel in the greatest disorder. The sons of Eli had made
themselves vile, and the people abhorred the offering of the
Lord Samuel, divinely commissioned to be the reformer of
the commonwealth and the restorerof true worship in the Church
of God, made provision for the maintenance of the knowledge
and service of God, by furnishing instruction for the teachers
of the people. It is generally admitted that he established
the schools of the Prophets, and presided over one or more of
them. The place where he dwelt, Naioth, is by the Chaldee
paraphrast, termed a College or School of education. The
description given in I Sam., xix. 20, of “the prophets
prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them ,”
is explained in the Targum of Jonathan, by “standing as
teaching them,” and by Philo as “The president going before
and teaching, the rest increasing in goodness and improving
in life and manners.” (Quoted by Stillingfleet in his “Origines
Sacrae.”) Elijah and Elisha are evidently found in connexion
with these schools, Avhere the sons or young disciples of the
Prophets were trained ; and in a later period of the Jewish
history, Huldah is described as dwelling in the “college at
Jerusalem.” 2, Kings, xxii. 14. The numbers of the Prophets
must have been considerable, when Obadiah, in times of
persecution, concealed a hundred of them by fifties in a cave.
And although Amos says of himself, that he was neither a


Prophet nor the son of a Prophet, yet this expression serves
to show that, generally, every one who was called to the
prophetical office, had received instruction as one of the sons
of the prophets.
These schools existed, and without accepting all that Jewish
writers have said about them, we may well suppose that the
sons of the Prophets were trained for the work which we
afterwards find them engaged in performing. Living together
and labouring with their own hands, preparing their own food,
and erecting their own dwellings, they were brought up in a
manner characteristic of the simplicity of the age, and suited
to the circumstances in which they were placed. They were
taught to regard their teacher as their Father and their Head.
“Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from
thy head to day ?” is the question addressed by the sons of
the Prophets to Elisha. “My Father, My Father ! ” is the
passionate cry of Elisha as he sees Elijah carried up into
heaven. Obviously they would learn from personal inter-
course with Samuel, or Elijah or Elisha, far more impressive
lessons than we can gather from the lives of these holy men.
They would be trained in the exercise of those gifts which
qualified them for the study and exposition of the divine law
and for insisting upon the truth which concerns the nature
and attributes of God, the necessity of unreserved submission
to His will, and that service of the heart which alone He
regards and accepts. They would learn to rebuke the offen-
der, however exalted his station, and to defend the cause of
the poor and the oppressed. They would be taught to regard
the highest interests of their country as involved in the
moral and spiritual character of the people, aud to look upon
nations, as existing only at the will of the Supreme Ruler
of them all.
In forming schools of this kind, Samuel proved himself a
wise and far-seeing reformer of abuses. He was not content
with the pulling down of idolatry, but made provision for


perpetuating the truth of God. The public trial of the pro-
phets of Baal by Elijah, and their subsequent destruction, was
doubless needful for the uprooting of a hateful superstition :
but the Prophets hid by Obadiah, and the seven thousand
faithful ones, who had not bowed the knee to Baal, would
scarcely have been found to uphold the true faith of Israel,
if the schools of the Prophets had not been previously estab-
lished by Samuel. The advantages of such institutions can
hardly be questioned. The disciples of Samuel, Elijah, and
Elisha, could not fail to receive a portion of their master’s spirit.
Like P*e disciples of our Lord, their spiritual knowledge would
increase and their prophetic character would be formed under
the training of a teacher sent from God. They would be
fitted for their work, just as the fishermen of Galilee, under the
constraining influence of the love and patience and wisdom of
Jesus, became the zealous, bold, faithful, and well-instructed
Evangelists of mankind.
It is hardly possible to imagine any thing more likely to
form the ministerial character aright than a college of this kind-
At the proper period of life, young men, whose hearts have
been touched by the grace of God, are brought into close,
friendly, yea filial relation to one able and desirous to direct
their studies, and to mould their characters with continual
reference to their sacred calling. Having some experience in
life, having received a certain amount of previous instruction,
actuated by a desire to engage in the highest of earthly duties,
these young men are placed under the guidance of one to
whom they look up with the confidence and affection of
children, and with the reverence of disciples.
The want of such institutions at home, or of some provision
at our Universities, which shall supply this want, has recently
been stated as one of the causes of the alleged inefficiency of
the Church of England. In a Sermon preached before the
University of Oxford by Dr. Miller, Rector of St. Martin’s,
Birmingham, the following remarks occur.


44 Notoriously it is matter of complaint, even after all that
44 has been said or done both here and and at Cambridge, that,
“ whereas the student in medicine, or law, or music, however
44 highly he may graduate in one general course of studies?
“must necessarily superadd a long and diligent course of
“ reading specifically confined to his future profession, and in
‘ 4 the case of medicine, practical apprenticeship in the wards
44 of the hospital,—the candidate for Holy Orders has laid on
44 him no such necessity. Our Bishops’ Chaplains will sorrow-
-44 fully attest the existence of this evil. Even now does the
44 newly ordained curate too often essay the composition of his
44 first sermon, when he comes forth with the responsibilities
44 of an ambassador of Christ upon him : too often is his own
44 Parish-school the first in which he has inspected a register
44 or taught a class: too often is the death-bed of a sick
44 parishioner, to which he is summoned as a Pastor, the first
44 bedside, at which he has opened his bible or bent his knees.
44 Thus is the Church weakened by entrusting so much
< 4 of her work to novices. The transition involved in ordina-
-44 tion is a plunge for which they were unprepared, rather
44 than a ready application of well-stored resources and well-
-44 trained gifts and powers to the work of God upon the souls
44 of men.” Again. “It were alike dishonest and unwise to deny
44 that the power of the pulpit is lamentably below its proper
44 standard. Crude theology, ill-defined and indistinct views
44 of Christian doctrine, disproportioned statements of truth,
44 a lamentably defective acquaintance with the original Greek
44 of the New Testament, lack of orderly arrangement, bad
44 elocution, the non-cultivation of the power of extempore
44 speaking, these but too often present the newly ordained
44 Curate as a raw novice rather than as a finished and well-
• 4 trained Teacher.”
The only remedy for this state of things may not be the
formation of Theological Colleges, but at present it is the best
in ourpporer.w r er. If a young man has enjoyed the advantages of


such an education as can now be obtained in the Colony at
our public schools, has exhibited diligence and achieved
success in his Collegiate course, and is desirous of dedicating
his powers and acquirements to the service of God in the
ministry of the word, I know of nothing at present which,
humanly speaking, is better calculated to fit him for this work,
than the course of training which awaits him here. The
influence of the head, the instruction of the teacher, the
affectionate care of the father, are found in combination with
opportunities for the acquisition of practical and pastoral
experience, which few other situations could afford. The
school for the young, the hospital for the aged and infirm,
the congregation in the Bush, as well as direct theological
instruction and the habitual composition of sermons, all supply
to the earnest student, invaluable means for becoming “ a
workman that needeth not be ashamed.'” And it will not be
the fault of this institution, if the newly ordained minister
does not go forth to his work knowing what is to be done, and
animated by an earnest desire to accomplish that which he has
been qualified to perform.
This, doubtless, was the intention of those who originally
founded this College ; the intention of the liberal donor and
of the friends by whom he was advised. One of these, and
the one to whom this foundation is chiefly owing, has passed
away: but he left friends in England and in this Colony who
would not willingly let his memory die. He, who as Bishop
of Australia, did with much foresight and great disinterested-
ness form five other dioceses out of his own, has surely deserved
to be held in grateful remembrance by all who desire the exten-
sion of Christ’s kingdom upon earth One of those who admir-
ed his character and loved him as he deserved, left the sum of
money which has served to erect that portion of the chapel
which is at present built, and which in honor of his memory is
henceforth to bear his name.
The number of Students is at present five. Others will


present themselves from this diocese. From Mauritius one
has applied. From Melbourne we may receive others ; and
there is no reason why all the dioceses of Australia should not
find in this College a means of completing the ministerial
instruction of their young men, moderate in cost, and calculated
to send forth, faithful, earnest and well instructed preachers of
the word of God.
lam aware of some of the dangers of such institutions ; lam
deeply conscious of the necessity of the Holy Spirit’s teaching,
in order that spiritual life may be imparted and maintained.
I am satisfied that very little good can be hoped for from a
Ministry, which is not actuated by. the love of Christ and of
the souls for which Christ died. The dangers we watch and
pray against. The gifts of grace we earnestly solicit from the
Head of the spiritual body, the Church. And whatever may
be the imperfections, which belong to this College, we are
conscious that hitherto the desire of its founders, of its former
and of its present Principal, has been, that the best interests of
this Colony may be advanced, by the formation of Christian
character, and the inculcation of Christian principles in those,
who as the future Ministers of the Church of England must
exercise so great an influence upon the people.
I may add one word as to the pecuniary state of the College.
For many years it was not possible to open it, because the sum
annually at the disposal of the Trustees did not permit them
to enlarge the building or to supply a stipend for the
Principal. By the liberal assistance of my co-trustees and
by means of I)r. Warneford’s gift, these difficulties have been
in some measure overcome. The accumulation of past years
has however, been expended upon the present structure; and I
regret to say that a considerable sum will be necessary to
discharge the debt and to complete the buildings by adding
six more rooms, a Hall, and a Library. The expenses already
incurred were absolutely necessary, in order that the Institu-
tion might be properly established. My text was literally


applicable to the want of accomodation. u Behold now, the
place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us. I'’ 1 '’
I have no doubt of the beneficial effects of this College.
I believe that it will be the means of conferring great blessings
on the Colony, and I feel assured that its advantages have
only to be known, to secure for it that measure of public
assistance, which will at the same time complete the present
design and relieve the trustees from their pecuniary
responsibility.
I pray Almighty God that the high purposes for which this
College was designed may be accomplished, and that from its
walls there may go forth men, worthy to take their place
among the sons of the Prophets, and able to perpetuate in this
land all the blessings which flow from the faithful, intelligent,
and spiritual Ministry of the Gospel of the Grace of God.
14




J n\ p
B\&L‘rO
F iobbS
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




