





COLONY
WE LIVE IN
delator:
FREARSON & BROTHER, PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS,
KING WILLIAM STREET.


.
,


THE COEONY WE HIVE IN.
ooJ<K.
At S those who look at a landscape from several
standpoints view it differently, so, also, each
person who beholds it has within himself certain
O' ’ proclivities which will influence his estimate of its
various merits.
Colonial life embraces a multitude of subjects, the
importance of which varies according 1 to the degree
of interest, either personal or otherwise, one may
happen to take in it. To those who would study
humanity and its capabilities, there is perhaps no
better field of observation than that of a colonial com-
munity, composed as it is of such an infinite variety
of material, brought together from many parts of the
world, to be worked up by circumstances into a singu-
larly distinctive people full of vigour and enterprise !
Each nation’s representatives bring some contribu-
tions to the general stock of practical information,
which self-interest soon teaches men to take advantage
of. It is both curious and interesting to watch how,
under that mighty stimulus, deep-rooted prejudices
(whether of nation or class) are set aside, and how soon
fusion takes place.
Powers in men, never dreamt of before even by them-
selves, are called into sudden action ; and natuies
which, under the conditions of their early life, might
have remained torpid and colourless until the dull, sad
end, are quickly roused into intelligence by contact
with their fellow beings, and a broad cosmopolitan
brotherhood becomes to them a natural university,
where they may learn the possibilities which exist in
humanity, even in its crudest state —whence, too, encou-
raged by the success of their peers, they may acquire
that self-reliance which ever forms the solid basis of
prosperity.
Thus grounded, even the most common-place prole-
taire, if he but work steadily at his vocation, and gain
what knowledge he can on his way, storing it up as a
thing of value for future use, may in time rest peace-


fully from his labours in competence and respectability.
But for the man whom nature has favoured with espe-
cial gifts, opportunities such as never could have fallen
to his lot offer themselves to him in this land so full of
resources. He has but to choose his path ; no matter
what his ambition may be, if he keep it constantly in
view, working towards it, and he be “ but indifferent
honest,” he will prosper, and reach the goal at last.
But here too often begins the grand failure of his
life. He has reached a height for which neither his
breeding or education qualify him. In his road up to
it, in that narrow groove which leads to wealth, he has
missed those extensive views of the world’s ways and
means, which teach man how small he is. And how
much he has to be taught and refined before the iron of
his uncultivated nature can be tempered into that
strong, true polished steel, wherewith the battle of life
must be fought and its laurels secured.
A new colony, blest with freedom and prosperity,
with the greatest natural advantages, and teeming with
young life, needs, above all, culture—culture of the
country to bring out its resources, and culture of
humanity to enable it to make good use of them.
Wealth is a great gift, but it is not a blessing per se.
Its potency for evil is quite equal to that of the good it
may bring ; and where it is allowed to usurp the
authority which should belong to experienced wisdom,
it is an evil of great magnitude—one which must
infallibly impede the highest progress of a community,
and give the lead in society to a class whose riches may
be their greatest recommendation, and who set up dis-
play and extravagance in lieu of good taste and
simplicity.
Few people may be said to choose new colonies as a
desirable place of residence, and there is no doubt
much to be said against them in a social point of view.
The wonderful upheaving of the lower strata of our
little world, and a general mixing up of its ingredients,
however heterogeneous they may be, is, perhaps, more
attractive to the philosopher, as a study of men and
manners, than it can be to those, who, accustomed from
early days to the elegancies and amenities of good society
and its refined associations, feel out of their element
when deprived of them.
2


But yet there is much in the growth of a new coun-
try to interest and please a thoughtful mind much of
wholesome excitement in active progress. The large-
hearted philanthropist must find much cause for re-
joicing in the contemplation of such abundant good for
the many in this our favoured land, where each indi-
vidual may in time possess a share in it. This, possi-
bly is the mainspring of the marvellous success which
has blest our adopted home. But success, to be a
blessing, needs the guiding hand of wisdom ; and
wisdom, born of experience, may come with it.
Already, like a gentle stream which flows hidden
from sight, purifying and nourishing all things on its
course, education (steadily permeating throughout our
community) is preparing the soil whence may spring in
the future men whose elevation to important and re-
sponsible posts shall not be won by mere wealth or
corrupt influence, and who, when they “ once attain the
upmost round unto the ladder, turn their backs, scorn-
ing the base degrees by which they did ascend ; but
men who by personal merit alone shall rise, and whose
pride shall be to make each round of the ladder as they
ascend it record some manly effort, some good achieved.
Such self-made men should be the natural growth of
our young and prosperous colony, which presents on all
sides such advantages to the humblest of her children.
If he be industrious and steady, there can be no life to
compare to that of a colonial one for the working man.
Nowhere can his capabilities be so soon ascertained and
tested, or a broader field for their development afforded
him. Encouragement greets him at every turn, beauti-
ful homes in all directions serve him as sign-posts of
successful industry, and what might have appeared a
wild dream in his native land stands boldly forth here
as reality. He needs but knowledge of the blessings
he enjoys, and a thankful and contented spirit to
enhance them.
When time has brought his softening spell to bear
on much which now seems incongruous and harsh in its
sudden transformations and contrasts —when a kindly
spirit of toleration and charity shines through its many
imperfections and shortcomings,—it may find a thou-
sand good things to rest upon in South Australia.
Life in colonies must ever be of a distinctive character.
3


Nature’s rules are imperative, and climate deter-
mines wliat the different countries shall or shall not
produce, and the kind of human beings best adapted for
their cultivation. This, as a platform, must bring about
certain conditions peculiar to each, which should be
carefully considered in its management, and the laws
made for its development. But there is in human nature,
generally speaking, a greater tendency to follow than to
lead, and the force of habit too often excludes judg-
ment and keeps back progress.
To become an efficient colonist a man must under-
stand the specialities of the land he is in, and by com-
paring them closely with those of the old country find
out how much of what he has previously learnt may be
available to him in his present life, and resolutely set
aside that which belongs not to it. He may then, step
by step, work towards the light, and the knowledge
thus acquired will become with him an active principle,
training his mind to keep pace with general advance-
ment. It is with tenacious minds often more difficult
to unlearn than to learn. The agriculturist, especially,
needs to be on his guard against too great a fixity of
opinions, and the paralysing effect of prejudice on the
march of improvement. An untaught man, with
merely fair intelligence, might succeed better by simply
following the lessons taught by experience, than the
man who, confirmed in a system (however good in
itself), would fail to see its unsuitableness to the
circumstances of the land he cultivates. The farmer is
the colonist par excellence ; he belongs to the land,
lives by it and for it, and his labours are for the good
of all. South Australia may well be proud of her
trusty yeomanry, to w r hom the stability of her pros-
perity is confided ; in whose hands the staff of life has
become a great power in the land ; and to whom, in
time of need, she will not look in vain for help.
We have in Adelaide some excellent mechanics,
whose works are hardly to be surpassed anywhere, as
testified in some instances by the prizes awarded to
them at great exhibitions, and in others by substantial
and beautiful monuments of their skilled industry.
But their number is but small compared to the demand
which our rapid progress calls forth.
4


In the different branches of building work, more
especially, the dearth of competent workmen is greatly
felt. Houses must be had ; and houses of more or less
pretension greet you at every turn, springing up, as it
almost seems, in a day. But to build them, men who
have scarcely learnt the rudiments of their trade, and
others who have left theirs for higher emoluments in
the building line, form the builder’s staff. The houses
are often inhabited before completion, the workmen are
well paid, and the builder grows rich. And the em-
ployer? Well, he pays highly for much imperfection
and great discomfort, and has to be thankful if in a
stormy night his roof is not blown away, or the walls of
his house do not fall in upon him.
New colonies are essentially beneficial to the labour-
ing populations, and all kinds of work here are better
remunerated than brain work. The educated man, who
seeks to better his fortunes in a purely intellectual
groove, will find himself a great deal out of place
amidst the hurry and turmoil of the pursuit of wealth.
Many young men of good families meet here with
disappointment, owing, perhaps, in great measure, to
their relying too much on the superiority of their birth,
deeming it a groat advantage, and on the prestige of
old-world connections. In some instances they are
quite unfit, either by nature or otherwise, for the process
of adaptation to circumstances, which is the mainspring
of success in a colonial world ; and in others they are un-
willing to try it. The experiment of sending out to
the colonies younger sons of the upper classes with the
idea, or under the plea, of reformation, is as unwise as
it is cruel and selfish; it often meets with the saddest
results, and cannot be too strongly reprehended. As
ignorant of the requirements a life so utterly different
from their early one calls for, as they are unfitted for
it ; away from all control of family and friends ; no
longer restrained by the wholesome fear of losing cast
with the associates of their old sphere, they become dis-
couraged, indifferent, careless, and too often drift Into
the dangerous loafing class, whence they rapidly sink to
their ruin.
Manly examples are, however, not wanting of men
well bred, well educated, and gently nurtured coming
out here to seek for a more promising field for endea-
5


your than is offered to them in the old world, and who,
joining at once the great brotherhood of workers, beat
out through countless vicissitudes, trials, and privations
a path for themselves to honourable positions, and in
time become a power in the land. In their successful
battle with difficulties they have gained self-control,
and consequent strength of character. In witnessing
and sharing with the poor the hardships often so
patiently endured by them, they have learned to sympa-
thise more widely with their fellow-beings, and to help
and support them in time of need. This is the class of
men, who, valuable everywhere, become priceless in a
new world where so many elements of contention and
discord exist—where so many and various are the
interests to be reconciled—so many the claims to be
adjusted! Would that our legislators were chosen
from such patterns, and possessed the self-respect, calm
judgment —the dignity, the tact and forbearance of the
true gentleman.
In a sphere where wealth is the magnet which draws
the multitudes in its thousand channels ; where men
live for it —and through it are made or marred, “ the
nouveau riche ” plays an important part, and one
which calls for the earnest attention of the successful.
Nothing tries the nature of a man so much as pros-
perity ; and unless he be blest with an honest and
kindly heart, with the enlightenment which comes with
a good education, and he possess that liberality of
spirit which springs from a generous interpretation of
his fellow-mortals, the acquisition of riches will be to
him a stumblingblock. He will make himself the centre
of a narrow circle outside of which his interest and
sympathy will not reach ; he will be arrogant to his
less favoured equals, insolent to those under him, and a
sycophant to those above him. Wealth, all-powerful as
it is, cannot of itself make a gentleman ; and frequently
serves but to bring out in high relief faults in a person’s
nature which might have remained unsuspected but for
the glare of his ostentation. This class is a natural
growth of young colonies, where, in the eagerness of
the race after riches, the means of enjoying them when
attained are overlooked, and their power for good is
missed. But Time, our great interpreter, throws the
light of experience on the fallacies of the past, and men
6


find that the grand edifice their wealth has built up for
them lacks its chief good—the substantial foundation of
education.
South Australia, proud of her material success, is
ambitious to advance in mental development; and great
efforts are being made to shed the blessings which edu-
cation confers on all her children alike. Men of high
attainments, and earnest in their noble task, are taking
the lead in our Universities and strike the key-note of
a more elevated strain of intellectual being. Hundreds
of schoolmasters and mistresses are patiently devoting
the best years of their lives to the improvement of the
future generation ; and in a few years ignorance will
have become a shameful thing in our favoured colony.
It is greatly to be hoped that so important a result will
bring forth the gratitude due to the instruments which
have brought it about ; and that adequate provision
will be made for teachers who, with incessant toil and
harassing brain-tension, have worn themselves out in so
good, so grand a cause. Is not education of the greatest
moment with a community, where each man has the
responsibility of his country’s welfare in part entrusted
to him ; and should net every help and encouragement
be given to those who have to mould the future men
and women of this our adopted land ? Eespect and
consideration should, by the example of superiors, be
instilled into the pupils for their masters, both to make
their teaching more effectual and raise the standard of
their profession, which should be deemed honourable
even as it is important. But whilst South Australia
recognizes and extols the inestimable benefits of in-
struction, she yet impedes its progress by her singular
want of liberality to the scholastic class. It is a fact as
grievous as it is anomalous, that some of our school-
teachers are worse paid than upper servants. Can this
be right ? Is it wise or just? We are rich, we are
prosperous, we need education, we wish for the best
kind ; why not pay the best price for it, and thus bring
to our help first-rate talent and experience ? What in-
ducement under the present regime do we offer to young
people to qualify themselves highly for the task of
tuition ? We are said to be a generous community ;
let us then be so to our good friends the school-teachers,
and in time we shall reap a rich reward.
7


In harsh contrast with the small remuneration accor-
ded to the educational staff, stands out the high rate of
profit obtained by the tradesmen of South Australia.
The clerk, the man of small salary in various occupa-
tions, or those of fixed and narrow incomes, cannot keep
pace with the increasing costliness in the necessaries of
life, and they must remain poor in the midst of pros-
perity.
The climate of our adopted land, with its bright skies
and clear atmosphere has, when it is at its best, a charm
which infuses itself into human life with the exhilara-
ting air one breathes ; and which lingers long and
yearningly in the memory of those who have fully en-
joyed it when they have returned to the gloom and
austerity of their native land. Our drawbacks are heat
and sudden and often extreme alternations of tempera-
ture ; but, on the whole, few climates have so little to
complain of; and few colonies can be found —if any—
where advantages so far outweigh its inconveniences.
Were we, whilst undergoing the process of acclimatiza-
tion, to bring our judgment en rapport with the exigen-
cies of our new condition, we might greatly mitigate
the ills which may spring from it, and increase the
pleasures which belong to it. Circumstances are all
changed with us, and we have to learn their effect ; why
not take advantage of the experience, born of time and
gained by those who inhabit climates which approximate
to ours, and avoiding exposure to the mid-day sun, turn
some of its most oppressive hours into a time of rest or
siesta ? We should all be stirring at early morning,
and do as much of our work whether of brain or muscle
as we can, before the heat overpowers us. One is often
struck with the servility with which old customs and
fashions are adhered to, though they have become in-
congruous from their utter unsuitableness, and we groan
under their tyrannical sway. To see a man walking
about the streets of Adelaide in the white heat of its
summer days with thick, dark clothing on, must impress
strangers with grave doubts of his sanity. Wliy not
take an independent stand, and instead of following-
sheep like—the lead of others, even to our own detri-
ment, initiate customs and fashions of our own ? We
need clothing which should combine ease and grace of
outline ; and with cheerful colouring to do honour and
8


be in harmony with the brightness of Nature as it is
here. Why should women, with reckless disregard ol
health and good looks, expose themselves as they do
unprotected from the ardour of the sun’s rays, simply
because it is the fashion of their sisters in the far away
land ; forgetting that what may be done there with
impunity, may here entail, besides the loss of good
looks, impaired eyesight, or cerebral degeneration ? In
course of time the transformation brought about by
adaptation will enable descendants of the present gen-
eration to meet the climatic requirements of their native
land ; but time alone can effect the change—and until
South Australia has seasoned her new family to do her
work, she must have recourse to hired servants who are
able to accomplish it. The prejudice which prevails so
extensively against the employment of Chinese labour
in our Northern Territory is much to be deplored, and
will keep back if not destroy the great prospects which
it offers to us, and which can only be secured by means
of Eastern labour. The vast advantages which would
accrue to us from its position alone should recommend
it to the earnest consideration of the true disciples of
progress. A great sacrifice of time and money has
already been made, and valuable lives have been lost
from sheer want of management. The Northern Terri-
tory has been for many years a serious drain and an
incubus to the colony ; and yet no one, having author-
ity, has come forward to give the needful impetus to set
the proper wheels to work ! May it be the gracious
task of our new, and highly-gifted Governor, to bring
his wide experience to bear upon a subject he seems to
have so much at heart ; and may his energy infuse
itself into our over-torpid and faint-hearted legislators.
It has been said by a good judge (Sir W. Stawell) that
we are “ fully twenty years in arrear of the success
which our manifold resources entitle us to.” Let us
follow the example of Dr. Brown, who, with the spirit
of enterprise, so well represented here by the squatters,
has taken the lead as they always have done ; and let
us turn to account the goo< gifts within our reach.
Content with her steady progress, South Australia
has, thus far, kept herse'f retired from the world’s
notice, whilst her sister-col lies have received much of
the credit due to her alone She has not been true to
9


herself; and she lacks ambition, which is the greatest
stimulus to high achievement. It is full time she
should assert herself, and let her standard fly aloft, that
it may be seen from afar ! Let her make up for lost
time and opportunities, and prove herself worthy of the
high estimate Bir W. Jervois has so generously ex-
pressed in her favour ; and if indeed “we hold the key
of Australia,” lat us keep it bright with good use, and
entrust it with full confidence to his care.
10


-• .* ■ * -
, r


MYLES’S SIDE-NAIL SYSTEM OF SHOEING HORSES.
ILLUSTRATED- BY RNE WOODCUTS.
Being a Paper Head before the Philosophical Society by George
Hamilton, Esq., J.P.
' \
Also.
AN APPENDIX TO THE ABOVE, ILLUSTKATED.
PKEARSON AND BROTHER, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS.
