

?HE EMPIRES
♦ OF THE EIST,
BY W. GRIFFITHS, M.R
[From the South Australian Register, May 8, 1895.]
I
*
Adelaide :
W. K, Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street,
CHINA AND HER ANTAGONIST.
*




•—^ —'
In the following lines I shall endeavour to
give a few impressions I have gathered during
my visit to China and Japan, which may be of
interest, not altogether on account of the
present time being what may be fairly con-
sidered a momentous epoch in the history of
that portion of the globe, but from other
points of view. It is an acknowledged fact
that it is next to impossible to foretell with
accuracy the events of the remote future,
whilst one may bo fairly successful
in predicting possibilities of a certain
nature which must necessarily follow as
the results of the general laws of progress.
Starting with this assumption, basing my
statements on careful enquiry and the
opinions of those intimately connected with
the inner workings of both China and Japan,
I shall-attempt to draw deductions as to the
effects which the opening up of these two
countries will have upon the higher civilized
manufacturing nations of the world. It has
been popular opinion to regard China as a
monster power and to allude to that country
as a slumbering Ajax which it would be
dangerous to disturb. We have seen such
nations as Britain, France, Germany, and
others cringing and yielding to China
for fear that she might close the avenues
of wealth and profit to their traders,
and were it not for the sturdy opposition to
Britain’s mercantile treaty with China on the
part of the colonists the Australians might
now be overrun by hordes of Chinese. But
the time has now come when the existence of
China under its present system is to become a
thing of the past. China with its millions,
as a nation, is nothing less then a seething
THE EMPIRES OF THE EAST
mass of corruption, bribery, and “squeeze”—
permeating through its whole system. Amongst
the highest mandarins and rulers of the land
to the lowest officials peculation and treachery
are the rule, and the affairs of the country
are conducted on principles of robbery
and dishonesty. It is an open secret that
the highest appointments in the War
Department (?) are purchased at a premium,
and the holders of these positions extract
from the Government payment for two, three,
and even four times the number of soldiers
they have under their command ; also further
supplementing their revenue by false returns
and embezzlement. The purchase of muni-
tions of war is conducted on the same lines,
the Government becoming proprietors of old
and obsolete material at the hands of their
officials, who consider nothing but their own
aggrandizement. The result is the soldiers
are badly armed, ill-fed, and, in many
instances, unpaid. The corruption of official
life is well known to the people, and
there is a distinct want of confidence
between the people and the Government.
Though it is difficult to determine to what
extent mutual distrust and dissatisfaction
exist, the fact of its existence in no un-
measured degree is beyond all question.
Rumours of internal uprisings are frequent,
but although the dissatisfaction is disunited
aad subterraneous only, the rumblings and
tremors indicate that which may at any time
become volcanic, and result in a civil disrup-
tion protesting against that malversation and
mismanagement which has brought China to
its present impotent state. On such a pedes-
tal of corruption, maladministration, and


ignorance does that anachronism,* China,
stand, can it be wondered that disunion
from one end of the Empire to the other
exists, and that such a thing as patriotism is
practically unknown ?
It is reported on reliable authority that
the Japanese intend to recruit their army
from the Chinese themselves, and that the
latter are only too glad to join a service where
their pay and food are regular. At present
the Chinese peasantry desire nothing more
than to be seoured a continuance of peace
and to be freed from the worst extortions of
the officials. This feeling is growing more
apparent amongst the better classes. So any
Government offering a system of conduct
of affairs on these lines will be
hailed with welcome. This the Japanese
are in a competent position to do, and it i
quite evident that they are prepared to use
Northern China as a fulcrum for establishing
a base of operations from which that great
mass of Chinese power can be levered as they
please. With their occupancy of Corea, the
acquisition of the Pescadores, and the early
occupation of Formosa, Japan is installing
itself in an impregnable position for the
carrying out of this object. It has been
stated that Japan could never rule China
under Western ideas, but this has proved in
all oases to be a misconception. Throughout
Singapore and the East Indies, under various
laws, the Chinese population is large, and
in Hongkong, Australia, and America they
are well enough accustomed to modern ideas
and usages, submitting themselves very easily
to Western forms of government. In foot
everything indicates that the Chinese as a
race are exceptionally easy to rule, otherwise
how would their millions have so long submit-
tedpassively to the domination of a foreign
Tartar dynasty, against whom they have
always cherished an instinctive hatred ?
The Japanese recognise that the changes at
first to be introduced must be manifestly ad-
vantageous to the people, and to pave their
way have already given out in Corea that
they are not fighting against the people
but against the Manohu dynasty and
its soldiers —so detested by the Chinese.
The subjection of the Chinese to Japanese
rule is made all the more easy when the dis-
united state of the Empire is considered.
General opinion has fallaciously credited
China with being a compact nation, while
actual experience shows it to be absolutely the
reverse.
It has been authentically stated that
Japan’s design is the union of the two
empires, China and Japan, under a rule either
directly Japanese or representatively so.
Whether their desire will be accomplished is
a matter for conjecture, buc it is ap-
parent that, allowing Japan a free
hand, they will ultimately carry out their
intentions. The Japanese have repeatedly
said they only desire that China should be
thrown open, and that her conservatism and
intolerance of higher grades of civilization
should be given up, and they seem sufficiently
capable of employing such means with a
thorough knowledge of tactfully dealing with
and overcoming any prejudices of the people
with whom they have to deal. The question
now arises are the Japanese capable of ad-
ministering the affairs of such a vast extension
of empire as the acquisition of China would
entail, together with those of their own coun-
try ? Present appearances tend to show so.
Take the progress of Japan from 1868, when
the feudal system was abolished and
the country brought under a constitution.
We find the revenue then was $40,000,000 as
against the estimated income for 1895 of
$87,000,000. So large an income shows the
prosperity of the country at the present day.


The growth of foreign trade in 1894 to modern manufacture, and they have the
$230,728,041, as against $177,970,036 in 1893
an increase of 30 per cent, during the twelve
months—shows that the Japanese are enjoy-
ing the prosperity which railways, the circula-
tion of money, and the adoption of free trade
have brought them. One would have con-
sidered that a country emerging into competi-
tion with the open world as a mercantile nation
would have been sufficient for their ambi-
tion, and that they would be fully occupied
working factories in which to weave the
$27,000, OOOworth of oottonand yarn they import
a year, to find the leisure to undertake an ex-
pensive foreign war. But the tastes of com-
merce and industry under a new regime,
stimulated by national sentiments, which
have been carefully instilled into the present
generation, rebel against a quiet life and seek
a wider field.
Japan undoubtedly now is a recognised
Power of the world, raised by the energies and
patriotism of its people to a position of which
it has every reason to be proud. It is a country
no longer too weak for aggression or under
tutelage, but absolutely independent, and bent
on monopolizing the trade of its own regions.
Their powers of organization during the war
are looked upon by authorities on such matters
as nothing short of marvellous ; but how did
they arrive at such a pitch of excellence?
Their officers have been for years receiving
the best instruction possible to be obtained in
the first military schools of Europe, and the
nation has been slowly and silently working
itself up into a defensive or offensive Power
for the past quarter of a century. It has been
their desire to excel, and to this end they have
learnt what the best masters and latest wars
could teach them. So well have they suc-
ceeded that their armies are directed in such a
manner as to earn the eulogies and plaudits of
the highest military authorities. Their arms,
materials of war, and outfit are of the most
details of the latest inventions at their fingers’
ends.
Perhaps Russia’s threatening attitude to-
wards Japan is rather accelerating the latter’s
energy in the mobilization of troops which is
being steadily carried on. While I was there
the railway system was taxed to its utmost in
the transport of soldiers to the port of embark-
ation, Hiroshima. So much so is the regular
rail traffic interfered with that the train
service is at present most unreliable. That
China will be opened up to the world in the
very near future is assured, and as the Japa-
nese have shown themselves from a
military and administrative point of
view quite capable of doing it, it
is perhaps more advisable that that country
should take the initiative rather than any
other marauding European Power whose
actions would probably conflict with the in-
terests of other Powers in the East. Should
Japanese rule dominate China it will result in
a process of civilization and education of
China’s millions and the adaptation of their
latent strength for occupation as a producing
nation in open competition with the other in-
dustrial countries of the world. The question
arises, pregnant with import to the labouring
classes, how will this competition affect the
manufacturing and producing countries of
Europe, America, and Australia? We in
Australia already recognise to some extent and
are experiencing the competition of different
classes of foreign cheap labour in our midst.
The northernmost portions of Australia are
already monopolized by Chinese, Japanese,
Malays, and others of a similar description,
and is it not due to the efforts of competition
that in the southern colonies we have Chinese
cabinetmakers, gardeners, and labourers,
Afghans and hawkers of various Eastern
nationalities, many of our trading steamers
manned by lasoars, Malays, Chinese, and


other foreign cheap labour? To go a
■tep further, it is a notorious fact that
the fish and fruit trade and cheap
restaurants are nearly all in the bands of
Italians, Greeks, and other cheap forms of
European employers and employes. This
state of affairs is accounted for, to use
a general term, by the “cheapness of pro-
duction” and the unwritten rule all the
world over of buying in the cheapest market.
This principle is recognised by the working
classes of Australia, for whom else do cheap
furniture-makers, market gardeners, Asiatic
hawkers, the cheap fish and fruit shops of
Sydney cater? And it may reasonably be
asked can the amount of sentiment be esti-
mated that will induce a Unionist’s wife to
purchase her cabbages from a European gar-
dener if she can obtain them a penny or two
cheaper from a Chinaman? This principle
also applies to the capitalist and employed
who act upon it voluntarily, or in many in-
stances are forced to accept it by either obstruc-
tive legislation or keen competition of foreign
countries. Many instances have been brought
under my notice where British - owned
steamers have transferred and worked solely
under foreign flags, and I have good reason
to believe that this practice is on the increase.
The few foregoing remarks will serve to
emphasize the influence “cheap production”
has upon countries similar to our own, and as
the competition of Eastern labour is now
being dealt with I will allude to the progress
of industry in Japan, which may be regarded
as the most advanced portion of the East, and
the conditions of labour there. Japan has
attained the same degree of proficiency rh
manufacture as it has in military matters.
Emissaries, subsidised by the Imperial
Government, are dispatched to all corners of
the earth to report the latest and best methods
of production, and it can safely be said that
there is hardly an article of foreign or local
use which is not now made in Japan at a
figure which defies competition. At Kobe,
Nara, Osaka, Kyoto, Tokio, Yokohama, and
other manufacturing centres factories of
various descriptions are both numerous and
enormous, and I was simply astounded at the
cheapness and excellence of the goods made
there. The country is naturally adapted for
manufactures, possessing extensive coal
measures and minerals, the cost of carriage to
seaboard is insignificant, and above all the
skilled labour available is the cheapest in the
world. An ordinary labourer gets from 10c.
to 250. (fid.) for overseers per diem,
whilst girls and female factory hands
receive from Id. to 2d., and the hours
of labour vary from ten to twelve per day.
The population of Japan is over 41,000,000 or
compared with Great Britain it contains
3,000,000 more inhabitants. The Japanese
may be termed an instinctively industrial race;
even the children the moment they are able to
work are given employment—all doing their
little.
Geographically, Japan holds the same posi-
tion in the East as Great Britain does in the
West; and from its local position and absence
of adjacent competitive neighbours is fast
acquiring a monopoly of the trade in that
region which has hitherto been supplied by
European and other countries. A glance at
the following clippings of news appearing in
local papers during the past few days will give
a very good idea of the expansion of the
Japanese mercantile connection in the East.
The excerpt relative to the hold Japanese
goods is acquiring at Macao in China is worthy
of special note.
Japanese in Siam.—We learn from the Straits
Times that about fifty Japanese are now engaged in
rice cultivation at Sapatoom, in Siam, in connection
with the Siam Emigration Company. The Company
is experimenting with these Japanese labourers,
and in case of success intends to arrange for
bringing out two or three thousand more of th


next year, comprising jewellers, bricklayers, Japanese already monopolize the valuable
farmers, tailors, ship carpenters, and clerks.
Japanese Competition in Macao.—The import of
cheap articles into Macao (says the British Consul
at Canton) is a matter of necessity, as the majority
of the people have little to spend even on clothing,
not to speak of luxuries and fancy articles. Hence
the rapid rise in Japanese goods. Already various
shops are getting well stocked with them, and as
the articles sell at low prices they are often chosen
in preference to European goods. The articles
from Japan at present consist of curios, cotton
cloths, blankets, flannels, hosiery, soaps,
lamps, tea-kettles, matches, hats, umbrellas,
Gladstone bags, silks, and such like. To give an
idea of the cheapness, I may say that umbrellas of
European pattern cost 30c. to |l (lid. to 2s. 2d.),
and cotton crapes $1 to |1 20c. a piece of 20 yards,
that is 2s. 2d. to 2s. 7d. These are of fine texture
and nice appearance, so that they are much appre-
ciated by Chinese and Europeans, and worn as
dresses and shirts. Indeed, the competition of
Japanese goods is sure to become keener in course of
time, as, besides the depreciation of silver, there
are other advantages which work in their favour.
Japanese Enterprise.—As an instance of Japanese
enterprise and self-reliance, says the Calcutta cor-
respondent of the Pioneer, it is worth remarking on
the presence here of two merchants of that nation-
ality, who have been in other Indian commercial
centres as well during the past few months on
business intent. In Calcutta they have had a busy
three weeks attending the indigo sales, and have
purchased on their own account indigo to the
value of abont £15,000, which they are ship-
ping to Yokohama. A limited quantity
of the dye has for some years found its way to
Japan through European agency, but it is a fresh
departure for Japs personally to buy here; and
that not through the middlemen but by personally
sampling and bidding at the auctions in the same
manner as the professional buyer does. What
makes it themore remarkable is that one of the two
gentlemen does not appear to be able to say much in
English, though his friend, of course, speaks for
him; but even if they were both adepts at
the language, it would be surprising, for indigo-
buying is a speciality and even a science. They
have no w gone south to purchase indigo in Madras;
they also intend to acquire some knowledge of
indigo-growing and manufacture in that] part of
India. There is a good demand in Japan for blue-
dyed yarn for weaving foriexport to China, the
Celestials of both sexes mostly attiring themselves
in nether garments of that hue.
It may not be generally known that at
Thursday Island, in North Queensland, the
pearling industry there, owning and work-
ing the majority of pearling luggers and
schooners, whilst at Port Darwin, where
the industry is in its inception, they are
attempting to do the same thing. Arrange-
ments are under negotiation for the importa-
tion of a large number of Japanese to be
employed in the sugar plantations of Queens-
land. It is furthermore the policy of the
Japanese Government to induce emigration
on a systematic and large scale, whilst at the
present time agents are touring Australia on
the look out for favourable employment for
Japanese emigrants.
As I have previously shown, the volume of
Japan’s foreign trade, notwithstanding the
war, increased last year by 30 per cent, over
that of the previous year, which is a very
significant fact. Amongst the many industries
I might mention at present in full swing in
Japan are coal, shipbuilding, ironfounding and
working, the manufacture of silk, cotton, and
flannel goods, paper, matches, glassware,
boots, shoes, and all kinds of leatherware,
umbrellas, chemicals, eleotrio appliances,
scientific instruments, &o.—in fact there is
hardly anything they are not producing. As
an Englishman put it to me in Kobe—“l get
all I require, except whisky, made in Japan at
least 50 per cent, below what I oould
import it for.” The Japanese appear to be
totally independent of foreign help; their
professional men have all graduated at the
best Universities of Europe and America,
and their engineers, foremen and managers of
factories have acquired their knowledge in
pranufacturing countries, so they are them-
selves capable of conducting their own works.
In Kyoto I saw a large system of eleotrio
tramways being constructed entirely under
native supervision and labour. Here they
have made a canal some seven miles long, in
which there are three tunnels, one of whiph is


over 8,000 feet long, and another 2,800 ft., meroial influence is spreading, and from the
piercing two ranges of mountains. The water
power drives a motor which supplies the
city with electric light. At Osaka the Im-
perial Mint is located. This is run purely by
Japanese labour and supervision, turning out
a coinage of which any country oould be
proud. Osaka is one of the principal manu-
facturing cities of Japan, and the district is
literally dotted all over with large factories.
Here I saw Japanese making and packing all
descriptions of chemicals, and I understand
that owing to theinoperativeness of the patent
laws they produce imitations of patent medi-
cines and sell them at ridiculously low prices.
Whilst there I bought two sets of scientific
instruments made of the best material, and of
the best workmanship and latest designs, for
355. These at the London makers’ would cost
£6 wholesale. At Kobe boots and shoes
oan be purchased of equal quality
to those made in Australia at a third
of the price they can be gob there, I was
also shown some English standard works
printed in Japan at a quarter of the cost they
oould be got elsewhere, and in other depart-
ments the same cheapness appertains. The
manufacture of woollen goods has nob yet
been entered into on a large scale, bub the
steamer Menmuir on her last voyage brought
520 bales of wool from Australia, so it may be
reasonably supposed that should their experi-
ments prove successful Japan will acquire the
Eastern market for woollen goods, whilst
Australia may find a new outlet for her wool.
The Japan coal trade is assuming large and
growing proportions, and she has now a
strong footing in the Eastern market, retain-
ing the trade which Australia lost and will
never regain during the late Newcastle coal
strikes, and is gradually shutting out the
market for Australian coal in Chinese ports,
Hongkong, and the Straits Settlements.
Although in its infancy Japanese com-
hard facts quoted no one oan deny that it is
capable of great extension, especially when
her declared policy is to heavily subsidize
lines of steamers to Europe, America, and
Australia. It is within reason to suppose
that as Japan has fairly launched herself
as a mercantile and military power it is
also portion of her policy to acquire
fresh countries where she oan remove
surplus population and minimize the con-
gestion of some of her districts, whereby
Japanese trade would be powerfully stimu-
lated as new colonies needing Japanese
products were formed. This supposition is
strengthened by the fact that Japan will have
ere this acquired Formosa, a sparsely popu-
lated and highly productive country, to
which she intends to send Japanese. The
Philippine Islands are also contained in
their programme of annexation, and I have
heard it rumoured that Japan looks upon
Australia as not without the bounds of acqui-
sition. This latter statement may be looked
upon as Quixotic, bub should a course of
events, which it would take too long to par-
ticularize, happen, giving Japanan opportunity
of acquiring Australia, what is to hinder
her doing so? With the expansion of Japan
must necessarily follow the increased intensity
of the effect of her competition. When that
effect is felt, and it must be in the very near
future, it is difficult to foretell precisely how b
will operate on the welfare and conditions of
the working classes of Europe, America, and
Australia. Ido nob intend to suggest a policy
whereby these effects oan be averted, bub it is
most evident that this question demands
careful and immediate consideration. Feder-
ation may be a means to an end, and in my
opinion the question of “ cheap production”
will be one of the stern necessities of the
people that will bring about the feder-
ation of Australia, so desired, but for


various political reasons held back, is only too true at the present time, and it
The moulding of the destinies of Australia is
in our own hands to make or mar, and I am
all the more oonvinoed that impetuous and
ill-considered laws made and directed against
the employer will tend to divert the employ-
ment of capital towards the cheaper labour
which is so near at hand. This unfortunately
behoves the Legislatures of all the colonies to
consider carefully the interests of the employer
and keeping before themselves the
fact that it is low prices and competition of
cheap productions we have to unitedly contend
with, and not always the grinding exactions
of capital of which we so frequently hear.
i _ j^li
W, K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


THE south AUSTRALIAN (Established 1836) an eight-page
REGISTER Daily Paper, containing the latest
news from all parts of the world by
wire and post. Price One Penny.
the ADELAIDE is the largest Weekly Paper published in the
OBSERVER Colony. It consists of 48 pages. The Observer
is arranged in several distinct departments.
The ‘'Miscellany” contains reviews of the latest books, essays on
popular subjects, notes on science, incidents of travel, interesting
sketches, articles on exploration, chess problems, riddles and puzzles
and witticims, a column for ladies containing the lastest fashions, a
department for children filled with tales and poetry for the young,
and novels by the best authors. No expense is spared by the Pro-
prietors in obtaining the right to publish stories by the best English
writers. Tales by local writers of ability are constantly published.
The Farm and Garden Department contains a vast amount of well-
edited information for the benefit of farmers, sheep and cattle
owners, gardeners, and others interested in the tillage of the soil and
the growth of stock. The Sporting columns (which are under the
control of a Special Editor) contain full details of all racing matters,
cricket, [football, aquatics, rifle shooting, &c., in the Australian
colonies and the old country.
The Observer also contains full British, Foreign, Intercolonial ship-
ping, commercial, and general news, original articles on political and
social subjects, dramatic and musical criticisms, &c. The columns
devoted to “Echoes and Re-echoes” contains humorous comments
on current events in poetry and prose.
An early edition of the Observer is printed on Friday morning for
the country mails. Irice Sixpence, Six Shillings per quarter in
advance, or £1 2s. per annum in advance (including postage).
the evening Published every afternoon, contains the principal
JOURNAL. news of the day. Price One Penny.
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN is published fortnightly for
REGISTER SUIVIIVI ARY despatch by the English mail.
Price Twopence, or (includ-
ing English postage) 6s. fid. per annum.
1508
01296924
