

.« '• *
rilflj


This Sermon was not intended to he published: it appears
in print i?i compliance with the wishes of some who heard it
preached, who have most kindly requested to be allowed to
defray the cost op publication.
borrowed some thoughts and information from others.
It will be seen that the preacher has once or twice


in pri.
preache
defray
h
borrowed some thoughts and information from otners.


4 <T *7O
The Command of Remembrance.
“ The Lord Jesus, the sa?ne night in which He was betrayed’,
took bread: and when He had given thanks, he brake it,
and said, Take eat; this is my body, which is broken for
you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same
manner also He took the cup, when He had supped, say-
ing, This cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do
ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew
the Lord's death till He come.” —i Cor. xi. 23 to 26 v.
The present seems to me to be a fitting opportunity for
addressing you upon the subject of the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper. I have just given notice, as our Church
directs, that on Sunday next, I purpose, through God’s assist-
ance, to administer it to all such as shall be religiously and
devoutly disposed. I am anxious now to try and explain
this holy institution, and to shew our duty with regard to it.
And my hearty desire is, my friends, that you should this morn-
ing and during the present week, give your earnest attention
to this matter, so that you may clearly understand what this
Sacrament is, and be able to give a right answer to the
question whether you ought or ought not, whether you will
or will not, kneel with us next Sunday morning, around the
Table of our Lord, and partake with us of the memorials of
His love.


The words I have read for my text are St. Paul’s account
of the institution of this Sacrament by our Lord Himself. I
have chosen them in preference to those in the Gospels
which are, in substance, the same, because I think in them
we have at the outset a very important lesson.
In St. Paul’s day, as in our own, there were great irregu-
larities in this matter, though of an opposite kind to ours,
which, in his first letter to the Corinthian Christians, he tries
to remove. How does he do this 1 Does he write some
difficult treatise on the subject 1 Does he dress up his ideas
in showy, learned words which only few could understand ?
Or, does he found what he has to say upon the practice of
other churches, and make their rule a rule for those at
Corinth 1 No, he does none of these things. He contents
himself with merely repeating the very simple words our
Lord used when He appointed the Sacrament, as if to teach
us, which I think he does very plainly, that this subject
which men, in their error, have made so obscure and difficult
is, in reality, the very reverse. The solemnity of those
words would prevent irreverence, and their simplicity would
prevent superstition.
What can be simpler and plainer than this, exceedingly
serious though it be? The Lord Jesus the same night in
which He was betrayed, took bread: and when Lie had
given thanks , He brake it, , and said, Take eat; this is my
body, which is broken for you : tins do in remembt ance of me.
After the same manner also He took the cup, when He had
supped , saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood ;
this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. How
well would it be for us, my friends, if we could regard this


matter in the same way, and not confuse ourselves with
traditionary notions, nor man-made opinions ! Let us be
sure, first of all, that this Sacrament is simple, and plain,
and not involved in hopeless mystery.
Our Lord and His twelve disciples were gathered together
in a large upper room at Jerusalem to partake of the pass-
over, The occasion was a solemn one. It was the last
time that that rite could be celebrated, for He Himself to
whom it pointed was about to be offered up as the Lamb of
God : and the thought of His approaching sufferings was
filling His mind. At that solemn time He institutes another
ordinance in place of the passover ; an ordinance the effect
of which should be to refer back to His sacrifice of Himself
which He was about to offer, just as the passover pointed to
it as a thing then future. He took bread; and gave thanks,
and brake it, and gave to His disciples, saying, This is my
body, which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me.
And He took the cup, and said, This cup is the New Testa-
ment in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remem-
brance of me. It was a parting, a dying request. Do this
in remembrance of me: after Tarn gone meet together as we are
now met, take bread, and give thanks, and break it, and eat of
it: that bread will represent to you my body broken for you,
and your eating of it will teach you that you must by faith feed
upon me in your hearts. Drink ye all also of the cup: the
wine will represent to you my blood shed for you, and your
drinking of it will teach you that you must by faith be
partakers of those unspeakable blessings which my blood has
purchased for you. As often as ye eat that bread, and drink
that cup, ye will shew, ye will proclaim my death. Do this in


remembrance of me—in remembrance of my meritorious death
a?id passion.
Now, dear friends, it seems to me quite manifest from our
Lord’s words that the main feature of this holy ordinance is
simply this :it is a commemorative ordinance. The emphatic
word, in our Lord’s short sentence, is the word remembrance—
do this in remembrance of me. Let us grasp and hold fast to
this conclusion and it will save us from much difficulty. In
the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, the main thing we do
is to co7timernorate His dying love. In this simple idea a
great deal is involved : very much arises out of it : still, let
us keep the idea in its simplicity.
A great deal is involved—for what is it to remember the
death of Jesus Christ 1 ? That death, you know is the
centre truth of Christianity; everything depends upon it.
Had Christ not died, He had been nothing to us. Had
He lived a thousand years on earth, and performed a
thousand times as many miracles as He did, and had not
died, nothing that He did could have been any blessing to
us. It is through his meritorious death that God can accept
us sinners as though we were holy. It is through the shed-
ding of His most precious blood that our sins may be
washed away. Through His death He has overcome death,
and opened to us the Gate of Everlasting life. This is
just a little of what the death of Christ is to us. Well now,
when we re7nember that death, we remember all these bles-
sings concerning it; and—which is very important—we be-
come partakers of those blessings. This is what arises out
of remembering it. But observe, I speak not of the mere
act of memory. Remembering Jesus Christ, as He uses the


word, involves faith in Him. Remembering Him is some-
thing like looking unto Him : and you know that looking
unto Him is everlasting salvation.
Perhaps you will say that this remembering Jesus Christ
can be done apart altogether from the Sacrament which we
are dwelling upon. If you do say so, you will shew that
you rightly understand my meaning. It can be done apart
from the Sacrament, and endless blessings will follow. But
then, if it be so, think you not that equal, or greater, bles-
sings will follow, if we remember Him in the way which He
has appointed ?
And this leads me on to say that the blessings which we
get for our souls by rightly partaking of the Lord’s Supper
are of the same kind as those we get from the various acts
of the soul by faith, at other times, which we call prayer, or
communion with, or contemplation of, our Lord in any of
His offices, specially in His death : —of the same kind , I
say, (and this I think may of itself help us rightly to under-
stand the Sacrament) and yet these blessings are not exactly
the same; for of this we must be certain, that our Lord
did not appoint the ordinance for nothing. If we could have
done as well without it we should not have had it. And
the very fact that He has specially appointed it, should be
enough to teach us that there is a special blessing attached
to its right observance. To commemorate the death of
Christ in the Lord’s Supper is a special exercise of faith, in
obedience to a special command; therefore, must not a
special blessing be expected % One of the special features
is this. Here we have outward signs to assist our appre-
hension. The broken bread, the wine poured out, help us


so very plainly to think upon, and understand, the death and
sacrifice of our blessed Lord. They seem to bring them be-
fore our eyes. And, when we eat the one and drink the
other, we are taught so very plainly the spiritual truth that
we must feed on Him in our hearts by faith. It must be
clear that, whilst the blessings we obtain are like those which
follow any exercise of faith, yet they have a special charac-
ter; so that, as our xxviiith Art. says, “to such as rightly,.
“ worthily, and with faith, receive the same, the Bread
“ which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and
“ likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood
“ of Christ.”
This does not, I know, exhaust the subject; for I have
not dwelt upon the wrong views of this Sacrament. I trust,
however, I have said enough to save any of us from holding
them; and I prefer to treat the subject not in a controversial
way.
It remains for me now to explain one or two words, and
a sentence, which have caused difficulty to many minds.
First, there is the very word “ Sacrament” : why do we use
it 1 It does not occur in the Bible ; our Lord never uses
the word : what does it mean 1 Now it would take a very
long time to trace the meaning of that word from the earli-
est use of it up to the present; we must be content here
with saying that at first it meant any sacred thing and was
applied to very many rites and ceremonies; but at the early
part of the fifth century, St. Augustine thought it wise to
limit its meaning thus : —“ Those sacred things are most
“ properly to be called Sacraments which have in them two
“ parts; the one visible and material, which is the sign,


“ the other a spiritual grace and virtue which is invisible ;
“ there being between the two a certain fitness or corres-
pondence.” Here we have the meaning of the word which,
you will find, is the same as that given in our Catechism. A
Sacrament is a sacred thing of two parts, the one of which
represents, or is emblematical of, the other. Now, in the
Lord’s Supper, there are two parts, manifestly; there is the
bread and wine which we can see, and, by our Lord’s own
appointment, they represent to us His body and blood
which we feed upon by faith invisibly. Surely it cannot be
very wrong to give it a name which we see from its meaning
so exactly defines it. The Lord’s Supper is a Sacrament.
Also ; in Baptism, there is the outward sign of water; the
other part being the cleansing grace of the Holy Spirit which
is represented to us by the water. Therefore, Baptism is a
Sacrament.
And, here let me remark, that it is quite wrong to speak,
as so many do, of the Lord’s Supper as “ the Sacrament,”
when it is only one of the Sacraments, the other being.
Baptism.
Again, there are the words 11 mysteries” and “mystical”
which confuse some minds, and lead them to think that the
Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is the very opposite of plain
and simple. Now what do these words mean? In general,
when we speak of a mystery we mean something which, if it
be made known to us, we cannot understand, or else, some-
thing which is not even made known to us. In either of
these senses it is used in most of the twenty-two passages
where the word occurs in the new Testament. But I feel quite
sure, (and I say this after a great deal of careful investiga-


tion) that in our Baptismal and Communion services it has
not either of these meanings. If you look at Rev. i. 20.,
you will read Write the mystery of the seven stars
which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden can-
dlesticks. What does “ mystery ” mean here 1 It has in
it here the idea of representation; it means “the sacred
things signified f or, if you like, “ the sacred secrets signi-
fied.” This is quite clear from the remainder of the verse;
for it goes on to say what the things are which are signified
by the seven stars, and the seven candlesticks. The seven stars
are, that is, they represent, the angels of the seven churches ;
and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest, are, that is, they
represent, the seven churches. Thus the word “ mystery” in
some places bears a meaning almost equal to “ Sacrament”:
indeed, the Greeks are known to have used it, in later
times, as the Latins did the word “ Sacrament,” for any
sacred sign. This, I have little doubt, is its meaning in
our services. So that, when we speak of “ these holy mys-
teries,” we do not mean these mysterious things which we can
know nothing about, but we mean one or both of the parts
of a Sacrament; we mean either the bread and wine ; or,
we mean as well as these the body and blood of Christ :
more often, I think, the bread and wine only is meant. “ He
hath instituted and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of
His love :” that is, He hath instituted and ordained that
we should partake of bread and wine ; the sacred things
which they represent to us being the body and blood of
Christ.
And so with the word “mystical” which occurs in
the Baptismal service. Many people think it means


“ mysterious.” No doubt, its first meaning is akin to this.
But you have only to look a little further on in the
Dictionary, and you will see that its second meaning is
“ emblematical” ; “ partaking of the nature of an emblem.”
Now, an emblem is a picture representing one thing to the
eye, and another to the understanding. A circle is an
emblem —of eternity. There is no end to the line which
contains a circle ; we can go round and round it and yet
never get nearer the end, for it has none ; this is something
which we can see, and it represents to us eternity which we
cannot see ; for, you know, eternity has no ending. Let
us say that a circle is mystical of eternity, and you have the
meaning which I feel sure belongs to the word in our
Baptismal service. “ Sanctify this water to the mystical
washing away of sin;” that is, the emblematical washing
away of sin ; that is, Sanctify this water so that it may repre-
sent, by its cleansing nature, the inner invisible cleansing of
the soul from the pollution and guilt of sin.
But something ought to be said about eating and drinking
the bread and wine unworthily. This is the sentence to
which I alluded. Our Church has some strong words on
the subject, and no doubt they are a stumblingblock to
many persons. Where do those words come from 1 Almost
entirely from the same chapter as that from which my text is
taken; and to that chapter must we go for an explanation
of them. Now, if we read that carefully we shall see that
some of the Corinthians were in the habit of eating and
drinking their own supper when they met to celebrate the
Lord’s Supper, That is, in all probability, they held a love
feast which some of them turned into a common meal, at


which even some of them became drunken : perhaps, during,
or after, this love-feast they used to obey our Lord’s com-
mand —Do this in remembrance of me. But St. Paul tells
them in sharp words that, such being their behaviour, a true
celebration of the Lord’s Supper was impossible ; they were
eating and drinking unworthily; and, on that account many
of them were weak and sickly and many died': such being
his interpretation of the word “ damnation” which, as we
now use it, is farther from his meaning than the word “judg-
ment” which our translators have put in the margin.
Now, we can easily see that it is impossible for us to eat
and drink unworthily in the same way as the Corinthians
did, for we do not make the Lord’s Supper into a meal;
therefore, “ eating and drinking unworthily” can only mean
for us some offence similar to theirs. If we eat in the same
spirit as they did, we shall be guilty of the same offence.
That is, if we come to the Lord’s Table in a profane, irre-
verent spirit ; if we come without any proper thought of
what we are doing; if we come in hypocrisy, professing to
be sorry for our sins whilst all the time we love our sin and
intend to practise it; if we come, professing to belong to
Christ, whilst we are really not serving Him at all; —then,
we eat and drink unworthily.
And what will be the consequence 1 does the Bible say
we shall be eternally punished for it 1 No; quite the con-
trary, It says, God will visit us with some chastisement in
this life so that our souls may, in the end, be saved; so
that we may be brought to a better state of mind, and learn
how to receive the Holy Communion in a worthy manner.
Verily, no more than this is meant by that word “ damna-


tion” which, I say, is here equivalent to the word “ judg-
ment.” Of course, all who continue impenitent will be
unpardoned ; but nowhere is it said that to eat and drink
unworthily is at the peril of our soul’s salvation.
Now comes the practical question : —What is our duty
with regard to this Holy Sacrament ? Obedience, gratitude,
common sense, and common policy, have but one answer.
We ought simply to obey our Lord’s command and do this
in remembrance of Him : that is, if we have obeyed His
former command to come unto Him by faith, and obtain
pardon for our sins. Not all have done this, and, there,
fore, we do not bid all to draw near to the Holy Table.
Here we have, indeed, the question answered : —Who are
fit to be communicants ? but we must not so hastily dismiss
it. Yet, dear friends, do not suppose that lam about to do
the work which your own consciences ought to do : I cannot
read you hearts, so I cannot tell you, one by one, whether
you are fit, or whether, if you come, you will eat and drink
unworthily.
But I can tell you this, that the fitness we require for
becoming communicants is no more than the fitness we
require for approaching God in public, or private, prayer.
Are we fit to kneel in one place and pray tor forgiveness ;
then we are fit to kneel in another place and partake of
those elements which signify to us that our forgiveness has
been purchased by the precious blood of Christ. Are you
sorry for your sins? Do you believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ ? Are you in earnest about salvation ? Do you
desire spiritual blessings? Do you want to be fed with
spiritual food ? then, are you fit to come and remember the


dying of our Lord, and receive the innumerable blessings
purchased for us thereby. We are invited to the Lord’s
Table not to bring with us any goodness or righteousness,
but to receive when there the blessings of our Father’s
bounty. Let us see that we understand this. Many persons
say they are not good enough to be communicants. I ask,
what is there in this Sacrament to shew that it is only for
those who think themselves good ? Do we not, in the service ,
make a humble and hearty confession of our sins? We
should not be taught to do this if it were only meant for
those who are good. Indeed, we know well enough none
of us are, or can be, good in this sense. No; but are you
a penitent, needy sinner? and do you desire to be better
than you are ? Then you are good enough to come. Be as-
sured that we who communicate say not, by that act, that we
are perfect, say not that we are what we wish we were: no, the
holiest amongst us make no greater profession than this, —
we desire to be perfect; we desire comfort, and strength to
enable us to live according to God’s will ; we desire to obey,
and to glorify Him.
Again, others do not come to the Lord’s Table because
they think that if they do so they must, to be consistent,
lead more strict and holy lives than they do at present:
and yet they call themselves Christians ! To such I would
say, if there is anything in your life which makes it incon-
sistent for you to become a communicant, then there
is something which makes it inconsistent for you to
be called a Christian at all. You had better re-
form your life at once; staying away from the Holy
Communion on this account will not make things any


better for you. If you are conscious of irregularity of life
and wilfully continue in it you are indeed in a bad case.
What seems to me so strange is this : Some there are who
profess to have a hope of heaven, who would be offended if
we suggested a doubt about their obtaining pardon; and
yet, when we ask them to 'come to the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper, they say they are not fit. What! fit to
enter heaven, and not fit to come to the Lord’s Table on
earth! Something must be wrong here. Ah! I gravely
fear such are not fit to enter heaven. Oh ! take heed, my
friends, that you are not deceiving yourselves.
Again, some do not become communicants on account
of the wrong doing of others who do communicate ; their
inconsistency is a stumbling-block to them. No
doubt, in this imperfect state of things, some are
called Israel, who are not of Israel; no doubt,
at our various Communion Tables, there are some
whom their ministers would rather see absent than present:
but why should their conduct affect us ? They may be a
warning to us ; we are wrong in letting them be a hindrance.
And, let us remember, when the Holy Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper was first appointed, there was there in our
Saviour’s actual presence one unworthy one, into whose
heart Satan entered immediately afterwards, and yet the all-
seeing Jesus allowed him to partake. Shall we be more
scrupulous, more severe, than He was 1
Some there are who see no great necessity for becoming
communicants. To them I would say what I have reserved
till now to say to all : Our Lord commands us to communi-
cate. Putting everything else out of the question, it is our


Lord’s command. We cannot escape this, do what we will;
and surely we may not disregard our Lord’s command just
as we please. Let us think of this. When God says “Thou
shalt do no murder/’ “ Thou shalt not steal,” He is not
uttering a plainer, or a more binding command than when
our Saviour says, This do in remembrance of me.
And now, as we leave this subject, let us use it by way of
examination of ourselves. If we are not communicants, let
us find out exactly why we are not. It may lead us to see
that we are not Christians at all; it may undeceive us. If so,
well : then we shall the more easily learn to become
Christians, and also communicants. Our examination may
teach us that we have hitherto lived inconsistently with any
Christian profession, and may make us reform our lives ; or,
it may teach us that we have done very wrong in neglecting
this great means of grace, and have been robbing ourselves
of a great privilege. At any rate, dear friends, it is my
earnest desire that many more of you may commence the
habit of partaking of this Holy Sacrament; for, whilst you
neglect it, we can only come to the reasonable conclusion
that you are careless about those great matters which are so
plainly shewn forth in it : and, if you are careless about
them, you are careless about your soul’s best intereg^_j»^—
7Afp
tI&LD
fisw
