

THE INAUGURATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR AERONAUTICS
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA




The Inauguration
of the
Australian Council for Aeronautics
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA


AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR AERONAUTICS
Postal Address:
BOX 4331, G.P.O.
Melbourne, Australia
Office Address:
C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics
Lorimer Street
FISHERMEN’S BEND
Melbourne Australia


First Australian-Built Aeroplane in Flight
Inset: J. R. Duigan at the Controls


First Wind Tunnel in Australia, University of Melbourne


THE INAUGURATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR AERONAUTICS
HISTORICAL
The Australian Council for Aeronautics was established by the Commonwealth
Government to advise it on aeronautical matters, to co-ordinate aeronautical research, and
to perform certain other related functions.
The purpose of this document is to describe the organization and functions of the
Council and the facilities which exist in Australia to-day for aeronautical research. Before
proceeding, it is of interest to trace briefly the development of aeronautical science in Australia.
A historical survey has been published* dealing with the period 1884-1937, and this has been
freely drawn upon.
The earliest records of Australian aeronautical research are found in the journals of the
Royal Society of New South Wales. Lawrence Hargrave was the first worker in this field and
he was the author of 19 papers, the first of which appeared in 1884. He was an experimental
research worker of the highest calibre and made many valuable contributions of a fundamental
nature. Unfortunately, because of the undeveloped state of the dissemination of aeronautical
literature at that time, much of Hargrave's work consisted of rediscoveries. Amongst these, he
established, as the result of his experiments, the superiority of a cambered aerofoil over the flat
plate ; the stabilizing effect of a reflexed trailing edge and the advantage of the rotary engine
towards the development of a light source of motive power. As far as one can determine, he
was the pioneer of the box kite. Records show that the Wright Brothers studied Hargrave's
papers during the early stages of their work. Santos Dumont and Voisin furnished evidence
of having been influenced by the same writings. Thus it may be assumed that Lawrence
Hargrave occupies the position of Australia's greatest aeronautical research worker to date.
Hargrave's experiments ended in 1909 when he contributed to the Royal Society of New
South Wales his last paper entitled, “ Rigid Stable Aeroplanes ".
Until 1913, no records relating to attempts at systematic research are available, except
those of Hargrave. Between 1908 and 1913, however, a considerable amount of activity took
place and interest was shown in the production of aircraft and aero engines. Many people
constructed flying machines which met with varying success. Two are worthy of mention.
J. R. Duigan made the first sustained flights in an Australian-built airframe and engine at Mia
Mia, Victoria, in 1910. Mr. Duigan was responsible for the construction of the airframe and
the engine was built by T. E. Tilly, of Melbourne. The second outstanding engineer of
this period was L. J. R. Jones of Ryde, New South Wales, who had all the characteristics
of an enthusiastic research worker. The design for his aeroplane constructed in 1913 indicated
a considerable amount of private research and was well advanced for its time.
It was not till 1913 that the first serious attempt was made to give instruction in some
phase of aeronautics. This was initiated by Professor Henry Payne of the University of
Melbourne, who introduced lectures on the mechanics of the aeroplane as part of the mechanical
engineering course.
* Aeronautical Engineering Training and Research in Australia, by T. D. J. Reech and E. J. C. Rennie—Journal o( the Institution of Engineers,
Australia, Vol. 9, No. 6-8, 1937.


In 1914, a flying school was established at Point Cook, Victoria, and the training of
pilots and ground engineers commenced. In 1916, a similar school was established at Richmond
in New South Wales. In May, 1918, the European situation became critical and the British
Government requested the Australian Government to take up the construction of aircraft. A
body known as the Aircraft Construction Committee was appointed to make the necessary
arrangements. After discussion with the Australian and British authorities, this Committee
decided that they would attempt the manufacture of the De Havilland DH-9A, fitted with an
American Liberty engine. When the Great War ended in November, 1918, the work of
organizing local resources for the production of aircraft was well advanced, and it was considered
desirable that certain activities of this Committee should be maintained, one being the
investigation of Australian timbers for the purpose of determining their suitability for aircraft
purposes. Both the Universities of Melbourne and Sydney assisted in the details of this work
between 1918 and 1921. In 1921, the work ceased before definite conclusions had been reached.
At the same time, a research into Australian timbers was made by the Australian Aircraft and
Engineering Co. of Mascot, Sydney, and as a result, six Avro 504 K aeroplanes were built for
the Department of Defence incorporating parts made of Australian timber.
In 1921, with the return of W. E. Bassett from active service as a pilot and his appointment
as Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering, the lectures on aerodynamics at the University of
Melbourne were extended to form a very useful course. An aerodynamical laboratory was
installed, the most important item of equipment being an N.P.L. type wind tunnel with a
working section 6 feet square, having balances and a fan driven by a 120 h.p. motor. It
represented, at that time, a most modern and complete piece of equipment. It had formerly
been in an English aircraft factory during the 1914 War and was bought by Melbourne
University. Mr. Bassett, now a Member of the Aeronautics Council, was responsible for its
purchase and re-erection. He continued giving lectures until the end of 1928.
In 1924, the Australian Air Board established an aircraft experimental station at
Randwick, New South Wales, to develop new designs of aircraft and methods of construction.
During the period from 1924 to 1929, in which year the station closed down, five new types of
aeroplanes incorporating many Australian materials and new methods of construction, were
produced under the direction of Wing Commander L. J. Wackett, now also a Member of the
Council. The aircraft were the Warbler, a light aeroplane with an engine of novel design ;
Widgeon I (flying boat) and Widgeon II (amphibian) ; Warrigal I and Warrigal 11, both
landplane trainers. In the development of these types, a considerable amount of research was
necessary, of which two investigations are outstanding. The first relates to the use of Australian
timbers in landplanes and seaplanes, and the second to work on the lateral stability of aeroplanes.
In 1926, a series of lectures in aeronautics was undertaken at the University of Sydney.
The success of this course exceeded all expectations, the average attendance being 108. The
Sydney University Glider Club was also formed, under the control of which several useful
pieces of research were carried out, amongst them the development of short wave radio
communication between instructor and pupil.
With the appointment of T. D. J. Leech to the position of Lecturer in Civil Engineering
at the University of Sydney, the course of lectures and practical work in hydraulics was developed
along the lines of those established in Germany. A broad outlook was taken and the problems
associated with fluid flow in its most general form were considered, the relevant portions of
aerodynamics being introduced. A limited amount of aerodynamic equipment was installed


Administrative Buildings of C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics
The 9' x 7' Wind Tunnel at C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics


Full Scale Wing Testing Laboratory, C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics
2,000 H.P. Engine Test Plant, C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics


and several pieces of research completed. Lesser developments in the teaching of aeronautics
were also taking place at the Universities of Queensland and Adelaide and at the Melbourne
Technical College and the Sydney Technical College.
A need was felt in 1924 for a technical society, the interests of which would be purely
aeronautical, and as a result, the Australian Branch of the Royal Aeronautical Society came
into existence. In 1929, the Institution of Engineers, Australia, established an Aeronautical
Engineering Branch in Sydney. In 1930, the Controller of Civil Aviation approached these
two bodies, requesting them to appoint a Research Committee to enquire into the effects of
atmospheric density on aircraft loading within Australia. Preliminary arrangements were
made, but these were suspended because of the financial stringency of the period. In 1932
and 1933, this same committee came together to examine critically the findings of the Air
Accidents Investigation Committee and a series of researches were formulated. In 1935,
organized research in collaboration with the Aeronautical Research Committee of Great Britain
was proposed, but abandoned.
INAUGURATION OF ORGANIZED AERONAUTICAL RESEARCH
The period from 1884 to 1937 may be said to have been exploratory as regards aero-
nautical science in Australia. Many beginnings had been made in research, in teaching and
in manufacture, but no generally organized growth had occurred. The visible beginnings
of the present developed state of the industry and of research may be traced from two sources.
In 1936, the Broken Hill Proprietary Company, in collaboration with other leading
industrial companies in Australia, and with the agreement of the Commonwealth Government,
decided to establish a modern aircraft factory to manufacture aircraft and aero-engines. After
preliminary investigations overseas, the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation was established
with its factory at Fishermen's Bend, Melbourne, and L. J. Wackett appointed manager.
The first aeroplane, a Wirraway, constructed substantially to the North American NA-33 design,
was completed and flew in March, 1939.
In February, 1937, the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research outlined a plan
to the Commonwealth Government by which the secondary industries in Australia might be
stimulated and promoted on lines which had been proved successful in other countries. The
urgency of the local development on an organized scale of aircraft and engine manufacture was
stressed, and a recommendation was made that an aircraft and engine testing and research
laboratory be established as soon as possible. A report was appended by Messrs. W. E. Bassett
and L. J. Hartnett, indicating generally the nature of the equipment and probable future lines
of development. It was also arranged that Mr. H. E. Wimperis, former Director of Scientific
Research of the Air Ministry, Great Britain, visit Australia at the invitation of the Commonwealth
Government, to advise regarding the proposed erection of a laboratory.
Mr. Wimperis presented his report to the Government in December, 1937. In it he
wrote :
44 It is natural that it should be asked whether Australia by reliance on research
work done elsewhere, could not obtain all the information it will need. The answer
is that it could not ... . Australia will wish to know the degree to which home-
produced products can safely be used in substitution for materials which have to be
imported, how far it is safe to adopt novel methods of manufacture which may suit
local conditions, and, most important, to learn promptly, the cause of any failure
during manufacture or use, of any aircraft component, or of the aircraft as a whole.


Moreover, if for local reasons any modifications are desired in a given design of
aircraft, a study must be made in advance of the effects of such modifications.
Sometimes the results can be predicted by calculation and sometimes they cannot;
in the former case an experimental confirmation is usually found desirable, whilst
in the latter, experiment is the only means available of arriving at the answer. Such
experimental investigations cannot well be carried out many thousand miles away —
despite the readiness, which it is safe to assume, at Teddington or Farnborough to
undertake them. They must be made in Australia and be available at once/'
With these ideas in mind Mr. Wimperis made three main recommendations in his
report. The first was that an aeronautical research laboratory be established in Melbourne ;
the second that a chair of aeronautics be created at one of the Universities ; and finally, that
a committee be appointed to co-ordinate and to give advice on aeronautical research in Australia.
The research establishment came into existence in 1939, when the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research (C.5.1.R.) formed its Division of Aeronautics. The chair of
aeronautics was founded at the Sydney University in the next year. The declaration of war
in 1939 less than two years after the presentation of Mr. Wimperis's report, amply justified
these measures. Not only has the overseas supply of raw and fabricated material and
equipment necessary for aircraft manufacture and operation been severely curtailed, but even
the facility with which overseas research information was formerly allowed to reach Australia
has been considerably reduced. Both these factors are mitigated by the fact that aeronautical
research work is in progress, which in association with the teaching of aeronautical engineering,
is helping to build up a body of aeronautical engineers and scientific workers within the country.
No action was taken on Mr. Wimperis's third recommendation until some progress had
been made in regard to the other two. Towards the end of 1941, sufficient progress had been
made to justify the formation of a committee, and the Prime Minister accordingly established
the Australian Council for Aeronautics, so completing the organization which Mr. Wimperis
had recommended.
For the first two years after its inauguration the body was known as the Australian
Advisory Committee on Aeronautics, but in 1943, this title was changed to the less cumbersome
one now used.
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL
The functions of the Council may be said in general to be the promotion, direction and
co-ordination of aeronautical research in Australia. When defined in detail they are :
1. Development of the Aircraft Industry—
(а) To advise the Commonwealth Government on scientific and technical matters
relating to the development of the aircraft industry in Australia.
(б) To review aeronautical developments abroad in relation to the planning of
future developments in Australia.
(c) To examine proposals submitted for development projects and to make
recommendations in regard thereto to the appropriate authorities.
(d) To assist the aircraft manufacturing industry in the solution of problems
associated with the construction of aircraft.


2. Initiation and Co-ordination of Aeronautical Research —
(a) To make recommendations to C.S.LR. and other appropriate authorities
regarding research investigations which the Council considers it
desirable to initiate.
(b) To assist with advice any research carried out by or on behalf of the
aeronautical industry.
(c) To co-ordinate aeronautical research work in the various governmental
and university laboratories.
(d) To advise on the conduct of the investigations initiated on the recommen-
dation of the Council.
(e) To co-ordinate researches in aeronautics with those in other fields, e.g. ;
meteorology and radiophysics.
(/) To establish close official contact with the British Aeronautical Research
Committee and to co-operate with that body in researches of a general
nature.
3. Investigation of Other Aeronautical Problems —
(a) To assist aircraft operators in the solution of problems associated with the
operation of aircraft.
(b) To investigate the use in aircraft construction of Australian materials.
(c) To investigate causes of such accidents as may be referred to the Council
by Government Departments concerned, and to recommend methods of
preventing their recurrence.
{d) To examine and report on inventions referred to the Council by
responsible authorities.
4. Collection and Dissemination of Aeronautical Information —
To maintain close contact with the research published in other countries and
to make this information available.
5. Guidance on Aeronautical Education —
To with educational authorities and with the industry in the
promotion of education in aeronautics.
ORGANIZATION OF THE COUNCIL
The constitution of the Council is such that it draws its Members from all aviation and
related activities in Australia. These Members are appointed by the Prime Minister and serve
in an honorary capacity. The Council is thus an independent body and need not be swayed
by any considerations other than scientific and technical in its deliberations and expressions
of opinion.
Unlike the Aeronautical Research Committee and the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics, the corresponding bodies in England and the United States of America, the
Australian Council has some Members who are connected with commercial companies.
Eleven official Members are representatives of Government aviation authorities or related
bodies, while of the three non-official Members, two come from privately-owned aircraft
companies and one is a consulting engineer.


The Chairman is Sir George Julius, Kt., D.Sc., 8.E., who has had a long and distinguished
career in science and engineering in Australia. Sir George is also Chairman of the Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research.
The full list of Members is as follows :
MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL
Sir George Julius, Kt., D.Sc., B.E.
Group Captain W. S. Armstrong, B.Sc.,
D.I.C.
Mr. W. E. Bassett, M.C., M.Mech.E.,
8.E.E., M.l.E.Aust.
Mr. Gordon Berg, 8.E., A.F.R.Ae.S.,
A.M.I.E.Aust., M.S.A.E., M.I.Ave.E.
Mr. I. H. Boas, M.Sc., A.A.I.C.
Mr. L. P. Coombes, D.F.C., B.Sc. (Eng.J
A.F.R.Ae.S., A.M.I.E.Aust.,
A.F.I.Ae.Sc., M.I.Ave.E.
Mr. N. A. Esserman, B.Sc., F.lnst.P.,
A.M.I.E.Aust.
Mr. A. Murray Jones, M.C., D.F.C. ..
Mr. J. T. McCormick, M.Sc., A.A.C.L
Mr. F. J. Shea, M.l.E.Aust. ..
Professor A. V. Stephens, M.A., F.R.Ae.S.,
M.l.E.Aust.
Mr. John Storey, B.Sc.
Air Commodore E. C. Wackett, 0.8. E.,
A.F.R.Ae.S.
Mr. L. J. Wackett, D.F.C., A.F.C., B.Sc.
Mr. H. A. Wills, 8.E., A.F.R.Ae.S.,
M.I.Ave.E.
Chairman
Royal Australian Air Force
Consulting Engineer
Department of Civil Aviation
Division of Forest Products, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research
Division of Aeronautics, Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research
National Standards Laboratory, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research
De Havilland Aircraft Pty. Ltd.
Munitions Supply Laboratories, Ministry of
Munitions
Maintenance Division, Department of Aircraft
Production
Department of Aeronautics, Sydney University
Beaufort Division, Department of Aircraft
Production
Royal Australian Air Force
Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty. Ltd.
Division of Aeronautics, Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research
The Secretary is Mr. Bruce Foster, 8.C.E., D.1.C., A.F.R.Ae.S., who is also Secretary
of the C.S.LR. Division of Aeronautics. His office is at the C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics,
Fishermen's Bend, Melbourne, and the postal address is Box 4331, G.P.0., Melbourne,
Australia.
SUB-COMMITTEES OF THE COUNCIL
The work of the Aeronautics Council is also carried on by Sub-Committees appointed
to deal with particular branches of aeronautical science. There are three Sub-Committees.
The Chairmen of these bodies are Members of the Council, while Sub-Committee members
are drawn from the aircraft industry, the Royal Australian Air Force and government
authorities.


The 7' x 5' Wind Tunnel in the Department of Aeronautics, University of Sydney
Heat Transfer Apparatus in the Department of Aeronautics, University of Sydney


Apparatus Used for Investigation of Friction, Lubrication and Wear at C.S.I.R.
Lubricants and Bearings Laboratory
Test Engine for Investigating the Lubricating Phenomena in a Running Engine
at C.S.I.R. Lubricants and Bearings Laboratory


Structures and Materials Sub-Committee
Mr. Gordon Berg, 8.E., A.F.R.Ae.S.,
A.M.I.E.Aust. M.S.A.E., M.I.Ave.E.
(Chairman)
Mr. T. W. Air
Group Captain W. S. Armstrong, B.Sc.,
D.I.C.
Mr. I. H. Boas, M.Sc., A.A.I.C.
Dr. H. H. Davis, B.Sc., 8.E., Ph.D.
Mr. W. Isbister, B.Sc., 8.E., A.M.I.E.Aust.
Mr. E. G. Thurlby, B.Met.E.
Mr. A. P. West, A.F.R.Ae.S., M.I.Ae.Sc.
Mr. H. A. Wills, 8.E., A.F.R.Ae.S.,
M.I.Ave.E.
Engines
Mr. L. P. Coombes, D.F.C., B.Sc. (Eng.),
A.F.R.Ae.S., A.M.I.E.Aust.,
A. (Chairman)
Wing Commander H. G. Bennett, M.B.E.
Dr. P. Bowden, Sc.D., D.Sc., Ph.D. ~
Mr. W. L. Ellis, M.I.Ave.E.
Mr. H. H. Knight, 8.E., A.M.I.E.Aust.
Mr, G. Quarry, M.A.S.M., A.M.I.Ave.E.
Wing Commander E. L. D. White, 8.E.,
B. A.M.I.E.Aust., A.R.Ae.S.
Dr. M. W. Woods, D.Phil., 8.E., B.Sc. ..
Mr. W. H. H. Gibson, B.Sc., M.E.,
M.l.Mech.E., M.l.E.Aust.
Department of Civil Aviation
Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty. Ltd.
Royal Australian Air Force
Division of Forest Products, C.S.I.R.
National Standards Laboratory, C.S.I.R.
De Havilland Aircraft Pty, Ltd.
Munitions Supply Laboratories, Ministry of
Munitions
Beaufort Division, Department of Aircraft
Production
Division of Aeronautics, C.S.I.R.
Sub-Committee
Division of Aeronautics, C.S.I.R.
Royal Australian Air Force
Lubricants and Bearings Laboratory, C.S.I.R.
Department of Civil Aviation
Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty. Ltd.
General Motors-Holdens Ltd.
Royal Australian Air Force
Division of Aeronautics, C.S.I.R.
Engineering School, Sydney University
Aerodynamics Sub-Committee
Professor A. V. Stephens, M.A,, F.R.Ae.S.,
M.l.E.Aust. (Chairman)
Wing Commander Geoffrey Dawson,
8.E., A.F.R.Ae.S.
Mr. H. A. Francis, A.F.C., M.A.,
F.R.Ae.S.
Dr. G. N. Patterson, B.Sc., M.A., Ph.D.,
F.R.Ae.S.
Mr. E. J. C. Rennie, M.E., M.Mech.E.,
A.M.I.Mech.E., A.M.I.E.Aust.
Mr. J. L. Watkins, 8.E., D.1.C.,
A.F.R.Ae.S., A.M.I.E.Aust., A.M.I.Ave.E.
Mr. A. P. West, A.F.R.Ae.S., M.I.Ae.Sc.
Mr. M. M. Waghorn, A.F.R.Ae.S.
Department of Aeronautics, Sydney University
Royal Australian Air Force
Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty. Ltd.
Division of Aeronautics, C.S.I.R.
Engineering Laboratory, University of Mel-
bourne
Department of Civil Aviation
Beaufort Division. Department of Aircraft
Production
De Havilland Aircraft Pty. Ltd.


PANELS OF THE COUNCIL
To subdivide the work still further and so allow more detailed consideration of research
projects, Panels can be appointed by Sub-Committees whenever necessary. A Panel is
responsible to its relevant Sub-Committee or to the Council.
Up to the present three Panels have been formed —
Cylinder Plating (Chairman, Mr. L. P. Coombes).
Timber (Chairman, Mr. I. H. Boas).
Handbook (Chairman, Mr. T. W. Air).
RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
There are two main aeronautical research establishments in Australia. These are the
Division of Aeronautics of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research and the Department
of Aeronautics of Sydney University. A little aeronautical research work has been done
in the past at the Engineering School of Melbourne University, but at present no work is in
hand. None of the other Australian universities have equipment for aeronautical research,
but it is possible that theoretical papers will emanate from them in the future.
C.S.LR. Division of Aeronautics
It is the function of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research to aid the primary
and secondary industries of Australia by undertaking scientific and industrial research. The
Division of Aeronautics was established to fulfil these obligations to the aircraft industry. The
Division carries out investigation and developmental work for the industry and for the Royal
Australian Air Force, as well as fundamental research. It also co-operates with other
government authorities doing research work related either directly or indirectly to aeronautics.
Since the arrival of the United States forces in Australia in 1942, a great variety of work has
been carried out for the U.S. Army Air Force.
The Division of Aeronautics is under the control of Mr. L. P. Coombes, Chief of
Division, who was for many years on the scientific staff of the Air Ministry, before coming to
Australia in 1939 to found the Aeronautical Laboratory at the request of the C.S.LR.
The work is organized under four sections, each being well-equipped to deal with its
group of problems. The sections are —
Aerodynamics. —This section deals with the outward form of the aeroplane,
control and stability, and problems of fluid flow. A flight research group
forms part of this section.
Structures and Materials. —Here the problems associated with the load carrying
structure are investigated. Materials and methods of construction come under
this heading, and physical metallurgy is given considerable attention.
Engines and Fuels. —This section deals with the power plant, its installation,
accessories, and associated problems. Type testing of aero-engines is also
part of the work.
Instruments. —Aircraft instrument type testing and calibration are undertaken.
In addition, this is a general physical section which designs and constructs
special instruments required by the other sections for research purposes.


The site of the Laboratory is at Fishermen's Bend, Melbourne, adjoining an aerodrome
so that flight research can be undertaken. At present, facilities for making flight tests are
available at a Royal Australian Air Force station close to Melbourne and the Division maintains
technical personnel at this station to carry out work as required.
The equipment of the Laboratory is adequate for the work in hand. In the Aero-
dynamics Section an atmospheric pressure wind tunnel having an octagonal working section
9 feet by 7 feet and speed of 290 feet per second is provided for design tests and general
research. This is constructed of welded steel and is of the closed jet return circuit type.
A second tunnel is being constructed for research into problems of high speed flight,
duct design and turbulence. The working section is 2 feet diameter, and provision is made
for varying the pressure between J atmosphere and 6h atmospheres. A velocity of 1,100 feet
per second is expected at low pressure.
Small tunnels are also available for minor tests.
The Structures and Materials Section has a range of mechanical testing equipment.
The largest testing machine at present installed has a capacity of 60,000 lb., but a machine with
adequate accommodation for large structural components is at present under construction.
This has a maximum load capacity of 600,000 lb. Fatigue, hardness and impact machines are
also available. A large structural test bay 120 feet by 40 feet has recently been added. This
has a strongly reinforced concrete floor on which loading tests of wings and fuselages can be
set up. Pick-up points are provided at convenient intervals and distributed loads up to 250
tons can be applied by a system of hydraulic jacks. Attached to the Structures and Materials
Section is a wood-moulding shop with autoclaves capable of moulding components up to 13
feet long and 5 feet wide.
The resources of a physical metallurgy section are also available. A metallographic
microscope, laboratory facilities and a large range of furnaces form the equipment.
In the Engines and Fuels Section is found a comprehensive range of engine test plants,
with capacities from 120 to 2,000 h.p., three of these being completely equipped with cooling
fans for air-cooled engines and the multitudinous accessories necessary in an aero-engine
test bed. A silenced test house is provided for the 2,000 h.p. plant. A fuel rating engine,
and apparatus for testing magnetos, air cleaners and other accessory equipment are also
installed.
The Instruments Section contains calibrating equipment and apparatus for type-testing
aircraft instruments together with a properly equipped instrument workshop. The Laboratory
is completed with an excellent library and well-found workshops. In addition, the resources
of the C.S.I.R. Division of Industrial Chemistry which is situated on the same site can be
utilized for research in plastics, chemical analysis, corrosion, spectroscopy, ceramics and so
forth, while nearby the C.S.I.R. Division of Forest Products can be consulted for information
on aircraft timbers and gluing processes.
Department of Aeronautics , Sydney University
The Department of Aeronautics at Sydney University forms part of the P.N. Russell
School of Engineering. The chair of aeronautics is held by Professor A. V. Stephens, who
was at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, and at Cambridge University * until
he came to Australia in 1940 to organize the newly-formed Department of Aeronautics. The
present staff of the Department is not large, but it is hoped to add to it in the future.


The Department is primarily intended for instruction and research in aerodynamics
and the specialized application of other branches of engineering to aeronautics. The funda-
mentals of structural design and heat engines are well catered for by the equipment and staff
of the other branches of engineering represented in the School.
The principal item of equipment is a 7 feet by 5 feet closed jet return circuit wind tunnel.
This is built of reinforced concrete and forms an integral part of the building in which it is
housed. The circuit lies in a vertical plane with the return duct, driving motor and motor
generator set in a basement below the main experimental floor. The working section is of
wooden construction and sections of its floor have been made readily moveable so that full
head-room can be obtained for adjustment. It has a maximum speed of 180 feet per second.
There is also a 3 feet by 2\ feet non-return wind tunnel capable of a wind speed of 100
feet per second and also a i/6th scale model of the large tunnel which can be used with either
a closed or an open working section. In addition there is a small scale smoke tunnel for the
visualization of air flow round two dimensional models.
The P.N. Russell School of Engineering contains in addition. Departments of Civil,
Mechanical and Electrical Engineering and a Department of Engineering Technology. These
departments are equipped for research in their respective subjects and their apparatus is
available also for the solution of aeronautical problems. For example, the Department of
Civil Engineering contains a wide range of mechanical testing apparatus and the Department
of Mechanical Engineering is particularly well-equipped for photo-elastic work. The
Hydraulic Department has a tank which may later be used for seaplane and flying-boat model
testing. The dimensions of this tank are 200 feet long by 9 feet wide by 6 feet deep.
C.S.LR. Lubricants and Bearings Laboratory
This laboratory is situated at the University of Melbourne, and is engaged on research
into problems associated with friction, lubrication and wear, and with the development and
manufacture of aircraft bearings. It was set up in 1940 and is under the direction of Dr.
P. Bowden, who was lent by the University of Cambridge for this purpose.
Bearing testing apparatus is available to measure the friction and temperature of bearings
under various conditions of load and speed, to study the frictional properties of bearing alloys,
and to investigate the factors determining breakdown and seizure. The laboratory is also
equipped with apparatus for the development of casting and electroplating techniques for the
manufacture of various types of bearings. The Department of Aircraft Production has set
up a Pilot Bearing Annexe which is also situated at the University and which works in close
association with C.S.LR.
Wear apparatus which measures the wear between rubbing surfaces under dry or
lubricated conditions and in the presence or absence of dust or abrasive is in use. Another
apparatus analyses the friction between sliding surfaces, both when dry and when operating
under conditions of boundary lubrication. The surfaces can be heated to temperatures up to
400° C. and simultaneous records of the friction and surface temperature may be made.
A laboratory has been equipped for the analysis of oils, greases, Sec. The equipment
includes apparatus for the standard Air Ministry tests. A research engine has also been
constructed for the investigation of the nature of the lubrication occurring between the cylinder
wall and the piston rings of an internal combustion engine under various conditions of operation.


TEACHING ESTABLISHMENTS
Melbourne University
A limited amount of aeronautical teaching has been given at Melbourne University for
a considerable time. As already stated, the University possesses a wind tunnel of the non-return
N.P.L. type with a working section 6 feet square. It is capable of an air speed of 90 feet per
second. The tunnel is still in use for teaching purposes and is now under the charge of E.
J. C. Rennie, Senior Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering and Aerodynamics, who also delivers
the aeronautical lectures. No degree or diploma in aeronautics is given by the University,
the lectures being given as part of the mechanical engineering degree course.
Department of Aeronautics , Sydney University
The Department of Aeronautics at Sydney University is a dual-purpose organization in
that both research and teaching are carried on together. As in Melbourne, instruction in
aeronautical subjects has been in progress at Sydney University for a considerable time. The
G. A. Taylor Memorial Lectureship was founded in 1929 and the Geoffrey Sulman Memorial
Lectureship in 1933. Both these bequests provided for special lectures on subjects connected
with aviation and both series of lectures were first given by T. D. J. Leech, Professor of
Engineering at Auckland, N.Z., since his resignation from Sydney in 1939. To Mr. Bassett
and Professor Leech belongs the honour of being the pioneers of aeronautical teaching in
Australia.
With the establishment of the chair of aeronautics and the appointment of Professor
Stephens in 1939, a course in aeronautical engineering was started. This course occupies
four years, of which the first two are common to all students at the P. N. Russell School of
Engineering. As the Department is part of a Federal scheme for the promotion of aeronautics
in Australia, arrangements have been made to allow students who have completed the first two
years of a recognized engineering course at any university in the Commonwealth to enter the
third year course at Sydney and proceed to the degree of Bachelor in Aeronautical Engineering.
The object of the course is to provide a general education in the fundamental principles
of engineering with as much specialization in aeronautical subjects as the university is able
to provide. At present the department deals mainly with aerodynamics and its application
to design problems, coupled with the more general aspects of aeronautical engineering. The
principles of aero-engines -are dealt with by the Department of Mechanical Engineering and
the Department of Civil Engineering provides special courses in the theory of structures and
materials used in aircraft construction. It is intended to extend the Aeronautics Department
to include specialists in aeroplane design and stress analysis when opportunity offers.
In order that students may acquire theoretical knowledge against a background of
practical experience, arrangements are made for them to spend the second six months of their
third year at an approved firm, preferably one engaged in aircraft construction. This plan for
providing industrial experience in the middle of a university course (a practice long established
at Sydney and other universities) has many advantages. Experience shows that the student
starts his last year of work at the University better developed in mind and character and is thus
able to derive far more benefit from it than would otherwise be the case.
Although the course has only been in existence a short time, four annual batches of
students, numbering 1,8, 7, and n have graduated.


Sydney Technical College
Teaching in aeronautics is also available at the Sydney Technical College. The College
awards a Diploma in Aeronautical Engineering and the length of the course is six years. Of
this time, four years are spent on the study of selected subjects from the Mechanical Engineering
Diploma course with extra aeronautical subjects, after which follows two years study of
aeronautical subjects alone. A total of 27 students were engaged in various stages of the
course during 1942, and the number this year has increased.
A wind tunnel capable of a speed of 120 feet per second is available. It has an elliptical
working section 3 feet by 2 feet.
The Melbourne Technical College
A new four-floor building is now being completed at the Melbourne Technical College
for its Aeronautical Engineering School. The school provides a four years full-time day course
for the Diploma of Aeronautical Engineering, a seven years evening Diploma Course, and a
five years evening course for the Aeronautical Engineering Certificate. The Certificate course
was established in 1938 and the Diploma course in 1941. Several students have completed this
latter course and about sixty are at present studying in the two courses. In the new building
provision is made for drawing office, library, lecture rooms, fluid mechanics, structures and
dynamics laboratories, also wood working, metal working, and assembly workshops. In the
fluid mechanics laboratory, a wind tunnel of section feet by 3* feet, and a hydraulic channel
5 feet by 3 feet are being provided. The aero-engines section is housed in another building.
The purpose of the workshops is to demonstrate the various construction processes
to professional course students, and to provide trade training for apprentices and other youths
employed in the industry.
PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH REPORTS
Aeronautical research in Australia is still in a very early stage of development. It is
only four years since the foundations of the buildings of the C.S.I.R. Division of Aeronautics
in Melbourne were laid, and much of this time has been spent in erecting buildings, procuring
equipment and training staff. The initial period is now complete and the time is rapidly
approaching when results of scientific interest will be available from Australian sources.
The Australian Council for Aeronautics has received permission from both the Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research and the University of Sydney to publish reports on work
done at their aeronautical research establishments as the Australian contribution to world
knowledge on aeronautics. This document therefore serves the additional purpose of being
an introduction to the A.C.A. series of reports, the publication of which has now commenced.
Distribution of these reports to research authorities, libraries, universities and other approved
organizations connected with aeronautical work is being arranged on as widespread a basis
as possible consistent with the war situation.
BRUCE FOSTER,
Secretary
January 1944
n.7f, 93/44,




