

THE
W AIM ATE GAZETTE;
A JOURNAL OF THE VOYAGE
OF THE
|itte Cflmpnjj's jjjfiu,
“WAIMATE«”
FROM LONDON TO CANTERBURY, NEW ZEALAND.
18 7 6.




EDITORIAL.
0
It is begun ! The “ Waimate Gazette ”is launch-
ed forth into the literary ocean. The Editor assumes
the Editorial ‘ we/ seizes his quill, and makes his
figurative bow to an intelligent Waimate public.
According to all precedent we have on this first
morning of our plurality to present to our readers a
few remarks upon the plan and prospects of our
paper. As to our plan, it is delightfully simple; we
are liberally ready to welcome to our columns science,
literature, art, the drama, music, wit, humour, —in
short, anything we can get which is not inconsistent
with the well-being and peace of the Waimate world.
Our prospects are such as to raise our hopes to the
highest position. Surely such a prospect was never
held out to Proprietors or Editors ! The “ Waimate
Gazette ” is the first and only periodical now before
the public—it has the monopoly of the attention and
talents of the World.
That literary talent does still exist in this 19th
century, no one can doubt who reads through this our
first issue; were anyone sceptical on this point, a
glance at the litter, so freely supplied to the Editor's
box, would at once silence all doubts. Certainly it is
no easy matter to steady one's mental powers to any
subject while one's bodily centre of gravity is contin-
ually changing; but we hope shortly to be supplied
with a brand new cargo of sea legs, which, besides re-
gulating the position of our bodies, will no doubt
remedy any slight mental irregularities which may be
traceable in the literary efforts of editor or contri-
butors.
Much has been heard of late about the higher
education of women. We think the starting of this
newspaper will be a most eligible opportunity for the
fair sex to prove to the whole world what has been
so strongly upheld among them (we can express no
opinion at present upon so delicate a subject) namely,
that women are not beasts of burden, —not stocks and
stones, —not mere domestic appendages, but rate-
payers, citizens, educators of humanity I
But, O, let not the stern realities of life banish from
our columns the softer influence of the muses!
Rather let the mighty power of the boundless deep
stir up to action latent springs of tragic lore within :
and as we stand in the witching hour 'neath the
sombre main or Cro' Jack yard, let the balmy in-
fluence of “the Bood, the idcodstadt Bood,” bring
forth the softer lays of love and distant home.
But the dying embers of the editorial pipe give
warning that its inspiration is about to cease. We
will therefore conclude by thanking those ladies and
gentlemen who have kindly given us their support;
at the same time reminding all our readers that not
even the “Waimate Gazette” can continue its week-
ly issues unless individuals come forward to contribute
to its pages. Let all do something to support our
paper that it may earn, and then sustain, the reputa-
tion of being the most intelligent, intellectual and
cultivated newspaper on the briny deep.
Communicated.
COMMENCEMENT AND PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO NEW ZEALAND.
In the early morning of the 28th July, 187—, the
good ship W. left the S. W. I. Docks, the stearn-tug
“ Cambria ” taking her in tow, and commenced her
first instalment of her voyage to far off New Zealand;
stopping at Gravesend to complete her cargo, com-
plement of passengers, and sundry other matters.
Here she was visited by the good folks attached to
the Mission, who kindly supplied a stock of religious
and useful books, as is their wont. Leaving Graves-
end on the morning of the 30th, she proceeded on her
way, passing through the Downs that evening, where
the Pilot was landed, and arrived off famed old
Beachy Head at 9 o'clock the next day, when the steam
tug was dispensed with, and the gallant ship starting
away on her own account, spread her wings, making
good progress against a contrary wind. I said
“famed” Beachy Head; famed for its grand white
cliffs of chalk, standing out in the sea like buttresses,
guarding the wealthy realm behind, but famous more
for the pudding-eating propensities of the neighbour-
ing inhabitants. A legend accounting for this fail-
ing (?) runs thus, “ Many years ago it happened that
“ a Dutch galliot laden with flour was wrecked here
“and as her cargo was washed ashore, it was eagerly
“ appropriated by the * natives,' so that the unfortunate
“Dutcher lost both vessel and cargo. Having ob-
tained another galliot, the Dutchman made another
“voyage, this time returning with a cargo of faisins,
“only to again get wrecked at Beachy, losing his
“cargo as before. His surprise was great, and ex-
“fclaiming Tunder and Turf' in Dutch, he savs,
“ f Yell, I did nevare know you vanted plums mit
“ your duff; vat next, vat next ?' ”
The next day, the 31st, the Isle of Wight was pas-
No. I
Saturday, Aug. 12th 1876.
ISSUED WEEKLY.


From the Land's End to the Equator ..
. 3,200
Equator to Trinidad Isle
1,260
Trinidad to Tristan d'Acunha ..
1,340
Tristan d'Acunha to off Cape of G. H...
1,470
Cape to the Snares
6,300
Snares to Canterbury ...
235
sed, though the winds continued adverse, and some
of the passengers began to feel “ a little queer,” but
bore up bravely for all that, the frequent “ tacking ”
and consequent noise and bustle being a source ol
great tribulation to many, not only of the gentler,
but also of the sterner sex ; but their anguish was yet
to come. Next morning, 'ere yet 'twas dawn, the
ship was off* the pretty little seaport of Dartmouth,
where the channel pilot left us, taking with him all
the letters that were written; the ones he
could hardly be expected to take, so that the non-
writers must begin their regrets where charity begins.
Having dispensed with this aid, her last, the good
ship spreads her sails again, and recommences her
battle against the hard-hearted Westerly winds, which
showed no signs of relenting, but on the contrary,
began to show signs of anger by ruffling Ocean's fea-
thers a little.
August is ushered in in no very pleasant guise;
for—
“ Now high, now low, o'er the waves we go,
“ Now rise on the surge amain :
“ We all are filled with grief and woe,
“ And—and—oh, dear ! I'm sick again !"
We leave the Start Point with its revolving light
behind us, and after a good deal of pitching and tos-
sing against head winds and sea, wc sight the
Bishop's Rock Lighthouse, (standing alone a white
sentinel by day, and a warning by night to guard the
mariner from the treacherous rocks behind) at noon
of August 3rd, this being the last sight of anything
belonging to the Old Country we are to see. Now
we make our way to the Southward, sea-sickness of
course being the order of the day.
The distance we have to traverse ere we reach our
destination are as follows : Miles.
Total in direct lines ... 13,805
But unfortunately direct lines are not our forte,
and as curved ones must of necessity be followed, we
shall not be very far from the truth if we take the
gross distance at 15,000 miles. Having now left all
land-marks for the use of other folks, we must deter-
mine our progress hy other means, and make
“ Heaven's lights'' our guide.
August 4th, —Brisk winds with unsettled weather,
and much head sea : ship pitching a good deal, and
making everyone wish for a change, the pitching
arrangement becoming rather monotonous. Lat. 47*
45, N. long. 5*57 W.; distance made good 120 miles
in the right direction. We have frequently had the
beautiful ditty of “ I'm afloat ” softly murmured
among our friends between decks the last day or two.
August sth.—At last the much wished for change
has taken place, fine weather has come extremely fine
and most of our good folks have revived, and find
themselves as pert as ever. Lat. 47‘06. long. 737
distance 69 miles.
August 6th, Sunday.—Weather all fair and fine aU
that can he desired, except that the ship is out of breath
and having no wind has stopped for a while. We
had divine service performed, morning and evening,
and readily availed ourselves of the opportunity of
divine worship on the great waters, without the cus-
tomary annoyances often attending the same on land.
No fear of the children falling into the fire, or the
cook spoiling the dinner, or setting the house on fire
while we are at Church. We had two most enjoyable
services. Lat. 4-6’14. long. 8*40.; distance 72 miles.
August 7th, —Another fine day, and in the much
dreaded “ Bay of Biscay, oh !*' All sails set, but only
a little wind to fill them; all the good folks making
haste to get well, and a smiling face no novelty now,
whatever it might have been a day or two ago.
Lat. 45• 16. long 9 40.; distance 71 miles.
August Bth, —All fine beautiful weather, and a nice
breeze; everybody ‘ quite well thank you,' with a
tendency to be jolly. Out of the Bay of Biscay, and
not very much hurt, and sailing gaily along towards
Madeira. Lat. 43 24 long. 11 - 50.; distance 109 miles.
August 9th, —Nice breeze, with beautiful weather.
General health—“ as well as can be expected.'' Lat.
40*38, long. 50*00; distance 221 miles.
As we have sailed 930 miles in a straight line from
the Land's End, and the total distance to New Zea-
land is taken at 15,000 miles, our present distance
from our desired haven is 14,070 miles.
[Progress of the Voyage to be continued week by week in this Paper.)
“TOM M Y."
The question of Tommy is now before the Public
mind; it is the burning question of the day. Tommy
is in everyone’s mouth ; it is—
“ Tommy, 'Tommy, everywhere,
“ And who is he d'ye think ?
We cannot do better than devote a short space to
the consideiation of this great question.
Then who or what is Tommy? The great point
about him, upon which all are agreed, is that he has
to make room for someone —Tommy's Uncle. Who
then is Tommy's Uncle ? The answer to this question
appears to be simple “ My'' uncle and “your” uncle
are the same all the world over, and it seems most
probable that Tommy's uncle is the same— i.e. the
universally indulgent and benevolent uncle who has
e obliged' so many of his indigent nephews.
Then who is Tommy? Many commentators iden-
tify him with the well-known “Tommy Dodd,” of
gambling fame, but that strikes us as a dodge to get
out of the question. Then Grotius makes him to be
“ Tommy Tidier; ” but this can hardly be, for if


Tommy were really rolling in gold and silver, as T.T.
is represented to be, what in the world would he want
with his uncle? Again it has been supposed, but
only by men of little note, that Tommy was so named
after the celebrated pudding called “ treacle Tommy,”
on account of the sweetness of his disposition in al-
ways “making room ” for people; we only wonder
how any informed person could have made such a
ludicrously improbable suggestion, for if the pudding
had given him any name at all, it must without doubt
have been “Treacle” rather than “Tommy.”
Our own matured opinion is that Tommy is the
ideal representative indigent nephew, who makes room
tor an uncle who “wants” him for pecuniary reasons.
The latest discoveries however tend undeniably to
prove that “Tommy's gone to Liverpool,” (probably
to accomplish his long-formed purpose of making
room for his uncle,) and we cannot end this short
paper without expressing a hearty wish that he will
stay there, and let us hear no more of him.
EIGHT BELLS.
A good nights rest is a most acceptable thipg—a
nice moonlight promenade is another, (with a partner.)
But who of their own choice would promenade a ship's
deck, at intervals, off and on of four hours at a time?
* Why, what is four hours to talk about?' One would
think it was a trouble to get you up, and as for four hours
why,any one would do that with pleasure, especially on
fine moonlight nights !' Of course they would—and
after doing it for three or four months without cessation
would like it more and more, —of course ! Now most
folks think themselves very hardly dealt with when
they are awakened at night by the feats of cam pan-
'ology performed at intervals upon the ship's bells, or
by the marines accompanying their labours by request-
ing in stentorian tones, someone to “ give them some
time to blow the man down,” I say that is mere baga-
telle; imagine a cold, wet, windy, dark miserable
night, 12 o'clock; yop are comfortably settled “ in the
arms of Morpheus,” snug and warm, dreaming of
home may be, and comfortable, oh, so comfortalde!
You fancy you hear a squeaking voice calling your
name, with “ eight bells, sir !” as an appendix ; you
try to make yourself believe you are dreaming, but
the sound so often repeated at last makes itself heard.
You open your eye, only one, and what do you behold?
a wretched boy with dripping oilskins, drops of rain
on his hair, nose, and everywhere a drop can find a
place to hang on. Your feelings are not charitable
towards that boy, they are not; you could kick him ;
but by that time you are awake, and know if you do
not at once turn out there will be a growl from your
colleague. So taking as long as you can to dress,
you at last appear op deck, and find the night dark,
and miserably wet and cold. Your colleague meets
you with a smiling face, for is he not going below ?
while you, miserable wretch that you are, have only a
prospect of four hours of ditto weather. And oh, the
long miserable watch seems endless. As time goes
on, you feel the clock must be wrong or stopped; at
any rate you are quite sure it must be later. At last
the long-looked-for eight bells again draws near; how
your spirits revive at the welcome sound! and after a
good deal of persuading your colleague again appears,
looking as though he had received a personal injury
at your hands, and when you tell him you wish him
a pleasant watch he looks marline spikes at you, taking
your good wishes as an insult. For yourself you get
between the blankets as fast as possible, only wishing
you were able to leave orders that you were not to be
called again on any account. And so it goes on week
after week, and month after month, until it gets to be
monotonous rather.
A SCHOOLBOY'S LETTER TO HIS MOTHER-
My dear Ma,
We had a feast last night, I am suffering to-day
from indigestion, could you not send something to
relieve your poor boy; Mrs Cox, the matron, always
comes every Saturday night to cut the boy's toe nails.
Is that etiquette ? Please answer this point in your
next, as 1 should like to enlighten her. I have look-
ed in the little book you gave me, but could not find
it either in “ etiquette for gentlemen or ladies,” I
am writing this in bed, where I was sent by Mr.
jor the following reason, He asked me a question
which I did not feel inclined to answer, he said it was
obstinacy, and said he would knock my head through
the wall; I merely said, “ please sir, may 1 run round
and pick it up again, as I might look odd without
it ?” for which he sent me to bed. I ask you, is that
gratitude? And after my wishing to add to the ap-
pearance of his school! Please send me a shilling, I
really owe the boy I/O, but I pinched him at prayers
until he took off 6d. Mary Raynor is killing me, she
is so cruel, she actually winked at Tom Brown with
the turn-up nose last Sunday evening out of church.
But never mind, it wont be for long!!! I have a
bad cough, which I feel coming alternately from the
right and left lung. Please send the shilling soon,
or it may come too late, to
Your loving and dutiful son,
Patrick O' Flanagan,
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Waimate Gazette.
Knowing that your paper is open to all as a medium
of doing good, giving advice, and answering corres-
pondence, I have ventured to address you, apologizing
at the same time for so doing,
I hardly know how to approach the subject of this
letter, it being a very delicate one, —however, I will
explain it as well as my sensitiveness will allow.
I am a poor broken-hearted man—the cause I need
not say is love. Six times have I made advances to
the fair sex,(bless them I ) and as many times have I
received the promise of their hands in marriage, but


sad to relate, as often as the bridal day came round, I
found myself standing alone for hours in the church
anxiously awaiting the expected bride, in a most
miserable state of mind, fearing and hoping, and
thinking of all the sweetest sayings to greet my darl-
ing. But alas, my wishes have never been consum-
mated, having always found myself jilted.
I cannot account for this sad state of things. I
certainly am not good looking, have no means of sup-
pox-ting a wife, but that is no consequence now-a-
days. lam disconsolate and miserable, and contem-
plate a seventh advance, but before doing so shoxxld
like to take advice upon the subject. No doubt some
of your correspondents would assist me, and recom-
mend a lady who will say yes and stick to it.
Yours obediently,
Bth August. (Card.)
LATEST FOREIGN NEWS.
—o —
Captain's Corner, Aug. 11th,
It is reported that the great Crater in the S. Penin-
sula of the Moon has undex-gone an eruption, and has
kicked out several populous cities, and that we may
expect before long that it will rain cats and dogs, not
to mention cabbages and kings.
Foi-ecastle, Aug. 11th.
Rumour asserts that a fearful outbreak of Atlantic
Cholera has occurred in the Dukedom of Fcathei-land.
It is feai-ed that a large number of deaths have occurred.
LOCAL INTELLIGENCE.
0 —
The Dowager Lady Morrison, the Ladies Morrison
and Lord Charles have ax-rived in Town, and have, we
believe, taken two large mansions at the West End.
The Archbishop, Loi-d Boyle, the Duke de Wilsonne
and Sir David Laurance have left Town, and have
taken up their residence in Deck Castle, the magnifi-
cent country seat of Admiral Madcarver.
Our readers will remember that this palatial man-
sion is situated a shoi’t distance fcom Town, extending
the entire distance from Port Road to Star-board Road,
and is believed to be the most extensive x-esidence in
the countiy. One suite of rooms is occupied by the
Admiral himself, another by the Court Physician and
the Hon. F. Berners, and the third is now occupied for
the sporting season by the first-named nobleman.
On dit, that a certain highly talented authoress, who
is regularly to be seen in the Park, intends to become
a frequent contributor to the pages of the ‘ Waimate
Gazette.'
It is perhaps not generally known that two events
have happened since the ‘ Waimate' left England,
which may, or may not, touch on the future fortunes
of our hitherto happy and delightful community. We
all know the effective power of harmony and the force
of vocal eloquence, but not to exceed our limits, we
are requested briefly to state that the Ladies Louisa
and Ellen Canary succumbed to sea-sickness, and af-
ter every effort of those experienced practitioners, Sir
Cherry Cayenne Castor Oil, F.C.P.E , Dr. D. Seedy,
M.D., and Mr. Linseed, F.R.C.S.E., they did not re-
suscitate to the great grief of their devoted and
venerable mother. They are near relations of the well
known Prince Canary, who lately caused a great sen-
sation in Brighton, by taking an airing alone , when
he was laid up with an attack of asthma, and without
the permission of his physicians. The poor old gen-
tleman was unable to proceed many yards, when he
was carefully tumbled into safe hands, and brought
home to his anxious friends, where a most joyful re-
ception awaited him, and the magnificent sum of one
shilling was dispensed in honor of his safe return.
TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.
I, A. Sloper hereby announce that I will not be
responsible for any debts contracted by my wife,
Belinda Sloper, after this date.
Witness my hand,
Aug. 10th, 1876. A. Sloper.
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
THE ERUPTION IN THE MOON.
— o —
OUTBREAK OF ATLANTIC CHOLERA.
By Telescopic Telegram.
Moon, August 14th, 3.17-| a.m.
News of Eruption confirmed. Thousands of miles
of country overflowed. Expect cabbages, kings, &c.
shortly. Stand from under.
By Writer's Telegraph.
Featherland, August 11th.
Fearful outbreak of Cholera has occurred. No less
than 21 of the noble Dukes have perished, and it is
feared the disease is increasing.
Opeicial.
During the afternoon of Aug. 9th, the ‘ Waimate '
spoke the barque f Maria' of Corunna, 327 tons,
Captain Costo De Cozada, fx-om Santander to
Havana.
BIRTHS. DEATHS. MARRIAGES.
DEATHS.
August 2nd.—At the Castle of the Me Alpines, Chops
of the Channel, the Lady Ellen Canary, of a severe
cold caught in moulting.
August 4th.—Off Cape Finisterre, the Lady Louisa
Canary, of Paris and Brighton.
On various dates, in the Duchy of Featherland, 21
noble Dukes, of Atlantic Cholera.


POETRY.
A few lines on “ the unhappy nobleman now languish
ing in Dartmoor.”
—o—
I met a man of twenty stone,
Whose weight did make him stagger ;
I said “ Whence art thou, gentle Sir ?’ ’
He muttered “ Wagga Wagga.”
That manly form, that portly tub,
(He was indeed a stodger,)
“ Thou’st like no soul I ever saw
He muttered “just like Roger.”
I roar’d out in a frenzied yell,
“ Ha, ha, thou art the Claimant!
I’ll go to night to hear thee speak ;
One shilling is the payment.”
“ And I shall hear the wondrous tale
How thou wert drown’d at sea ;
How brought to life, and then condemn’d
To awful butchery.”
He grasped me with his fleshy paw,
“ There was a ship,” quoth he—
-1 said, “unhand me Waggabone !”
And soon my fist dropp’d ho.
He fixed me with his fishy eye,
And said, “ wilt join our spree,
And dine with us, my beamish boy,
All at the hour of three ?”
I said “ Sir Castro —Orton—Tich—
Borne—Doughty, sir, I will,”
He beckon’d me to follow him;
The “ Claimant ” had his will.
How quick the noble feast was spread,
I saw the Claimant eat;
And soon found out what caused the rise
In price of butcher’s meat.
Then bye-and-bye he told his woes
In language quite “ up-topping,”
How at his trial whopped he’d been,
Tho’ somewhat used to Wapping.
How some had said he’d soon retire,
And live in the Old Bailey ;
Nor get bailed out by fishy friends,
Like such as Mr. Whalley.
He spoke of Wagga Wagga too,
And all his wicked courses;
Likewise the mare’s nest tales they told
About his stealing horses.
He finished off by saying that
“ ’Twas very odd he thought,
Although just over twenty stone,
He had no weight in Court.”
When he had done, I straight arose
His honest hand to shake;
But in my joy I called him
“ Mr. Orton ” by mistake.
The chairman swore a wicked swear,
The Claimant only sighed;
I felt I could embrace him,
Only he was too wide.
Then let us roar for evermore,
“ Long live Sir Roger T.”;
And when he goes to Tichborne hall,
May I be there to see.
MARRY FOR LOVE.
Oh, marry the man you love girls, if he is as rich as
Croesus, or poor as Job in his fall. Pray do not marry
for pelf girls, ’twill bring your soul in thrall; but
marry the man you love, girls, oh, if he be ever so
small. Never marry a fop girls, whether he be little
or tall; he’ll make a fool of himself and you —he
knows nothing well but to drawl. But marry sober
men left on the ball, you’ll never rue the day girls,
that you ever married at all.
0 —
We are glad to hear that an Amateur Musical
Society is about to be inaugurated at the West End.
There are also signs of a Dramatic Club in the same
locality. We sincerely wish well to both these pro-
jects. It is always worth while to cultivate musical
talents, by judicious use of part singing; and for our
own part we know no better means of assisting confi-
dence and distinctness in elocution than the amateur
stage. We hope shortly to see both these societies
in full play, and to be present at more than one
entertainment given by them.
—o —
CUTTINGS FROM THE COMIC PAPERS.
YE (ORIGINAL) MERRIE JESTE.
Here you have two mad wags, (the maddest wags on all the coun-
try side), who are right on for a Merrie Jeste.
Here is Ye Merrie Jeste, knocking a regular ratter-ta tat at old
Mrs. Loviboud’s door in the middle of the night, and then running
away like anything!
This is the hill they ran up (only three-quarters of a mile) Mrs.
Lovibond slept in the back parlour, so she had not very far to come,
it is true. But ’twas a Merrie Jeste!
After all though, one Mad Wag suggested to the other it might be
a Merrier Jeste still to knock up old Dr. Crump, and tell him Mrs.
Lovibond wanted him most particular. Then Mrs. Lovibond hearing
another knock. Ha! Ha!
Now Dr. Crump hated to be disturbed in the middle of the night.
However he went; and Mrs. Lovibond, naturally supposing that it
was the Mad Wags again!
Yea, verily, ’twas a right Merrie Jeste! (JUDY)
Answers to Correspondents.
XMAS. The Editor cannot undertake to return rejected commu-
nications.
LUNAR NOTES.
August H. M. j August H. M.
4th—Full Moon 18 37 I 19th —New Moon 0 25
12th—Last Quarter 9 58 | 26th —First Quarter 6 17
Evening Star, Jupiter, sets midnight.
Morning Staq Venus, rises 3 a.m.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Office and Residence, Deck Castle,
Waimate, August 12th, 1876.




SUPPLEMENT
THE WAIMATE GAZETTE.
REGISTERED FOR TRANSMISSION ABOARD.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
D. L. to A. B. If you see this, write to me, my
own darling, once more, and let me know my fate;
or if more convenient, meet me on the poop at mid-
night, when the bell is striking the hour.
P.S. —Do come !
WAIMATE DINING ROOMS,
POOP BUILDINGS, CITY.
Branch Store :—3, Green Street.
SPIERS & POND, FIRST CLASS CATERERS.
Superior Liquors at Moderate Rates.
S. & P. are also prepared to furnish Useful Clothing
for ship wear, at a low figure.
They beg to return their sincere thanks for past favors?
and hope a continuance of them.
N.B. Ice Creams under weigh for the “ Line.”
SMITH & Co., beg to announce a repetition of the
Slap-Face performance, for Monday evening next.
The entertainment to conclude with an exhibition
on the tight-rope, entitled “ Pulling hard against the
stream.” Tickets at the galley. Carriages at 9.30.
Horses heads S. W. by S.
IMPORTANT NOTICE! Mr. Barnose begs to
inform the public that he is prepared to BREAK all
the Watches on board, at the very lowest possible
rate!
Every Watch guarranteed Never to go again !
Watches broken from ss.
Watchbreaker to the N.Z. Shipping Company.
WANTED.—AN INSTRUMENT to accompany
the voices of three children. The instrument must
be quite uncontrollable, or it will not match the dar-
lings. Apply with particulars to the Fid of the
Mizen Topmast.
THE MARINE PICTURE GALLERY.
Under the immediate patronage of
H.R.H. The Princess of Wales,
No. 142, New Bond Street.
Admission, (including catalogue) One Shilling.
Open 10 till 6.
LOST.—Onboard the “Waimate,” A LADIES
BLACK SILK UMBRELLA. Handle of different
kinds of wood, a piece of German silver round the
handle. Quite new. The owner will feel greatly
obliged if the finder will return it to Mr. Metcalf.
PUBLIC NOTICES.—Water Lane, ’tween Decks,
near the Assembly Room s, has been re-named Green St.
By order of the Board of Works,
J. Hogg Chips, Clerk.
JEMMY DUCKS, from Cheapside, when slaugh-
tering poultry is particularly requested to confine his
sanguineous operations to one spot, and not to mark
the decks after the pattern of his neckerchief.
By order of the Sanitary Commissioners,
Washy Scrubbs.
Gloves to Mend! Buttons to Sew on !!
Stockings to Darn!!!
Apply to—No. 2, Bath Road. W.
N.B.—Every order executed on the shortest notice
and on cheapest terms.
EXCHANGE.—JOHNNY SMOKER would be
glad to exchange from 4 to 8 oz of “hard” for a similar
amount of light baccy. Apply—Office of this paper.
LOST.—A VERY SMALL FOLDING CHAIR.
The owner will be very glad if the party who has
mistaken it for a tooth pick will return it to
No. 5, Green Street.
LOST.—A HEART,
The property of a gentleman made of steel. The
finder will be suitably rewarded on returning it to
“Impregnable” Deck Castle.
FOUND.—On the Bth inst.— A GOLD STUD.
The owner may obtain same on paying expenses, and
giving description, at
No. 2, Green Street.
FOUND.—A KEY,
Will be returned to anyone producing the lock to
which it belongs. Apply—Editor of W. G.
FOUND—A PAIR OF SCISSORS,
May be had by the owner on applying to the Fore-
castle men, Starboard watch.
/Vo. I
ISSUED WEEKLY.
Saturday, Aug. 12th 1876.


WANTED.—A SOFT EASY COUCH, to be used
for morning and afternoon naps ; if a comfortable one
can be provided, no expense will be grudged
Cracknut Villa, Deck Road.
VARIETIES.
As through this weary world you go,
Three things observe with care;
Of whom you speak, to whom you speak }
And how, and when, and where.
—o —
An old maiden lady, complaining of cold, said, “My teeth are
just chattering,”—“You had better not let them chatter too much,”
replied her neice, “ or perhaps they will tell from whom you bought
them.” S. S.
A gentleman was once asked to make a verse which would rhyme
to “ Timbuctoo.” After cogitating some time, he gave the following
answer;—
I would I were a Cassowary,
On the plains of Timbuctoo;
If I met a missionary,
I’d eat him and his hymn-book-too.
(For the last two lines try the following: —guess they’ll fit ?
*‘l would eat the missionary
Hat and gloves and hymn book too ”
How’s that stranger ?) Ed.
—o—
ENIGMA, See.
(Answers to the following, if placed in the Editor's Box , with names
or initials, will be acknoivledged in our next , when the right answers will
also be inserted. Ed.)
1. ENIGMA.
I am a word of 7 letters.
My Ist is in water, but not in milk.
My 2nd is in satin, but not in silk.
My 3rd is in kitten, but not in cat.
My 4th is in mouse, but not in rat.
My sth is in boat, but not in ship.
My 6th is in thong, but not in whip.
My 7th which is the last of me,
Can be easily seen both in river and sea.
—o—
2. SQUARE WORDS.
A place of rest.
The opposite of weariness.
Small poisonous serpents.
To try, with intent to prove the qualities of.
—o —
3. CHARADE.
I am composed of three letters;
Cut off my head, and the singular I act;
Cut oft my tail, and plural I appear;
Cut oft both head and tail, I’m nothing left;
What is my tail cut off ?—a flowing river.
What is my head cut oft ? —a beauteous sea,
Beneath whose waves I sportive play,
The parent of sweet sounds ? tho’ mute for ever.
—o —
4. In what did Queen Elizabeth take her pills ?
—o —
ANOTHER MERRIE JBSTE!
Three Irishmen were tramping it one day; the weather being hot
they stopped to rest on a bridge. One dropped his stick in the water
below, and soon hit on a right safe plan for its recovery. Number
1 got over the bridge, and hung on by his hands; No. 2 did ditto
and hung on to No. one’s feet; No. 3 hung on to No. 2; Pat No. 3
was just reaching the stick, when Pat No. 1 hollered out, “ Houldon
while I spit on my hands.”
It was a damper on the days fun.


EDITORIAL.
When we come to our second issue we find that
our hopes and fears have assumed a much more tan-
gible form than when our venture was first made.
Our hopes are raised by our so far successful beginning,
and our fears tells us that we have undertaken rather a
heavy job. For instance, about Tuesday morning
might have been heard some such conversation as the
following among the editorial staff. “ Now then,
Mr.—, when are we going to work at that Gazette?”
“ Oh, we’ll set about it to-morrow morning.” “ Right
you are sir!” (Wednesday afternoon.) “By-the-
bye, Mr.—, how about that paper? “Forgot it en-
tirely ! However its no use beginning now; sup-
pose we make a fair start to-morrow morning?”
Next morning the ship is rolling about like a porpoise,
and landsmen can’t steady themselves to write. And
so Friday comes, and then it is a case of “ grinding
like mad ” in the office to get the work done by night.
Well this is the second issue, and we begin to feel
ourselves to be a very old established periodical in-
deed. We have no longer the fears which belong to
a new venture; and here we may take the opportu-
nity of thanking those ladies and gentlemen who have
so kindly continued to us their support through so
many —“years” we were going to say, but we will
scratch out the word and write days.
There is not very much news in our uneventful life
aboard ship to furnish matters for the Gazette, but
the weeks are never altogether without circumstances
worth noting. This week we have actually seen a
few inches of something black upon the water, which
we were told was a shark’s fin. And we believe it,
Why ? Are not sailors proverbially given to “ yarns?”
And does it not strike us sometimes what grand op-
portunities these sailors have for playing upon our
credulity ? But mum ! don’t let us throw out any
more hints which might be too readily acted upon to
our disadvantage. Rather take a piece of advice, as
follows : swagger about the ship with a nautical roll;
look critically at the sails and spars; keep a wise-
looking eye to the weather; whistle gently for wind;
use frequently every nautical word you can catch up ;
always smoke ‘hard;’ if you are sick take a fishing
line with you to the lee side as a blind; call a gale a
‘ fresh breeze’; learn plenty of ‘ shanties ’ and hum them
carefully about the ship; hitch your trousers frequent-
ly, and put on any amount of ‘ side’; and then you will
be like the child or the ostrich which thrusts his head
nto th e curtains or the sand, as the case may be, and
triumphantly exclaims, “ Can’t see me !” All this
apropos of the shark’s fin. Another event of the
week has been the first entertainment of the season.
Taking into consideration, that the room is as bad
a room for sound as could possibly be obtained any-
where, that the harmonium is about the worst possi-
ble instrument to sing to, that the atmosphere was
densely misty, that the preparation was very short,
&c., &c., we are prepared distinctly to pronounce this
first performance a success.
We heard, however, of several headaches among
the audience next morning, and we have no doubt
that the majority will echo our hearty wish that it
may be possible to have the next entertainment upon
deck.
We have also had a chat with our old friend
‘ Tommy ’ Stephens. We wish him a good voyage,
and shall be happy upon our arrival at Port Lyttleton,
to telegraph to Melbourne, that he may be expected
shortly.
PROGRESS OF THE VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
Last week we ended our remarks on the progress
of the voyage on August 9th. We now enter upon
a new literary week.
August 10th—position lat. 38-14., long. 17-48;
distance, 194 miles.
We are now sailing “o’er a summer sea,” and
enjoying beautiful weather, which after our first ex-
periences, in tumbling and tossing, we have learnt to
fully appreciate. The effects of the fine weather have
been quite apparent in the looks and behaviour of our
little community in general, and, in the fair portion
particularly, for now we hear ringing laughter, and
see happy blooming faces, where a few days ago moans,
and wailing, and general dejected looks, only were to
be heard and seen; and, oh joy! there is no antici-
pation of a recurrence of the pitching programme, with
its concomitants for ever such a while; our principal
trouble just now is, we don’t get along quite fast
enough. What is the use of the ship’s officers point-
ing their “ horses’ heads ” at the sun every day, and
going through such a performance if they can’t chalk
higher figures on the board. They say we shall go
faster bye and bye, well, I hope so, that's all. But
there, grumbling won’t make it any better, and the
Editor says he won’t insert any grumbling—but still
No. 2.
Saturday, Aug. 19th 1876.
ISSUED WEEKLY.


its very hard; they ought to have ships to go with-
out wind.
Looking over the ship’s side at the ocean, so
“ deeply, darkly, beautifully blue,” we cannot help
admiring its clear depths, and wonder at the cause.
Scientific men tell us, that of all the prismatic colors
contained in light,—blue has the most intensity, the
other colors—orange, red, yellow, &c., being absorbed
by its intensity. Hence also the deep blue of a clear
sky, the perfection of which we have yet to see.
Think of seeing the larger stars by broad day-light,
or the moon when less than 12 hours old.
The night sky has been particularly fine of late,
and those who take sufficient interest in the matter
may see nightly; “ Sweet Hesperus lead the starry
host,”
In the North we have the “ great and little Bears ”
with the “ Polar star,” “ Cassiopea,” and the Crown.
In the West high up are the constellations of the
“ Eagle ” and “ Harp.” In the East the “ Pleiades,”
the “Bull,” “Orion,” with his sword and belt and
“Sirius.” Venus rising at 3 a.m. The Southern
constellations we have yet to see.
August 11th—distance, 165 miles; latitude 35-53,
long. 19-18.
To-day the wind has gradually failed, though the
weather continues remarkably fine and clear. “ Old
Sol ” has taken advantage of the absence of the cool-
ing breeze, to pour his rays down on us, much to the
detriment of the fair complexions of the gentlemen’,
but they need be under no apprehension on that head,
as by a gentle process of skinning when the cold
weather of the Southern latitudes is reached, their
beauty will be quite restored. I may here suggest
that P. B. in hot weather is exceeding good (?) for
prickly heat.
The night has been sufficiently calm to satisfy the
most fastidious, for according to rule, “ When it is
calm, there is no wind at all, and the sails hang from
the yards.” That is our sentiment exactly, calm
accordingly. General health—frisky.
August 12th—distance, 75 miles; latitude 34-42.
Jong. 19-9.
To-day, as could only be expected, we have made
but indifferent progress, and not wishing our invisible
companions the “ Langstone,” “ Thos. Stephens,” &c.,
any ill luck, we hope they are no better off, for we
have no particular desire to be beaten on the voyage,
by them, or any other vessel, no doubt we shall fall
in with them if they are anywhere near, always pro-
viding they are not a long way astern, which is very
likely.
Great anticipations of a turtle hunt prevailed
among many of our younger citizens, and no doubt
visions of a nautical civic feast, passed like the shadow
of a dream through the minds of our seniors. How-
ever, as the cookery book says, “ first catch your hare,
&c.” Very likely the pleasure of catching and con-
suming the coverted fish is yet in store for us. Allow
me to send you a little green fat and a little calliper,
0, thank you ! do you think we shall catch another,
&c., &c.
Console yourselves dear youths, and you shall have
a row in a boat if you are very good.
Health bulletin from the court physician; bipeds
suffering slightly from ennui; quadrupeds, from con-
sumption, indeed as they grow smaller by degrees,
and beautifully less, no other cause can be assigned.
It is said to be incurable, and can only end when the
last grasshopper gives his final “ baah,” the last por-
cine her final squeak, and the last hen her final cackle.
In other respects, the general health is all that can be
desired, and is in a swing(e)ing state.
Quadrilles in the evening, the Waimate Vocal
Orchestra performing on the occasion, and accomplish-
ing terpsichorean feats of the first magnitude. Gen-
eral jubilee of inharmonious sounds in Maindeck-road
All parties perfectly satisfied with their own perfor-
mances.
August 13th—Sunday—distance, 64 miles; lat. 34-
20, long. 17-37.
To-day all is calm, and nature sleeps. One solitary
sail is all there is to be seen, and it like ourselves,
the clouds, and sea—all but motionless.
And when not a wave is curled,
How grand it is to me ;
To see ’neath Heaven’s blue arch unfurled,
The Sabbath of the sea.
Sounds well, no doubt, but that is not the way to get
to New Zealand. So I opine the ladies had better
wish, and the gentlemen whistle, till we are favoured
with a breeze.
We have great complaints about the heat, now the
temperature in the shade to-day is short of 80 degrees,
if that is unbearable, how do we get on in London
where no doubt this very day the temperature is much
higher. Still as we have to pass through much
warmer weather before long, it may be as well to
commence a course of training, by attiring ourselves
in our heaviest clothing, and by taking violent exer-
cise and so reduce the system, making each one a
portable Turkish bath. Should there be any grease
about the decks it can be easily collected, care being
taken that the arrangement is not carried so far, that
suits of clothes alone may not be found walking about
without an owner; electricity is good for reduc-
ing the system, a story about which runs in effect as
follows:
“ A gentleman, troubled with corpulence, and be-
“ ing informed that a dose of electricity would do him
“ good, called upon a telegraph operator, a friend of
“ his, who anxious to do his friend a turn, gave him
“ hold of the wires of the instrument, and begun to
“ turn away, putting on the full power of the battery;
“ instantly the fat man began to feel relief, and he


“ felt easier and easier, and so nice, but presently the
“ electric bells from the various stations began to ring
“ furiously, and along comes a message, “ What on
“ earth are you about at , you are filling our
“ offices with grease.”
But no doubt we shall get through the warm wea-
ther as hundreds of thousands have done before us.
We have had, as on last Sabbath, two most inter
esting and enjoyable services.
August 14th—distance, 100 miles; latitude 33-01
long. 18-10.
Calm, calm, calm, hot, hot, hot, this ends remarks
on the weather.
Some people like Madeira in bed at certain seasons*
say, after a late dinner, or party the previous evening-
We don’t, the early risers get Madeira—that is a
sight of it; those who did not rise with the lark,
(what a lark) didn’t get any, (good sight of) Madeira.
What a loss !
August 15th—distance, 45 miles; latitude 32-41,
long. 17-31.
Madeira is on tap all day to-day, and glasses are all
in use. The sea is calm, the wind gone “tother end
of nowhere,” and the sky is bright and clear : the
consequence of which is that our day’s run becomes a
walk, if we may say so, at a snail's pace. Our friend
Tommy Stevens seems to like Madeira too, for he has
been hanging about all day, and we have had the
opportunity of a yarn with him,
August 16th—distance, 54 miles; latitude 31-54,
long. 18-1.
We shan't get to New Zealand this year at this
rate, for the weather keeps as calm and fine as ever,
and a great deal hotter. So hot, in fact, that if the
Waimate does reach the Port the passengers won’t for
as things are going now there will be nothing left
of us but big spots of grease and little heaps of
clothes all over the poop.
August 17th—distance, 80 miles ; latitude 30-38,
long. 18*28.
Notwithstanding the continuance of * calm, fine,
hot,’ in the log book, the good ship seems to be get-
ting up steam ; very gradually indeed, and not much
of it—not nearly so much as our good folks got up
when they underwent the boiling-down process in the
Waimate assembly rooms last night. It certainly was
hot down there. Hot sir? Boiling heat, sir, you bet!
The entertainment went off certainly ; but it too was
affected by the steam arrangement, and went off ra-
ther jerky, like a steam engine starting. Everybody
was rather limp, “ like a cleaned boiled rag ”; and so
our first attempt was hardly as brilliant as might
have been expected. Everybody knows there is a
vast amount of undeveloped talent among the town's
folk, and there can be no doubt that next time we
shall astonish thg natives. Certain sailors attempted
to perform some tomfoolery of their own, and succeed-
ed. One bright geniushad a patent opera glass rigged
up with two beer bottles with the ends knocked out;
and the bobbies very nearly had a job to turn him
out.
Note. — We vmst apoligise for the shortness of this
number as it appears in print. The original copy was
lost aboard, and we have been unable to replace the
greater part of the paper, notably hvo short scientific
articles by Mr. Metcalf ] “ The Stars,” “ The Clouds.”
E. F. G.
LATEST TELEGRAMS
THE ERUPTION IN THE MOON.
THE WAR.
0
By Telescopic Telegram.
Moon, August 19th, 7.45 a.m.
News of the Eruption false. A lunatic jest of
two mad wags. All quiet here.
Constantinople, August 19th, 1 a.m
Great battle reported. Insurgents routed with
immense loss.
Vienna, August 19th, 9 a.m.
It is reported here under good authority that in
consequence of the late Servian defeat, the Russian
troops have been moved across the frontier. England
cannot be expected to remain neutral; immediate
declaration of war is expected.
[These alarming telegrams reach us too late for
any comments in our present issue.—Ed.]
It is currently reported that the late Sultan Abdul
Aziz is now the Sultan Abdul as teas, having done for
himself with a pair of scissors.
LOST.
On the 52nd inst., A SMALL BOY, about the
size of a man, barefooted, with his father’s boots on.
Wearing when last seen a maccaroni jacket trimmed
with sawdust, trowsers of the same material, lined
with cod liver oil. Had an empty paper bag under
his arm made entirely of turpentine and tar, contain-
ing four shops, three omnibusses, and four pigs.
Lives in No. 1, Round the Corner, a wooden house
in the middle of the street, built entirely of brick.
Whosoever shall give information respecting him
shall be liberally rewarded with 1 £ farthing, and a
yard of baked snowballs. Signed,
A Voice from the Skysail Yard,
To Correspondents.
Several Communications are unavoidably held over
till next week.
Our next number will contain the first instalment
of a tale (by a highly talented authoress J Entitled
“ Ruby.”
Edited, written, and [published for ihe Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Residence, Deck Castle, Waimate
August 19th, 1876.


SUPPLEMENT
THE WAIMATE GAZETTE.
REGISTERED FOR TRANSMISSION ABOARD.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SPIERS & POND,
Have on Sale
SUPERIOR CAVENDISH TOBACCO at 3/6 per lb.
Ordinary— 3/0 per lb. —a perfect nosegay.
Extensive Alterations are being made in the Pantry
for the production of the contemplated
ICE CREAMS !
Poop Buildings and 3, Green Street.
MR. BARNOSE, WATCHBREAKER.
Testimonials to the above.
It is with feelings of the very deepest sympathy for
those unhappy victims who have unwittingly entrust-
ed their watches to Mr. Barnose, that I certify to
his abilities as above stated.
C. J. Y.
I hereby certify that Mr. Barnose prevented my
watch from going in a most effectual manner, &c., &c.
S. K. R.
N.B.—lt is to be hoped that Mr. Barnose’s youth-
ful appearance will in no wise mislead the Public,
regarding his capabilities as a watch-breaker !
IMPORTANT NOTICE.
MR. SIMMONDS, OPTICIAN, &c.
Is now prepared to furnish the Public with the new
patent Opera glasses, especially adapted for long
voyages.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
A MEETING will be held at 2, Water Lane, on
Saturday afternoon, at three o’clock, to appoint an
Inspector of Nuisances, who will be expected to visit
the berths daily, and report the result to the Doctor.
NOTICE.
The Instrument required to soothe the feelings of the
three little darlings ’tween decks has been procured.
LOST.—A GOLD SLEEVE STUD.
The finder will kindly return the same to the
Editor, —Office of this paper.
LOST.—A PAIR OF SCISSORS,
supposed to have been dropped between the flying
jib-boom end, and the spanker-boom end.
The finder shall receive substantial reward on bringing
the same to
No. 6, Black Hole, Green Street
Answers to Last Week’s Enigmas, &c.
0
1. Enigma.
“ WAIMATE.”
2. Square Words.
SEAT
EASE
ASPS
TEST
3. Charade.
“ COD.”
4. Riddle.
IN CIDER, fJn side her.)
RIDDLES.
1. When is a Ship like a woman?
2. When is a Ship in Love ?
3. Why do fleas resemble Railway Engines ?
N.B. —No riddle inserted unless answer is sent at the
same time as question.
A Timely Warning to Young Gentlemen
or
“ Look Before You Seat.”
Listen, all ye who are fond of open-air serenading,
and take warning by the sad misfortune which befel
four young gentlemen living in W—, who on a certain
night in September did meet together with instru-
ments of music, and betake themselves to the residence
of the Town Belle, and there on the pavement opposite
did seat themselves, and under the sweet influence of
the moon were soon wrapt in melodious sounds.
The last bar of “ Tommy make room for your
Uncle ” was scarcely ended, when with blunderbuss
in hand, the maiden’s uncle did appear.
Simultaneously the four attempted to rise, but Oh,
horror of horrors ! they seemed glued to the spot!
/Vo. 2.
Saturday, Aug. 19th 1876 .
ISSUED WEEKLY .


The struggle was short, a peculiar sound rent the air,
like unto the bursting of stitches. Oh, it was amerrie
jeste for the bobbye who shone his bullseye full upon
the fugitives, and marked there was something
amiss with their dress. The mystery was fully solved,
when arriving at the serenading ground, there on the
newly laid down asphalte he found four—yea! but it
was a merrie jeste !
Nine tenths of our poets make little of much,
For I know all their worth to a tittle;
But—’s conceptions and powers are such
That he always makes much of a little.
H. M.
NAUTICAL COURT, FORECASTLE TERRACE.
Judge —Hon. John Anchorstock.
Councillor for Defendant —Tom Marlinspike, Esq.
Councillor for Plaintiff— Bob Toppinlift, Esq.
Chairman —Jesse Capstan.
Jury —Charlie Bobstay, Jerry Fid, Bill Ringbolt,
with nine others.
fatnesses —Four Pigs, Six Sheep, Twenty Chickens.
MORAL . — Always look before you seat yourself ;
and beware lest you are trapped with pitch and tar
instead of asphalte. Quid,
—o —
POETRY.
On Saturday there was a fuss,
All up and down the decks ;
To try and see who would be first
To read the Ship’s Gazette.
There’s all amusements full of fun,
Prisoner —JEMMY Ducks.
Plaintiff —Harry Fowls.
Court Opened at 10 a.m.
And for to get it we did run ;
And when we got it in full glare,
To see the wonders we did stare.
There’s all about Tommy’s Uncle,
The butcher and his mate;
And other things as well as that,
Which I can hardly state.
The Chairman —“ Prisoner at the Bar, you are here
“accused with the pretence of killing pigs and poultry,
“but in reality you go a long way about it, and your
“infamous ways of murdering them.”
“ Are you Guilty or not Guilty ?”
Prisoner . —“ Not Guilty.”
Z>. Toppinlift, Esq. —“ Did you not on the 211th inst-
slaughter a pig ?”
Prisoner —“ No, I only stopped its breath.”
I hope I’m not intruding,
By making up this rhyme ;
Because I’m not a poet,
Or nothing of the kind.
“ Did you not stick your knife rudely into its gizzard,
and then kick it to death ?” “ No ! It is false !’•’
T. Marlinspike, Esq. —“ I have the evidence to say, as
“ it is not clearly proven, we may not take the liberty
“of calling Jemmy Ducks a murderer.”
The case was adjourned, and Prisoner put back into
the pantry.
Although I am a rover,
And happy I do dwell ;
Who’s awe wi ye the nicht
Why brawley who’s ye sell.
We may give thanks to the Editor,
For the good that he has done ;
By bringing up this paper,
And giving us the fun.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstrbet, at his Residence, Dock Castle, Waimate
Spokeshave.
August 19 th, 1876.




REGISTERED FOR TRANSMISSION" ABOARD.
EDITORIAL.
We print to-day some alarming 1 telegrams on the
war in Europe; due comments on them will be found
in another column.
The past week has not been without excitements
though they were not all of a pleasant kind. Our
paper has received a shock this week, and has stood it
well. On Monday we were all, sad to say, in our old
positions on the lee side, and whispers were heard
among the Editorial staff of “ No paper this week " or
“ only one copy." But the breeze dropped and the
danger passed. We believe that one of the few per-
sons who did not appreciate the change was the Cap-
tain, for the ship made a very good run during the
time the breeze lasted, at one time doing as much as
14- knots.
There has been no entertainment this week; the
Assembly-room was found to be so unbearably hot
last time, that it was determined not to repeat the
experiment. The idea, cnee started, of a concert on
deck appears impracticable, so we shall have to wait
a week or two, when the Captain tells us we may ex-
pect cooler weather. In the mean-while, the' Waimate
West End Musical Society, has begun its rehearsals.
We hope that both pastime and practice will be
gained from these meetings, and we shall look for a
treat of choral music in a few weeks. The members
must tax all their energies to do credit to the name of
the society
Dramatic whispers also are becoming more stage-
like and audible. We have seen well thumbed copies
of “ Box & Cox " and “ Whitebait at Greenwich," and
comico-tragical faces may be seen poring over them
in odd corners. We hope that ' a time will come'
when more will be heard and seen of them.
Perhaps the greatest excitement of the tropical
weather is the vermin. As we write, a very lively
cockroach has been manoeuvering about the table,
safely eluding our efforts at countermarching and en-
tercepting it. The rats are truly exciting, too excit-
ing to be pleasant. They seem to have a curious
preference for the least tempting portions of the human
frame, for we constantly hear of hair and toenails being
attacked. If any gentleman happens to have con-
trol over these nightly visitors, it might be as well to
hold them in, at least for a week or two, when per-
haps the excitement will be welcome. Flying fish
have been seen in abundance for the last few days.
Could not we catch some ? The idea is fresh fish
for breakfast should sharpen people's intellects to in-
vent a plan for this purpose.
For instance, why not leave the main deck ports
open these fine nights, to give the fish a chance of
flying in.
The homeward bound vessel which we are all look-
ing out for has not yet appeared, but every one is
writing letters, and when we do meet with a postman
we shall increase his cargo somewhat. A German
homeward-bounder has however been spoken; her
name was not recognised, but she acknowledged our
signal requesting her to report us at Lloyds. So we
may hope our friends may hear of us in three or four
weeks.
We most earnestly request our readers to give us
their kind assistance in circulating the paper. If
each person would pass it on as soon as he has done
with it, there would be some chance of our whole
company getting a read at it, which is impossible un-
der any other arrangement. We should be very glad
if anyone in possession of a hack number will return
it at once to our office. It is intended to print the
paper in New Zealand, and therefore whole sets are
needed.
The momentous events referred to in the alarming
telegrams which we print to-day, call for far more
notice than our limited knowledge and space permit
us to accord them. The prompt action of Russia has
taken the world by surprise, even Servia was not to be
trusted with the movements of her intended ally.
Lord Derby was taken aback. His explanation of the
Government policy of July 14th was well calculated
to allay the unquiet feelings at home and in foreign
courts, and it was only in Berlin that the weakness of
its explanation of the refusal to support the Berlin
Memorandum was noticed. The speech was made in
good faith, and as the “ J)ebats }> said, was “ the lan-
guage of a statesman, of a diplomatist, who goes
“ straight to the facts, and who judges of them with
“ superior good sense." It produced a profoundly
tranquilising effect in most foreign courts; but the
isolating policy of Russia was impossible to be forseen,
and for once facts misled Lord Derby. That the
noble Lord's speech was uttered in perfect good faith
is witnessed hy the comparatively unprepared state of
England when the war broke upon her, as instanced by
/Vo. 3.
Saturday, Au£. 26th 1876-
ISSUED WEEKLY.


the dismissal of the Naval reserve. Now that the
time is come, England is not slow to act; and the
mobilisation of the army looked at in the light of the
numerous wise ideas vented upon it of late in both
Houses, may prove the salvation of the country. The
regular troops are now all concentrated at Aldershot <
The militia are all out and are undergoing constant
drill. The volunteers have unanimously responded to
the call of Mr. Hardy, and are now in full drill on
Dartmoor. Mr. Arch has applied for permission to
form a “Working man's regiment," himself to be
colonel; but the government has been wise enough to
refuse consent. It is said that the “ Captain " and
the “Vanguard" are on a submarine cruise to the
Mediterranean; but their movements are kept very
much in the dark. Austria is divided between the
Austro-Servian interest, and her close political
relations with Russia.
From Berlin accounts are unsatisfactory. Alarm-
ing statements reach us of negociations with Austria
as to the joint action in the Russian interest. France
of course, only awaits for her old enemy to begin, and
then she will go at it tooth and nail. All news points
at Constantinople as the scene of the coming struggle.
SERIOUS MARINO-GEOGRAPHICAL
ACCIDENT.
H.M.S. “ Lightning," while cruising in the Pacific,
having been caught in a storm, drifted North, and
came into collision with the North Pole, with such
violence that it shattered it.
Also the lines of Longitude which are fixed there
are loosened, so that great damage is done to naviga-
tion and commercial intercourse. The shock was
severely felt at the Equator, which is shifted 59 min.
59 sec. to the North hy the jerk. The“ Lightning"
has her bows stove in, and her bow-sprit carried away,
‘and it is dreaded that she will never return to
England.
The Captain who was standing on the forecastle,
at the time we speak of, was killed, and had various
other injuries.
It is feared that the accident will bring England
into hot water. We are informed however, that a
staff of latitudinarians, organised by Government, is
being fitted out with provision for the repairing of
damages. They have taken a new Pole with them,
also a lightning conductor attached, so that a like
disturbance may not occur again.
(Specially sent to the ‘ IFlimate Gazette ' hy a
Correspondent .)
POLICE.
NAUTICAL COURT, FORECASTLE TERRACE.
—_o—
August 59th, 1877.
Continuation of the trial of Jemmy Ducks, who
was before the Court last week, charged with mur-
dering a pig.
New witnesses were examined, and it has been
clearly proved that Jemmy Ducks is a murderer.
He was sentenced to eighteen months in acjok's shop,
licking the steam otf the windows.
Report signed by
B. T.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
MATRIMONY.
(To the Ladies, hy a confirmed Bachelor , aged 57.)
'Tis an act of the priest to give patience a test,
'Tis a desperate hope and a serious jest,
'Tis catching a dolt when his wit is suspended,
'Tis a toil where the labour can never be ended.
'Tis a leap in the dark which both parties agree.
To perform hand in hand, tho' neither can see;
’Tis walking through mines filled with sulphurous
vapour,
Where to find out a path you must brandish a taper.
'Tis like Tantalus' feast, where the good does but seem,
And both ope the eyes, tho' they're both in a dream;
'Tis going to sea, in a black stormy night,
Which reason calls madness, but custom delight;
For wedlock's a minx, who deceives by her sleekness*
As craft wore a cloak to envelope her weakness;
'Tis a comical, tragical, fiery ordeal,
Where the ploughshares are hot, and your faith is not
real.
Church Notes.
August 21th —11th Sunday after Trinity. Hymns
at morning service, 188, 189, 162.
Sept 3rd —l2th Sunday after Trinity. Hymns at
morning service, 136, 222, 142, part 3.
Practice for Sunday's hymns will he on Tuesday after
evening service.
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
Aug. 18th —lat. 28'51, long. 19-45; distance 127
miles.
To-day we have passed the Canary Islands, and
have entered the region of the North-East trade-
winds, so to-day we are spinning along very plea-
santly. The acceptable breeze makes tho weather
delightfully cool. Of course we have some trouble or
tribulation, our present disorder is “ rats." To enter
into an essay on rats, describing their acuteness,
sagacity, beauty of form and powers of destruction,
would not be relished just now; at present they mean
nothing to us, but an unabatable nuisance, in the full-
est sense of the expression. The mysterious manner
in which these “ insects " obtain access to, and destroy
things, may be illustrated by the following story.
Two gentlemen of colour, named respectively Jake
and Sambo, invested a dollar or two in a few pieces


of salt pork, getting the barrel and pickle in, Sambo
being the proprietor of a cellar, was deputed by mutual
consent storekeeper, and in that capacity acted hon-
ourably towards himself, by taking by far the larger
share, till one day the barrel was minus pork; Jake
came to get a piece, but found none, and at once tax-
ed his partner in the transaction with unfairness.
Sambo was nonplussed, but a “ bright idea '' struck
him, says he, “ Lookee here, Jake, I gone to de cellar
“ dis morning to get a piece of pork, for dis darkie’s
“ brexfus, and I feel all round de barrel, but no pork
“ dere —I feel again, sir, among de pickle, right atde
“ bottom of de cask, and I find one big hole, and
“ when I look I see de rats eat de hole in de cask and
“ eat all de pork. Hi!! replied Jake, but how de
“ pork get out and leave de pickle. Ah, said Sambo,
“ dats de mystery.”
A little “ cold poison '' would be a warning to them,
and though we should not mind misstng them, their
wji'sterious would be a boon to many
misses we wot of, and no mistake.
General health, pretty well thank you, with a few
exceptions. One of our young men is troubled with
fits, pity he did not get his clothes at Blank's estab-
lishment, for nobody ever had a fit yet who dealt
with him, he is usually known as old neverfit.
A hint to the Gods :
At public entertainments it is usual to observe a
little propriety and decorum.
Aug. 19th.—Lat. 26’12, long. 2L21; dist. 191 miles.
To-day we have a “ free wind and a flowing sheet,
with a wind that follows fast,'' that is, we are having
the full benefit of the “ bonnie'' N.E. trades, and are
operating along quite merrily. Our novelty of to-day
is a flying fish, who, no doubt to his own astonish-
ment, found himself near Main Hatch Square, oppo-
site the managerie; while performing one of his
daring feats of high flying, he did a little too much
lofty tumbling, to his own disadvantage; these deeds
of daring are usually hissed (in the frying pan) by
nautical piscators. N.B. —He is dead now. lt No
more he'll skim the ocean wave, &c., &c.'' Strange
it is, that some folks can never believe in these
winged fish; “ Some little time ago, (say a century or
“ so) a lad returning home after a West Indian voyage,
“recounting to his mother the wonders he had seen,
“ told her about mountains of sugar, rivers of rum,
“ and was proceeding with his remarks about flying
“ fish, when the old lady feeling herself imposed on,
“ stopped him with, “no lies, Jamie, no lies ! moun-
“ tains of sugar of course there is, else where does it
“ all come from, and so must there be rivers of rum
but don't tell me of fish that can ‘ flee' for that can
(t never be.'' (Wisdom venerate it.)
General health, only middling, please.
Aug. 20th.—Lat. 23T2, long. 23‘23; dist. 220 miles.
To-day we have splendid trades but cloudy unplea-
sant weather, the appearance of the sky portending
more wind and unfavorable weather,
“ But, never mind the weather, while
The wind blows fair.*'
A bright idea, indeed a gushing one, has originated
in the massive intellects of the native population of
Water Lane, (central) it is the invention, manufacture
and production of a toot, toot, toot; in other words,
of an instrument (unmusical) to accompany infantile
voices when they are lifted up. Its chief feature is
that it plays both music and words; being a first
attempt, its scope is rather limited, it at present only
plays one note of the tune , and only one word of the
song, both being comprised in toot, toot. To moral-
ise upon this word toot, please observe the words, tut,
tut, signifying unbelief, are a corruption of toot, toot,
of which the following is the origin :
“ A Glasgow shipowner engaged in the African
“ trade, was desired by a friend to procure him a cou-
“ pie of monkeys ; he accordingly wrote to his agent,
“ desiring him to send him two, spelling, or rather
“ mis-spelling the word too, without crossing, the t—
“ the agent reading the letter, being a correct speller
“ himself, read it thus, 100 ( i.e . one hundred.) He
“ accordingly procured all he could at the time, to the
“ number of fifty, sending them off by the first ship,
“ accompanied by a letter stating that the balance
“ would be sent by the next ship. The vessel made a
" long passage, the sailors being unable to haul round
“ the yards or work the sails on account of the mon-
“ key's tails continually getting jammed in the
“ blocks. At length she arrived, the amazement of
“ the owner was great on seeing his ship all alive
“ with monkeys, but on reading in the letter that a
“ like number were to follow in the next ship, he
“ raved, tore his hair, &c., roared, fifty monkeys, a
“ hundred monkeys, oh, toot! toot! toot!'' He
found it to be his own mistake in due time, but every-
body in his office have to cross their t's now.
General health very dubious, only tolerably well,
not much so, dangerous subject, touch it not.
As on our last Sabbath we had two very interest-
ing and well attended services, despite the rather un-
favorable state of the weather.
Towards night we had an increase in the force of
the wind, sea rising in proportion—result to-morrow.
Aug. 21st —lat. 19‘41, long. 26’9; distance 261 miles.
To-day we have quite a fresh breeze, accompanied
by a short jump of a head sea, the ‘ Waimate' un-
commonly polite on the matter, continually bowing
to the waves in acknowledgment to repeated salutes
they gave her on her cheeks, throwing their spra} r s
over her and making themselves rather too officious.
Our citizens and citizenesses appreciate this civility,
by going “en masse'' on their beam ends, casting-up
accounts or quoting poetry, of which the following
may be taken as a specimen :
Oh, dear ! oh, dear I I feel so queer,


Whatever shall I do ?
Do tell the man, who has to steer,
To keep the ship still, oh do,
refrain ; oh dear ! oh dear! ad lib.
The general health therefore is, oh, dear! pray
don't speak to me, lam so —oh, oh, dear! But this
is too much so to last, we shall most likely have the
weather too calm afterwards, when plaints again arise,
the irrepressible oh, dear, isn't it very hot? meeting
us on every hand.
Aug. 22nd—lat. 17*14, long. 27*47 ; dist. 181 miles.
To-day our fiery breeze has gradually cooled down,
the diminuendo movement tapering away to a perfect
calm, a something out of the common course, as the
trades extend usually some distance further South.
However, if we get into the doldrums collectively,
that is no reason that we are to do so individually, so
we had better arrange at once to have no personal
doldrums. Those in favor of the arrangement please
vote in the wrcusual way, (down) : on the contrary,
carried unanimously. Arranged accordingly.
Dear me, the longer the time one inhabits the terres-
trial sphere, the more knowledge becomes indelibly
fixed in our brain, fancy! one of our gentlefolks has
found an old copper coin, supposed to be antedelu-
vian, (by its owner) the supposition of its great anti-
quity remains, or did remain incontrovertable, simply
because there is neither stamp or mark upon it. Its
owner, led away by a laudable triumph, declared it
to be more than two thousand years old, and in the
absence of proof to the contrary, we had to believe it.
“ But how vain is man who boasts !'' along came an
old whale, he had been to sea many years, and of
course knew all about it. The oracle spake, “wot
de ye say, two thousand years old, why its only
1876 now, ho ! ho ! ho !
General health much improved and we are pretty
middling thank you.
Aug. 23rd—lat. 16*16, long. 28*30; dist. 76 miles.
Duringthis day the wind and weather may be briefly
related, the remarks on the wind being almost calm and
ditto on the weather, very hot. Let us hope the return
of fine weather will enable those of our community who
have managed to regain the position natural to bipeds,
viz; perpendicular or as near thereto as they can safely
get, to recoup their wasted (hear !) health, and regain
sufficient strength to resist, and fortitude to overcome
the Waimate's next undulatory and pendulous move-
ments, while bowing her acknowledgments to the
waves, as they obligingly allowed her to pass.
We have another individual tribulation “ rats,” one
“insect” in particular in the “ midnight hour when
ghosts troop forth,” manifesting an intense desire to
disturb the innocent and peaceful slumbers of some
enjoying their naps “al fresco.” But that daring
quadruped will yet suffer for his timerity, and no
doubt saw and heard from his secure “ couch ” the
unavailing search and the threatened what I'll do to
him if I catch him. That wretched effigy paralized
by fear, doubtless showed no more; but sufficient for
the night is the torment thereof, the tormented and
“couch” soon faded from view, to continue the
pleasant phantasms so rudely broken in upon else-
where. The latest novelty is ships, but just now
there is no novelty in that line.
General health, much better to-day thank you.
Exceptions rather languid—cause ennui.
Aug. 24th—lat. 13*51, long. 28 36; dist. 150 miles.
To-day, in a very gentle and unassuming manner,
the N.E. trades have resumed business, but on the
limited liability system, so that they are prepared to
close their establishment, at their earliest convenience.
We are full of good wishes for their health and
strength, if they would but exert it in our favor. We
could wish them to hold on tenaciously, even as the
old lady did with her son's gun, thus, “ During the
“war in America, recruits were much needed, and
“ the female portion (not having to fight themselves)
“ strained every nerve to get the young men to join
“ the army. One bright youth fired with a thirst for
“glory, and urged on by his patriotic mamma, enlis-
“ed; he was put through his drill and acquitted
“himself like a second “ Washington.'' There was
“ one slight drawback to this young man’s ulterior
“ success, he was afraid to fire his musket. He told
“this to his ma, who upbraided him for what she
“deemed his cowardice; he tried, and tried, and
“failed, and failed, at last his ma scolded him to such
“an extent, that he determined to fire his gun or
“perish in the attempt; fortune favored him; on that
“day the recruits were to fire twelve rounds of ball
“ cartridge, the time came, then the order, “ load
“ arms,” present, fire, bang ! but no bang came from
“ his gun, he tried, but couldn't. However, he deter-
“ mined to do it yet, so proceeded to load again on
“the top of the first charge, the order came again,
“present, fire! but no bang again; he didn't know
“ what to do now, but concluded to load each time,
“and pretend to fire, in which he was successful.
“ But after drill he returned home, and in answer to
“ the maternal queries said, he had loaded twelve times,
“ which his ma loudly applauded; but when he con-
“ fessed he had fired nary one, the old lady flew into
“ a rage, and seizing the gun presented it; young
“ hopeful flew outside the door; the old lady fired,
“ bang !—away goes the lady one way, the gun to
“ parts unknown, while this brave youth, thinking it
“ was only one cartridge discharged, roared out, stick
“to her mother, there’s eleven more yet” Result
unknown.
General health, quite well thank you; the physician
has got no work to do-00-00.
ESSAY ON LOVE LETTERS.
What do you mean by a love letter ? What is the
use of a love letter ? What is the difference between
a love letter and any other letter ?


Love letters are of so many different kinds, that it
Would be a very hard matter indeed to answer any
one of these queries collectively; but taking any in-
dividual case, having a knowledge of the Writer, all
are at once answered, and the motive that has
prompted each word, plainly discernable. Of the
various kinds of love letters, we make a classification,
thus,— there is the ridiculous ; the writer has nothing
to say and says it, spends hours over his composition;
tries poetry, and fails, wasting time in an agonizing
seaich for rhyme: something after this fashion—
“ Let's see, (scratches his head) brilliant eyes, beau-
tiful skies, your sweet lips, finger tips, a thousand
“ ships." No! no! that won't do, (scratches his
head) “ Oh, love's delight; go home tightOh ! its
no use, if I take it out of a song book, she'll find me
out; oh ! How the poetry, so he gives it up and com-
poses an epistle, with neither sense nor meaning.
These letter writers do not gain their - object; at any
rate by their letter writing abilities. Next in order
we will take.
THE HONEST LOVE LETTERS.
In this class we find many people who have much
to say, but cannot say it; they are to be pitied—full
to overflowing with good honest feeling, they cannot
express it, but they succeed in their object. The one
‘Co whom they write, understands them well and fills
in their letter for them, with all they could have said,
had their caligraphy been ever so eloquent. What a
sweet construction is put on each blunder, or obscure
meaning, with “Dear John, I’m sure no one but
“ myself can properly understand his letters, but /
“ know what he means. He loves me and I know it,
“ if he falter with fingers numb."
Among the unused strings of love's expression, the
notes are dumb. He shrinks within himself in voiceless
sorrow, leaving the words unsaid. And side-by-side,
we who love the dearest, in silence “ tread."
Another class of love letters give immediate satis-
faction, they are direct to the point, and say what
they have to at once. The pleasure derived from this
class of letters, has not the lingering sweet pleasure
of the last class; there is nothing to find out, all is
plain and straight, and it approaches nearer of all to
a business letter.
As poetry is beautiful thoughts beautifully ex-
pressed, we will keep to poetry and endeavour to pro-
duce a specimen of love letters of the class under
consideration.
If I could have my choice
Of you, or all the treasures earth could hold;
Lover so true; I should choose you,
You —with your laughing voice.
Are more to me than shining gems of gold.
If I could have my choice
Of you, or in fame's highest niche to shine.
You should be mine,
As I am thine,
You—with your low sweet voice,
And perfect face and features soft and fine.
If I could have my choice
Of you, or the most glorious wreath ;
Lover so true,
I should choose you.
You—with your tender voice
And graceful form and loving heart beneath.
Another class is “The Gushing" love letter writer,
his or hers, oh's ah's sighs, lies, tears, biers, fall
like hailstones. Their letters are all interjections
and produce a result. They use' up the whole stock
of tender words at one speaking, or rather writing,
and do not leave themselves enough words to fill an-
other letter, in consequence, after their first letter, the
rest are flat and stale, and are more suggestive of
physic, than the tender matter in hand. It is not
worth while to render a specimen.
There is yet another class—those of the slow, heavv
and sensible type. They know what they have to
say, and they say it, more or less, slowly,' heavily,
sensibly, or gracefully, according to the nature of the
writer; these letters are always worth reading, and
can well be saved for that purpose in after years, for they
contain that one ingredient so necessary to a letter,
but rarely found in love epistles—common sense.
SPECIMEN.
Only a gentle pressure love
Of your arm within my own,
Only a loving look or two.
As we now stroll out alone;
Only a yearning kiss love,
That may rise from the heart of each,
Only an eloquent silence,
Our hearts to full for speech.
Only a few short words love,
While I know my heart is thine;
Only a modest “yes " love,
And I know that you are mine;
Only a short while too love,
Till the time when we may be wed.
Only a life of bliss love.
Until we both are dead.
Thus we may infer that a love letter is an expres-
sion of affection, so mingled with common sense, that
it may be rea'l with interest at any time, after a lapse
of years—treasured beyond all else, a momento of the
undying affection of two loving hearts, one already
passed away perhaps.
Love fond love a chaplet weaves,
Of fresh young loves, and verdant leaves,
And still in fancy I can twine,
thoughts sweet as flowers that once were mine.
What is the use of love letters ? Very brief must
be the reply to this query. For the most part, they
can be used for household purposes, for instance, cigar
lights, fire kindling, and such like, but not all. Do


we not know of cases in which one after a life, all
solitary and alone, has died, there has been found
placed on heart, or in some hidden recess, a moment©
of love in earlier days, unquenched to the latest
thought and breath, it may be but a poor and all but
illegible letter, many a time and oft wept over, in
secret; or a poor long withered flower, a ring, token,
or even a lock of hair; each or any oft recalling those
happy days “Of love’s young dream,” long passed,
never to return.
Yet never more to them—oh, never more,
Has sun, or moon, or stars, been bright as when
Love wildly came and all too wildly fled,
A bright brief gleam across a desert shore.
We will briefly assume that the use of a love letter
is first, to express, and ever after to keep alive the
memory of love; and in many cases to do the same,
by unavailing grief, by keeping alive the sad memo-
ries of the past, or if not that, nothing, or an inane
unmeaning compliment, which is less.
And lastly, what is the difference between a love
letter and any ordinary one ? May I ask, did any of
our gentle readers receive a real, bona-fide, sincere
one; or what is next best, see one received and note
the result ? The contents are known before the letter
is opened; you know it is one even before you receive
it—there is a magnetic charm in it, that tells you
what it is, that no other letter does. If ever a charac-
ter can be determined or judged, or estimated bvthe
hand-writing, it is to be done by closely examining a
love letter with the eye of good honest love. No
hypocrite can so simulate true feeling, and no true
feeling so badly express itself, but the real sentiment
can be at once discovered, creating at once feelings of
disgust, disappointment, or increased happiness, as
the mind grasps that sentiment. Love is said to be
blind, no doubt, mere superficial love is so, but no
sight or sense is so keen as that of real deep and earn-
est love.
We will therefore assume, the difference be-
tween a love letter and an ordinary one, to be—that
one relates, more or less to ordinary life, of which
money matters form the chief subject; while the
other bears the priceless treasure 'of undying love,
firmer and more firmly cementing the sympathies of
two loving hearts “ That soon may beat as one.”
A story that our readers may put to themselves, or
to the writer, if they see the application, may as a
finale, be here related:—
“ A certain old man, Jacob by name, had a most
“ vicious habit of swearing at anything, great or trivial.
“ to use his own expression, he used useful swearing,
“ when it was for amusement ( but took to select orna-
“ mental swearing v> hen out of temper, when he was
“ dreadful to hear. One day he had to take away a
“ cart-load of potatoes, his road lay up a steep hill,
“ on the way, his tail-board got loose, and the pota-
“ toes ran out of his cart, as he progressed in a man-
“ ner delightful to the crowd who followed to hear
“ him swear, when he should discover his mishap.
“He found it out at last, when the cart was near
“ empty; he looked, opened his lips, and the crowd
“ gathered round, after a long pause, the old man
“ seated himself on a stone, and burst into tears, “ It’s
“no use boys he groaned, I can’t do justice to the
“ subject.” And he didn’t swear.
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
THE WAR.
—O—
St .Petersburg, Thursday.
The main army has crossed the Pruth, and is now at
Bukharest. The reserves have been called out. Every-
thing denotes a most active policy on the part of the
Government.
Malta, Thursday night.
The Mediterranean Fleet left here this morning with
sealed orders. It is certain however that their destin-
ation in the first place is Constantinople.
Berlin, Thursday.
Bismarck looks on at European affairs with a quiet
smirk. His public utterances are vaguely pacific,
but warlike preparations throw doubt on the sincerity
of his words.
Port Said, Friday.
England has occupied the Canal, and is rapidly
completing the fortifications, H. M. S. “ Invincible ”
is now here with four gun-boats. Troops are being
landed.
Bukharest, Thursday night.
The Russian troops have arrived here in great num-
bers and are concentrated round this place to the
number of about 450,000 men. A move is about to
take place, and it is confidently asserted, on high
authority that the troops are about to march direct on
Constantinople. Sebastopol is being garrisoned.
Constantinople, Friday night.
Great confusion prevails here, the troops have been
defeated at Limborg, the Servians having rallied on
the news of Russian intervention. The English fleet
is expected. The Russian army is marching on the
city.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Nowhere, August 22nd, 1876.
Dear Mr. Editor,
Where are we ? it is no use trying to deceive
ourselves any longer; we know we cannot answer this
important query; the Captain is evidently at sea, and
the officers only prevaricate. No one can possibly
have a higher opinion of, and greater respect for our
Captain and officers in their private capacities than
myself! but lam forced to the unhappy conclusion
that they are entirely ignorant of the very elements of
nautical science, and we are being taken no one knows
whither.
We see every day Mr. Metcalf and Mr, Greenstreet


playing with their sextants, and the former scribbling
on the black board. Now what does it all amount to ?!
It is only done to cover their own ignorance, for we
know that figurescan bemadetoprove anything. We
had only been on board a very few days when we
found ourselves in the vortex of afearfulhurricane. We
were told we were still in the channel. Now every-
body knows that there never was and probably never
will be such a storm in the channel at this time of
year, which naturally makes us ask, “where then were
we ?” “ Oh ! this slight breeze is nothing,” say they,
“ wait till we get to the Bay of Biscay.” In a very
few days we are told we are in the Bay, and what do
we find ? the sea as smooth as a mill pond, and every-
thing beautiful and delightful. We landsfolk may be
very gullible, but that was carrying the joke too far,
we could hardly swallow that, the veriest child knows
that it is never calm in the Bay of Biscay, but is
always blowing like mad.
Query again, where were we? echo answers “ don’t
know !” I hear someone complaining “ how warm it
is,” “ warm do you say, just wait until we get into
the tropics ”; and we wait accordingly, until last Sun-
day when we notice the Captain and Officers with a
peculiar look of self satisfaction upon their faces and
beaming with delight.
“ We are in the tropics now ” they exclaim; we are
all delighted, and feel inclined to dance a hornpipe
with the Captain (only it is Sunday) and observe a
knowing wink in Mr. Metcalfs left eye, which in our
then ignorance we interpret very differently from
what after events proved it to mean. Our enthusiasm
gets the better of us when we give Mr, Greenstreet
our morning salute, and the slap on the back which
he receives sends him reeling to the spanker-vang for
support.
No more cold, no more storm, no more sea-sickness
now, how delightful, nothing to do but sit under the
awning and gradually melt, too indolent to read, too
lazy to speak ; such are our blissful anticipations. As
the day passes we wonder when it is going to begin,
but to give it a fair chance determine to wait until
morning. Alas ! when morning does arrive, have we
any further doubts as to our Captain, officers and crew
being a delusion and a snare ? unfortunately we can-
not doubt any longer. Everybody rushing for over-
coats, overalls, cloaks, rugs and anything to keep the
cold and wet from their wretched bodies. The wind
blowing nearly a hurricane, the sea mountains high,
and all with one or two exceptions in the throes of
awful sea-sickness. This is the tropics is it ? the ques-
tion is too absurd to dwell upon, but that does not
answer the question “ where are we;” at any time we
may be dashed against an iceberg in either the North-
ern or Southern Polar Regions or sunk upon some
unseen coral reef in the Pacific. Nobody knows any-
thing about it! therefore, as our selected leader, I
demand, Mr. Editor, that you immediately take steps
to get us out of this awful predicament.
Keep the signal H. B. constantly hoisted, in hopes
of attracting the notice of some passing vessel. Have
the bottle ready forthrowing overboard, so as to inform
our distant friends of our impending fate, and write
a fearful strong article on the subject.
I remain,
Your miserable and deluded
Passenger.
[We print the above letter merely to show the
abject condition to which sea-sickness is capable of
reducing the usually solid British intellect, and with-
out the least fear that the aspersion contained in it
will so much ruffle the feathers of our excellent
Captain and his officers.
The following lines have found their way into the
Editor’s Box and we print them in this place with
the reminder to our correspondent “Passenger” that
“ Little Pitchers have long ears.” —Ed.]
II ow very provoking, in tempest or calm,
0 f people to ruffle the nautic’s smooth brow,
Where are we, pray tell us, oh, where are we now?
Can you really assure us we’re quite free from harm.
0 ft repeated the question, one can’t see the reason,
U nless it’s to bother one out of their wits ;
L oud in complaint if on each side the dits,
B egrees, also minutes, don’t appear in due season.
Y et some folks get be-fogged about their location,
Or get in a stew about Ice in the Tropic,
U rgent need have they to read up on the Topic,
M ark, read, and digest old Madcarvers vocation.
R est easy, dear Sirs, I assure you no danger,
M adcarver may wink just as sly as he please,
A nd no doubt he does so on purpose to tease,
R est easy and be to all fear quite a stranger.
S hould storm and sea rise foaming amain,
H ow soon is the query “ where can we be now ?
A nd “ where have we got to,” that now is the row;
L aid low, very prostrate in woe and in pain,
L ow, horribly low, till ’tis calm again.
The primals rested with care and thought,
Will solve a problem now much sought,
An answer to the query see,
In three short words, viz, “ Here are we! ”
THE WATER SUPPLY.
Dear Mr. Editor,
Almost every one on board believes that the
officer administering the precious fluid wishes to do
his duty; in fact the ladies all say, as the truth is,
that he is a very amiable nice young man indeed,
yet a few ignorant persons insinuate that he is stingy
in serving out the water.
Now my humble opinion is that he does the best
he can with the present “ gear,” which is not in the
best working order ; and I would suggest, to prevent
waste, that the present apparatus be dispensed with,


and in lieu of it an Abyssinian pump, be rigged and
worked as soon as possible. These pumps are adapt-
ed only for shallow work, and our young friend will
excuse me if I suggest that he should be very careful
in using it as over-exertion on his 'port might
scuttle the ship, and throw up salt water instead of
fresh.
I would not venture to enter on a scientific subject
had I not had some experience in engineering, my
late lamented father, Mr. Peter Pipes, having acted
as bellows blower in a Parish church in Devonshire
for over thirty years.
Yours truly,
Jemima Pond Pipes,
Spinster.
RATS.
“ What can be done to destroy the vermin?” is
the cry. We were alarmed the other night by a fe-
male shrieking for help, a rat being about to commence
operations upon her infant’s head, and another one
gnawing her corns. The chyropodist’sinthe Colonies
could not benefit by these vagaries if all ships were
infested by these animals.
Another lady, suffering from mental depression in-
formed me the other day, she was compelled to sit up
all night in her berth, with a toothpick to keep the
cockroaches off. I can assure you this nightly exer-
tion has had great effect upon her, and I feel confident
that by your kindly inserting this letter in your valu-
able paper, something will be done to destroy these
“ Tam O’Shanters.”
I am, Sir,
One who must not be worried.
ißrcriß^r.
In the middle of the 17th Century, in one of the
lovliest spots in the county of Devon stood a handsome
house of Elizabethan architecture. It was approach-
ed by a long avenue of limes and chestnuts, loading up
to a broad lawn studded with magnificent trees, which
cast a pleasant shade over the otherwise sunny house.
It was a lovely day in the early part of August, the
avenue and lawn were bright with school girls flitting
about here and there. The sound of their merry
voices was wafted along by the breeze, dying away
at that part of the walk nearest to the road, where
two girls were walking with their arms round each
other’s waist, engaged in earnest conversation.
One, a beautiful dark-haired girl seemed to be
pleading with her companion, Ivy, a fair delicate girl,
of a sweet clinging disposition; while Ruby, the
former, was peculiarly fitted from her fearless nature,
to be Ivy’s friend.
These two girls had come to Raleigh House at the
same time, and although Ruby was the daughter of
Earl Gordon, a staunch Royalist, and Ivy’s father
was Colonel Fairfax, the well known Parliamentary
leader, they had become friends at once.
On the day in question, they were discussing the
pros, and cons, of having a feast in the Green Room,
which, being smaller than the dormitories, was more
fitted for a social gathering. Ruby and Ivy slept in
a room at the other end of a long corridor, and it was
this fact that caused the latter to draw back, as the
thought of passing along there late at night, when
all the lights would be out, frightened her, and it
needed all her friend’s arguments and pleading to
win from her a reluctant consent. Evening came,
and at the appointed time the girls assembled.
After two or three hours enjoyment, during which
time, sundry cakes had been consumed and numerous
ghost tales told, (which had not tended to reassure
Ivy) they separated. Ruby put her arm round her
friend, and they crept quietly on, until, suddenly a
door at the end of the corridor near their room open-
ed, and a tall dark figure glided out, holding a small
lantern in its hand. Ivy fainted, and Ruby, brave as
she generally was, shrank back into a recess, supporting
Ivy in her arms, and gazed at the approaching figure
which came nearer and then passed out of sight.
(To be continued.)
ORIGINAL POETRY.
Mainsail v. Skysail.
Our ship before the Nor’ East trades,
Was making way ahead,
Frtsh on the quarter came the breeze,
The canvas all was spread.
The mainsail pi*oudly bellied out,
Important in Ins power,
And thought the good ship owed to him,
Her fourteen knots an hour.
He stared around, looked fore and aft.
And puffed himself with pride;
Then gave a little angry flap.
And pettishly he sighed.
(t That stuck up little skysail there,
“ He’s not a bit of use, —
" They’d furl him if there came a gale,
ft The silly little goose.”
u Why should he hold his head so high,
“ I should just like to know,
While, I, by whom the work is done,
“ Perforce, must stay below ! ”
The wind was listening the while,
And in his sleeve he laughed !
The Captain shouted “ square the yards ”
“ The wind is hauling aft.”
And then it was a merry jest,
To see the tables turned,


And how the sky-sail from his post,
The main-sail’s laugh returned.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SPIERS and POND having been informed that
gentlemen are disturbed in their rest by juveniles,
rats, and cockroaches, are happy to notify to those
who can’t sleep, or wont do so, that they have received
from New York a consignment of
“ You’ll please allow ” the sky-sail said,
“ That I’m as good as you ;
“ If you are bigger, I can pull
“ When you can nothing do.”
For now the main-sail idly flapped.
Because he had no breeze;
But still the little sky-sail pull’d,
As bravely as you please.
The Captain standing on the poop,
Had listened to it all,
And to the main-sail sharply said,
“ Pride goes before a fall! ”
Winslow’s Soothing Syrup, at 1/1£ per bottle.
Warranted to relieve the poor sufferers at once, the
patient awaking in the morning as bright as a new
button.
It soothes the mind, regulates the system, allays
pain, produces quiet sleep, and is the best known
remedy for over indulgence in lime juice, and such
stimulants.
A moral plain for all to read,
This little strife has shown—
3, Poop Buildings and 3, Green Street.
LOST! STOLEN! OR STRAYED!
“ Before you sneer at other’s faults,
Look straightly at your own.”
From the Cook’s Water Cask on Tuesday morning last,
A Common Brass Chain, which was linked to the key
of the aforesaid cask. It is feared that the party who
has it means to clean it up and sell it to some poor
New Zealand native for gold. But remember people
of the “ Waimate ” that the Cook has sworn that un-
less the chain is given up at once, the person in whose
hands it is found will be stripped and placed on the
stove at noon the same day the chain is found, for
that is the hottest time.
V. V. V.
Answers to Last Week’s Enigmas, &c.
1. When She is in Stays.
2. When She is Attached to a Boy (Buoy.)
3. Because they Run oyer the Sleepers.
By Order,
COOK’S MATE,
GUESS ME !
Ship “ Waimate.”
I’m but a little letter, but
I’m sure you’ll never get a
More effective rouser on
The “ Waimate.”
WAIMATE WEST END AMATEUR
MUSICAL SOCIETY.
Rehearsals have been fixed for Monday and Friday
next, at four p.m.
Not the weighing of the anchor,
Nor the storm that rends the spanker.
Nor the brat that spying “ Tommy ”
Shouts out hi ! ma ! te !
NOTICE.
Missing since the 33rd day of last Octember
A YOUNG MAN,
From passenger to A. 8.,
From the ancient to the baby.
From stowaway up even to our
Sly matey.
Every one looks all the quicker,
Each one does his work the slicker,
When I’m hoisted bv the Capt’n of the
“ Waimate.”
age about 82 years,complexion about 5 ft-9in,; height,
rather pale; nose, red; Turkish dress ; sawdust coat,
lined with cod-liver oil ; Wellington boots, turned in-
side out; last seen crossing Hyde Park on a washing
machine. If the said young man sees this advertise-
ment he will please return to his brokenhearted
mother.
COUCH TO BE SOLD.
And now till this day week
I’ll play at “ hide and seek,”
Then at least you’ll know my
Whereabouts from
A Rich Couch (Temp. Charles II) mahogany head
and legs, covered with as good silk as ever was sat in ;
is thoroughly free from moth and well stuffed. The
embroidered work upon the arm is of a neat find
chaste design. Full particulars as to price, size, and
with permission to inspect may be had at the
BLACK HOLE,
Rhymer T.
TRUE—BUT LOW.
How doth the little passenger
Delight to bark and bite !
He swiggeth lime juice all the day,
And sweats it out at night.
GREEN STREET.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Grbenstreet, at his Office and Residence, Deck Castle,
Waimate, August 26th, 1676.




No. 4.
ISSUED WEEKLY.
Saturday, Sept. 2nd1876,
EDITORIAL. We have partially altered our determination as
We have to apologise for the lateness of our issue expressed in the poster ot August 31st. The paper
this week; our readers are aware of the cause. will still be issued weekly, but only one copy and
We cannot help referring to the matter, and stat- under the following' regulations, designed to insure its
ing the case as clearly as possible. Out of seven f 01n g the ro ™ d ot whole ship as quick as possible :
copies of the Gazette which had been issued, we Sa “ 0N — an y P ersoI > to whom the Gazette is delivered
found after last week’s issue that only two remained wl11 '* as s00nas P osslble . to the Editor, and
in our possession. This was partly our own fault, for *°, n0 °™ er P 6 !* 0 ,"- , A f as * s dol ; e wltb in , th «
perhaps we had not made it sufficiently clear at first sldoon ’ lb will be landed to Mr. Taylor who undertakes
that all copies must be returned to us. But it was *° ! ead °^ lC Vi 1K ! Ca f s P as ® en^ ers as care
quite necessary that one copy at least, of each issue, bear UI^| erta ces to do tbe same f° r
should he saved, as it was intended, if possible, to tha peerage passengers. The Gazette will then be
print the Gazette in New Zealand for the convenience se "‘ fol ™ rd , *? eltl "f r watob ’ be read du "“ g tbe
of passengers and others. Therefore in our issue of ne xt w atc i Je ‘°w; A Wlb then be passed to the next
Aug. 26th, we appealed to our readers to return the wat( ‘J 1 m the same manner, and returned as soon as
missing copies. No notice was taken of this appeal, P 0SSlble to the
and therefore we posted a notice to the effect that no A t> * ™cTTt« * nTT1r
further issue of the paper would take place until some, AUTOBIOGRAPHY,
at least, of the missing copies should be returned. 0
We think that all our readers will agree that we , 1 have , no doubt 1 was born or T should not b «
took only a fair course in the matter. We would re- bere n P w * as recollection of that important
mind them, that it is impossible for all in the ship to ® verd 111 existence; I regret to say, that although
see the paper if any person, negligently or otherwise, was mosd certainly present, I have none,
keeps it beyond the time actually required to read it; I remember my first impressions of this world
also that it is impossible to print the Gazette (which distinctly. First I thought what a flannelly world it
it is still hoped may be done) in New Zealand, if there was > and then as I grew older and able to sprawl and
is no full set to be had. kick my limbs about, (they looked like well filled
It takes four days work to prepare two copies for sausa 8“ es then) osed to lay on the bed beside my
publication, irrespective of the work of contributors motber an( J wonder why the tufts on the counterpane
themselves. This labour is not in the least grudged for would not let me pick them up; then I would try and
the interest and amusement of those in the ship pro- a la m 7 mouth, this to a baby I found to be
vided that it's results are properly utilized; but it is an /f 0m P bshment rec l uinn g considerable practice,
simply not worth the trouble, if half of our would-be and fo , r . some da * v * . tned and trled 111 vain > often
readers never see the paper, because some one else succeeding to reaching an ear or eye, or perhaps
chooses to detain it, and it those who do see it only dealing myself a blow on the nose, such as nowadays,
get half an hour's read without the chance of get- should feel ashamed to receive from anybody; let
ting a full copy in New Zealand. We have at present a one •
no copy whatever of the Gazette for August 19th, Then there was the process of dressing and un-
the second issue. A copy ot this is necessary to the dressing—oh, such an operation—my mother seated
plan of printing the paper, and we shall therefore on a chair, with its legs cut short, so as to make it
endeavour, if the original is not returned to us shortly, lower, with an ample rough flannel apron spread
to make one up as nearly like it as possible, so that across her lap, on one side a large white earthern
the number may be preserved. This will take at least basin fixed into a wooden stand about the height of
two day's work, and looking upon the prospect, we my mothers knees, on the other side “ the baby's"
cannot help uttering an appeal admisericordiam. basket, full of mysterious things, which even now, I
Good people ! dj search your chests and your papers, am not able to understand the full and proper use of.
and try to unearth the “ Waimate Gazette" for I know there was a hard pudding-looking thing with
August 1 9th, and save your unhappy Editor from the a fringe round it, stuck full of little shiny white
miserable prospect of two extra da} s work for nothing, knobs, and perhaps, here and there a black one. This


I have since found out was the pincushion. Then
there was a round wooden box, the lid of which came
off with a squeak, the box being filled with a feathery
looking thing and a lot of flour-like stuff. I used to
like that box because I knew when I heard the squeak
there was to be no more nasty cold water, but they
would tickle me all round my neck with the feathery
thing, under my arms and everywhere—l liked this
and used to laugh as well as I could then. After
patient research I found this to be the powder box
and puff.
I never could make out why my first garments were
so long, and why the second edition of garments was
so lamentably shortened. I have always supposed
that the long clothes were intended to give me some
idea of the length I might ultimately grow to, or per-
haps, they were meant to make me look nice and
pretty and innocent in the nurses arms. I forgot this
venerable old party before. I know her name though,
it was Mrs. Shelcott, and she had a son a sailor. The
number of " pretty little dears " that worthy old lady
wasted upon me is simply incalculable, if they had
been of any use whatever I am sure I should have been
about the best looking fellow in this world.
The way she used to nurse me I have ever had
reason to thank her for; she didn't dandle me up and
down on her arms, no ! not she—she knew better.
She used to lay me down on her lap, like laying down
a sofa pillow there, and then roll me over and over,
backwards and forwards, between her great strong fat
arms and her lap. 1 thank her for this, because I know
it must have been the way I was rolled out so as to
cause me to grow to the respectable height of 5 feet
10£ inches.
Then the pap, I know it was nice and sweet and all
that; but there was a drawback even to that, and this
was it. I knew as well as possible that with every
spoonful of that pap, however good it might be, I was
sure to have the nurses fat little finger pushed into
my mouth with the back-end of the spoonful, and
this I did not like; but I used to beat her at that
game sometimes —I used to take the pap in very quiet-
ly—finger and all—and when she thought she had got
it safely stowed in my little hold, I would send it all
out again down my bib and cry. When I did this, she
used to say, " and does its little stomach ache then,"
and forthwith give me a spoonful of peppermint.
This was one of the ways I played " old soldier " with
the nurse.
Most babies have a "coral " when they are cutting
their teeth, or else a nice piece of india-rubber to
suck—l didn't—l had an old ivory ring off a worn
out martingale which was part of the gearing of
somebody's horse—perhaps it was the doctors. Cut-
ting teeth is not bad fun, because everybody feels
sorry for you and says nice things, but sometimes
after they have said all sorts of nice things, they give
you half a nasty powder in milk, or water, or some-
thing. They used to call them " Steedman's Soothing
Powders/’’ They didn't soothe me much though, 1
used to " la, laa : la-a-a," awfully after one of them.
A nasty great rough thing they call “ Papa" has
just come into the room and wants me to go and kiss
him, hut I won’t. I'll cry first, and so I do. I heard
him say I was a "crosspatch " —I doi/t believe it—l
only cry when they won't let me do as I like and
when I’ve got the stomach-ache.
I'm going to be christened to-day, they've rigged
me out in all sorts of finery, and there's a thing on
wheels at the door, they put me in it on nurses knee
and off we go to church. Here is a nasty old man,
dressed in white, like myself—except his nose and that
is red. He keeps on mumbling something—l don't
know what. I could talk as well as he can, if I had
as many teeth. Presently he flops a lot of nasty cold
water all over my face —I cry and open my mouth,
a lot of water gets in and nearly chokes me, so I
splutter and the nurse has to turn me over to pat my
back. If he wants to christen me any more, he must
do it on the back of my head—they have christened
me , I've got a silver mug, and pa says, my other
name is
ANY OLD CLO'.
Any old clo’. I will give in return, the only ster-
ling coin I possess; paying in willing service, and
sincere gratitude, for any cast off wearing apparel,
unfit for use, and about to be thrown away, as worn-
out, useless, and done for.
My near proximity to the ladies and gentlemen
about the ship, in the performance of my simple duties
creates in me a feeling of shame, at my (at no time
prepossessing) appearance; and I gladly avail myself
of any opportunity to hide my poor ragged self from
view. The feeling is new to me, and strikes me with
the more force on that account. How true it is that
" one half of the world know not, and still less cares,
" how the other half lives," or rather exists. It may
interest some of the ladies and gentlemen if I briefly
recount my short, profitless, useless, and wretched life,
as far as I can remember.
On the 22nd of May, 1857, at the City of Man-
chester 1 first saw the light. My father was a brick-
layer's labourer, earning a precarious livelihood, being
more frequently out of work, and tramping in search
of it, than in employment; and most of the little money
he did earn was spent at the public house, our wretch-
ed home, being rarely any the better for his provid-
ing. My mother, with four young children (girls)
beside myself, and an elder brother, earned a scanty
subsistence, by making match boxes, she, for many
years receiving little, or no assistance from my father.
When I was four years old, my mother with her
children came to London. Father continuing to work,
when it could be got, in London; or in tramping about
the country in search of it in slack times.
Education I never had, I am now nineteen years of


age, and cannot read even so well as a child of five.
During the last year I have attended an evening school,
and acquired the little knowledge I possess, but in the
I do not doubt that I can soon learn some calling in
life, by which to earn the small living I shall require;
and thanking captain, passengers, and crew, for their
short time I attended school, I learnt to see
myself kind consideration
~ in not converting me into an object
as I am, and to avoid the disreputable acquaintances
of my class, to whom I had no other feeling than dis-
gust and contempt. As soon as I was old enough,
that is, at ten years of age, I left my mother, who
(with my sisters, then young children) could barely
earn sufficient to support herself, and sti-ove to earn my
own living. I should have stated that at the age of
six years, I was thrown from a swing, and had my
thigh broken, the limb being permanently shortened,
and I rendered a cripple for life.
of ridicule, or a helpless butt for cruel amusement, I
beg to subscribe myself gratefully,
John Brown.
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
August 25th—lat. 12-21, long. 28-57; distance,
102 miles.
I used at intervals of about a fortnight, to obtain
jobs on board steamers, to crawl inside boilers and
flues, to clear out the soot from the tubes and other
parts. At this I could earn about eight
or ten shillings a week, and maintained myself very
well, contributing as much as I could to my mother's
support ; till one day, while at work on the steamer
“ Duke of Argyle," I fell down thestokehole and again
broke my leg at the knee joint, this completely crip-
pled me, and after a long confinement in hospital, I
came out to the world again, maimed, friendless,
penniless, and homeless, (for I could not call my mo-
ther's poor home mine,) even as I am now.
We are not troubled with much wind to-day, a little
more would be very acceptable, but of more there are no
signs, so we must be content to jog along at the mag-
nificient speed of two knots an hour, till further orders.
At any rate, it is warm enough for all intents and pur-
poses, for “ Old Sol ” gets himself up regardless of
expense, (to us,) this clear calm weather.
The principal item in the record of winds and
weather, is summed up in ditto weather, a.m ; ditto
weather, p.m Speaking of slowness and warmth com-
bined, brings to recollection a little story, a love epis-
ode in fact :
“ A very bashful young gentleman, was paying his
“ addresses to a young lady, who had almost despair-
“ ed of the “eventful question" ever being “ popped
“ for though his affection was very warm , his bashful-
“ ness made him progress so very slowly towards that
“ important query, that, she determined to stir him up
“ a bit. He called one day, when she was alone in
“ the house, and after discussing the weather and
“ other small talk, Miss said, —looking slyly at him,
“‘1 dreamt of you last night. “Did you, really ? lor !'
“ ‘ Yes, Idrearatyou kissed me,' ‘ Did you really ? lor !'
“ c what did you dream your Ma said ?' f Oh, 1 dreamt
“ she wasn't at home.' ‘Oh ; lor !' A light seemed to
“ flash upon this young man's intellect, and immedi-
“ ately something was heard to crack !—perhaps it was
“ his whip, perhaps not, at any rate they were married
“ in a month after."
After many shifts and struggles for a bare
I got a box and brushes and became a shoe-black,
but at this I could do but little, —the regular brigades,
and the shoe-black's homes, as well as numbers of lads
like myself, earning their living by the same occupa-
tion soon drove me away, and I became reduced to the
lowest stage of poverty and destitution, scarce know-
ing in which direction to turn in order to earn a bare
existence.
I have often heard of the many facilities of af least
gaining a honest livelihood in New Zealand, and the
desire to get there has been strong in me, to get there
has been indeed the one ruling thought with me for a
long time, no way was open to me but to stow away
in some ship, bound to my El Dorado; ignorant and
crippled, as I am, every way is barred against me. I
do not possess the activity of other lads of ray age, I
know no trade or calling, and I am totally uneducated,
have no standing in society, the only companions I
could associate with, my better nature revolts from, and
tries to avoid. A short time ago I stowed away on board
the ship “Paramatta," but was discovered, and landed
at Plymouth. Getting to London again, the craving
to get by any means to New Zealand, became stronger
than ever, and I ultimately found a secure hiding place
on board the “ Waimate,” I succeeded in crawling out
occasionally, and procuring food, and I thank God, and
all the good people on board, that I have been per-
mitted to remain, and have been treated with a kind-
ness lam not entitled to and never expected. Should
the fact of my stowing away in this ship be overlooked,
and I allowed to go free on arrival at New Zealand, |
General health is pretty well thank you.
August 26th—lat. IP2O, long. 28'57 ; distance,
62 miles.
To-day, as yesterday, we have a good deal of ditto
weather; that is, if it is not quite calm, it is as near
thereto as it can safely get, without committing itself.
Oh! we hear some of our ladies say, as they look at
the porpoises, shark, and pretty little pilot fishes, tak-
ing their constitutional so deliciously coolly, wagging
their tails in evident satisfaction, oh, I wish I were a
fish ; dear me, what fish would you like to be ? Oh !
a whale of course ! ! (pointing to a young shark follow-
ing the ship) wouldn't I blow. lam sure the whales
are much to be envied; indeed long ago when whale
bone constituted an iudispensible article of dress, a


lady poet thus apostrophizes these pretty little crea-
tures. (N. B. a whale is between sixty and seventy
feet long.)
Ye whales that swim the vasty deep,
Repine not at your fate ;
Your flesh illuminates the world,
Your bones make women great.
The novelty of to-day is, “ such a great shark
He attracted much attention.
The bait attracted him ;
How he took it off, don't mention,
But we could not take him.
That miserable wretch of a shark was afraid, to take
hold of the hook, the “ great coward," but he took
good care to put himself outside of as much pork as
ought to make his tail curl the wrong way all the days
of his life, —I hope it will have that effect, for then he
will hereafter progress backwards ever after this, in
the same fashion, that the troops did during the war,
when they were ordered to the assault of Richmond; —
“double quick, charrrrrrge; came the word of
“ command, and the gallant fellows, full of visions of
“glory, charrrged accordingly. But what is this?
“ The doomed city gets fart her away, farther and farther
“ away, awa aay, until it fades from view altogether.
“ A halt is made ; a council of officers is called ; a strict
“ investigation is made; a startling discovery is made.
“ It is discovered that the soldier's contract shoes, have
“ been made with as much heel behind, (or rather more)
“ than there was toe before. The daring soldiers, in
“ their zeal and hurry to attack the foe, put on their
“ shoes hind part before, so that they advanced to the
“ charge backwards, and the city was saved." When
tbeeye witness left, the general was gloomily examin-
ing the distant city through the bottom of a tumbler,
with a piece of lemon and a spoon in it. The subor-
dinates reconnoitred the scene through an inverted
bottle.
General health, pretty well thank you.
August 27th—lat. 10 41, long. 28 - 46 ; distance
45 miles.
W T e have to-day a continuance of ditto weather, that
is to say the wind continues to be so very light that
it may be called the most gentle of all gentle zephyrs,
wafting our “ frail bark " along in a most gentle man-
ner also, (too much so.) As to-day is the sabbath we
will have a homily instead of a story, (say) on con-
tentment. How do we get along if we are discontent-
ed? Why everything wears a more or less sombre
and gloomy hue, everything is sombre ; all beauteous
nature cannot produce a single charm for us, the
weather is intolerable, we cannot enjoy the sunshine,
we find fault with the clouds, the rain is an abomin-
ation, the children squall, everything, and everybody
conspire to annoy us; we have in fact a dreadful pain
(in our temper,) and the sooner we go to bed out of
the way the better. Per contra, we are contented
with our lot, what a difference ! we are cheerful and
bright, the sea is so blue, our hearts are so light, all
nature smiles with us, the air is more balmy, the sky
more clear, the very flowers have a sweeter fragrance,
the little birds sing more blithely, the dear children
cry more musically (?) the moon and stars shine more
beautifully, we are in short better and happier in every
way. To say nothing of the £5O reward.
Moral —lt is better to be contented than discontented,
if the latter, you had better go to bed at once. As on
our previous sabbaths, we have enjoyed two excellent
and well attended services.
Health much as usual thank you.
August 28th—lat. 9 54, long. 28‘30; distance
64 miles.
Still ditto weather and not much progress made.
However the calm weather will not last much longer
so we had better make the most of it. We have tried
to get up a series of raffles, in the E. Central portion
of our city. We have not succeeded much. A fancy
fair might be safely got through if the ladies at the
stalls wouldn't cheat in such an outrageous manner as
they usually do, they wheedle innocent gentlemen
into buying everything that they don't want, and don't
they make you pay for what you do buy, oh, no !
“ A gentleman at oneof these fairs, had safelv resist-
“ ed all the persuasions of one of the syren stall keepers,
“and felt himself more than a match for them all,
“and to display his bravery, offered five guineas for
“ an article not for sale , —a lock of the lady's hair ;
“ promptly the fair one severed one of her beautiful
“ tresses, handed it, and pocketed the £5 ss. The
“purchaser in triumph displayed his trophy to a
“mutual friend, who quietly remarked—“l expect she
“ had you there, for of my own certain knowledge, I
“ know she only paid three guineas for the whole wig."
He almost fainted, and the wretch declares, the fair
sex are nothing but a delusion and a snare.
The general health is only so, so, thank you. It is
so very hot.
August 29th—lat. 8-37, long. 27"43; distance
96 miles.
We have certainly done a little towards three figures
to-day, and are sufficiently proud of the performance.
Ah ! and if we have done all that to-day, what shall we
not do to-morrow. Echo answers, don’t know, per-
haps less, which need not surprise us even so much as
Mr. Daniel Fender was surprised when his sweetheart
crushed his hat, just as he had “ popped." “Mr.
“ Daniel Fender had a bran new hat, in which he
“ arrayed his proud form and went to see his dear
“ Mary, fully primed to put the “ question " extra-
“ ordinary. He got through it all beautifully, and
“ had just concluded with, “ say, yes," dear Mary, and
“ I will be your ever, and faithful, D. Fender; when
“ Mary quite overcome, sank into a chair, the chair
“whereon he had placed his pride, his beloved hat,
“ and—
“ He blushed fiery red,


Rises p.m.
Sets a.m.
Rises p.m.
Sets a.m -
Sept. 1st—4.40
4.49
Sept. 5.—7.30
7.52
„ 2. —5.28
5.22
„ 6.—8.14
1.35
„ 3. —6. 5
6.25
„ 7.—9.00
9.40
» 4. —6.47
7.26
,, 8.—next week.
Full Moon 3rd, 9. p
m. 1 Last quarter 10th, 4.40 a.m.
New „ 17th, 9.45 p
.m. |
1st. quarter 25th, noon.
“ Her heart went pit-a-pat;
“ She gently hung her head,
“ And look’d down at the mat, —
“ He trembled in his speech;
“ He rose from where he sat;
“ He shouted with a screech,
“ You're sitting on my hat !!!”
General health pretty well thank you, only it is so hot.
August 30th—lat. 733, long. 27'43; distance
70 miles.
To-day we have got for the time, out of the doldrums,
and are now enjoying a glorious breeze from the
African South West monsoon, and making good pro-
gress to the Eastward. That we have had the dol-
drums to a certain extent, is beyond doubt. By the
bye, a certain “ infidel ” letter found its way into the
orthodox columns of the “ Waimate Gazette,” asking,
‘ where are we ?’ And echo answered, ‘don’t know !’
Know nmv, pagan echo, that you are in the doldrums—
doldrums; but the name of the horrid thing is
enough, so we will cut it short, as the barber did
Mr. Watkins’ most luxuriant crop:
“ Mr. W. had an intense horror of talkative people,
“as well as a fine head of hair. He had occasion to
“ have it cut, and innocently went to the most gabbling
“ barber in all the city, to be done. Being seated,
“ the barber commenced to operate, and began one of
“ his interminable stories. This irritated Mr. W. who
* ‘ desired him to ‘ ‘ cut it short. ” “ Yes sir,” said the bar-
“ ber, gabbling away. “ Cut it short,” said Mr. W.
“ with some asperity. “Yes sir” said the barber, mag-
“ gingaway,withincreased rapidity. “ Cut it short !”
“ roared Mr. W. ‘Yes sir, yes sir !’ returned the barber,
“ cutting and gabbling away faster than ever. “ Will
“ you cut it short" at last screamed Mr. W. “I can't
“ cut it any more, sir,” roared the barber; “ look in the
“ glass, and see I’ve cut it all of.” He look’d, stagger-
ed, fainted, —his hair, —his beautiful hair, —all gone,
all gone! Oh, Mrs. Allen, your zylobalsomum will
be wanted here.”
General health quoit well thank you, with a few
sentimental exceptions.
We have a bucket quoit match now daily,—it is
worthy of remark, that the quoits do go into the
buckets ( occasionally .)
August 31th—lat. 0*41., long. 25‘6; distance 141
miles.
To-day after our short struggle with the late vari-
able weather, we have got into a nice steady breeze,
just enough head sea to remind our citizens that they
are still mortal; and yet in some few cases, subject
to the pangs and throes of that gentle monitor “ sea
sickness.” But most of our good folks are not only
inured to the dangers of the “ nasty ” deep; but
have got their sea legs and daring feats of pedestrian-
ism at times performed, are a marvel to see. With what
recklessness and self-confidence, they can fetch the
lee scuppers at the heaviest lurches, is really wonder-
ful, though some of the worthy citizenesses, and at times
citizens too, deeming prudence to be the better part
of valour, prefer the prone attitude, under the im-
pression that if they do fall, it will not be very far
at any rate. But putting aside the grace and ele-
gance of the “pose ” —what they gain in ease, they
lose in speed, for were they to bustle about and face
the 11 foe," he would soon be vanquished.
“Ah ! woe is me !
“ My heart will break !
“ I have burst in 2-tears!
“ Alack! alack !!
“ It is not, it was not,
“ Heigho, the critic! the critic!!
DIED.
At the early age of 0, —of poor but honest parents
of the male persuasion, it did not die of measles, nor
of various hooping coughs at one time, nor of age,
nor of anything else; it never was, it couldn’t be
did, —it wasn’t christ’ned, it was to have been named
“ critic,” of (y)east end origin, enough (y)east end
new’s couldnotbegottomsike it rise, and it didn’t rose;
(not much.) Let us wish its parents better luck next
time, but as their “ sigh ’’entitle endeavours have
failed this time, to produce a “ critic,” do please ac-
cept a “ critique ” from a more successful parent,
even though some of its (the parents) infants are a
leetle astray, they are no doubt contemplating com-
ing under the passenger Act and have stowed away
or been stolen with the idea of a market. The parent
does not despair of finding his lost ones, and the kid-
nappershad betterbewarrrrrre, of vennngee hance^
The general health is quoit well thank you.
We can now (if we look) see the three beautiful
constellations of Cygnus the Swan, Centaur, the nearest
fixed stars to the earth, and the Crux Australis, or
Southern Cross.
The Magellan clouds too will soon be visible.
The moon will rise and set at about the following
times during the week, but will not be answerable
for any (s-centimental) delay that may arise through
unavoidable delay, (of the clock.)
Jupiter keeps late hours as the Evening Star.
Venus is up long before the lark, as the Morning
Star.
Two Eclipses this month, both invisible.
Sept. 1st —lat. 5-46., long. 22T2 ; distance, 190
miles.
To-day, we have had a nice Southerly breeze all


through, and though a contrary wind, it has been a
very refreshing one, and has revived the drooping
spirits of our folks amazingly; there is no doubt
that the breeze, though not wafting us in the pre-
cise direction we wish to go, will soon lead us to
better things, that is, the South East trades. We
have been remarkably free from the usual disagree-
able weather of the calm region, between the trade
wind systems; it is a rare thing to pass from the
Northern tropic to the Southern, without severe
squalls of wind, accompanied by torrents of rain,
thunder, lightning, and various other atmospherical
amusements. In our case we have had none, literally
none at all. I am not aware that a single flash of
lightning has been seen since the Sunday prior to
our leaving London. Speaking of electricity reminds
me of a startling scientific discovery, made by young
ladies, to wit: —“ If two ladies each take hold of a pole
“of a galvanic battery, and then kiss each other , the
“ sensation on the lips is precisely the same as that
“ produced by the pressure of a moustache.” This won-
derful addition to our scientific discoveries began at
a ladies college, and in the absence of the professor.
The number of batteries supplied to families where
grown up daughters prevail has been enormous,
curious very.
General health, quite well thank you, with a few
exceptions.
Sept. 2nd—position lat. 4-59, long. 20*16;
distance, 170 miles.
During the past 24 hours there hasbeenafine steady
breeze, so refreshing and cool, as to keep all the folks
in a high state of preservation. At 8 o’clock this
morning, the oracle of cheating the doldrums was
performed by tacking ship to the South Westward.
It is now “ Hey! for the South East trades ” and
the “ Line,” the crossing of which by special arrange-
ment is to take place on Monday about noon, (that’s
settled). In some of our wanderings, to and fro, we
hear curious things, curiously discussed; sometimes
in a metaphysical manner, at others, rather more ab-
trusely. The subject of Auroras was on the table
the other evening, when some highly scientific (?) and
extremely original theories were adduced. Amongst
others were “ don’t you see this,” you never saw the
Northern lights when the moon was shining; well,
you see, the North Pole is turned towards the moon
when its new moon , that's why you can't see her , and
then she’s a shining on the Ice , don’t you see, and it’s
the reflection of the Ice that makes the Northern
lights! (lucid very). A still more lucid description,
or explanation of this phenomena, may be thus
taken:—
“ When the melofygistic temperature of the horizon is
“ such, as to caloricise the impurient indentation of the
“ hemispheric analogy; the cohesion of the borax cur-
“ bistus becomes surcharged with infinitesimals, which
“ are thereby deprived of their fissural disquisitions.
“ Ihis effected, a rapid change is produced in the
“ thorambumper of the gyasticutis palerium, which
“ causes a convacular in the hexagonal antipathies of
“ the terrestrium acqua verusli; the clouds then be-
“ come a mass of deoderumised speculae of cermocular
“ light, which like our lunar eclipse can only be seen
“ when visible.” Some of our readers may not be quite
clear as to what it all means, and I am much the
same way myself, but that's it you may depend.
As we now approach the Equator, a short descrip-
tion of the saturnalia—customary on the occasion in
years gone by, but now exploded, since the civiliza-
tion of sailors, may be useful. The one grand fea-
ture of the ceremony was grog. That was to be the
grand motive power, with it immunity could be pur-
chased, without it “ look out." All the necessary
arrangements being made, “Neptune,” “ Amphitrite,”
“Davy Jones,” the “Barber” and “Assistants,” a
“ Bear,” “ Doctor,” “ Satyrs,” and the other “ Dra-
matis personce" fully arrayed in (un) suitable guise,
“ Neptune ” hails the ship from over the hows with
a stentorian voice, “ Ship Ahoy!” “ Halloa!” replies
the captain, “ Have you any strangers coming into
my dominions ?” “Yes,” (so many.) lam coming on
board. And on board they come, a motley throng,
the principal article of dress being old canvas, and
swabs, with bunches of rope yarns, artistically arrang-
ed in various novel designs about their stalwart
forms. “ Neptune ” and his wife, “ Amphy,” are
drawn round and round the decks, enthroned on a
gun carriage, followed by the motley procession of
Doctor, Barber, &c.
After a deal of form and ceremony, “Neptune”
demands and receives (after certain intervals of rum)
a list, of all persons on board, who are now crossing
the line for the first time, and the whole have to be
shaved, or buy off, with rum or an equivalent. The
first luckless wight having been seized, the doctor
feels his pulse, the barber gets a brushful, (a tar
brush) of his abominable mixture, which he calls
lather, composed of the most filthy materials; and
the first question is propounded —“ where do you
come from?” The unfortunate opens his mouth to
reply, and a dab of the lather fills that aperture for
him at once, and the operation is repeated, as often
as he opens his mouth to cry out, or abuse his tormen-
tors. He is then lathered and the barber produces
what he terms a razor, viz : about three feet of hoop
iron, with which he scrapes away, till he thinks the
patient is shaved satisfactorily. In former times,
ships did not have deck houses as now, the space on
and about the main hatch being taken up by the
largest boat called the long boat. Into this boat,
filled with water, and superintended by the Bear and
the Sea God’s assistants, is the unfortunate individual
thrown, and every effort is made to drown him;
brutal violence being often used, to create fun enough.
Many persons have been seriously injured before fin-
ally escaping from the ordeal. Buckets of water are
freely distributed on all comers, and the mildest form
the ceremony can assume, is getting, and giving,


good drenchings. In some very rare instances, some
fair lady has at her own request been shaved; but then,
the exquisite care of Jack, that the water, the razor,
the soap, &c., should be perfectly clean, is as ludicrous
as the rest of the performance. The one great saving
clause in the whole transaction, is Jack’s extreme
gentleness to the fair sex. No use for any male in-
dividual to lock himself in his room, or arm himself
with pistols; for they would be taken from him at
any risk, and paraded before him in a bucket of water.
A jolly good drunk usually follows ; and it is a good
thing that it is not allowed now.
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
—o —
Captain's Corner, Sept. Ist.
The telegraph lines are all intercepted and all com-
munication with the seat of war is broken off. It is
doubted whether this is the result of a manoeuvre of
the enemy in Turkey or of the concussion of the air
resulting from the discharge of guns at the com-
mencement of the shooting season.
In consequence of the fact stated in the above
telegram, we are unable to present to our readers any
war notes this week.
If the destruction of the telegraph wires is to be
attributed to a bold stroke on the part of the Russian
Generals, we can understand the importance of the
move. It is indeed a masterly stroke of policy to
keep the news of the war and Russian tactics from a
newspaper like the “ Waimate Gazette,” which pos-
sesses such unparalled influence, not only at home,
but also in foreign courts. We congratulate the
enemy on the temporary success of their wise scheme.
TIME.
There are no doubt many of our readers, to whom
an esssay on this subject, can only be a waste of words,
but still there may be some few, to whom it may con-
vey information, and for their edification I subscribe
this short article. What is time ? Time is eternity.
To our limited minds, time is no more than a classi-
fication, system, or record of years, months, and days,
hours, minutes, and seconds.
The Great “Architect of the Universe" placed
lights in the firmament, they were to divide the day
from the night;—and were to be for signs and for
seasons, for days, and for years; by what mechanical
means has “ He " accomplished His purpose, nothing
can be more beautiful. Nothing can be more admir-
ably perfect, than the spinning motion of our earth,
and all the planets, as they revolve round their com-
mon centre—the sun; by which, each body in the
course of its day, alternately exposes and withdraws
every part of its surface; to and from, the Solar light
and heat. The length of days and years, differ in the
heavenly bodies according to their distance from the
sun, thus:—
Planet. Length of day. Length of year.
H. M. S. DAYS. HOURS.
Mercury 24 5 38 87 23J
Venus 23 20 54 224 16f
Earth 23 56 3£ 365
Mars 24 39 21 687
Jupiter 10 55 49 4.332 14 J
Saturn 10 29 17 10,659
Uranus —B4 years.
Though the solar heat does doubtless , reach the
most remote planet of our system : it is hardly feasible
to suppose that they entirely depend on the sun for
light. Take the case of Uranus, this planet’s distance
from the sun, is estimated at one thousand, eight hun-
dred and twenty two millions of miles. To the inhabi-
tants of this planet therefore, the sun would appear
but very little larger than Venus does to us. Bid
they depend on the sun then, they would have a winter
and summer of forty-two years duration each ; which
could not correspond with the other works of the
“ Great Giver of all good." Let us come down from
this too high flight, and proceed to the practical version
of our subject, as understood, and applied by ourselves
in our daily life. The longest period of time that can
come within our comprehension is that termed, the
“ Cycle of the precession of the equinoxes.”
It is of course known to everyone that our earth is
flattened at the poles, and swelled at the equator,
forming what is known as an “ oblate spheroid.” By
the joint action of the sun and moon, on the protuber-
ant parts, a slow, almost imperceptable change, takes
place in the position of the equinoxes ; they apparent-
ly moving backward, in a direction contrary to the
order of the signs of the zodiac, at the rate of 501-
seconds yearly; making the entire circuit, through
all the signs, in about twenty-six thousand years.
Many scientific men in different ages, have made
this fact the basis of a poor human theory; accounting
for, and predicting the destruction of the world by
flood ; caused by a change in the earth’s equilibrium,
and the consequent overflowing of one hemisphere,
by the waters of the other.
A Solar Cycle, is a period of four years, in each of
which the relative motions and positions of the earth
and sun are repeated. The same date and elements,
answering again nearly.
A Lunar Cycle, consists of about 18 years, and 244
days. The moon's nodes in that time complete the
entire circuit of the ecliptic and her motions, lunar
phenomena, and the order of the eclipses, is again
repeated.
A Sidereal year, is the time in which the sun
(apparently) performs a complete revolution in the
heavens, returning to the point from whence he started
in 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, and 12 seconds; —I
would wish our young folks here to note the cause of
leap year. We say there are 365 days in a year, and
mean by that, that the earth has turned that number
of times on her axis, and produced that number of days


and nights. But the earth has actually made 366
revolutions on her axis, and only produced 365 days
and a fraction; how is this? Now imagine you stand
before a round table, and place a lighted candle on its
centre, calling it if you like the sun. Now move
round the table keeping your face to the candle, until
you arrive at the spot you started from, you will
perhaps think you have not turned round at all, but in
reality you have turned round once completely; repeat
the experiment, and turn yourself round and round,
say six times, as you move round the table, you will
find that although you only count six times you will
actually have performed seven complete revolutions;
therefore as 366 revolutions are actually made by the
earth in her circuit round the sun; and the year con-
sists of 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, and 12 seconds,
the difference must be 5 hours, 50 minutes, and 48
seconds, which four times repeated in a solar cycle,
gives the additional day of leap year.
A Sidereal day; Sidereal time is that fixed, and
unalterable time shown by the fixed stars, it never has,
never can, and never will change, while the earth's
motion continues, or all things come to an end. It is
the return of the heavens (apparently) to the same
point after completing the circuit of the earth. There
are always 366 sidereal days in a year, and its time is
kept distinct from any other, the hours numbering 24.
An Apparent day; Apparent or Solar time is that
shewn by the sun; thus, when the sun is on any
meridian it is noon at all places situated on that merid-
ian, and midnight on the opposite side of the earth.
The Solar days are not of uniform length, being
sometimes longer at others shorter than 24 hours. No
clock or watch can be set to apparent time, but are
regulated by—
Mean time, which is for the sake of uniformity, the
mean of the sum of the lengths of all the solar days in
the year, and is exactly 24 hours in length. By it all
astronomical data and calculations are made, and it is
known as Greenwich time, railway time, &c., and all
timepieces must keep it.
The difference between it and apparent time, used
for readily converting one to the other is called the
Eqiiation of time.
A Civic day is that which begins at midnight, and
has twelve hours a.m. and twelve hours p.m.
An Astronomical day begins at noon of the civil day
and counts through the whole twenty-four hours.
Longitude, is simply the difference of time between
any two places, converted into arc:—the circumference
of the earth is divided into 360 degrees, and 24 hours
represents that circumference, so that the proportion
and reduction, are very simple. Instance—to-day by
observation of the sun at the instant, a chronometer
shewed I Oh. 15m. 265. the apparent, converted to
mean time at the ship was hh. 24m. 19s, The
difference of time between the ship and Greenwich
therefore is Ih. 51m. 7s. and as 360 degrees, 24 hours,
lh, 51m. 7s. 27- 46- 45* W,
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the “ Waimate Gazette."
Mr. Editor,
Dear Sir,
It grieves me very much to see the poor poultry
suffering and gasping for breath this hot weather
from want of sufficient water; and I intend the first
opportunity that offers to write to the Baroness
Burdett Coutts and Mr. Plimsoll to use their influence
with the Board of Trade, and stop the shipping of
poultry for long voyages, for what are they, Sir, but
bags of bones when brought to the table. Could not
Jemmy Ducks take the water he now wastes in mix-
ing the pigs food, and give it to the poultry? There
must be plenty of “ slush " and waste in the galley to
do this, and for my part I never saw clean water
used for hogs in my life on my father's farm in Lei-
cestershire, only wash and dirty water.
Apologising for troubling you,
I remain, yours trulv,
Sarah A. Thomson.
28th Aug., 1876.
[“ Stocktarmer " writes a strong letter (for which we
have not room) on this subject. We fear there may
be some reason for our correspondent's complaints and
hope the authorities will inquire into the matter. Ed.]
Answer to Last Week's Conumdrum.
o—
(GUESS ME.)
My name begins and ends with “ S."
As perhaps some of you will guess,
What anchor, storm and “ Tommy " do
In my small way that do I too,
For tho' I crooked am and weak,
If rightly used I make “ Peak,"
“ Speak."
ORIGINAL POETRY.
Advice to Young Men.
Some day most likely you'll be asked to a ball,
Then a white tie be sure to provide
A pair of canaries buy at the same shop,
Or your old kids take care to have d}^ed.
A bouquet of the smallest you also must bring,
Of flowers both fragrant and rare;
An eye-glass to stare with is also the thing.
It gives you a ton-debonair.
The favorite pas you must practice of course,
And for tit-bits of scandle not be at a loss—■
Be able to tell what no one else knows,
Epigrammes, quips, on dits and bon mots.
Small talk you must furnish—no matter 'bout what
And in waltzing don't tear out the gathers,
And if you should flirt, for the mother's care not,
They'll not mind, but beware of the fathers.
Ben Backstay,
Port Watch,


ADVICE TO YOUNG LADIES.
To marry now you’ll do right well,
A proper man, mind—not a swell;
The reason why I will not tell,
You’ll know it in the Lune-de-mel.
Dame Glass has said “ first catch your hare,”
And that the heir you may ensnare,
Put your best panier and sash-on
“ For pic-nics now are quite the fashion.”
In coming back beneath the sheen
Of Luna lighting up the scene,
’Tis then he’s likely to propose;
If not, you must repeat the dose.
On no account, if you have nous,
Allow your swain to scent the grouse;
Kept from the moors, and at your side,
You’ll get him quickly to decide.
Aquatic fetes Mamma must get up,
The croquet hoops you too must set up
And if you do not net your bird,
It really will be too absurd.
Ben. Backstay, Port Watch
On dit that a marriage will shortly take place be-
tween the Hon. Adam Davick and the Lady Jemima
Betty Morrovick. Both parties are most highly
connected.
A COOL REQUEST ; RATHER COLONIAL.
You can’t call a man a friend, unless you can make
some use of him. When about starting for England
by the P. & 0. Steamer, a year ago I met a Melbourne
acquaintance named Smith, who said, can you take a
little parcel for me to a friend in London ? I assented,
told him to send it to Scott’s, and left word with the
boots if any parcel came to pack it in my Portman-
teau ; opening this at sea, I was taken aback by the
size of the little parcel and felt somewhat uneasy as
to its unknown contents, which might envolve me
in Custom House troubles on my journey overland
from Brindisi. However I got safely to London, and
at once transmitted it to the address; a few week's
later I was favoured by a communication from a
West-end tailor, who wished to be informed when I
would be leaving for Australia, as he had completed
the required alterations in Mr. Smith’s dress-coat
and trousers, which he was advised I was to take
back with me to Melbourne. Small Talk.
Church Notices.
Sept. 1 Oth.—l3th Sunday after Trinity. Morning
Hymns, 137; 222; 181.
SANITARY INTELLIGENCE.
Sanitary inspector General Sawbones, has sent in
his weekly medical report, which comes to hand rather
late.
Our readers will be happy to hear that the health
of the passengers and crew, on board the “ Waimate ”
is very good. Dr. Sawbones has only two cases under
treatment, viz: —the Lady Irene Dorothea Maypole,
and Mr. Burrell. The Lady Maypole has been suffer-
ing from a most severe and prolonged attack of
hysteria. The usual remedies, such as cold water to
the face, and antispasmodics given internally have
been tried, but failed to produce any amelioration of
the symptoms.
Dr. Sawbones has been unable, as yet, to find out
the cause of her Ladyship’s suffering, but strongly
suspects an affection of the heart.
Mr. Burrell is suffering from a scald of the foot.
His numerous and ardent admirers will be glad to
hear that he is progressing as well as can be expected.
Dr. Sawbones intends leaving him at the Line for
two or three weeks in order to recruit his health, he
will be picked up by the next ship.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SPIERS AND POND announce with regret the
failure of their project to supply ICE CREAMS
during the passage of the township through the tropics.
The failure they feel in duty bound to inform the
public, has been entirely unlooked for, and may be
attributed mainly to the following causes :
Firstly. —Our travelling agent whom we had
appointed to meet us at the tropic of Cancer was true
to his time bringing with him the needful supply of
ice, we were some ten days behind time, and the ice
had become water, and the agent was missed (mist.)
Secondly. —The cow we had so carefully stowed
away in the fore-peak was threatened with an attack
of prickly heat, and had to be placed in the hands of
Dr. Curacoa, the veterinary surgeon, who mistaking
her symptoms, administered so much lime juice that
her milk curdled. Hence cream is out of the question.
Thirdly. —Our manufactory being so close to Squall
Alley, the inhabitants of which are continually making
such thundering rows, we are unable to guarantee a
supply of cream, even should we eventually get milk.
We all know the effect of thunder upon beer, milk, &c.
N.B.—The above reasons would compel us to charge
exorbitant prices to cover expenses, but we would
(circumstances permitting) make the attempt to sup-
ply ices, provided we are guaranteed a sufficent num-
ber of subscribers, at the charge of one guinea for
three ices.
School of Cookery, Squall Alley, Waimate.
All persons proceeding to the Colonies are respectfully
informed, that the art of cooking may be learned here
upon reasonable terms.
TABLE D’HOTE DAILY, AT NOON.
PEASE soup, salt junk, baked, ditto, an natural,
SALT PORK, BOILED RICE PUDDING, PLUM DUFF, JAM
AND CONDENSED MILK.
A MUSICAL ACCOMPANIMENT DAILY.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Residence, Deck Castle, Waimate
September 2nd, 1876.




REGISTERED FOR TRANSMISSION' ABOARD.
EDITORIAL.
Telegraphic communication has at last been restor-
ed, and telegrams pour in upon us rapidly. We are
now able to present to our readers a summary of the
tremendous events now taking place in Europe.
England now finds herself in company with France,
Italy and Turkey, in active opposition to the three
great Empires of Russia, Germany and Austria.
• We will rapidly sketch the course of events, as they
have happened since we were last able to refer to them
on August 26th. We then published telegrams
announcing that Russia had actively taken up the
cause of Servia, while the rights of Turkey were being
forcibly upheld by England.
The large Russian army concentrated round Buk-
harest, commenced a rapid march on Constantinopie
on August 26th, reaching Rustchuck the afternoon of
the following day. Here they crossed the Danube
without serious opposition, and took advantage of the
railway to the seaport of Varna. A strong body of
Turkish cavalry greatly delayed the passage of this
short line, and in one place succeeded in ripping up
nearly one hundred yards of rail; but beyond this they
were unable to effect any formidable opposition to the
large force of Russian cavalry which scoured the
country in advance of the troops.
At Varna, Russian transports endeavoured to land
stores for the army, but were intercepted and dispersed
by the Devastation and Glatton, which, with some
Turkish vessels had been despatched from Constanti-
nople for the purpose. The Russian troops resumed
their march on the 31st, meeting with desultory
opposition, and marching with much caution. On
crossing the Maritza, near Adrianople, the vanguard
repulsed a strong body of Turkish troops which dis-
puted the passage. No further opposition was made
until they reached a small village about twenty miles
from the city, where they encountered the main body
of the Turkish army, supported by a small force of
British sailors with some heavy guns. A great battle
was fought j and, though we have no circumstantial
account of it, we know to our satisfaction that our
brave fellows stood as only Englishmen can stand
against enormous odds, while the Turks fought with
the desperation of men driven to the defence of their
homes. Both sides claimed a victory ; ultimately the
Turkish line effected an orderly retreat on Constanti-
nople in the face of the immense Russian army,
leaving their out-posts about 15 miles from the city.
The Mediterranean fleet reached Constantinople on
the 29th ult, and immediately landed men and guns
to man the forts and reinforce the Turkish army
before the city. Eight Iron-clads, with gun-boats,
had steamed away to blockade Sebastopol and Nikolaiv
on the first news of the outbreak of war, and the Rus-
sian fleet in the Black sea was now kept fully occupied.
The “ Sultan,” H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh
in command, then left to bombard Odessa, being
joined at Varna by the “ Devastation ” and “ Glattou,”
which left five Turkish men-of-war to hold the block-
ade of the place. The three Iron-clads commenced
without delay a most vigorous bombardment of Odessa,
and the fall of the place was hourly expected.
Germany and Austria declared for Servia (“ in the
interest of the peace of Europe ” (!) ) on August 31st,
in consequence of an offensive and defensive alliance
formed with Russia. In Germany, four Army corps
were concentrated at Leipsic on the 2nd, and were
moved at once by rail toward the seat of war, taking
the route through Dresden and Prague, they reached
Vienna on the 4th, and during the night of the sth,
crossed the Danube at Bazars. Here they joined the
Austrian army, and the united forces marched upon
Widin; on the night of Thursday they were within
forty miles of the place.
The Prussian fleet at present merely guard the N.
coasts, and its apparent inactivity causes much sur-
prise and conjecture.
Prance appears to be little inclined to consult the
plans of England, and cares for nothing but to revenge
herself on her old enemy. There has been much talk,
but slow action; however the army is now on the
frontier, and we may expect more news shortly.
In England the enthusiasm is unbounded, and the
war fever seems to have taken possession of all classes.
In answer to an immense petition signed by the whole
body of Volunteers, nearly the whole regular army
has been shipped (on 31st ult.) for Constantinople
and the East, and passed Gibx-altar yesterday. The
Volunteers are thus left to guard the country in case of
attack, and great confidence is felt. Their numbers
have been doubled since the declaration of war.
Little anxiety is felt about affairs in the East ; the
Russians are making their first great stroke at Con-
stantinople, and seem unlikely to make any move on
India at present. Should they do so, however, India
is prepared for them; for the natives would be faithiul
to a man.
No. 5.
Saturday, Sept. 9th 1876.
ISSUED WEEKLY.


RUBY— Continued.
As soon as the figure had disappeared, Ruby set
about rousing Ivy from her swoon, and then they
proceeded quietly to their own room, which they
reached without farther adventure. For a long time
Ruby lay awake and wondered what the figure could
have been, and at last determined to watch the next
night. Fortunately for her, Ivy was easily persuaded
that it was only one of the servants, or Mrs. Armstrong
(the principal.) so that there was no more trouble on
that score. Tlie next evening came in due course,
and at about twelve o'clock Ruby rose, and putting on
her dressing-gown and slippers, crept quietly into the
corridor and took up her station in a curtained recess,
and waited. After some time the door again opened,
and as the figure reached the recess, Ruby stepped
out, and as the light of the lantern fell on its face,
she saw with astonishment that it was an old play-
mate of hers, Oscar Charlcote, who was then, she
knew, supposed to be hiding from the Roundheads.
He soon recognised her, and told her that he had
gained an entrance into the house by means of a
secret door, of whose existence he knew, as the house
had formerly belonged to his father; and that he was
then going to seek for news of the parliamentary
doings, which were brought to him by an old servant,
“but,” he added, “as I have not seen or heard of him
for two or three days, I am afraid he must be dead.”
Ruby then said, that her father had just told her that
there was a price put on Oscar's head, and that the
soldiers were even then searching for him. Then
promising to try and devise some plan of escape, she
ran back to bed and was soon asleep.
Two or three days after this, at about one o'clock,
(a.m.) three figures might have be seen in the cor-
ridor, and no one would have recognised —save by the
height, in the sad-faced elderly widow with Ruby,
the handsome young Royalist for whom the spies were
on the watch; with them was an elderly servant,
whom they had been obliged to take into their confi-
dence. They left the house, and after leaving the
avenue, struck out into the high road for Exmouth,
where they hoped to meet a boat, which would convey
Oscar to the continent; after walking about a mile,
they stopped suddenly, for coming towards them was
a party of soldiers, —Mary the servant immediately
lost all presence of mind, and flew back towards the
house, while Ruby hastily telling Oscar to get under
the shade of the hedge among the foliage, went
bravely forward hoping to pass quietly by. One of
the soldiers however stopped her, and asked where
she was going, “ only to visit a sick friend at Ex-
mouth” she answered, aud would have passed on;
“ not so fast pretty one ” said another, “ we are looking
for one Oscar Charlcote, a rebel, know you ought of
him ? ” Ruby hastily pointed to the fast disappearing
form of Mary, and the soldiers, who had been drink-
ing freely hastily pursued, aud so passed Oscar, with-
out seeing him. The latter then came forward and
they went briskly on till they reached their destina-
tion. Luckily, there was a boat there, about starting,
and the owner (on promise of a lai-ge sum of money)
undertook to convey Oscar to a little fishing village
on the coast of France, whither he was himself bound.
Oscar leant down and kissing Ruby, said “ good-bye
little Ruby, some day I will thank you, hut now,
good-bye.” Then the boat pushed off from the shore,
and Ruby stood alone, but quickly started off for Ra-
leigh House, which she reached without further mo-
lestation ; found Mary, who had eluded the soldiers,
waiting for her, and Ruby got back to her room
without being missed. A few days after this Ruby
had a letter announcing Oscar's safe arrival. About
a year after this, Ruby received orders to join her
father in Paris, which, although she was glad at the
prospect of seeing her father again, gave her much
pain at the thought of parting from Ivy, to whom she
had become much attached.
On the restoration of Charles 11, among those who
came over in his train were our old friends Earl
Gordon, and Oscar Charlcote, with his beautiful bride
Ruby, who was not a little pleased at finding Colonel
Fairfax and his daughter enrolled among the King's
friends. And when, some time afterwards Charlie,
Ruby's brother, announced the fact of his engagement
with Ivy, it only added one more drop to her cup of
happiness, which was already full.
Finis.
MUSICAL & DRAMATIC NEWS.
“ On dit,” that the season will open this year with
more than usual “ eclat.”
The “ West End Musical Society ” are rehearsing
several new compositions; which will shortly be per-
formed. They are fortunate in having secured the
services of that far-famed but youthful tenor, who
made his “debut” last season at Timbuetoo; we
allude to Signor Barnosiraldini. Monsieur De Jung
has been secured for a leading bass.
The “ Waimate Theatre ” which has so long been
closed, has been leased by that enterprising and ener-
getic manager Mr. Boyle, who will, we believe, open
the house, (which by-the-bye is now most elegantly
and artistically decorated) with the well known play
of “ Box and Cox,” for which he has engaged the
services of first-class comedians; he will also produce
later on, the serio-comic play of “ Whitebait at Green-
wich,” the low-tragic part of Small to be taken by
Mr. Flack, who comes among us as quite a novice.
It is rumoured that Mr. Flack is the renowned Count
de Wilsonne, who has circumnavigated the world, and
has now adopted the stage as his profession; he will
no doubt be a novelty to modern English play-goers,
as his style is quite new; and will also bring out the
criticisms of our local critics.


PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
—n—
September 3rd—lat. 2-57, long. 22 , 24; distance
181 miles.
We are now fairly within the influence of the S. E.
trade winds; and though we are all so thoughtless,
that the change has passed unobserved and uncom-
mented upon, yet the invigorating qualities of the
more bracing atmosphere have made themselves quite
palpable to the observant eye of experience. Else
why the bright smiling faces, again ? where is the
languor and depression of spirits, so universal during
the last few days ? where is my appetite ? why are
all our good folks so buoyant and smart ? It is no use
applying to echo , she has confessed she “ don’t know
we can but answer: “all due to the enlivening
influence of the trade wind.” We are carrying a fine
steady breeze, and bid fair to run over the 200 miles
to-morrow. —Our two services to-day, were as usual,
excellent in attendance and very impressive ; so much
so, as to set the writer moralising on the subject of
divine services on board ship at sea. He (the writer,)
having followed the sea as a profession for nearly
thirty years, has seen the subject in almost every
nautical light, and believes that the few words he has
to say, may not be without their interest. During
the first fifteen years of the writer’s sea life, he was
engaged in the West India, Central American, and
Mexican trades. In all that time, although in several
different ships, with different commanders, divine
service was never performed but in one vessel, and in
her only for the space of about one month. This excep-
tion was the “Agnes” Capt. Fleet, among her passen-
gers was a minister of the gospel, (Dr. Newport,) who
naturally anticipated the pleasure of at least conduct-
ing service on the sabbath, (en passant,) I may observe
that at the time I write of (1850,) and in many ships
to this day, the crew are all kept at work during the
afternoon; the men having no afternoon watch below
at all ; Sundays excepted. In the vessel I now speak
of, as a great piece of indulgence, and an encourage-
ment to attend the Sunday service ( one only) the
watch were allowed to have Saturday afternoon below.
This worked very well, as near as I can remember,
for two Sundays—after which, the attendance grew
less, till Dr. Newport pointed out the matter to the
captain, (who did not attend service himself) who at
once clinched the matter by stopping the Saturday
afternoon watch below, and keeping all hands at
work, till dusk, as heretofore. This brought about a
result; a large portion of the crew attended service,
for what ? They brought obscene books, playbills,
and such like with them, and before service was ended,
open conversation, laughing, and miserable jests, were
freely passed, and the minister gave up all idea of
holding the sabbath in a civilized manner any more,
and retired within himself. He received no support
froni captain or officers, and no more services were
held. The writer was very young then, and thought
with the rest, that it was very smart to “ shut up the
“parson” who we considered deprived us of our watch
below. Increasing years have brought a very differ-
ent construction to his mind, and often the scene
passes through his minds eye now; and is as fresh as
though it occurred but yesterday. During these years,
and many following, the writer can safely say that it
was “ a very rare thing ” indeed to hear the name of
the Almighty used, unless in curses and oaths, and
used too quite as much by those in authority , as by
poor Jack himself. In 1862 the writer changed the
class of ships he had been accustomed to ; from the
dirty, leaky, ill-found, ill-conditioned, and ill-discip-
lined “ timber or sugar droger ” to a first class vessel
and the Bast India trade, —here was an elysium, so I
then thought, well found, discipline maintained, quite
an aristocratic sort of thing, and we had service on
Sunday morning too. What a service ! the prayer
book produced, and gabbled through, no hymns, and
on many occasions, portions omitted in order to get
done by seven bells; merely done, I see now, to fill
out the owners instructions, while passengers were on
board; and to have an entry in the log book, that
divine service was performed on the sabbath, attend
it who liked, but none of the watches off duty ever
attended as well as I can recollect. With the except-
ion of these two ships, the “ Agnes ’’and “ Lord Raglan,”
the writer in a course of twenty-eight years, has
never, out of about twenty different ships, in the East
and West Indian trades, been in one that held Sunday
services, till fortune or fate brought him into the N.
Z. S. Company’s service, in which it is regularly per-
formed every sabbath. It must be understood that
the gentlemen, connected with the Seaman’s Mission
at various ports (but notably London,) have frequently
held services on board ships where the writer has
been, as well as betheFs when in dock ; but he refers
in the above remarks to voluntary services at sea.
The Gravesend Mission has done much to improve
the moral and religious condition of seamen, they have
the best opportunity, and it is well they possess the
energy , to carry out their good work. In these
remarks the writer is far from supposing that his
experience as here given, forms any general rule, as
to the neglect of the sabbath in the mercantile marine,
on the contrary, and much more so in late years,
many good and earnest men are to be found in it
both in large and small ships ; but it will in general
be found, that the worse the class of ship, the more
the sabbath is neglected, and “ vice versaand that
the ill-found, parish rigged ship of low class, where,
under the guise of economy, the most miserable mean-
ness is practised, so sure in those vessls is the sabbath
desecrated, there is no discipline or order, and the
ship is a torment and misery to all on board her.—l
know of no one thing more calculated to preserve
harmony and good order on board ship, than a
willing and earnest observance of the sabbath.


As before stated the general health is all that can
be desired, which is a great comfort and blessing.
September 4th—lat, 030, long. 24-39 ; distance
205 miles.
According to our expectations we have (considering
there has been only a moderate breeze, and the ship
sailing close to the wind) made a very tolerable day's
run. The weather continues gloriously fine, and our
worthy citizens and citizenesses ought to make the
most of it, as it has its limits, which may very likely
be reached in about a week or ten days, it is better
not to trust too much to a continuence of fine weather,
or we may be served as the darkie was with his hut:—
“ One rainy day a party of folks being out in the
“ rain, lost their way, and seeing a hut some distance
“ off, made for it to obtain shelter ; on arrival they
“ found it almost roofless, the rain pouring in, and only
“ one small spot (then an island) sheltered. This one
“ dry place was occupied by the lord of the manor,
“ represented by a wretched shivering darkie, on
“ whose skin a piece of charcoal would have left a
“ white mark. There he sat, surrounded by the pud-
“ dies of water, as formed by the rain coming through
“ the thatchless roof. The party were disappointed
“ and indignant, at having the trouble of coming for
“ their pains, and asked the darkie, “ why he didn’t
“ mend his roof V* “ How you 'spect a nigger to
“ work dis weather massa?" “Then why don’t you mend
“ it when the weather isfine?’’ “Cha! when de wedder
“ fine massa I no want de roof, what I want wid roof
“when de wedder fine.” That roof if not since
mended, leaks still—that darkie could not understand
that procrastination was the thief of time.
General bearing of the above anecdote lies as
“ Capt. Cuttle ” would say, in the application on it.
All the folks in a general way quoit well, and in a
swing(e)ing state, thank you.
September 5th —lat. 2-22, long. 26-50; distance
217 miles.
During the last twenty-four hours, we have enjoyed a
nice steady breeze with remarkably fine, clear, refresh-
ing weather. The event of the day* is the oft wished
for one, of crossing the equator or the line, as it is
termed. That there is a line (though an imaginary
one) was clearly proved by some of our ladies and gen-
tlemen, who saw it distinctly through the telescope;
and by examining the horizon carefully through the
sextant, carefully adjustedfor the purpose, two distant
horizons could be clearly made out.—The event took
place at 4.30 p.m. precisely. The meridians were not
visible, on account of the sun not being on any of them
at the time; had it been noon, the sun might have been
observed to cross the meridian, at twelve o’clock exactly.
Many folks are gifted with a wonderful talent for
unbelief, in these purely nautical phenomena; remind-
ing one of the story of the darkie; who being on
board a fever stricken ship, was appointed to act as
sexton, i.e. to pitch the people overboard, as soon as
they died. “ One morning the captain espied him
“ dragging out an old “ shell," who had been ill some
“ days, and observed the supposed dead man to be
“ resisting, as well as he could the endeavours of the
“ darkie to get him along. “Hi! you Quashie” called
“ out the captain, “ are you going to throw the man
“ overboard before he is dead ?’ ‘Well massa lookeeyer,
“ dis ole fellar such a big liar always, he say he no
‘‘ dead but I no believe him, so I spose he no quite
dead, him needn’t be so very particular for a few
‘‘ minnits, so I throw him ober, den I make sure him
dead enough."
Study this moral well, for if you do not adhere to
the truth; perhaps a time will come when you will
say “ I no dead massa ” but nobody believe you.
General health, quoit well thank you.
September 6th—lat. 4-34, long. 28-45; distance
181 miles.
During the past twenty-four hours, the weather
has been all we could desire, with a nice cool breeze,
and a smooth sea, the weather is so unalterably fine,
that we find it some difficulty in amusing ourselves,
except in the cool evenings, when our juvenile days
seem to come back, and we play games with the young
folks, all but forgotten till now. The fact is the long
continuence of the fine weather is getting rather
monotonous, —and just a little storm, (only a very
leetle one,) would make a pleasant variety, that is the
“ long and short ”of it. This is a very common and
favourite expression, but very few folks know its
origin, it is thus : —“ A certain tall girl named Short ,
“ loved a big Mr. Little ; while Mr. Little, little
“ thinking of Miss Short, loved a little lass named
“ Long. To make a “ long story short " Little pro-
“ posed to Long, and Short longed to be even with
“ Little’s shortcomings. So Short meeting Long,
“ threatened to marry Little before Long, which
“ caused Little in a short time to marry Long.”
Query? Did tall Short, love big Little less, because
Little loved Long ? Answer, well, don’t know, things
look slightly mixed up.
The general health is nearly all that can be desired,
and our especial wish is that “ long may it wave.”
September 7th—lat. 6-42, long. 38-28 ; distance
171 miles.
We are still favoured with a fine steady breeze, and
very cool delightful weather. It is so nice to sit
about all the day pretending to work, we have really
no time for any useful work during the day, for what
with fanning, crotchet, and resting, particularly rest-
ing, the day is got through at last, and we are very
glad of a little recreation, in the shape of games.
A favourite game with some young folks, especially
if they are courting is, for one to hide away some-
where, and to burst upon the other suddenly, crying
“ boo !” the game is called “ boo,” and the fun is,
to see who can startle the other most.


“ A young man not long since came home with his
“ unmentionables very much torn, and his anatomy
“ very much the worse for wear too, he stated, that
“ being out in the field, he saw “ Mary Ann a coming,
“ and thought it would be a good joke, to give her a
“boo,” so he climbed a tree near by; and Just as he
“ was going to jump down and “ boo,” the branch
“ broke, and he came down quicker than he had in-
“ tended, his downward progress was arrested by a
“projecting stump whose jagged edges caught, pene-
“ trated, (and the rest) that portion of his dress, on
“ which he was in the habit of sitting. He didn't
“ boo” then , but after Alary Ann extricated him, he
“ sat down and “ boo-oof d, for some time.”
September Bth—lat. 9T3, long. 32.21; distance
201 miles.
Our good friend, the South East trade wind, still
keeps in a very serene and settled state of mind
giving us a very full share of fine, settled weather;
although it makes us go rather farther West than we
should go, if we had our choice in the matter. Never-
theless, where one vessel makes even as straight a
course as ourselves, half a dozen fetch the Brazilian
coast, and are compelled to tack. As we get farther
South, we shall find the wind haul more to the East-
ward, and then, “good bye John,” we're off ;—speak-
ing of this phrase, “ Some time ago, one of our leading
“ divines in the course of his usual remarks, rather
“ committed a bit of slang, when he said, if a man
“ lose all his riches, he can get more, if he lose his
“ children, he may have more; but if he lose his soul,
“ then “good bye John”
General health A.l. 100, and | veritas—if any
better is required, fresh arrangements will have to be
made.
September 9th—lat. 12’26, long. 33‘49; distance
210 miles.
We have had a very nice breeze indeed, during the
last twenty-four hours; though it had a good mind to
be squally from sunset to midnight, it turned out of no
consequence, and we got through the night without
starting Jack or sheet.
The heat is diminishing by degrees, slow ones, it is
true, but still degrees, that is undeniable. It was not
so one hot summer in India where the thermometer
having reached the top, and could get no higher, the
papers noted that at last the limit of heat had been
reached, as the thermometer could get no higher if it
tided ever so.
The public health, is all that can be expected from
a delicate community, and as there is to be no more
sickness of the sea allowed, it is arranged that the
present delicate state of health is to continue.
ALL HANDS SHORTEN SAIL.
It is not worth while to head this briny article, in
Latin or Greek, it is no doubt Greek to some few of our
non- nautical community; to others it may be a familiar
term; and to the real “ canvasback” himself, it sug-
gests visions not pleasant, but pretty distinct, of a
certain something in store —Ah !
“ Ye gentlemen of England,
“ Who sit at home in ease;
“ How little do you care about,
“ The troubles of the seas.”
Well here we go, sailing along all so gaily O’; every
stitch of canvass spread, little master sky-sail from
his lofty perch, giving any amount of impertinence
to Mr. Mainsail; (vide —“Waimate Gazette”) little
does the saucy fellow know how soon his little game
will be stopped. The breeze freshens, the waves put
on their white caps, the ship careens more on her side,
setting all laws of base and perpendicular at defiance;
the non-nauticals constantly find themselves on the
lee side in a most curious manner; however, they
struggle up hill again, only to return, so easy it is to
go down an inclined plane in this world; occasionally
something over the vessel's side attracts their attention
and they resume the up hill journey again looking
rather white about the gills, something they have seen
no doubt. However away goes the gallant ship, four-
teen knots is a mere circumstance, as she converts
the sea into an effervescing eauldran in her career, and
makes all “ sneer” again, “ aloft.” Ha, what's that ?
Take in the light sails; what do you think of it now,
Master Sky sail, you’re played out, at all events, though
you were so swelled out in your pride; its no use your
flapping, in you come. The wind increases, dark mass-
es of clouds arise, a half pleased, one quarter
and the remaining quarter anxious look passes over
the commander's features, he glories in his fine ship's
performance, and in his heart, wishes that instead of
fourteen, she was going about forty milesan hour; a little
because he has to take in sail; and a trifle
anxious, because his right hand man, the barometer has
been telling him an unpleasant truth, that he is to
expect more wind yet, perhaps a gale, but it is not
quite certain about that yet.
Now comes the value of the commander's long
experience, “well,” he knows the signs of “old ocean,”
and the meaning of the gathering murkiness of the
sky. “ I believe we're in for it Mr. Snooks,” says he, to
his chief, who also has some idea, that there will be a
game at sails before long, and as he has the next
watch below, he hopes the “ old man ” will get her
snug before his watch is out, and not disturb him by
“ all hands shorten sail,” after he has turned in.
(Selfish, but true and just like those sailors.) “We'll
hang on that main top gallant sail as long as we can,”
says the commander; “yes sir,”says the chief, wishing
secretly it, and more, had been taken in long aoo, all
his visions of a watch below vanishing with the reply.—•
Sunset, increasing wind with dark threatening appear-
ance, and rising sea, —seven p.m. took in the main top
gallant sail, at eight (my watch below) increased gale,
ship pitching heavily, (N.B. that means bows under!


reefed the top sails, that brings round nine o’clock.
“ Now we’re snug for this watch ” I’ll go and turn in
for a nap,—“ deluded wretch,” turn in, eh ! but any
how I’ll try it, andlyo, humming “ cease rude Boreas,”
but Boreas won’t cease, the gale gets more force, the
sea rises, the night becomes dark as pitch, and taking
it in its component parts, it may be called, a delight-
ful mixture of wind, rain or darkness, thunder, light-
ning, sea, ropes, and sails; very soon after getting
below, I feel by the groans and complaints of the vessel,
that more sail will soon have to be taken in, and after a
while of torment, comes the sound, “ call all hands,
shorten sail,” out I come again, say ten o’clock, in jib,
mainsail, spanker, reef the foresail, furl the upper top
sails, and then ; “ strike eight hells.” And hang out
another watch of pulling and hauling, drenched with
sea, and cold, wet and miserable ; Ah; and then I
think if I had only been a good boy, and minded what
my ma said when I was a little boy, I should have
been at my own fireside, not knowing or caring to
know what weather there was at sea now.
END OF CHAPTER IST. TO BE CONTINUED.
ASTRONOMICAL.
(BY SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT.)
—o —
The moon is to rise and set on the—
H. M. H. M.
9th—rise 10 28 p.m.—set 11 10 a.m.
10th— ~ 11 22 ~ „ 018 p.m.
11th— „ 12 20 a.m.— „ 126 „
12th—., 120 „ „ 232 „
13th— „ 225 „ „ 327 „
14th— „ 323 „ „ 427 „
15th— „ 420 „ „ 5 8 „
ECLIPSES.
In the following article it is to be understood, that
the intention of the writer in inserting it in the
columns of the “ Waimate Gazette ” is solely for the
edification of the younger members of our community.
The writer does not presume that any of our mature
friends require any information on the subject from
his pen, still, should there be some few who have not
given it attention, they may perhaps pick up some
scraps of information, and may possibly after mature
thought be inclined, while admiring the wondrous
works of the universe, to raise their thoughts from
nature, to nature’s God.
May I ask one simple question ? What impression
did the partial eclipse of the moon on Sunday evening,
3rd inst. leave on you—what did you think ? Oh, its
only an eclipse, that’s all; only a partial eclipse of the
moon. Did it occur to you that the same eclipse has
occurred and will occur at regularly fixed periods,
“ Till rolling years shall cease to move,” or did you
think how very wonderful and simple and perfect are
the works of creation, perhaps none of these ; no
danger was threatened, and it was only an eclipse.
Taking it for granted that our young friends have
already learned something, much or little of elemen-
tary astromony, let us at once say a few words about
the moon before we proceed to study out the nature
of an eclipse.
The moon, the earth’s satellite and constant atten-
dant and next to the sun the most useful to us of all
the planetary bodies, is but a small sphere , 2,160 miles
in diameter, and distant as a mean 237,519 miles from
us. The moon revolves once round the earth always
progressingeastwardin29days, 12 hours, 44 minutes,
and 3 seconds, in this time she goes through all her
phases of new to full and to new again, she turns once
only on her axis in this time, and therefore always
present the same side to us. There is no reason to
suppose the moon is inhabited, she has little or no
atmosphere, and therefore has neither clouds or rain,
no seas or rivers, and consequently no vegetation, no
alternation like twilight between light and shade, and
all parts of her surface exposed to the sun’s light must
be brilliant like burnished silver, and where not exposed
in the darkness of blackest night. A few notes will
be necessary and may as well be made at once.
The moon is in conjunction when she is between
the earth and sun at new, she is in opposition when
on the opposite side of the earth to the sun, that is
at full.
The quadratures are at first and last quarter when
she has completed, or has to complete one fourth of
her revolution, or 90 degrees.
The moon’s nodes are those points in her orbit
where they cut the ecliptic.
The penumbra is the shadow of the earth on the
moon, or of the moon on the earth.
To account for the moon’s changes, let us suppose
it is new moon. The moon is progressing eastward
in her journey round the earth at a rate of about 13
degrees a day, now in about two days she will be 26
degrees from a line joining the sun and earth, and as
exactly one half of her surface is illumined by the sun,
while the other half is in intense darkness, we may
see a small portion of the enlightened part in the form
of a crescent, (fig. 1.) As she still moves onward we
may see her illuminated side more and more, the
half being visible at the first quadrature, (fig. 2.)
the whole at full moon, (fig. 3.) and only half again
at the last quadrature, (fig. 4.) See Illustrations.
If the plane of the moon’s orbit coincided with the
ecliptic, there would be alternate eclipses of the sun
and moon at every conjunction and opposition or two
in every lunation, but as her orbit is at an inclination
of 5|- degrees to it, the eclipses can only take place
when she is in one of her nodes, or near to one,
(fig. 2 a and b.)
An eclipse of the sun (so termed) is caused by the
moon passing between the earth and sun, intercepting
his rays, and casting her shadow or penumbra upon


the earth, causing the eclipse to be visible at those
parts whereon the shadow falls, but no where else, it
can only take place at the instant of a new moon.
Now should the moon be at her nearest distance to
the earth and in one of her nodes, there will be a total
eclipse (fig. 3-1) of the sun, as at that time her
apparent diameter is greater than that of the moon, if
not in but near one of her nodes, at that time, a partial
eclipse (fig. 2) is the result, the moon only covering
a portion of the sun’s disc. If at the full, the moon be
in one of her nodes, she will pass through the earth’s
shadow (fig. 3) and produce a total eclipse of the moon,
but if not in but near her node, a partial eclipse will
occur (fig. 4.) When at new moon an eclipse of the
sun takes place, should the moon be in apogee, or at
her greatest distance from the earth, then her diameter
is less than that of the sun and she cannot hide the
whole of his surface, but a ring of light is visible
round the dark body of the moon, and an annular
eclipse takes place (fig. 5) when a total eclipse occurs
with the moon in perigee, or at her nearest distance to
the earth, then the moon’s apparent diameter exceeds
that of the sun, and not only hides the whole face of
the sun but casts her shadow beyond the earth, and
causes the longest time of total darkness that can occur
in any eclipse, but as the moon’s diameter when greatest
can only exceed that of the sun when least by two
fifths of a degree, the time for real total darkness can
never continue longer than 4 minutes and 6 seconds
of time, which is the time the moon takes to move
through that space, (fig. 6.) The greatest possible
duration of any eclipse is 3 h. 57 m. 6 s., and happens
when the moon is in apogee, or farthest from the earth.
When she is in perigee or nearest to the earth, the
greatest length of an eclipse is 3 h. 37 m. 26 s., that is
from beginning to end in each case. The number of
eclipses in any year cannot be less than two nor more
than seven. In the first case they would be both solar,
and in the latter case Jive would be solar and two lunar.
The usual number is four, two of the sun, and two of
the moon; as an approximate rule the same eclipses
are repeated in 233 lunations of 18 years and 11 days,
but the exact time known as the chaldaic period consists
of 6,890 lunations, or 557 years and 22 days, (nearly
omitting the hours, &c.) at the end of which lapse of
time the moon’s distance from the position she held at
the beginning of this period will not exceed one minute
and four seconds.
To render the above statements as clear and simple
as possible, one page will be devoted to diagrams,
and before proceeding with them I would ask the
reader who feels any interest in the subject, to think
it out. He will see by the manner that the orbits of
the earth and moon cut the ecliptic in their separate
revolutions, and the moons orbit again cutting that of
the earth in her monthly journey round us, that in no
other way could the various phenomena be produced,
and that nothing created can be more grand and
sublime, more simple and mor eperfect, See Illustrations.
CHARITY.
O
I met two beggars in the street,
Each had two wooden legs :
“ We’re stumped ” you see, “ they said to me,
“And that is why we begs.”
Said I, as sundry pence I dropped
Into their outstretched palms;
“ Oh ! would that I could find you legs,
“As well as give you alms.”
WARRANTED STIFF ENOUGH TO SHIFT
WITHOUT BALLAST.
We were bound from Liverpool to San Francisco*
and had rounded Cape Horn. It was the middle
watch I kept, being the only mate on board our ship.
Two bells had just been struck, when a big Scotchman
came on the poop to me, and said, “keep her North
West.” Knowing he was not of our crew, and
treating the appearance as an odd creation of my fancy,
I took no notice of the matter, beyond making a note
of it on the slate. Just after four bells the same
thing was repeated—this time I went down and re-
ported the matter to the captain, who told me to
“ keep her N.W.,” should my Scotch friend again
appear, and to call him the captain. At six bells
my Scotty appeared with the same request —this
time I answered “ aye, aye, sir!” and altered the
ship’s course. We were going seven knots, and after
about three hours we sighted a large barque on fire,
we bore down on her, and boarding her, found my
Scotch friend to be no other than the captain of the
burning ship, a man not one of us on board the
“Electra” had ever seen before.
LINES.
I clasped her hand in mine,
I clasped her beauteous form,
I vowed to shield her from the wind
And from the world’s cold storm;
She turned her beauteous eyes on me,
The tears did wildly flow,
And with her ruby lips she said,
“ Confound you! let me go!”
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
O—
St. Petersburg, Friday.
The army is within 25 miles of Constantinople.
The Turkish forces occupy a strong position a few
miles to the front. A battle is imminent.
St. Petersburg, Friday night.
Great battle fought near Constantinople. Strenu-
ous opposition of the enemy, assisted by a small
force of English Marines. Turkish army has retreated
on Constantinople.


Constantinople, Saturday.
The army has retreated on the city in good order.
City is prepared to stand a blockade. The English
Mediterranean fleet here has sent detachments to
fortify and man the forts.
Gibraltar, Saturday.
The transports with the English army passed here
last night for the seat of war.
Berlin, Friday.
The Landwehr have been called out, and will pro-
ceed to the Rhine, to complete the strength required
on the French frontier.
Vienna, Friday.
The combined Austrian and German armies are
making forced marches on Widan. They left Bazias
on the 6th.
London, Friday.
The Volunteers exceed the highest expectations
which were formed of them. Continued drill is
showing the best results. The Volunteers are divided
into three Army Corps, and are being manoeuvered
upon the South and West of England. Their num-
bers have been rather more than doubled since the
declaration of war.
London, Saturday.
Great enthusiasm prevails on the receipt of the
news of the gallant ponduct of the blue jackets near
Constantinople. The fleet has been sighted at Gib-
raltar. Channel fleet is off the downs.
Paris, Friday.
Extraordinary indifference as to the alliance with
England and her need of assistance in Turkey is
manifested. The great object is revenge on Ger-
many.
LOCAL INTELLIGENCE.
MARKETS.
Metals. —Recent despatches report no activity in
the metal market generally.
Iron. —Particularly dull.
Coinage Metals. —Changed hands in small parcels
and at a slight advance on late rates.
Lead is in the hands of a few holders, and notwith-
standing the present demand for bullets, prices remain
steady. Outsiders have no opportunity of making
purchases.
Tin Plates. —ln good demand, light gauges for
rat screens, and heavy ditto for Rifle Targets,
Other metals call for no remark.
Provisions.
Fish. —Only small parcels coming forward, which
are eagerly bought up by Messrs. Spier's and Ponds,
Game. —No supply.
Beef. —Has been better in quality since our last
publication and a better demand is felt, without any
alteration in supply. No hope is entertained of our
being able to import increased supplies during the
next two months.
Mutton. —Fair supplies and full demand at late
prices—quality of home grown mutton not up to
standard owing to recent droughts. Foreign stocks,
quiet and firm—fair demands.
Pork. —Both home and foreign stock better in
quality and demand, prices quiet and steady.
Poultry. —Demand, disease and drought have
rapidly reduced stocks —prices high with no prospects
of increased supply.
POLICE.
A well known butcher from the East-end of London
was called upon to surrender his hail. The charge
was one instituted by the Society for the prevention
of Cruelty to Animals, and had been adjourned that
more evidence might be brought forward. The
prisoner was a purveyor of live stock to ships, and
was known at many times to have some hundreds of
heads of stock in his possession.—The main bearing
of this case was his carelessness in supplying his
poultry with sufficient water; it being proved that he
had an ample supply. —After some consultation the
bench ordered him to catch his own water during
rainy weather, from the roofs of his pens, &c., &e.
RIDDLE.
What is that which man cares for more than life ?
More than death or mortal strife;
That which contented men desire.
The poor possess —the rich require.
The miser spends —the spendthrift saves,
And all men carry to their graves.
EPITAPH FROM ST. MATTHEW'S SARK.
Who's buried here? John Berry,
Is it the younger ? no, it is the Elder Berry.
An Elder Berry; buried surely must
Spring up and live, than turn to dust.
So may our Berry, whom grim death hath slain
Be only buried to rise up again.
CHURCH NOTICES.
Sept. 17th. —14th Sunday after Trinity. Morning
Hymns, 222; 214; 200,
ENTERTAINMENT.
It is intended on the first opportunity, that is
when the weather is cooler, to give an entertainment,
consisting of songs, &c„ and the laughable farce “ Box
and Cox;" the characters in the latter will be taken
by first class artistes.
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ A looker on.” If such grievances as you com-
plain of really exist, your best plan is to appeal to
the authorities; you will no doubt receive full atten-
tion.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Ofiice and Residence, Deck Castle,
Waimate, Sept. 9th, 1876.


EDITORIAL.
As our readers may be aware, our telegraphic
communications with the outer world have been again
interrupted, this time by the late thundery weather,
consequently we are in receipt of no news of the war
later than Monday last. Messages have indeed arrived
since that date, but the electricity has jumbled up the
words so thoroughly, as to render them unintelligible.
Take a specimen of the form in which several telegrams
came to hand, “ Duke of Edinburgh—and Suez
“ Canal—blown up —Railway engine—Odessa—
“Bismarck—bombarded—lndian Empire—&c.” An
attempt to decipher this muddle would result in
something like this—“ The Duke of Edinburgh and
“ the Suez Canal have been blown up by a Railway
“engine,”—“Odessa and Prince Bismarck have
“ bombarded the Indian Empire.” The only events
announced since our last, are a fruitless attack of the
French on the German frontier, the approach of our
army to Constantinople, and the fall of Odessa.
We are glad to notice in our advertising columns
the announcement of a Musical and Dramatic
Entertainment for Thursday next, in the Assembly
Rooms. We hope that all our readers will be able to
attend, and do their best to make this opening event
of the season a success.
We are now out of the tropics and are experiencing
the effects of cool reviving wind; our appetites are
consequently increasing furiously, as may be guessed
from the letter of our correspondent “ Invalid,” who,
we are inclined to believe has a tremendous appetite,
and can’t find time enough for six helps of pork. But
the change of weather does not blow good alone. On
Thursday night the ship was rolling like a porpoise,
the result of “ square yards,” and we can testify to the
truth of a correspondent’s remarks on this subject, as
far at least as they relate to Deck Castle; the fiddle
made a violent attempt to reach the lee scuppers by
hurling itself against the door, but only succeeded in
splintering its case. What groans of misery w'ere
heard as the blood coursed wildly through the would-be
sleeper’s veins from head to toe. But the step from
the sublime to the ridiculous is no shorter than that
from misery to mirth; and so it happened that about
2'30 a.m. roars of laughter might have been heard
from the usually serene bunks of Deck Castle.
The other day an “ imbecile youth of yellow
complexion ” was careering with faltering steps in the
main rigging, when two ruffianly burglars set upon
him, bound him hand and foot, and then put him to
ransom. The police took no notice of the affair;
probably the “ force - ” was engaged in capturing small
boys playing marbles in the next street.
Our advertisement sheet is very empty this week,
likewise our “ varieties” column ; the reason no doubt
is that the public are in possession of all that they
need, and so have no further use for advertising , while
varieties are beginning to be rare, owing to the
monotony of the voyage.
The Deck Castle hounds have had two fine runs this
week. On Monday they drew the cover at Wash
Corner, and soon found. After a fine run over some
splendid country, they killed at Starboard Gate; Lord
Boyle being in at the death. On Thursday, an “ old
hand” was turned out of Dreg-pan Cover, and led a
full field, a very heavy run over some difficult country;
at length he ran to earth in Bookshelf Lane and was
dug out by the Archbishop, and accidentally killed.
The corpse was hove overboard to slow music.
“MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE.”
A COUNTRY YARN. BY V. V. V.
Do you know North I >evon ? If not, let me advise
you to try it the very next holiday you get, especially
if you have the chance to get acquainted with it under
as pleasant circumstances as those in which I knew
it in 1860.
I see you are right for a yarn; so take the easy
chair, cock your feet up on this camp stool—so, light
your pipe, and make yourself at home.
Well, you must know that when I was at school,
I had before me the great object of ambition wdiich
every Magilalen College School-boy aims at, a scholar-
ship. Alas ! I went in for many; often might my
face be seen within the halls of colleges, among the
nervous uncomfortable batch of freshmen and school-
boys, undergoing the dreadful ordeal of an examination,
but as often was I doomed to see Jones,’ Brown’s, or
Robinson’s name on the important notice as “ Elected
to the scholarship.” Well, no scholarship turning
up, and my father’s purse, which had been marvellously
stretched for my school expenses, beginning to show
signs of shrinking, I left school at the end of the
“long half” 1860. But the great scholarship notion
had not yet been driven out of my parent’s heads, and
so it came to pass, that about the middle of August,
I found myself, by the kindness of my uncle Sinclair
Saturday, Sept, 16th, 1876,
No. 6.
ISSUED WEEKLY.


settled beneath his hospitable roof at Marlescombe, to
read for Oxford. Let me introduce you to the family.
Uncle Charles was rector of two little parishes,
Marlescombe and Trenford, on the north coast of
Devon, between Lynmouth and Ilfracombe. His age
was about fifty; his hair had long lost its youthful
colour, and his tall figure was already losing its height
through a kind of meditative stoop, his face was full
of kindness, and we all liked him very much; but
there was a certain quiet reserve about him, and an
absence of mind which kept us often at a distance, and
he would sometimes keep to himself all day, at which
times even his daughters seemed half afraid of him.
The “ living ” was a very poor one, and my good
uncle to eke it out took to receiving pupils for Oxford.
An old friend of his, then head of a college, used to
recommend men to him, for uncle Charles was, or had
been a good scholar, and had only thrown up his
fellowship in order to marry. I need not say much
here of the rest of the family, but will let them speak
for themselves as we go on. There was aunt Charles,
who good soul had done her best to prevent her
husband repenting of throwing up his fellowship;
there were the three boys, (still so called, though the
two eldest were at Oxford) Walter, Arthur, and
George, the trio usually going by the name of the
“wag;” then came a good batch of jolly housekeeper
girls, Patty the eldest, engaged to be married, Mary
the invalid, Amy, Harrie, and Maude the youngest,
and of course her father's pet. The family circle was
completed by five pupils, “Jim” Cannington, a
skimmery man, Jones, the butt of the party, Pryor,
who preferred dogs to classics, Mayell, and Reggie
Summers, an old Magdalen boy like myself. With
such a party as this, the prospect of a delightful
summer holiday was considerably more certain, than
the chance of a few weeks' hard reading. Nevertheless
we set to work with a will, and j can answer for
myself that I began to attack Greek plays with an
immense voracity, which argued rapid satiety.
We spent five hours each day in the “schoolroom”
at our books; the rest of the day we passed perfectly
to our own satisfaction. There was the walk across two
bare fields, and down the wooded cliffs to Woodabay,
where we revelled many an hour in the waters of the
channel. I can see even now the whole party of us stand-
ing together on a rock, surrounded by water, Arthur
wildty quoting poetry for the occasion, which always
ended in the line “ plunge headlong from the briny
deep !” at which signal we would all plunge in with
a simultaneous dash from our several positions round
the rock. Then there were the paper chases. Talk
about paper chases at school, over dull flat country
with nothing but an occasional river to enliven the
proceeding; why they failed into insignificance beside
our splendid runs over hill and dale, through tangled
brake, down steep cliffs, among the wild scenery of
North Devon. On these occasions the girls of course
were unable to join us, but when I went as “fox” I
usually managed to let my pretty cousin Maude know
whereabouts I and my companions were likely to be at
a certain time, and if we met toward the end of the
run, we would lay a false scent toward the cliffs, and
then walk quietly home by the path.
{To be continued .)
YE COURT NEWS. (Balmoral.)
Ye Queen walked out this morning, attended by
Mr. Browne. Ye Prince and ye Princess of Wales
are at ye present tyme in Wales, where they intend
staying for ye shooting season. Ye Prince has
purchased ye beautiful shooting box at Dwychyfwlchi,
near Llanferfechan. Ye Duchesse Edynburghe is now
at St. Petersburg, she will staye there untill ye war
will be over; the Duke, poor fellow, is passing ye
quiete tyme off Constantinople, in ye “ Sultan,”
(N.B. we mean ye warre shippe “ Sultan”) of which he
is ye captaine.
Sir Davyde Lawrence, and my Lord Boyle, who
are now in attendance at ye Courte, were issuing forthe
from ye Queen's pantrie laste nighte, at about ye
houre of ye ten of ye clocke, and were on ye pointe of
journying for “ Decke Castle,” ye residence of ye
Archbishope, when they were suddenlie caughte in ye
squalle, and were carried to ye leewarde side, and dyd
there meet with ye righte proper duckinge in ye
scuppers. (Now this was ye merrye jeste of Lorde
Boyle, which he did tell to ye Archbishope, when he
arrived at “ye castle.”) “In goade soothe it dyd
take ye winde out of my sails.” Ye Archbishope
however dyd comfort them both, with ye cup that
doth cheer, but doth not inebriate, and dispatched
them both hacke againe righte blythely to Her
Majestic the Queen.
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
Constantinople, Sept. 11th.
The English Army has been reported off Malta.
The enemy are making preparations for an attack
on the city. Fortifications are progressing rapidly.
The fall of Odessa is announced at Head Quarters.
Berlin, Monday.
The French have made a simultaneous attack on
the frontier, and have been repulsed at all points.
CHURCH NOTICES.
Sept. 18th.—Monday. [Ember Week.]
Sept. 19th.—Tuesday. Hymns at Evening Prayer
10; 14; 17.
Sept. 20th.—Wednesday. [Ember Dav.]
Sept. 21st.—Thursday. Feast of St. Mattheiv.
Sept. 22nd.—Friday. [Ember Day.]
Sept. 23rd.—Saturday. [Ember Day.]
Sept. 24tb.—15th Sunday after Trinity. Hymns
at Morning Prayer, 101; 222; 299.


Practice for next Sunday's Hymns and Chants
will be held below, after Evening- Prayers on Tuesday,
WAR.
This is the substance of my dream of war. I saw a
vision of all the blood that had been spilled upon this
planet since the world began. All was hushed, the
din of war, the roar of battle, the clang and clash of
meeting armies; all was hushed and silent as the
catacombs of death. The breath of heaven stirred
no t—every leaf was motionless. There was an awful,
awful stillness.
There, before me, lay stretched beyond the reach of
keenest vision, a wide extended ocean, deep and fathom-
less. It was a sea of blood, and mingled blood of man,
woman and child from the beginning, shed by their
brother's hand. A citron sky girded that purple
lake—pale and lurid as death's fingers, with black
angry clouds above, and reflected in that lake, striking
down its sultry beams therein, hung suspended a
blood red sun fixed and motionless. And there were
figures, silent and solitary, pacing on its yellow sandy
margin; others standing with folded arms, were gazing
on its gory waters. These were old generals and
commanders.
As I stood gazing on that crimson sea, or splashed
my boots with the blood, several old veterans passed
me, and quizzically reminded me of Chelsea and
Greenwich hospitals. Close by me stood a fine soldier
like old fellow, pale and careworn, and with but one
eye. I asked him where he had lost his eye. “ And
have ye never heard ?" replied he, ‘ f of that little child,
who upon the altar of his country's gods, swore an
eternal hatred to the Roman name." “ Have ye never
heard of Saguntum and Cannae?" I replied, that it
must be gratifying to him to know that every school-
boy reads of him in Titus Livius, and knows that he
lost his eye whilst crossing the Alps. I also compli-
mented the venerable gentleman upon his ingenuity
in melting the Alpine snows with hot vinegar—it
shewed his depth of resource, and knowledge of chem-
ical affinity. This truly great man looked as if the
laugh had been quite taken out of him, and considering
the termination of his career, this was not surprising.
He said he had not seen anyone to speak to for about
two thousand years, which of itself was not calculated
to raise his spirits.
Hard by on a mossy stone sat an elderly man who
attracted my attention by his unceasing laments. He
was crying like a child, as if his heart-strings would
break, whilst around his feet was a salt pool formed
by his salt tears. I asked him to tell me, if the dis-
closure were not too painful, what was the cause of his
emotion; sobs for a time choked his utterance; at
length he managed to tell me that he was underpaid.
I asked him further if he could make a rough guess
at the amount he had received from his ungrateful
country. This set him crying worse than ever, and
the old Punic general, >vho stood looking on, said he
had been piping his eye to the same tune for the last
century and a half. The salt incrustation at his feet
gave about the same reading; and this would bring
us to the reign of that excellent Queen whose farthings
are in such repute. This was John Churchill, first
Duke of Marlborough.
(to be continued.)
SQUARE YARDS,
And the attendant evils thereof.
We turn in early with every prospect of a good
night's rest; but towards eight bells our repose is
rudely interrupted by the gruff command of u square
the yards." Whatever advantage the ship may derive
from such a manoeuvre, its disadvantages to those who
are in need of that indispensable luxury, sleep, are
very obvious.
The first feeling of uneasiness, especially to those
who lie athwartships, is a rushing of the internal fluids
towards the head, which makes you wonder where you
are; and secondly, ditto towards the opposite extrem-
ities : in short, the human body becomes for the time
being, a veritable churn; the disengaged gases from
which take the form of smothered imprecations.
The motion, together with the ominous clatter of bot-
tles and glasses, the swish of water on the floor, and the
occasional fall of a book from the shelf, is borne for
the space of half an hour or so; until your head is
suddenly shot clean over your pillow, and you find
yourself using your companion's body as your couch.
After this piece of performance, the silence is broken
by the altogether unnecessary query of one of the
quartette, (< I say, are you fellows asleep " ? “ O yes !
of course; what in the world did you wake us up for ?"
upon which there is a smothered roar with a disgusted
groan from one of the party, who does not care to see
the joke. Immediately after comes a tremendous
crash, and a slide of something against the lee side of
the cabin. The poor wi’etch who thinks it is some of
his property which is not able to keep its legs, instant-
ly springs out of bed to light the candle, and in hunt-
ing for the lucifers, his hand is wildly plunged into
the tea-pot, before he is able to lay his hands on the
necessary articles. At length a light is struck, and
who can describe the scene. On the floor lies an im-
mence bottle of citrate of magnesia, which is quietly
doing the rounds of the cabin, accompanied by mis-
cellaneous articles in the shape of books, pipes, match
boxes and candle-ends.
After collecting the erratic goods, and carefully
packing them to prevent further misbehaviour on their
part, the poor fellow extinguishes the light, and with
a sigh of relief turns in, not to sleep, but quietly to
enjoy the soothing motion of the ship.
Ten minutes perhaps is passed in comparative quiet,
when the ship not content with her hitherto gentle
motion, takes it into her head to try a somersault.


Crash! hang 1 ! goes something more weighty than
before, with a running accompaniment of small goods,
which has the effect of causing individual No. 2 to
spring out of his bunk, and having gone through the
same exciting hunt for the matches, he succeeds in
raising a light to behold—what ?—his favourite in-
strument, case and all lying prostrate on the floor;
having failed in its attempt to escape through the
port-hole. There it lay amid a motley throng of
books, pipes, writing-desk, ink-bottle, and sea-boots.
The above having been carefully replaced by No. 2,
he also sighs and, having made several futile attempts,
at length scrambles into his berth, vowing, that should
the roof itself fall in, he would not budge an inch to
remedy the disaster.
As for those who lie with their bodies fore and aft,
their night is chiefly occupied in holding on to the
side of their bunk; the monotony, of course, being
relieved by an occasional smash, and a rolling about
of some resounding piece of furnitm'e. One unfortu-
nate mortal finds himself wallowing in a bath of
Condy's fluid, which had, quite uninvited, taken the
liberty of stowing itself in his bed. Between decks
the effects of the rolling systems was an immense heap
of matter, which being analyzed, was found to be
composed of plum-duff, treacle, broken crockery, tins,
candles and concentrated milk.
Such are our several experiences. In conclusion I
should be glad to know it something can't be done
to put a stop to these gymnastic performances on the
part of our ship. We have a carpenter; why can't
he rig up one or two props to steady her ? or perhaps
someone of a more ingenious turn, could invent
something more efficacious still; at all events, that
we shall never more experience the well known words
of that well known song of “ Rolling home in the
morning, boys" is the earnest wish of the writer, and
no doubt of the whole community at large.
ASTRONOMICAL.
(by special arrangement.)
The sun is to rise and set at six o'clock precisely,
(weather permitting.)
The young moon will be visible, and set on the—
H. M.
19th at 7 40 p.m.
20th „ 8 44 „
21st „ 9 52 „
22nd „ 10 56 „
23rd „ 0 19 a.m.
24th „ 056 „
Jupiter is still the evening star.
Venus „ morning ~
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
—O —
September 10th—lat. 15*56, long. 33*49; distance,
210 miles.
During the past day, (since noon of yesterday,) we
have been favoured by a continuance of fine, clear
weather, and a nice steady breeze, and have made very
fair progress. There is no incident of note to record,
save that yesterday, we came up with, and passed a
large ship, who was operating along in the same direct-
ion as ourselves; after displaying our ensign all the
afternoon, she at last noticed it, but failed to read our
signal letters, having probably mislaid the telescope,
and attempted to substitute the cabin stove pipe,
whose magnifying powers are not recorded as very
great. This morning she was like the great Solar
eclipse, to come off on the seventeenth iust, —viz :
invisible to us.
It is very nice to see all our folks so very cheerful
and well; if real happiness cannot be reached on
board ship, cheerfulness is an excellent substitute, for
its joyous spirit fills the soul with harmony, it com-
poses our music for church and heart, it produces
thankfulness and serves the end of charity, and it can
be diffused through the whole community, the diffuser
losing none, though imparting to all. See our lamp-
lighter at home; he carries no more with him than a
little taper, yet with it he lights up the whole city,
diffusing light and safety to all, yet his little candle,
loses nothing more than if it had burned solitary, and
for itself alone. So with cheerfulness, it can spread
its happy influence among multitudes, its diffuser being
all the more happy and benefited also.
The general health, with exceptions, is all that can
be desired. And we are very glad this is a day of rest,
for we do need it so much.
September 11th—lat. 18*26, long. 33T5; distance
161 miles.
Although the weather continues to be beautifully
fine and almost cloudless, there is an indefinable warn-
ing of change in the appearance of sky and stars.
The wind also has changed from the point it has
adhered to, ever since we crossed the line, and has
become more Easterly, hauling at the same time North-
erly and growing less. It is rather early to lose the
trade winds yet, for as a general rule they blow steadily
from the S. E. very much farther South than we now
are. This was fully experienced, by the “Geordy"
(North country) brig who was bound from Shields to
the Cape of Good Hope, with a cargo of coals. No
one on board her had ever been off the English coast
before, and the voyage to them was at least a novelty.
Having crossed the Line all right “ Geordy " fell in
with the S. E. trades, and not knowing what they
were, undertook to make a straight course for the Cape
by tacking ship every four hours. After banging
away for several weeks, and making but little or no
progress towards his destination, “ Geordy " got
dispirited, and thought either the ship or the wind
must be bewitched. He at last sighted a homeward
bound Indiaman, who seeing a vessel pegging away in
the heart of the S. E. trades, supposed he must have


lost himself, bore down on “ Geordy,” and asked him
where he was bound to. “Where am I bound tae?”
says Geordy, “ where I'll never get in this warld, unless
“ the wind shifts. I been here tacking and tacking
“ for six weeks, and the wind ha'nt shifted a pint.”
of a future musical treat will be fully realised. The
writer of these notes was musical from his earliest
infancy, being born with a crotchet in his head, (N.B.
it's there yet.) The present form of the malady is a
notion that music and words might be written together,
instead of the usual way by separate verse. As an
illustration, please note the score of the following
pathetic and moving ditty.—entitled M. D. (money
down).
He was told how to steer, to go right away on the
port tack, till he got out of the trades, and Geordie
remarked that he deserved to “he well kicked” for
com'ng South Staining at all.
General health is all that can be desired, the order
of the day is quoits, and after necessary rest, games
in the evening.
We have been employed for the most part during the
day, and part of the evening too, in resting. As a
rule we do a good deal of it, and are very attentive to
that particular part of work.
September 12th—lat, 19*26, long. 32*57; distance
67 miles.
The general health is excellent, our few exceptions
are much brighter, and we may safely consider ourselves
to be quite serene.
Our trade winds are gone, and we are ushered into
a new system, or rather no system at all of winds,
for now when they blow at all they blow where they
list, we can only hope soon to be favoured with a breeze,
fair of course, that we may start on a course of straight
running, and begin to score respectably. We had a
series of weak flashes of lightning last night, denoting
changeable weather, and slightly arousing fears of a
tempest in the minds of a few of our citizenesses.
People think it often affectation on the part of ladies
to fear lightning, but in reality it is an effect, following
a very natural cause. What will attract the electric
fluid quicker than steel, and of what are one half, and
the other half too, of their hearts made ? From time
immemorial, their chief business in life has been to
steal hearts, and then to steel their own. It is not
September 14th—lat. 25*00, long. 33*00; distance
239 miles.
During the past 24 hours, we have had a very plea-
sant variety of winds and weather; from noon yester-
day to seven o'clock in the evening we were operating
along cheerfully at six and seven knots, but from that
time started a trot of ten, and at last put on a good
spurt of thirteen and fourteen knots for over ten hours.
It made it rather lively for some few of our good folks,
but most stood their ground manfully against the
common enemy S. S., many and varied were the ex-
cursions to the lee side, partly in pedestrian exercises,
partly for other reasons. Towards noon to-day the sky
which has been quite gloomy all the morning, betray-
ed its weakness in a copious shower of (say rain,)
which though compelling our good folks to retreat for
shelter, created quite a jubilee among the ducks and
geese, who gracefully paddled about the decks, sing-
ing in joyful strains their ( natural ) anthem. Their
bath ought to do them a world of good, and make
them very nice. By the bye, some “ Cuisine
Artistes,” vulgarly called “cooks,” can make almost
anything resemble the taste of duck. As a case in
point, “ A celebrated gourmand, stopping at an Inn
“or Cafe in some foreign town, where he could not
“ speak a word of the language, wanted some dinner,
“ and gave his order for it by showing the looseness
“of his waistcoat to the waiter, at the same time
“ smacking his lips to indicate that it was to be some-
“ thing nice. He was perfectly understood, and in due
“ time a most savoury made dish appeared, to which
“ he did ample justice, more so, as he found the flavour
“of a fine duck predominate. He expressed his satis-
“ faction to the waiter by patting his (hem) rotundity,
“ and again smacking his lips with a zest, the waiter
“ bowed, and smiled graciously. Then to show his
“knowledge and appreciation of the good things
“he had put away, the gent' smiled interrogatively
“at the waiter, saying, “ quack ? quack ? quack ? ”
“The waiter shook his head negatively repeating
“ mew, mew, bow, bow, bow.” A change came o'er
the spirit of the trav'ler's dream, and he left.—Eg.
Bum.
generally known that the safest,
or at any rate one of ed
the safest places to be in a thunder-storm, is inside an
omnibus; it is a disputed, but incontrovertible fact,
for has it not a conductor ? For the comfort of our
community, it should be known that a lightning con-
ductor used as a radius [i.e. imagine it to describe a
circle with its own length,) will protect everything
within that circle. The “ Waimate's ”is near 150 feet
in length, so no apprehension need arise, in the most
vivid lightning, should we experience any. “ There
is no danger,” as the sentry observed, when after
giving the challenge, “ Who goes there” in a stentor-
ian voice, an old lady piped out, “ its only me , guard
“ don't be afraid.”
The general health is v. g. in three places, and with
a few exceptions we are quoit, &c.
September 13th—lat. 21*11, long. 34*3; distance
67 miles.
To-day we have had nothing special to boast of in
the shape of winds and weather, the latter has certainly
been fine enough, but the breeze has been practising
the swell movement, commencing manissimo, to cres-
cendo, and forte, and again falling into the diminuendo
where it gracefully remains.
Our Waimate, West-end, glee and madrigal associ-
ation, (or the W. W. E. G. & M. A.) have commenced
rehearsal in earnest, and have some very nice selections
indeed, and I am sure we all hope that our anticipations


With deep regret, it must be announced that the September 16th—!at. 30 58, long. 27‘00; distance
foe, S. S. has triumphed in several individual cases, 250 miles.
bad cess to him. Otherwise we are as jolly as cii*'
cumstances will permit.
September 15th—lat. 27*57. long. 29*57; distance
251 miles.
To-day we are enabled to register our first day’ B
straight running, which though not quite up to our
expectations, is much better than we have been used
to of late. We begin our sea day with a fine breeze
from the N, Eastward, accompanied by gloomy over-
cast weather, which turned to rain; none of your
poor little English showers, but a real, good, honest
downpour, three drops to a bucketful. It had the effect of
killing our beautiful breeze for a time, but by four
o'clock the rain ceased, and a nice breeze sprang up
from the Northward.
Onr brave bark, responding to the “ aerial goad,"
straightened herself out to the work, and dashed off
again, from twelve to fourteen knots, according to the
impetus applied; “ isn't this splendid," is one remark,
“ 1 know I shall be ill again," is another; “ shall we
“ have a storm ? " is another; so is, “ I'd sooner get
“wet than go dowu stairs." However all things
find their level on board ship, and very soon it is
splendid, we are ill, we have the storm, and we have
to go down stairs, apd we get wet. All things being
thus pleasantly arranged to everyone's satisfaction, we
subside and await the result. It is a well known fact
to housekeepers that their grocer has a very strong
objection to selling tea, unless the customer takes
sugar too. It appears to be the case also with
“ Aeolus," Esq., he won't let us have a breeze without
a proportionate or disproportionate amount of sea.
(N. B. seas are sometimes termed waves). A good
“ see "is a very nice thing for a (say Bishop;) a good
sea is not so nice for us. A nice roll is very proper
at breakfast; rolls all night, are not only not nice,
but show decidedly bad taste and are highly improper,
so we won't have any more night rolls, (if we can
help it) except when the wind is very fair. It was
very fortunate, (and displayed a great amount of
forethought amounting almost to second sight,) that
we placed all our moveables securely and firmly on
the low side before retiring last night, and if the
ship hadn't tossed so, they would have been quite
safe now; but the low side went up, and the high side
went down in such a manner, and there was such a
noise and a rattling, that I felt quite sure some of
the things must have fallen down, that is, I am not
quite sure which was down, but that must have been
the way they went anyhow. And such a sight you
never saw this morning, nothing was to be seen but
the ends of everything sticking out in all directions,
and the pieces, Oh ! dear me ! why everything must be
broken to bits, and I can't find my clothes, or any-
thing, and then when I go on deck those horrid sea-
men want to congratulate me on having such a fine i
jiigbt. Splendid they call it. Bah ! !
To-day we have had a very nice run, with pleasant
weather all through, excepting for about an hour in
the early morning, when in a smart squall we had
an equally smart shower of rain.
We are very glad to find that no very serious injury
has arisen from the assault committed by the various
articles of furniture that were vainly seeking a rest-
ing place from the turmoils of the night, during the
disruptive rolls of last night; the question that arises
is who is the assaulting party, for instance in a recent
application for separation, brought by an injured
husband on the ground of his wife's cruelty. The
defence set up was that she was engaged in her
kitchen, when her husband quarrel'd with her, and
forgetting himself, ran his hand against a fork she
held; he then rushed against her uplifted hand, and
fell down ; he got up again, and knocked against a
pan of boiling water she hold, and it went over his
head; he then lay down on the floor, and as she at-
tempted to raise him by the hair, it all came out in
her hand; so that it was he who was guilty of cruelty
not her.
General health much as usual, thank you.
ALL HANDS SHORTEN SAIL.
-"-O'—-
When we left off last week, we had got our ship
reduced to lower topsails, and foresail, (reefed) the
sea getting up, and every prospect of a breeze. All
the non-nauticals had disappeared long ago, before
the wind had freshened much ; a little brandy, and
a good deal of basin, being in demand soon after,
they dare not slumber; if they do their “ slumbers "
are not sleep, but a recurrence of their waking
dreams.
The barometer is falling fast, the wind has consider-
ably increased, the night is as dark as the inside of
a cow, the rain is driving aslant in sheets, and so is
the spray. All the watch with long faces, and
arrayed in oilskin suits, are anticipating more work,
and less sleep. The look out man, with the top of
his Southwester pointed to the wind, and his body
pointing at an angle of about 50 degrees, sticks on
the drenched forecastle, trying to look out, though he
could not see himself Q\en were he to try. No light
anywhere visible, save an occasional blinding flash
from the sky, making the darkness still more intense.
But the rain falls heavier, and the wind comes in
violent gusts now; the commander says to Mr.
Snooks, who has the pleasure of being on deck yet,
“ see the braces all clear, we shall have something
sweet here before long, or I'm a Dutchman." Mr.
Snooks gives the order to see the braces clear, so the
watch proceed to feel them, and the answer comes
strangely to an unpractised ear, “ all clear, sir."
While we have been talking, the wind begins to


fluctuate, and presently comes a lull, with a sudden
indescribable feeling of relief. The wind is roaring
around, and the sea breaks on board, while the ship
begins to wallow about; presently comes a blinding
flash of lightning, and amid a torrent of hissing rain
the wind came howling along again, bringing a cold
sensation with it, that can only be felt to be described.
“ All hands wear ship ” is the command shouted
from mouth to mouth, with “bear a hand now” before
the wind comes, but the wind won’t wait, and with a
flap, that would astonish a novice's weak nerves, the
sails are aback, the wind increasing every moment,
and the ship going astern like mad. “ Round with
the yards, round with them,” and as they move, and
the sails shake, what a din there is. The foresail
takes charge, dragging the ropes from the men's
hands, and with two or three flaps that sound like
thunder, and shake the ship to her keel, away it
goes to ribands, cracking and snapping like a thou-
sand regiments, platoon firing; however, we can't
spare time to save the pieces, so it must go.
The wind has shifted fair, but blowing harder
than ever, so away flies the gallant ship before the
gale, never raising her head to go over the head sea,
but meeting it full butt, dividing it where she can,
and going clean through it when she cannot.
The decks are filled with the tons of water deluged
over the bows, and everything loose, and everybody
floating and washing about; but this state of things
is too good to last, the new wind is blowing too
furiously to let the sea raised by the first wind run
very long, it has its own particular sea to bring along,
and does it, and between the two they raise a nice
disturbance; soon however the new sea gets the
mastery, and away like a bird goes the “ clipper,”
dry as a bone for the time. But the waves increase
in height, the squalls come fast and furious, and the
ship wants, and must have more sail.
“We must get that other foresail bent Mr. Snooks,”
says the commander, so Mr. S. sets about it, such a
nice job, dark as the “tents of Kedar,” no one can
see to work but has to trust to feeling, and after
hours of very hard work, the foresail is at last set,
and off goes the ship at increased speed.
Now she scuds beautifully, and we can afford to
laugh at the briny monsters towering after us; they
seem to say, “if I catch you I'll smash you,” (a
remark quite as applicable to Norfolk Howards) but
we don't intend them to catch us if we know it.
Many a ship has come to grief in a sea like this,
by being pooped, i.e., by a wave bursting over the
stern, perhaps washing everybody overboard from
the poop, broaching the vessel to and ending in a
general smash, and perhaps total destruction, when
she came broadside to the sea.
Give me the “ modern iron clipper ” say all the
nauticals, that's the sort of packet for this weather,
and nothing can be truer, for away we fly before
thd gale, and though the sea runs fast we can go
faster.
Let us draw a comparison; we are in a wooden
ship of the old style, and trying to run out our gale.
While W 6 Were by the wind at the commencement
of the breeze, our ship behaved like a duck, mounting
every wave, and pile driving away, dry as a chip,
but in the second act, where she has to face the sea
with a press of sail, forcing her on to it, how she
jumps and flings, “whoosh” she goes at a sea,
knocking it all to pieces, and sending the fragments
flying all abroad, tearing along about four (4) knots.
In act third where she ha? a mountainous sea after
her, what a performance, rushing along at the rate of
seven (7) knots, she leaves a wake after her, like a
paddle-wheel steamer, and a most devious track it
is. She requires all the watch, and half the ocean
to steer in, yawing from side to side, and occasionally
turning l half round to look at the men at the wheel.
Add to this, she is leaking freely, having started
a butt probably, while driving into the head sea,
It's a long lane that has no turning, and her turn
comes after a while, she cannot go fast enough to
leave the sea, so while taking one of her sidelong
glances at the helm, a heavier wave than the rest
towers over her quarter, comes on board, and in an
instant, all, all is done.
The men, possibly commander and officers, also
swept away, most likely overboard, wheel and
binnacle carried away, skylight smashed, and cabin
full of water, stores, furniture, everything destroyed,
and worse than all, round she comes broadside to the
sea; the bulwarks crash in at the next sea, sails blow
to ribands, and by the time she can be laid to, it is
hard to say what loss of life and destruction may
not have taken place.
“Our iron clipper” scorns such mean tricks, on
the contrary, this is the sort of weather she is built
to encounter, and now it is that she makes her big
runs, 340 miles being about the score.
By the time Mr. Snooks' watch is up, the gale
begins to moderate, so at “eight bells” again, he
stops up another half hour or so, to spread his
packet's wings again, and away she speeds without
losing a feather. Mr. S. adjourns below to shift and
turn in, and earnestly hopes that the next time “ all
hands are turned up to shorten sail,” that it may be
at their destination, to be followed shortly after by,
“ LET GO THE ANCHOR.”
CORRESPONDENCE.
Shell-back Hall,
Sept. 13 th, 1876
Dear Sir,
I beg to announce through the medium
of your excellent paper, that J. R., the veteran whaler,
is prepared to entertain the Waimate public by a
description of the thrilling adventures and hair


breadth escapes, that befel him in Humpback Bay
and other parts, during a cruise in the American
whaler Woodlark.
J. R. intends, as part of his entertainment, to
favour the public by describing the manner in which
they caught the monster fin-back, from which they
obtained seven hundred barrels of oil; a performance
never before achieved, and never likely to be again.
J. R. will also describe the miraculous manner in
which he was rescued after the loss of the ship, and
undergoing terrible hardships and sufferings for a
period of twenty days, on the back of a sperm whale,
the only article of food being the barnacles that had
clung to the sides of the whale. Of a crew of 35
J. R. alone survived to tell the tale.
J. R. desires to state that upon the re-opening of
the Waimate Concerts, he will favour the public with
an affecting recitation, being entirely his own com-
position, entitled the Woodlark on the seas.
J. R. may be seen daily in the mizen-top, on the
look out for his old friend the sperm whale.
Harpooneer.
For further particulars see bills.
MASTICATION.
Sir,
Can any of your scientific readers give
me any information on the above subject.
The time allotted to our dinner in the saloon,
appears to me to grow small by degrees, and beauti-
fully less. The second steward watches my plate
with the eye of a fox, and as surely as my attention
is turned from my food, to do the polite to either of
the lovely beings between whom my unhappy lot
places me, so surely does he make a wild dash at my
plate, regardless of the transverse position of my
knife and fork.
Everybody appears to be just finishing their meat
by the time I am ready for my second helping, and
my extreme bashfulness often prevents my asking
for the second supply of meat which exhausted
nature requires. Sir, I am particular about my
mastication, —mastication, proper mastication, long
enough to allow the what d’ye call’em juices to act
upon the food, I believe to be essential to health.
I fear, sir, that others are less careful on this point
than they ought to be. Mr. Jones and Mr. Brown
I am convinced, never allow their food to come in
contact with the what d'ye call'em juices. Now, sir,
if any of your readers can tell me that my estimate
of the necessity of mastication is incorrect, I shall be
able to bolt my dinner like my neighbours, with a
clear conscience, but if it appears otherwise, it would
be a great boon if you would publish a leaflet on the
subject, for Messrs. Brown and Jones' benefit.
Yours,
Invalid.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
“ theTrat.”
(A tribute to the infested inmates of Deck Castle.)
—o—
Not a sound was heard, but a squeak and a hum,
As around our castle we hurried,
In search of the creature whose trumpet and drum,
Our delectable slumbers had worried.
We vowed as we leapt from our narrow bunks,
And relinquished our pleasant pillow;
That we certainly would not return to the same,
Till we’d put an end to the fellow.
We hunted and hunted, at dead of night,
Each portmanteau and packet o’er turning;
By the flickering moonbeam’s misty light,
And our candle dimly burning.
But half an hour had nearly elapsed,
Ere we met with the wretch that had bit us;
And raising our boots gave some terrible slaps.
To make our tormenter quit us.
At last the fatal stroke was given,
By a valiant son of the soil;
Such skill at rat hunting, and all other sports,
We could only expect from a Boyle.
Quickly and gladly we turned from the dead,
And left him all smashed and gory;
We blew out the candle, and popped into bed.
Determined to tell you the story.
OUR PARSON.
Who is it has a verdant name ?
Who is it that enjoys a game ?
Who seems the opposite of tame ?
Our Parson !
Who is it sings a comic song,
When time, at eve, seems oh, so long;
Who's always right and never wrong ?
Our Parson!
Who is it that conducts the glees?
(We hope to learn them by degrees;)
Who hates to quarrel, fret or tease ?
Our Parson !
Who is it takes part in the play.
Which will be acted some fine day;
Who’s really never in the way ?
Our Parson !
Who very kindly bids us see;
We to the golden rule agree,
“ We must love us, us must love we ?”
Our Parson !
Answer to last week's riddle, “ Nothing.”
GEOGRAPHICAL CHARADES.
1. My first is a part of the face.
My second a vowel,
My whole is a country of Asia.


My first is to be able,
My second a weight ;
My whole is a city of China.
My first is a stoppage twice repeated,
My second a letter ;
My whole is a country of Africa.
My first is a measure of wine,
My second is part of the verb “ to be,”
My whole is a city in the North of Africa.
My first is a deep gulf,
My second a preposition,
My third is two fifths of Maria,
My whole is a country of Africa
My first is not old,
My second is a place of defence ;
My whole is a city in the North of England.
My first is a term of endearment,
My second a weight;
My whole is a city of Durham.
My first is not white,
My second is a stream ;
My whole is a city of Lancashire.
My first is f of a rock,
My second a letter,
My third a place between two hills;
My whole is a city of Lancashire.
My first is f of what children do at a very
early age,
My second is more than half bony;
My whole is a city of Portugal.
My first is not sane,
My second is half ridden ;
My whole is a city of Spain.
RIDDLE.
He loved her to distraction, and followed her
about everywhere.
She hated him like poison, but like a true woman,
did her best to catch him.
THE WAIMATE THEATRE
Will positively open (weather permitting,) next
Thursday, 21st inst., when will be produced for the
first time at this theatre, the highly interesting and
intellectual play of “ Box and Cox.”
CHARACTERS.
John Box ... (a printer) ... Mr. Flack.
James Cox ... (a hatter) ... Mr. Fleck.
Mrs. Bouncer (a lodging house keeper) Miss..
Stage Manager ... ... ••• Mr. Boyle.
Musical Director ... Sgr. Barnosiraldini.
Prompter and Scene Shifter ... Mr. Wilson.
(Mr. W. has also undertaken the duty of selling
programmes.)
The doors open at 7. 15. p.m. the curtain (if any)
to rise at 7. 30. (a.m.)
NOTICE.
The Manager begs to announce that all the tickets
are sold, and places secured; friends therefore
wishing to go had better apply at the box office,
(daily from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.) from to-day to
Thursday, the day of performance.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Office and Residence, Deok Castle,
VVaimate, Sept. 16th, 1676.




No.
ISSUED WEEKLY.
Saturday, Sept. 23rd, 1876
EDITORIAL.
The news so lately announced by the telegrams
which we print to-day, adds to the ancient crown of
England another laurel, and by far the most glorious
of all the many glorious ones, with which the gallant
conduct of her brave sons has decked it.
England is again victorious. With three such
allies as the Sick Man, France bent on her own pet
schemes of revenge, and half-hearted Italy, she has
humbled the power of the three great Empires,
Russia, Germany, and Austria.
The course of events since we were able to announce
the fall of Odessa, has been briefly as follows.
The combined German and Austrian armies
invested Widin on Sept. 10th, and on the 14th,
finding that the besieged had ample supplies for a
siege, bombarded the fortress,| which capitulated on
the following day. The armies resumed their march
on Constantinople on the 16th.
In the meantime, the English army under the
Duke of Cambridge, with a few Italian regiments,
effected a landing, under cover of the Ironclads, 3
miles south of Constantinople, on the 17th, and on
the 18th and 19th, after some sharp fighting, forced
the advanced posts of the Russian army, and gained
a strong position before the city, under cover of the
guns of the forts. At an early hour the following
day, the English commenced an attack by moving
up the left wing under cover of a dense fog, against
the enemy's right, which was completely routed,
after two hour's fighting.
The English left and centre then commenced is
shelling the Russian centre, which was compelled to wi
retire to the rear of the left wing, which had not ha
yet come to action. The whole English line then th
advanced, and drove the enemy before them on to a an
large tract of marsh land, about 5 miles north of of
Constantinople. The next morning (Sept. 215 t.,) im
several gun-boats succeeded in running into a creek of
between the marsh land and the city, from whence
they opened fire on the Russians, the Ironclads doing
the same from the open sea, The Russian army was thi
thus surrounded, and about mid-day the commander-, mi
in-chief, General Cutazoffhedzoff, and his aides-de- ah
camp Generals Gotischertoff, Poolisbootzoff and be!
Schnappisknowzoff, delivered up their swords to the roc
Puke of Cambridge. cul
The Turkish troops were then left to guard the
prisoners on the land side, and the English army
took up a new position, to oppose the advance of
the Austro-German army.
The Italian force had advanced, and came up with
the enemy, 30 miles from Constantinople, but were
driven back in some disorder, and retired behind the
British centre.
Our latest telegrams (from Constantinople this
morning,) inform us yesterday another tremendous
battle was fought, in which success again crowned
the British arms. The whole Austro-German army
was cut to pieces, and the remnant was in full flight
toward the Austrian frontier.
In the meanwhile the German fleet in the Baltic
leaving those of the Russian ships which were there
to engage the French fleet, bore down on the English
Coast, eluded the Channel fleet, and landed a very
large force on the Kentish Coast. They were met
by the volunteers, under Lord Elcho, at Dorking,
and were utterly defeated by them, in a pitched
battle on the 22nd, the same day on which the great
victory at Constantinople took place.
Thus summarily was ended this terrific war, the
most sharp, decisive, and sanguinary of modern times.
The terms of peace have of course not yet been
decided upon, and we will leave them to the
imagination of our readers. We cannot be expected
to guarantee the exact correctness of the events
announced in the telegrams, which we have from
time to time laid before the public, on account of the
intangible nature of the telegraphic apparatus, which
is connected by a strong line of mental obse vation
with our own brain; but we doubt not that something
has been going on in Europe, and we are quite sure
that newspapers will be eagerly sought for on our
arrival at Port Lyttleton. Should the announcement
of these tremendous events be confirmed, we shall
immediately take out .a patent for our new process
of mental telegraphy.
We have at last got into real cold weather, though
the prospect of 20 or 30 degrees more cold yet
makes us think that we must not begin to say much
about it just at present. The cold has however driven us
below, and we had a regular warming in the Assembly
rooms, last Thursday night. There a most mira-
culous transformation scene appeared, and instead of


the Assembly-rooms we found ourselves in the
“ Waimate Theatre/’ A stage with practicable door,
windows, bed and fire-place, took the place of the cold
deck on one side; and on the other, dress circle, pit
and gallery, accommodating over 60 persons.
The entirely new play “ Box and Cox,” was
played with a vigour, which in one or two instances,
became positively alarming. The large audience
which filled the house was most appreciative, and
when Mr. Box applied the match to the fire, and after
a remarkably short interval a bright cheery blaze
appeared, the applause was deafening.
We are glad to see in our advertising columns, an
announcement of another such entertainment, for
we were but boys, and though we were ready enough
to consider ourselves men, we have found out since,
that what was love at eighteen becomes an amusing
retrospect ten years later.
We had a jolly time of it as you may imagine, for
we were all good friends together, except when a
temporary “cut” took place, and was soon solemnly
made up again by the intervention of a peace-maker.
There was the butterfly hunting. Jim Cannington
was a great butterfly fancier, and the whole party
became infected with his hobby, and would turn out
before sun-set, armed with nets, pill-boxes, and jars
filled with a sweet spirituous mixture, for Woodabay,
orthe Hunter’s Inn ; and after sun-down many lanterns
Thursday next, when “Whitebait at Greenwich v might have been seen, dancing about like wiil-o’-the
is to be performed, by a different company of artistes
We hope that we may have a few more of the songs,
which we enjoyed so much before the play, last
Thursday, and we shall certainly not be satisfied,
unless we can have another opportunity of seeing
again our dramatic friends, though in other char-
acters.
On Thursday morning, we were roused by a cry
of “ land,” and though the captain did not ’bout
ship and give us a day on Tristan d’ Acunha to stretch
our limbs, yet we greatly enjoyed the sight of its
cloudy snow-capped peaks.
MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE.
( Continued .)
What delicious walks we had down those deep
over-hung Devonshire lanes, or along the narrow paths
above the steep cliff’s, Maude was pretty; I thought
her beautiful, for there was something in her large
lustrous eyes, which had quite overwhelmed the soft
heart of the school-boy, years ago; and though we had
not met for nearly three years, the impression had
never worn out, and the faces of all my heroines in
fiction, somehow formed themselves in my mind after
Maude’s likeness.
Of course I had a rival. Maude was by a long way
the pretty one of the party, and if old Summers had
not fallen head and ears in love with her, it would
have been nothing short of a miracle.
Reggie was one of those impulsive hot-brained
fellows, who if they are not “ awfully fond of” a girl,
are perfectly sure to “ hate her like poison.”
Reggie was an adorer of beauty, and therefore as
a matter of course, he fell in love with Maude, as the
prettiest girl at hand.
Our rivalry was a friendly one, and we used to rave
over it together, and I am sorry to say, compare notes
of the favours our capricious fair one dealt out.
A novel way of carrying on a rivalry in love you
will say, but what a lot of trouble would be saved if
all jealous rivals would try the same plan. After all
wisps among the woods, throwing uncertain lights
upon trees daubed with the delicious concoction of
rum and treacle.
But we sometimes used to think how jolly it would
be if there were a few more young people near, for
Marlescombe was a most out of the way place, and
we never saw anyone, except Mr. Higgs, the curate of
Parford, who was engaged to my eldest cousin.
He was a good sort of a chap in his way, but then
his way was not ours, as he cared neither for cricket,
nor bathing, nor paper-chases, but passed the whole of
his existence (as far as we knew) in concocting vile
puns.
So “ old Higgy ” was no use to us, and as we began
to think we should soon be in want of fresh faces
now and then, we were thrown into an intense state
of excitement to hear that “ Woodabay,” the house
in the bay, had been taken by a London man, with a
large family.
It was not long before half a dozen of us were at
Woodabay, making all sorts of enquiries of the elderly
female whom we found in possession, directing the
operations of two stout country damsels engaged in
scrubbing.
What was his name ? Pretty. Not much to be gained
from that. What family had he ? Five daughters.
That was all we could get out of our elderly friend,
for she suddenly drew in her horns, as if she thought
we might be meditating a burglarious attack upon
the house, so for the next few days, we were in a fever
of excitement and conjecture, as to the possibilities of
our future neighbours.
{To he continued .)
Astronomical Notes for the Week.
—o —
By special arrangement the sun crossed the Equator,
to get the summer ready for us in New Zealand, on
Friday (yesterday) afternoon, at 5 p.m.
The sun being on a yearly engagement, will also
rise and set at the times here appointed.
The moon having made a successful debut on Sunday


last, has been engaged, regardless of expense, to
rise and set as follows :
The Sun. The Moon.
A.M. P.M. A.Mi P.M.
Sept. 23rd. Rise 6.0 —set 6.0 Rise 8.39 —set 12.8
„ 24th. „ 6.0 „ 6.0 „ 9.23—„ 1.5
„ 25th. „ 6.0 „ 6.0 „ 10.15—,, 1.57
„ 26th. „ 5.58 „ 6.2 „ 11.11—„ 2.43
„ 27th. „ 5.56 „ 6.4 „ 0.9 „ 3.23
„ 28th. „ 5.54 „ 6.6 „ 1.12 „ 3.52
„ 29th. „ 5.53 „ 6.7 „ 2.10—„ 4.24
Jupiter, the evening, and Venus, the morning star.
Moon’s Ist quarter, 25th at 3 min. past noon. On
the 29th at noon the moon will pass over the planet
“ Saturn,” and will be close to him on the previous
and following evenings.
By Order,
Wind and Weather Office,
Marine Villa, Main Deck Road.
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
—o —
GLORIOUS VICTORIES !
—o—
BATTLE OF DORKING!
DEFEAT OF THE RUSSIANS AT
CONSTANTINOPLE!
Constantinople, Sept. 23rd, Saturday.
Great battle fought near the City yesterday. The
Austro-German army is entirely routed ; and great
loss has been inflicted. The remnant is in full flight
towards the frontier, pursued by bands of Turkish
troops. Severe loss sustained by the English and
Italians.
London, Saturday morning.
German invaders met by Volunteers at Dorking.
Tremendous battle; enemy cut to pieces. 20,000
prisoners. Great rejoicings everywhere.
Berlin, Saturday.
The French armies have been beaten in several
more engagements, and the German troops are
reported as in full march towards the frontier.
(This telegram only just received on going to press.
If it is true, these movements will of course be put a
stop to by events in other quarters.)
London, Saturday
Immense rise in Turkish bonds; they are already
above par, and rising rapidly,
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Harpooner.” Your letter is unavoidably crowded
out, aud will be inserted next week.
V. V. V. The instalments of your tale are rather
too long for our space ; we have been obliged to insert
shorter portions in both issues in which it has appeared.
Several communications have been held over till
next week.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
I’m far awa’ frae thee Jamie,
Far across the main ;
I’m thinkin’ aye o’ thee laddie—
Meet me once again.
I’m standin’ by the lee side,
My heart wP grief is fain ;
It’s no because I’m sick ava,’
Oh, meet me once again !
They say I’m gettin’ thin lad,
It does na’ give me pain;
For love o’ you I’m losin’ flesh,
Oh, meet me once again !
“ Our parson ” thinks me daft a wee,
But I can hauld my ain;
I wrote a letter last gazette,
To prove him I am sane.
I gave him sic an awfu’ slap,
I made him wince amain ;
I dinna think he’s sic a fule,
Tae meet me once again !
CHARADES, &c.
Answers to last week’s Geographical Charades :
1. China; 2. Canton; 3. Barbary; 4. Times; 5.
Abyssinia; 6. Newcastle; 7. Darlington; 8. Black-
burn; 9. Rochdale; 10. Lisbon; 11. Madrid.
The Riddle —A flea.
Correct answers received to Nos. 1,2, 4, & 10, from
“ Xmas,” who asks for something “ more difficult and
worthy thinking out.” Go it Xmas; but why did
you not answer all the Charades if they were so easy ?
And why did you not try the riddle ? Here’s a nice
one to suit you :—“ Why is your wisdom tooth like
your name (Xmas) ?’* Answer; Because it is coming.
RIDDLES.
1. What is the difference between a bird with one
wing, and a bird with two ?
2. What is the difference between kissing a lady,
and a wave on the main deck ?
Church Notices.
Q- ■-
Sept. 29th.—Friday, Feast of St. Michael and all
Angels
Oct. Ist.—l6th Sunday after Trinity. Hymns at
Morning Prayer, 222, 165, 175.
Practice after Evening Prayer on Tuesday.


THE THEATRES.
(From our Special Critic.)
I have to report to you this week a great success
which has been achieved by the enterprising manager
of the Waimate Theatre. He put on the stage last
Thursday, (for the first time here) the well known
comic drama, “ Box and Cox.”
The roll of “ Box ” was taken by Mr. Flack, and
I believe I may say that this was his first appearance
upon any stage. His get-up was perfection; and his
acting shews very great promise of future success.
He threw a great deal of force into his part, and
sustained it well throughout. As he is engaged at
the Theatre for another month, we all hope to see
more of him.
Mr. Fleck performed the part of “ Cox ” to perfec-
tion ; he has taken this part before, having played it
over 400 nights at the “ Queen’s.”
“ Mrs. Bouncer ” was taken by a young lady, who
also chose it to make her debut with. Her acting
was immense , and I was only sorry that she had not
greater scope for her abilities.
The play was preceded by some exquisite music
from some ladies of the audience. On the whole the
first night was quite a success , and I hope to be able
to chronicle a first-rate season. “ Whitebait at
Greenwich ” is advertised for next week, when you
shall have a few more jottings from your faithful
Critic.
ANOTHER TOUGH YARN.
{Vide Waimate Gazette Sept. Sth, 1876.)
—o—
A good many years ago, (say 50,) when I was in
the gay hey-day of youth, when there was no such
word as “fail” on board ship, I, with another wild
character, went out to the West Indies, in the mail
steamer “ Orinoco,” for the purpose of finding and
bringing to England, a large brig, hitherto lost to her
owners’ underwriters, and all concerned, and had been
missing for some months. We took passage (deck
£4O) as above, and after changing to the “ Derwent *’
and “ Eagle ” at St. Thomas* and Jamaica, we found
ourselves on the 23rd day from Southampton, landed
at the sweet and airy city of Belize, in Honduras.
Sufficient intelligence had reached the owners, by
whom we were sent, to assure us, that somewhere on
the wild desolate coast of Central America, we should
find our “ quarry.” We lost no time, as we were not
to come on pay till we were in actual possession of
the vessel; we having the proper authority to take
her wherever we might find her.
Hiring a small craft, with four negroes, and a
supply of “ fish wi’ one yi,” viz :—split mackerel, and
plantains, with a goodly stock of pork and rum, we
started away south—north she could not be, the coast
being pretty well inhabited, that is, it might have a
city (of two huts) every hundred mile or so. We
sailed away, past all British Honduras, calling in at
all the river mouths and cities, (oh, how I should
like to describe those cities,) mixed with Caribs,
Spaniards, Creoles, indeed with a veritable motley
series of tribes, all along Spanish Honduras, calling
at Omoa, Truxillo, and all the rivers, but no news of
our prey, past Cape Gracios a Dios, the great Wanks
river, and along the Mosquito shore, and there at last
at, or rather off the great Mosquito river, a wreck,
though at anchor, lay the poor wretched, miserable,
and forlorn craft we were in search of.
Bad as she was, we were very glad to get alongside
and on board. To see the outside of this poor old
brig, was enough to make anyone with a grain of sense
think about breaking their contract, and returning
while they were safe, but we were not burdened with
a very large stock of the article.
Her sides looked literally rotten ; the oakum hung
dangling in tassels from the seams; parched, blistered
and dead, she Looked all over ; torn patches of lead*
put on over very rotten places, also adorned her sides’
We climbed on board. “No one at home.” So
hunting up an old flag we stuck it in the rigging,
and took possession. Having a due regard to discip-
line, to regulate our future movements, we at once
nominated our captain and officers. My partner, on
the strength of having been once mate in a coasting
vessel, took the command; I was put in as chief; two
of the darkies who could steer, were appointed as
quarter-masters; and the other two as cook and
steward, trusting to p vovide-ncQ to pro vide ns a crew.
As we were all officers and all very smart, the
arrangement was highly satisfactory to all parties;
we all gave our orders to the cook, to provide some-
thing to eat forthwith, so we got up our “ fish wi’
one eye,” and plantains, and while the cook and
steward set about the affaires de cuisine, we, that is
the officers, took a look round ; what a sight! rags,
tatters, rot, bleached ruin, and burnt up neglect, and
more rags and tatters, comprised the whole view.
The history of this brig was, that the captain and
all hands but two had died on board of yellow fever;
these two knew nothing of navigation. The vessel
was from St. Thomas’, bound to Belize. After these
two were left alone, they used to keep themselves
drunk as long as there was any liquor to be got, the
vessel meanwhile drifting about, just as wind or
current took her, till partly by running before the
wind when they were sober, and partly by drifting
when they were drunk, this pair of beauties found
themselves one fine day in sight of some coast, they
did not know or care much which; so getting into
smooth and shallow water, they let go the anchor,
cut the sails from the yards, tumbled them into the
hold, and considered that they having safely navi-
gated the vessel to a place where she could have


shelter, had done all that coidd be required of them’
getting out a boat with sails, and taking something
to sell, they started to navigate the coast on their
own account, and to get some more rum.
[To he continued in our next.)
PROGRESS OF THE VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
September 17th—lat. 33’38, long. 23.00; distance
290 miles.
Yesterday shortly after mid-day the wind rapidly
increased to a brisk gale, and for the first time since
leaving the “ land " the main top gallant sail had to
be taken in. The squalls were pretty sharp, but the
sail was taken in more as a matter of policy, than
actual necessity; as the force of wind only amounted
to a fresh gale. By eight o'clock we began to pack
the muslin on again, and by midnight we were
spanking along, fourteen knots, with a fine breeze and
all sail set.
To-day we have had a fine steady breeze, with all
sail set, and noon showed us, that we have been sing-
ing to the tune of 290 miles in the twenty four hours
This is not nearly so much distance as the
“ Waimate" can accomplish by about fifty miles, but no
ship dots so well in squally weather as she will with a
steady wind, for obvious reasons. Our good folks,
strange to say, were not ill, probably they considered
that the rolling of the previous day was to all intents
and purposes sufficient for two, at any rate they did
not see the force of taking the trouble to be ill on
Sunday, (we must make a distinction somewhere) and
week days too.
The only event of note we have to record is the
capture of a Leviathan flying fish; in an unthinking
moment, this unhappy insect (N.B. —It measured by
special survey, 21 \ inches, from the tip of the nose,
to the tip of the tail; and from the tip of the tail, to
the tip of the nose, inches; so, that the nose and
tail were precisely the same distance apart,) flew on
board, alighting near the Grasshoppers' Palace, Main
Hatch Square. It was a fine specimen of the kind of
fish, and strange to say though it could be heard
hissing at eight a.m. at nine o'clock it had disappeared I
We firmly believe he is dead now.
According to our wont, we have enjoyed two excel-
lent and well attended services at the Town Hall to-day
General health, quite well thank you.
September 18th—lat. 35’47, long. 19’36; distance
215 miles.
During the past sea-day, we have had a rather fine
time of it, a fairly steady breeze, with mostly fine
weather. Occasional showers, (which we of course
expect) passed over, but on the vvhole, it has been
very pleasant and invigorating, and so cold ; our
greatest heat has not exceeded ninety degrees, (if so
much) and we expect the thermometer to reach thirty
degrees by and by; half way therefore will be sixty
degrees, which is exactly our present temperature.
Now if it is so cold now, we presume it will be, oh
dear me, it's so very, &c., &c., &c., by and by, when
the minimum is reached, especially if there should be
any (n) icebergs around.
Come out 'tis now September,
The Fowler’s time's begun ;
And though we don't hit anything,
We hear the frequent gun.
Come out with balls of crotchet cotton,
And let us fish in thirds ; (N. 8.)
And see that it isn't over rotten.
And we'll catch all the birds.
Our novelty of to-day is birds; we have a mania for
Cape pigeons, and we'll have Cape pigeons, regardless
of expenditure of crotchet cotton (real Boar's Head
No. 3.) We have been wondering why the ladies
smiled so sweetly while dispensing this necessary
article for bird fishing. Was it, or is it, that visions of
real plumes from real birds, converted to the various
uses, that to the ruder (so very rude) sex are sealed
books; ah no ! beneath those sweet smiles, lurks a
little secret; dare I venture? (N.B. The ladies will
please not read this.) What an excellent excuse I shall
have for not finishing that antimacassar, &c., got no
cotton, (all through the birds of course.) I dare say
the crotchet hooks would be very useful to catch too
wary chickens, altogether the proceedings are rather
fowl towards our fair ones.
A paltry joke is in circulation about the poultry
appearance of the great hall of Deck Castle, whose
massive walls present a novel and feathery appearance,
unknown hitherto.
The general health is excellent and exhilarating, and
we do enjoy our rest so much.
September 19th—lat. 36 7, long. 16’23; distance
178 miles.
We have not done anything very specially grand
to-day; we have arrived in the latitude of the Cape of
Good Hope, so we may entertain a good hope that
the fickle foul wind, that now holds us in thrall, may
soon shift its unwelcome attentions to some more
favoured locality; we wanted Easterly winds leaving
home; we did not get them ; now’ we want Westerly
winds, we have not got them; we are in the latitude
for them, so some arrangement had better be made at
once, to secure our rights in that line. The best refer-
ence we can give is to those extensive publishers and
booksellers so well known on the English railways
(not Bradshaw).
The bird catching excitement has toned down some-
what to-day; why ? simply because Cape pigeons are
too small game for us, —it's “ albatrosses " we want
at the very least, “Eagles," “Moas," a “Plesiosaurus,"
a good sized “ Pterodactyl," or “ Ichthyosaurus," or


other autedeluvian game, would be some sport, but—
To lose all our crotchet line,
As well as our precious time;
And to Cape pigeons thus confine,
Such wondrous skill as yours and mine—
No never! let's have a “ Plesiosaurus" on the half
shell.
This brings to mind the ruse of a weary traveller,
who putting up at an inn one cold wintry day, found
he could get no access to the fire to warm himself.
The landlord came to him for orders, but he manifested
great solicitude about his horse, and startled the whole
company by ordering a “ half bushel of oysters " to be
given to it; everybody was surprised, and told him
his horse would not eat oysters, “ won't he " said the
man, “go and see," they went; and he took up the
most comfortable seat and waited. When they all
came back said they, “ there, we said a horse wouldn't
eat oysters," “ah ! " said the man, “ but I can , so
hand them over," and he ate them, history says, shells
and all; but we are not bound to believe that.
The general health is pretty good, thank you, it’s
very cold.
September 20th —lat. 36-7, long. 15-21; distance
66 miles.
What are we to say to-day? We have only made
sixty-six miles, the weather is too calm and fine. We
are prepared to rough it, and are not to be disappoint-
ed with impunity in this manner. One at least of our
folks has commenced to rough it, but ideas differ on
this as well as on other nautical points. Our friend’s
idea of hardship is lying in bed instead of getting up
to breakfast, going in for a late meal off whatever
may be around, —“hard tack’’will be his fate as
sure as eggs.
It is not always wise to take whatever comes to
hand for granted as eatable; for instance, “ a certain
“ person had occasion to be out rather late one night,
“ and returned home in rather elevated spirits and
“ very hungry. His wife had retired, and he could
“ not find the matches, but he knew there was some
“ cold hash in the cupboard, left from dinner, so feel-
“ing on the shelves he found a basin , containing, as
“he felt sure, the hash, so he set to work with a
“ spoon and his fingers to satisfy his hunger. He
“ thought the jelly delicious; but in his progress he
“ came across some stringy parts that he could not get
“ his teeth through, so he contented himself with the
“ jelly, and having finished it went to bed. When the
“ wife came down stairs next morning, she was horrified
“ to find her best nightcap all torn to shreds, and all
“ the starch gone out of the basin; the presence and
“ state of the spoon and surroundings, told her the
“ tale at once; and didn’t he catch it when he came
“ home, that’s all.”
We have no novelty to-day, and the general health
is very good.
September 21st—During the past “sea day,” we
have been favoured to a limited extent, by a little
more wind, and have progressed beyond the islands
composing the Tristan d’ Acunha group; making our
position at noon to-day—lat. 36-24, long. 11-50;
distance 126 miles.
At dawn this morning the main island came in to
view, as we passed Northward of it, the other two isles
being too far off to be seen by us. These islands,
three in number, are named respectively, “ Tristan d’
Acunha”the largest and most Northern; “Inaccessible’'
island the Southernmost; and “Nightingale” island the
Westernmost, lying in the form of a triangle, they
were discovered by the Portuguese, before the year
1600; were visited by the Dutch in 1643 and by the
French in 1767.
The height of the peak of the large Island which
we have seen is 8,326 feet from the sea, and it may be
seen in clear weather at a distance of seventy five
miles. The cliffs in most parts rise sheer from the sea
to 1,000 feet. A rocky shelf on the South West side,
is the only landing place, great numbers of seals, sea
lions, sea elephants, and large quantities of sea birds
and fish inhabit the islands : (the birds not the fish,)
the collection of their skins is the staple commerce of
the islanders, the produce is pigs and goats, potatoes,
cabbages, and various kinds of vegetables. Its first
inhabitants were an old soldier named “ Glass ” and
his family, since increased by emigrants from St,
Helena and the Cape of Good Hope, as well as by
stragglers left by whaling vessels, to the number of
about two hundred. The people are essentially English,
and are a remarkably good and orderly community; the
established church is strictly adhered to as their form
of worship. They obtain all the necessaries of life
from the island itself, and what luxuries they can get
from any vessels that may visit them; they are always
glad to exchange skins, stockand vegetables, for books,
clothing, or small luxuries. The vessels engaged in
whale fishery frequently visit the island, and bring
them most of the articles they stand in need of; about
Tristan d’ Acunha is one of the whaling grounds, used
by the whalers from St. Helena, to which island they
go to sell and tranship their oil and whalebone.
“ Governor Glass ” has been dead some years, but
his memory, as a wise ruler, and good man, is cherish-
ed by the islanders. The other two islands are not
inhabited, but frequent fishing and sealing excursions
to them are made by the people of Tristan island.
Many vessels at various times have been wrecked
on them, and in the thick, stormy weather that fre-
quently prevails in these latitudes, they become dan-
gerous obstacles, lying as they do in the beaten track
of all vessels, bound beyond the Cape of Good Hope.
Gough island, or “ Diego Alvarez," —is a small
island something like Tristan island in shape, but
lying far away South of the 40th degree of latitude,
or about three hundred miles South of our present
position. It is uninhabited, but in former years an old
Portuguese monk, secluded himself there, his skeleton


being found a long time after his death ; his name
was “ Diego Alvarez;” none ever knew how he came
there, but by a manuscript left by him, his name and
ideas were made known. There is nothing remark-
able about this island, save that it is a mere mountain
top, rising from a fathomless depth, to a height of
4,380 feet above the sea, and its possessing a rock;
the very counterpart of a church, and called the church
rock, it is much frequented by sea fowl.
There, are no more islands near our route till we pass
the Cape of Good Hope, when we pass the Prince
Edward’s Islands, and further on, the Crozets, and
Kerguelen’s Land, none of which we may pass near.
There are no more islands after this till we reach
Tasmania, but there is a group of islands beyond that,
called “ New Zealand,” where we may stay.
September 22nd —lat. 37‘44, long. 7*55 ; distance
230 miles.
From noon yesterday, until eight o’clock in the
evening we were favoured by a moderate breeze from
the southward, making about seven or eight miles
per hour; but from that time up to to-day at noon,
the breeze has increased to a fine steady wind, and we
“ balled off” eleven miles per hour all the time.
We have now entered upon a course of straight
running, and anticipate making a fair show, hence, to
Tasmania. It cannot be too strongly recommended to
all our good folks, to see their movables, especially
breakables, safely placed at all times ; as it is quite
possible some heavy rolls may be encountered at any
time, not heavy from want of yeast, for it will be seen
that when the heaviest rolls take place the general
aspect of the ocean will be yeasty enough, in fact all
yeast; and should any articles of crockery or “ vertu”
be inclined to roam at these times, good bye to its
integrity. Whole numbers will have to be abandoned,
and fractions substituted.
I may not, indeed cannot criticise; one critic has
already* come to an untimely epd. I take warning;
annihilation is not good for me. I could not stand it. I
trust therefore that “ other lips, and other pen,” will
render the meed, just and due, to our kind friends
who produced the entertainment of last evening. But
in this “ progress,” it must of course be noticed. The
music and singing by the ladies, as a prologue, was
simply delightful—the execution of voice and instru-
ment caused us to hang on each note with admiration,
and to feel sorry at its being cut down to a few pieces.
The performance of ‘Box and Cox’ was really an amateur
marvel, and well worthy of professional imitation : for,
and in behalf of the nautical population of “ Waimate,”
I offer our very best thanks, and can only say, “ do it
ayain .”
W AR— Concluded.
—o —
Several old Roman Imperators were there strolling
about, as hard featured, square toed, unaccommodating
crusty old codgers, as you would wish to see. The old
Carthaginian turned his back on them, which was
natural enough.
But of all the great heroes pacing the shores of the
lake, two attracted my attention more than any
others.
Their piercing eyes andhigh foreheads,shewed them
born to command; they seemed kindred spirits, tho’
of different countries and times, and unlike the rest,
who were moody and unsociable, these seemed chatty
and conversable.
The one was a small spare wiry man, with a very
long neck, whilst his eagle or hawk nose bespoke
him of the Wellington or Napier type. The other
was shorter, more corpulent, and with delicately
chiselled feminine features.
They were arm in arm together; the modern tried
walking in step with the ancient, but it was no go.
‘ Old fellow,’ said the modern, nudging the ancient
under the ribs, ‘what was your object in raising such a
dust when overhead?’ * What was yours old fellow?’
replied the other, ‘tell me your motive, but mind you
I don’t promise to tell you mine ; whatever it was I
did not gain much by it personally,’ (holding up his
white toga, riddled through and through, and dyed
with his own blood.)
‘ Anyhow ’ said the other, ‘it was a quick death, a
thousand times better than to be assasinated by inches,
in cruel exile from my own dear France.’ Here the
Emperor, for it was the Emperor himself, folded his
arms, and fell into a deep reverie, his glazed eyes
turned strainingly to Fi’ance, across that bloody sea.
I tried to wake him up, taking him by his green
collar, giving him a shake, but in vain; I then pushed
against him, trod on his toe as if by accident, but
with the same result; his eyes were still bent fixedly
in the same direction. The Roman told me, that
during the Italian campaign, they had jointly con-
structed a map on the sand with a stick, using blood
for ink. The Emperor would get very excited,
suddenly starting up, waving his cocked hat, shout-
ing furiously—“ Steingal! Desaix !! Massena !! !
courez! pressez la charge! ils sont a nous.” ‘ Doubtless’
said the Roman, “he is a man of no ordinary* mental
power, although I am unable to make out who he is.”
‘ You are right,’ replied I, ‘he is the greatest military
genius since your own time;’ at the same time, I
remarked to the Imperator, ‘you are in one point vastly
the Emperor’s superior; I allude to your method of
handling your pen, as well as your sword. Your
“ Commentaries ” are the most remarkable literary
production that has survived.’
‘ And what of my grammar; has the ablative
survived ?’ ‘ Oh, yes ! we have the ablative absolute,
you understand.’ ‘And the Calendar?’ ‘All but the
Ides of March : moreover, except with the Society of
Friends, the seventh month bears your name, the
greatest historical name we possess. I repeat the
o ther half of it myself a hundred times daily; it is my


dog’s name. It is so we call our great dogs ; our
little ones we call * Pompeys.’
The Imperator was gratified; I offered him a pinch
of snuff, handing him the box; he was going to toss
it off like a draught of ‘ Bass/ and but for my quick-
ness would have been choked ; this clearly proved him
to be of a pre-snuff-period formation.
I now asked him to tell me what he considered
the most brilliant passage in his life; * I could shew
you the least/ replied he sadly, drawing aside his toga,
and shewing his wounds. It was a piteous sight,
those ghastly, gaping, dagger stabs, many of them
still bleeding, and the lips of others still green and
gangrenous.
I was shewn which was the work of Brutus, (
Casca, and all about it. So much for Julius Csesar.
A clock struck, a dog whip cracked, a harsh voice
cried, “now gentlemen, kennel up, there is a time for
all things/’
In less than a minute, I was left alone on the
shores of the lake, and as I stood solus, gazing on
that crimson ocean,, and thought of all the pangs the
spilling of that blood had cost, the tears, the sighs,
the groans, the convulsive writhings, the abruption
of the most holy charities of life, there rose, or seemed
to rise, the most hideous monster ever my eyes rested
upon; it was the impersonation of war, swelling
gradually in bulk, until it filled the entire heavens,
its fierce green eyes glaring things unutterable; it then
burst out into a wild unearthly laugh, that rattled
like thunder amongst the distant hills, seeming to
shake the very centre of creation. It awoke me in a
cold perspiration; my dream was done. H.M
CORRESPONDENCE.
MASTICATION.
Dear Mr, Editor,
In your impression of last week, I
observed and noted, and was very much pained at
reading the recital of your correspondent “ Invalid’s ”
terrible trials and sufferings. (IT,) not yet having
determined the gender of your correspondent, I see no
alternative but to speak in the neuter; it regrets that
its unhappy lot has placed it between tivo lovely
beings—how very dreadful; perhaps it would prefer
being placed among several, two only not being
apparently to its taste. From this I conclude that it
must be of the male persuasion and of decided Mormon
tendencies, or the sad wail could not have escaped
from its oppressed bosom.
I will therefore picture to myself “ Invalid ” to be
he, third person, (very) singular and nominative case
(sad case). He feels deeply the premature removal
of his plate on certain occasions, and regrets that
too. His bashfulness (oh! oh!!) will not permit
him to masticate the good things of this life, and as
ur a consequence, his what d’ye call’em juices, fail to
what d’ye call it in the thingemabob. Dear me, he
c h cannot get time, thyme must be meant, (he can’t eat
)gs time) thyme with sage and onions are the usual
ingredients for stuffing, and as a final regret, he has
lUI actually to bolt his dinner ! the same as the rest of us !
whatever that may mean. Whatever is holt as
, connected with dinners? Literally it cannot be
C( English, what is it lexicographically ? Bolt, aye
" w that’s it, B. 0. L. T.—Bolt, let us see. Bolt, a noun,
’ ’ a fastening, to fasten or secure within, that won’t do ;
1 ' to bolt, verb neuter, to fasten with a bolt, nor that
™ either: to bolt, verb active, to spring out suddenly,
aa that must be it; hisdinner springs out suddenly; still
that has no reference to anybody else’s case, but his
of own. The only inference I can draw therefore, is
. that we bolt our dinners to secure them within, while
ce “ Invalid” poor fellow, bolts his, or rather it suddenly
or springs out again; no wonder he is an invalid.
Do Mr. Editor comply with his pathetic appeal;
give him a leaflet, a nice one, give him two, give him
several, but don’t let him bolt them in his acceptation
of the word ; warn him in time, dear Sir, of the
danger to his peace, in persisting to sit between only
two lovely beings; how can he expect to masticate?
Advise him to change his base. To seek fresh fields
and pastures new, where thing-a-mary’s are plenty,
and stewards few ; so only can he arrive at that pitch
of happiness, where lovely beings cease from troubling
and dinners are at rest. Admiral.
MASTICATION.
Sir,
I beg to call your attention to a
serious error in your impression of Saturday last. In
my letter to you of Sept. 15th, I spoke of the two
lovely beings, between whom ray “ happy lot places
me/’
Sir, you had the audacity to alter my letter, by the
insertion of the negative “ un ” before “ happy,” so as
to make it appear to the public that I was afflicted by
the proximity of the aforesaid lovely beings.
Now Sir, I am universally known as a lady’s man,
and I naturally love them all—bless them ! Imagine
therefore my horror at your awkward mistake.
Considering the great unpleasantness which has
occurred, and the risk of a dead cut from both of the
two lovely beings, I must request you in your next
impression, to make an apology as public as was your
error.
Yours
• f Invalid.”
[We are extremely sorry for having wounded the
delicate feelings of our correspondent “ Invalid.”
We acknowledge that the error (a clerical one)
was ours, and to prevent all further mistakes, must
repeat our request, that all communications should be
legibly written. Ed.]


“ BOX AND COX.”
Steerage, Waimate,
Sept. 21st, 1876.
To the Editor, etc.
On behalf of the passengers in this portion of
our ship, allow me to thank the ladies and gentlemen
who took so much trouble and pains to amuse us for
an hour with “ Box and Cox.” We were asked what
we thought to it, and replied “ not much.” We
thought a good deal o/‘it however, and consider the
curtain-raising apparatus “ immense.”
Yours,
One of the audience.
NOTICE.
Stores will be delivered at the following times only.
Passengers between decks —Saturdays, from 9.30
to 11.0 a.m.
Pantry —daily from 10.30 to 11.30 a.m.
Galley —daily from 6.0 to 7.0 a.m.
Forecastle —Mondays, 3 to 4 p.m.
By order
C. R. Couch,
Store Keeper.
MUSICAL PUBLICATIONS.
Messrs. Brewer & Co. beg to announce the publica-
tion of their new songs—
“ Alley give over,” and “ Willie dear.”
LOST.
—O—-
A hook tea-pot, broken lid made fast to pot with
twine. No reward is offered, but the sorrowful, silent
Sandy relies upon the honesty of the finder for its
restoration. Apply as above in the steerage.
BIRDS ! BIRDS !! BIRDS !!!
—o —
Sea birds carefully and cleverly cleaned, cured, or
stuffed on the shortest notice.
Terms. For stuffing the smaller kinds, one bird in
exchange for a bird of similar species. Skinning and
cut ing, bird out of three. Cape hens and albatrosses,
bird for bird.
Applications attended toby A. C., 3, Green Street,
where specimens may be seen. Office hours —7 p.m.
to 10 p.m. daily.
N.B. The advertiser, a young man commencing
business, will not be answerable for loss through
accident, or destruction by rats or other vermin.
Special arrangements made with clubs and schools.
AMUSEMENTS.
—— o —
WAIMATE THEATRE.
—— o —
On Thursday next, 28th Sept., will be produced,
(wind and weather permitting) the serio-comico,
tragico, burlesquico drama, entitled—
WHITEBAIT AT GREENWICH.
Dramatis Personce,
Mr. Ben. Buzzard Sgr. Flbccini.
Mr. Glimmer Sgr. Barnosiraldini.
John Small ... (a waiter) ... Mr. Flock.
Miss Lucretia Buzzard ... Miss B. R. Nett.
Sally ... (a servant) ... Miss L. M. (H)Orizon.
The manager begs to state that the above play has
been put on the stage regardless of expense.
Entirely new Scenic Effects !
Gorgeous Costumes! !
The Orchestra, as before, will be under the conduct
of that able and talented musician Sgr. Barnosiraldini.
Prices of admission as usual.
N. 8.—0. P. Q. Philander Smiff has been specially
engaged as scene shifter.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Office and Residence, Deck Castle,
Waimate, Sept. 23rd, 1876.




EDITORIAL.
With the solemn Words of the burial service still
in our ears, we cannot help alluding for a moment
to the sad event which has just taken place among
us. It would have been strange if general sympathy
had not been felt for the poor lad, whom a danger-
ous illness had overtaken in our midst, under such
melancholy circumstances; and his death has cast a
gloom over us, and has suggested thoughts which
it will perhaps be as well for us not too hurriedly to
dispel. He died last night, and this morning we
have, most of us for the first time, joined in a funeral
at sea.
Surely all who saw the feeble body committed to
the deep, must have been forcibly reminded of the
Almighty power of the God in whom we trust, and
must have felt that He who made the universe, can
rule it, and can give either sea or land charge con-
cerning His people, according to the mighty working
whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto
Himself. “It” then, “God be with us, who can be
against us?”
SONNET.
Ist. Voice.
Methought a change came o'er me,
Strange, yet sweet, as if unmanacled a captive sprung,
Lightness for dull incumbrance, wiugs for feet.
The heavy and the weak asunder flung—
To sink, to sail, to fly, were all the same;
No weight, no weariness, unfleshed and free,
Pure and aspiring as the ethereal flame
In the full strength of immortality.
Reason clear, passionless, serene and bright.
Without a prejudice, without a stain !
Unmingled and immaculate delight!
Without the shadow of a fear or pain.
A whisper, gentle as a Zephyr's breath
Spake in mine ear—
“ This liberty is death.”
2nd. Voice.
“ Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory, through
Our Lord Jesus Christ.” “ For lam persuaded
That neither death, nor life, nor angels,
Nor principalities, nor powers, nor
Things present, nor things to come.
Nor height, nor depth,
Nor any other creature
Shall separate us from the love of God
Which is in Christ Jesus Our Lord.”
Sept. 29th—Michaelmas day, a.d, 1876.
We are inclined to envy the sailors their enjoy-
ment of Saturday night, the week of hard work past,
and the comparative rest of the holy-day at hand,
with its home memories which are expressed by the
time honoured toast of “ wives and sweethearts.”
We are told by one who ought to know sailors,
that our ideas of their style of enjoyment are far too
high, and that we must not look for such things from
them; still we cannot help believing that it is a law
of nature that honest work brings a certain amount
of satisfaction (to say the least) with it, therefore
we cannot get rid of the idea, that a good sailor
finds a peculiar enjoyment in Saturday night. We
have no set work to do; therefore our Saturday
nights are like all other nights of the week.
We remember our Saturday nights at school, the
sense of freedom after the hard work of the week,
(especially if our Latin prose, Greek verse, trans-
lations, essays, &c., had been delivered up to time in
the morning); the exhibition of glorious scars, won
in the afternoon's football match, or the blisters
raised by the rowing, and then the prospect of
Sunday with it's long country walks, and it’s change
of occupation and scenery.
On looking back we can say that it was on those
Saturday nights, that we occasionally experienced
those rare hours of almost perfect peace and hap-
piness, which we suppose are given more or less
rarely to brighten even the most common-place
existence.
But if we have no other special enjoyment on
Saturday nights, we can at least join in the home
memories of the night. Indeed since we have become
plural, we consider ourselves perfectly free to drink
the toast (not of “wives,” because we have no
Mormon tendencies), but of sweethearts , in the plural
number, all to ourselves.
There is almost no event to talk about this week,
hence the foregoing little bit of moralizing.
The feast of St. Michael and all Angels, (or
“Michaelmas day”) has passed almost unnoticed.
As it so happened the traditional goose was not (for
a wonder) on the saloon table that day.
We have bad some heavy squalls though the last
day or two, and have not thought it necessary to
keep our distance below the 300 miles.
The condition ot our box on being opened on
Thursday night was very melancholy; only two little
scraps of blue paper were turned out, one of which
Saturday, Sept. 30th, 1876.
No. 8.
ISSUED WEEKLY.


was a strong 1 letter, a regular smasher for ourselves,
which we print, the other a growl at the unhappy
superintendent of water-works, which we don't.
So if it had not been for the exertions of one or
two regular contributors, and a few scraps over from
last week, our readers would have been obliged to
go on short commons this week. There are only
four more Saturdays now left to us if all go well, so
we confidently appeal to all well-wishers to “ keep
the pot boiling." We have no doubt that our
friends of the saloon only want reminding of our
needs, and we shall have our box crammed full next
week.
“MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE."
{Continued .)
We had not to wait long, before our curiosity as to
our new r neighbours was satisfied.
Two days after as we passed down by the usual
short cut through the grounds of the house, with
towels flying in the wind, toward our old bathing
ground, our songs and laughter were brought to a
sudden check by the sight of the flutter of a puggery
on the lawn before us. We stopped short, and after,
a moment's hesitation, knowing that our voices must
have attracted attention, we bolted straight away
from the path through the wood, and in halfa minute
were in the road ; we did not stop however until we
reached the beach at the bottom of the hill, half dead
with fits of uncontrollable laughter.
“Well," said Arthur, “you are a set of pretty
fellows to run from a girl's ribbon like hares from a
hound; there's old Prior pale in the face with fright.''
“Don't you talk" said Prior, our “horsey"
character, “ that double in the wood would have done
credit to the finest old hare in the county, and as if
you didn’t run yourself, harder than any one of us."
“ Don't tell me you didn't, when you stand there
puffing and blowing as if * Wasp' had given you
chase over the moor for the last half hour." “Of
course I ran" replied the other, “do you think I
would desert you in your hour of danger, not a bit
of it, as the donkey said when the boy politely offered
him the stick," —and down he ducked, just in time to
avoid a pebble which his jest evoked from Prior's
hand. “ I'll bet you five bob " said Reggie, “ that
was a pretty girl." “What makes you think that"
asked George. “What a question" said I, “Reggie
can tell a pretty girl by the wag of her puggery, as
well as old Prior here can decide the breed of a dog
by the curl of his tail." There was a laugh at this, for
Prior had only the week before given a sovereign to
old farmer Cramp for a dog, which he decided to be
well bred, because of the peculiar characteristics of
this very feature, and it had turned out after all to
be a rank old cur.
W r e had our bathe, and were walking along the
shore beneath the lofty cliffs before returning, when
we heard a voice calling. It was evidently a female's
voice, and though it was at some distance, it sounded
like a cry of someone in alarm. We looked around,
no one to be seen on the beach, and for some
moments we were puzzled; but my cousins more used
to the place, were scanning the cliffs above. George
soon exclaimed, “ look, there's someone on the cliff."
We followed the direction of his hand, and there near
the top of the cliff, apparently hanging on the bare
face of the cliff above us, was a female form.
“ She is on the Mare " said George, and away he
went toward the foot of the cliff*, and we after him.
The “ Mare " was a narrow zigzag path down the
cliff, easy enough to those who were accustomed to
the cliffs, but of some difficulty to others, and really
dangerous to any one with weak nerves.
We reached the lower end of the path, and quickly
began the ascent, George and Arthur leading the
way. Who could the stranger be? Surely notone
of the cousins; they knew the path well enough, and
Would have no fear of it. No, it must be one of the
new comers. Many such thoughts passed through
our minds as we clambered up the narrow path, until
as we neared the summit we saw George some way
ahead of us, leading a young lady up the cliff. We
were soon at the top, and learned from her lips that
she had left the house for a ramble after the dust
and bustle of unpacking, and had found her way to
the top of the cliff; seeing a gently sloping path, she
had ventured carelessly along it a little way for the
sake of the view, and not noticing that it grew
steeper and narrower, until suddenly on looking
down she had turned giddy, and fearing to move,
had clung to a stunted bush, and called for help.
(To be continuedJ.
CHURCH NOTICES.
Oct. Bth—l7th Sunday after Trinity. Hymns at
Morning Prayer, 222; —; —.
Answer to Last Week's Riddles.
—o—
1. A matter of opinion (a pinion).
2. One is signing a she , and the other shipping
a sea.
RIDDLES.
—o —
1. What is the difference between the Emperor
of Russia and a beggar boy?
2. What is the military definition of a kiss? and
what is a sailor's definition, also ?
3. I went into the wood and got it, I sat down to
look for it, and not being able to find it, I carried it
home—what was it ?
4. What is that -which you have not got, which
you don’t wish to have, and if you had it, you would
not part with it for anything ?


MORE MERRIE JESTES.
At a tavern one night, Messrs. Moore, Strange and
Wright met to smoke, and good thoughts to exchange.
Says Moore, “ of us three
The whole town will agree,
There’s only one knave, and that’s Strange.”
“ Yes!” Says Strange, rather sore,
“ I am sure there’s one more, (Moore)
A most terrible knave, and a fool,
Who cheated his mother,
His sister and brother ; ”
“ Oh yes ! ” replied Moore, “ it is Wright.”
ORIGINAL POETRY.
Composed and sung by “ II Signor,” after a dinner
consisting of two plates of pea soup, three roast pork,
two plum duff, and a hatful of nuts and raisins.
0
Tune—“ Oh !if Mary Jane would only marry me.”
—o—
If my dinner time would only come again,
I'd amputate my curls,
And devote them to the girls,
If my dinner time would only come again.
If my dinner time would only come again,
I’d dive after every turtle,
Till sharks nibbled off my shirt tail,
If my dinner time would only come again.
If my dinner time would only come again.
I’d give back my skeins of cotton,
And every pigeon I have gotten,
If my dinner time would only come again.
If my dinner time would only come again,
I’d brave “ Scotty ” in the rigging,
Tho’ he lashed my nose and wig in,
If my dinner time would only come again.
If my dinner time would only come again,
Oh ! I’d sing with Flick and Flack,
Till my boasted tenor crack.
If my dinner time would only come again.
If my dinner time would only come again,
To the lee side I would run,
And deposit ppinber one ;
If my dinner time would only come again.
LATEST INTELLIGENCE.
(By pigeon express.)
The ocean keeps in pretty good repair, considering
the traffic. Davy Jones is confined to his bed ; the
mermaids being doubtless busy with his gruel, as we
have seen nothing of them.
LOCAL.
A Serious Matter.
A young gentleman in Green Street, in training to
pass through a gas pipe, having complained to the
superintendent of the insufficient supply of water, was
reminded that a quart of his supply went daily to the
cook, which his party had failed to do on many occa-
sions. He was therefore advised to wash in salt
water. To this the young landsman demurred, on the
ground that his complexion would be ruined, his
head troubled with violent pains, and he surely laid
up for days at a time.
Having consulted the highest medical authority on
board, I am able to say that the advice of the super-
intendent is perfectly sound; and I think that our
delicate young friend cannot do better than place
himself under the guardian care of that officer.
‘ May his shadow never grow less,’ is the wish of
A Mutual Friend.
ACCIDENT.
—O—-"
Narrow Escape of Mr. Spiers.
An accident which might have proved fatal, hap-
pened to this worthy industrious individual on the
night of the 22nd inst. He was occupied in making
the staff of life and toffy for the dear little ones on
board, when a sudden lurch threw him from one side
of the spacious bakery in Green Street to the other,
(somewhere about thirty feet more or less,) his head
coming in contact with some rusty knives and forks,
suspended against the wall. We are happy to inform
the anxious public that our respected friend was not
seriously hurt, but received a severe shaking only,
with merely the loss of a button carried off his pants
forward on the starboard side.
THE SHOOTING.
Birds have been plentiful, but are scarcer the last
few days, and are becoming wild. Good sport has
been obtained on the Forecastle moors; Quartermaster
Humphrys having made several large bags.
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
September 23rd. —lat. 39T6, long. 2-27 ; distance
302 miles.
To-day we have had what we may term a very
fair day’s run, nothing very extraordinary, but still
above the average ; with the same amount of wind,
and as much abaft the beam as it was before it, [we
might have accomplished thirty miles more. With a
continuance of a breeze like it, we should be at New
Zealand in short metre. Of course, though all sail
has been set, as the sea has been on the beam , there
have been rolls in great variety, and it is a very great
satisfaction to see nearly all our good folks bearing
up so well, and making good weather of it generally.
Our particular friend the sun has followed us into
Southern latitudes, crossing the Equator at five p.m.
last evening. We wish him success in his endeavours
to instil some warmth into the regions we have to


travel through. According to the Negro astronom-
ers, the sun (after the moon) is de most useful of all
de planets, c’as he only shine in de day when we no
want de light, but de moon shine in de night when
we do want de light.
The general health is very excellent indeed, and
we can handle a very fair knife and fork, in spite of
the rolls, our hope is that we may continue in the
same frame of mind.
September 24th —lat. 40*22, long. 2-57; distance
260 miles.
The past twenty-four hours has been only one
particular roll, with at times a slight variation to one
a little more particular. It is a pity no one attempts
to save some specimens. However, there has been
nothing broken, and what do we care about a few
trifling rolls while we have such a splendid fair wind,
particularly as the ship does it all on Tier own bottom,
“ let her rip.” We trust that our fine fair wind
may last, as there is every probability of its doing
for several days.
While moralising on sundry matters on Sunday,
how frequently thoughts that never visit us during
the week claim our attention—take for instance, the
beautiful idea suggested by the following passage
from the “ Koran ” —Angels in the grave will not
question thee, as to the amount of wealth thou hast
left behind thee, but what good deed thou hast done
in the world, to entitle thee to a seat among the
blessed. Or thus rendered :
And if one poor troubled heart can say,
Your kindness softened his life’s rough way;
And the tears fall o’er your lifeless clay,
You shall stand up in heaven, in brighter array
Than if all earth rang with your praises.
Eor the good you have done shall never fade,
Though the work be wrought, and the wages paid;
And the wearied frame of the labourer laid,
All peacefully under the daisies.
We have no incident of note to record, save that as
usual on the Sabbath, we have enjoyed two well
attended and interesting services, and find great
assistance in the use of our harmonium.
The general health is all that we can reasonably
expect, while in the rolling forties.
September 25th—lat. 41*21, long. 7*10; distance
214 miles.
West is the wind, and west steered we, with the
wind dead astern. Of course we are not steering west,
and west is not steering we; with these two trifling
exceptions, the above statement would be quite cor-
rect. But if the steersman’s name were West, it
would be quite right, inasmuch as West would steer
we. This result of deep study is so logically put, that
the Editor ought to come down handsomely.
The wind continues steadily in the western quarter
of the compass, a nice breeze, with tolerably fine
weather for the forties, i.e. the 40th and 50th degrees
of latitude, are proverbial for the rolling the ships
perform while operating within their limits. There
is nothing special to record, save that we have caught
no birds, not even a pterodactyl, though a continual
crossing (and tangling) of lines takes place in our
wake.
The general health is excellent, and the chrysalis
and butterfly transformation, witnessed among our
fair ones, according to sunshine or shower, is very
interesting.
September 26th—lat. 42T0, long. 11*56 j distance
228 miles.
To-day we have had another very fair" day’s run,
nothing to boast about, but just about the usual thing.
The wind continues westerly, and the weather fine
but cloudy: some rolls, though, customary in these
latitudes, have been experienced, and to which our
worthy citizens and citizenesses are not yet accustom-
ed.
Our bird fishery has slightly revived, but is still
confined to Cape pigeons. We are now nearing the
meridian of the Cape of Good Hope; if we can pass
it with impunity, that is without a breeze of wind, we
shall do something very unusual, and must take it as
a clear proof that we have those with us who are
destined to bring us good fortune (one for the ladies).
The general health is still excellent, though we
have one case between decks that gives us much
anxiety.
September 27th—lat. 42*20, long. 16T2; distance
191 miles.
We have not done anything very extraordinary
during the past day towards shortening the seven
thousand and odd miles we have still to travel; the
simple fact being, a falling off in the supply of wind.
Our barometer lifts his warning voice saying, “ look
out for squalls,” to which we respond c: all right,
hand them out, we expect them, we are waiting for
them.” After midnight our wind increased to a stiff
breeze, and some of our ropes having got into the
habit of fancying that they were only put up for
ornament (in which respect they stand not alone), so
little real use have their powers of endurance been
put to, that two of the sheets thought proper to give
way. Now here is an illustration of the ridiculous
fallacy poets fall into, by murdering technicalities for
the sake of producing rhyme; one says “ quick, quick,
spread the sail, let the sheet catch the wind,” leading
true believers (in poetry) to the understanding, that
the sheet is the sail, whereas, it is but the rope that
spreads the sail. Here is another quotation, explain-
ing satisfactorily (to the author) the mystery of
“ wearing” a ship.
“Ho ! reef in the fore-sail there,
Hold the helm fast •


So lot the vessel wear,
While sweeps the blast."
Doubtless the poet had great experience at (Batter) sea
Our citizens will please to note for their guidance,
when yam spinning by and by, that the helm is a
tiller, and the jib-sheet or any other sheet (save in
connection with blankets) is a rope.
However we weathered the storm and “ noon ’’
arrived quite safe and at the usual time, that is at
noon exactly; it may not be generally known, that
what the poor folks on shore call noon, is not so in
reality except four times in a year • noon is the instant
of the sun crossing the Meridian, or mid-day ; shore
folks call twelve o'clock noon; they use mean time,
which means, when they say it is noon, that it is twelve
o'clock mean time, which is a very mean way of making
their meaning obscure by using a meaningless term.
But there; how can they be expected to know any-
thing, when they have never been to sea.
The general health is very excellent, thank you,
robust, boisterous, jolly in fact. Our onecase of serious
illness, continues to give us great anxiety, otherwise
with the exception of a grumbler or so, (vide Box
and Cox, act 1, scene 11, grumble, verb neuter, &e,, &c.)
Our projected theatrical performance has been post-
poned, pro tem. —We confess to being rather art ful,
else where do we get our artistes, but we scout the
idea of being so heartless as to enjoy an entertainment,
with a fellow creature nigh unto death, within a few
yards of us. Friends wall please accept this intim-
ation ; the apology will be on view in due course.
We are all right.
September 28th—lat. 42’20, long, 2L00; distance
210 miles.
A pretty middling tolerably good sized run, con-
sidering all things, and taking into account the rend-
ing of sheets and so forth, has resulted from the
operations of the last twenty-four hours. The wind
has continued fair, and the weather (well, never mind
the weather while the wind blows fair,) though some-
what broken and unsettled will no doubt mend, if left
to its own devices; we must take it as it comes, for it
has been found from the close investigation of 150,000
of those true books (log books) that it is always some
sort of weather, near the Cape of Good Hope.
By the bye, have any of our good folks ever seen
or heard of the flying D utchman ? If not, they should
know that a good many years ago, (the year of dots,
I believe, before ones were invented,) a Dutch skipper,
Vanderdecken by name, having failed, after trying
about a few thousand times to get round the Cape,
swore that he would beat about there till the end of
time, but he would get round; according to last advices
he is beating about there yet. But there is really
some truth in the story of the phantom ship. We all
know the theory of mirage; now at the extremity of
a vast and over-heated continent like Africa, it stands
to reason, the density, and electrical as well as chemical
conditions of the atmosphere, must be uudergoing con-
tinual and rapid changes; let us suppose the upper
strata of the air to be of considerable density, and in a
lit state to support a large amount of vapour, in the
form of cloud ; now let a sudden increase of rarefaction
take place at the earth's surface, caused, say by the
rising sun, the two different temperatures of airs would
not mingle instantaneously, and a transparency would
be produced, similar to that we may at any time see
surrounding an over-heated substance, like a steamer's
funnel, a red hot iron, &c., &c., under the most favour-
able conditions; if an observer should be between the
cause i.e. the sun, and the effect, i.e. the mirage, he
will see some very distant object reflected on the sur-
face of the elond, diametrically opposite to him, some-
times inverted, at others in its proper position, We
have not far to seek to prove this; the “ mirage "of
the desert or the “ Fata Morgana " of Italy are suf-
ficient ; at times the atmosphere of the Cape is so very
clear and pure, that the larger stars can be seen at
mid-day, therefore why not the flying Dutchman; all
readers will please consider themselves as converted
after this.
The general health is superlative, thank you, and we
deeply feel for the one case of dangerous illness among
us, hoping always for the best.
September 29th—lat. 42 34, long. 27’41; distance
300 miles.
To-day the wind has been all that could be desired,
it has been both pleasant and profitable, its direction
has been from the South West, and what is known as
a stiff breeze. Our city has removed three hundred
miles nearer to its destination, and a prospect is still
open to us of another good day's work; we are now on
a splendid ground for racing purposes, and it is a pity
we have no fellow voyager to try conclusions with.
A sail was reported to be visible astern this morning,
but as only one eye beheld it, and that eye failed to see
it a second time, it is clear that it could not have been
a case of second sight, but more likely a thread of
canvas must have obstructed the observer's vision, and
the convexity of the pupil, dilated with astonishment,
threw an extremely exaggerated vision on the camera
of the retina, which in the mind's eye appeared in the
form of a top-sail.
Saturn and the moon are in conjunction; Saturn
has rings we are told, and we have observed rings round
the moon of late. Now it is a very strange coincidence,
that a number of curious antiquated rings have been
discovered at the bouquet rack in the “ Waimate"
attics, the material appears to be of the genus “ Tenax,"
and they are of very curious workmanship. The idea
that in the recent “ brush" between “ Luna and
Saturn," some of the rings might have fallen off is
preposterous, as an ancient legend can just be discerned
it is : — Ye Q.V —O—ITS. If it can be done with-
out any “ hector" ing, they will be sent to the
Canterbury mew-see-um.


The general health is the same as yesterday; our
serious case has somewhat improved.
ANOTHER TOUGH YARN.
( Continued .)
Resuming the threads of this true narrative from
our last issue, allow me here to state, that I do not
expect anybody to believe a word of it, as it is all
perfectly true. I cannot say more in less words, so
the less the subject of veracity is touched upon, the
more likely am Ito obtain belief. Well the brig's
name was the “Prince Edward ," of 319 tons, per
register, built at Prince Edward's Island; and a
Prince among ships she proved to us. Having
completed our investigations, taken stock, &c., we
set our minds to work as to which would be the best
plan to adopt to get our prize to the part she was
to go to, viz :—Belize. The two men returned to
the vessel the day after we joined her, looking seedy
enough; we had concluded to know nothing about
their actions in regard to the vessel, so as to secure
their services in getting the ship to Belize, and there
to let them answer to the proper authorities. We were
very wise in our generation in this, as in a good many
other matters.
The story as related by these two would be as
follows : —The brig went to the Island of St. Thomas'
with a cargo of coals, from Newport (Monmouth)
she had only one case of fever while there, and left
for Belize (Honduras) with all her original crew,
save one, who was substituted by the negro now on
board.
Soon after sailing, it became evident that yellow
jack ( i.e. yellow fever) was on board, taking for his
second victim the captain himself, the first being the
carpenter; several of the hands followed in succession;
the mate died in the arms of two of the men, while
they held him up to try and get an observation of
the sun. In ten days, out of a complement of
thirteen people, only the two still by the vessel
remained.
Neither of them were navigators in the smallest
sense of the term, but as before stated, they hunted
out the grog, and kept themselves glorious as long
as they had the wherewithal, determined to at least
preserve their handsome carcasses in spirits, never
doubting but that their turn must soon come too.
The brig found her own way to the coast; they
anchored her, and there she had remained, till us
smart articles picked her up. Well, we hauled out
her sails, found them of course rotten, cut, and
destroyed, but we managed enough to get three top-
gallant-sails on the main-mast, and a fore-sail and
top-sail on the fore-mast. For fore and aft sails we did
very well, so having made the best arrangements we
able, we up anchor, and started to find our way
to “ Belize," without compass or knowledge of the
coast. During the first night the wind came fair,
hut having no compass to steer by, and not being
quite clear what course to steer it we had possessed
one, we concluded to lay to for that night, and shape
a course by the land when day-light came. To while
aw r ay the time, and at the same time to prepare for
going on shore, (en regie) our commanding officer
undertook to wash his white shirts (two in number),
and did it, hanging them over the stern to dry when
the operation was completed, and hugging himself in
the idea that no one saw him, and would not know but
that they were mine; it being of course, infra dig. for
the commander to wash his own shirts; the night
being dark favoured his little game.
I have read somewhere , a story which (cum grano
salis) I fully believe to be true, about a big Scotch-
man visiting a vessel some 20 miles off, directing her
only mate to steer N.W., appearing three times in
succession, and the only mate having at last done so,
arrived just in time to rescue the crew of a burning
ship; the big Scotchman being her commander; and
it is to corroborate that tale, that this tough yarn is
being spun.
Well, I relieved the watch at midnight, that is, I
was the officer, and the darkie nominated quarter-
master, was the watch. For want of something better
to do, I went to sleep, the vessel was hove to, and
though a heavy head swell made the old brig pitch a
good deal, there was little or no wind, I might
have been nodding for some little time, when I was
startled by a “juice” of a row aft , and something
apparently about a ton weight flew past me, or rather
at me, and over and over it and I went sprawling on
to the main deck, I roaring in wonder, astonishment,
and all that, and the assaulting party, who soon let
me know he was the black quarter-master, yelling
and howling, yah ! o-o-o yah ! eyhah ! yah ! yah !
&c., ad lib.
Here was a row, wffiat was the matter ? The darkie
was evidently frightened out of his wits, that is if
he had any; he kicked, tore, raved, and all I could
make out was yah! yah! de skipper and mate, hi,
yah ! yah! &e. Up came the rest of the crew,
(that is the other quarter-master), and the officers,
(that is all hands). I and my partner tried to hold
the maniac and find out what was the matter; the
others seeing that he came from the wheel, went in
that direction, but “ hey presto!" back they came
helter, skelter, “Oh! scissors;" Dante's Inferno, don't
begin to describe a scene such as we had with those
five blessed darkies and the “white nigger ;" fits were
the order, screams and yells the disorder of the
night, each one as he got all-right rushing
around for some place to hide. After looking at each
other for some time in tire blankest of all blank
amazement, my partner dropped the darkie's head to
the deck, with a crack that was like to have started a
beam, and over he rolled too, worse than any of them,
and laughed. Oh ! how that man reared, laughing is
no name for it; I have heard a horpe laugh, a hyena,


J ■ - , , ■ ■ ■ __ —.— ■■■ ■■ ■ ■ '■ —' ■ •' 1 ■■ ■
a baboon, all were mere shakings compared to this
man. I was just about to follow suit, and have a
roll, and a private yell too, when up he jilraped; he
couldn’t speak, but seizing me, he dragged me away
aft. “ Ha, ha, ha,” roared I, “ ho, ho, ho,” says he,
“he, he, ho, ho, ha, ha, well I’m blest! ha, ha, &c”
Chorus—ha, ha, ad infinitum.
What do you think it was all about ? There over
the stern in their pristine whiteness were the two
shirts he had washed. When the brig came down by
the stern by pitching in the swell, the up current of
air caused them to fill out and blow upwards with
arms extended; and this all hands had taken for the
ghosts of the defunct captain and mate. This is what
we saw, rendered more distinct by the utter darkness
of the night.
The darkies got such a fright, that none of them
could be made to go aft at night afterwards; the white
man could not steer at all, so that in addition to our
Other onerous duties, we had to steer the vessel between
us. We got to Belize after some time, but all our
crew cleared out with the only boat on the first night,
and we saw no more of them.
The brig was condemned as an unseaworthy vessel,
and we two dolts had to find our way home again as
we best could. The people who sent us out lost about
£lOO by the transaction. I received £4 for my five
months’ time, and my partner got £7 for his, neither
of us got any thanks, but were counted as a couple of
idiots because we did not pull the brig through and
bring her to England.
This little incident or ghost story is not to be
believed, for as before remarked it is quite true.
I always feel for a brick, or an anchor stock, when
I hear of ghosts being around.
A young lady once tried the ghost joke on me, by
dressing up a pillow in a sheet, and standing it so as
to face me when I opened my room door. I wasn’t
much frightened, but I retaliated by putting her own
effigy inside her room; she fainted, went into hysterics,
&c., and I got into a terrible scrape.
TO THE ELECTORS OF WAIMATE.
Fellow Sufferers,
A requisition numerously signed by
myself and several others, whose handwriting is very
similar, has been placed under my eye for inspection.
From this document, it appears to be the general
wish, as far as we’ve got, that I should let go my
hold of family ties and domestic bliss, and tljrow
myself into the political debauchery of an election.
I am accustomed to sacrifices. I once offered one
on the altar of duty, but it was unconditionally de-
clined, as ray charges were considered high. The
next was thrown with a lavish hand on the altar of
necessity, and ended in 9d. in the pound. The other
was when Maria and myself laid the celestial combus-
tibles tenderly on the altar of Hymen, and set fire to
them amid tremendous silence. I am now going
to sacrifice myself in the lump on the altar of liberty,
provided the funds subscribed suffice for this patriotic
purpose.
I am suited for public duties—most of ray time has
been spent within sight of a cask of spirits; and as
an enemy of short measure, I’m worth a pension. The
subject of liquors has been a favourite study, and has
engaged much of my undivided attention. After
numerous experiments of a painful nature, it is my
unbiassed opinion that getting drunk is only a matter
of time, provided the stomach can stand it. Pure
spirits are enjoyable; hut alas! they are too often
tampered with by some person or persons unknown;
I am therefore prepared to bring in a bill for the
abolition of adulteration.
I’m in favour of closingpublic-houses during repairs,
or when they don’t pay. Thus far, lam an ardent
supporter of Sir Wilfred Lawson’s principles—closing
them during church times is unjust to the women;
it don’t give them a fair chance of finding their hus-
bands, who are not partial to refreshments kept at
a dairy.
The United Kingdom Alliance is a bad egg. Pump
sucking is first-rate for youngsters, but it ain’t in my
line.
The Irish question is not yet drawn to a close. It
has been enjoyed by the universe and other parts for
some centuries, and is still before us. Fighting for
an equal distribution of poverty, and shedding blood
for delusions generally, the peopleofthatancient isle have
occasionally daubed themselves over with war-paint,
to conceal the nakedness of the land; and so doing,
have attracted the attention of the savages of the far
West. Once a feeble war cry issued from among the
cabbages, and years after, another burst off among
the snow that covered the potato forests of old Ire-
land, and then it was echoed back from the banks
of the St. Lawrence; then there was silence, and
everybody seemed sorry he’d spoken.
Now I’m prepared to move the following resolu-
tion : —“That in the opinion of this house, Ireland is
“ politically and morally fly-blown; that nothing can
“ be done to bottle up the fizzing of deluded patriots;
“that the women are as bad as the men; that the
“ following remedies should be tried; —
Ist. Encourage suicide, emigration, and natural
death.
2nd. Stop the supply of infants, and allay sweet-
hearting.
3rd. Give all the women and children three months
notice to quit, and finally invite the seven plagues to
come and enjoy themselves.
Church and State have been crowded out from my


notice for some time, but I say without hesitation,
that I am ready to stand up for anything, particularly
for the abolition of collections, and for the eradication
of vermin from the pews. As for our state, that is
not easily accounted for; but here 1 am —health and
spirits predominating.
and other sports during week-days; and the Sabbath
in future shall be devoted to the catching of wild
birds, all needful work being suspended for this purpose.
Finally, be up and doing. Vote with sovereigns
on the ballot principle; the undersigned will see they
are rightly counted, and the numbers shall be stuck
Vote by ballot is quite ripe; and lam
in favour of up every ten minutes during the
memorable day.
every man, woman and child, having a vote on the
teeth qualification, (which will unfortunately exclude
a good many under six months and over sixty years
old). Still I don’t think we can venture yet to extend
the franchise to the lower order of animals, as some
of them are wanting in intelligence, and a good many
of them are undoubtedly deficient in manners.
Now is the present time.
With feelings seldom equalled, and never surpassed.
Yours, thirsting for the fray,
Henry Swipeswig de la Bierb.
CORRESPONDENCE.
—o—
The present mode of deciding political arguments
by a mutual rending of garments, as the ancient
lunatics did, is unsuited to modern times; I shall
therefore issue a tract to every voter containing rules
for fighting, and a few hints on treating flesh wounds
and blue lumps. My committee rooms will be fur-
nished with boxing gloves, for the education of those
who are unaccustomed to the franchise. Everything
necessary will be taught, to enable them to let out
straight from the shoulder, and go straight to the poll.
Dentists and eminent bone-setters will be in atten-
dance during the election,
A Salt's Appeal.
Shellback Hall,
Sept. 20th, 1876.
Dear Sir,
On Saturday last, several of the lady pas-
sengers honoured us by visiting, what we are pleased
to term, our end of the ship; in fact ventured as far
as the foksell head, (or I should say Shellback’s
Parade), well knowing the risk they ran of being
chalked ,
I have no doubt, my dear sir, you are aware that
by the laws of Neptune, (which are sacred to all sea-
men), that any person over and above the age of
fifteen, and not having made any previous voyage to
the South of the Line, thereby never having entered
into the sacred territory of our illustrious patron, are
compelled to undergo various operations, namely :
shaving, chalking, lashing, etc., or pay the usual for-
feit on such occasions, ere they are entitled to enjoy
the rights and privileges of a loyal subject.
I am in favor of gory wars for those who are in
that way inclined. Bleeding is not a favorite amuse-
ment of mine; but for thinning over-crowded families
it stands unequalled.
I’m in favour of christening parties, and ultimate
vaccination, together with a moderate use of boiled
turkey and toasts.
I believe in the total abolition of gruel, rhubarb,
ginger wine, pop, nettle beer, and other beverages of
a similarly flatulent character; but shall give my
unconditional support to Scotch whiskey, rum, nectar,
ambrosia, &c., &c.
You are aware also, that the customary christening
was objected to, which I deeply regret, as it deprived
us of a bottle or two of grog; and you may depend a
fine fair wind also.
The grievance I wish to call your attention to, is
of a more recent date; the facts are as follows :
1 shall oppose all reckless and sudden change. I
consider giving a man one and six for a shilling is a
financial error requiring no further description.
Three ladies (their names being unknown to me)
were chalked on Saturday last—one by a member of
the starboard watch, and two by a member of the port.
The former paid the penalty in a prompt and creditable
manner, which, if it be any satisfaction to the lady in
question, has raised her immensely in the estimation
of us all. Of the two latter I cannot give such a
cheerful account; and I must say they are very back-
ward in sending the grog forward, for no sight of it
yet has gladdened our eyes.
I’m in favor of the gradual introduction of posterity,
and the immediate death of those "who don't like the
look of things temporal—we are swarming too thick.
The question of health is somewhat important—l've
kept it in view for some time; and if sent to parlia-
ment, nothing shall be wanting on my part to prevent
(as far as possible) death from causing another election
for your town.
I have a number of bills to lay before parliament,
some of which have been owing some time; and one
person, a tallow chandler, is pressing for the money
in language that knows no bounds.
I am deeply grieved to see the rights and time
honoured customs of Neptune's children so totally ig-
nored ; and we must not be surprised, if we experience
any amount of heavy weather, through the non-obser-
vance of His Majesty's laws. Harpooneeh.
P.S. lam pleased to inform the public, that qa
Amateur Dramatic Club has been formed by several
talented members of the deep.
I shall vote for encouraging the naked truth, (except
in sculpture), and for reducing the price of soap —
cleanliness is a bit backward lately.
I shall vote for the abolition of the pursuit of field


I am requested to state, they will make their first
appearance before the public, in the tragical scenes
of “ Black Jack, or the Terror of Cape Horn under
the distinguished patronage of the Cape pilot, that
individual being expected on board shortly. The per-
formance will conclude with the laughable farce of
“ Luney , the Melbourne Larrekan ."
A piece to be entitled the “ Key , or the Mysteries of
a Boatsivain’s locker ," is in active preparation by J.
Gussetts, who is, I believe, a great favorite with the
fair sex. Harpooneer, Hon. Sec.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES.
Sir,
Your reply to “Xmas" is nonsense. No
bpe (out of the saloon) can obtain the paper, until
alter the Thuisday after its weekly issue; how then,
in the name of fortune, can they get their answers to
charades, etc., in time, when you close your contribution
box on Thursday ? It may be done by a fluke, when
Vour paper is not out to time, for instance.
Yours, Xmas.
[We print your letter—but are you serious ?
Your first polite assertion is on a matter of opinion,
and we leave it to our readers.
Your second assertion we are bound to say is not
true, and the interest of this paper obliges us to rebut
it. We believe that it has not once happened that
the Gazette has been kept in the saloon for five whole
days after the date of publication—except on that
occasion when there was purposely no issue—and that
is certainly not enough to warrant your general asser-
tion to the contrary. As an instance, our last issue
was not published (owing tounavoidable circumstances)
until Tuesday, on Wednesday it was 'tween decks,
(and if we are not mistaken “Xmas." read it) and
all Thursday it was lying in the office unasked for.
So the saloon passengers took one day to get through
it. But perhaps you are joking. If so, please let us
know next week where the laugh comes in. You had
better not invoke fortune next time; she has evidently
deserted your remarks. Ed.]
WAIMATE GALLERY OF ART.
Squall Alley.
The proprietor b£gs to announce that a daily exhibition
of choice photographs will be held here until further
potice. The photographs comprise excellent speci-
by the leading operators of the day, and consist
of a large private collection made by the proprietor
himself- ,
Musical accompaniment daily.
N B. Photographs and the living subjects of Messrs.
Brewer and Go’s, new songs, “Alley give over," and
“Willie dear," may be seen here.
SQUARE YARDS.
Sir
' I was much struck by the recitation of the miser-
ies resulting from the above, in your issue of the week
before last. I happened to hear a remedy for the
rolling- mentioned by some sailors, but thinking- that
somebody else would be sure to suggest a good one,
I did not put myself forward.
The remedy I heard mentioned was to put a hand-
spike into the lee scuppers. I don't at all know what
it means, but perhaps you will be able to make some
use of the suggestion. Yours, etc.
Landsman.
WAIMATE ELECTION.
To the Electors of Waimate.
My Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen,
The representation of your borough
having become void, owing to the lamented death of
your late member, I intend to canvass the borough and
shall issue my address at an early date.
Yours obediently,
Henry Swipeswig de la Biere.
GOVERNMENT NOTICE.
The superintendent of water-works will feel obliged
by passengers and uninterested parties keeping clear
of the pump while he is dispensing the afternoon sup-
ply, as the conduct of these busy bees (query, wasps ?)
causes waste of the precious fluid.
By order,
C. R. Couch.
NOTICE TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.
That strangers coming to tea in Green Street will
please bring their water with them at boiling point on
account of the scarcity of that liquid.
By Order of the Captain of the Mess.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
WAIMATE ELECTION.
To the Electors of Waimate.
My Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen,
Owing to the fearful murder of your
late member, he having been eaten up by fleas, you
are now unrepresented in parliament. Having been
waited upon to-day by an influential body of electors,
I have been reluctantly prevailed upon to come forward
in opposition to Henry Swipeswig de la Biere. I may
here say in short, that my views are in total opposition
to those of my antagonist, who comes amongst you as
a perfect stranger, and who cannot have the cause of
the borough at heart, half so much as an old establish-
ed citizen like myself.
My Committee will sit daily at the Town Hall,
Deck Castle (when they are not pitched off their seats.)
My address will be issued in the next number ot
this paper.
Your obedient servant,
Obadiah Drinkwater. (I. O. G. T).
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Residence, Deck Castle, Waimate
September 30th, 1870.




REGISTERED FOR TRANSMISSION- ABOARD.
EDITORIAL.
“ Experientia docet” saith the sage; "experience
does it ” translates the school-boy —but if experience is
always of the same moist uncomfortable nature as our
present, we are inclined to say, experience kindly keep
clear of us for the future.
We are at present experiencing wet floors, duckings
and bruises frequent and hearty, in the midst of which
the weekly issue of the “ Waimate Gazette ” has to
appear. So our readers must expect moisture in our
columns this week, moist moralisings, damp “local
intelligence,” clammy jokes; and they must not mind
if the force of the frequent concussions received by
the editorial corpus, is communicated to them through
the pages of the “ Waimate Gazette,” and they get a
good many hard raps.
What do shore editors know of the difficulties
we have to contend with? We think we see our
contemporary the “dimes' •—his Editorship comfort-
ably sitting in his well fitted sanctum, at a solid table,
surrounded by neatly labelled pigeon-holes, a cheery
fire burning in the brightly polished grate, everything
in apple-pie order, any number of sub-editors, clerks
and other functionaries hard at work in the big room
outside, and doing everything he does not care to do
himself.
An easy time he has of it! We should just like to
set that good man down in our office, with two or
three inches of water splashing about, the movables
all rolling, or rather flying from side to side of the
ship, his own equilibrium in constant danger, and
relays of well-meaning gents to keep up a constant
supply of “gas” in his ears all day, and bid him
prepare an issue of the “ Waimate Gazette by Satur-
day morning, and forage for his own material. W hat
a picture his blooming countenance would present at
tbe end of the day !
Well, we are getting used to this sort of thing now;
and after all there is a certain grim enjoyment in it—
there are a few big plums in our heavy duff. Such a
plum was the theatrical entertainment of Thursday
night. Circumstances prevent us from bestowing any
impartial criticism on the performance itself; we leave
that to our own critic, for whose opinions we are of
course not responsible. But we can truly say that
everyone appeared to be thoroughly amused by the
entertainment, from the hills and posters to the silent
chorus , People did “flock to see Hock in flocks,” in
fact in no small numbers; and what a buzz of excite-
ment there was among 1 them, when they heard the
tuning up of the instruments ! The big drum evoked
many a sally from those who were in the secret of its
original use ; and the whole performance called forth
at least a glimmer of wit from even the most obtuse.
As to fun, there was a regular “ Benjamin’s mess ”
of it.
There is to be a concert this day week, by the
members of the “ Waimate West End Amateur Musi-
cal Society.” We cannot give it any better wish
than that it may be as great a success as was “ White-
bait at Greenwich.”
What a change has come over us the last month or
so ! The “ Waimate” sails so rapidly, that we found
ourselves in the thick of the cold weather before we
were aware of it; and we had to go into the thick of
great coats to counteract it. And now it appears that
we shall soon have to put our great coats away again,
for the good ship made the fine figure of 325 miles yes-
terday ; and at this rate, we shall be caught in the
Snares before we see them.
MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE
( Continued .)
—o—
We accompanied our new acquaintance to her home,
and received the warm thanks of Mrs. Pretty, whom
we all decided to be a “jolly old girl,” tho' she did not
appear to be over forty years of age.
Our little adventure served to set us at once upon
a friendly footing with the Prettys, for the danger
from which we had rescued Helen (such was her name),
was much exaggerated by the anxious mamma. We
were soon fast friends, and scarcely a day passed with-
out Marlescombe going down to Woodabay, or Wood-
abay coming up to Marlescombe; when the whole
party would join for a walk or other amusements.
I soon began to find that I had less difficulty in
securing Maude's companionship in these expeditions,
for Reggie had found counter attractions elsewhere,
and was usually to be seen at the side of “la belle
Helene.”
The three eldest of our new friends were decidedly
good-looking; and had a dash of fun about them,
which made them very genial companions for us young
fellows. But Helen was really a beauty. I am not
going to spin out a long yarn about her face, hair.
/Vo. 9.
ISSUED WEEKLY.
Saturday, Oct 7th, 1876.


eyes, figure, &c., because I am not writing a novel,
and I have three large volumes to fill out; enough
that she was a beauty, and Reggie Summers was not
the only one of the party who perceived the fact.
Arthur and George were almost as hardly hit; only
poor George was always cut out by some older hand,
and his devotion did not often get an opportunity of
showing itself. They had plenty of opportunities of
making themselves agreeable, for our afternoon walks
often extended far into the evening.
Our favorite walk was to Watersmeet, a lovely spot
where the Lynn and Tever join their streams, not far
from Lynmouth. The path lay along the coast,
through the “ valley of Rocks,” where there was the
choice of the sea path, with its glorious panorama of
sail-studded sea, and bluff jagged head-lands; or the
land road, through the grand rock scenery of the
valley, at the head of which stands the “ Castle Rock,”
whence there is a fine view on both sides.
The walk in the other direction is through a different
scene. Going toward Ilfracombe wemighttake either
of two roads, one the cliff walk, the other leading by
deep lanes through thickly wooded slopes, and along
the side of purling brooks. And now and then, while
the path lay through the valley, there would open out
before us a delicious peep at a rich green pasture,
watered by the rippling stream girding it like a silver
fringe, and protected it would seem, from all that
could disturb its deep repose, by the sombre woods
which rose in stately grandeur round. While the
rude path ran higher on the wooded crest, a more ex-
panded view, more bold, yet not less beautiful, would
break upon our gaze. The wooded slopes beneath,
now sank intoinsignificance before the rugged heights
which rose before us from the right, with bold outline
against the summer sky; while on the left, there
stretched for into the distance an expanse of rugged
moorland, here and there encroached upon by the
advancing hand of cultivation. The whole scene was
one which might well call forth the poet’s most aspir-
ing strains, or fire a patriotic soul to doughty deeds.
Such were the scenes among which our merry party
wandered day after day, sometimes together, but more
often in two's and three's; for Maude was seldom
absent from my side, and Reggie soon won the confi-
dence of the pretty Helen, and they became insepar-
ables. The others generally took what companion
luck sent them for the day; though sometimes very
amusing dodges were resorted to, in order to cut out
a more favored one from a coveted place beside one
of the fair ones. If it‘was desired to detach Arthur
from the side of Miss Pretty, nothing was more easy
than to let them pass on first, so that Arthur would
have to open the next gate; and when his politeness
led him to hold the gate open for the next comers,
there would be a rush to the front, and Miss P. would
get a new companion for the next few miles. It has
struck me since that the girls may have thought these
little arrangements queer enough, but they were
never consulted.
[To le continued.)
LATEST SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
(By Pigeon Express.)
Christchurch, Friday Afternoon.
The following telegram has been received from
Kerguelen’s Land, by the N. Z. S. Co.
“ A vessel has just been sighted off the island by
“ the 15-horse power extra superfine patent telescope ;
“by the wake she leaves behind her (it stretches
“ some miles away), we know she is a colonial packet,
“ and by the following signs we have little doubt
“that she is the “Waimate” of London.
Ist.—“ She has a large amount of canvas spread
“ such as only a man of Capt. Peek’s experience
“ would dare to carry.
2nd.—“ A slim curly headed figure may be seen
“ trailing a bird-line over the stern.
3rd.—“ The cry of “ ally, ally ”is distinctly heard
“ over the water.
4th.—“ She has a deck house abaft the main-mast,
“from one door of which we have distinctly seen
“ four remarkably handsome young men issue forth.
sth.—“ We can count thirteen children on the
“ poop, playing follow-my-leader.
“She must have been going 17 or 18 knots, and
“ may be expected in port in a fortnight.”
Friday, Tristan d’Acunha.
“ The “ Tommy Stevens ” for Melbourne, is now
“ in sight, she is struggling against a head wind and
“is rolling heavily, her main-top mizen {sic) is
“sprung; she is doing about 3 knots, and shipping
“heavy seas.”
Lat, 63-39, long. 9*17., Friday.
“ The ship * Langstone ’ has been here for three
“ days stuck fast in the ice, she has lost her mizen
“ top-mast, owing to the bad look-out kept, and her
“ main-brace bumpkin is carried away by a berg.
“ May be expected in Port Lyttleton about Xmas if
t ‘the weather proves favourable.”
TAKING THE CENSUS
To-day I have been interviewed for the purpose
of being entered into a dictionary.
The person who called upon me said he had already
taken a good many names, and would be happy to
take mine.
I told him “ I hadn’t quite done with it,” however,
he might sit down for my portrait.
He sat down, saying he would ask me a few
questions, and took out a note book and pencil.


i lit my pipe; there was silence.
“ Where were you born ? “In a remote part of
the 19th century .”
“Do you remember the circumstance?” “Not
distinctly, my mother was ill at the time.”
“Was your father present?” “No, he was at a
meeting of churchwardens, and didn't know Td come.
He came home suffering from “ bowl ” complaint; he
seemed glad to see me, he sat on me.”
“ What were your earliest recollections (looking
into my eyes as if he expected some of my brains
would make their appearance) ? ” “No trousers, and
corporal punishment” I said, referring to a mode of
correction which my earliest friends adopted.
“ Did you manifest any decided tastes at an early
age ? ” “ Yes, I'd a taste for measles, I had them
three times.”
“Were you fond of music?” “Passionately, 1
blew an organ for ten years/'
“ What can you play ? ” “ Skittles, all fours,
poker, dominoes, pitch and toss.”
He looked at me as if my costume consisted
entii’ely of coat tails. I was very near resolving
myself into a committee.
“ Was your father well-to-do ? ” “ Middling, but
since his death I've heard he is better off. We
don't correspond.”
“ Had he a numerous family ? ” “ Yes, I was the
one; he used to say I was too many for him, and
never got tired of counting me. He did it with a
strap.”
“ He’s not living?” “ Not since his death.”
“Did you ever write for publications?” “Yes,
I was first melted down into thirteen verses of
poetry, brought on by the ridiculous notion that my
manly bosom was me ant for a woman's heart, I
dedicated my ideas to Maria.”
“Was she the lady of your love?” “ She nigh
killed me.”
“ With love ? ” “No fire-irons.”
“ Then you married her ? ” “X regret to say
you've told the truth.”
“ I hope she's well ?” he observed. “ You haven't
the pleasure of knowing her ” I said.
“It seems a painful subject to you ? ” “It was
painful at the time” I said, (instinctively putting
my hand to several places at once, which had been
interfered with in former days) “ but the impressions
are gradually wearing out. Maria is no more” I
added, closing my eyes, and trying to delude
myself with the delicious idea. We proceeded.
“ What were your next literary works ? ” “ Some
fugitive pieces which no one ever overtook, a book
on betting, a volume of anecdotes, confiscated by
Government for being too miscellaneous.”
“ There were several blots in your works ? ” he
said sternly, as if performing a public duty.
“ Yes, my pen spurkled.”
“ I refer to moral blots.” “ Yes, morals spurkled
too.”
“ Moral eyes and ears cannot alter the past, let them
see and hear what has been, and then let them turn
up their shirt sleeves and put it right. Contented
morality means indifference, and indifference means
condemnation. Pious people with closed eyes and
ears never did any good. Did ever a parson’s son,
nursed in precept, turn out a credit to his family?
Did a man who never had toothache, know what
toothache meant ? Ora teetotaller that never felt the
fever of thirst know the temptation offered, by a
bottle of beer ? ”
“As to school boards, we have enough to stock a
timber yard, but all of them have shakes, knots, and
waney edges. They have made a great error in
admitting women; there are only two places for
women, the cradle and the grave; women want no
boards except for ironing.”
“Do you believe in the abolition of the purchase
system ? ” he enquired, after praising the army with
a few disparaging remarks.
“ Entirely *' I said; “ when we can get everything
for nothing, some of us will be happier. This
appears to be the major general idea.”
“You feel strongly” he said. “Yes, I am a
good deal better than I was, my doctor has ordered
me a bottle of wine every day for a gargle; it does
me good/'
He took down my doctor’s name and address, and
said his throat had been sore for some time. I asked
him if he would have a gargle; he said he would.
He gargled several times. After giving the
remedy a fair trial, he took up his notes and resumed.
“What do you consider the most remarkable
event in your life ?'* “My birth ” I said emphat-
ically, “ I don't think it will ever occur again/’
“ What were your peculiarities as a boy ? ”
“ Holes in trousers, and frequent attacks of stomach
ache.”
“ What were your favourite amusements ? ”
“ Making pincushions of boys with short jackets,
and penwipers of boys with long ones; chewing
india-rubber and unripe fruit; thinning over-loaded
apple trees; ruining Sunday hats; trying to quench
hunger, but without any permanent result, I once
set fire to my Grandmother, but it was only in fun.”
“ Have you ever met with any accident? ” “ Yes
I was once found insensible on a doorstep; it was
discovered I had broken my pledge; there were a
good many accidents that night; it was New Year’s
Eve, and our throats were very slippery, owing to a
hard frost,”


“ You have travelled among the Indians; how did
they receive you ? " “ Coldly ; we first exchanged
clothes, which put me in undisputed possession of a
suit of war-paint of the coarsest quality, though scarce-
ly warm enough for the season. We then proceeded
to discuss the desirability of my joining a small party
about to proceed to the other world ; I said I was
tired, and would like them to take plenty of time to
consider, so as not to hurry it; they cut about a
pound of flesh off me for this remark, and then said
1 could sit down ; I said I couldn't, and declined for
strategic and other reasons. For several days I
seemed to form their chief amusement; I passed a
month of suffering there very pleasantly, but in the
end I got tired of so much sameness, and ran off
without wishing them good-bye; when I reached
the first village, I put on a new suit of rhubarb
leaves; I looked moderate well in them.”
It was too dark for further observations, so he
closed his book, and rose to go.
THE THEATRES.
(By our Special CriticJ.
I have to notice this week the highly successful
production of a new play at the Waimate Theatre,
entitled “ Whitebait at Greenwich," which was per-
formed last Thursday evening, for the first time. I
was only sorry there was not a larger attendance,
especially since the house has been enlarged; but
the squally state of the weather no doubt prevented
many would be play-goers from attending.
I must first take notice of Mr. Flock, who is the
head of this company. I noticed during the week,
placards all over the town in public places, announcing
that “ Flock was coming," and truly he did come,
and made a great commotion among us; his acting
the part of Small was admirable.
I notice next Mr, Fleck, who impersonated Mr.
Buzzard; nothing could be finer than his attempts to
conceal his marriage to Sally, which character by-
the-way was taken by a young actress who bids fair
to shine in the theatrical world; I refer to Miss L.
M. Orison.
I now pass on to the other lady, who took the
part of Miss Buzzard; I mean Miss B. R, JNett; she
was in great form, and some really good acting was
brought out, When she accosted Small with “you
naughty little man you," when he returned from the
taking in of coals.
Signor Barnosiraldini was quite at home as
Glimmer, only he seemed to have been bothered
about the bill of fare for dinner, having got mixed
up between a shoulder of mutton, and a mutton pie.
Finally I must notice the splendid performance of
the orchestra, who gave us a fine selection of music
from “ Madame Angot." The audience was evidently
not prepared for such a treat, taking it as it did,
quite by surnrise; but I may here mention that the
manager telegraphed to London the day before, and
brought down a few dozen of the band of the Royal
Italian Opera Company.
COMMERCIAL.
We notice this week the retirement of Mr. Charlie
Morrison from the Young Men's Fishing Association,
his share of the profits not being up to his wishes.
This gentleman has we believe joined the well known
firm of Barnose & Co. Mr. Barnose will still leave
his capital in the concern, but will for the future be
nothing more than a sleeping partner.
PROGRESS OF THE VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
September 30th—lat. 43*51, long. 34 02; distance
295 miles.
Owing to the necessity of the “ Waimate Gazette"
going to press early on Friday, a full detail of that
day's proceedings must unavoidably stand over till the
next issue of that much sought for periodical. We
must now therefore, as we intend to omit nothing of
note from our progress, make a few remarks on yester-
day afternoon. Our good ship was spinning along
gaily, with fine weather, and a south-westerly wind,
till five o'clock, when squalls arose, which strength-
ened to afresh gale. Squall after squall from the West
was experienced, bringing with them hail, snow, and
sleet, while the sea, ready to rise upon any pretext,
got up fast, and made a good many frantic endeavours
to come on board, succeeding to a limited extent to-
wards midnight, to the detriment of our poop rail.
About this time the spirit of our fellow voyager
departed, we trust, to that Land where the wicked
cease from troubling , and the weary are at rest.
His remains were committed to the deep in the
presence of us all, at 11.30. a.rn. to-day, with the
same respect and reverence they would have received
on shore.
During the early part of to-day, indeed almost up to
noon, the weather continued squally, but by noon it
had become so far settled that all the sails were again
set, and our city was bowling along towards her des-
tination at a great pace.
The health of the whole community is excellent; it
is very cold, and as a consequence, we have to resort
to a good deal of thick clothing, causing our fragile
forms to resemble sentry boxes and barrels in a loco-
motive point of view. We are very happy, and very
hungry.
October Ist—lat. 44*26, long. 38*41; distance
230 miles.
To-day we have what we may term a steady breeze
with fine weather. Since leaving the tropical regions.


we have learnt to appreciate a bit of sunshine. The
appearance of all our population on parade to-day may
therefore be assigned to sun-dry reasons. A high swell
from the west still keeps up, signifying that the fair
wind will last for some time yet —though so many
heavy swells continually running after Miss ‘ Waimate,'
gives her quite the air of a coquette.
We have entered upon our month of April, and the
spring season of the south has fairly begun, and on
shore—
Blithely lusty Roger now.
Through the furrows plods along,
Singing to the creaking plough,
Many an old quaint country song ;
Morning l as he sing's
With the praise of other springs.
While on board, the youngsters —
Now with shrill and wondering shout,
As some new found rope they pull.
Quickly range the decks about,
Till their heads with yarns are full;
Then seated round upon the ground.
How they sort the wonders found.
According to our custom we have enjoyed two well
attended and excellent services, and our pubHc hall
being much more spacious by the removal of some
cargo than hitherto, we enjoy them the more.
The general health is extremely fine, and though
the cold weather evidently agrees with us, we do not
agree with it, and wish it would make haste and get
warmer.
October 2nd—lat. 44*46, long. 45*13; distance
312 miles.
During the last sea day, we have carried a fine
steady breeze, resulting in a score of 312 miles. And
are we all quite satisfied ? Partly, yes —partly no.
While the operative exhibited the score on the tele-
graph board, murmurs of, “is that all?” could be
heard, “ why Igave,her3so at least.” Dear me, “ poor
ship," nothing short of doing the whole distance in
one leap will please your citizens.
The American mode of serial navigation will have
to be resorted to yet. It is to construct a suitable
machine for the purpose, rise in the air, and allow
the earth to turn round. When the place you are
bound to comes round, you have only to descend in a
most graceful manner, and there you are. A voyage
round the world can be performed in twenty-four hours,
and you can arrive back the day before you set out if
you like.
The general health is superlative, thank you, but it
is so very cold.
October 3rd—lat. 44*52, long. 50*51; distance
242 miles.
We commenced this day with a very fair prospect
of making as good a run as yesterday, but alas ! our
fine wind has failed, and we are almost becalmed. We
are enveloped in a nasty wet fog; there is a nasty
swell running; we are opposite those nasty Crozets,
where the unhappy “ Strathmore " was wrecked, and
we can't catch any of those nasty birds. However,
we sleep well, and our dreams are pleasant, not like
the shopkeeper's who kept on hand the latest music.
“ A young lady entered his shop and asked him if he
“had happy dreams?" “No Miss," he replied, “I
“ have been very much troubled with the nightmare
“of late," and yet he couldn't see why she bounced
“out of the shop and slammed the door. Shortly
“ after a young man came in, and asked for a “young
“ man's companion," when Mr. Shopkeeper called his
“ daughter, and said “ here’s the best young man’s
“companion I have got." He evidently did not
understand his business, and has since gone on.a rail-
way, simply because it teaches all people to know their
stations, and stop there.
The general heath is excellent, thank you, but it
would be so nice if we were at home, with nothing to
do but keep the fire warm.
October 4th—lat. 45*02. long. 55*05; distance
200 miles.
All yesterday afternoon we were enveloped in a
thick wet fog, and had but very little wind until after
eight o’clock, but during the night the breeze fresh-
ened again, so that a score of 200 miles has resulted
from the day's operations.
Our gross distance from the south end of New
Zealand is to-day 5,080 miles.
Under favourable circumstances, we can get over
that distance in twenty-one days, but as arrangements
have already been made for entering Port Lyttleton in
all pomp and circumstance on the 28th inst, it will
not be advisable to alter them, (unless we can get
there sooner).
There is no remark of note to make. We are all
quite well thank you. We have caught no birds, and
the company are on the verge of bankruptcy ; but we
nearly caught two porpoises, both of whom could be
heard faintly murmuring, as they floated astern :
“ Dear brothers I've come back to die."
The barometer again raises his warning voice say-
ing, “ look out for squalls," all right, say we, hand
them along.
The day closes with a spanking breeze, and dark
gloomy weather, a wet sheet, and flowing sea in fact
October sth—lat. 45 08, long. 61*42; distance
281 miles.
A fine slashing breeze has prevailed all the last
twenty-four hours, and our city has been trundling
along to the tune of twelve knots an hour most of the
time, but having the wind dead astern, the highest
rate of speed has not been attained; however we are
having a very good innings, and the fielding in the
form of big waves, is grand. We have got a change
in the bowling, in the shape of stinging snow squalls.


the novelty is, that although we have the innings, and
do all the running, still, we are bowling along at the
same time. Rather a hidden meaning for a cricketer,
something like a captain I once knew, who among his
passengers to India, had a lady and her two daughters,
both of whom determined to marry the captain whether
he would or no; mamma highly approving of their
efforts in that line. They made it pretty lively for
the captain, who might frequently be heard singing
in subdued tones, ‘Oh ! happy could Ibe with neither!'
The voyage ended, but not the gallant captain’s
troubles, persecution he called it. The trio of fair ones
gave him no peace. If he went on shore, they would
hunt him up and insist on a visit; if he stayed on
board, they would come off in a boat and visit him.
At last, driven to desperation, he determined to deny
himself to the fair would be marry- ners, and told the
mate to look out for them coming off to the ship. He
did not have to wait long before the mate reported,
“ Here’s the Duchess a coming off with Hcmily and
Hangelina, sir;” “look here. Mr. Giles," says the
captain, “ don’t tell them any lies, but give them some
hidden meaning just to keep them from coming on
board, for I don’t want to see them." “ Aye, aye, sir,"
says the delighted mate, who hated their frequent
visits. Alongside came the conquest seekers, and en-
quired in dulcet tones, “ Is Captain Batchelor on board ?”
“ He’s gone ” said the mate, “ Indeed, where may he
be gone to?" “ Jericho " says the mate. “Oh! Ah !
what did you say?" “ Gone to Jericho mum, didn’t
say when he'd be back!" “Oh!"saidthe Duchess— “did
you ever] No/never/’ said Heraily. ‘The Hidea ,' said
Hangelina. Crestfallen they returned to the shore, and
the captain had peace once more. He asked the mate
what he had said, “ Oh," says he, “ I gave them the
truth, but in a hidden meaning; I told them you were
gone to Jericho, and I wish to goodness you were.”
The universal health is excellent, it is very cold,
but we keep jolly.
October 6th—lat. 44‘53, long. 68 47; distance
325 miles.
Our weather of the past twenty-four hours, may be
classed as strong winds and squally weather, accom-
panied by a short high and turbulent sea. Ship
rolling at times and occasionally taking small seas on
board. The bowling has been excellent, and the
running first-class, but exactly at noon to-day the
“ Waimate" resigned the willow, having lost her
middle wicket in the form of her wind.
The telegraph board showed a total of 1,885 runs,
for the week's innings, which was received with much
applause; the Grace’s scoring nowhere, (Le.the waves).
Last evening our kind artistes produced another
theatrical entertainment; it cannot be criticised here
for reasons before stated : .but on behalf of the nautical
part of the audience, we thank the lady and gentlemen
concerned in it very much, and cry, encore! encore!
encore! Mr. Small’s performing was very great, and
our heads and ears still buzz with that of the Buzzards'*
long- may they buzz, —and may Mr. Small's shadow
never be less. The music, the overture, oh, “ Madame
Angfit" the “ Ethereal/' ‘‘Terrestrial," and domestic
blending of delicious harmony was simply Ncrwmjptious.
The general and universal health is most excellent,
thank you, and our spirits most jubilant.
YE VISION OF YE MIZEN TOP GHOST.
[See Illustrations).
—o—
The air was cold, the moon was bright,
And all was very fair to see !
I sat upon the mizen top,
The mizen top supported me.
And first I turned my eyes to scan
The man for ever at the wheel;
Oh ! how annoyed he seemed to me.
Whichever way it went to feel.
He turned it right, he turned it left,
But nought was satisfactory;
He frowned, and clearly thought it shewed
Behaviour most refractory.
Another bloke was there engaged
In conduct most peculiar;
He thrashed his breast as tho’ he knew
That nothing was unrulier.
Perhaps he meant to stir the blood
About his veins and busy ’em;
I’m sure he wasn't warm, and felt
His post was not Elysium.
But soon a female form was seen
Up the companion steps to creep;
Her hat was white, her shawl was plaid.
Her hair streamed far toward the deep.
She pierced each corner with her eye,
While ’gainst the wind she held her hat;
If she had been a terrier,
You’d calculate she smelt a rat.
Then started off; she heard below
Her mother's tongue vociferate;
I scarcely ever saw before
A girl run at so stiff a rate.
Then someone on the ladder steps
Loomed upward like a mountain peak ;
His hair was grey, his glance was quick,
His form was roundabout and sleek.
If from his hair you guessed his age,
You might have guessed much more than mine;
But if you saw him hop and skip,
You’d say he’d just turned “ double nine.”
He spotted her, and growling said
In accents very strong and low;
“ My dear, your Ma’s a calling you,
I rather think you’d better go.”






She stamped and said she would not go,
(Perhaps she used a naughty word);
“ I will, I shall, I must stay up,”
Were sounds that I distinctly heard.
He looked more stern, and pointed down;
“ Oh captain,” and “ that horrid bunk ''
She wheedling said, then gathered up
Her “ little coats,” and down she slunk.
Now why she came I cannot tell,
I will, if ever I am told;
Perhaps to meet some sweetheart cove,
And hear him there his tale unfold.
Perhaps she thought the cold night air
Would brace her frame and make it stronger;
Perhaps like spoilt children sent to bed,
She “ wants to stay a little longer.”
TO THE ELECTORS OF WAIMATE.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I beg to offer myself as a fit and proper person to
represent this borough in parliament. As you are
all aware, your late member is at present nowhere to
be found, and is supposed to have been eaten up by
fleas, whilst in the discharge of his duty in London.
The seat is therefore vacant, and I unhesitatingly
ask for your support in the forthcoming election.
I will endeavour to state my views in as few words
as possible.
I would first of all point out that I am entirely
opposed to Henry Swipeswig de la Biere with regard
to the liquor traffic. My opponent states that he
has spent the greater portion of his existence within
sight of a spirit cask; the “ spirit evidently moved
him ” when he made such an assertion; he would
indeed be ill-fitted to fill the high post he now
contends for, especially if he were obliged to take the
aforesaid spirit cask to the House along with him; he
would probably be obliged to leave it in one of the
lobbies. He also asserts that liquor has engaged
much of his attention, and that after numerous
experiments of a painful nature, it is his opinion that
getting drunk is only a matter of time. No doubt as
far as he personally is concerned, he is perfectly
correct, (being always in sight of the aforesaid spirit
cask) in fact I am inclined to think that the “ same
old drunk ” must have still been on him when he
wrote his address. As for myself, I am entirely
opposed to the sale of intoxicating liquors at any
time, but on Sundays I am in favour of total closing
of all public houses, gin palaces, &c., &c.
My opponent states that the Irish question is still
before us; now this I assert is untrue, as we have left
it behind us, and hope to hear no more of it for some
time.
I am prepared to bring in a bill for the better
inspection of vessels before proceeding to sea; the
primary object of the said bill would refer to the
better caulking of ships' decks and deck houses, I am
also in favour of the early closing of theatres and
concert rooms, and would support the Lord Chamber-
lain in his attempts to suppress political allusions and
impersonations in stage plays. I would also be
inclined to favour any measure for a less sanguinary
and cruel mode of pig sticking; and would not
oppose a measure (supposing one was brought in) for
the better strangulation of poultry.
Be careful when coming to the poll not to be
deceived by any of the numerous deceptions now in
practice since the introduction of the “ ballot act.”
On entering the booth, a card will be handed to
each one claiming a vote, something after this fashion :
SWIPESWIG. DRINKWATER.
Voters will kindly oblige by plumping for me as
above, by inserting the X under my name; any other
way is accounted void under the new act.
Come and vote, and bring your friends. My
committee sit daily at the Town Hall, Deck Castle.
If there is no one in the committee room, kindly look
behind the bunk curtains.
Your obedient servant,
Obadiah Drinkwater, i. o. a. T.
P. S. Any of my opponent’s friends and supporters
found lurking near my committee room door, will be
immediately shot forth into the lee scuppers.
O. D., I. O. G. T.
CORRESPONDENCE.
SQUARE 0 YARDS.
To the Editor of the “ IVaim ate Gazette.’'
Dear Mr. Editor,
In your last issue you published a letter, which
under the guise of innocent enquiry, betrays such a
blood-thirsty inclination, mixed with a most subtle
and outrageous misrepresentation of facts and
technicalities, that my profession as shipwright, my
knowledge as a scientist, my feelings as a humane
member of society, compel me to take up a tool that
I do not profess to handle as well as a spoon —axe I
mean, that is to say a pen, and lay my view of the
matter before your august editorial eyes.
That a hidden meaning of a terrible nature under-
lies all the fair speech of your correspondent is evident.
I note with fear and trembling his fiendish allusions
to being struck, to handspikes, to lee scuppers; the
word gore being only wanted to make these obscure
allusions plain. Worst of all dear sir, I am personally
alluded to in connection with handspikes. Allow me
to try and explain first his term of “ square yards.”
He says square yards make the ship roll; first of all
the yards are not square, they are cylindrical, and
next they don't make the ship roll; it is an unevenness
in the surface of the sea that does that; with these
exceptions he is right, I give him credit for that ;
again, a square yard is three feet each way, or a figure


having’ right angles and equal sides: his square yards
evidently won't hold water, which the cylindrical ones
will, and. spare yards have been used for that purpose
on more than one occasion. He doesn't say anything
about yard-arms-, if in turn rny meaning is hidden,
let me state in conclusion, that if I should fall a victim
to his horrid machinations, his performances at the
yard-arm will surely be a conclusion that he will
arrive at in due course.
Yours doubtfully,
CHIPS.
GROANS FROM THE LEE SCUPPERS.
(As we are still in the rolling forties , it may be interesting if we publish
from time to time , under this head, notes of any accidents which may occur).
—o—
Yesterday morning Prince Pokee, (eldest son of
King Hokee Pokee Winkee Wum, King of the Canni-
bal islands), was scuttling along Port Road, when an
enormous wave flooded the country, and the poor young
prince from wading a few steps in the turbid waters had
to take to swimming. The water soon drained off in-
to a dry water-course, called Lee Scuppers; and Prince
Pokee was left kicking on the road. Beyond a bruise,
and his weather main-brace carrying away, he was
not much hurt; and he has his usual grin on this
morning.
The editor of this paper was proceeding yesterday
at a sober pace toward Town, meditating on affairs of
state, when a sudden earthquake, accompanied by a
tremendous rush of water, gently moved his legs from
under him, and propelled him in a horizontal position,
heels foremost, into the Lee Scuppers. The main
sheet took a currish advantage of his position to bark
both of his shins severely.
The young Lord Francis Schmidt was yesterday
waiting for an audience with the Premier, when the
h*e bulwarks suddenly sprang forward, and hit him
violently on the chest. His lordship is better, but
breakfasted in bed this morning. His lordship's father
intends instituting an action against the bulwarks.
ANOTHER SERIOUS MATTER.
May his shadow never grow less. We regret to
state that the young gentleman from Green Street,
who is in training for cleaning stopped up water-pipes,
and who has probably defrauded some Necropolis com-
pany by coming to sea, should so deeply feel the
annoyance of washing in salt water, as to be obliged
to remain in his bed till the day is well aired ; generally
about 11.30 a m. On Sunday last he appeared at 8 a.m.
Why? He himself only knows. Perhaps he wished
to see how birds were coming up; at any rate he had
several knots of wool round his neck, probably substi-
tutes for crochet cotton, for bird catching. The doctor
ought to look him up —see last week's paper.
CHURCH NOTICES.
Oct. 15th.—1 Bth Sunday after Trinity. Hymns at
morning prayer, 222; 162; 182. Practice for next
Sunday's hymns on Tuesday evening.
BY THE HOLE IN MY COAT.
Said the young Obadiah to the old Obadiah, “ it’s
the awfulliest funniest thing ever I see." Said the
old Obadiah to the young Obadiah, “keep it dark,
Obadiah, keep it dark.” “ Oh, ten men and a boy "
said the young Obadiah, “it’s immense, it’s immense!"
Said the old Obadiah to the young Obadiah, “ keep
it dark, Obadiah, keep it dark." “Ah ! by my tea
toast and butter, you’ll be all in a flutter, for you’ll be
s’prised !" said the young Obadiahto the old Obadiah.
Said the old Obadiah to the young Obadiah, “ keep it
dark, Obadiah, keep it dark."
Now our friends will wonder what all the above
twaddle means —we must tell them. It is made up
of some of the words of a popular comic song, and the
words of a learned critique on the forthcoming play
of “ Whitebait at Greenwich."
The critic states that he has matriculated at the
University of Dublin (poor U. of D!) and has some
idea of going up the country to Anglicise the Maoris.
We recommend him to carry a Webster’s unabridged
in his waistcoat pocket, and to take several copious
doses of Lindley Murray, followed by Morell’s com-
position.
Answers to Last Week’s Riddles.
1. The one issues his manifestoes, the other
manifests his toes without his shoes.
2. A report at head quarters.
3. A thorn.
4. A bald head.
RIDDLES.
1. It went to the Crimea and stopped, it didn’t
go, it came back and went again—what was it?
2. Why is an author an extraordinary person?
3. Why does a sculptor die a painful death?
4. What would you do if you lost your nose ?
5. Would you rather be burnt or beheaded?
6. A word taken from each of lines 7 to 15
(inclusive) of the following, will give the answer as
required.
Readers great, or readers small,
Readers short, lean, stout, or tall.
Pray respond now to this call;
Read this riddle or none at all.
Every other has had to fall,
Unread, unsolved, to the author’s gall.
The problem is, there is a name,
For ill or good ’tis all the same,
Just like a ship upon tlie main,
The way it’s tossed is quite a shame,
But for this Neptune’s mates to blame,
He feels none ; we all of the pain.


From London far famed city,we
For health or business tempt the sea;
And at New Zealand all agree
In all good time we shall, D. Y.,
Arrive in health and strength to see
The anchoring of the Waimate.
Now all the riddles sent as yet
For a solution in our gazette
Remain unsolved ; and you may bet
Whatever you like, at last they’ll get
Into waste paper, which will fret
Our worthy editor, sans his pet.
Whoe’er shall find an answer meet,
Pray send the same to our Green-street;
Should it be right, oh ! rara avis;
’Twill be acknowledged by our Davies.
[“Xmas” sends a correct answer to the cipher puz-
zle contained in our issue of Sept. 23rd, and suggests
(rightly) that there was a mistake in the original.]
TO BE WRITTEN FROM DICTATION.
Knows he who never took a pinch—
Nosey—the pleasure thence which flows?
Knows he the titillating joys
That my nose knows ?
Oh! nose, I am proud of thee
As any mountain of its snows;
I gaze on thee, and feel that pride
A Roman knows.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED at Timam Post Office a general clerk,
to be employed as sorter and telegraph clerk ; will be
required to stand outside the door each evening,
with his tongue out, for people to wet stamps on.
Must be married, and wear a fur cap.
Apply G. P. O. St. Martin’s le Grand.
WANTED.
By a Dunedin potted meat establishment a middle
aged man, who has determined to smoke himself to
death.
Apply at the soup kitchen, between 1 and 2
o’clock, p. m.
SALES.
A Whole Suite of Chambers to be Sold Cheap.
Address, as soon as practicable, “ Pro Bono Publico’S
Squall Alley, Green Street.
CHRIST CHURCH THEATRE ROYAL.
Wanted an efficient scene-shifter; a good-sized
boy from provincial theatre not objected to.
Apply, stating size of hole in my coat, to Manager,
Theatre Royal, Christ Church.
LOST,
From Green St., a portion of a very fine York
ham, a portion of a pot of jam, also part of a tin of
condensed milk; the latter is sometimes used in
making “ coffee royal.” As in all probability neither
can be recovered, no reward is offered. Anyone
pointing out the delinquent to Admiral Elliott, will
be publicly thanked.
AMUSEMENTS.
A GRAND CONCERT,
Will be given (weather permitting) , by the member*
Of the
Waimate West End Amateur Musical Society,
On Thursday Next, Oct. 12th.
Programme to consist of glees, trios, quartettes, solos,
&c., by eminent amateurs.
Among the performers will be
The Ladies Morrison,
The Hon, Alice Barnett,
Lady Hartnell,
Signor Barnosiraldini,
Count de Wilsonne,
Sir D. Lawrence,
M. de Yonge, &c., &c.
The Archbishop will act as Conductor and Manager
and is doing his best to secure a Great Success.
THE ASSEMBLY ROOMS (WAIMATE)
Have been engaged for the evening, and will be
tastefully decorated and cleaned for the occasion.
Doors open at 6. 45. To commence at 7 precisely.
Prices of admission to any part of the room will be
a cheery face, and hearty applause.
N. B. No one will be admitted who is not on hoard the
“ Waimate ” between the hours of 6. 45., and 7p. m.
TO BE LET.
With possession, at the half quarter.
All that well-known and desirable Hotel and Res-
taurant situate in Poop Buildings, now in the occu-
pation of Messrs. Spiers and Pond, whose lease ex-
pires, The hotel, capable of making up forty-three
beds, will be found replete with every modern conve-
nience and comfort. Waimate is admirably situated;
a beautiful marine view may be had from every win-
dow in the hotel, while sportsmen will find excellent
shooting and fishing in the immediate locality.
Messrs. S. and P. having hitherto had a monopoly
of the wine, beer, and spirit trade in Waimate have
realized large profits, which have enabled them to
retire without contesting for an extension of the lease.
With moderate charges and fair attention, large pro-
fits may still be made, and will increase with any in-
crease in the population of the township. Good Sun-
day trade done. Young and pushing men will find
this an admirable opportunity of opening up a new
connection. For permission to view, apply to the
present lessees; and for price, etc. to
A. 1., Peek’s Chambers,
Poop Buildings.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Office and Residence, Deck Castle,
Waimate, Oct. 7th, 1876.




REGISTERED FOR
TRANSMISSION ABOARD
No. 10.
ISSUED
WEEKLY.
Saturday, Oct. 14th, 1876.
EDITORIAL.
The Waimate world has this week encountered
heavier winds than it has hitherto been her lot to
experience. Certain magniloquent individuals declare
that we have had a tremendous storm; and no doubt
they are right to a certain extent, for w r e were un-
doubtedly on the edge of a severe storm, as may he
seen from the letter of our correspondent Admiral
Madcarver; and it was only the warning voice of the
barometer that kept us clear of the worst part of it.
But we believe that the wind which we actually telt,
could not be called more than a strong gale, under
which the good ship might have scudded along famous-
ly on her course, had not the barometer fallen so unusually
low, that Capt. Peek was obliged to go considerably
out of his course to avoid the centre of the storm.
The Waimate behaved admirably; and except when
in an occasional heavy lee lurch she scooped up a sea,
she scarcely shipped any water. Deck Castle was far
drier than it had been on former occasions; but perhaps
that was owing to the increased amount of precaution
and cement, both of which combined, will probaUy
succeed in making that “palatial residence '* probably
water-tight by the time we reach New Zealand.
The scene from the poop deck on Friday afternoon
was very grand; and though we don’t like having to
go out of our course, we are nevertheless very glad to
have been able to witness a real good sea.
The Waimate W, E. A. Musical Society’s Concert
came off on Thursday as advertised, and was univer-
sally pronounced to be “ quite a success;" the society
may be congratulated on the result of their labours.
A full account of the concert, from the pen of our
critic, appears in another column.
We seem to be in the middle of winter. On Thurs-
day night there was a heavy fall of snow, and the sailors
had a rough night's work taking in sails clotted with
half-frozen slush, the new upper mizen topsail being
described as “ as hard as a board."
Our contributor, H. Swipeswig de la Bi£re, adver-
tises his contributions largely in our columns this
week. He has been suffering from an internal confla-
gration, and. sends us a paper descriptive of his suffer-
ings, which leaves no doubt in our mind that there is
something very seriously the matter with him some-
where-, and fearful of losing the services of so voluminous
a writer, we have taken the liberty of advising a clean
shave of the head, and the application of ice, or in
default of the Utter, snowballs.
“MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE.
( Continued ).
—o —
Eor some time we kept regularly to our inland
walks, and in the evening would repair to the large
empty drawing-room at Woodabay for an impromptu
dance. There were good gardens at Woodabay;- and
the walks sometimes stretched out into the surrounding
woods, and formed most propitious little shady nooks
and bits of avenue tor those who had had enough of
dancing, or from any other cause wished for a stroll.
Chance one day drew our attention more to the
sea-side, which had hitherto been rather neglected
except for bathing purposes,
It happened thus. One day we (the boys) were
strolling along the shore after our swim, and had got
some distance beyond the “ Mare," when we were
tempted by the lowness of the neap tide to clamber
round a point beyond which we had never yet been
able to explore. It was an awkward climb along a
narrow ledge of rock, scarcely left uncovered by the
waves; but we succeeded, and were well rewarded by
what we saw. We found ourselves on a wild rocky
bit of coast, which turned out to be indented with a
series of caves of all kinds and sizes. There was one
with an opening like a huge Gothic arch, eighty or
ninety feet high, which g-radually lessened in size as
the cave receded, until it met the ground about one
hundred feet from the entrance. This cave was full
of splendid specimens of the fern “ Asplenium Mari-
nura," which hung in luxuriant clusters from the roof,
nearly covering the inner surfaceof therock. Another
cave was still higher, but more bare and rocky. ft
had several entrances, hall blocked with huge rough
boulders, and extended in several directions into long
rambling corridors, and was altogether of a somewhat
weird and cavernous appearance,
It did not take us long to explore the whole of the
newly discovered ground, and when we had, there was
but one opinion, viz., that the girls must be brought
downtoseeit somehow. The question was, how ? They
could never get by the way we had come, because
that was impassable even to us, except at very low
tides; and “ Jacob's Ladder," the difficult path by
which we should have to retreat, was not to be thought
of for a moment.
A bold idea struck us-?—why not have a path down
the cliff? The notion was put down as impracticable
at first, but after some consideration we saw that it
might be possible by a judicious route, to work a


roundabout track the whole way. The plan was no
sooner seen to be possible than it was decided to be
quite easy. We went home and propounded our plans,
which were received with great applause by the young
ladies. The elders were of course inclined to laugh ;
but we had settled that the thing was to be done, and
all the laughter in the world would only have made
us more determined to carry it through.
The next morning a strong party of us set out to
the top of the cliff with pick-axes, shovels, and “ two
bills,” an implement I believe peculiar to Devonshire,
and commenced in earnest.
We began cutting at a place where the grass sloped
away from the cliff walk, and we gradually worked
our way downwards. There were plenty of obstacles,
such as hard rocks, which defied all our efforts to get
through them, and soft landslips where no path
would hold.
The job took us about a week, and afforded us ex-
citement as well as work for that time; for we ran no
small risks of returning home with broken heads or
limbs, or of not returning home at all. While one or
two of us were working away vigorously at the lower
end of the path, some lazier individual at the top with
a pipe in his mouth, would think it amusing to see if
some huge block or other were firmly fixed, giving it
a kick by way of test, the result of which was a shower
of stones and lubbish about our ears, with the velocity
of fifty or one hundred feet fall.
However, there were no serious accidents; and one
day, a fortnight after the plan bad been mooted, the
whole party from Marlescombe and Woodabay pro-
ceeded together to the head of the path, and there
ceremoniously declared it open under the name of
“ Cannington's Path.” We then made the descent
with ropes and staves after Alpine fashion, and spent
the afternoon in rambling over the new found land,
and giving the name of each of the party to some
cave or stream or rock which we found; finishing up
with pic-nic tea in the fern cave, or* St. Helen's Grotto/
We enjoyed it all immensely; especially our triumph
over the doubts of the elders, who deputed Mr. Sinclair
to make us a speech at tea, in which he declared us to
be “ public benefactors ” and “ bene merit! de patrici.”
{To be continued).
MUSICAL & DRAMATIC.
(From our Critic).
Since my last, I have been prevented by cir-
cumstances over which I have no control, from visiting
Drury Lane and Covent Garden, but on Thursday
last, I gave the “ Waimate” Assembly Rooms a turn,
as I heard that a great treat was to be expected in
the Amateur Concert to be given by the well known
W. W. E. A. Musical Society.
I was not disappointed, for the concert was by far
the best which I have heard this season, beating even
the “ Squall Alley ” concerts both in selections and
rendering-.
As the doors were not advertised to be open until
6'45 p.m., I took care to be there in good time, and
had leisure to examine the illuminations of coloured
lamps with which the inhabitants of Green St., marked
their appreciation of the importance of the occasion.
Shortly before seven, several distinguished for-
eigners arrived, and I have reason to believe that
among the number was the royal father of our neigh-
bour Prince Pokee, namely King Hokee Pokee
Winkee Wum of the Cannibal Islands, with his
royal wife and chief minister of state. The entrance
of the party was the signal for a round of applause.
The performers were all ladies and gentlemen of
rank, but dropped their titles for the occasion.
The performance commenced punctually at 7 with
the “ Gipsy Chorus ” from “ Preciosa,” rendered with
excellent precision by the full strength of the society.
The other chorus in the first part was “ Pinsuti’s Glee
“ Tell me Flora,” which was sung with much taste
and a delicacy of expression which I much enjoyed.
The second part opened with the “ Carnovale ” of
Rossini. This was given with great force and pre-
cision, and received hearty applause. The “Belfry
Tower” followed towards the end of the programme,
and was rendered with great care and precision by the
society, so much so, that for my own part I was
sorry it was not met with greater applause by the
audience.
he The programme also included several excellent
o- quartettes and trios; of the former “The Three
re Chafers” was well sung, and caused much amusement,
of while “To our Next Merry Meeting” fell rather flat,
nt coming at the end after several comic pieces. Of the
nt latter (trios), “ Aldiborontiphoscophornio,” an old
id, bit of Callcott's was given in a most slashing manner,
ne and was vociferously re-demanded. “ The Gipsies'
up Laughing Trio ” was also well rendered, and not-
0/ withstanding a slight shakiness in one or two phrases,
ph received a hearty encore. I noticed a sentence
“by the sloping woods where the wild deer bound,”
which must have been meant for a sly hit at the wild
l» freaks of the dear ladies on our sloping woods , the
decks.
The other trio, “ Dame Durden,” was rather
erratic; the key was a high one, and to make it better
the singers managed to slope up into a higher still
during the first verse, the rest of the piece being
thus rendered rather shrieky.
Miss Barnett gave the well known song “ Esmeralda”
in a highly finished style, and in response to a hearty
encore, repeated the latter part.
Miss L. Morrison sang in very fair style; she has
a pretty voice, and will no doubt make an excellent
soprano when her voice is more formed.
Miss Morison sang her song in great style, and


received much applause. I fear that the creaking of
the bulkhead prevents some of the words from being
heard at the end of the room.
The solo of the evening was Miss N. Morrison's
topical edition of “ Cornin' thro' the Rye," containing
some most pointed hits, which the young singer
gave with a distinctness of elocution which is so
often lacking in the singing of the fair sex.
I believe it is no secret that the renowned Signor
Barnosiraldini sang as an amateur under the name
of Bernays. He rendered his comic solo from
Offenbach, in his usual stylishly sentimental manner.
He was of course encored.
Mr. Davies sang “ Cherry Ripe" in remarkably
good form. I have often been sorry that this
gentleman is not willing to make more use of his
remarkably fine tenor voice.
Mr. Young gave “ Simon the Cellarer" in fine
style, and with great zest, as if he agreed with the
sentiment of the song.
Mr. E. Greenstreet the conductor of the society
sang Molloy's “ Polly" with some spirit at the
beginning of the concert, and towards the end a
nautical yarn “ the Merman," but by that time the
audience had had quite enough of him.
I fear this is the last concert by the society, as it
is about to be dissolved, and I can safely say that
the society extinguishes itself with as much eclat as
if its last struggles had been eased off with blue fire
and tremolo music.
Next week I intend to go and see Flock, in “My
Turn Next," at the “ Waimate" Theatre, and Mr,
Flack, (who lately made such a hit as “ Box ") in the
“ Unwarrantable Intrusion," and 1 am, as ever.
Your truthful Critic,
LAW COURTS.
Elliott v. Editor of “ Waimate Gazette.”
We publish the following correspondence which
will show to our readers the exact position in which
the above case now stands, requesting our readers if
they should meet with the noble Fogg to deal
mercifully with him, and not quite to kill him.
(copy)
3, Middle Court,
Lincoln's Inn,
Oct. 13th, 1876.
To the Editor of the “ Waimate Gazette."
Sir,
My client Admiral Lord Elliott, &c., &c., has
been fearfully libelled in your issue of 30th Sept,
last, just come to his knowledge, with respect to Mr.
Spiers’ accident, and has made affidavit (copy enclosed).
Unless you apologise, or give up the writer's name at
once, I shall apply to the Supreme Court of
“Waimate" next term for a criminal information
against you. It's the paragraph as to the rusty
knives and forks we complain of.
I am, yours obediently,
{Signed) Anthony Fogg.
(Copy of Lord Elliott's affidavit, enclosed in the above).
In the Supreme Court of “ Waimate," ex parte Spiers'
accident.
I William, commonly called Lord Elliott, also an
Admiral of the blue, being one of the peculiar people
called Shakers, do solemnly affirm, that I hold for
the present during good behaviour, responsible
situations of steward, and assistant ditto combined, to
the second class passengers, and to the third also
when they can get me in the humour, 'tween decks
of the ship “ Waimate."
That I have read a statement in the “ Waimate
Gazette" of 30th September, 1876, describing an
accident which took place in my pantry to one Mr.
Spiers, a confectioner, baker, bird-stuffer, public-
house keeper and jack-of-all-trades, wherein it is
alleged that the aforesaid Mr, Spiers was thrown
violently against rusty knives and forks suspended
against the wall of my said pantry, resulting in an
injury to the said Mr. Spiers. I say really and
solemnly that there is not, never has been, nor was at
the time of the accident aforesaid, and never will be
in my pantry aforesaid, suspended as aforesaid, any
rusty, filthy dirty, or unclean knives and forks of any
description whatsoever, or any other article or thing
rusty, dirty, filthy or unclean; and I really say that
the before mentioned statement, in the aforesaid
paper is calculated to lessen and injure my professional
reputation as such steward as aforesaid, and also as
an officer and a gentleman in the estimation of my
friends and the public generally. And lastly, I really
and solemnly say that the publication aforesaid, is a
gross, wicked, malicious, and defamatory libel on me
in the public characters aforesaid, and in my private
characters likewise,
{Signed) Elliott.
Affirmed before me on the high seas, somewhere
between London and New Zealand this ninth day of
October, 1876.
{Signed) Aaron Smith Jones,
Commissioner of aU the courts at home and abroad.
(copy)
“ Waimate Gazette" Office,
Oct, 11th, 1876.
To Mr. Anthony Fogg,
Sir,
1. I will not apologise.
2. I will not give up the name of any writer
whatsoever. These are plain statements 1 hope ; if
you could write plainly it would be better for the
world in general.


Your client may nix his dolly and fork away.
Yours,
rain, and sleet, all very nice in their way no doubt*
but the larger hail-stones have a striking way, that is’
to say at least unpleasant. As an accompaniment,
a magnificent cross sea is running, causing our ship
to execute a series of fantastic rolls and capers, of ex-
quisite beauty and variety, particularly during the
night, “ when none were there to see/* However, to
judge by the number of our good folks who soundly
slept through it, there must be a number of clear
consciences and guileless hearts on board, whom capers
don't effect.
Editor, W. G.
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
October 7th —lat. 45*50, long. 74*22; distance
266 miles.
We open our new week with an entirely new pro-
gramme. Our last week closed on one of the best runs
we have made on the voyage, but unsettled weather
has supervened, and our diagnosis is represented by
fresh unsteady winds, with overcast cloudy weather,
and frequent squalls, necessitating the frequent mani-
pulation of the sails.
Speaking about capers, an Irish officer returned from
service abroad some time ago, from a part where these
articles grew, and being in conversation in a public
room, the conversation turned upon the scarcity of
anchovies, he casually remarked that they grew plenti-
fully on trees where he had just come from. Upon a
general laugh being raised, he became indignant, and
dared anyone to contradict, or doubt the truth of his
statement. One gentleman did so, and a challenge to
fight was the result.—On the parties meeting, the
Irish gent shot his opponent; the second remarking,
“by Jove he’s hit, see what capers he cuts; oeh, hone,
what have I done " cries the victor, “ sure it's capers I
saw growing on trees, and not anchovies at all, at all/*
Of course he at once apologized to the wounded man,
which satisfied every-oue.
Our fine running is easily stopped, changes of wind,
changes of weather, changes of sea, and changes of
sails, each contribute their quota, or withdraw it, as the
case may be; but it requires a combination of fortuit-
ous circumstances, to enable us to keep up at our top
speed. But we are not so easily stopped as some rail-
way trains are; for instance, a certain train having
left its station, was proceeding majestically along at a
pace, when it suddenly came to a stand-still, the af-
frighted passengers looked out of course, but could
only see the guard using terms of reproach, to some
one standing on the carriage steps. It turned out
that this man, would persist in standing outside the
carriage door, and in consequence, the tail of his coat
had caught a nail in one of the telegraph posts, and
stopped the train ; he would have been rightly served
had he got his coat torn, but he didn't.
General health is first class, thahk you, its very
cold.
October 10th—lat. 47*01 long. 92*37 ; distance
230 miles.
During this day the weather has been anything
but nice, a continuation of nasty rainy, squally, haily,
snowy weather prevailing, A high cross sea, crosser
indeed than ever, continues to run, making our good
ship perform some most extraordinary feats in the
rolling department. The night itself was one of black
darkness, ending in a heavy fall of snow, and a gale
from the Southward, this again contributing its quota
to the general disturbance of the sea. The rolling
motion resulting of course in general destruction and
demolishing of crockery. The universal feeling is a
sort of, I don't know what is the matter with me
kind of sensation, something like the elderly lady, who
The general health is quite well, thank you, and if
you please will it be any colder ?
October Bth—lat. 46*05, long. 81*42; distance
300 miles.
During the past twenty-four hours, our weather
has been anything but fine, although up to this morn-
ing we have had a tolerably good wind, yet the weather
has been squally and unsettled, and the barometer
keeps saying “look out, there is queer weather some
where around," the waves, too, seem to have a notion
that they are to run sme way, and in the
absence of feeling unwell, called
in a doctor, who prescribed for.
a steady wind to guide them they conclude to run any
way, and do it, making our city roll from side to side
most unpleasantly; and interrupting Divine Service
b} r the call of “ all hands shorten sail," as the squalls
come on thick and fast in the middle of it. By noon
it is blowing a fresh gale, and the ship under her
reef'd top-sails.
and told her she had a touch of dyspepsia; the lady
had never heard of this complaint before, and forget-
ting the word, told her inquiring friends that she had
an attack of pipsywizzys; “but there, lor," she remark-
ed, “them doctors has such queer names for things, that
one never does know what is the matter with them."
The general health is very good, thank you, and it
is not so cold since the snow.
The general health is quite well, thank you, but the
weather is miserably wet and cold.
October 11th—lat. 46*43, long. 97*54; distance
226 miles.
October 9th—lat. 46*25, long. 87*30; distance
260 miles.
The past day has been one of a gradually improving
character, as far as the weather is concerned, for with
the exception of a small squall now and then, we have
The past day has brought us a continuance of un-
settled squally weather, with frequent storms of hail,






had a nice sunshiny day; but the waves, oh, those
waves, and the rolls, oh, those roll! I feel sure the
feeling of utter misery cannot be described in words;
the annexed engraving can best show the sensations
of the night.
As for the day, it is only when a crash of extraordin-
ary magnitude takes place, that we feel the least interest
in the fate of things, and really don't see any cause
for astonishment, any more than the man did, when
his donkey blew up. He had been trying in vain to
split up some big roots, and had concluded to sunder
them with nitro glycerine; while he was busy boring
the trunks, the donkey strayed in and mopped up the
nitro glycerine, and the man suddenly detecting him
at it, seized a stick and gave him a whack, the result
being better imagined than described.
The general health is in all other respects excellent,
thank you.
October 12th —lat. 46 54, long. 104-2; distance
250 miles.
From noon yesterday to daylight this morning, our
weather was tolerably fine, though the cross sea still
kept up, and in consequence the rolling, though in a
less degree kept up too. By mid-night the wind had
changed from the South West to the North West,
and then although the ship became steady, our worthy
friend and monitor began to speak, saying “ look out
for squalls again.” Said squalls come to hand in due
course, and we have a remarkably fine forenoon, (for
the ducks), a genuine downfall of rain taking place,
changing again at noon to fine weather, and fresh
rolls, which, recommencing just before dinner time,
were a contingency quite unlooked for by chef and
artistes of the culinary department; unprovided for
contingencies are generally disastrous, as in the case
of a certain studious farmer, who observing one of his
cows while ploughing-, to swing her tail about con-
siderably, in order to brush off the flies, thought that
she expended far too large an amount of strength on
that operation, which would be more profitably employ-
ed on the work. He therefore fastened a heavy brick
to the cow s tail, and walked on beside her to note
the result; pretty soon the flies tormented the cow,
who swinging her tail round with considerable force,
brought the brick down full on the farmer's head.
When he discovered the use of his brains some time
afterwards, he observed “it all happened through my
not being prepared for the contingency.” He was
perfectly satisfied that the subject was too weighty
for him.
The general health is quite well, thank you, and if
you please is it much further to New Zealand?
October 13th —lat. 49-00, long. 108-20; distance
202 miles.
During the past twenty-four hours we have had
pretty well all sorts of winds and weather —the former
has changed its direction through all the points of the
compass, from the South West to the North East.
And the weather commencing at clear and bright,
terminated in a howling gale from the N.W. known
as a N.W. bust, at sea, or a brickfielder in the Colonies.
We have experienced in fact the N.E. quadrant of
a revolving storm, and the confused high sea raised
by the constant varying wind, has given us a pretty
lively time of it—per contra, those who know what a
leaky ship is in bad weather will thank their stars,
that at least one great trial and grief is spared them,
to wit, —the everlasting clank, clank, of the pumps.
At the close of the day the gale had abated, but all
the night the rolling motion continued, our city giving
us some specimens of what can be done in that line,
rather over-doing it in fact.
We had a splendid concert last evening, a full
account of which appears elsewhere.
The general health is as well as can be expected
under the circumstances, thank you, and we hope to
get over it in time.
THE DYSPEPTIC ULSTER.
[See Illustrations.)
—o —
To the play! to the play ! they had rushed amain,
Of crew and of passengers every scrap;
On the poop was left in an ulster coat
An elderly whiskered chap.
I wondered what was the row with him.
For no phiz could look duller or flatter;
A doctor I'm sure would have said at once
'Twas some ill digested matter.
I was thinking how to accost him best.
And had drawn a step or two nearer;
When I heard his voice, and I never heard
A harsher one or severer.
But yet these words had a mournful sound.
Less of anger I thought than of sorrow;
'Twas just such a tone as a thoroughly good
Undertaker would gladly borrow.
“ Too many a goose and a gander too,
Too many a duck I've seen,
Too many a fowl which in point of size
Is a kind of a go between.
“ I've carved and carved till o'er my sleep
Gaunt cock and hen bogies teem;
All skin and bone and sinews and legs
Like a medical student's dream.
“ While ever to stifle my favourite snore.
Without any remorse or rest;
Comes the steward's cry, ‘ I'll trouble you sir
For a lady—a piece of the breast.'
“ When I try the far famed “ three quarter cant,”
To get what solace I can;
Comes t'other one’s ghost, with a glance at the corpse
Grinning out ‘ for a gentleman.'


“ So I get less rest, than when round me hopped
The fleet animalcule;
And my “ turn turn” will ne'er regain its tone
From acid to alkali.
“ Then no wonder I moan when every one else
Can do just as he chooses to;
Doubly wretched is he who loses his rest,
And his “ thing-em-bob juices too.”
Then that ulster “ swoll” and he “hove” a sigh,
And I pitied him quite from my heart;
And I hope that he never may carve again
Goose tougher than gooseberry tart.
Waimate Edition of the old Song.
“ Why are you wandering here I pray ? ”
“ Why are you waiting out here my dear ? ”
The old man asked a lady fair;
“ The turtle to watch so green and fat
Father 33 said she “ that's what I'm at! ”
“Fie! Fie!”
The old man's cry;
“ Turtle be sure alone or in shoals
Are seen about the tropics, but never near the poles.”
“ Why are you waiting out here my dear ? ”
The old man asked again that lady fair;
“ Of albatross down for my winter muff
Father ” said she “ I want to get enough ! ”
“Fie! Fie!”
The old man’s cry;
“ Albatross to catch so people say
’Tis harder still by night, tho’ hard eno’ by day.”
The old man looked grave, the lady shy;
When “ someone ” jumped up the steps hard by;
The old man looked graver, the lady more glum;
“ Someone” he twiddled his finger and thumb.
“Fie! Fie!”
The old man's cry;
“ Turtles so green I own are rare,
And of such albatross muffs beware,”
ELECTION EXPERIENCES.
——— o —
“maria and the nightmare.”
Here comes another period and very near a full stop.
The duties of the election have come upon me with
unusual severity, and have begun to tell. Nature can-
not stand more than a certain quantity even for the
good of our country, and some pf the noblest patriotic
feelings have often been obliterated by griping pains
of colicky kind; it has been very nearly so in pay case.
I had been feeling upside down for several days, but
the effect was not sufficiently unusual to attract my
attention ; I therefore took no notice. One morning
however in the middle of the night, when darkness
has everything its own way, I experienced sensations
which induced me to believe I was about to turn in-
side out. I sat up. Jn the confusion of the moment
my first idea was to send for the police ; but suddenly
remembering that it was ten to one they would take
up the wrong party, I abandoned the idea, and after
groaning plaintively for what appeared to be about
three weeks, I fell asleep—l dreamed I was being con-
verted into sausages. It was still dark, when I again
woke with a jerk, which very nigh snapped my spinal
cord. Without a moment's loss of time I opened my
eyes and to my horror discovered a pain under the bed
clothes; on examining it minutely I found it belonged
to me ; it was a pain of extraordinary proportions such
as could not be properly felt without being appreciated.
It somewhat resembled a stomach ache, produced by
partaking too freely of melted lead after a heavy sup-
per, I have never seen a pain like it before, after or
since. I have known a good many kinds of suffering
during my mundane career, but thistime I have caught
a Tartar. I tried to console myself by remembering
having seen somebody else internally exposed to view,
but memory refused to be a party to any such decep-
tion. I reviewed the past.
There had been times when the Angel Maria had
flapped her wings and had produced sensations such
as might be correctly described as belonging solely to
this world, but memory indignantly repudiated the
idea of my ever having been turned inside out before,
even for her; to do Maria justice, she never tampered
with my inside; although she meddled with my ex-,
ternal feelings to an alarming extent, and made me
often regret that physical strength should accompany
mental weakness,
She never laboured much under anything, but if
she did, it was under the impression that my head
was a stamp which required a great deal of licking
before it would properly stick to her, She was proud
of the idea and frequently explained it in a manner
which left nothing to be desired. Dreadful griping
pains here again set in, such as required my undivided
attention, and for some time I was kept fully occupied
in groaning over a brandy bottle.
If the night had been measured with a tape it could
not have been longer. Darkness had fallen upon the
earth, and there it lay, there was no moving it. I
folded myself up in a blanket and once more relapsed
into thought. Yes —Maria had a rich vein of bad
humour, and was good at reading character with al-
most anything. It was astonishing how she could
point out my weakness with a plain kitchen poker;
she made bumps as she went op and those in time
made her phrenological studies very complicated; I
fancied sometimes Maria wished to be a corpse, but
the law forbids a weak man to strike a strong woman,
because she is the weaker vessel. And so she still lives;
there is nothing in nature so cruel as a woman. Her
cruelty is only equalled by her kindness, which varies
a good deal in some, and fluctuates in others; when
they have done purring they begin scratching and
carrying on as if their milk had not agreed with them.


When they are in these moods it is dangerous to be
within a poker’s length of them. When they are not
in these moods, merciful heavens I how they can purr!
Even Maria (of my bosom) purred once, and placed
her velvet paw in mine, and rubbed her head against
me, and threatened me with everlasting happiness and
vowed to love me in health and cherish me in sickness;
and here I am on my back, but Maria is far away, and
may be one of the many in the house of an Elder.
I am sorry for the many (particularly the Elder).
What a time he will have! Here lam again reminded
of my internal possessions by a rumbling pain similar
to what might have been had I swallowed an earth-
quake. I have evidently swallowed something.
I broke loose into a cold perspiration and trembled
like a cab horse. I applied a tumbler of brandy lotion
to the parts affected, they appeared to like it, and
their snarling died away in the distance as I dosed off
into America, where I saw Maria at the head of a
tribe of Indians advancing to welcome me, with
screams of vengeance. Fashions were different
there; she wore a small calico apron, and was sur-
mounted by a plume of feathers, but this disguise
was not enough for me; I knew her as soon as I saw
her face, worse still, she recognised me. There
wasn’t a minute to spare; with a view of concealment,
I jerked my head into a sandhole, but the Indians
discovered other portions of my extremities and made
a target of them.
They let fly a shower of arrows at me, and I found
it desirable to withdraw my head from that san dhole.
On looking rapidly round I perceived with surprise,
bordering on astonishment, that I had the appearance
of a bird of plumage. In the excitement of the
moment I essayed to fly, but I flapped my tail of
arrows to no purpose. I shall never forget that
moment of disappointment. I thought I should have
fallen down dead.
Fortunately a serpent of enormous size came to
my assistance and swallowed me whole. Maria and
the Indians were lost to view, and things seemed
to have taken a turn for the best. I travelled down
that serpent pleasantly for several weeks, until I
reached his digestive organs; he then began to play
the “ gastric juice ” with me. I was glad to wake
in great pain and find all a dream; it was broad
daylight this time, and the sunshine was searching
everywhere for the night which had absconded with
the darkness. I thought to get up, but there was no
time for reflection, I had a volcanic feeling coming
on in my upper works which could not be trifled with;
I felt as if I were about to erupt, and spurt out fire
and brimstone with terrific explosions ; all at once,
before I had time to make arrangements for the
alarming event, I erupted; I think I never felt such
a grand and awful spectacle before. There were no
fireworks, I being short of brimstone, but my eyes
very nearly shot out of their sockets at what they
saw ; I believe I parted with everything, except my
political opinions ; the sunshine turned yellow, and
my complexion took the color of diseased wax works,
I thought the end of all things as far as I was con-
cerned had safely arrived, and I gave a few appropriate
groans suited to the occasion. The world began
to go round too quick, and I lost my footing and went
off at a fearful speed ; memory here loses all power,
I became obscured in a thick swoon, and drew a total
blank, which ensues.
Yours,
H. SWIPESWIG DE LA BIERE.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(Bee IllustrationJ.
—o —
Friday, Oct/ldth, 1876.
Dear Mr. Editor,
Our fortunes, and the usual course of things have
brought us into acquaintance with a revolving gale ;
we have been extremely fortunate in having escaped
bad weather hitherto, and it is therefore no wonder
if many of our fellow voyagers should for want of a
knowledge of these purely sea discomforts exhibit
some little degree of timidity and anxiety.
Firstly and principally, allow me to assure them
that with a ship like ours there is no danger of them,
save that of their own seeking. Our city we can
proudly and safely say is impregnable to all assaults
of winds and waves.
Well, now as we know there is no danger, allow
me to open a sealed book. We see by the diagram
the commencement of the storm, we see the
manoeuvring of the ship to dodge the central and
worst part, and at 4 p.m. we see that all real danger
from a storm, which had our ship pursued her course,
would have involved her in its vortex, is past.
Ships 50 or 100 miles more south than we are at
present in the centre of a terrific gale. We are where
we are. The worst part of the storm has passed
astern, we have weathered the climax, and the rest
can but be a gale —not a cyclone; soon we hope the
wind will be fair, that we may keep the storm
company toward New Zealand.
Yours,
Madcarver.
GROANS FROM THE LEE SCUPPERS.
0
On Friday, the Lady Mac Alpine was taking the
air in the park, when a terrific lee lurch precipitated
her ladyship against the ginger-bread stalls which
surround that fashionable promenade ; her ladyship’s
ankle was severely hurt, but is now progressing
favourably.
On Tuesday night, Admiral Madcarver was gazing
up into the blackness of the night near the mizen
mast, when the mizen topsail maliciously projected a
huge mass of snow into his left eye, and felled him


to the ground like an ox. The Admiral was very-
stiff for a day or two, and the boys “ got it hot”
now and then, but no serious damage was done.
The Venerable Walter Mac Alpine was reported to
have met with a serious accident last Sunday ; the
report originated in an observation overheard from
a flippant youth, to the effect that the highly
respected old gentleman had “ cracked his nut.”
Whatever be the extent of the mischief, we are glad
to be enabled to state that it will not seriously
interfere with his usefulness, and to observe that
his silvery locks are still the glory of our decks.
A party of ladies and gentlemen were walking on
the ladies’ mile on Friday, when they simultaneously
lost their respective centres of gravity, and fell
violently. No one was hurt, but the Lady N.
Morrison planted her feet [so firmly, that they cut
two large holes where she was standing.
On Friday night, certain papers belonging to the
“Waimate Gazette” fell'into the lee scuppers of the
office, and came into unpleasant contact with the
contents of a broken bottle of lime juice and glycerine.
Church Notices.
Oct. 18th. —Wednesday. Feast of St. Luke the
Evangelist.
Oct. 22nd. —19th Sunday after Trinity. Morning
Hymns, 222; 141; 182.*
*l'oa M.S. tune.
Answers to Last Week’s Riddles.
1. A watch.
2. Because his tail comes out of his head.
I 8. Because he makes faces and busts.
4. Take the first one that turned up.
5. Burnt —because a hot steak is better than a
cold chop.
6. The good ship Waimate of London for New
Zealand.
AS CD E F N. Q m /
GH I J K L
MNOPQR X Y Z
' (“ Xmas " answers this riddle correctly, but does
not give the key).
LOST ! STOLEN ! ! or STRAYED !! !
From a Portmanteau, (locked) A SILK NECKTIE,
also a pair of gentleman’s SOCKS. Any person
giving information leading to the recovery of the
articles, will be rewarded.
W. A. N. a,
Water Lane,
Green Street.
AMUSEMENTS.
WAIMATE THEATRE.
0 —
On Thursday next, October 19th.
0 —
The Enormous Drama !
MY TURN NEXT!
CHARACTERS.
Taraxicum Twitters (a village apothecary) Mr. Flock.
Tom Trap .. (commercial) ... Sgr. Barnosiraldini.
Parmer Wheatear (of Banbury) Sgr. Horatio Flacco.
Tim Bolus ... (doctor’s boy) ... Sgr. Fleccini.
Lydia ... (Mrs. Twitters) ... Miss More Ison.
Cicely ... (her sister) ... Madlle. Barnetti.
Peggy ... (slavey 1 ... Mdm. Nella Bouncetta.
To be preceded by the comic Interlude
THE UNWARRANTABLE INTRUSION,
CHARACTERS.
Mr. Nathaniel Snoqzle ... Sgr. Fleccini.
Intruder ... ... Sgr. Horatio Flacco.
Prices as usual.
Henry Swipeswig de la Biere’s Contributions,
THE ELECTION ADDRESS,
TAKING THE CENSUS.
—O-r-
MARIA AND THE NIGHTMARE.
—O——
To be followed next week by—
HIS INTERVIEW WITH THE DOCTOR,
&c. &c. &c.
-—O——
List of persons for whom H. S. de la B’s contribu-,
tions are particularly intended.
Christians generally, (including Jews, Turks, InfU
dels, and Heretics),
Members of Parliament (and others whose education
has been overlooked).
Parsons of all sects, (and other natural curiosities),
Lawyers and doctors, (with self-denying and
necessarv evils of the middle class),
Private gentlemen, (and other advocates of honest
labour).
Storekeepers, (and all evaders of the law and lovers
of the profits).
The working classes, (who appear to be retiring
from business).
Schools, (including the use of the globes),


Future ages yet unborn (including women and
children) .
SwiPESWIG DE LA BIERe’S CONTRIBUTIONS.
The most amusing articles in the paper.
For Nervousness, Youthful Giddiness, hopeless
Melancholy, extreme Poverty, and general Debility—
read “ Contributions.”
For pains in the back, legs, arms, head, chest, sides,
shoulders, internal complaints (inside and outside),
and every other infirmity—
read “ Contributions. ”
For Stammering, Stubbornness, Baldness, Blind-
ness, Want of Perseverance, old Sores, Delirium Tre-
mens, Fraud and Bankruptcy—
read “ Contributions/.’
For circumstances over which you have no control
read “ Contributions.”
For Dropsy, Brandy and Water on the Brain,
Eating, Drinking, and Total Prostration—
read “ Contributions.”
For Ignorance, Spiritualism, Superstition, and real
intellectual enjoyment
read “ Contributions.”
For loss of Memory, loss of Appetite, loss of Tern-
per, loss of Fortune, loss of Presence of Mind, loss of
Situation, loss of Life, loss of Fishing Lines, loss of
everything —
read “ Contributions/’
For the sake of him who loves his publisher as only
an author can—
read “ Contributions/’
TESTIMONIALS.
—— o —
Twenty years ago my father broke his neck. For
a long time he was confined to his grave. At last
my mother was persuaded to read “ Contributions,”
and I am now happy to say that she can walk with-
out crutches. O. D.
A gentleman of limited means having been in
want of money for some time, borrowed a trifle from
a friend which he was unable to repay; for twenty-
five years it preyed on his mind; he lost all taste for
work, could not sleep before midnight, forgot all his
poor relations, couldn’t enjoy a bad sermon, didn't
agree with anybody who took the trouble to differ
from him, couldn't pay his way and didn't; at last in
a happy moment he was persuaded to read “ Contri-
butions,” and all at once a rich relation died, leaving
him a large fortune, wherewith to mourn his timely
loss. D. M.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Grkensireet, at his Residence, Deck Castle, Waimate,
Oct. 14th, 1876.




ISSUED WEEKLY.
Saturday, Oct. 21st, 187 S.
/Vo. 77.
EDITORIAL.
—o —
Who wouldn't sell a farm and go to sea ? Who
indeed ? The advantages of such a proceeding are
obvious. There is the experience.
We have enumerated some of the experiences
which are to be met with in the editorial business,
but there are other lines of experience to be gained
on board; experiences in fishing, in bird catching and
stuffing (and other stuffing) ; experience in cold
water (and other liquids) ; experience in bruises and
their treatment; experience in preserving the heat
of the body under the most trying circumstances;
experience in ropes and knots (especially matri-
monial knots) ; in nautical slang, and a thousand
other experiences.
Again we get a practical insight into certain
branches of natural history, not to mention fish and
birds, (from the whale and albatross, to the pilot-fish
and mother Cary's chicken ; we form close acquaint-
ance with rats, cockroaches, and other smaller and
less mentionable vermin.
We get opportunities of minutely observing the
texture and colour of a rat's skin, as it rubs softly
against our face in the dead of nighty entering perhaps
into some pleasant dream of home as a soft caress, or
in more horrid guise personating the clammy hand of
a spectre in a nightmare. Another advantage—we
learn to “ rough it." If one objects to the proceeding
oneself, and (as a poetically minded correspondent
suggests), prefers courting sleep till a late hour in
the morning, still one has the opportunity of observing
how other people do it, and gains experience which
might be useful if ever the necessity should arise,
which may fortune avert.
Then there is the opportunity of the observafion of
character (by the bye, we are to have some phreno-
logical notes from our correspondent H. S. de la
Biere next week). For instance, you notice an
elderly dyspeptic ulster, you hear him snarl, and you
see a discontented sneer upon his moustachio’d lip,
and you settle yourself down serenely to study his
character.
What is the origin of this interesting trait in the
elderly gentleman's disposition ? W T ere his first
mundane experiences such as to sour the rest of his
existence? Did his eyes first open upon some scene
of sadness which has left its mark upon his tender
intellect, and embittered the whole of his life ? Or
did it happen in childhood? Was the interesting
child perpetually misunderstood by his friends and
relations, so that his growing impulses were nipped
coldly in the bud, instead of developing as they
ought to have done? Or was the damage done more
lately ? Has he been easing something that disagreed
with him? Is it the sad fact that the muscles of the
brawny limbs of ducks and chickens lately deceased,
have stuck in his gizzard and hardened his hitherto
gentle heart.
Try another instance, what can be the meaning of
that sad interesting look upon the face of that
youthful maiden ? She has perhaps suffered much,
but has it been suffering of mind or of body ? Has
she been treated with cruel indulgence by fond
doating parents? In plain words, has she been
spoilt? Or has unrequited affection preyed upon
her tender heart, and drawn those ominous lines of
care unon her white forehead ? Perhaps she has
been an invalid. Perhaps she has never known the
glorious glow of health and strength which raise the
young heart above the low grovelling cares (and
duties) of this matter-of-fact world, and sends it
skipping like a young unicorn, for very exuberance
of animal spirits.
Don't pity such ca«es as these —they are sad, but
they afford good objects lor our study of character
nevertheless.
But we can't stop here paying people compliments
all day, we must go on. Many other advantages
might be enumerated, all of which tend to make us
echo the cry “ who wouldn't sell a farm and go to
sea ?" (as a passenger on board a well found colonial
packet),
As for going to sea as a sailor, that's quite another
pair of shoes; fancy getting plum duff once a week
as a great treat. One of the sailors gave us a yarn
the other day about the way in which the plums are
fitted in; he said that the steward stands at the
pantry door and shies the plums one by one into the
dough in the galley.
Fancy too, having to be out half the night in some
of those storms of sleet and snow we have had lately,
not but that there are advantages even here. The
southern lights are splendid just now; they were
splendid on Monday morning about 2 a.m., at least
so thought two young men who were persuaded to


turn out about that hour in a very moderate costume
to view them. A mutual friend told us that he
carefully searched the poop next morning l to see if
they had chattered all their teeth out, or if they had
shivered all the buttons off their pants. They won't
go again. “ Mr. Flock " has a bad attack of influenza,
and can't use his nose for speaking purposes, the
consequence of which (and other causes combined),
was that the theatrical entertainment was put off
until next week, when the season will be closed.
The good ship has had two of her old “ muslins "
split this week, no wonder; even a lady's muslin
dress won't wear long with the greatest care, and
how can the “ Waimate '* with all her hard work be
expected to keep her garments without a tear for two
whole voyages.
CHURCH NOTICES.
Oct. 28th.—Saturday.—Feast of S. S. Simon and
Jude.
Oct. 29th.—20th Sunday after Trinity. Morning
hymns, 222 ; 288; 182.
MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE.
{ Continued .)
Our reading came off very badly all this time as
you imagine; we just did what we had to do and no
more, and that was never yet enough to get anyone
beyond mediocrity.
But if we got tired of our books, we were not tired
of our amusements, nor of one another. We regularly
went in for enjoying a holiday, and we succeeded.
We got up cricket matches and athletic sports, and
astonished the natives by our feats, though there
were one or two young villagers who were by no
means despicable as competitors with us, notwith-
standing their want of practice.
The pie-nics and excursions went on with unabated
zesl. There was one pic-nic in particular which some
of us had good cause to remember; it was given by
Mrs. Pretty, and was to be a specially grand one, for
it was Mr. Pretty's birthday. We started about 11
o'clock one glorious morning from Marlescombe, met
the Prettys near their home, and then proceeded on
foot together to the scene of the day's enjoyment.
That morning everything seemed brighter and
more beautiful than ever. The waves were dancing
in the bright sunshine, and looking like a sheet of
crystal spread out beneath us, and the sea was studded
with small sails coming up the channel under a strong
sea breeze, which served to keep the heat of the
morning sun from being oppressive, and to brace up
our nerves to their highest tone. We had to go along
the cliff walk for some distance, in the Ilfracombe
direction.
We were walking merrily along, as jolly a party
as you would wish to see, in the lull enjoyment of the
glorious morning. Miss Pretty and 1 were walking
together, and Helen was just before us with
Caunington, when suddenly a loud cry from behind
startled us ; we looked back, and there saw Reggie
about six or seven yards below us, lying across a
stunted bush which grew upon the very edge of the
cliff, and hanging right over a sheer precipice of
some hundreds of feet. There was a great screaming
and exclamation among the ladies, but Helen did
not utter a sound, she stood like a statue, with parted
lips, and her eyes fixed upon Reggie. It was a most
awkward position, for Reggie had slipped down a
deceptive bank of hard brown turf, which gradually
grew steeper as it neared the edge. But fortunately
he did not move, and George, to whose practised foot
the place was as easy as a high road, was soon beside
him, and with a firm hand and steady voice helped
him on to the path again.
Reggie appeared much shaken, and the whole
party was in an unpleasant state of excitement.
Helen only was silent, but I noticed a look in her
face that told me very plainly that the accident had
made more impression on her than she cared to show.
It was not long before we went on, and we soon
regained our former merry mood. The pic-nic was
splendid; everybody was in high spirits; the elders
were in the best of humours; the viands were
pronounced the best ever eaten ; and the very mishaps
were such as only added to our fun.
There were other causes which made that pic-nic
enjoyable to some of us. Maude was with me the
greater part of the day, and she was never so charming.
We wandered about together through the woods and
over the hill, we were together at luncheon, we
strolled out again together in the afternoon, and it all
seemed to come right without any of the usual
manoeuvring on my part. Helen and Reggie too
were companions during the greater part of the day ;
this was nothing l unusual, but I who had noticed her
at the time of the accident could see a change in her
manner toward him, which indicated something
more than a mere friendship; and I began to think
it boded ill to her peace of mind, for Reggie was not
the most constant of mortals as I knew very well.
He seemed to notice the change too, and the
consequence was a corresponding change in his
manner toward her, and things began to assume
rather a serious aspect.
But the happiest days must come to an end, (I
don’t mention that as an original remark, but they
must) and so did this one. We returned to
Woodabay by a circuitous route early in the evening,
and there finished our day by a dance. We went
home thoroughly tired about half past eleven, the
Pretty's accompanying us part of the way. Pipes
were lit, and the events of the day discussed by “ the
boys ” until a late hour.
{To he continued .)


LAW COURTS.
—o —
October Sittings, Waimate Supreme Court,
BEEORE
Chief Justice Shallow,
AND
Mr. Justice Swallow,
On Thursday, 18th October
Elliot v. Editor “ Waimate Gazette .''
Mr. Sami. Swindell Q.C. (with him Mr. Benj. Bolt)
moved for a criminal information and damages against
the defendant for a gross libel on the plaintiff, and
read the evidence as set out in our issue of the 14th
inst. He characterised the conduct of the defendant
as the most gross act ever perpetrated by the editor
of a journal pretending to be conducted on the most
honourable principles, but really resorting to the low-
est practices to gain a livelihood ; and to confirm this
startling statement he (the learned counsel) need only
refer their honors to the insolent remarks of the
defendant in his paper of the 14th inst., in reply to the
mild remonstrance addressed to him by the respected
Mr. Fogg, the solicitor for the plaintiff. In that
article the defendant had added gross insult to irre-
parable injury. It was in fact a piece of Yankeeism
throughout, and just the coarse and boastful language
and threats of the editor of a New York paper or San
Francisco bully. He (Mr. Swindell) humbly submit-
ted that his client was entitled to heavy damages, and
made his motion accordingly.
The learned gentleman then sat down with a smile
on his countenance, winking at the Bench as he did
so. His junior was busily engaged in drawing cari-
catures on the back of his brief.
Mr. Alexr. Crowe, Q.C., (with him Mr. Smirke)
denounced the whole affair as a swindle, and confidently
submitted that there was no libel in law; that the
defenbant conducted his highly respectable paper for
pleasure and not for profit (loud cries of “gammon”
by the plaintiffs friends) ; that the plaintiff was a
darned old thin-skinned, parchment-faced, naval cau-
liflower. (xVpplause. Here the marshall of the court
called “ order'” and threatened to turn the public out).
He (Mr. Crowe) would then simply submit to the
Bench that the plaintiff must be non-suited on the
following reasons :
1. That the plaintiff not having appeared before
the court iu full dress uniform, there was no evidence
that he was an admiral at all, but probably an impostor.
2. That the knives and forks in question were not
the property of the plaintiff, but of private individuals.
3. That the pantry was not solely the plaintiff's,
but used in common by one Spiers-—the dough and
pieman of a certain shipping company, trading with
a distant country occupied by man-eating people of the
color of brown paper, called Maories,and other savages.
4. That the plaintiff was only there on sufferance,
and therefore had no character to lose.
5. That Mr. Spiers not having been produced as
evidence, it was to be assumed that he was a myth,
and dead in the eye of the law. (Here Mr. Bolt
bawled out that Mr. Spiers was alive, but dreadfully
ill through ennui, that he was now out of business,
and had been seen that morning wandering about as
pale as a ghost). Mr, Bolt wascalled to order by Chief
Justice Shallow for interrupting his senior learned
brother Mr. Crowe.
6. Lastly, that the words made use of were not
libellous, but only friendly advice, and meant for the
public good.
Chief Justice Shallow delivered judgement,—He
said that the publication certainly showed a want of
discretion and error in journalism on the part of the
defendant; but taking into consideration that the
editor was a young man at his work, they were willing
to give him another chance, hoping that he would be
more cautious for the future. He was also of opinion
that no malice was proved, and that some of the de-
fendant’s pleas were good, especially with respect to
the absence of the witness Spiers, who his honor
feared had been tampered with. Taking all the sur-
rounding circumstances into consideration he thought
that the justice of the case would be met in the plaintiff
being non-suited, each party to bear his own costs.
Mr. Justice Swallow, who had just awoke from a
sound sleep, here nodded his assent.
The admiral, who had a huge quid of tobacco in hi s
chops, which he had been chewing some time, turned
white with passion, and abruptly left the court, wish-
ing as he did so that the judges, the counsel, and
people in get eral, including Ins own lawyer, might be
sent to Jericho, threatening to call the defendant out,
and muttering that there was no justice to be had
save on board a man-of-war.
MY INTERVIEW WITH THE DOCTOR,
AND SOME PHRENOLOGICAL NOTES.
0 —
H. S. DE LA BIERE.
I was left last week in a swoon. When I came
round I opened my eyes with considerable caution, for
fear of finding myself in another world. I found
myself however, without much difficulty in this. I
was sitting on a box leaning against a print dress with
a warm fleshy lining; a cold wet towel round my
head, and a smelling bottle under my nose.
The scene was still my bedroom. I felt very com-
fortable leaning my face against the warm print, and
was almost afraid to move lest I should disturb my
dream.
A sharp pain made me sit up. I raised my eyes
and beheld my landlady’s daughter. “ Oh! Mr.


Swipeswig, you did give me such a start ” she said,
withdrawing her arm from my head and blushing like
a cherry apple—“ You've been very ill” she added, blot-
ting her eyes with her handkerchief and trembling.
“ Where do you feel wrong ?” he asked.
“ Here,” I said mournfully, moving my hand all over
my waistcoat. He felt my pulse and looked at his
watch. I asked him if I was right by Greenwich time;
he said I was fast and irregular and wanted winding
up. Thinking our front door key might be suitable
for the purpose and save a new one, I offered it to him ;
but he said it was too serious to joke about. He is a
lull sized one.
I felt vacant, and gazed accordingly.
“ Are you better?” she enquired anxiously.
“ Will you be good enough to ask me the multi-
plication table?” I said in a low weak voice, with a
view to finding out if I was really awake in this world
or dreaming in some other.
“ Have you ever been ill before ?” he enquired look-
ing at me as if I was about to let off a prevarication
“ Not now ” she said gently, “you must rest, the
doctor will be here presently.”
“ Yes, I have known several diseases intimately. I
have partaken freely of mortification.”
“The doctor!” I exclaimed in a voice which was
pretty good for a corpse; “do you want to kill me ?”
I said, looking into her eyes with the courage of one
who didn't know his danger.
“ Show me your tongue ” he said drawing his chair
close to mine.
“ Have you any pain ?” he asked.
“ Considerable ” I replied, “ there is something like
forty bladed knives traversing my alimentary canal,
and I've been acting like the whale which once got
friendly with Jonah.”
She looked down timidly, and sighed as she said
“No Mr. de la Biere, I hope you will see the flowers
of many a summer yet —I will gather them for you if
I can, and will try to make your ”
There was a long knock at the door, and the land-
lady's daughter never finished what she was saying,
but hurried down to admit the doctor, but the doctor
didn't come; he was detained assisting another patient
into another world, and didn't know how long he’d be
He wiped his glasses and looked at me with twenty
cart-horse power.
“ Were you strong when you were young?” he en-
quired examining me attentively.
“ I once went so far as to upset the school-master”
I replied.
“ But did you enjoy your health ?”
I went down and sat by the fire, and beguiled myself
with gruel. The landlady’s daughter looked very sad ;
she said I must take care of myself, the house would
seem so lonely without me now, and she knelt down
and sobbed at the thought.
“ Immensely ” I said, “ I believe I was never so
happy as when I was well.”
“ And when you were ill. what was the matter
with you ?” he asked, as if annoyed at the uncertain-
ty of my constitution.
I did all I could to soothe her, for I can’t stand by
and see a pretty woman weep; it’s like seeing a dumb
animal die.
“ I suffered a good deal before I wore waistcoats,
both outwardly and inwardly; the same remark applies
to trousers. I have had several attacks of compound
fracture in the skull, and once took a prize for the
biggest wart. It was certainly all it pretended to be.”
A woman knows when a man’s heart is beating,
and I saw it was time to consult a medical man, so I
put on my boots and went. The doctor was a stout
man, and looked as if he believed in taking plenty of
nourishment. He was very solid—had the name for
being very clever, attended church, and weighed fifteen
stone. He never charged poor people if he knew they
couldn't pay; but being very clever he wrote the figures
very thick for those who could. Fond of good things,
and not selling his own physic, he depended a good
“ But these are all trifling matters ” he said im-
patiently ; “I want to know if you are constitutionally
sound.”
“ Sound ” replied I, “ yes, wind and limb ; I can
blow a trumpet and beat a drum with any man, and
deal on diet. He didn’t believe a beefsteak would
do anybody any harm, and so his patients with weak
stomachs went in for them in imitation of those with
strong stomachs. He had the satisfaction of having
a very wide circle of suffering friends.
would shouldn’t be far behind in
a retreat.”
After having given him further particulars too
numerous to mention, he appeared to swell out into a
grand idea—
“ You are suffering from gastro, enteritis, mucosa,”
he said, leaning back in his chair with evident satis-
faction.
“ Good morning ” he said, “ take a seat.”
I did so and sat down.
“ Thank you ” I said, rising to go.
“ What is the matter with you ?” he said sinking
heavily into a spring chair.
“ Stop ” he said, taking up a pen, “you haven’t got
your prescription.”
“ From symptoms observed during the last twenty-
four hours I am induced to believe I’m not very well,”
I replied, not wishing to give him any clue which
might enable him to discover my complaint.
“ No ” I said, moving towards the door, “ I can call
for it at the undertaker’s, I can order a coffin at the
same time.”


“ But I can cure you" he said, “ Never mind " I
said “if I've got gastro enteritis mucosa, I can't do
better than let nature take its course. There is no
remedy for such words as those, if it had been cholera,
or scurvy, or boils, or spontaneous combustion, I could
have seen the good of physic, but gastro enteritis mu-
cosa ! not me ! "
“ What's in a name ? " said he quoting the immortal
Shakespeare, and smiling with a roar of laughter,
“ your complaint is known among ordinary people, as
an inflamation of the stomach—gastro enteritis mucosa
is but the professional term."
“Oh then, lam not so bad as I thought '* I said,
returning to my seat, “ but you'll kill some timid
people by speaking in dead languages—long names
and short stabbing pains will kill anybody who was
not born in the tower of Babel.
(To be continued) .
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
October 14th—lat. 49*23, long. 110*53; distance
90 miles.
We left off last week in the finishing up of a strong
gale; since then the wind has entirely moderated, and
after changing its direction to West has subsided
into a very moderate sort of breeze indeed.
A very high cross sea has resulted from the violence
of the different winds, so that the consequent rolling
has far surpassed our previous experiences in that lino,
indeed there are not wanting among our citizens,
some few, who declare we turned right over and came
up on the other side; at least they expected to, which
is much about the same thing. One thing is very
certain, they turned over a good many times on their
downy, or rather, up and downy couches, in their
fruitless efforts to woo nature’s sweet restorer, but did
not succeed to any great extent, and displaying a
considerable amount of unwillingness to turn out this
morning.
By the bye the newspapers have not arrived this
morning, owing to the weather.
The general health is very good indeed ; our good
folks between decks bear up well, under their discom-
forts unavoidably pertaining to stormy weather, and
our invalids are as well as can be expected, though
the cold is very trying to them.
October 15th—lat. 49.30. long. 113*16; distance
97 miles.
To-day our winds have been light and variable, and
the weather cloudy and unsettled, frequent showers of
snow falling, and general damp, muggy weather pre-
vailing; this being the case, our spirits are not par-
ticularly bright, and we want to growl very bad.
AVe try, don't succeed much, and give up the attempt,
and think about other things.
Vestiges of Eden are rare to us, yet two institutions
still survive the wreck and have come down to us,
witnesses of that perfect condition in which they origin-
ated ; these are the marriage relation and the Sabbath.
Paradise lingers still with us in a measure in the sweet
and sacred relations of the family. The other memorial
of Eden is this day, the share of time measured out to
man, by the celestial clock-work of those heavenly
bodies, whose motions are to us for times and for sea-
sons, for days and for years. And what is more
redolent of Paradise than the calm and bright, ever
welcome Sabbath morn As usual, we have enjoyed
two very excellent and well attended services.
The general health is extremely good, but the
weather is extremely damp and cold.
October 16th—lat. 49*18, long. 117*01; distance
127 miles.
Our progress is still slow, we have had very fine,
very cold, and this forenoon very changeable, snowy
weather, the snow part of the day's proceedings being
exceedingly to the juvenile taste, and the combat be-
tween the rival fortifications of Poop and Deck Castles,
gave opportunity for deeds of heroism and strategy
rarely equalled in actual warfare.
During last night the Aurora Australis came out in
gorgeous array, and some few of our citizens in light
and airy costumes, came out to see, staying but a
limited period of time, and retreating after a mere
cursory view, to an accompaniment that sounded sus-
piciously like castanets. The thermometer being
below freezing point may have something to do with
it, or perhaps the wind, like the country bumpkin who
performed in the old Christmas pantomime of St. George
and the Dragon, who having run away during the
combat, was brought before the audience to account
for his cowardice—he said, “ I and my master did
“ prevail, he cut off his head, and I cut off his tail.'*
“Then what are you tremblin’ and shakin’ about," “ oh,’'
he replied, “ it’s not me that's a shakin', it’s the wind
a blowin’ up the legs of my trow’sis."
The general health is superlative thank you, and we
do so resemble (with the assistance of the bread) a
crysalis; oh; pray why ? Because we make the
butter fly. N. B.—Extra charge for this.
October 17th —lat. 49*20, long. 121*39; distance
209 miles.
During the past twenty-four hours, our wind and
weather may be defined as mostly light, variable, and
unsettled; from mid-night we had a better breeze, and
have managed to put the score over the 200 miles.
The weather glasses and prophets all agree in say-
ing that the weather is like a young lady's mind, not
quite to be depended upon yet.
During last night, those of our good folks who
stayed up a little late, were witnesses of a splendid
display of Aurora Australis, —street lamps would hardly


be needed anywhere, if these “ merry dancers'” were
to perform nightly and be everywhere visible, and
then where would young sparks be ? For it has been
proved on high scientific authority, that the principal
use of street lamps is for “ weary young men ” to re-
cline against, when they forget the way home at the
midnight hour.
The general health is very excellent indeed, thank
you, and it's very—c 000 o o Id.
October 18th—lat. 50*03, long. 127*37; distance
240 miles.
Our winds and weather during the past day have
not been very nice, the former being rather “ too far
North ” for us, which is nn\\ air, and the weather dark,
dreary, damp and drizzly. A very strong wind pre-
vailed during the “ witching hours,” to the consider-
able detriment of our sails, for the “ foul wind ” rent
our sheets in some instances, and the morning shewed
a choice assortment of tatters, of course limited in
quantity. Our good friends as usual showed their
solicitude about the sheets, and many kind enquiries
were made about the departed muslin; the missing
link in the chain of evidence that exposed the jibboom
to the storms of life, has been recovered, it is exposed
no more, since a bran new sheepshank and cat’s-paw
having been taken in the outer martingale stay, the
inner one has again resumed duty on the dolphin
striker. This being now lucidly explained, the most
timid need not fear.
Indeed it is not wise to get up in the morning in a
state of trepidation, as may be seen from the following
anecdote—“ A certain gentleman on rising one morn-
“ing, while arraying his manly figure in his unmen-
“ tionables, suddenly felt a sharp dart or bite upon his
“ i the thought of snakes, scorpions, centipedes,
“ tarantulas, and all other “ great nasty things,” with
“ rmsty long tails, armed with nasty long stings,
“ instantly flashed through his massive brain; without
“ a word to the terrified partner of his joys and sorrows,
“ grasping tightly his leg, including the venomous
“ reptile within, off he dashed, coatless, hatless, and in
“ a state of general deshabille to the nearest surgeon,
“ rushed madly into the surgery, crying ‘ quick! quick !
‘ cut! cut! a snake ! a snake !’ Out came the ampu-
tating knife, and quick as thought breeches and
“ reptile were cut through and the limb exposed—and
“ there plain to the view was the cause of all his terror
“and pain (his wife’s garter with a pin attached).”
The general health is superfine thank you, and it’s
not quite so cold, but if you please is it very much
further to New Zealand, and are we going very fast?
October 19th—lat. 49*06, long. 131*37; distance
205 miles.
Ihe past day has been the finest that we have ex-
perienced for a long time past, and the sun coming
out dry and warm has been a great boon to our invalids,
as well as very welcome to us of robust health.
tarded our progress, that where we were two days'’ run
in advance of the Waimate’s previous voyages, we are
now but exactly equal. Those of our friends who have
staked large amounts of cash and credit on our arrival
on, or before the 2Stb. inst. begin to look blue, all
owing to the unfair interference of the too fair weather.
Two gentlemen of the sporting persuasion, having
rung the bell for the waiter at an hotel, the poor
fellow had no sooner entered the room in obedience to
the summons than he fell down in a fit. “ He’s dead ”
said one, “ he’ll come to ” said the other, “dead for
five hundred ” said the first, “ done ! ” said the other.
In came the landlord in a terrible way, and wanted to
send for a doctor, “ no, no,” insisted both, —“ no inter-
ference, there’s a bet on.” “ But he’ll die” said the
host, “ well never mind that, put him in the bill,” and
he did.
Six days’ good running would now take us to the
land, but at present our prospects are not specially
bright.
The general health is excellent thank you, and we
do require a little rest during the day, to think, with
closed optics.
October 20th—lat. 48*48, long. 142*37; distance
290 miles.
We have enjoyed a nice steady breeze during the
last twenty-four hours, which has sent us spinning
along to the tune of nearly three hundred miles.
Should we keep up our rate we shall probably see
only one more issue of our paper. Our distance from
the South end of New Zealand is now 1200 mdes. Five
days’ good running will cover this. From the Snares
to Port Lyttleton is 235 miles, which will probably
occupy us three days or thereabouts.
Speaking about the Snares, forcibly reminds us of
the fruitless endeavours of the juveniles to ensnare
our winged companions. We are glad that there are
no worms about, as there are so many early birds about
that the poor things would stand no chance whatever.
The general health is superlative thank you, and we
are so glad the weather is getting milder, and so are we
THE ACTION FOR LIBEL.
—o—
We have given above a notice of the proceedings
against us in the Waimate Supreme Court. Our
readers will doubtless agree with us that we have been
shamefully treated in the matter.
The language of the counsel for the plaintiff is most
insulting, and where he remarks upon our position as
editor, that our motives are low and mercenary, he
gives us a handle for a counter action for libel, which
we shall not be slow to use unless he draws in his
horns pretty quickly. The summing up is wanting
in everything except platitude, and we should like to
keep a certain learned gentleman awake with a long
pole.
We intend to appeal at once to the Privy Council,
The last few days of inferior winds have so far re- and in the meanwhile shall be happy to write over the






graves of either Ch-f J-st-ce Sh-11-w, or J-st-ce
Sw-11-w, or Mr. Sw-nd-11 Q.C., or Mr. B. B-lt, or
Mr. Anth— y F-gg, or better still, over the graves of
all of them, the full epitaph, which we recommend to
their several notices :
Reader, beware the path you tread,
Lest by mischance you wake the dead;
Nor dream my caution insincere,
For lawyer sleepeth here.
A man to every demon known,
Who made the statutes all his own ;
Conceived in ruin's baneful womb,
His heart was harder than his tomb.
For forty summers at Assize,
He cast a film o'er reason’s eyes.
But now alas! his toil is o'er,
Who made us sweat at every poi’e;
And having left this earth so fair,
He'll do his best to cheat down there.
A STARRY NIGHT FOR A RAMBLE.
{See Illustrations .)
“ Up Flock and Fleck, up ! up ! on deck !”
Thus shouted our Madcarver;
“ The southern light resembles quite
Vesuvius's lava.”
'Twas four a.m., they had on them
Attire fit and nightly;
With waterproof by way of roof,
They cased their “ something whitey.”
Then up they danced, with backward glance,
They are so shy and modest;
Should other eye their limbs espy,
Or call their “ get up ” oddest.
“ I need not state ” began the mate
“ The results of rarefaction ;
“ The laws of light, or all they write
“ Of reflection or refraction.”
“ There's one on board whose head is stored
“ With scientific knowledge,
“ And all that's taught or even thought
“At boarding-school or college.”
“ Then here we'll start,” “Oh ! bless my heart”
Like a monkey when it itches;
Flock looked below at a flake of snow;
“ I think I'll fetch my breeches.”
“ I'd like to hear” said Flack “ but fear
“ My teeth too loud do chatter
Then “ aft ” he clapped his hands, and wrapped
His scanty clothing flatter.
“ Ere one bell wags, I'll get my bags,
It's draughty kind of weather;”
But ne'er again came those young men
Alone, or both together.
At seven bells news-hungry swells,
The editor and subs sought ;
Beside this spot you see the lot
By the artistic eye caught.
“ THE CASTLE IN THE AIR.”
—o—
On the main deck of a gallant ship.
Upon the briny deep;
There stands a little wooden house,
Into which I did peep.
It has two port-holes and two doors.
Four little curtained beds,
Belonging to four blooming youths,
Oh ! bless their little heads.
Number one with goloshes on,
(Lucky who can afford them !)
Is playing “ Tourney ” with one hand
Upon a fine accordion.
Then number two of this quartette
Is seated at the table,
Writing “ editorial ” to our gazette
As fast as he is able.
Now number three I clearly see
Is of handsome mien, but fiery;
He's scribbling in a little book
He's pleased to call a diary.
The last of these, but not the least,
Seems of a cleanly cut;
For he's proceeding, mop in hand,
To titivate the hut.
But lo ! fifth presents himself,
He exclaims in a voice serene,
“Never mind, 1 shall have him at last,
And then, —what can he mean ?”
But I must now retrace my steps,
They’re going to have tea;
And if they caught me looking in,
What would the consequence be ?
A BIRD’S EYE VIEW.
A pigeon he sat on the main-top mizen,
To see what he could spy :
He watched the motion of those on deck
From off his perch so high.
First at the stern five youths are seen.
Oh ! say, who may they be;
They have got long lines with a bait at the end
To catch my brethren, I see.
Then the boys scamper round the deck.
And are told to follow their leader;
If you cry what a noise, my head quite aches,
A voice cries out “ never heed her,”
The ladies have got an amusement too,
A swing on the spanker-boom ;
It is never empty all day long,
Even two sit on when there is room.


When theclouds grow dark, and the sun disappears,
The children begin to brawl;
The youths dress up in waterproofs,
And say “ look out for a squall.”
These waterproofs are of different hues.
There are blacks and also yellows ;
I can’t say they add to their figure or looks.
They quite spoil those handsome fellows.
But I hear a bell beginning to ring,
Oh say what may that be ?
Only look in their faces as they run down stairs,
You may guess it’s for dinner or tea.
CORRESPONDENCE.
A Delicate Question.
To the Editor of the Waimate Gazette.
Dear Sir,
I am, and have been for a long time,
trembling on the verge of matrimony. I have often
wished for the opportunity of getting the information
I now ask of you. A lady alone can give it, but my
natural bashfulness and diffidence has always hitherto
prevented my obtaining it from one, and though 1
have frequently screwed my courage up to the
necessary pitch, the same bashfulness has ever
damped my ardour, and my question still remains
unanswered. Now I know from your own confession
my dear Sir that you are essentially a ladies’ man;
and while admiring your courage, and even some-
times envying the happy fortune which gives you
such opportunities (as an editor) of confidential
conversation with the fair ones, I beg you to tell
me which is the letter half in the matrimonial firm.
I fear me that despite the immense mass of
information at your command, you will have to invoke
the assistance of our lady friends in my behalf; pray
do so dear Sir, and for ever gain my gratitude.
The circumstances of my case are these, is it to be
expected from a young lady to write to a young man
first, supposing he is too diffident to take the
initiative? To use an illustration suppose her to ask
"in what way can I let him know how I love him,
when he is so bashful, and has no other ladye love?”
It is really most affecting and distressing to see
how other sympathetic spoons get one, and indeed
get assisted out of their difficulty by t’other party
coming to the rescue. The fact is that:—
The sweetest notes among the human heartstrings—
Are dull with rust;
The sweetest chords adjusted by the angels—
Are clogged with dust.
I pipe and pipe again my dreary music—
Upon the selfsame strings;
While sounds of spoons and fear of ridicule—
Come back in sad refrains,
Benedict,
[We dare not attempt to answer the question of
our correspondent " Benedict” ourselves, so we give
the answers of several friends among the fair sex.
1. “ Pussie ” says that she has found “a gentle
pressure of the hand ” pay very well.
2. " A spinster friend ” (set. 49) sa} r s she does
not believe it can be done by any means; she has
tried a good deal.
3. “Phyllis” asks if 'Benedict” can wait till
Valentine’s day? If so, the lady may just send him
a valentine, (she can do it for 2d. or 3d.), only 1,4
her be careful to put full postage on, or she will have
all the fat in the fire.
4. “Amazon” would remind '‘Benedict” that
this is leap year, and that the young ladies may ask
him straight out, without any breach of etiquette.
These are all answers to a side question in ouP'
correspondent’s letter; the main question is “which
is the better half?’’ and we hope that some of our
lady friends will try to answer this question next
week, and put this poor wretch out of his misery. Ed.]
A MYSTERIOUS MATTER.
Wai mate,
Oct. 17th.
Dear Sir,
I have an immense stake, (money of
course, not beef), in the Waimate arriving at her
destination before the end of this month, and tho
other day I thought my opponents in this matter,
who while glorying in the prospect of my defeat,
and of course in their own victory, must have mado
me wish some naughty wish. Now Sir, lam so far
sure of winning the above stakes, that another very
naughty wish must have been expressed, because one
party gravely remarked " honey swore, qui mal ye
pency.” I didn’t swear Sir, I assure you I didn’t,
although the yards were square, and the difficulty I
had to keep my position was enough to make any-
body—hem ! get up and sit down again; from thjg
expression, I can only gather that in a disguised
manner my opponents intend to pay me in bad coin
when the stakes are claimed, else why do they use
such words as mal (bad) ye (the) pency (money of
course). As for calling a fellow honey, and saying
he swore, is to say at least a sugary way of taking
away a fellow’s character; please tell me what it is
all about, and confer a lasting favour on your
bewildered, R. G. •
WAIMATE ELECTION,
MANIFESTO OF MR. CROSS, M.P,
To the Editor ot the Waimate Gazette.
Sir, Oct. 18th,
Venomous and unscrupulous aspirants to
honours far beyond their capacities, have been


imposing upon your limited experience. Your youth
has been tampered with, and you've been hoodwinked.
Who but a very baby would endure to be told that
one of his members was bitten off, and believe the tale
without so much as looking ; yet you with infantine
credulity have allowed that barrel-sucking time-server
H. S. dk la Biere to promulgate through your columns
what, if I choose to take it so, would be not only (what
it also is) a handsome lie, but a libel. Dead, am I?
Devoured by “ animalcula," am I ? How ? When ?
Where ? There is not so much as a flea's stride of
truth in the monstrous statemnet.
I have, indeed, journeyed with you more or less
incog., that I might learn your most intimate feelings,
your most crying needs. I have been with you
sleeping and waking (generally the latter), in squall
and cabin (generally the latter), in funk and bunk
(generally the latter) ; and 1 rejoice to say that I have
survived. As to the particular disease (which has
the credit of my mortification), I had forewarning of
my companions, and shipped several packets of insect
powder. I slept in it, and have escaped even irrita-
tion ; and yet, Sir, in a certain sense, mortification
has set in upon me. lam mortified that my proud
title should have been dragged through the dirt of
H. S. db la B's. and O. D’s. fulsome chicaneries.
The imposture is simply undertaken with a view
of dragging their obscure names before the public.
They are probably rival caterers for the diseased ap-
petites of those who are pledged to carry to extremes
their outrageous theories of indulgence on the one
hand, and abstinence on the other. Such, lam sure,
will never get so near the position I have the honour
to hold by your votes, as even the familiar and Gamp-
loved shrimp; for its name must be written with
M. P. at the end, whereas the votes of all reasonable
people will never attach to theirs any other remark
than M. T.
Yours indignantly,
Cross (Jack) M. P.
LATEST BETTING.
—o—
5 to 1 against the “ Waimate” reaching port before
Sunday, Oct. 29th, taken and offered.
6 to 1 against dropping anchor during either of the
dog watches.
Evens on the first man coming onboard setting his
right foot first on deck, offered.
AN APPROPRIATE EFFUSION.
When the cold wind blows
Take care of your nose,
That it don't get froze ;
And wrap up your toes
In warm woollen hose.
(The above, we suppose,
Was"written in prose
By someone who knows
The effect of the snows).
Spokeshave.
MIRTHFUL MELANCHOLY.
The large bottles of beer have been consumed some
time since, and we now content ourselves
with the small-sized bottles. This, we suppose, is
what is referred to in the following ditty (to the tune
of the National Anthem), which we have heard
lately:
Happy and glorious !
Half a pint among us !
Good job there a'nt more of us'! &c., &c.
W AIM ATE THEATRE.
Closing of the Season.
—o—
On Thursday next.
Will be produced the Enormous Drama entitled
MY TURN NEXT!
CHARACTERS.
Taraxicum Twitters (a village apothecary) Mr. Flock.
Tom Trap .. (commercial) ... Sgr. Barnosiraldini.
Parmer Wheatear (ofßanbury) Sgr. Horatio Flacco.
Tim Bolus ... (doctor's boy) ... Sgr. Fleccini.
Lydia ... (Mrs. Twitters) ... Miss More Ison.
Cicely (her sister) ... Madlle. Barnetti.
Peggy ... (slaveyl ... Mdm. Nella Bouncetta.
To be preceded by the comic Interlude
THE UNWARRANTABLE INTRUSION.
Being a most unwarrantable intrusion committed by
Mr. Davies, to the annoyance of Mr, E. Greenstreet.
CHARACTERS.
Mr. Nathaniel Snoozle ... Sgr. Fleccini.
Intruder ... ... Sgr. Horatio Flacco.
Positively the very LAST APPEARANCE of this
company.
Doors open at 6.45 p.m. To commence at 7 o'clock.
Prices as usual.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Residence, Deck Castle, Waimate,
Oct. 21st., 1876,




REGISTERED FOR
TRANSMISSION
ABOARD.
No. 12.
ISSUED
WEEKLY.
Saturday, Oct. 28th, 1876 .
EDITORIAL.
At length we come to the last issue of our
“ Gazette,” and take leave of our readers with mingled
feelings of regret and pleasure. There is something
almost solemn in the breaking up of a large party
never to meet again, of whatsoever kind that party
may be, but when it has been so harmonious and
happy as ours has had the good fortune to be during
the whole of the past three months, our regrets at
parting cannot but be real and sincere.
Yet no one is sorry to reach land, for the most
pleasant of voyages will get monotonous in time, and
all of us are anxious to see the New Country which
is to be the future home of so many. For the editor
of the Gazette, there is a sense of relief in getting to
the end of this last issue, for it comes out under most
unfavourable circumstances—land is in sight, and
everybody is packing in a great state of excitement,
and nobody cares to sit down and write. We hope
to reach harbour to-morrow, and therefore our readers
will perhaps forgive us, if this issue is rather smaller
or less varied than we could wish our finale to be. As
we write, a volatile individual is spying some very
varied objects on shore. “Oh bedad ! see the houses
on shore ! ” “ there's an ould 'oman waving her
handkerchief to me.” “ There's a church on top oi
yonder hill, and a fat parson, and a funeral—no it's a
wedding—my word! the bride is dressed immense
though! ”
But notwithstanding this sense of relief at the end
of our labours, we are at the same time sincerely sorry
to know that they are over. The work has been a
selfish one for us, and we have thoroughly enjoyed it,
and we suspect that the occupation has prevented us
from experiencing any of the ennui which is often the
plague of long voyages.
We must offer our hearty thanks to all our contri-
butors for their kind support, without which the
Gazette must have died a natural death weeks ago.
We are very glad to be able also to congratulate
our readers upon the very friendly spirit in which they
taken and given the chaff which has flown about
somewhat freely in our columns, and we ask their
indulgence if at any time we have trodden too hard
upon any pet corns. It is not an easy thing to go
through with a newspaper intended to be spiced with
fun and chaff, and at the same time to avoid touching
upon any of the unknown susceptibilities, which he
like hidden rocks around. It would need a man of
more experience to succeed entirely in the attempt.
It is quite time that the Gazette should cease, for
our blotting- paper which has become blacker and
smaller day by day, has now arrived at an extreme
pitch of blackness and smallness. It almost sets us
moralising. We could write a touching little piece
entitled “ the last scrap, or the repentant editor.”
We have had our last entertainment this week—on
Monday, the actors attempting two plays. Both were
excellently done, and afforded quite as much amuse-
ment as any of the former entertainments.
Captain Peek gave a farewell supper last night,
which was highly appreciated by the company; an
account will be found in another column. A number
of toasts were drunk, the name of Captain Peek being
most warmly welcomed, and he was congratulated
upon the short time in which he has brought us from
land to land. The passage has been a very good one,
only eighty-four days, that is one more than last
year's voyage. We hope Captain Peek may live to
make many a quicker passage yet, and to enjoy the
goodwill and confidence of his passengers as he does
this voyage.
We must now say our farewell, wishing to every
one of our readers health and happiness; and when
they form new homes, new ties and friendships in the
New Country, may they never forget the old.
MY SUMMER IN DEVONSHIRE.
( Concluded ).
Two days after this, the post brought me a letter
from my father, in which after expressing his hopes
that I was working hard and making full use of my
time, he informed me that I must leave Marlescombe
at once, in order to go up to Oxford for the—scholarship.
Here was a sudden end to all my plans for the next
three weeks I had hoped to spend at Marlescombe.
It was too bad. To have to leave such a party in the
midst of such fun was hard enough, but to be dragged
away to the horrors of an examination was most
melancholy.
There was no help for it however, and that same
afternoon we took a last walk along the cliff, and paid
a farewell visit to Woodabay. I said a glum good-
bye to Maude, inwardly resolving that I would win
the scholarship, and come back some day and propose
in form. The next morning 1 left; the nearest railway
station is Barnstaple, sixteen miles away, so we had


to get up at half-past three in order to catch a train
leaving at seven o'clock. The morning was cold and
wet and miserable, so was I: the whole household
turned out to say good-bye; it was the ordinary time
for leaving that remote village. Arthur and George
drove me to Barnstaple, and the old fashioned carriage
jogged us over the sixteen miles of hills in three hours,
just in time for the train. Tired, hungry, damp and
altogether Uncomfortable, I entered the carriage; after
a few last messages and good wishes between myself
and the cousins, the train moved slowly off, and thus
ended my Summer in Devonshire.
**************
The New Zealand Shipping Company's Fleet
consists of the following vessels : —Wairnate, Waitangi,
Waimea, Waitara, Waipa, Waikato, Orari, Otaki,
Hurunui, Rangateiki, Rakaia, Mataura, Wairoa, and
three new ships now building.
OUR HARMONIUM.
To the Editor ot the Wairnate Gazette,
Dear Sir, Friday, Oct. 27th.
The harmonium in our Town Hall which
has been so kindly, unbegrudgingly, and unreservedly
placed at our disposal, and for our amusement, that
we can hardly help calling it our harmonium, will
after to-day's service be packed up for removal. Can
we, dear sir, allow the great kindness of its owner in
so greatly contributing to our comfort and amuse-
ment to pass without a word? I say no , sir. Has
any of your numerous readers anything to say on the
subject ? 1 should rather say yes, considerable : —well
proceed. Yours,
One of the thankful.
It is many years since these events happened, and
many changes have come over that merry party;
perhaps some of us may wish that the freedom and
carelessness of youth were once more ours. Reggie
is now a staid married clergyman, but Helen is not
his wife. Whether they ever got engaged I don't
know, but they never met after that summer, and I
remember hearing of several other temporary lunacies
which attacked Reggie before “Miss Wright" came
upon the scene.
[We entirely agree with our correspondent that the
best thanks of all are due to the owner of the
harmonium which has been of such great use to us.
The matter was eloquently stated by the mover of
the toast “the ladies," last night. From personal
acquaintance, we are able to say that the clergyman
on board is specially thankful for the use of the
instrument, as also is Sgr. Fleccini, of the “ Wairnate"
Theatre. Ed.]
There were no hearts broken, for Helen herself was
married some years ago; at least so the “Times"
informed me, for I have never seen any of the family
since.
I did not marry Maude. Somehow things changed
after I went to College. We undergo very radical
changes on leaving the chrysalis state of boyhood,
and though we may not notice when the change takes
place, yet upon looking back when we have fully
attained to manhood, we find that our feelings and
wishes are no longer what they were two or three
years ago.
PROGRESS OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON
TO NEW ZEALAND.
October 21st —lat. 48*48, long. 142*17; distance
224 miles.
Our now week is ushered in with weather of the
most squally and unsettled description, and the sails
as well as the sailors are having a rather hard time of
it; the yards no longer square have been round and
round, in order to enable those brave, but very pru-
dent warriors, the sails, always to present their back
Can I regret that I was not constant to my bo}dsh
fancy ? No. I look to the happy face of her who
now shares all my joys and sorrows, and its bright
and trustful glance teaches me my answer. Yes, little
wife ! a our face once lifted a veil like magic from mv
eyes, and taught me higher and more holy
things of P ar fs t° the common
friend and foe, the wind. And
love than any other could awaken within me, and
now we two sail over the turbid waters of the world,
but they are safe and peaceful to us now, for we are
together. finis.
like ourselves, they much prefer showing said wind a
clean pair of heels.
Master Sky-sail from his safe and snug retreat, has
fairly the laugh of his big fellow labourer Mr. Main-
sail, who judging from his disreputable appearance, and
frequent shiverings and shakings, has fallen into bad
habits; but in extenuation of the poor fellow, we must
say, if drowsiness shall clothe a man or a main-sail
with rags, it's very little drowsiness has fallen to his
share of late, much more shaking will lay him up all-
together, and his present state will be mere shakings,
to what he will be reduced to if the prevailing unsettled
weather continues.
OUR CITY.
The accompanying coloured sketch kindly furnished
by Mr. Manby, shows our City of Wairnate in full
sail, in the fulfilment of her mission of carrying
seekers of pleasure, health, or business, and spreading
commerce and wealth to the ends of the earth; long
may she pursue her way in safety and with speed.
This fine ship is one of the ships of the New
Zealand Shipping Company; she was built by Messrs.
Blumer, at Sunderland, in 1874. Her dimensions
are : —length, extreme, 224 ft.; breadth, 36 ft. 6 in.;
depth of hold, 21 ft. 6 in.; gross tonnage, 1,124 tons ;
burthen, 2000 tong.
The general health is quite well thank you, and
though some few of us, under the influence of influenza,
are not exactly in a fizzing state, we have to resort to
the aid of physic to restore our phys\csx\ condition to
the requisite standard.


October 22ud —lat. 48.40, long-. 148*35; distance
253 miles.
This day with the wind from the North West all
day, the weather shows the following variations,
viz:—a.m. wet and squally; noon, squally and wet;
p.m. wet and squally; rest of day—ditto weather.
The charming wet and sloppy state of everything
very forcibly reminds one of the delightful spring
weather of the old country, (we Colonials must speak of
Great Britain now as the old country, or we shall get
the by no means desirable cognomen of ‘ new chums/)
and sets us ‘ thinking of home and the dear ones there/
so dear, that with the present price of provisions, the
labour of love, as regards housekeeping, becomes a toil
as well as a pleasure; but still on calm nights, the
attentive ear can catch a sweet murmuring, as poor
harmless Luna is addressed—example:—
“ The moon is sleeping on the wave,
And silv'ry bright it falls on me;
But has no power to cheer or save,
This weary heart that pines for (here insert name).
It only brings the old dreams back.
That blest me once when thou wast here,
And written on its gleaming track—
-1 read, “ dear me, supper time's near/'
Our services of to-day were held as usual in the
public hall, but for the first time, owing no doubt to
the wet, the attendance was not large.
The general health, barring a few slight colds, is
good as usual, for which we are truly thankful.
October 23rd—lat. 47 58, long. 154 8; distance
232 miles.
The weather of last twenty-four hours has had no-
thing special about it to call for any great expressions
of praise ; it has been for most part of the time miser-
ably muggy, wet, and squally. The wind still holds
to the North Western quarters, fickle in direction and
uncertain force, variable and squally in fact, to the
considerable detriment of the small sails who are in-
clined to think themselves much smaller, so frequently
are they taken in, but that expression won't pass for
wit with us, any more than the re-reading of any sup-
posed racy article of one's own composition does.
A certain editor wrote and published in his paper,
what he really thought a master-piece of wit. Some
time afterwards wishing to wound the feelings of a
rival editor, he made a selection from that gentleman's
paper, and as it so happened, pitched upon his own
article, which had been pirated, and reprinted it, as
coming from the other paper, with an editorial note,
viz ; —“ wretched attempt at wit/'
We are all very nicely thank you, but the weather
is so miserable.
October 24th —lat. 47*42, long. 158*43; distance
156 miles.
The day's winds and weather have been—winds be-
tween North and West, weather damp, squally, and
royal, that is royal so far as the sails of that name are
concerned, they being* set and taken in a variety of
times, alternately appearing and disappearing.
The general health is all that can be desired thank
you very much, and shall we soon see land ?
October 25th —lat. 47*33, long. 164.30; distance
222 miles.
Fine weather at last, such a nice warm sun, most
enjoyable weather, everybody on deck, all the sailors
hanging all over the masts, painting away like artists,
and the hair strokes “ dear me, howerer can they do it.”
It's all very well to say everybody on deck, but it is
perhaps as well not to say too much about the time,
but suppose us to hear a soliloquy about the early
hour of first breakfast bell.
Theme — I wish some one would bring me a cup
of tea, (short notes).
I understand the sun is up, — Do you !
And that upon the sea, — Ah!
It's shining down refulgent— Hum !
Refulgent as can be.— Oh!
Strange that this does not move me !— Very.
I don't doubt what is said, — ’Spose not.
But it strikes me I am better, — Dear me!
Where I am now —in bed !— Very much.
Some people wake too early,— Wise ones.
And some too early sleep; — Say too late.
Some would seem but made to work, — Not you.
And some but made to weep. — Poor things.
Bright sun, cease not your shining,— Don't intend to!
But keep a ray for me, — Raise you mean.
Meanwhile, I'll have my coffee, — Perhaps.
Or perhaps a cup of tea, — If you can get it.
The general health is very well indeed thank you,
and it is such a treat to get in the air.
October 26th —South Cape, Stewart's Island, New
Zealand, North, twenty miles.
Land ho ! was thundered out from the stentorian
lungs of our captain at eight o'clock this morning, and
“ such a getting up stairs you never did see'' as there
was among our citizens, and there away on our port
bow, lay the land we have been longing for this many
a day, but the weather is very unfavourable for a
distinct view.
But where are the Snares? Where are the traps ?
The Snares are too far off to see, but the traps are
coming. At four p.m. we see the traps, i.e. the sea
breaking on them.
But the wind falls very light, and trapping and
snai’ing albatrosses become the order of the day, and
very successfully, though some of the birds manage to
escape again. In the afternoon rain set in, hid the
land, spoiled our sport, and concluded to rain all night
which it did.


The general health is very excellent thank you,
and if you please if anybody wants me, tell them I
am busy packing.
Champagne supper, 9. p.m. sharp.
October 27th —Off Foveaux Straits.
Our day's work has not been so very bad considering
the little wind we have had, and noon to-day brings
us in sight of the Southern part of the Middle Island.
At six p.m. We are off the Nuggets, of whose light-
house we have a very fine view.
After a night of tacking, we find ourselves next
morning off Quoin Point, in a half fair wind, i.e. a
calm, and noon again does not place us a very great
deal farther on our way. We may now expect to be
kept out to sea all Sunday, though the probability
that we may reach Port Lyttleton by Monday, is
sufficiently good for us to assume our voyage finished
on that day, so that we will on the strength of this
say : —that the “ Wairnate's " voyage has been of 94
days' duration altogether, or 86 days from land to port,
or 86 days from land to land.
The last evening was devoted to our special supper,
and the several toasts proposed and honoured, were
marked by speeches remarkable for the brevity—(soul
of wit) satisfaction, happiness, comfort, health, and
general blessedness, which they expressed or conveyed.
Such good feeling has existed, and entire harmony
prevailed among our whole community during our
entire voyage, that it has been one continued round of
displays of “ merrie jests " from Alpha to Omega.
Fare-you-welly—fare-you-well,
Since the parting hour's now come;
Heaven's protection still defend you,
Heavenly blessings still attend you,
In your new colonial home.
Farewell.
This is the last time we shall hold converse together;
soon now we shall all part, probably never to meet
again. ■
It has been a source of great pleasure to the writer
of this progress, to see it accepted and published by
our worthy editor and staff, and read by our general
public; and he trusts that among all the nonsense
written, there may be some few grains of good sense
picked out and digested.
Thanks to our good ship, our good editor, and our
good folks, and I wish you all you can wish yourselves,
but still we say among true men—we ever part to
meet again.
So here's to our next merry meeting.
M ADCARVER.
MY INTERVIEW WITH THE DOCTOR,
AND SOME PHRENOLOGICAL NOTES.
( ContinuedJ,
H. S. DE LA BIERE
Something here seemed to attract his attention;
he was looking at my head curiously, and at last
remarked—‘“yours is a remarkable head. 0
“ It ain't on sale " I replied.
“ I should like a east of it " he said, “as Em en-
gaged in studying the functions of the brain in con-
nection with the formation of the skull. 0
“Do you want to make a waxwork of me ?" I
enquired with powerful interrogation, preparing my
person for self defence.
“ Nonsense, sit down *' he said pleasantly. He
barked gruffly to clear his throat, leaned back in his
chair, and mistaking me for an influential meeting
which had overflowed too much, he proceeded to ad-
dress me as follows j— i -
“ Phrenology is a splendid study; in the hands of
the ignorant it is a folly, but properly understood it
will prove one of the greatest of the sciences; once
reduced to fixed laws it will have a mighty influence
on future ages, and we shall one day wonder how it
was that in ages past we put it aside as worthless,
and left it only to the uneducated to teach and
practice. External observation alone may teach
something, but the starting point of phrenology must
be a profound knowledge of the construction and
physical properties of the head. The action of the
young brain on the young bone, and of the young
bone on the young brain, must be closely observed.
We must find why heads differ in their sections, and
why certain formations should indicate (as they
certainly do) peculiarities of temperament, and
different degrees of mental power. We must
discover by experiment the effect of pressure on
certain parts of the infant skull, and of continued
pressure on the different bumps in early youth, ere
the bones have hardened into their final formations.
You can never alter them in age.
“ Maria could" I replied, unable to forget all she
had done for me in this respect.
“ Only by fracture" he replied quickly, as if
annoyed at the interruption; the “mouldingl repeat
must be done in infancy and early youth; the skull
once hardened, gentle pressure loses its effect, and
violent pressure proves fatal."
“ Would a moderate application of fire-irons, between
the mature ages of forty and fifty alter a man's moral
character?" I enquired, almost falling headlong into
the belief that everything had been for the best.
“From a phrenological point of view—no, but"
he added smiling “as a corrective, it might act
beneficially in leaving an impression on the memory
that may remind one of the unsatisfactory results of
previous error."
“How would a poker-rut like this one count?" I
said, pointing to one of Maria's deepest tokens of
untold love.
“Nothing" he replied, “as an indication of your
character, but it speaks strongly for somebody else's;
it is simply a bump on the wrong head.”


“Yes'* he said, in the imperfect state of our
knowledge of this great study, mistakes do often
arise, and bring the subject into ridicule among
people who will not and cannot think for themselves,
and so day after day, and year after year, the shallow
crowd are disheartened by their own ignorance, and
the hidden truths are covered over by masses of
speculative rubbish, heaped up by men who write
before they think, and so mislead and mystify, rather
than explain and direct. But there will come a time
when all their false doctrines and foolish theories
will be swept away, and be replaced by fixed
principles and immutable laws, based on something
sounder than a mere superficial connection between
bumps and coincidences."
Just here the front door bell rang violently, and
on proceeding to the hall we found several people
holding up another phrenological study, which looked
pale and head broken. He was bleeding merrily.
His troubles seemed to have borne hardly upon him
in one place, and more or less in several other places.
I asked them if it was a reward for bravery.
They said “it was the result of uncurbed affections;
his wife had caught him talking to somebody else's
sister, and had explained her views on the subject
with the dolly peg." She had appealed to his reason
from the outside. He looked as if he'd like to he
unmarried, without a family to mourn his untimely
end.
Alas, how married some of us are. I took my
unnatural feelings home, and only spilled a groan or
two on the way. The landlady's daughter opened
the door for me with a smile, taking my prescription
from me; she drew the arm chair to the fire, told me
to sit down whilst she went for my medicine, saying
she would not be long.
I felt at that moment that I did not want to die.
Henry Swipeswig de la Biere.
MUSICAL AND DRAMATIC.
—O—
Waimate Theatre.
On Monday night, the manager put on the boards
for the first time here, the enormous drama “My
Turn Next," and the “ Unwarrantable Intrusion."
Both plays were to have been produced last week, but
were postponed in order that they might be placed
before the public in that finished condition which the
high reputation ol this theatre demands.
In the “ Intrusion," Sgr. Fleccini played Mr.
Snoozle, and made a very good old man indeed. I
hope it did not take him very long to get the flour off
his hair. The “ Intruder " was played by Sgr. Horatio
Flacco, who fully sustained the reputation won by
him in his great creation, “ Box." “ My Turn
Next," followed, the principal character Taraxacum
Twitters, being taken most ably, of course, by the
great Flock. He was very nervous, and very ecstatic,
ur and when his suspicions were aroused by the conduct
en of his wife, and the insinuations of Peggy and the
ig others, he became simply frightful. Mrs. Green—no;
is. Brown —no; White — Black —l mean Mrs. Twitters
)w was played by Miss More Ison, who acted naturally
ad and well. She did not, we must say, look like a
of (i serpent "or “ rattlesnake/' rather the reverse ; she
te helped poor T. to a tremendous helping of cat-sup, as
er if she really did wish to settle him right off.
Cicely (Mdlle. Barnetti) spoke her long dialogues
with great point and vigour.
Peggy, the rustic outspoken slavey, was taken by
Mdlle. Nella Bouncetta, who we believe takes her
name from the part in which she made her hit,
“ Mrs. Bouncer."
I shall not in a hurry forget the meaning accent
thrown into the words “ all about poor Green !" and
the insinuating lone of the exclamation “ it's wery
mysterious ain’t it sir?"
Sgr. Barnosiraldini took Tom Trap, and the
opportunity of bringing in a song “If my dinner
time would only come again," which was greeted
with enthusiastic applause.
Tim Bolus, the doctor's boy, was impersonated by
Sgr. Fleccini in a brand new oakum wig, manufactured
expressly for the occasion. He ate Twitter's rejected
food with tremendous relish, and was outrageously
horrified when he thought he was poisoned.
I wondered if Tim ate all that big jar of camphor-
ated chalk, and if so, how he felt after it. The
whole performance was quite a success, and I am
very sorry that this company are so soon to leave
the theatre.
Your faithful.
Critic.
W AIM ATE ELECTION.
Waimate, Oct. 37th, 1876.
To the Editor of the Waimate Gazette.
Sir,
I have read Mr. Cross’ manifesto. If it be
true that Mr. C. is not devoured by insects (say fleas),
allow me to point out to my friends, that from the
temper in which he writes he has evidently imbibed
the venom of the fleas which attacked him.
Granted that Mr. C. be still alive, I venture to ask
him through your valuable paper, if he thinks an
intelligent constituency, such as is unfortunately mis-
represented by him, would appreciate the two-faced
proceeding of their “ honorable " M.P. living in their
midst “ incog.” Is he afraid that his habits of life
becoming known to his constituents would result in
his being thrown overboard, as undoubtedly he would
be, unless he very shortly resigns his position in the
township.—He admits he has been embalmed like a
mummy, and it certainly is the fittest position for him.
Our American cousins have christened coffins


“ wooden ulsters and unless Mr. Cross can act as
an M.P. should do, and behave like a man before his
constituency, the sooner he takes himself to the wear
of one of these garments the better.
I have explained my principles in my address to
the constituency; probably Mr. C. has no principles
to speak of.
Yours faithfully,
H. S DE LA BIERE.
Sir,
In the advertisement column I hope you have
inserted a public notice to the effect, that I withdraw
from the contest for the representation of your town-
ship in parliament. My reasons are :
Ist. I cannot so degrade myself as to oppose my
manly form to such a flea-bitten specimen of humanity
as your present member appears to be.
2nd. Ido not mean to be subjected to phlebotomy
at the hands of the constituents of Waimate.
3rd. No such time-server, bung-hole-sucker, as
H. S. de la Biere shall oppose me,
Yours obediently,
Obadiah Drinkwater.
HAPPY INTELLIGENCE.
The young gentleman in Green Street, (of whom
we wrote some time since), is now fast recovering
from the indisposition caused by his having been
compelled to wash in salt water. This is owing to a
supply of spoilt or brackish water having been sent
through the mains of the Waimate waterworks, and
which their manager has allowed to be used, free of
cost, for washing purposes.
We hear he has applied for admission to a neigh-
bouring volunteer corp, but he was too hasty in his
desires for promotion—wishing to be made corporeal
(corporal) in a fortnight after his admission. This
his ghostly appearance scarcely admits of, whilst his
ambition leads him to desire to become a serjeant in
a month after joining the corps. The worthy drill
serjeant expressed his willingness to enrol the gentle-
man as a ramrod, provided he were sufficiently straight.
He had better ascertain if he is in a state to fall in
with the drill serjeant’s proposal.
RECIPE FOR UNIVERSAL MEDICINE.
Take any vessel, say a worn-out harness cask, and
as an apothecary dispensing chemist or medical man,
place the cask in the best position in your dispensing
room. Next, take all bottle drainings, medicines
wrongly put up, and other natural errors attendant
upon the business, and throw them pell mell into the
cask. Mix thoroughly, and draw off as required.
This will be found an excellent medicine for all com-
plaints; besides serving as liniment, lotion, &c., &c.
RIVAL SHOEBLACKS.
Pokey and Luney having dissolved partnership
Luney most respectfully announces that he alone, not
Pokey, has polished off the cabin boots and shoes from
the beginning to the present; for which service he
humbly hopes to receive, &c., and he will ever be
thankful, and pray, &c., &c.
Waimate, Oct, 27th, 1876.
A FACT.
The young lady who was seen yesterday packing
up her things in a great state of excitement and a
small deal box, finds that the small deal box holds most.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED.—An owner for an Old Scotch Hound, an-
swers to the name of “ Bur-r-rgo,” is rather grizzled
about the jaws, has bad teeth, ife slightly mangy, contin-
ually growling, is very snappish when spoken to. If
not owned within seven days he will be put beyond the
limits of the township at the first opportunity, as he
is fast becoming a public nuisance.
Apply : —Water Lane, Green Street.
AUCTION MART.
Main Hatch Square.
Messrs. Runitup and Knockitdown,
Beg to announce that they will dispose of the follow-
ing goods by public auction
On Monday, 30th Oct. 1876.
2 Fishing lines complete, with hook bait and alba-
tross float.
2 ditto, lines only.
4 ditto, lines with hooks.
3 ditto, crochet cotton.
5 ditto, rope yarn.
13 Fishing hooks, assorted sizes.
3 ditto, tinned.
5 ditto, make-shifts, unbarbed.
2 Hook pots, without lids.
3 Tin plates, much indented and scratched.
3 Stone ink bottles.
11 3rd class passengers, nearly worn out, at per cwt.
2 Musical instruments from Squall Alley, nearly
worn out.
1 Jew’s harp.
1 Wooden whistle. odt ;idi
Quantity broken earthenware. rmrT
14 Old hats.
3 Suits clothes, very worn.
Quantity old leather, partly made-up boot and
shoe uppers, soles being gone.
1 Accordian, the property of a gentleman, very
much out of tune, who has no further use for it, his
day for waking and keeping awake overworked and
wearied town councillors being over.
The “ Waimate gazette ” contribution box, (paper
having died of coast fever).
SPIERS AND POND
Beg to announce that the hotel and restaurant in


Green Street and Poop Buildings, will be closed for
the season, on or about the 31st October.
All accounts owing by the firm will be settled on
the 31st Oct. All debts due to the firm are required
to be paid by visitors before giving up possession of
their apartments.
No food or drink will be supplied to debtors after
the 31st inst.
SPIERS AND POND
Beg to announce that they have made arrangements
to re-open the Hotel and Restaurant in Green Street
and Poop Buildings, about the end of the current year,
or early in January next. It is intended to give an
opening dinner. Bill of fare of which will be found
in another column.
DEATH.
On the 28th October, off Quoin Point, New
Zealand, Waimate Gazette, aged 12 weeks.
This interesting child after a short life has
succumbed to coast fever, and but for the excitement
produced by his peculiar disease would have lived an
honourable life, and have done credit to the nurses
and preceptors of his young days.
We hope to see a full length print of him 'ere long.
SPIERS AND POND,
RESTAURATEURS.
BILL OF FARE.
SOUPS.
Ox-Tail, Hare, Kangaroo, Mulligatawney, Gravy
and Kidney, Hotch Potch, Hare, Aboriginal
Caterpillar soup.
FISH.
Schnapper, Snooke, Murray Cod, White Herrings,
Whitebait, Haddock.
JOINTS.
Roast Beef, Mutton, * Pork, Lamb, and Veal,
Wallaby Hind Quarters and Jelly, Corned Beef,
Boiled Mutton and Capers, Calves Head, Haunch of
Venison, Roast Wombat.
POULTRY AND GAME.
Roast Emu and Curlew, Boiled Moa and Oyster
Sauce, Cape Hen and Anchovies, Maori Hens, Cape
Pigeon and White Sauce.
ENTREES.
Fried Snake, Stewed Guiana, Roast Dingo and
Apple Sauce, Buffalo Heels, Kangaroo Kidney.
PASTRY.
Black Fellow’s Head and Brandy Sauce, &c., &c.
WINES &c., &c.
N.B. No Goats will be slaughtered as a substitute
for Lamb.
Edited, written, and published for the Proprietors by Ernest
Frederick Greenstreet, at his Office and Residence, Deck Castle,
Wairaate, Oct. 28th, 1876.


