

V m
The Disputed Territory
BETWEEN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
SPEECH OF Mr. GEORGE ASH, M.P.
Delivered in the South Australian House of Assembly,
Session of 1893.
REPRINTED PROM “ HANSARD.”
Burden & Bonython, “The Advertiser Office,’" King William Street.




THE DISPUTED TERRITORY
BETWEEN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND VICTORIA .
Debate in the South Australian House of Assembly, Session of 1893.
[Reprinted
Mr. ASH moved —“That as the efforts
heretofore made to refer the question of the
disputed ownership of the strip of land along
the eastern boundary of South Australia, from
the River Murray to the sea, to the Privy
Council for settlement have failed, the Govern-
ment be and is hereby instructed to test the
legality of the claims made to the said land by
authorising one or more persons to sell on part
of the land known as the ‘ Disputed Territory’
commodities which in Victoria cannot be
legally sold without a license, or by taking into
the ‘ Disputed Territory ’ commodities liable
to duty under the Victorian Customs tariff,
and by refusing to pay any duties which may
be demanded on account of the same ; such
commodities to be of sufficient value to give
the right of appeal to the Privy Council from
any adverse judgment which may be given in
an Australian Court.” He said it would be
convenient, and would tend towards the saving
of time, if the matter were discussed under
three branches—First, what has been done con-
cerning it up to now? secondly, what is the
present position of it ? and lastly, ought any-
thing to be done to change the present posi-
tion, and if so what ? Dealing with the first
branch he might preface his remarks by saying
that during the past 20 years many attempts
had been made to settle the matter, and they
had all failed on account of what appeared to
him to be the deliberate procrastination adopted
by the Government of Victoria in connection
with the matter, and through the imbecility
almost of the Governments of our own colony
in accepting excuses year after year from the
neighboring colony, which it was clear in light
of experience were made with the view of
postponing the matter indefinitelv. Pie would
not deal fully with everything that had been
done bearing on the matter, but he would
consider it necessary, in consequence of his
knowledge of what had taken place, to bring
forward every important point, at least by re-
ference, which could have a bearing on the sub-
ject. This would really be a saving of time, as it
would prevent the necessity of other hon.
members going into the past records, because
he thought he could promise that everything
that had happened bearing on the subject,
either in Victoria, here, or in England, would be
mentioned in the course of his remarks. This
complete way of dealing with the first branch
of the matter was recommended for four
reasons. Firstly, it would show conclusively
to the Government the utter uselessness of con-
tinuing the system adopted since 1869 of
applying to the Victorian Government to
have the matter settled. Secondly, it would
“ Hansard.”]
show hon. members in a way which no general
terms could do what had been the conduct
of Victoria in the past and how very tedious
this matter had been to those in the
south-east particularly, who had taken an
interest in it —a feeling of tediousness which
he ventured to say would be shared by every
member of the House before he had finished.
Thirdly, in adopting this course he would be
able to fully inform hon. members of every
fact which it was necessary for them to know
before coming to an intelligent conclusion on
this important matter ; and lastly, it would
save them the trouble of going back to the
authorities themselves. They must first estab-
lish the fact that the 141st meridian was fixed
as the legal boundary ; and he thought, al-
though there was some variation in the
early records, there was no doubt that
since 1834 this boundary had been accepted.
In a letter dated July 9, 1832, sent to Lord
Goderich by Mr. R. Torrens, the
chairman of the provisional committee
of the South Australian Land Company
(ordered to be printed by the House
of Commons on March 12, 1841) the 141st
degree of east longitude was suggested as the
eastern boundary of the province ; but in a
“modified plan for establishing a colony in
South Australia,” sent on July 6, 1833, by
Mr. W. W. Whitmore, M.P., to the Right
Hon. B. G. Stanley (and printed in the same
English Parliamentary Paper), it was said :
“The extent of land which it is thought
desirable to fix as the territory of the colony is
that lying between the 130th and 140th degrees
of west longitude.” The word “west” was
evidently a mistake for “ east,” and
it did not appear why the 140th
degree was mentioned on this occasion.
This showed that in the beginning of the
colony there was considerable doubt in the
minds of some of the founders as to where the
colony was to be situated. The substitution of
“ west” for “ east longitude” might be a mere
mistake, but if so it was printed and reprinted
in official papers. In the draft of a proposed
charter for founding South Australia, dated
February 21, 1834, and sent by the provisional
committee of the South Australian Associa-
tion to the English Government, a return was
made to the 141st degree, and he believed that
in all documents sent either to or from the
English Government since 1834 the 141st degree
had been accepted. He would not trouble to
go into a considerable number of letters dating
from 1831, because the matter, as a point of
law, was set at rest altogether by the English
Act of Parliament, 4 and 5 William IV,


(August 15, 1834), chap. 95, the preamble
of which read as followsAn Act
> to empower his Majesty to erect South
Australia into a British province or pro-
vinces, and to provide for the colonisation
and government thereof (August 15, 1834).-
Whereas that part of Australia which lies
between the meridians of the one hundred and
thirty-second and one hundred and forty-first
degrees of east longitude, and between the
Southern Ocean and twenty-six degrees of
south latitude, together with the islands
adjacent thereto, consist of waste and un-
occupied lands which are supposed to be fit for
the purposes of colonisation; and whereas
divers of her Majesty’s subjects possessing
amongst them considerable property are
desirous to embark for the said part
of Australia; and whereas it is highly
expedient that his Majesty’s said subjects
should be enabled to carry their said
laudable purpose into effect; and whereas the
said persons are desirous that in the said in-
tended colony a uniform system in the mode of
disposing of waste lands should be permanently
established: be it therefore enacted by the
King’s most excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords spiritual
and temporal and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that it shall and may be lawful for
his Majesty, with the advice of his Privy
Council, to erect within that part of Australia
which lies between the meridians of the one
hundred and thirty-second and the one hundred
and forty-first degrees of east longitude, and
between the Southern Ocean and the twenty-
sixth degree of south latitude, together with
all and every the islands adjacent thereto,
and the bays and gulfs thereof, with
the advice of his Privy Council to
establish one or more provinces and to fix
the respective boundaries of such provinces.”
It was interesting to notice by clause 2 that it
was evidently intended that this colony should
be cursed with the system of a State Church,
which misfortune had happily been avoided.
There were 26 clauses in the Act, but as far as
he could see none of them related to the present
subject. The material point was that it fixed
the eastern boundary of the colony at the 141st
degree of east longitude. Some time in 1836
letters patent were issued by William IV.
establishing the colony. These were a material
link in the chain, because if the letters patent
fixed any other boundary we would be Pound
by them. He would point out as a peculiar
thing that although the Parliamentary
Library contained over 20,000 volumes
it did not contain any document or book
giving all the words of the letters
patent without which this Parliament itself
could never have come into existence. It was
a curious defect, and he hoped the Library
Committee would at any reasonable cost repair
it. Certainly if the matter was ever argued
before a legal tribunal that point would have to
be supplied. He would, however, assume that
the letters patent were issued, and that assump-
tion was borne out by the preamble of a subse-
quent English Act. The next document he
wished to refer to was the Act 1 and 2, Vic-
toria (1838), chapter 60, which amended the
Act to which he had just referred. Part of the
preamble appeared to be a recital of the
missing letters patent, and was to this effect—
“ And whereas by warrant under the sign
manual of his said Majesty, and countersigned
by the Right Hon. Charles Baron Glenelg, one
of her Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State,
having the department of the colonies ; Robert
Torrens, Wdliam Alexander Mackinnon,
William Hutt, John George Shaw Lefevre,
George Palmer the younger, Jacob Monte-
fiore, Samuel Mills, Edward Barnard, Josiah
Roberts, and James Pennington. Esquires,
were duly appointed to be such Colonisa-
tion Commissioners for South Australia;
and whereas his said Majesty on or about
the nineteenth day of February, one thousand
eight hundred and thirty-six, by letters patent
under the great seal of Great Britain, with the
advice of his Privy Council, and in pursuance
of the powers in that behalf vested in his said
Majesty by the said recited Act of Parliament,
did erect and establish one province to be
called “ The province of South Australia,” and
did thereby fix the boundaries of the same
province in manner following; that is to
say, on the north the twenty-sixth degree of
south latitude, on the south the Southern
Ocean, on the west the one hundred and thirty-
second degree of east latitude, and on the east
the one hundred and forty-first degree of east
longitude, including these in all and every
bays and gulfs thereof, together with
the island called Kangaroo Island and
all and every other islands adjacent
to the said last-mentioned island, or any part
of the mainland of the said province; and it
was thereby provided that nothing in the said
letters patent contained should affect or be
construed to affect the rights of any aboriginal
natives of the said province to the actual
occupation or enjoyment in their own person
or in the persons of their descendants or any
lands therein then actually occupied or enjoyed
by such natives.” The last part was necessary to
be read to prevent any possibility of an
assumption on the part of the Victorian
Government that they represent the descen-
dants of the aboriginal natives in whose favor
a special exemption of territory was made.
That recital pretty well established the exis-
tence of the letters patent, which themselves
were not to be found. The next document was
the English Act of Parliament, 5 and 6, Viet.
(1842), chapter 6. That Act repealed both the
previous Acts to which he had referred, but
preserved the validity of anything which had
been done under them, which of course
would include the letters patent establish-
ing the eastern boundary of the colony.
On December 16, 1847, the Governor of this
colony (Colonel Robe) issued a proclamation
for defining the eastern boundary of the
colony. It was published in the Government
Gazette and was reprinted in Parliamentary
paper No. 103 of 1887. The material part of
this proclamation was as follows And
whereas, from the progress of settlement on
the eastern frontier of the said province and
on the borders of the territory of New South
Wales, it has become necessary to mark out
and ascertain the 141st degrees of east longi-
tude, so fixed as the boundary of South Aus-
tralia on the east as aforesaid ; and for this
purpose, by an arrangement previously en-
tered into, the Government of New South
Wales has, with the consent and concur-
rence of the Government of South Aus-
tralia, caused the position of the 141st meridian
of longitude east from Greenwich to be
correctly ascertained at a spot on the sea coast
near the mouth of the River Glenelg, and
therefrom the said meridian to be surveyed
northward as far as the 36th parallel of south
latitude, by Henry Wade, Esq., surveyor, and
to be marked upon the ground by a double row
of blazing upon the adjacent trees and by
mounds of earth at intervals of one mile where
no trees exist. And whereas it is expedient that
the said survey should be authoritatively
adopted and made known—now, therefore,
by virtue and in pursuance of the power and
authority to me confided, I, the Lieutenant-
Governor aforesaid, in name and on behalf of
her Most Gracious Majesty, do hereby notify
and proclaim that the line so marked as afore-
said and particularly described in the schedule
2


That said plainly that so long ago as 1867 the
Government of this colony were expecting
every d y that the matter of the eastern
boundary would be definitely settled. (An
hon. member —“It is a progressive move-
ment.”) It seemed to be a progressive move-
ment which had stood still for about 30 years.
Then they came to the South Autralian Parlia-
mentary paper No. 182, of 1868-9. It contained
12 pages, and was headed “Report on the de-
termination of the boundary line of the colonies
of South Australia and New South Wales, by
Charles Todd, F.R.A.S., Observer and
Superintendent of Telegraphs, South Aus-
tralia.” The report was dated December 14,
1868, and the work had been done with the
assistance of Mr. G. R. Smalley, who repre-
sented the Government of New South Wales.
Steps had actually been taken for determining
the line, and a post had been subsequently
erected on the true boundary. On page 7 the
report said—“ The position of the boundary
thus determined from the foregoing observa-
tions and mutually agreed to by Mr. Smalley
and myself on behalf of our respective Govern-
ments would be defined by a meridian line,
starting from the River Murray, 2 miles 19
chains due east of the pile of stones on the
south bank of the river (mentioned in a
former part of this report), marking the north
end of the line at present adopted as the common
boundary of South Australia and Victoria.”
On page 12 was the following joint report by
Messrs. Smalley and Todd “ We, the under-
signed, having been instructed by our respective
Governments of New South Wales and South
Australia to determine the common boundary-
line of the said colonies as defined by Imperial
legislation to be the 141st meridian of east
longitude, do hereby declare that starting from
the north bank of the River Murray, the said
meridian line is about two miles 19 chains east
of the prolongation of the present boundary-
line between Victoria and South Australia (the
north end of which is marked by a pile of stones
12 ft. high on the south bank of the River
Murray) and that its position is permanently in-
dicated by a substantial brick pyramid built on
the scarp forming the limit of the Murray
floods, measuring 5 ft. 6 in. square at the
base and 13 ft. 6 in. high, having the words
“ Province boundary” on the north and south
faces, “N.S.W.,G.R. Smalley” on the east face,
and “S.A., Charles Todd,” on the west face;
the said mark being situate about 70 yards
from the nearest point of the present line of
telegraph and north of the same ; the bend of
the River Murray immediately to the east of
Slaney’s Island being nearly 3-i miles distant
on an astronomical bearing of about 53° west
of south, Mount Hancock bearing about
16i,° east of south. And we hereby agree on
behalf of our respective Governments to accept
the line hereinbefore described as the common
boundary line of the two colonies.” In con-
sequence of the decision come to by these two
Government representatives after extensive
observations, the Government of this colony in
the following year officially asked Victoria
that the boundary line should be shifted to its
true position. Later on, in the House of
Assembly on August 26, 1868, “Han-
sard,” page 283, reported Mr. Riddoch to
have moved That the result of survey
and observations recently taken by the
Telegraph and Survey Department to fix the
east boundary of the province, with diagram
showing relatively the correct boundary and
that previously marked upon the ground, be laid
upon the table of the House.” That motion was
carried. In the House of Assembly on Feb-
ruary 22, 1870 (S.A. “Hansard,” page 1777),
“Mr. Pearce asked the Attorney-General
what steps had been taken bv the Go-
vernment to recover that tract of
country on the border said to belong to
South Australia, but at present claimed by
Victoria. The Attorney-General (Hon. 11. B.
T. Strangways) could not state offhand what
steps had been taken, but there had been
communications made with a view of having
the boundary lines between this colony
and Victoria settled in a scientific
way, and the boundary had been
so settled.” In the House of Assembly
on September 21, 1870 (South Australian
“ Hansard,” page 867), in reply to Mr. Laurie,
the Commissioner of Crown Lands (Hon. A.
Blyth) said : —“The Government of Victoria
has agreed that the boundary line shall be
fixed by a determination of the 141st meridian
of east longitude by the Government astrono-
mers of the two colonies as soon as they can
arrange to meet at or near Glenelg.” That
was 23 years ago. The precise date had even
been arrived at when the matter was to be dealt
with, and yet we were no further advanced
now than was the case then. On January 7,
1871, in the Assembly, South Australian
“Hansard,” page 1928, reported the Commis-
sioner of Crown Lands to have stated in reply
to Mr. Laurie, that “there would be no
delay in getting the matter attended to.”
Every year since 1870 each successive Go-
vernment, until very recently, had assured
members that the matter was just
on the point of being settled. In the
Assembly on August 2, 1871 (S.A. “Han-
sard,” page 47), in reply to Mr. Laurie, the
Commissioner of Crown Lands said the matter
of the boundary would be settled when Mr.
Todd had completed the overland telegraph.
A similar statement was made in the Legisla-
tive Council on November2,lß7l (“Hansard,”
page 931), and the Chief Secretary added “it
was quite understood that the boundary line
would be fixed by observations made by Mr.
Ellery on behalf of Victoria, and Mr. Todd on
behalf of South Australia.” The following
year in the Legislative Council, on April 16,
1872, South Australian “Hansard,” page 476,
reported the Chief Secretary (the Hon. H.
Ayers), in reply to the Hon. W. Milne, to have
said ‘‘ there was an agreement existing between
the two colonies that it should be ultimately
settled by Mr. Todd and the officer to be ap-
pointed by the Victorian Government.” In
the Legislative Council on August 19, 1873,
“Hansard,” page 162, reported the Hon.
A. B. Murray to have asked the Commissioner
of Crown Lands the following question:—
“ ‘ Is the intention of the present Government
to have the boundary line between this colony
and the colony of Victoria definitely fixed
without further delay, and if not, why not ?’
His reason for asking the question was that
the boundary line had remained in uncertainty
a great many years. He had asked the ques-
tion of three or four former Governments, but
he trusted there would not be any further
delay. The Commissioner of Crown Lands
(Hon. W. Everard) replied as follows :—“ In
December, 1869, arrangements were made
between the Governments of Victoria
and South Australia for determining the
boundary line, but the pressure of business in
connection with the transcontinental telegraph
has prevented the observations necessary for
fixing the position of the 141st meridian of
east longitude taken by the Observer. No
further delay, however, need occur, and in-
structions have been given for early attention
to the matter;” and on November 12, 1873
(“Hansard,” page 1040), the Chief Secretary
said that the then Government had been
requested to instruct their astronomer
to mark out the true line with
our astronomer as previously agreed.
He evidently believed in the maxim that one
should do nothing in too much of a hurry. In
4


Legislative Council on December 18, 1873
(“S.A. Hansard,” page 1514), in reply to the
Hon. A. B. Murray, the Commissioner of
Crown Lands stated that ‘ ‘ he believed the
actual boundary between this colony and Vic-
toria had now been determined, and there
would be very little delay in setting it out
upon the land.” Parliamentary paper No. 72
of 1874 contained a large amount of corres-
pondence with regard to the Victorian
boundary question. The first letter was from
South Australia, and was as follows:—“Chief
Secretary’s Office, Adelaide, November 8,1869.
—Sir—l have the honor, by desire of his
Excellency Sir James Fergusson to inform you
that by a letter from the Lands and Survey
Department, Melbourne, to the Surveyor-
General of South Australia, dated August 11
last, there appears to be an intention to lay out
roads on the Victorian side of the boundary-
line, as at present recognised, to meet those of
South Australia. I would suggest that before
any such steps are taken or the new map of
Victoria is published as projected it might be
well for your Government to consider the
fact that the line referred to being about 2|
miles to the west of the 141st meri-
dian, which decree was fixed by Imperial
statute 4 and 5 of William IV., cap.
95, as the boundary of the new colony
of South Australia. Under the circumstances
it would appear desirable that the Government
Astronomers of the two colonies should at
an early date make a voltaic determination
of the difference of longitude between the
south end of the boundary line and the Mel-
bourne Observatory, following a similar course
to that pursued in determining the true
boundary north of the Murray.—l have, &c.,
John T. Bagot, Chief Secretary. ” The reply
from Victoria came on November 26, 1869, as
follows: —“Chief Secretary’s Office, Melbourne.
Sir—l have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of Bth inst., suggesting
that the Government Astronomers of the two
colonies should determine the difference of
longitude between the south end of the boun-
dary line of your colony and the Mel-
bourne Observatory, and m reply to inform
you that approving of such a step being
taken I shall issue instructions for its being
carried into effect at as early a date as
possible.—l have, &c., John A. McPherson.”
That showed that the Government of Victoria
promised to deal with the matter as early as
possible, but that promise was not fufilled.
The South Australian Government waited four
years, and then the Chief Secretary of the day,
Mr. Arthur Blyth, wrote on August 19, 1873,
as follows : —“Referring to the correspondence
which took place in November and December,
1869, and to your predecessor’s letter of that
year, stating that instructions would be issued
for the determination of the south end of the
boundary line of this province and the Mel-
bourne Observatory, in conjunction with Mr.
Todd, Observer for South Australia, I have
the honor, by the desire of his Excellency
Governor Musgrave, to inform you that the
pressure of business which, as you are aware,
has hitherto prevented that officer from attend-
ing to the matter has now ceased, and this
Government will be glad if you will instruct
Mr. Ellery to communicate with Mr. Todd, in
order that the necessary arrangements
for definitely fixing the boundary may
be completed as early as possible.”
The Victorian Government paid no attention
to that letter, and accordingly on November
18, 1873, Mr. Blyth wrote again as follows :
“ I have the honor by desire of his Excellency
Governor Musgrave to draw your attention to
my letter of August 19- last having reference to
the boundary line between Victoria and South
Australia, to which I have not yet been
favored with any reply.” On December 24,
1873, the following letter was received from
the Chief Secretary’s Office, Melbourne :—“ln
reply to your letter of 18th ult. and previous
correspondence proposing that the boundary
line between South Australia and Victoria
should be more accurately defined than it is at
present, I have the honor to inform you that
the existing line having been, as is well known,
determined and marked on the ground in
the year 1847, proclaimed as the boundary
in the South Australian Government Gazette
of December 16 of that year, and univer-
sally accepted ever since as the established
line of demarcation between the two colonies
for all purposes, this Government cannot now
give its consent to any course of action which
might tend in any way to disturb so well-re-
cognised a line as it is, or that could be capable
hereafter of being construed into any kind of
admission that it regarded at the present time
with favor a proposition for amending or
altering what has served for many years to
define the territorial limits of the two colonies.
Having now guarded against the risk of any
future misunderstanding occurring on the
subject I have only further to state that there is
no objection on the part of the Government of
Victoria to unite with the Government of
South Australia in determining as nearly as
can be the position of the 141st degree of east
longitude, subject to the express condition
mentioned above —that in engaging in the in-
vestigation both Governments do so distinctly
in the interests of science only—and that they
agree beforehand that the result arrived at,
whatever it may be, is in no degree to affect
the boundary of the two colonies as fixed in
the year 1847. —I have, &c., J. G. Francis.”
On January 29, 1874, the following letter
was sent by Mr. Blyth to the Chief Sec-
retary of Victoria:—“l have the honor by
desire of his Excellency Governor Musgrave to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
24th ultimo, ’in which, referring to former
correspondence on the subject of a more accu-
rate determination of the boundary line be-
tween Victoria and this province, you state
that your Government is not disposed to take
any action which might possibly lead to a dis-
turbance of the line surveyed in 1847, and uni-
versally accepted ever since as the established
line of demarcation between the two colonies
■ for all purposes, but will have no objection to
unite with South Australia in deter-
mining as nearly as possible the pre-
cise position of the 141st degree of
east longitude, on the express condi-
tion that it is in the interests of science only and
in no degree to affect the boundary question.
Before replying I must express the surprise of
this Government that although the subject has
been under consideration for many years this
is the first intimation that you question the
propriety of this Government’s proposition that
the boundary should be accurately fixed. On
November, 8, 1869, this Government addressed
your predecessor, pointing out that the line
surveyed in 1847 was about l l\ miles to the
west of the 141st meridian, which degree of
longitude was fixed by Imperial Statute
4 and 5 of William IV., cap. 95, as the
boundary of the new colony of South Aus-
tralia, and requesting that the astronomers of
the two colonies should accurately fix the exact
position of the 141st degree by voltaic signals,
as had been done in determining the true
boundary north of the River Murray. On the
28th of the same month the Chief Secretary of
Victoria informed me that approving of such a
step being taken he would issue instructions
for its being carried into effect as early as pos-
sible, and on December 6, 1869, we replied
that Mr. Todd had been directed to proceed
on the above service and to com-
5


hereto annexed, and delineated on the public
maps deposited at the Survey Office at Adelaide
as the meridian of the 141st degree of east
longitude, is and shall be deemed and con-
strued to be the eastern boundary of the pro-
vince of South Australia to all intents and
purposes; and all and singular her Majesty’s
officers, ministers, and subjects in the said pro-
vince, and all others whom it may concern, are
required to take due notice hereof accordingly.”
That document formed a strong point with the
Victorian Government in the present dispute.
He would deal with it more fully in his subse-
quent remarks, but it was now sufficient to say
that in 1847 the Governor of this colony did
not possess a shadow of right to alter the
boundary of the colony as fixed by the Imperial
Government. Fourteen years later an Act was
passed by which, under certain strict limita-
tions, the power of altering the boundaries was
given, but it was not retrospective in any way,
and the proclamation had no more power to
alter the boundary than if issued by any
private person. On August 5,1850, an English
Act was passed, in the years 13 and 14 Viet.,
chapter 59. This was to establish the
colony of Victoria. The preamble stated :
“And whereas it is expedient that the district
of Port Phillip, now part of the colony of New
South Wales, should be erected into a separate
colony, and that further provision should be
made for the government of her Majesty’s
Australian colonies —Be it enacted therefore by
the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal and Commoners in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that after such provinces as herein-
after mentioned shall have been made by the
Governor and Council of New South Wales
and upon the issuing of the writs for the first
election in pursuance thereof, as hereinafter
mentioned, the territories now comprised
within the said district of Port Phillip,
including the town of Melbourne, and bounded
on the north and north-east by a straight line
drawn from Cape Howe to the nearest source
of the River Murray, and thence by the course
of that river to the eastern boundary of the
colony of South Australia.” That preamble
used the phrase “eastern boundary of South
Australia,” and in this connection it would be
interesting to see the exact words of the letters
patent of 1836, which probably would contain
very strong affirmative evidence of the conten-
tion that the 141st degree was the boundary
not only of this colony but of Victoria. It
had been contended in the Victorian Parlia-
ment that it was true that the 141st meridian
was fixed as the boundary of our colony, but
that in 1847 the boundary was altered in an
irregular way by a proclamation of the
Governor of South Australia, and that this
Act of the English Parliament was passed
three years later, and confirmed the irregu-
larity of the act of our Governor. He thought
the position untenable, but it had been taken.
Possibly, although he had not been able to find
any, public reference had already even then—
in 1850—been made to the disputed territory
between South Australia and Victoria. Section
30 of that Act of 1850 contained pro-
visions which if they had been put into the
Act of 1834 would have prevented this pre-
sent difficulty. It read as follows: —“ And be it
enacted that in case at any time hereafter the
Legislative Councils of the said colonies of
New South Wales and Victoria, or the Legis-
lative Council of one of the said colonies, shall
petition her Majesty to alter the boundaries
of the said colonies of New South Wales and
Victoria, so as to transfer to one of such
colonies a portion of the territories which,
after the separation authorised by this Act
shall be comprised in the other of them.
it shall be lawful for her Majesty, if she shall
think fit, by any order to be made with the
advice of her Privy Council, to alter such
boundaries in pursuance of the prayer of such
petitions or petition, or in such varied manner
as her Majesty with such advice shall think fit.
Provided always that unless the Councils of
both the said colonies shall petition for an
alteration of such boundaries, notice of the
petition and of the intention of her Majesty to
order the same to be taken into consideration
by her Privy Council shall be given in such
manner as her Majesty shall direct to
the Legislative Council, which shall not
have petitioned, six months at least before
such petition shall be so considered.”
If a similar clause to that had been inserted in
the Act of 1834 the South Australian Govern-
ment in 1869 could have sent a petition to the
Privy Council of its own motion and without
the concurrence of Victoria, and probably the
dispute would have been settled twenty years
ago. The next document he came to was an
Act of Parliament passed on August 1,
1861. This was Act 24, 25, Viet., chapter
44, and among other things authorised Go-
vernors of the colonies to agree to alterations
in the boundaries. The fifth section read as
follows :—“ Whereas the boundaries of certain
of her Majesty’s colonies on the c ntinent of
Australia may be found to have been imper-
fectly or inconveniently defined, and it may be
expedient from time to time to determine or
alter such boundaries. Be it therefore
further enacted, as follows:
be lawful from time to time for the
Governors of any contiguous colonies on
the said continent, with the advice of their
respective Executive Councils, by any instru-
ment under their joint hands and seals, to
determine or alter the common boundary of
such colonies ; and the boundary described in
any such instrument shall be deemed to be,
within the limits there laid down, the true
boundary of said colonies, so soon as her
Majesty’s approval of such instrument shall
have been proclaimed in either of such colonies
by the Governor thereof.” That Act ended
the English action dealing with this matter.
Henceforth they would deal altogether with
what had been done in the colonies. In the
Legislative Council on May 30, 1865, on page
327 of South Australian “Hansard,” the Hon.
S. Davenport was reported to have put a very
long question relative to the eastern boundary
of this colony. The Chief Secretary had
replied that steps would be taken with as little
delay as possible to permanently mark the
boundary line. In the House of Assembly on
March 7, 1866, on page 1,244 of “Hansard,”
the Chief Secretary, in reply to Mr. Williams,
was stated to have said “ the Surveyor-
General was preparing a proposition which
if agreed to by the New South Wales
Government would enable him to commence
the definition of the east boundary line of the
province about the beginning of May, 1866.”
In the House of Assembly on July 31, 1867,
“ Hansard,” page 236, reported the Treasurer,
the Hon. T. Reynolds, to have said—“ The
Government intend, in concert with the
Government of New South Wales, to define
the boundary line of the colony. The pre-
liminary steps are being taken to define the
boundary.” In the House of Assembly on
October 23, 1867, “ Hansard,” page 1,125, re-
ported the Treasurer, in reply to Mr. Williams,
to have said: —“The Government, as recently
as the 16th instant, complained to the New
South Wales Government of the delay in fixing
the eastern boundary, and requested that steps
may be taken as early as practicable to fix the
boundary. The Government have no reason to
suppose that the boundary will not be fixed
before the close of the approaching summer.”


municate with Mr. Ellery with a
view to combined action. Unfortunately,
Mr. Todd was unable at once to enter upon the
work, as the construction of the Overland
telegraph occupied the whole of his time, and
the matter was left in abeyance until August
19, 1873, when I requested that the instruc-
tions referred to in your predecessor’s letter of
November 26, 1869, might be given to Mr.
Ellery to proceed with the service. With
reference to the view now taken by your
Government I think it only necessary to point
out that the issue of the proclamation of
December 16, 1847, declaring as the boundary
a certain line erroneously surveyed, and
which was not the 141st degree of east
longitude cannot but be void as against
the Imperial statute above quoted, which
distinctly names that degree as the boun-
dary between the two colonies. As means
are now available for exactly defining the
boundary in accordance with the Imperial
statute which determined it, and as the more
the country becomes peopled the more likeli-
hood there is of crimes affecting life and
property being committed upon the strip of
land in question, which might lead to grave
legal difficulties, this Government would
strongly urge upon you to unite with it in
setting this important matter finally at rest in
the manner formerly arranged. ” The reply came
from Victoria on February 5, 1874, as follows:
“ Chief Secretary’s Office, Melbourne.—l have
the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 29th ultimo, No. 186, on the sub-
ject of the determination of the boundary line
between South Australia and Victoria, and in
reply to inform you that I have brought it under
the consideration of my colleague, the Hon. the
Minister of Lands. —I have, &c., J. G.
Francis.” On March 30, 1874, the Chief
Secretary of South Australia wrote as follows :
—“ I have the honor to draw your attention to
my letter of January 29 last on the subject of
a more accurate determination of the boundary
line between Victoria and this province, and to
state that as our Parliament will shortly re-
assemble I shall feel obliged if you will com-
municate to me at your earliest convenience
the steps your Government propose taking in
the matter. ” The following was received from
Victoria in reply “ Chief Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, April 10, 1874. —Sir —I have the
honor to acknowledge the receipt of your *
letter of the 30th March asking an early inti-
mation of the steps which this Govern-
ment may propose taking with a view
to the more accurate determination of
the boundary between South Australia
and Victoria. — I have, &c., Thos. Webb
Wone, Acting Under-Secretary.” On May 26
the Chief Secretary of South Australia wrote
to the Chief Secretary of Victoria as follows :
—“Sir—l have the honor to again draw your
attention to my letters of January 29 last, and
to my subsequent communication of March 30,
the receipt of which was acknowledged by you
on April 10. The question of the boundary
line is one which this Government is most
anxious should be set at rest, and I shall be
glad therefore if you will bring the matter
before your colleagues with a view to my
being placed as early as practicable in
possession of the steps proposed to lie
taken by your Government. ” That letter con-
cluded that Parliamentary paper. In the
Assembly on July 30, 1874 (“Hansard,”
p. 1,143), the Chief Secretary said no further
letters had been received from Victoria relat-
ing to this matter. In the Assembly on
August 20, 1874 (“ S.A. Hansard,” p. 1,381), in
reply to Mr. Laurie, the Chief Secretary said
a long letter had been received from Victoria
on the disputed territory, and “ the matter was
not lost sight of. ” In the Assembly on August
-26, 1874 (“S.A. Hansard,” p. 1,437), Mr.
Boothby asked for further information, and
the Chief Secretary (Hon. A. Blyth) said the
Ministry had been occupied in considering the
letter received from Victoria, and he asked for
a little time as the matter was of considerable
importance and could not be hastily decided,
and the matter was again referred to in a
similar way in the Assembly on September 29,
1874 (“Hansard”, p. 1,834), and on October 4,
1874 (“ Hansard,” p. 1,909), the Chief Secretary
stated that the Government were still
anxiously and carefully considering the matter,
apparently with the view of immediate
decision, and a similar statement was made in
the Legislative Council on October 8, 1874
(“Hansard,” p. 1,953), and in the Assembly
on the same day the Chief Secretary
said the Government hoped to deal
with the matter “at no distant date.”
Parliamentary paper No. 24 of 1875 contained
the correspondence previously mentioned, and
then came the following letter from the Chief
Secretary’s office, Melbourne, on July 27,1874:
—“ In reply to your letter of May 26 last, No.
703, and previous communication on the ques-
tion of altering the boundary line between
South Australia and this colony in accordance
with recent observations, I have now the honor
to forward a memorandum prepared by my
league the Hon. the Minister of Lands, accom-
panied by a report from the Surveyor-General,
stating the obstacles that stand in the way of
acceding to the application of your Govern-
ment. I regret the delay which has occurred
in transmitting this reply, but the papers have
only just now reached my hands from the Lands
Department, though repeatedly and urgently
called for before.—-I have, &c., J. G. Francis.”
Then followed a long memorandum from the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, who appeared
to have been a lawyer (Mr. J. J. Casey). He
would not read the whole of it but only those
parts which bore on future communications.
Paragraph 1 said : —“ln returning the papers
in connection with the correspondence on the
subject of the boundary between the colonies
of South Australia and Victoria and forward-
ing to you a memorandum by the Surveyor-
General, I must take the opportunity of ex-
pressing my regret that the intervening general
elections and the pressure of departmental
business generally have prevented me until
now devoting the necessary attention to this
question.” At that point he would like to say
that future correspondence showed that the
Victorian Government during the last 15 years
had always the excuse that it was either the
beginning or end of a session, consequently
they could not take action. Paragraph 2 went
on to say : —“ Before, however, entering upon
any consideration of the general question or of
the particular points involved therein, there
are some remarks I desire to premise. First,
so far as concerns the actual territory
under notice —one cannot say in dispute,
for Victoria has as yet recognised
no ground of dispute—this department
has no desire to claim one inch of ground
beyond that to which this colony is not only
fairly but legally entitled.” That ground was
subsequently abandoned, and Victoria whim-
pered because she was such a small colony and
we were such a large one, and consequently
territory should not be taken away from her.
The memorandum continued:—“Secondly—
Fully five-sixths of the land that would be
affected are valueless mallee scrub, and of the
remainder (if the value given to it by the
settlement of our population along the
border be excluded) scarcely an acre
can be considered as of special value.”
That had been altered by more recent know-
ledge ; and although the value of the land did
not affect the motion, no one would value the
6


land at less than a million. The memorandum
continued—“ In the third place, the boundary
line was proclaimed in 1847, while this colony
ha,d not a separate existence until 1851.
Victoria, therefore, found the line separating
South Australia from itself fixed, marked on
the ground, and authoritatively adopted, and
proclaimed in the Government Gaz< tie, and has
always felt itself concluded by these Acts, so
far as that boundary was concerned.” Then
there was a recital of what had taken place,
which he had mentioned, and which he would
not read. Paragraph 4 went on to say—“ The
Honorable the Chief Secretary of South Aus-
tralia contends ‘ that the issue of the proclama-
tion of the 16th December, 1847, declaring as
the boundary a certain line erroneously sur-
veyed, and which was not the 141st degree of
east longitude, cannot but be void, as against
the Imperial Statute of 19th February, 1834,
which distinctly names that degree as
the boundary between the two colonies.’
The reply to this contention is that the pro-
clamation does not contradict the Imperial
Act, or more correctly the Order in Council,
but is in aid of it. It was not the intention of the
Parliament or the Crown that the neighboring
colonies should be continually engaged in
attempts more or less successful to solve an
astronomical problem, but that they should
have a convenient and practical line of separa-
tion. No human being can at this moment
determine with perfect precision the position
on the earth’s surface of a meridian. The law,
when it assigns a meridian as a boundary, does
not compel any person to do what is impossi-
ble, nor does it love certainty so little as to
leave questions of territory and of government
to depend upon the improvements of astrono-
mical instruments, or upon the advance of
astronomical knowledge. Until it is marked
upon the surface .of the earth a line
of meridian is not a boundary, but a
direction for a boundary. This direction
in the present case was bona fide carried out
by both parties acting in concert with a full
knowledge of all the facts, and with the best
means at that time available. The boundary
so obtained has been for more than a quarter
of a century recognised by both parties. Both
parties have during that long time acted upon
the agreement as though it were absolutely
binding, and important interests have grown
up under it. The result therefore is that what-
ever it may be for astronomical purposes, for
legal purposes, and as between the two colo-
nies, this boundary line is the 141° east longi-
tude within the meaning of the Act and the
Order in Council. The proceedings of the two
colonies and the marking of this boundary line
were duly reported to the Home Govern-
ment, and were communicated in the usual
course by that Government to the Im-
perial Parliament. In 1850 the Act of
Parliament (13 and 14 Viet., cap. 59, c. 1) was
passed by which the colony of Victoria was
established. That Act, in describing the
boundaries of the new colony, used the follow-
ing words : —‘ And thence by the course of
that river to the eastern boundary of South
Australia,’ not to the 141st degree of
longitude, but to the eastern boundary. The
question, therefore, arises on the construction
of this Act, what is the eastern boundary of
South Australia here meant? Is it the 141st
meridian ? or are not these words a Parlia-
mentary recognition of the line marked upon
the ground by the agreement of the two
colonies authoritatively adopted in the name
and on behalf of her Majesty by the Governor
of South Australia in his proclamation,
practically used as the boundary for (at that
time three years, and acquiesced in during
that time by) both the Crown and
Parliament. 6. It must not be for-
gotten that this agreement, which it is
now sought to set aside, was not a mere
voluntary courter-y, but was made for valuable
consideration. ‘ Although nothing valuable, ’
says Lord Hf>rdwicke (Pennv. Lord Baltimore,
1 Ves. 444), ‘is given on the face of the
articles as a consideration, the settling of
boundaries and peace and quiet is a mutual
consideration on each side, and in all cases
make a consideration to support a suit in this
court for performance of agreement for settling
the boundaries.’ Nor is this all. When the
boundary line was marked a distinct advantage
was deliberately given to South Australia.
Mr. Wade’s survey was based upon the deter-
mination of the mouth of the Glenelg. For
this determination three special sets of observa-
tions had been taken in different years by
different observers. The first set was by Mr.
Tyers, R.N., an officer commissioned for the
purpose in 1839. The second was that by
Captain Stanley, R. N., of the Britomart.
The third was in 1845, by Captain Stokes,
R.N., of the Beagle. Both Captain
Stanley and Captain Stokes differed con-
siderably from Mr. Tyers in favor of New
South Wales. Yet with a full knowledge of
all these facts the determination of Mr. Tyers
was accepted, and the initial point of the
boundary line was calculated accordingly.
Thus not only was the exact position of that
line determined with great care, and after
much enquiry, but South Australia was treated
in the matter with conspicuous liberality. 7.
If such a claim were made as between private
persons it is almost superfluous to say that
whatever might have been the original rights
of the parties a solemn and deliberate agree-
ment bona fide carried into effect, with
full knowledge of all the facts upon both
sides made for valuable consideration, and
accepted and acted upon without ques-
tion for 27 years, would be conclusive,
and that no attempt to set it aside on the sole
ground that the parties were alike in error
upon a matter of fact when the agreement was
made would be entertained. ‘ Where parties
says a learned judge (see ‘ Broom’s Maxims,’
p. 172, and the authorities there cited) * have
agreed to act upon an assumed state of facts, their
rights between themselves depend on the con-
ventional state of facts and not on the truth,
and it is not competent to either party after-
wards to deny the truth of such statement. ’
8. As between sovereign States, boundary
treaties are always regarded with peculiar
respect. Unlike most other treaties, they con-
tinue in force notwithstanding that the parties
to them become engaged in mutual war. They
are considered not so much as treaties in the
ordinary sense of the term, but rather as reci-
procal declarations and recognitions of rights
(Twiss on the ‘Law of Nations,’vol. i, p. 356.)
‘ When a nation has once recognised another
nation to be in lawful possession of a territory,
the right of possession of the latter is thereby
established against the former, whatever change
may subsequently arise in their mutual re-
lations as friends or foes. The common law of
nations maintains the latter nation in its state
of possession whenever such possession has had
a lawful origin ; and the former nation is by
that law for ever precluded from challenging
the lawful origin of a state of possession which
it has once solemnly recognised.’ 9. It can
hardly be supposed that principles which guide
the ordinary administration of justice, and to
which independent nations in their mutual
dealings habitually conform their conduct,
should be inapplicable to colonies alone.
Whether we regard colonies as exer-
cising certain high rates of sovereignty,
and thus for certain purposes as ranking with
sovereign States, or whether we regard them
as corporate communities under a common
7


sovereign, there appear on general principles
no grounds to assume that claims which would
be untenable between two States or between
two fellow-subjects are just and reasonable as
between two colonies. The hon. the Chief
Secretary of South Australia has doubtless
reasons in support of this exceptional character
of colonies which he has not yet disclosed. In
anticipation of them, however, one case.at least
may be cited where it has been judicially
decided, and that by a judge of no mean
authority, that the boundaries of colonies are
determined not by astronomical lines, but
by visible marks made on the surface of the
earth in pursuance of a definite agreement.
The province of Maryland was granted by
Charles I. to Lord Baltimore in fee. The
province of Pennsylvania was in like manner
granted by Charles 11. to William Penn, who
also acquired by derivative title from the then
Duke of York three counties adjacent to
Maryland. In these charters or deeds of grant
the boundary line between the two provinces
was fixed on the 43rd parallel of north latitude.
In course of time disputes as to the precise
position of this boundary arose. At length, in
1732, articles of agreement were made between
Mr. Penn and Lord Baltimore providing for
the determination of the boundary. Lord
Baltimore failed to carry out his agreement,
and in 1750, both parties being then resident
in England, Mr. Penn filed a bill in Chancery
(Penn y, Lord Baltimore 1 Yes. 44) against
Lord Baltimore for the specific performance of
the articles. Lord Hardwicke (the Lord Chan-
cellor) gave great consideration to the case, ‘it
being,’ as he said. ‘ for the determination of
the rights and boundaries of two great pro-
vincial Governments and three counties.’ It
was urged among other things on behalf of the
defendant that as these provinces were grants
from the Crown ‘ the parties had no power to
vary or settle the boundary by their own Act.’
The following extract from Lord Hardwicke’s
judgment shows how he dealt with this objec-
tion : —‘ To consider the points in dispute, and
first upon the defendant’s charter, in which it
is insisted _ the whole 40th degree of north
latitude is included, and if so, that it is not to
be limited by any recital in the preamble.
There is great foundation to say the computa-
tions of latitude at the time of the grant vary
much from what they are at present, and that
they were set much lower anciently than they
are now, as appears by Mr. Smith’s book,
which is of reputation, but I do not
rely on that for the fact is certainly so. ...
But the result of all the evidence, taking it in
the most favorable light for the defendant,
amounts to make the boundaries of these
countries and sights of parties doubtful.
Senex, who is a good geographer, says
the degrees of latitude cannot be computed
with the exactness of two or three miles, and
another geographer says that with the best
instruments it is impossible to fix the degrees
of latitude without the uncertainty of 17 miles,
which is near the whole extent between the
two capes. It is therefore doubtful and the
most proper case for an agreement, which,
being entered into, the parties could not resort
back to the original rights between them, for
if so no agreements can stand, whereas an
agreement entered into fairly and without
surprise ought to be encouraged by a court of
justice.’ It will be seen that the present case
is much stronger than that of Penn v.
Lord Baltimore. In the first place
the difficulty in ascertaining a meridian
of longitude is much greater than
that of fixing a parallel of latitude. The
latter can be determined with tolerable accu-
racy ; with the former nothing beyond an
approximation is at present possible. In the
second place, between Penn and Lord Balti-
more a repudiated and unexecuted agreement
to mark out boundaries was specifically en-
forced, and that, too, after the time for perfor-
mance had long elapsed. In the present case
the proposal is to disturb a settlement which,
in pursuance of a similar agreement, had
actually been made, and had been accepted,
recognised, and acted upon during 27 years.
If Lord Baltimore was compelled specifically
to perform his agreement to define his boun-
daries, is it reasonable to believe that, suppos-
ing that his agreement had been duly framed in
1732, he would, in 1750, have been heard to con-
tend that that agreement ought to be set aside
because a more exact calculation of the latitude
had subsequently been made ? 10. It is obvious
that the gravest inconveniences must arise in
the administration of the criminal law of both
colonies if any doubt be thrown upon the
legality of the old and recognised boundary
line. These inconveniences will not be at-
tended with any compensatory advantages.
We should only have lost one line, and not
have secured with any certainty another. The
objection taken in 1874 to the agreement of
1847 may, with at least equal force, be taken in
1901 to the agreement of 1874. It was sug-
gested in the opening letter, to which reference
has already been made, that the same course
should be adopted in revising the Victorian
boundary as that followed in fixing the boundary
between South Australia and New South Wales
north of the Murray. Yet in that very case
the surveyor commenced with an acknowledged
uncertainty of nearly half a mile. Nor is it all.
One of the elements in calculating the initial
point of that survey is the assumed position of
Melbourne. That position has been determined
with greater care than of any other
places in these colonies. The determination of
the longitude of Melbourne rests upon 142
moon culminations. The determination of the
longitude of Washington rests upon 800 moon
culminations. Yet, when electric communica-
tion was established between Europe and
America it was found that the longitude of
Washington, notwithstanding all the pains
that had been taken to fix it, had not been accu-
rately ascertained. We cannot expect that a
better fortune should attend the less ex-
tended and the less laborious calculations
that have hitherto been made respecting
Melbourne. It is therefore not merely pos-
sible, but highly probable, that in some few
years a new determination of the 141st
meridian will take place, and that if the boun-
dary line be now disturbed a new rectification of
the boundary line will be thereupon required.
There is still more serious objection to alter
the present boundary. Large quantities of
land have been sold by this colony up to the
very line, and in some places a comparatively
dense population has been settled upon the
land which it is now proposed to annex to
South Australia. It is no great concession to
part with a few thousand acres of valueless
land, but it is a very different matter to trans-
fer, without their consent, a large number of
people who, in reliance upon the legality and the
permanence of the boundary line, elected to
settle upon Victorian soil and to live under
Victorian laws. It seems that the claims of
good faith towards these people are not less
weighty than those of theoretical accuracy in
determining the meridian. If the whole of
the land along the line were unsettled, like the
land along the upper parts of it, and like the
land along the line that divides New South
Wales from South Australia, the question
might be considered in a different light. But
when a settled population has become estab-
lished the interests and rights of private
persons demand attention. Even if there were
no other objection to disturb the present line,
this difficulty appears insuperable. But on this
8


occasion, and on all other occasions, it is
the anxious desire of Victoria to maintain
the most friendly relations with the. sister
colonies. But in the present circumstances
the Hon. the Chief Secretary of South Aus-
tralia, when his attention has been called to
all the facts of the case, will not fail to appre-
ciate the obstacles that deprive this Govern-
ment of the satisfaction of complying with his
request.” Then came a very long memo-
randum from the Surveyor-General, which
gave a repetition of the preceding facts, and
some astronomical calculations which did not
bear in any way upon the main point. When
the South Australian Government received
this long legal letter they were staggered, and
sent it round to the members of the Cabinet
individually to consider. Subsequently it was
forwarded to the Crown Solicitor to
find out what he thought of it.
The result he would not be able to
give in the few minutes at his disposal, and as
he understood that two other members wished
to bring forward notices of motion before the
orders of the day were called on he would ask
leave to continue the debate on a subsequent
date.
Leave was given Mr. Ash to continue the
debate on August 23.
Mr. ASH, in resuming his remarks, said
when speaking previously he ended by quoting
a memorandum of Mr. J. J. Casey, of Victoria,
on what was claimed to be the legal position on
that side. He had looked up the case in detail
since, and he did not think that it went as far
as the Victorian authorities thought it did.
In quoting this case the contention of Victoria
was that it was binding, apart from the absence
of an agreement between the two colonies.
In the case of Penn v. Lord Baltimore the
decision was that specific performance should
be decreed of articles executed in England
between the plaintiff and defendant concerning
the boundaries of two provinces in America,
and executed because the defendant at the time
was in England. (See Tudor’s Leading Cases
in Equity). There had been no articles of
agreement executed between South Australia
and Victoria, which was an important difference
from the case quoted by Mr. Casey, and even
if there had been articles executed they would
have been void, because against the Act of 3
and 4, William IV., which established South
Australia. The contention of Victoria appeared
to be, in quoting the case of Penn v. Balti-
more, that the decision was relevant apart
from agreement between the parties, but in
giving judgment in that case Lord Chancellor
Hardwicke said:—“This court therefore has
no original jurisdiction on the direct cptestion
of the original right of the boundaries; and
this Bill does not stand in need of that. It is
founded on articles executed in England under
seal for mutual consideration, which gives
jurisdiction to the king’s courts, both of law
and in equity, whatever be the subject matter,”
and throughout the judgment there are fre-
quent references to the agreement between
the parties. The whole judgment in effect is
an assertion that the court could act in per-
sonam as against the defendant, who was
within the jurisdiction, a doctrine inappli-
cable to the Government of a colony like
Victoria or South Australia, which has
no conscience for the court to act upon.
Throughout the long judgment there were fre-
quent references to an agreement being made
between the parties, and that had been con-
sidered an important point. As he had
put the full legal position from the Vic-
torian standpoint it was necessary to repre-
sent the opposite side, which was put by
the late Mr. C. Mann, and was printed in
Parliamentary Proceedings, No. 24, of 1875,
and was as follows:—“In returning the
papers on this subject I may say that
I have very attentively considered the
elaborate memo, of the Hon. Minister of Lands
in Victoria, Mr. Casey, which at first sight
seems to make out a strong case against
any attempt being made to alter the boundary
line between South Australia and Victoria as
now marked out on the ground. A little con-
sideration, however, will show that there is a
fallacy underlying the whole of Mr. Casey’s
argument, which when pointed out places the
matter in an entirely different light, and seems
to me to settle most effectually the claim, now
for the first time put forward by the Victorian
Government, to take advantage of the ad-
mitted mistake which was made in 1847 in de-
fining the supposed position of the boundary
line. I refer to the fact that throughout his
memo. Mr. Casey argues on the assumption
that the same rules which govern transactions
between Sovereign States or private persons
are applicable to the present case. If this
contention be admitted Mr. Casey’s argu-
ment is unanswerable; if not, it en-
tirely fails. Now, is this contention correct ?
I think it will not be very difficult to show that
it is not. A sovereign State has unquestion-
ably power to enter into a treaty to define the
common boundary between itself and any ad-
joining State. Nay, it can unquestionably cede
any portion of its territory to any other State,
either in exchange for other territory or for any
other sufficient or insufficient consideration.
It will, I think, hardly be contended for a
moment that (except in so far as expressly
authorised by Imperial legislation, to which I
shall hereafter refer) colonies constituted as
Victoria and South Australia are can possibly
have any such power of acquiring or ceding
territory ; in fact, the mere suggestion of such
an idea seems to carry refutation with it. If
they cannot do this it is clear that they have
not the same powers as sovereign States. The
quotation from Twiss on “The Law of
Nations,” vol. 1, p. 356, although undoubtedly
correct, is inapplicable. Mr. Casey seems to
have felt that this was the weak point in his
case, for in paragraph 9 he anticipates the
objection and endeavors to meet it by
quoting the case of Penm v. Lord Baltimore,
1 ves. 444. This case, however, was simply
a suit instituted by one private person against
another to compel specific performance of an
agreement which had been entered into for
ascertaining their respective rights and
property under certain charters which had
been granted to them. To my mind this case
in no way touches the point here involved, but
it leads me naturally to the second point above-
mentioned, viz., whether, in consideration of
this question, we ought to be bound by rules
similar to those by which private persons are
governed ; and on that point I am decidedly of
opinion that we ought not to be so bound. The
question from Broom’s Legal Maxims, page
172, no doubt correctly states the law as
between private persons, but can the same rule
be applied to the point in issue in this case ?
I should say not, because I take it that the
powers conferred on the Government of the
colony must be gathered from the Acts of the
Imperial Government constituting such colony.
Now the Letters Patent issued under the
authority of the Act 4 and 5 William IV.,
c. 95, established the colony of South Aus-
tralia, and defined its eastern boundary as
being the 141st degree of each longitude. Various
statutes of the Imperial Parliament from
time to time prescribed the mode of government
in the colony, and at length the Constitution
Act as it at present exists was passed,
which invests the Legislature of the province
with full powers to make laws for the peace,
order, and good government thereof. All the
9


waste lands of the Crown within the said
province have also, bv Imperial Acts, been
vested in the Government of this colony. The
effect of this is that, by Imperial statutes, all
the land up to the 141st degree of east longitude
belongs to South Australia, and persons resid-
ing on the west of that line are living under
South Australian laws. It is, in my opinion,
an altogether untenable position to take up
to say that, by the mere publication of a
proclamation in the Government Gazette, this
colony can divest itself of duties and responsi-
bilities imposed upon it by Imperial legisla-
tion. If it had been competent for South
Australia, by her own act alone, to divest
herself of two and a half miles of her territory,
it would have been equally competent for her
to cede the whole of it. I suppose it would be
hardly necessary to cite instances to show that
no colony can possibly possess such a power ?
But, if it were, it would be sufficient to mention
the latest instance in which a federation of
various colonies took place, viz., the present
Dominion of Canada, in which case, although
all the parties were agreed, it was necessary to
pass an Imperial Act to carry out that agreement.
I agree with much that Mr. Casey says in
paragraph 5. I certainly do not think it ever
was ‘ the intention of Parliament or the Crown
that the neighboring colonies should be con-
tinually engaged in attempts more or less un-
successful to solve an astronomical problem.’
nor do I suppose that ‘ any human being can
define with perfect precision the position on
the earth’s surface of a meridian.’ I fail,
however, to see that because precision cannot
be hoped for we are therefore to be content
with a definition which is confessedly in-
accurate to the extent of some two and a half
miles. I agree, however, with Mr. Casey
when he says that ‘ until it is marked upon
the surface of the earth a line of meridian is
not a boundary, but a direction for a boundary.’
The question, however, is ‘ how is that
boundary line to be defined, or rather by what
authority must the boundary line when so
defined be authoritatively and finally fixed ?’
And it seems to me to be clear that (in the
absence of express power, conferred by Im-
perial legislation, of which hereafter) the only
authority possessing the necessary power is
the authority which ‘ gave the direction for
fixing the boundary,’ as Mr. Casey has it,
i.e., the Imperial Government. The Imperial
Act, or rather the letters patent issued
in pursuance of that Act, fixes the 141st
degree of east longitude as the eastern boun-
dary of South Australia, and no authority that
I am aware of, except the Imperial Parlia-
ment, can alter it or say that in the construc-
tion of that Act or of the letters patent the
141st degree of east longitude means a line
marked out two and a half miles to the west of
such degree. The fact is that when the agree-
ment was come to between the colonies an
Imperial Act should have been passed to
ratify it. This has never been done, though,
as Mr. Casey says, the proceedings were duly
communicated to the home Government. It
is evident that Mr. Casey feels himself pressed
by this point, for he goes on to contend that
this new boundary was by implication vali-
dated by the Imperial Act 13 and 14 Vic.,
c. 59, constituting the colony of Victoria,
which, as he says, uses the words, ‘ and
thence by the course of that river to the
eastern boundary of South Australia ;’ not to
the 141st degree of longitude, but to the
eastern boundary. I need hardly say that the
express provisions of an Act of Parliament
(especially when the rights of Parliament are
concerned) will never be held to be varied by
implication from the words used in a subse-
quent Act. But these words do not seem to
me, even by implication, to bear the construc-
tion contended for, inasmuch as the eastern
boundary of South Australia, being fixed
by the letter patent as the 141st degree,
the eastern boundary, as used in a
subsequent Act, must he taken to mean that
degree. Certainly the Act 13 and 14 Viet,
does not in any way confirm the alleged agree-
ment ; but the fact of Mr. Casey citing it
speaks volumes as to his opinion of that agree-
ment requiring confirmation. Hitherto I have
discussed the question on the general prin-
ciples, because I was anxious to show that the
arguments used by Mr. Casey, although ex-
ceedingly specious, would not bear a critical
examination. The fact is, however, that so
far as the legal aspect of the question is con-
cerned it is absolutely set at rest by express
Imperial legislation. Section 5 of the Act 24
and 25 Viet., c. 44, is as follows;—‘Whereas
the boundaries of certain of her Majesty’s colo-
nies on the continent of Australia may be
found to have been imperfectly or inconve-
niently defined, and it may be expedient from
time to time to determine or alter such boun-
daries : Be it therefore further enacted as fol-
lows :—lt shall be lawful from time to time for
the Governors of any contiguous colonies on
the said continent, with the advice of their re-
spective Executive Councils, by any instru-
ment under their joint hands and seals, to de-
termine or alter the common boundary of such
colonies, and the boundary described in any such
instrument shall be deemed to be, within the
limits there laid down, the true boundary of
the said colonies, as soon as her Majesty’s
approval of such instrument shall have been
proclaimed in either of such colonies by the
Governor thereof.’ The recital clearly con-
templated the ratification of mistakes which
had been made ; and the fact of its being
necessary by an Imperial Act to confer on the
Governors of contiguous colonies, ‘ with the
advice of their respective Executive Councils,’
the power to enter into a formal agreement to
determine or alter the common boundaries of
such colonies, conclusively shows that, prior to
the passing of that Act— (i.e. 18fil) —such
Governors had not the power to enter into any
such agreement. It will be observed too that
even if an agreement is formally entered into
under the provisions of the Imperial Act, still
the boundai’y described in such agreement is
oidy to be deemed the true boundary of the
said colonies ‘so soon as her Majesty’s approval
of such instrument shall have been proclaimed. ’
This provision seems to me to place
beyond doubt the proposition for which I
have hitherto contended on general principles
—viz., that the colonies themselves are
absolutely powerless without Imperial
sanction to alter in the smallest degree
their boundaries as fixed by the Imperial Acts
constituting such colonies. The Act 24 and 25
Viet., c. 44, provides an easy and convenient
method for settling all questions of disputed
boundary and obtaining the requisite Imperial
sanction. Before the passing of that Act, I
take it, the only means of making an alteration
in such boundaries would have been the passing
of an Imperial Act for that special purpose.
If, even now, with all the enabling powers
conferred by the Act 24 and 25 Viet., c. 44, it
is necessary for the Governors of contiguous
colonies to enter into a formal agreement under
their hands and seals, and ‘ with the advice of
their respective Executive Councils,’ and if,
moreover, such an agreement when so entered
into is to be of no force or effect until her
Majesty’s approval has been obtained, it does
not, I think, require much argument to show
that the proclamation issued by the Governor
of this colony in 1847 was altogether in excess
of his powers, and that from a legal point of
view it is altogether void and inopera-
tive. The fact of the arrangement which
10


was come to between the two colonies
being communicated to the Imperial Go-
vernment cannot affect the question. The
proclamation was altogether ultra vires , and
nothing short of an Imperial Act could have
made it of any effect whatever. It seems to
me for very many reasons—some of which
have been pointed out by Mr. Casey in sec-
tion 10—that it is the imperative duty of both
Governments to have this vexed question
speedily and finally determined. The ques-
tion is one of such grave moment that it ought
to be discussed, and if possible settled, not
only without delay but without considering too
closely the material results which may flow
from authoritatively adopting the true
boundary line. Whether, looking at all the
circumstances, it can be considered as against
good faith for South Australia to take advan-
tage of her legal rights to disturb the arrange-
ment come to in 1847, and to now claim to
have the boundary line ascertained as accu-
rately as possible, and when so ascertained to
have it authoritatively and finally fixed, de-
pends upon altogether different considerations.
The position is simply this. In pursuance of
some arrangement (for it is not contended
that an ‘ agreement’ was ever formally
drawn up and signed) the Governor
of this colony in 1847 issued a pro-
clamation, fixing the eastern boundary of
this colony. That proclamation was altogether
beyond his powers, and consequently void.
Some considerable time ago it was discovered
that the line marked out on the ground, and
which at the time of such proclamation was
supposed to represent the actual position on
the earth’s surface of the 141st degree of east
longitude, was incorrectly laid down to the ex-
tent of at least two and a half miles; and a
correspondence (to which I subsequently re-
ferred at greater length) was opened with the
Victorian Government for the purpose of having
such mistake rectified, and the real boundary
line between the two colonies fixed. I think I
have shown tolerably clearly that we are not
legally concluded by the issue of that proclama-
tion ; but although not legally, are we now
that we have obtained a more correct know-
ledge of the facts, equitably bound to carry out
an arrangement which was entered into in
error ? In ray opinion we are not. I may here
call attention to a discrepancy in Mr. Casey’s
memo. In section 2he says—‘Fully five-
sixths of the lands that would be affected are
valueless.’ In section 10 he says—‘Large
quantities of land have been sold by this
colony up to the very line, and in some
places a comparatively dense population
has been settled upon the land which it is now
proposed to annex to South Australia.’ It is
clear that one or the other of these statements
is erroneous. I also demur to the statement
‘ that from that time (1847) up to the present
this line has been regarded by the Government
of both colonies as the common boundary.’ It
is clear from the letter of the then Chief
Secretary of this colony (Mr. Bagot) dated
November 8, 1869, that it was not so regarded
here, and the whole tenor of that letter, and
the request with which it concludes, can only
lead to one conclusion, viz., that it was desir-
able to make certain observations for the pur-
pose of fixing the boundary between the two
colonies, thereby, as Mr. Bagot observes,
‘ following a similar course to that pursued in
determining the true boundary north of the
Murray’— i. e. , between South Australia and
New South Wales. It will be observed that
the then Chief Secretary of Victoria (Mr.
McPherson) accedes to the request made by
this colony, and says he will issue the neces-
sary instructions as soon as possible ; and it is
a very remarkable fact that he does not for a
moment think it necessary to do as his suc-
cessor (Mr. Francis) does, and guard himself by
saying the observations are to be made ‘ in the
interests of science only.’ In fact, I think no
impartial person reading the two letters which
open this correspondence can doubt that the
whole and sole object of the proposed survey
was to fix the ' real boundary line between
South Australia and Victoria ;’ that the South
Australian Government disputed the correct-
ness of the disputed boundary, and that the
necessity for fixing the true boundary line was
not then disputed by the Victorian Govern-
ment. I may also point out that, in reality,
there was no mutuality in the alleged agree-
ment or arrangement of 1847. Suppose for a
moment the mistake had been the other way
and we had sought to resist the ratification of
that mistake on the ground that a proclama-
tion by the Governor of South Australia had
authoritatively fixed the boundary, I question
very much indeed if Victoria would in such a
case have admitted that that proclamation
could possibly be of any effect, and she would,
no doubt, have declined to be in any way
bound by it. Under these circumstances I
think we may fairly claim to have the mistake
rectified, and that steps should at once be
taken to mark out the true boundary, as has
been done north of the River Murray.
We ought, I think, to try and settle this
question as quickly as possible without paying
too much regard to the effect of such a settle-
ment as to the acquisition or loss of territory
in consequence thereof. The fact of the
Victorian Government having sold land up to
the reputed boundary no doubt makes the
settlement of the question more difficult, but
the longer such settlement is delayed the
greater this difficulty will become. Taking
all the circumstances into consideration I
suggest that the Victorian Government should
be asked to reconsider its determination and
to consent to an agreement being entered into
under sections 24 and 25 Viet., e. 44, for the
purpose of at once and for ever ascertaining as
nearly as practicable and marking out on the
earth’s surface the exact position of the 141st
meridian of east longitude, and upon such
position being ascertained, for ‘ authoritatively
agreeing ’ that the line when so marked out
shall be the true ‘ boundary line ’ between the
two colonies, and provision might be made in
such agreement for validating any titles
granted by Victoria upon terms to be
agreed upon, as to which I should suppose no
difficulty is likely to arise. Should the Vic-
torian Government refuse to enter into such an
agreement (which I can hardly bring myself to
believe it would do on a review of all circum-
stances) the only other practicable means of
solving the difficulty seems to be an appeal to
the Imperial Government. Some settlement
of the question must be arrived at, for at
present Victorian laws are being administered
over a strip of country two and a half miles in
width which is unquestionably a portion of
South Australia, and, as such, amenable to
South Australian laws. Very serious
difficulties might arise in the prosecution of
criminals and in various other ways. More-
over, any titles granted by Victoria of any of
the land comprised in this strip of country are
not worth the parchments they are written on,
and consequently in the interests of the people
referred to in the concluding paragraph of Mr.
Casey’s memo, it seems imperatively neces-
sary that this vexed question should be
speedily and finally set at rest. —0. Mann.’
Then there followed a minute, which it was not
necessary to read, from the Premier to the
Attorney-General urging that the affair should
be settled at once. Then came this letter from
South Australia to Victoria dated October 27,
1874 : —“Sir—I have, by desire of his Excellency
Governor Musgrave, to acknowledge receipt of
11


your letter of the 27th July last, forwarding a
memorandum prepared by your colleague, the
Honorable the Minister of Lands, and a report
from the Surveyor-General of Victoria with
reference to the claim of this Govern-
ment to have the boundary line between
the two colonies correctly defined. Both
these documents have received the at-
tention, perusal, and careful consideration
of this Government, and have been reported
upon by the law officers, copy of whose opinions
I now enclose. I am sure that your Govern-
ment will aeknowledge'that new light is thrown
upon the subject by Mr. Mann’s minute, and I
am to propose that an agreement should be
entered into between the two Governments,
submitting the whole question to the Secretary
of State for his decision. It is my intention
to visit Victoria during the ensuing month,
when I hope to have the pleasure of an inter-
view with you, when the matter can be fully
discussed.— Arthur Blyth.” He wished to
call the attention of hon. members to the nex
letter, seeing that it was written in 1874 —19
years ago—and that since then 20 or 30 diffe-
rent attempts had been made to get the matter
settled, and that Victoria had continuously
declined to do what that colony itself sug-
gested. This was the letter from the Govern-
ment of Victoria to that of South Australia,
pated November 17, 1874, as follows
“Sir —I have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of October 30, enclosing
the report of the Hon. the Attorney-Genera! of
South Australia upon the claims of that colony
to having the marked boundary line which
divides from Victoria moved further eastwards.
The Minister of Lands has prepared some
observations in reply to Mr. Mann’s argu-
ments, which are forwarded for your perusal.
I think, with my colleague, that as the ques-
tron at issue involves the territorial rights of
two Governments—and an important principle
besides the only satisfactory method for
determining it, if it be thought proper to refer
the matter to any tribunal, would be to lay the
case before the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council, with the preliminary under-
standing that both Governments agree to abide
by its decision. ” This was the proposal made
by Victoria itself, and this colony accepted it
and had been pressing ever since for the com-
pletion of an agreement, but nothing had been
done. The Chief Secretary of Victoria went
on to say—“ On behalf of the Government of
Victoria, I now propose that recourse be had
to that means of bringing the question at
issue to an amicable solution, although
I am well aware that even in offering
such a proposition this Government will
be thought to have made a material concession
to South Australia.—l have, &c.— Geo. B.
Kerferd.” With that letter was enclosed a
long argument from Mr. Casey, which it was
not necessary to read, except the last two
paragraphs:—“Since, however, the Govern-
ment of South Australia, after its attention
has been directed to all the facts of the case,
considers that it is not bound by its proclama-
tion of 1847, it must adopt such remedies for
enforcing its pretensions as its legal advisers
may think proper. Arbitration is obviously
impossible, because there is nothing upon
which any person can arbitrate. There is no
dispute about the facts, and the sole question
is the simple issue of law—whether the settle-
ment of 1847 is or not conclusive. Such a ques-
tion seems to come properly within the juris-
diction of the Privy Council. The Govern-
ment of Victoria has never hesitated to facili-
tate, so far as was in its power, the amicable
adjustment of questions of this character.
When Pental Island was claimed to belong to
New South Wales the Government of this
colony readily agreed to submit a jointly pre-
pared case for the opinion of the Privy
Council. If South Australia will agree to sub-
mit a case for the opinion of her Majesty in
Council Victoria will readily concur. —J. J.
Casey, Minister of Lands and Agriculture.”
That was in 1874. Since then South Australia
had gone to the trouble of preparing the case,
and Victoria, after delaying the consideration
of it for years, finally refused to adopt it.
South Australia had replied to that letter as
follows, in a letter dated December, 1874 :
“Sir —I have the honor, by desire of his Excel-
lency Governor Musgrave, to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 17th ultimo, for-
warding some observations from your hon.
colleague, the Minister of Lands, in reply to
the arguments of Mr. Mann, Attorney-General,
on the subject of the correct definition of the
Victorian and South Australian boundary line,
transmitted with my communication to
you of 27th October last, and pro-
posing that, as the question at issue in-
volves the territorial rights of two colonies,
and an important principle besides, a case
should be laid before the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council with a preliminary under-
standing that both Governments agree to abide
by its decision. In reply, I am to inform you
that your letter has received most attentive
consideration; and that this Government,
being anxious that the matter should be finally
set at rest, can have no objection to refer the
question to the Privy Council, and to abide by
the decision arrived at. The law officers have
accordingly been requested to prepare a case
for the opinion of her Majesty in Council,
a copy of which case I shall furnish you as early
as possible. I have the honor, &c., Arthur
Blyth. ” In the House of Assembly on August
10,1875, “ Hansard,” on page 645, reported that
the Hon. A. Blyth had desired to know whether
“a statement of the case in reference to the
boundary between Victoria and South Aus-
tralia had yet been prepared for submission to
the Privy Council.” The Attorney-General
(Hon. S. J. Way) replied as follows : —“ That
some further information was required, which
he understood had been prepared, and the
matter was now before a gentleman who was
settling the case preliminary to its being finally
settled by the Attorney-General.” Then they
came to “Hansard” in 1873. On September 7,
in the House of Assembly (page 941), “Han-
sard” reported the Hon. Mr. Blyth to have
asked what progress had been made regarding
the question of the boundary between the two
colonies. The Commissioner of Crown Lands
(Hon. J. P. Boucaut) had replied that
“ the question was in the hands of the law
officers of the Crown. Instructions had been
given to have the question settled by a
most eminent counsel, who was thoroughly
conversant with the whole matter. It
had been pressed forward, and he would
see that it was pressed still further.”
On the Bth September, in the same year, in
the House of Assembly, “ Hansard,” page 974,
reported the Hon. Mr. Blyth to have again
asked whether the papers in reference to the
question were ready, and if not why not. The
Commissioner of Crown Lands (Hon. J. P.
Boucaut) had replied that “ Mr. Ingleby,
Q.C., who was requested by the late Govern-
ment to prepare the case, has promised to send
it in to-day, after which it will be necessary
that it shall be carefully considered by the
Attorney-General. ” In the Legislative Council
on 11th July, 1876, South Australian “Han-
sard” (page 340) reported the Chief Secretary
(Sir H. Ayers) to have stated—“ The question
has not yet been agreed between the Govern-
ments of the two colonies to submit the case
to the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council for decision, and the necessary steps
are now being taken to obtain such decision,”
12


and he said the Victorian Government
five or six months before had agreed
to refer matter to the Privy Council.
On the 17th November of the same year, on
page 2060 of “ Hansard,” the Chief Secretary
was reported to have said —“The Victorian
Government seem to have changed their mind,
and seemed unwilling to carry out the arrange-
ment.” The next paper connected with the
matter was South Australian Parliamentary
Pa,per No. 69 of 1877. That was ordered to be
printed on the motion of Mr. Hardy, formerly
a representative of the district of Albert. It
commenced with a letter from Victoria dated
December 19, 1874. It read as follows “ I
have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the Bth inst. stating that the
Government of South Australia accepts the
proposal that the two Governments should
submit the question of the disputed territory
for the decision of her Majesty’s Privy Council.
The Government of Victoria is gratified at
receiving this information, as it is not
believed that any other mode of determining
the rights of the two colonies would
be regarded as satisfactory. With reference
to the last paragraph of your letter, in which
you state that the law officers of South Aus-
tralia have undertaken to prepare the case,
and that a copy of it will be forwarded to this
Government when ready, I have the honor to
suggest that as a preliminary step a statement of
the facts which will be relied on should be drawn
up in order that there may be an undisputed
basis for the legal arguments of both sides.
This resembles generally the course followed
in the case of Pental Island, excepting that
then, as the facts were disputed and the ques-
tion rather an intricate one, it was necessary to
appoint commissioners for the purpose of taking
evidence. In the present case I do not
apprehend any dispute will occur about the
facts, and if both Governments can
agree to a common statement all neces-
sity for taking evidence will be obviated.
—I have the honor, &c., G. B. Kerfekd.”
Then came a letter from South Australia on
July 28 stating that a draft petition had been
forwarded as requested. He would read two
of the paragraphs of the case then
proposed to be submitted to the Privy
Council, which stated that “the area in
dispute comprises about 700 square miles
of country, bounded on the north by the
River Murray, on the south by the sea coast,
and lying between 141st degree of east longi-
tude and the line run by Mr. Henry Wade
lying to the west of that meridian, and that
the value of the land improvements is approxi-
mately £BOO,OOO. That it has been agreed
between the said Governments of South Aus-
tralia and New South Wales to refer the
matter in dispute to your Most Gracious
Majesty in your Privy Council, and for that
purpose an agreement has been drawn up and
signed by your petitioners, with the advice and
consent of their respective Executive Councils,
by which it has been agreed that if your
Majesty in Council decides that the procla-
mations issued by the Governors of South
Australia and New South Wales in 1847, as
hereinbefore set out, were valid and binding
upon the colony of South Australia, then the
boundary between the said colonies of South
Australia and Victoria shall be the line marked
by the said H. Wade and particularised in the
said proclamation made by his Excellency
F. H. Robe, Esq.; but that if on the contrary
your Majesty in Council decides that such
proclamations are ultra vires and void, then
that the position on the earth’s surface
of 141st degree of east longitude shall be
ascertained as pearly as possible by surveyors
to be appointed for that purpose by
the respective Governments of South Australia
and Victoria, and being so ascertained shall be
marked out on the ground, and that the line so
ascertained and marked shall from thenceforth
be the true boundary between the said colonies
of South Australia and Victoria. Your peti-
tioners, therefore, most humbly pray that your
Most Excellent Majesty in Council will be
graciously pleased to determine whether the
said proclamations issued by the re-
spective Governors of South Australia
and New South Wales in the year
1847, as hereinbefore set out, are or
ought to be binding upon the colony of South
Australia, and that your Majesty may be
graciously pleased to make such further
or other order as to your Majesty in
Council may appear just and proper.
And your petitioners will ever pray.”
Then followed a draft deed which was intended
to be signed, but most of it was a repetition of
what he had already stated. In paragraph 4,
however, there was something fresh. That
paragraph said that “so soon as her Majesty
shall have been pleased to signify her approval
of the instrument mentioned in the last para-
graph then that the Government of Victoria
shall fully account to the Government of South
Australia for the amount received by the said
colony of Victoria for land sold by such Go-
vernment beyond the limits of such colony and
within the limits of the province of South Aus-
tralia.” Paragraph 5 read: —“ That the Go-
vernment of South Australia shall thereupon
cause to be submitted to the Parliament of
South Australia a Bill for the purpose of vali-
dating the titles of the purchasers or their
assigns of the land sold by the Government of
Victoria as mentioned in the last paragraph
and of issuing to such purchasers or their
assigns proper land grants or certificates of
titles for the land so purchased by them.”
Paragraph 6 read : —“ That from and after
the execution of this agreement no land within
the area of the territory in dispute shall
be sold by the Government of Victoria
until after the question in dispute shall
have been finally settled and concluded.”
Then came a letter from Melbourne, dated
October 23, 1876, acknowledging the draft peti-
tion, and in reply stating—“l beg to inform
you that this Government does not concur
therein. As regards the position of Victoria
in relation to this matter, the Government still
holds the views briefly expressed by Mr.
Francis in his letter of the 24th December,
1873.” The next letter, dated November 27,
1876, from the Chief Secretary’s Office, South
Australia, read as follows:—“Referring to
your -communication of the 23rd ultimo,
acknowledging the receipt of my letter of the
28th July last, enclosing draft of a petition to
her Majesty in Council and a proposed agree-
ment, with a view to a settlement of the ques-
tion of the common boundary line of the two
colonies of South Australia and Victoria, and
informing me that your Government does not
concur therein, but that as regards the position
of Victoria in relation to this matter
the views expressed in the dispatch
of 24th December, 1873, are still entertained, I
have the honor to state that after a careful
consideration which has taken place this
Government cannot but express its regret
that the Government of Victoria should decline
to abide by the final arbitrament which
they themselves selected. I would call your
attention to a dispatch from your Government
dated November 17, 1874, in which the follow-
ing paragraph occurs ‘ As the general ques-
tion at issue involves the territorial rights of two
Governments, and an important principle be-
sides, the only satisfactory method for deter-
mining it—if it be proper to refer the matter
to any tribunal--would be to lay the case
before the Judicial Committee of the Privy
13


Council, with the preliminary understanding
that both the Governments agree to abide by
its decision and also to the concluding para-
graph of Mr. Casey’s minute of November 16,
1874, enclosed therein, in which he stated —
‘lf South Australia will agree to submit a
case for the opinion of her Majesty in Council
Victoria will readily concur.’ On the Bth
December, 1874, this Government being
anxious that the question should be finally
set at rest, agreed to the suggestion to refer
it to the Privy Council, on the clearly ex-
pressed understanding that the decision
arrived at by that tribunal should be binding
on each Government. In preparing and
forwarding the case for opinion this Govern-
ment only pursued a course which had been
mutually agreed upon, and I have now but to
express a hope that upon further con-
sideration the Government of Victoria will
not desire to withdraw from that agreement.
I ' have the honor, &c.— Henry Ayers.”
The next point connected with the matter was
contained in a letter dated June 26, 1877,
from South Australia to Victoria, which
read as follows:—“I have the honor
to invite your attention to my letter
of the 12th January last, addressed
to your predecessor, on the determina-
tion of the boundary between Victoria and
South Australia. I need hardly say that the
longer the matter is delayed the greater the
inconvenience which may arise from the un-
certainty of the true line of demarcation be-
tween the two colonies. I would therefore
press upon you the importance of allowing the
question to be decided with as little delay as
possible in the way agreed upon by our respec-
tive Governments, viz., by a joint reference
to her Majesty in Council, with which view a
draft petition and agreement was for-
warded on the 28th July last. I enclose
printed copy of correspondence on the sub-
ject. I have the honor, &c.— Henry Ayers.”
Victoria had replied on July 31, 1877, when a
new figure came in—the historical Graham
Berry. That gentleman wrote as follows
“I do myself the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 26th ult. inviting
my attention to a previous communication,
addressed to my predecessor, on the deter-
mination of the boundary between Victoria
and South Australia, and to assure you that
the subject has received the attentive con-
sideration which was due to it. This Govern-
ment fail to discover why they should consent
to have resource to the Privy Council in regard
to a matter which the correspondence shows
to have been deliberately settled by the
Governments concerned in it long before this
colony was created. Victoria was separated
from New South Wales and constituted a
separate colony by the Imperial Act 13 and 14
Vic., cap. 59, and the territory assigned to her
by that Act was described therein as ‘ the
territories now comprised within the district of
Port Phillip, including the town of Melbourne,
and bounded on the north and north-east by a
straight line drawn from Cape Howe to the
nearest source of the River Murray, and thence
by the course of that river to the eastern boun-
dary of South Australia.’ There can be no
doubt what the eastern boundary of
South Australia was, for it is clear from
the papers submitted that it had years
previously been ascertained. At the request
of the Imperial Government a survey was
undertaken for the special purpose, and was
conducted with the greatest care. The line
was marked on the ground and was by the
Governments of South Australia and New
South Wales solemnly adopted as, and by the
proclamation declared to be, the boundary line
of the two colonies respectively. That subse-
quent observation has shown the survey line
not exactly to coincide with the astronomical
meridian, is, in the opinion of this Government,
of no moment; and where it possible, which
it is not, to mark the meridian
with absolute precision, it would afford
no ground whatever for opening up
a question of boundary line authoritatively
determined 30 years ago. This Government
must therefore decline to join with South Aus-
tralia in the proposed reference to the Privy
Council ; but if the Government of South
Australia is willing to enter upon the con-
sideration of the larger question of the general
rectification and readjustment as between the
colonies of South Australia, New South Wales,
and Victoria the Government of Victoria will
be prepared to discuss it and to advance
reasons for the enlargement of Victoria by the
extension of her boundaries to the Murray on
the west and the Murrumbidgee on the north.
I have the honor, &c. — Graham Berry.”
On August 16, 1877, the following letter came
from South Australia : —“I have the honor to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
31st ultimo on the subject of the boundary line
between South Australia and Victoria, and in
doing so cannot but remark that its publica-
tion in extenso in the newspapers of Victoria
before it reached my hands divested it of much
of its interest. Adverting now to the subject
matter in hand I may observe that this Go-
vernment dissents from the view so tenaciously
held that when the colony of Victoria was con-
stituted by an Act of the Imperial Parliament
the words ‘the eastern boundary of South
Australia’ meant the then recognised and
not the true boundary (eastern) of South
Australia. That boundary was then and
is now ‘ the one hundred and forty-first degree
of east longitude,’ and the mere fact that
an attempt was made to mark on
the earth’s surface a line corresponding with
the astronomical meridian, and that after the
line (an erroneous one) was so marked it was
believed to be the true boundary and was
accepted as such did not contravene or super-
sede the express terms of the Imperial statute
constituting this province. Recent observa-
tions having proved that the line marked out is
two and a quarter miles (or thereabouts) west
of the true line it follows that any Victorian
occupation of that strip of country is an
encroachment, and although no inconvenience
has arisen so far, yet as the country becomes
more densely populated serious inconveniences
may attend the non-settlement of this ques-
tion. It was to obviate the occurrence of such
evils that this Government acquiesced in an
appeal to her Majesty in Council, in which
appeal the Government of Victoria freely ex-
pressed its satisfaction and concurrence. This
Government cannot allow the matter to remain
in its present uncertain condition, and there-
fore asks you to be good enough to reconsider
your decision, as it is far preferable that a
mutual appeal should be made to the Privy
Council than that the question should remain
unsettled. Referring to the concluding portion
of your dispatch, I beg to inform you that this
Government are not inclined to discuss the
question of a general rectification and readjust-
ment of boundaries as between the colonies ol
South Australia, New South Wales, and
Victoria, as in their opinion no necessity
exists therefor, the boundaries being declared
by the Imperial Parliament. I am not with-
out hope that you will yet see the propriety
and expediency of adhering to the agreement
entered into by your predecessors.-—I have,
&c., Henry Ayers.” Then there was a debate
which took place in the House on October 31,
1877. The reference was “Hansard,” page
1,411, which showed—“ Mr. Hardy moved—
‘That in the opinion of this House steps should
be taken to obtain a decision of the Privy
14


Council on the question of the boundary
between South Australia and Victoria.’ He
said there could not be two opinions as to the
desirability of having the question of
the boundary between South Australia
and Victoria settled. It was a question
upon which points touching the criminal law
might arise, and it was of great importance
to persons living on the debatable ground in
the neighborhood of the present boundary line;.
It was our duty to take into consideration
what might be called the equitable point of the
question. As to the correspondence that had
passed between the two Governments in regard
to this matter, he considered that the terms of
that correspondence were such as were calcu-
lated to raise the indignation of all fair-dealing
people.” Mr. Hardy was a member for
Albert, and he well dealt with the position
as it was in 1877, and his speech showed
that the members for that district had
always taken an interest in the question ; and
naturally so, as it suffered so greatly from
the present condition of the matter. The
press of Victoria at that time were in favor of
a proper settlement of that question. He had
thought of collecting the press comments on the
matter, but he found that it would take too long
to read them. He would, however, give one
quotation from the Arc/us, which was included
in the report of Mr. Hardy’s speech. It was
as follows ; —“ Matters remained in this very
unsatisfactory condition until the Berry
Ministry took office, when the South Aus-
tralian Government determined to make
another appeal in the hope that the
agreement arrived at with the Kerford
administration (that was to refer the matter to
the Imperial Government) would be adhered
to. However, if the views expressed by Mr.
Berry on the subject are adopted by his col-
leagues it is perfectly clear that no harmonious
result can be obtained. To refuse to entertain
any proposal to settle the dispute by appeal to
the Privy Council except upon the conditions
that the whole question of intercolonial boun-
daries should be reopened, is obviously to
veto further proceedings. It would not be
to the advantage of this colony to raise the
question of the propriety of enlarging our
boundaries in such a dubious manner. Apart,
however, from this view it is impossible to
allow a matter involving the civil rights of a
large number of settlers to remain in its pre-
sent unsatisfactory position. It is unfair to
the people who have taken up land along the
supposed boundary line to leave their titles
open to challenge at any moment. The
interests of law and justice also de-
mand that any doubt respecting the legality
of the old boundary should be promptly
and finally settled, for grave difficulties in the
criminal law may arise, and if, as the South
Australians assert, Victorian laws are now
being enforced in South Australian territory.
The Victorian Government, who have investi-
gated the merits of the case, believe that they
can establish their claims to the lands in dis-
pute. If they can—and upon that point it is
unnecessary now to express an opinion—why
should any difficulties be thrown in the way of
arriving at a solution in the same manner that
the Pental Island dispute was finally settled,
namely, by appeal to the Privy Council.
Our South Australian neighbors cannot be
expected to quietly submit to what they con-
sider an act of gross injustice, and if they
cannot induce the Victorian Government in a
friendly appeal to the Privy Council they seem
to think it will be necessary to make an
ex parte application to the Imperial Govern-
ment themselves. A dispute of an analagous
kind has recently arisen between Queensland
and New South Wales, each of whom prefers a
claim to a strip of country along their boundary
line. They are, however, about to adopt the
common sense plan of carrying out a joint
survey with the view of defining the twenty-
ninth parallel of south latitude, which consti-
tutes the boundaries of the two colonies. By
thus acting in a friendly spirit they will attain
the end each has in view without arousing
intercolonial jealousies or irritation. If the
Victorian Government cannot see their way to
adopt a, similar course, the fairer way would
be to raise further objections to the ratification
of the agreement arrived at in 1874. An
authoritative decision of the Privy Council has
been accepted by this colony before in a somewhat
similar case, and whichever way the decision
went it would be more satisfactory than to
keep open any longer a grievance of old stand-
ing which can cause nothing but heartburnings
and bickerings between two neighboring
colonies. South Australia has preferred a
claim to no less than 700 square miles of our
already diminutive territory, and that the value
of the land and improvements, &c., involved
is estimated approximately at about £800,000.”
In replying to this motion the Attorney-
General(Mr. C. Mann)said —“The Government
would support the motion. All hon. members
would agree that Mr. Hardy deserved the
thanks of the House for bringing the matter,
which was an important one, before them. No
one would deny the importance of the matter.
Even from a monetary point of view it was
estimated that the value of the strip in dispute
was something like £BOO,OOO, but there were
many more important issues involved —such
as the titles of property and the punish-
ment of crime on the debatable ground
—and in the interests of both colonies
it was desirable that the matter jshould be
settled. As to whether South Australia was
legally entitled to the land he had no more
doubt than that he stood there. There could
be no doubt about that. It was some time
since Mr. Casey’s minute was written. It was
an exceedingly specious one, and would be
likely to mislead anyone who did not look a
little below the surface, but then the whole
argnments would be seen to be entirely fal-
lacious, as Mr. Casey assumed that the law
which governed the relations of private indi-
viduals or independent States was applicable
to questions between colonies which were
established under special statutes, and
whose powers were contained within the
four corners of those statutes. The
law was not applicable in such cases. If
competent by the Government by a proclama-
tion in the Gazette to cede a small strip of
country 2! A miles in extent, it would be equally
competent thus to cede all that Mr. Berry
asked for—the whole country up to the Murray.
. . . He agreed entirely with Mr. Hardy
that we ought to take steps to enforce our
rights, and the Government thought so too.
The Government would then make one last
effort to induce Mr. Berry to carry out the
contract of his predecessors, and then, if he
would not, other means would be devised —■
parhaps those suggested by Mr. Hardy,
of bringing the matter before the Queen.”
Mr. Bray (now Sir J. C. Bray) took part in
the same debate and appeared to have
taken up the position of cidvocatus cliaholi,
saying all that could be said from
the point of view of Victoria, but
during the course of his speech said—“ He
thought they would all agree that Mr. Hardy
had very carefully brought before them the
whole of the facts of the case. He entirely
agreed with the hon. member and the
Attorney-General that so far as South Aus-
tralia was concerned that there was not the
slightest doubt that she was legally entitled to
the territory in dispute. But he would put it
to the House that after all there were other
15


circumstances to be taken into consideration
besides the strict legal rights involved. . .
He could imagine that so far as the criminal
law was concerned a difficulty might arise if
the grant was not settled, but he did not
believe the Imperial Government would take
any action with regard to it upon our motion
independently of Victoria. It ought to be im-
pressed upon Victoria that it was absolutely
necessary in the interests of both parties that
the matter should be settled.” Mr. Wigley
also spoke, and he said —“ If this matter was
left over from time to time it was impossible to
see how it would end. To put it shortly South
Australia had received by charter from
the Queen certain lands. A part of
these lands the part in dispute had
been trespassed upon, and seized by the
adjoining province of Victoria. We had never
done anything to acquiesce in the taking of
that land, but on the contrary disputed and
did that which he thought the Government of
the day ought to be commended for—offered to
refer the matter to arbitration. The neighbor-
ing colony agreed that it should be referred to
arbitration, but when the matter had been
somewhat gone into and they found that their
case was so very bad they did that which he
thought no Government should have done—
withdrew and refused to refer it. If this motion
were carried of course the Attorney-General
and the other able legal members of
the Government would take care that
the proper course of proceeding was pur-
sued to have the matter tested without delay.”
That motion was carried, and things seemed to
have gone as far as they could, but in this
question, just when affairs seemed to have been
ripe for a conclusion, the negotiations collapsed.
The next quotation which he would make was
from Parliamentary paper No. 135 of 1878,
which was a short one, and contained two
letters which he would cite. On July 2, 1878,
the following letter was sent from South Aus-
tralia to Victoria: —“ I have the honor
to call your attention to a letter
dated August 16, 1877, addressed to you
by my predecessor, referring to the dis-
puted boundary line between South Austarlia
and Victoria, and to which a reply has not yet
been received. The Government feels it im-
possible for many reasons that this very im-
portant matter should be allowed longer to
remain in its present most unsatisfactory posi-
tion. I have therefore again to urge upon you
the desirableness of your Government agreeing
to submit a case to her Majesty in Council—a
course which was advantageously pursued in
the dispute between the Governments of New
South Wales and Victoria on the question of
Pental Island. I would remind you as regards
the subject now under consideration that the
suggestion of adopting a similar course
originated with the Victorian Government
itself, and was agreed to both by Mr.
Casey and Mr. Hereford, and I venture to
submit the proposition that any promises made
by those gentlemen when Ministers of the
Crown are as binding on your Government
now as if they had been made by yourself,
in which case, of course, no difficulty could
possibly have arisen. I trust you will favor
me with an early and favorable reply, as
whilst this Government feels itself compelled
to bring the question to an issue it would
much prefer a direct reference of it for settle-
ment by the Privy Council in an amicable
way to being forced to the adotion of other
measures for eventually carrying the case
before that tribunal, because it is apprehended
that the steps which in the latter alternative
would have to be taken might tend to disturb
the friendly relations which have hitherto existed
between the two colonies. —I have, &c.,
William Morgan.” To that the following
reply came from Victoria on July 23, 1878 :
“ Referring to your recent letter inviting at-
tention to your communication of August 16
last on the subject of the boundary line I have
the honor to inform you that having carefully
reconsidered this matter, and especially the
letter of August 16, this Government sees no
reason for altering the decision conveyed to
you on July 31, 1887. I desire at the same
time very respectfully to say that the reply
then given must be regarded as final so
far as the Government of Victoria is con-
cerned.—l have, &c., Graham Berry.”
In the House of Assembly on September 2,
1878 (“Hansard,” page 827), on the motion of
Mr. Hardy, it was decided to produce all
papers connected with the question. On April
16, 1880, Sir William Morgan wrote to the
Chief Secretary of Victoria as follows : —“ I
would more particularly draw your attention
to the dispatch from the Hon. G. B. Kerferd
of 17th November, 1874, proposing that re-
course be had to the Privy Council as a means
of bringing the question to an amicable con-
clusion, and to the last paragraph of the
minute of the Honorable J. J. Casey,
then Minister of Lands and Agricul-
ture, of the 16th of November, 1874, in
which he says— * If South Australia will agree
to submit a case for the opinion of her
Majesty in Council, Victoria will readily con-
cur. 1 It is unnecessary for me to recapitulate
the reasons that have been so forcibly urged
throughout the correspondence why this im-
portant question should be determined. The
action of the various Governments of this
colony has, I venture to say, been consistent
throughout. They have had but one object in
view, and that has been an authoritative
settlement of the matter, the gravity
of which was fully recognised by a
former Government of Victoria, and
when it is considered that, amongst
other complications that may arise, persons
holding grants from Victoria may have no
title to their lands, and criminals committing
offences within the disputed boundary may
escape punishment, and those arresting them
be liable for damages, it is evident it cannot
remain in its present unsatisfactory state.
I hope that your Government will
take the matter into consideration
with a view to early carrying out
the agreement to submit a case for the deci-
sion of her Majesty in Council, so that the ques-
tion may be amicably and definitely settled.
If any difficulty should be felt with respect to
the position of occupiers of land now holding
titles from Victoria I shall be happy to discuss
the question of inserting a provision in the
agreement of reference providing for validating
such titles upon terms to be agreed upon
between us.” On April 26 following Victoria
replied simply acknowledging the letter and
stating that a reply would be sent.
On May 14 Sir William Morgan telegraphed
to Victoria stating that as Parliament opened
shortly he would be much obliged if the Chief
Secretary of Victoria would inform him of his
views as early as convenient on the subject of
the disputed boundary. Under date of July
20 next Mr. Robert Ramsay replied, saying—-
“Referring to your letter of the 16th April
and Subsequent telegram, again bringing under
the consideration of this Government the
question of the boundary line between South
Australia and Victoria, I have the honor
to state that the boundary, whether
right or wrong, having been settled
between the colonies thirty years ago
this Government fails to see any adequate
reason for disturbing it at the present time
and concurs in the views expressed in my pre-
decessor’s letter on the subject of July 31,1877,
No. 337. I regret that pressure of public
1 6


business has prevented earlier attention to
your communication.” He understood that it
was not the desire of hon members to sit late,
and he would ask leave to continue the debate
on a later date.
Leave was given Mr. Ash to continue the
debate on Wednesday, September 20.
Mr. ASH moved for leave to add the words
“ and the Government is authorised and in-
structed to take all other steps necessary to
obtain the decision of the Privy Council in
this matter.”
Leave was granted and the words were
added.
Mr. ASH, in resuming the debate, said
on August 4, 1880, Mr. Hardy asked
(“Hansard,” p. 580) —“ 1. What action does
the Government intend to take in conse-
quence of the refusal of the Government of
Victoria to reconsider the question of the
boundary between South Australia and Vic-
toria? 2. When do the Government intend to
take action.” The Treasurer (Hon. C. Mann)
replied—“l. The Government intends taking
action for the purpose of forcing a decision on
the question of the disputed boundary between
South Australia and Victoria either by selling
dutiable articles on the disputed strip of
country or by granting a lease thereof. 2. As
soon as possible. Before they could take any
action it would be necessary to fix with pre-
cision the real boundary lines. This would
take considerable time and require signals
to be made in the Northern Territory.”
Mr. West-Erskine on the same day moved—
“ That copies of all correspondence during the
past 18 months between the Governments of
Victoria and South Australia with reference
to the boundary line of South Australia be
laid upon the table of this House.” Mr.
West-Erskine said—“ He had understood from
Mr. Hardy that he did not intend to move in
this matter, and had therefore taken action.
He thought something should be done to put
South Australia in a proper position with re-
gard to her own territory. We were being
robbed of a large annual income from not being
in possession of a strip of land which properly
belonged to South Australia, having been
deprived of it through the imperfect way in
Which the survey was originally made.”
The Treasurer (Hon. C. Mann) said “ that the
matter had been under consideration for some
six or seven years at any rate. First of all the
Government had communicated with the
Victorian Government when Mr. MacPherson
was the Chief Secretary. It was agreed that
the astronomers of the two colonies should
meet to fix the true boundary ; afterward Mr.
Francis had consented on the part of the
Victorian Government to fix the meridian, but
stipulated that that should only be done in the
interests of science. Since that time nothing
had been done to define the boundary, but
Mr. Kerferd had definitely agreed to sub-
mit the matter to her Majesty’s Privy
Council, but that agreement had been sub-
sequently repudiated. A very strong appeal
was afterwards made to Mr. Berry, but the re-
ply of that gentleman had been not only a flat
refusal but a very insulting one, and one which
should not have been made by the Chief Secre-
tary of one colony to the Chief Secretary of
another. The Government had even after that
appealed to the Chief Secretary of Mr. Ser-
vice’s Ministry (Mr. Ramsay), calling the
attention of the Victorian Government that no
less than two Chief Secretaries had promised to
submit the matter to a definite ruling, and
giving a resume of the history of the question.
The matter was doubtless a most important one.
It was not merely the value of the land,
although the Surveyor-General estimated
that at £BOO,OOO, but the interests of
justice, of good order, and good govern-
ment likewise demanded that the ques-
tion should be definitely set at rest. It was
for these reasons that the Government were
anxious to have it settled. It had been
proved that it was idle to suppose that the
Victorian Government would consent to re-
open the question, and the alternative that
the Government proposed was to force the
matter into one of the Victorian Law Courts,
either by selling dutiable articles, or by the
Government granting leases in the disputed
country. This course would be adopted as
soon as ever the boundary was pro-
perly determined ; but some astronomical ob-
servations would first have to be made.”
The Attorney-General (Hon. W. H. Bundey)
said that “the hon. member might rest assured
that the Government would take all necessary
steps before proceeding to extremities. He
thought, however, that when the additional
correspondence was laid on the table hon.
members would see that every possible effort
had been made by the Government to avoid
litigation. But the question must be brought
to an issue, otherwise complications might
arise in the hearing of criminal cases connected
with offences committed in the disputed
country. The very mode suggested by the hon.
member for Wallaroo of having the question
submitted to the Privy Council had been
actually agreed to by the Victorian Govern-
ment, but that colony had afterwards re-
pudiated its agreement. He would ask hon.
members to peruse the minutes of his hon. and
learned colleague the Treasurer, which set out
the facts of the case and showed that it was
absolutely necessary in the interests of public
justice in both colonies that the matter
should be definitely settled. That the
Victorian Government believed they were
wrong was true; they could not believe
otherwise, and they had not dared for
many years past to reopen the question.”
In the Legislative Council on June 8, 1881
(“Hansard” p. 36), the Hon. A. B. Murray
asked—“ 1. Has any progress been made with
regard to the settlement of the disputed boun-
dary line between Victoria and South Aus-
tralia ? 2. Which of the two disputed lines is
now recognised under the boundary Customs
duties arrangement between the two colonies ?”
The Chief Secretary (Hon. W. Morgan) said
‘ ‘ there was considerable difficulty in the Govern-
ment taking steps to settle this question.
The Hon. Mr. Murray would know that the
Government had asked the Victorian Govern-
ment to allow a case to be stated in the
Privy Council, and they had twice agreed to do
so, but when there was a change in the Govern-
ment of the other colony the agreement was re-
pudiated ; in fact they were told to do their
worst. The formal answer was as follows :
1. The opinions of counsel have been taken, but
no further progress has been made. 2. The
boundary line disputed by South Australia is
for the purpose of the arrangement recognised
without prejudice. The Government were still
considering the question and as soon as any-
thing was agreed upon prompt action would be
taken.” In the Assembly on November
18, 1881, the Government stated nothing
further had been done in this matter.
In the Victorian Assembly on 31st October,
1883 (according to the Victorian “Hansard ” of
1883, p. 1,745), “Mr. W. Maddern asked the
Minister of Lands whether he had recently re-
ceived any communication from the South
Australian Government with reference to the
disputed territory on the border between
South Australia and Victoria; and if not,
whether he would take action during the
recess to bring about a settlement of the
matter ? He might mention that during the
time he was in office the Premier of South
Australia expressed his intention of making
17


an ex parte appeal on the subject
to the Privy Council. Mr. Tucker
stated that there had been no recent
communication with the South Australian
Government on the subject, and the boundary
line as fixed was satisfactory to the colony of
Victoria. It was marked by competent sur-
veyors, and Victoria did not admit that there
was any disputed territory at all. Owing to
the increase of population and the in-
terests which had grown up in the
proximity of the 141st meridian, it would
be advisable to stick to the boundary.”
In the Assembly on September 23, 1884 (S.A.
‘"Hansard,” p. 1,071), in reply to Mr. Hen-
ning, the Chief Secretary (Hon. J. W. Colton)
said the matter of the disputed territory “ had
been under the consideration of the law officers
of the Crown for many years past, and it was
a subject that the Government regarded as
being of considerable importance. The Go-
vernment had determined to make an early
effort to bring about a settlement of the question.' ’
The next document was South Australian
Parliamentary paper No. 84, of 1885, which
contained a letter from the Premier of Victoria
stating that up to that date the Victorian Go-
vernment had dealt with the land in the dis-
puted territory by selling 22,677 acres and leas-
ing 137,246 acres. The next document was
South Australian Parliamentary paper No. 180,
of 1885. It consisted of 7 pages, but it was un-
necessary to refer to the first 6 of them, because
they merely set out the proposed case for
reference in substantially the same words he
had quoted on a previous occasion. This was
the proposed agreement between the two
colonies to consent to the Privy Council de-
ciding the matter. Part was as follows :
“ That it has been agreed between the said Go-
vernments of South Australia and Victoria
that Victoria shall issue, for grazing purposes
only, annual licenses renewable for five years
of other portions of the said disputed terri-
tory, and that all questions as to rents re-
ceived for the same shall be adjusted between
the said Governments according to the result
of the present case; and in pursuance of the
said agreement the Government of Victoria
has, during the year 1885, leased as aforesaid a
further area of 77,385 acres of the said dis-
puted territory at rents amounting to £4,063
12s. 6d. per annum. That the intercolonial
railway to connect Adelaide with Melbourne
will be shortly completed, and it has been
agreed between the said two Governments
that the border station shall be placed
on the said disputed territory, and
shall be constructed by the Victorian Go-
vernment at the joint cost of the said
two colonies, and that the railway across the
said disputed territory shall be constructed by
the Victorian Government, and in the event
of the said disputed territory being decided to
belong to South Australia, then South Aus-
tralia shall recoup the Government of Victoria
the cost of constructing the railway across the
said disputed territory. Your petitioners,
therefore, most humbly pray that your most
Excellent Majesty in Council will be graciously
pleased to determine whether the said procla-
mations, issued by the respective Governors of
South Australia in the year 1847, and of New
South Wales in the year 1849, as hereinbefore
set out, are, or ought to be, binding upon the
colony of South Australia, and that your
Majesty may be graciously pleased to make
such further or other order as to your Majesty -
in-Couneil may appear just and proper.” That
was the agreement which the Victorian Govern-
ment promised Mr. Colton to agree to. In the
Victorian Parliamentary paper No. 109 of
1887 they found exactly the same case printed
word for word. And some correspondence pre-
viously read was also printed in that Blue-book
of Victoria. He now came to South Australian
Parliamentary paper No. 74 of 1886, which
contained a plan of the disputed territory. In
the Victorian “ Hansard” of June 18,1885, page
22, there appeared a report of a debate on this
matter, which was commenced by Mr. Duffy.
After that gentleman had finished, Mr. Service
remarked that “the matter referred to was a
very little one —one which he thought the
House would agree justified him in doing all
that he had done so far. He believed that
every successive South Australian Government
had agitated for an adjustment of the border
line, and a great deal of correspondence had
passed on the subject, year after year, between
the Governments of the two colonies. No
doubt the question was one which ought to
be settled definitely one way or the other.
He had consented to the submission of the
matter to the arbitration of the Privy Council
on two conditions. The first was that the
reference should concern strictly the future—■
not the past —so that no question could arise
with respect to past possibilities; and the
other was that it should be submitted for the
approval of the Victorian Parliament before
being sent to the Privy Council.” That was a
distinct admission that the Victorian Govern-
ment had consented to the reference being
made. In the same volume of Victorian
“ Hansard,” page 747, Mr. Bent was reported
to have asked the Chief Secretary “whether
the rents to be derived from the disputed
territory on the South Australian border were
to be divided—as stated in the Argus news-
paper of the 15th August—between South Aus-
tralia and Victoria ?” Mr. Berry had replied
that the “ Government did not intend to divide
with South Australia the money received as
rent for land immediately east of the South
Australian boundary line.” The matter was
mentioned in the South Australian House of
Assembly on 7th July, 1885, Hansard, page
193, when the Hon. J. Colton had moved for
the production of a copy of the statement from
the Victorian Government showing the
quantity of land sold and leased in the dis-
puted territory between South Australia and
Victoria. He said—“ I wish to explain to
members and the country what has been done in
this particular matter. With a view to accuracy
I have copied the notes I made soon after the
interviews I had with Mr. Service in Melbourne,
and these I will read to the hon. members ;
On February 10, 1885 I first interviewed
the PI on. James Service on the disputed
boundary question, when we discussed the
whole matter at some length I pointed out
to him how important it was that the question
should be settled without further delay,
especially so as railway communication
between the two colonies will be completed in
about two years, and that it had been mutually
agreed to build the joint station in about the
centre of this land. I also submitted three
suggestions with a view of early settlement.
1. It should be submitted to arbitration. 2.
The whole should be valued, and as Victoria
was anxious for territory, South Australia
would let them have the country on paying one-
half of its value. 3. Refer the whole to the
Privy Council. Nothing was done at this
conference, but it was agreed that it should
stand over until my return from New Zealand,
when Mr. Service would be prepared to say
what Victoria would be prepared to do. On
April 2, as arranged, I again interviewed Mr.
Service, and while he was not prepared
to entertain the two first proposals, he
distinctly agreed to refer the question
to the Privy Council. On behalf of the
South Australian Government I assented to
this, and, at Mr. Service’s request, I agreed to
have the case drawn by this Government,
when it was to be submitted for final settle-
18


tnent. On my return to Adelaide I forwarded
all the papers to the Attorney-General, with a
minute requesting that the case might be pre-
pared as early as possible. During this inter-
view I asked Mr. Service if any of this land
had been alienated or dealt with in any way
by the Victorian Government. He intimated
that some transactions had taken place, and at
my request he promised a return, which
reached me soon after my return to Adelaide,
particulars of which I now move for. Some
statements which Mr. Service has made in the
Victorian Legislature bear out what I am
saying. As far as the facts are con-
cerned Mr. Service and I are agreed. As
to what is to be submitted to the Vic-
torian Parliament I am not clear. Mr.
Service has not said anything about that.
The only question has been as to the drawing
of the case, and it was arranged that the South
Australian Government should draw it and
submit it to the Victorian Goverment with a
view to agreement thereon. The matter is one
of vital importance to both countries, and
should be settled at once. With these remarks
I ask that the return desired may be laid on
the table of the House. (The Commissioner of
Crown Lands (Hon. J. H. Howe)—‘ The Go-
vernment have no objection to the motion.’)
Carried.” Similar statements were made in the
House of Assembly on July 21 and 23, in 1885.
It was mentioned in Victoria again in 1886,
and an amusing debate of the matter would be
found on page 723 of “ Hansard” for that year.
On that occasion it was brought forward as if
South Australia were for sale, not only in
single lots, but by the dozen, and it ap-
peared as if Victoria were prepared to buy
South Australia right out without even giving
notice of motion about the matter. Mr. D. M.
Davies rose “to ask the Premier if he would
consider the advisability of conferring with the
Government of South Australia with the view
of effecting, if possible, an amalgamation be-
tween that colony and Victoria? This question
is of 'such a wide character that probably it
may be misunderstood, and therefore it is
absolutely necessary that I should say few
words. I don’t intend to make a speech, but,
in order that the rules of the House may be
complied with, I will conclude with a motion.
I endeavored so to frame the question that it
should not bear the appearance of a wish to
take any advantage of or to humiliate the
sister colony. Nothing is further from my in-
tention than that. I myself am an old South
Australian. I know the people there and their
habits very well ; and I assert that no better
specimens of the British people can be found
in any of these colonies than in South Austra-
lia. I may say further that I would not have
put the question on the paper on my own
motion. I was induced to do so from conversa-
tions and correspondence which I have had with
some leading men in South Australia in which
I have been given to understand that there
is> a strong desire on the part of a large num-
ber of the people of that colony that South Aus-
tralia should join Victoria —not that we should
swallow them up —not that South Australia
should cease to exist as a colony, any more
than we should, by the transaction. I see no
reason at all why this should not take place,
except one based on sentiment. There is
nothing in the matter of name. So far as I am
personally concerned, if the object which I
advocate, and which I believe to be a good one,
were carried out, I would not care whether the
whole territory was called South Australia or
Victoria, or any other name. The name would
not at all affect the result. The proposal may be
objected to on the ground that South Australia
might have to give up its Parliament and other
institutions, but I see no reason even for that.
There might be a local Parliament in Mel-
bourne and a local Parliament in Adelaide,
and there might also be a Senate, or something
of that kind, in the Portland or the Wimmera
district to legislate for the combined colony.
South Australia has an immense territory and
a large amount of mineral wealth of almost
every description which needs developing, and
people in that colony are under the impression
that if they could command the money and
some of the energy which have raised this
colony to its present position their condition
would be materially improved. I need scarcely
add that the union of South Australia and Vic-
toria would remove a large number of diffi-
culties which now exist between the two colo-
nies. For many years we have had a dispute
with South Australia as to the boundary. We
cannot agree as to the exact meridian of
longitude which separates us, and therefore
there is between us a portion of country
which, so to speak, is no man’s ground.
That difficulty would be swept away at
once, as would also be the difficulty with
reference to the waters of the Murray.”
In the course of the debate Mr. Gillies
said: —l do not consider myself justified,
at the present time, in opening up com-
munication with South Australia ; but I can
assure the hon. member for Grenville that,
if I see the slightest opportunity for taking
the matter in hand I will heartily avail myself
of it. I believe that the interests of both South
Australia and Victoria would be materially
advanced if they were to become one united
colony.” On the 10th August, 1886, in the
Victorian Assembly, page 1035 of “Hansard,”
Mr, Bent was reported to have directed atten-
tion to the fact that the disputed boundary
had not yet been settled. He had received no
satisfactory answer. In the Victorian
Council on the 7th December, 1886, “Han-
sard,” page 2646, along debate was reported.
“The Hon. W. A. Zeal called the attention of
the Minister of Justice to the statements pub-
lished in the Melbourne daily journals to the
effect that the Victorian Government contem-
plated, in conjunction with the Government of
South Australia, referring the question of the
territory west of the 141st meridian of longi-
tude and claimed by the Government of South
Australia, but always held and occupied as a
portion of this colony, to the determination of
the Lords of the Privy Council; and asked the
following question:—‘l. Is such a reference
contemplated ? 2. On what data do the
Government admit the validity of the claim of
the South Australian Government; and, if
not, on what grounds do the Victorian Govern-
ment propose to consent to such reference. 3.
Do the Victorian Government propose, in the
presumed reference, to make any claim on the
South Australian Government ; and, if not,
on what grounds do the Victorian Govern-
ment propose to consent to such reference ?
4. Do the Victorian Government propose, in
the presumed reference, to make any claim on
the South Australian Government for the out-
lay incurred in the prosecution of the Burke
and Wills expedition, the result of which expe-
dition has been the acquisition by South Aus-
tralia of that large portion of the continent
known as Northern Australia, and which terri-
tory the Victorian Government might rea-
sonably have supposed the Imperial Go-
vernment would have incorporated with
Victoria as a reward for its large out-
lay and disinterested enterprise?’” In the
course of a speech on the matter he said—
“ln order to enable hon. members to realise
the absurd nature of the claim set up by South
Australia it need only be mentioned that the
country already possessed by that colony com-
prised 903,960 square miles, or no less than
578,361,600 acres, so that with an area of
upwards of eleven times the area of Victoria
19


—in fact one so large that it was unable to
administer it—it was seeking to wrest from its
diminutive neighbor a strip of land so incon-
siderable that it was hardly possible to con-
ceive of it being taken into account at ail. Surely
such conduct was the essence of meanness.”
The Hon. Mr. Cuthberthad replied as follows :
“ Coming to the questions put by the honor-
able member, the answer to the first was,
‘ Yes.’ To the second the official reply was as
follows:—‘ The Government do not admit the
validity of the claim of the South Australian
Government, but as this has been a long-
standing dispute, and as a submission to the
Queen m Council has been promised by pre-
vious Governments, this Government have con-
sented to a joint submission of facts, counsel on
each side to argue the case before the Privy
Council.’ To the third question the answer
was ‘No.’” The Victorian Government in
effect at that time had said they were willing
to do what was just in this matter. That had
not satisfied Mr. Zeal, however, who on
December 14 of that year was reported in
“Hansard,” page 2,823, to have moved: —
“ That in the opinion of this House no refe-
rence should be made to the Lords of the Privy
Council of the claim of the South Australian
Government to that portion of the colony of
Victoria which lies to the west of the
141st meridian of longitude until the
exact details of the alleged reference
are submitted to and have received the
approval of the Parliament of Victoria.”
The Hon. H. Cuthbert stated “ that this
matter of the disputed boundary between Vic-
toria and South Australia had been under the
consideration of various Governments, all of
whom had been desirous of having it quietly
and satisfactorily settled. The matter was
before the Service Government last year, and
they promised that it should be submitted for
the opinion of the Privy Council. Accord-
ingly, a case fairly embodying everything
which could be properly stated on behalf of
Victoria, on the one hand, and South Aus-
tralia on the other, had been prepared, and it
had been submitted to the Government of
South Australia for approval. As soon as that
submission to reference was agreed to, and
before it was signed, sealed, and delivered—
which was an important feature in connection
with the execution of a deed—it would be
brought before both Houses of Parliament,
and Mr. Zeal would have a full opportunity of
carefully reviewing it. Under these circum-
stances, and as the motion was calculated to
embarass the action of the Government, he
would ask the hon. member to withdraw it.
Surely, if the facts were fairly stated, as they
no doubt would be—and if they were not, as
they no doubt would be, it would be com-
petent for Mr. Zeal to move that the sub-
mission should be altered or varied —what had
they to apprehend from a reference to the
Privy Council ? If their claim was a just
one it would be confirmed. If it was
unjust, why should they want to re-
tain that which did not belong to them ?
On December 15, 1886 (“ Hansard,” p. 2896) in
the Victorian Assembly, Mr. Wrixon pro-
mised that the Government would afford the
House an opportunity of discussing the ques-
tion of the reference to the Privy Council. In
the Assembly on 15th June, 1886 (South Aus-
tralian “Hansard,” p. 158), “Mr. Handyside
asked—l. What progress has been made as to
the settlement of the disputed boundary with
Victoria during the past recess? 2. Do the
Government intend to take any further steps
in the matter ? 3. What do the Government
propose to do ? The Attorney-General (Hon.
J. W. Downer) said—ln December, 1885, a
dispatch was addressed to the Premier of
Victoria, with a copy of the case to be sub-
mitted to the Privy Council, to which a reply
was received objecting to several of its pro-
visions. A further dispatch was sent in
April, 1886, to which no reply has yet
been received beyond a telegram promising
communication on last Monday. On receipt
of the communication referred to above the
Government will be able to give the House
further information on the subject. When I
was in Melbourne I had frequent communica-
tion with Mr. Gilles and others on this subject,
and they promised me to assist in every way in
getting the case settled and submitted to the
Privy Council. I have no reason to suppose
they won’t adhere to what they then said.”
Parliamentary Paper, No. 103 of 1887, printed
a case for reference to the Privy Council, prac-
tically prepared by Victoria, but it did not
contain much new, except two paragraphs that
he would read, and which were as follow:
“Your petitioners, the Governor and Execu-
tive Council of the province of South Aus-
tralia, contend and humbly submit to the
decision of your Majesty in Council—That the
boundary-line laid down in 1847 by the said
Henry Wade was erroneous, and was not in
accordance with the provisions of the said Act
4 and 5 William IV., c. 95, or with the said
letters patent of his late Majesty King William
the Fourth, issued under the said Act, inas-
much as it does not truly define upon the
ground the said 141st meridian, but is more
than two miles to the west thereof, and that
the proclamations of the Governors of the
respective colonies herein set out were ultra
vires and of no validity, and that the said
boundary is not and never has been the legal
boundary between the said colonies, and that
it has acquired no validity by the operation of
the said Act of 13 and 14 Viet., c. 59, or by
the subsequent acts of territorial jurisdiction
exercised by the Government of the colony of
Victoria over the land to the east of the said
line, nor has there been any binding ac-
quiescence on the part of the Government
of South Australia in such acts of terri-
torial jurisdiction and occupation by the
colony of Victoria, or any acceptance
of the said line as a legal and bind-
ing boundary; and that no authority other
than an Act of the Imperial Parliament, or some
agreement entered into under the provisions
of such an Act, could possibly alter the boun-
dary line from the 141st meridian. And your
petitioners, the said Governor and Executive
Council, on behalf of the said colony, further
humbly submit to your Majesty that your
Majesty should give such directions as shall
cause the position on the earth’s surface of the
141st meridian of east longitude to be ascer-
tained as nearly as possible by surveyors to be
appointed for that purpose by the respective
Governments of South Australia and Victoria;
that upon the position of said parallel being
ascertained, the same shall be marked out on
this ground, and that the line so ascertained
and marked shall thenceforth be and be deemed
to be the boundary between the said colonies
ot South Australia and Victoria. And your
petitioners, the Govemorand Executive Council
of the colony of Victoria, contend and humbly
submit to the decision of your Majesty
in Council—That the line laid out by
the said Henry Wade in 1847, and
continued to the River Murray in December,
1850, and since acted upon as the existing
boundary between the said colonies, is now the
‘ eastern boundary of the colony of South Aus-
Australia,’ referred to in the Imperial Act 13
and 14 Viet., c. 59, as the limit on the west of
the colony of Victoria erected by the said Act
into a separate colony. And your petitioners,
the Governor and Executive Council of the
colony of Victoria, further humbly submit to
the decision of your Majesty in Council that
20


the said line should not be disturbed or altered
after the long undisturbed exercise of terri-
torial jurisdiction over the country on the east
of the said line of the colony of Victoria, under
which various rights and interests have been
created, and a population become settled under
the local laws and constitution of the colony of
Victoria. You petitioners therefore humbly
pray that your Most Excellent Majesty in
Council will be graciously pleased to decide
upon the matter in dispute between your peti-
tioners, as set out in this petition, and to make
such order on the same as to your Most Gracious
Majesty in Council shall seem right. And your
petitioners further pray that, whether the deci-
sion of your Most Gracious Majesty in Council
shall be that the line contended for by your
petitioners, the Governor in Council of
Victoria, shall be maintained as the boundary
line between the said colonies, or whether the
decision of your Most Gracious Majesty in
Council shall be, as contended for by the
Governor in Council of South Australia, that
the line laid down by the said Henry Wade is
of no validity as a boundary line between
the colonies, and that a new line in the terms
submitted by the Governor in Council of South
Australia shall be determined upon and laid
down as the boundary between the colonies,
that your Most Gracious Majesty in Council
will take such order in the matter that a
permanent boundary line shall be established
between the said colonies ; and that the rights
and titles of persons in possession of land
within the disputed area shall not be affected
by such decision of your Most Gracious
Majesty in Council; and that all necessary
steps may be taken for validating and confer-
ring without charge any titles to land or to the
occupancy of land granted by the Government
of Victoria; and that the Government of
Victoria shall not be required to account for or
pay over any moneys received by the said
Government of Victoria for land sold by such
Government on the east of the line laid down
by Mr. Wade, or rents and license fees re-
ceived in respect of any such lands, or for any
other moneys arising from the exercise of
territorial jurisdiction over such lands.” In
the Legislative Council on July 26, 1887 (S.A.
“ Hansard,” p. 294) ‘’the Hon. W. A. E. West-
Erskine asked—l. What progress (if any) has
been made between our Government and that
of Victoria as to the disputed territory ? 2.
Will the Government take immediate steps to
determine the question ? The Chief Secretary
(Hon. J. G. Ramsay) replied—l. The draft
case and agreement for reference to the Privy
Council have lately been returned with altera-
tions which are now under consideration. 2.
No effort has been or will be spared to secure a
settlement of the matter as early as possible.”
They would notice that that phrase “as
early as possible” occurred throughout
six years, and yet nothing was done.
In the Legislative Council on September 20,
1887 (South Australian “ Hansard,” p. 830),
the Hon. Mr. West-Erskine moved—“ That
an humble address be presented from this
Council to her Most Gracious Majesty, pray-
ing her Majesty to cause the question of the
disputed boundary of Victoria and South Aus-
tralia to be remitted to the Privy Council for
decision.” After discussion the motion was
withdrawn on the assurance of the Government
that the matter was being pushed on as fast as
possible, and that carrying the motion might
delay its settlement. In the Assembly on
October 25, 1887 (South Australian “ Han-
sard,” p. 1206), “the Hon. J. C. Bray asked
the Attorney-General what progress had been
made with reference to the Victorian boun-
dary dispute and the case to be submitted to
the Privy Council, and when it would be
brought under the notice of Parliament ? The
Attorney-General (Hon. C. C. Kingston)—t
cannot exactly say, but I think it is of
such a character that in the course of
a few days we will be able to
submit to Parliament an agreement with
reference to this long - standing matter.”
In the Assembly on November 1, 1887 (South
Australian “Hansard,” p. 1,301), the At-
torney-General (Hon. C. C. Kingston) moved
—“ That this House approves of the proposed
reference to the Privy Council of the matter of
the disputed boundary between the colony of
Victoria and the province of South Australia.”
After debate the motion was carried on
November 2, 1887. On November 10, 1887,
the Legislative Council (“ Hansard,” p. 1,403)
carried a similar motion, moved by the Chief
Secretary (Hon. J. G. Ramsay). In the
Council on November 25,1887, the Chief Secre-
tary (“Hansard,” p. 1,634) said Victoria
had not yet done anything further.
On August 3, 1887, in the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria (Victorian “Hansard,”
page 656), “ Mr. Duffy enquired of the
Premier when he would be able to lay before
the House the draft agreement between Vic-
toria and South Australia relating to the dis-
puted territory on the boundary between the
two colonies ? He had noticed a statement in
the public press to the effect that the draft
agreement had passed through all its pre-
liminary stages and was awaiting signature.
He was anxious that that draft agreement
should be laid before the House in accordance
with an undertaking already given by the
Government, especially as he was desirous that
a clause should be added to enable Victoria, in
the event of the decision of the Privy Council
going against it, to pay South Australia
in money instead of losing any territory.
Mr. Gillies said the proposed agreement had
been under consideration some time and had
passed backwards and forwards between the
two colonies. As yet absolute accord had not
been arrived at. For the last few months the
agreement had been in the hands of the South
Australian Government. He hoped that the
terms of submission would soon be settled so
that the Government might be in a position to
submit those terms for the approval of Parlia-
ment. (Mr. Duffy—“ln the meantime
Parliament will not be bound?”) Certainly not.”
On November 8, 1887, in the Legislative Coun-
cil of Victoria (Victorian “ Hansard” for 1887,
p. 1,969), “the Hon. W. A. Zeal asked the
Minister of Justice when the text of the re-
ference embodying the case of this colony with
regard to the disputed boundary between Vic-
toria and South Australia to be submitted to
the arbitrament of the Lords Justices of the
Privy Council would be laid before Parlia-
ment and whether the Government would afford
the Council an opportunity of discussing the
details of the proposed reference and express-
ing an opinion thereon. The Hon. H.
Cuthbert replied that the text of the reference
was in print and the document would be laid
on the table next week. He would be happy
to afford Mr. Zeal or any other hon. member
an early opportunity of bringing the sub-
ject before the notice of the Chamber.”
On November 10, 1887, in the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria (“Hansard,” 1887, p.
2,032), Mr. Shiels asked the Premier when it
was likely that the draft agreement between
Victoria and South Australia relative to the
disputed territory on the boundary between
the two colonies would be circulated, and
whether due notice would be given to hon.
members of the time when they would be
asked to consider it ? The matter was of great
importance, because if the decision of the
Privy Council were to go a,gainst Victoria this
colony would lose a valuable strip of territory
and also a great number of colonists who
21


could ill be spared. Mr. Gillies said the
draft agreement would be circulated on
Tuesday, and then he would be able to
intimate when he proposed to invite the
House to take it into consideration.”
On December 13, 1887 (Victorian “ Hansard,”
1887, page 2,597), on the order of the day for
the third reading of the Appropriation Bill,
Mr. Bent asked the Premier if he intended to
proceed with the Appropriation Bill before
asking the House to deal with the
following motion of which the hon.
gentleman had given notice, and
which appeared on the notice - paper:—
“That this House approves of the proposed
reference to the Privy Council of the matter of
the disputed boundary between the colony of
Victoria and the province of South Australia.”
The statement of the case in regard
to the disputed boundary consisted of
16 pages of printed matter. Time
should be given for its fair consideration.
Mr. Shiels observed “that he had come a con-
siderable distance to take part in the debate on
the motion, which involved a most serious
question. The motion should not be brought
on except on full notice and in a full House.
Certainly it ought not to be brought on at an
hour when the House was exhausted. He
might mention that in 1873 the then
Premier (Mr. Francis) distinctly told
the South Australian Government that
he would be no party to any arbitra-
tion or reference to the Privy Council,
which would involve the taking away of
territory that had always been Victorian, and
on which persons had settled in the faith
that they would be under Victorian laws. Mr.
Shiels said he simply wanted an assurance from
the Premier that this most grave and momentous
question would be determined only when the
House was fully seized of all the issues in-
volved. Mr. Gillies intimated that he was
willing to give the assurance. On October 9,
1888, in the Victorian Legislative Assembly
(Victorian “ Hansard,” 1888, p. 1,429), Mr.
Langdon asked the Minister of Lands if he
would lay on the table of the House a copy of
all reports, correspondence, and other docu-
ments relating to the boundary fence now
being erected between South Australia and
this colony? Mr. Dow promised that the
documents would be placed on the table.
On November 8, 1888, m the Legislative As-
sembly of Victoria (Victorian “Hansard” for
1888, p. 1855), Mr. Lai gdon asked the Minister
of Lands whether he ould lay on the table
the reports which had been received relating
to the boundary fence between Victoria and
South Australia ? Mr. Dow replied that he
would be happy to do so. On December 20,
1888 (Victorian “ Hansard,” 1888, p. 2,687),
Mr. Gillies moved—“ That this House ap-
proves of the proposed reference to the Privy
Council of the matter of the disputed boun-
dary between the colony of Victoria and the
Province of South Australia. In 1869, when
Mr. MacPherson was Chief Secretary of this
colony, the South Australian Government
drew attention to the fact that it had been
discovered that an error was made in the
original survey, and asked that another survey
should be carried out by two officers, one to be
appointed by Victoria and the other by South
Australia, so that the boundary-line might be
determined more accurately. Mr. MacPherson
agreed to send an officer, but nothing further
was done at the time and no officer was sent.
After a great deal of consideration it was
thought by the Victorian Government that
witli the view of retaining the amicable and
friendly feeling existing between the colonies,
and as South Australia, although she con-
tended she had legal rights, was yet prepared
to submit the whole questionAo the Privy
Council on the merits, it would be very much
better for Victoria to agree to that course.
Otherwise possibly an occasion might arise
when South Australia desiring to press what
she considered legal rights, might attempt to
enforce those rights. The result of that would
probably be a trial in one of the courts—
either of this colony or South Australia —
and then the decision given would be
appealed against to the Privy Council, and
the Privy Council would be called upon to
deal not with the broad and general merits of
the question, but simply with the purely tech-
nical and legal question as to whether the
boundary-line fixed many years ago was abso-
lutely the boundary determined by the Imperial
Act. The Government thought, with the
object of retaining amicable relations, that the
question was altogether too small for this colony
to fight from that point of view. At the same
time we felt that South Australia, having such
a very large territory, might very well have
afforded to adhere to the boundary which had
been settled for such a length of time. How-
ever, as the South Australian Government
have not taken that view it has been
felt by the Government of this colony
that in a case of this kind, where there
is honestly a dispute between two colonies, it
is much the best course to appeal to a body
whose decision will be final, and to appeal on
the broad merits of the question. The terms
of the reference to the Privy Council were not
altogether settled, although nearly settled,
before Mr. Service left office. Subsequently
the South Australian Government pressed for
the matter being dealt with, and the whole
question was reconsidered by the present
Attorney-General, and the terms of the sub-
mission nave been fixed and settled. I believe
I may say that, on the whole, the case has been
stated very fairly, and I think we may fairly
leave the question to be settled on the broad
f round of its merits by her Majesty in Council,
believe that is a much preferable course to
allowing the question to stand over, and
a sore to be created, possibly with the
result of the matter getting into the courts,
and there being an ultimate appeal to the Privy
Council, on the purely legal aspect of the case.
I have no hesitation in personally expressing
my opinion, after the most careful considera-
tion, that this colony has all the merits on its
side, and that on the broad substantial merits
of the case South Australia has no position to
stand on at all. If it were possible, I would,
for my part, be perfectly willing to abide by
any ordinary arbitration on the broad merits
of the question without going any further. In
the event of the Privy Council deciding in favor
of South Australia, that colony is bound to give
all the people in that territory their titles with-
out any doubt or dispute. South Australia
cannot come (upon Victoria for a single farth-
ing which this colony has obtained from the
disposal of any portion of the land, and South
Australia is bound to give every one his rights
in the same way as if the land continued to
be possessed by Victoria, so that no new
question no difficulty can arise from the
decision of the matter. It really seeme to me
that South Australia simply desires to have the
matter finally determined one way or the
other—that if the Privy Council considers that
this land belongs to South Australia it ought
to have it, but that, on the other hand, if the
Privy Council says that under all the circum-
stances South Australia is bound to abide by a
line that was fixed and agreed to by the
Governors of the two colonies, then
there will be an end of the dispute. ”
Mr. Duffy on the same occasion said—“ Mr.
Speaker, if this were the last opportunity I
would have of addressing the House —as it
may be—l would use it in entering my protest


against the proposition which the Government
have pnt before ns to-night. As a represen-
tative of the people I will never give in my
adhesion to any plan which would lose an acre
of our territory or a citizen from our com-
munity. That is what the Government pro-
pose, because although the Premier may tell
us that we have all the rights and equities on
our side I tell him that any person who goes to
law is only safe by assuming at the outset that
he is sure to lose his case. Instead of this
proposition for appealing to the Privy
Council there are two other courses
which the Government might have asked
this House to adopt, either of which, I take it,
would have been more satisfactory to the
House and the country than the proposal
before us. In the first place, as the two
colonies are on such friendly terms, why could
they not have agreed to appeal to the Imperial
Parliament instead of to the Privy Council,
not for an enquiry into and arbitration on the
facts of the case, which are well understood
and admitted on both sides, but to pass a
Validating Act which would give Victoria the
boundary which it at present possesses—and
to which the Premier says we are entitled in
law and equity—and to do that on any equit-
able terms the Imperial Parliament might
think fit to impose ? That would be a fair pro-
position, and it is the only proposition to which
I, for one, would be willing to consent.
Mr. Tucker —What about the feelings of South
Australia ? Mr. Gillies —What does he care
about their feelings ? Mr. Duffy—l confess I
care very little about their feelings in com-
parison with the feelings of the people of this
colony. As the Premier put it himself, if the
positions were reversed and Victoria had the
larger territory it would never have been so
paltry and small-minded as to insist on this
miserable strip only 136 chains wide. Never-
theless, as I have said, I do not wish to wrong
South Australia in any shape or form, and if it
should be decided that she has any right to
this land, Victoria is wealthy enough and
liberal-minded enough to pay her for those
rights in money. I am quite willing that
South Australia should be paid any fair com-
pensation to which she may be entitled, but
what I obj ect to is that we should part with an acre
of our already too circumscribed territory, or,
which is still more important, give away one of
our citizens without that citizen having been
consulted. I consider that the Premier deals
with the inhabitants of this disputed territory
even in a more arbitrary mainer than Bismarck
dealt with Alsace and Lorraine. In almost
every country of Europe, whenever a partition
of this sort is undertaken, some pretence
at all events is made of consulting the feelings
of the inhabitants or their representatives. If
the Premier will do his duty by the country
there will be no necessity for a determination,
because there is not a shadow of doubt that
South Australia does not want the land anil
will be glad to give up whatever rights it may
have for a small sum of money —a sum
that we are very well able to pay.”
All through the debate there ran the arrogant
assumption that Victoria was an immensely
wealthy country, to whom the matter of
£4,000,000 was nothing, and that South Aus-
tralia was some cringing beggar who had only
trumped up a case for the sake of getting
money. Mr. Duffy went on to say:—‘“The
Premier, in the course of his address, alluded
not once but twenty times to the broad merits
of the case, as apart from legal technicalities —
that we are going to the Imperial authorities to
have the question determined on its merits.
But where, in the agreement for reference,
does that occur ? I don’t see anything of it.
As far as I can judge, looking at the matter
from a reasonable point of view, the
Privy Council will be bound to determine
the legal aspect of the question, they will have
to decide legally where the boundary of South
Australia and Victoria now is. The Privy
Council will undoubtedly say what the law is.
Whatever the merits may be, the question with
the Privy Council will be one of dry law, and
will be settled accordingly. I notice that the
only shred of legality that is attempted to be
put forward is a rather thin legal quibble.
According to the Premier the eastern boundary
of South Australia was originally fixed as the
141st meridian of longitude. When Victoria
was constituted a separate colony the descrip-
tion of boundaries did not set forth in so
many words that the western boundary was
the 141st meridian of longitude, but
it stated that the western boundary of
Victoria was the eastern boundary of
South Australia, and it is contended
that because the boundary was then fixed on
the ground that must be the boundary referred
to in the Act of Parliament, which was subse-
quently passed as the 141st meridian. I take
it that on this very thin legal quibble that the
whole of the legality contended for in the re-
mission on the part of Victoria rests. As the
Premier has told us, the question, after
slumbering from 1847, cropped up in 1869.
The then Premier (Mr. MacPherson) was ‘ got
at’ ’ by the Government of South Australia.
He agreed at their suggestion to send a sur-
veyor to determine where the 141st meridian
was, but as soon as he had an opportunity of
looking into the matter under the advice of
responsible officers he at once backed out of it.
If he could not avoid going to arbitration—
though I see no reason why he should go to
arbitration—why could he not have inserted in
the submission a clause to the effect that under
no circumstances should our territory be taken
from us. As a representative of the people
who live in the disputed territory, I may tell
him that those people entertain strong feelings
on the subject, and that they don’t believe in
the idea of ceasing to be citizens of Victoria
and being taken into South Australia. I very
much regret that 17 or 18 members of this
House are asleep while this important question
is being discussed. A large amount of settle-
ment has taken place on the border, and a
handsome railway-station has been built there.
There is no use in talking of this matter
as one of sentiment on the part of the
South Australian people; the fact is,
that they want our railway-station.”
In the Legislative Council on September 18,
1888 (South Australian “Hansard,” p. 1014),
“the Hon. W. A. E. West-Erskine asked—
What steps have been taken to secure the
settlement of the boundary dispute between
this colony and Victoria ? The Chief Secre-
tary (Hon, J. G. Ramsay) said that when he
was last in Melbourne the Premier of Victoria
stated that as soon as the Estimates had been
disposed of the Bill agreed to by the Govern-
ments of both colonies for the settlement of the
question would be brought forward, and he
would press it on so that it could be passed
during the year.” In the Legislative Council
on November 22. 1888 (South Australian
“Hansard,” p. 1840), the Chief Secretary stated
that recently a letter had been sent ”to the
Premier of Victoria urging upon him the
necessity of at once taking the necessary steps to
have the disputed boundary question settled.
In the Legislative Council, Victoria, on October
30, 1889 (Victorian “ Hansard,” p. 2094), “the
Hon. W. A. Zeal enquired of the Minister of
Justice if the Government would lay on the
table of the House the papers comprised
in the proposed reference to the Privy
Council of the matters in dispute between the
South Australian and Victorian Governments
respecting the boundary-line between the two


colonies, and whether such papers would be
available at least one week before the question
came on for consideration? The Hon. H.
Cuthbert stated that the papers referred to had
been laid on the table of the House and printed.
The hon. member would find them among
the papers for the year 1887. (Mr.
Zeal - Is there no new matter ?) No.”
In the South Australian Assembly on August
14, 1889 (“Hansard,” p. 576), the Chief Secre-
tary (Dr. Cockburn) stated “ the Government
propose again to urge the Government of Vic-
toria to submit the question for decision by
the Privy Council;” and in the Council (South
Australian “Hansard,” p. 605) on August 15,
1889, the Minister of Education made a state-
ment in almost the same words. On August
29,1889 (South Australian “ Hansard,” p. 750),
“the Chief Secretary (Hon. Dr. Cockburn), in
reply to Mr. Basedow, said he was urging the
Victorian Government to submit the question
of the disputed boundary to the Privy Council.
The matter now rested with Victoria. (Mr.
Kingston—Keep at them.) In reply to Mr.
Kingston the Chief Secretary (Hon.'Dr. Cock-
burn) said he was aware that the Premier of
Victoria had promised that the border question
should be submitted to Parliament this session,
but he had no explanation as to why this was
not done.” In the Assembly on October 10,
1889 (South Australian “Hansard,” p.
1195), “ Mr. Kingston asked if the Premier
had anything fresh to report with reference
to the progress of the negotiations with Vic-
toria with regard to the disputed boundary ?
The Chief Secretary (Hon. Dr. Cockburn) said
he had nothing to report except that he had
telegraphed the Premier of Victoria two or
three weeks ago, and he assured him that he
would bring the matter before the Parliament
of Victoria before the present session closed.”
In the Legislative Council on November 12,
1889 (South Australian “ Hansard,” p. 1,498),
the Minister of Education said he did not
know the position the affair had got into. In
the Legislative Council on November 14, 1889
(South Australian “Hansard,” page 1,564),
“the Hon. W. A. E. West-Erskineasked—ls
it the intention of the Government to take inde-
pendent action re disputed boundary question,
and to submit a case for the determination of
her Majesty’s Privy Council if the Govern-
ment of Victoria neglects to fulfil their pro-
mise this session to join the South Australian
Government in so doing ?” The Minister of
Education (Hon J. H. Gordon) replied—“ The
Government do not contemplate any neglect on
the part of the Government of Victoria to
fulfil their promise. He might inform
the hon. member that a telegram was
sent that morning to the Premier of
Victoria urging that the matter should be
brought before the Victorian Parliament as
soon as possible.” On November 19, 1889, in
the Legislative Council (South Australian
“Hansard,” p. 1593) the Minister of Educa-
tion stated that the Government had tele-
graphed to the Victorian Premier that they
relied upon his promise that the boundary
question should be settled during their then
present Parliament. On November 27, 1889,
in the Assembly (South Australian “ Han-
sard,” p. 1724), “Mr. Johnson asked—What
steps do the Government propose to take with
respect to the disputed boundary between
South Australia and Victoria? The Chief
Secretary (Hon. Dr. Cockburn) replied—The
matter is now under consideration. He might
add that he proposed to have a conference
with Victorian Ministers on the subject.”
In the Assembly on June 17, 1890, in reply to
Mr. Ash the Chief Secretary (Hon. Dr. Cock-
burn) said (“ Hansard,” p. 99), “the Govern-
ment had obtained a renewal of the promise of
the Government of Victoria to make another
effort early this session to obtain the sanction
of their House of Assembly to refer the matter
of the disputed boundary to the Privy
Council.” On July 30, 1890 (“Hansard,” p.
649), this information was repeated, and the
Government promised to again communicate
with Victoria on the subject. On August 13,
1890, in reply to Mr. Ash, the Chief Secretary
(“ Hansard,” p. 827) said that on August 5
the Victorian Government had been reminded
by letter of their promise to bring the
matter forward at the beginning of that session.
On 29th October, 1890 (“Hansard,” p. 1778),
“Mr. Grainger asked the Chief Secretary
whether he would enquire if it were true that
the Victorian Government were parting with
land on the disputed territory to storekeepers
and others. The Chief Secretary (Sir J. C.
Bray) understood that there Was an agreement
that the Victorian Government would not sell
any land on the disputed territory, and they
would only lease land until a definite decision
was arrived at by the Privy Council in refe-
rence to the dispute. If the hon. member
woidd give him particulars of any case of the
nature to which he had referred, the Govern-
ment would communicate with the Victorian
Government on the matter. To Mr. Ash—
Since the matter was last referred to in the
House nothing definite had been done
with regard to the disputed territory.
The Victorian Government promised to bring
before the Parliament of that colony the special
case prepared for the Privy Council, and the
Government would communicate with the Vic-
torian Government to see if the matter could
not be definitely settled. Mr. Ash asked
whether the Chief Secretary was aware that
during the last session of the Victorian Parlia-
ment a similar promise was given, and an
attempt was made to keep it by bringing the
matter forward on the last day of the session,
when the proposal was rejected. In view of
that fact would the Government endeavor to
get the Victorian Government to agree to do
something, and failing some agreement, would
they push the matter on by issuing some
sort of licenses on the disputed territory ? ”
Sir J. C. Bray said it would be desirable to
remind the Victorian Government of their
promise, and to ask them to get the matter
settled this session.” On November 19. 1890,
in reply to questions, the Treasurer (Mr. Play-
ford) said (“Hansard,” p. 2050) the Govern-
ment would again communicate with Victoria
on the matter. On June 16, 1891 (“ Hansard,”
p. 90) Mr. Ash asked “ what had been done in
pursuance of the promises given on November
19,1890, and October 29,1890, to the effect that
the Government would at an early date com-
municate with the Victorian Government with
the intention of settling the ownership of the
disputed territory ; and what did the Govern-
ment intend to do in order to obtain a decision
on the question of ownership? The Chief
Secretary (Sir J. C. Bray) said the Government
had communicated with Victoria on the subject.
On May 22 last the Prime Minister of Victoria
wrote that he had no reason to believe that the
Assembly there would reverse the decision
arrived at in 1889, when a majority declined to
refer the matter to the Privy Council. The Go-
vernment of Victoria had been requested to re-
consider the question with a view to settle the
matter amicably. A letter had been received,
dated June 12, 1891, in which the Prime Minis-
ter regretted that he could not reintroduce
the question. The Government had not
yet decided what further action to take.”
On July 1, 1891, in reply to Mr. Kingston,
the Treasurer (Hon. T. Playford), said
(“Hansard,” p. 244) the Government had
“lately received a reply from the Prime
Minister of Victoria declining to ask the
Parliament to submit a case for the decision of
24


the Privy Council. The Government had
not yet decided what further action should be
taken. ” He wondered if the Treasurer remem-
bered now what he said then. On November
18, 1891, Mr. Kingston asked (“ Hansard,” p.
2048) “ what the present position was with Vic-
toria on the disputed boundary question.
The Treasurer (Hon. T. Playford) said the pre-
sent Victorian Government refused to bring
the matter under the attention of the Legisla-
ture in that colony. The Government were
not going to let the matter rest, but it was a
serious question and one which might involve
important consequences. The Government
were now considering what course to recom-
mend the House to adopt. The best way
seemed to him to have the question settled
on some point of contraband goods.”
On 24th August, 1892 (“ Hansard,” p. 690), the
Hon. C. C. Kingston asked whether the Trea-
surer could inform the House what was the
position of affairs in regard to the question of
the disputed boundary. The Treasurer, Mr.
Holder, replied that he believed it was in the
same position as it had been for years, but
said he would look into the matter; and on
30th August, 1892 (“Hansard,” p. 748), Mr.
Kingston again mentioned the matter, and the
Treasurer said the Government were consider-
ing Dr. Madden’s report, but that nothing had
been done. If Sir ,T. W. Downer had re-
mained in office it might have been wrong for
him to have moved in the matter, but from his
experience of the last three years he knew
Ministries could not always rely on the con-
tinuity of their official position, so he hoped
Sir John would pardon him for moving what
he might have liked to have moved himself.
On Ist November, 1892 (“ Hansard,” p. 1423),
Sir E. T. Smith asked “Is it the inten-
tion of the Government to take any
action with reference to the disputed
boundary question, and if so, what?”
The Chief Secretary (Sir John Downer) replied
—“ The Government intend to appeal once
more to the Victorian Government to carry
out their promise to submit the question to the
Privy Council, and in the event of their
refusal will consider the advisability of pro-
ceeding against the Victorian Customs officers
for seizing goods for nonpayment of duty on
the disputed territory. The last course is
recommended as the opinion of Dr. Madden,
of Victoria, obtained by the late Government.”
On November 15, 1892 (“Hansard,” p. 1607),
in reply to Mr. Handyside, the Chief Secre-
tary said —■“ He had not received a reply from
Victoria as to the opinion of Dr. Madden with
reference to the disputed boundary ques-
tion. If the reply was not satisfac-
tory he would look into the matter.”
On November 22, 1892, in reply to Mr. Cald-
well, the Chief Secretary said (“Hansard,” p.
1699) he had written to the Premier of Vic-
toria calling his attention to the whole of the
correspondence on this matter, and asking him
to keep the promise which had been made to
refer it to the Privy Council. On December 6,
1892, the Hon. Mr. Kingston asked for further
information on the subject, and the Chief
Secretary (Sir J. W. Downer) replied (“Han-
sard, p. 1926) that the Victorian Government
had replied to his letter, and had said “That
they would meet South Australia in consulting
our convenience as far as possible. On the
question of the disputed boundary the Vic-
torian authorities said that they must be
allowed a little more time to make their formal
reply.” On December 17, 1892, in reply to
Mr. Kingston, the Chief Secretary (“Han-
sard,” p. 2279) said nothing fresh had hap-
pened, and he promised that during re-
cess he would do all he could to
bring the matter to a settlement. Ac-
cording to the Victorian “ Hansard,” 1892,
page 3299, on Decern oer 7, 1892, Mr. Baker
asked the Premier: —1. If it is his intention to
treat the disputed area of land on the Vic-
torian and South Australian border as Vic-
torian territory ? 2. If not, is it his intention
to take action with a view to having the ques-
tion so long in dispute settled ; and, if so,
what steps does he intend to take? 3. Will
the Government take immediate steps to give
residents of the disputed territory a more satis-
factory tenure of their holdings pending a
settlement of the question? Mr. G. Turner
(in the absence of Mr. Shiels) said that certain
communications were passing between the two
colonies with regard to this matter, but the
correspondence was not yet completed. Honor-
able members might rest assured that the
Government would not do anything that would
give away any of the rights of the colony.
In the South Australia Assembly, on June 27,
1893 (South Australia “Hansard,” p. 91), in
reply to Mr. Ash, the Treasurer said —“The
last communication received from the Govern-
ment of Victoria was a telegram on the 14th
June as follows : —‘ Regret that owing to pre-
parations for opening of session, and state of
financial matters elaimingour attention, it is not
possible at the present juncture to enter upon
the consideration of the matters referred to in
your telegram.—B. O’Loghlen, for Premier.’ ”
This brought him to the official papers
laid on the table that day. The papers
the Attorney-General had laid on the
table contained 72 letters and telegrams,
most of which would not need reference at all.
The first date was April 10, 1883, when a letter
was written by Sir J. C. Bray to the Chief
Secretary of Victoria, which contained the
following:—“This Government urge the im-
portance of having the question definitely
settled, and I have therefore to request that
you will reconsider the proposal to submit the
case to the Privy Council. In the event, how-
ever, of your Government declining to do so
this Government propose to forward through
his Excellency the Governor of this colony to
the Right Honorable the Secretary of State a
copy of the correspondence now enclosed, to-
gether with a copy of this letter and your
reply thereto, and to respectfully request
him to consider the whole question, and to
indicate how, in his opinion, the matter may
best be definitely settled to avoid future
complication.” On April 27, 1883, Sir Graham
Berry replied stating:—“As the matter has
already been exhaustively considered, and as
you are fully seized of the views of this
Government in regard to the strip of country
in dispute, I fail to see any necessity for re-
opening this particular question. I desire,
however, to repeat that as previously inti-
mated this colony is willing and anxious to
submit a case to the Privy Council for a gene-
ral rectification of the boundaries of the colo-
nies of New South Wales, South Australia,
and Victoria ; but in view of the fact that the
area of this, the smallest in extent of any of
the colonies on the Australian continent, is
already unduly restricted in a northerly direc-
tion, this Government cannot give their
concurrence to a proposal that might re-
sult in a further diminution of her territory.”
On October 14, 1884, Mr. John Colton, the
then Premier, wrote as follows to the Victorian
Premier: —“The question of the federation of
the Australian colonies, in which you have
taken such a prominent part, has, as you are
aware, my warmest sympathy. The matter
has of late naturally engaged my particular
attention, as well as that of my colleagues, and
we are forced to the conclusion that the cause
we have all so much at heart would be most
materially advanced by the removal of all un-
necessary sources of friction between the
colonies. I therefore make no further excuse
25


for inviting your attention to the question of
settling the difference which exists between
Victoria and South Australia as regards the
local situation of the line boundary between
the two colonies. I cannot see that there is
room for two opinions as to the propriety, at
the earliest possible date, of putting an end to
the uncertainty which at present exists on the
subject, and which has given rise to incon-
venience in the past, and may be pro-
ductive of most undesirable complica-
tions in the future. South Australia
has no desire to claim anything to which
she is not lawfully entitled, neither do I
believe that your Government have any such
wish. Still, as the matter stands at present,
as regards what is popularly known as the dis-
puted territory, neither colony can deal with it
to any advantage—Victoria, as it appears to
me, being prevented by want of title, and
South Australia by Victorian occupation. My
Government will be prepared to draft the
necessary case, to be submitted for your
perusal, and I shall indeed be glad to hear
that your Government are prepared to assist in
the way I have indicated, or in any other mode
which we may mutually agree upon, for the
purpose of amicably, permanently, and defi-
nitely settling the rights of the two colonies in
the matter to which I have invited your atten-
tion.” On October 27, 1884, Mr. James Service
replied as follows—“I have the honor to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 14th instant respecting the question of
settlement of the boundary line between V ictoria
and South Australia, and to inform, you in reply,
that the subject will receive early consideration. ’ ’
He next came to the following telegram from
the Premier of Victoria (Mr. Service) to the
Premier, South Australia, dated June 29,
1885 : —“ The verbal arrangement which Mr.
Colton made with me was to the effect that a
case for the Privy Council was to be drawn up
by the South Australian Government, submitted
to us, and laid before our Parliament prior to
its being sent to the Privy Council.” On
February 12, 1886, Mr. Service wrote again,
and in his letter stated: —“Paragraph 4 is
contrary to the verbal arrangement made by me
with the Hon. Mr. Colton. ~ In arranging this
matter with him I laid down two distinct con-
ditions—lst, that the case for reference to the
Privy Council would have to be submitted to
our Parliament; and 2nd, that if the decision
of the Privy Council was adverse to Victoria
she should not be asked to account for any
moneys received by her in the past. In any
petition which may be agreed on I would
desire that the memorandum on this subject,
prepared under date July 25, 1874, and signed
by the Hon. J. J. Casey, who was then
Minister of Lands in this colony, should form
a portion of or an appendix to such peti-
tion, as it sets forth fully and clearly the
whole matter. A copy of this memorandum
was forwarded to your Government by letter
from the office of the Chief Secretary, dated
July 27, 1874. I am, however, inclined to sug-
gest that it would tend to facilitate the early
and satisfactory determination of the matter at
issue were the course which was pursued in the
case of the dispute between New South Wales
and Victoria with regard to Pental Island fol-
lowed in the present instance, namely, the ap-
pointment by each of the colonies interested of
a Commissioner, by whom jointly the case to
be submitted to the Privy Council might be
prepared for the consideration of the respec-
tive Governments ; and if this view is adopted
by you probably the first step should be to
submit a resolution to our respective Parlia-
ments to the effect: —lst. That it is desirable
that the question in dispute relative to the
boundary line should be referred for the deci-
sion of the Privy Council. 2nd. That a Com-
missioner from each colony be appointed
to draw up a case and deed of submission.”
On April 13, 1886, Sir J. W. Downer, the
Chief Secretary, wrote to the Premier of Vic-
toria, and amongst other things stated “it
appears to me that on the lines submitted by
me there will not be much difficulty in coming
to an agreement on the case and I trust you
will return the draft with such alterations as
you consider expedient, and when agreed,
bring the matter before your Parliament as
early as possible. I trust to your good offices
to bring this long-debated question to an early
settlement, and prevent any further continu-
ance than possible of the inconvenience sus-
tained by the residents on the territory in
dispute through this matter being in a state
of uncertainty.” On July 15, 1886, Mr.
Gillies replied by letter, in which he said ;
‘ ‘ Resuming the correspondence with reference
to the boundary-line between the colonies, I
must express my regret that considerable delay
has taken place, owing partly to the pressure
of public business and partly to the necessity
of submitting the whole of the papers to my
colleague, the Honorable thejAttorney-General,
who must necessarily be largely responsible for
determining the way in which the case should
be submitted. To a large extent he has recast
the case, and I venture to think simplified it in
such a way as I hope will meet with your
approval. I forward herewith a copy of a
memorandum which the Attorney-General has
sent me in the way of explanation. ” In that
memorandum the following clauses appeared :
“It has been further agreed between the re-
spective Governments of the said province and
colony that whatever may be the decision of
her Majesty in Council in reference to the
common boundary between them that all
necessary steps shall be taken to validate and
confirm the titles of the purchaser, lessee, and
licensee, and their assigns, who may hold
under grant, lease, or license from the colony
of Victoria any land within the disputed area,
and that the colony of Victoria shall not be re-
quired to account for any moneys received by
the said colony for land sold by such Govern-
ment, or for any rents or license fees received
in respect of any land within the said disputed
area of territory; and 1. That they jointly
and severally submit to the decision of
her Majesty in her Privy Council the
several matters in difference between the
said province and colony in reference
to the common boundary between them.”
That in case her Majesty in her Privy Council
shall determine that the said line as surveyed
and laid down by the said Henry Wade in
1847, and continued to the Murray in 1849,
shall not be accepted as the boundary of the
said province and colony respectively, that then
the respective Governments of South Australia
and Victoria will each appoint a surveyor to
act with the surveyor of the other of them, who
together shall ascertain and mark in the ground
the exact position of the boundary-line which
shall be determined by her Majesty in her
Privy Council to be proper boundary between
the said province and colony, and the said
surveyors shall describe the boundary so
ascertained and laid down.” Paragraph 7 was
as follows ; —“ That the said province of South
Australia and the said colony of Victoria shall
unite in seeking such Imperial legislation, if
any, as may be necessary to give effect to the
judgment of her Majesty in Council upon the
matters hereby referred for determination,
and to the terms of this agreement
between the said high contracting parties.”
On behalf of Victoria the petition to the
Privy Council ended as follows:—“And
your petitioners, the Governor and Executive
Council of the colony of Victoria, contend and
humbly submit to the decision of your Majesty
26


in Council—That the line laid out by the said
Henry Wade in 1847, and continued to the
River Murray in 1849, and since acted upon as
the existing boundary between the said
colonies, is now the ‘ eastern boundary of the
colony of South Australia,’ referred to in the
Imperial Act, 13 and 14 Yict., c. 59, as the
limit on the west of the colony of Victoria
erected by the said Act into a separate colony.
And your petitioners, the Governor and Ex-
ecutive Council of the colony of Victoria,
further humbly submit to the decision of your
Majesty in Council that the said line should
not be disturbed or altered after the long un-
disturbed exercise of territorial jurisdiction
over the country on the east of the said line of
the colony of Victoria, under which various
rights and interests have been created, and a
population become settled under the local laws
and constitution of the colony of Victoria.”
Then came several long appendices, which he
would not quote. These were followed by the
following letter to the Premier of Victoria :
“Chief Secretary’s Office, Adelaide, January
19, 1887. Sir—l notice that a sale is adver-
tised by the Victorian Government on Feb-
ruary 2 next of the land about Serviceton,
being a portion of the territory about which
the dispute is pending between our colonies.
I am sure this action would not have been
taken without consultation with this Govern-
ment had your attention been called to the
matter, and as it is highly desirable in the in-
terest of all concerned that nothing should
intervene to prevent the dispute being ad-
justed I now direct your attention to the action
of your Government, with the certainty that
you will interpose.—l have, &c., Jno. W.
Downer.” The reply was as follows: —
“Premier’s Office, Melbourne, February 14,
1887. Sir —With reference to your letter
of the 19th ultimo, relative to the
proposed sale by this Government of
certain land near Serviceton, being a por-
tion of the territory respecting which negotia-
tions are pending between Victoria and South
Australia, I have the honor to inform you that
in order to meet the views of your Government
it has now been arranged to offer for sale the
right to licenses for allotments of the land in
question. I enclose for your information a
copy of the Gazette containing the official notice
offering these rights for sale. You will observe
that the proposed licenses are to be for a term
not exceeding seven years, and to be subject to
a condition that the Governor may, if deemed
necessary, resume possession of the land without
compensation to the licensees upon giving three
months’ notice. —I have, &c., D. Gillies,
Premier.” On May 18, 1887, Sir J. C. Bray
wrote to the Premier of Victoria as follows:
“ Sir—l have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letters, dated July 15, 1886,
and March 28, 1887, referring to the question
of the disputed boundary between Victoria and
South Australia, and enclosing draft deed of
agreement and petition to the Privy Council,
as proposed by your Government, and I now beg
to return the draft with certain alterations sug-
gested for your consideration. . . Section 28.
Instead of South Australia waiving all claims
to the purchase-money of all lands sold by the
Government of Victoria it should be alleged
that South Australia is entitled to and claims
all purchase-moneys received by Victoria for
all Crown lands sold within the area in dis-
pute ; but South Australia will waive all
claim for interest on such moneys, and all
rents and mesne profits in respect of the same.
We are willing to waive all claims for interest,
rents, and mesne profits, because we assume
that the amounts received for that purpose
have probably been expended on or in con-
nection with the said land and the ordinary
expenses of its government. A condition has
also been added that neither Government
shall sell or attempt to sell or lease any land
within the area in dispute, but the Govern-
ment of Victoria may issue, for grazing pur*
poses only, annual licenses, renewable for
five years, of any unsold or unlet portion of
the said area, and we anticipate that you
will have no objection to this. Page B.—The
contention and submission of the petition on
the part of South Australia has been amended
by alleging that Mr. Wade’s line was erro-
neous, inasmuch as it did not truly define upon
the ground the 141st meridian, and that no
authority other than an Act of the Imperial
Parliament, or some agreement entered into
under the authority of such an Act, could pos-
sibly alter the boundary from the 141st meri-
dian.” On July 12 Mr. Gillies wrote —“ The
result is that certain of the alterations are
allowed ; the others this Government does not
see its way to accept. I now transmit here-
with another copy of the two documents, bear-
ing on their face the alterations, so far as they
can be accepted. One of the disallowed altera-
tions is that of clause 6 of the deed, which
would have had the effect of making Victoria
undertake to pay to South Australia, in case of
an adverse decision, moneys received for the
sale of land in the disputed territory. This
would be quite contrary to the understanding
on the basis of which submission to the
Privy Council was agreed to.” On Sep-
tember 21, 1887, Mr. Playford, as Chief
Secretary, wrote to the Victorian Premier—“ I
am sure you will not fail to note from the mode
in which we have dealt with your amendments
that we are desirous of doing everything which
can be fairly asked for the purpose of bringing
about a settlement of the question at issue.
The chief point raised by your amendment is
as regards the obligation of Victoria, in the
event of the decision being against her,
to account for moneys received in respect of
the disputed territory. We had proposed fol-
lowing what would no doubt be the course
adopted in the case of a private reference of a
dispute as to land ownership, in absence of any
very special circumstances, namely, that the
disposition of the proceeds should abide the
result of the case, and that after the agree-
ment, and pending the decision of the case,
that no attempt should be made to alienate
any of the land in question. To this,
however, Victoria objected, and we propose
to meet her objections—l. By waiving all
claim to the proceeds of land received before
May Ist, 1885. 2. By waiving all claim to
restrain Victoria from dealing with the ter-
ritory pending the decision on the petition.
To put it shortly, we practically concede the
position sought by Victoria as regards her
liability for proceeds already received. . . .
I trust that the manner in which we propose
to meet your objections will enable you to see
your way to ask your Legislature to deal at
once with the question, and we shall be glad
indeed to be so informed, as it would be no
small pleasure to be able to reflect that we
have assisted in the completion of amicable
arrangement for the removal of a source of
no inconsiderable trouble and inconvenience
to the sister colonies of Victoria and
South Australia. I have, &c., T.
Playford.” On October 22, 1887, Mr.
Gillies wrote in reply—“l beg to direct your
attention to 4 of my letter of July
12, in which it was clearly stated that the pro-
posal to make Victoria account for any of the
proceeds of the land in the disputed territory
could not be accepted, as it was contrary to
the understanding on the basis of which
submission to the Privy Council was
agreed to. This is quite apparent from
Mr. Service’s letter of the 12th February,
1886, to your predecessor, in which it is stated
27


as one of the cond t ons on wnich he agreed to
proceed with the submission “that if the de-
cision of the Privy Council was adverse to
Victoria, she should not be asked to account
for any moneys received by her in the past,”
“ the past” being before the date of the decision
of the Privy Council. The contention in your
letter that the date before which it might be
contended that Victoria was not liable must be
fixed in the early part of 1885, when Mr. Ser-
vice and Mr. Colton met and endeavored to
arrange the basis of the negotiations, is clearly
an error, as the above quotation from Mr.
Service’s subsequent communication shows.”
The following telegraphic correspondence then
ensued: —Telegram from the Premier, South
Australia, to the Premier, Victoria, dated
October 26, 1887. —“lie disputed boundary—
This Government will assent to all Victorian
alterations in drafts petition and agreement, as
forwarded on 22nd instant, with exception only
to those relating to our contention that Wade’s
line is more than two miles out and the excision
of our addition to paragraph 24 of the petition,
which simply states an admitted fact. No
doubt you will agree that no objection can be
taken by Victoria to our putting our contention
in any shape we please, seeing that you are not
bound by it, and you will also admit that no
exception can be taken to any statement of
fact. Presuming therefore that the drafts may
be considered settled we propose to give notice
to-morrow of our intention to submit the
matter to Parliament next week, and we shall
be glad if you can adopt a similar course.—T.
Playfobd.” Telegram from the Premier,
Victoria, to the Premier, South Australia,
dated October 27, 1887.—“ No objection to
your contending that the boundary is more
than two miles east of Wade’s line,
but parapraph 24 of the petition must
stand as settled, inasmuch as the
arrangement between New South Wales
and South Australia as to the boundary north
of the Murray cannot bind Victoria, and is
irrelevant to the case. —D. Gillies.” Telegram
from the Premier, South Australia, to the
Premier, Victoria, dated October 28, 1887: —
“Your telegram received some time after
meeting of House, when agreeably with wire
of Wednesday we had given notice of motion
for approval, and had laid on table copies of
petition and agreement. We must insist on
amendment to paragraph 24, which simply
states a fact, the effect of which is a matter for
argument, and which, if h-relevant, as you
contend, cannot possibly prejudice Victoria.
We have practically conceded everything
sought by Victoria as regards the form of
the case, and are very strongly of opinion
that we should not be asked to give way
further.—T. Playfobd.” Telegram from the
Premier, Victoria, to the Premier, South Aus-
tralia, dated October 31, 1887 : —“ Rc boun-
dary —Considering all circumstances, we are
willing to concede alteration made by
your Government in clause twenty-four
(24) of petition. D. Gillies.” The
following correspondence was also perti-
nent to the issue:—“Chief Secretary’s
Office, Adelaide, November 4, 1887. Sir—l
have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your
wire of 31st ultimo, which enabled "the
Attorney - General (having previously laid
before Parliament copies of the proposed peti-
tion and agreement) to move in our House of
Assembly that this House approves of the pro-
posed reference to the Privy Council of the
matter of the disputed boundary between the
■colony of Victoria and the colony of South
Australia. The resolution was unanimously
adopted the next day, and we anticipate a
similar result in the Legislative Council,
where a similar motion will be moved by the
Chief Secretary next week. I shall be glad to
hear that Parliamentary approval has also
been obtained in your colony, so that the
petition and agreement can be signed.—l am,
&c., T. Playfobd.” “Premier’s Office, Mel-
bourne, November 7, 1887. Sir—l have the
honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 4th instant informing me of what
has been done by your Government as regards
the submission to the Parliament of South
Australia of the proposed reference to the
Privy Council of the South Australian boun-
dary question. I hope to be enabled to lay
the draft agreement and petition before the
Legislature of this colony for approval at an
early date.- —I have, &c., D. Gillies.” Tele-
gram from the Premier, South Australia, to
the Premier, Victoria, dated November 15,
1887. — “Re boundary question Necessary
resolutions carried in both our Houses. Very
anxious to hear from you.—T. Playfobd.”
Telegram from the Premier, Victoria, to
th 6 Premier, South Australia, dated Novem-
ber 15, 1887. “Border dispute Paper
is being printed for Parliament prior
to submitting resolution. —D. Gillies.”
“Re boundary question.—Chief Secretary’s
Office, Adelaide, November 30, 1887. Sir —
Referring to previous correspondence hereon, I
have the honor to request that I may be fur-
nished with an early intimation as to the posi-
tion of the matter in your Parliament. I need
hardly add that I shall be very glad to hear that
you have passed the resolutions necessary for
completing the agreement for reference to the
Privy Council. —I have, &c., T. Playfobd.”
Telegram from the Premier, South Australia,
to the Premier, Victoria, dated December 6,
1887: —“Border question Very anxious to
hear from you hereon. Several members en-
quiring as to the position of this matter.
Hope you will expedite.—T. Playfobd.”
Telegram from the Premier, Victoria, to
the Premier, South Australia, dated Decem-
ber 6, 1887 :
give notice this day.—D. Gillies.” Telegram
from Premier, South Australia, to Premier.
Victoria, dated December 11, 1888:—“We
should be much disappointed if your session
were to close without Parliamentary approval
of agreement for reference of disputed boun-
dary question, and we earnestly trust that you
will not allow this to happen.—T. Playfobd.”
Telegram from Premier, Victoria, to Premier,
South Australia, dated December 11, 1888: —
“Disputed boundary question—Your telegram
of to-day duly received. It is my intention to
introduce matter before end of session.—D.
Gillies.” On December 11, 1888, Mr. Play-
ford wrote“ I can assure you that the delay
is productive of considerable inconvenience,
and to my mind the matter stands thus: —It is
to the interest of both colonies that the point
should be finally settled; but, each colony
believing itself to be in the right, neither is
inclined to give way. The question, there-
fore, can only be disposed of by the
friendly reference which has been agreed
on, or by litigation of a less amicable
character, which we should all deplore.”
Mr. Gillies replied as follows: —“Premier’s
office, Melbourne, December 14, 1888. Sir—l
have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 11th inst., relative to obtain-
ing the sanction of the Victorian Parliament
to the proposed reference to the Privy Council
of the matter of the disputed boundary between
the colony of Victoria and the province of
South Australia. You will doubtless have re-
ceived my telegram in reply to yours—both on
the 11th inst.—stating my intention to intro-
duce the matter before the close of the session.
I have now the honor to inform you that last
evening I gave notice of motion for Tuesday
next in the Legislative Assembly that the
House approves of the reference of the
28


question to the Privy Council as desired.”
On December 24, 1888, Mr. Gillies wrote
“ It became evident, however, that the subject
was one which would involve a lengthened dis-
cussion before it could be passed through the
House, and the close of the session was
too imminent to admit of the neces-
sary time being given for the purpose,
m view of the numerous other urgent
questions to be settled before the proro-
gation took place. I was therefore reluctantly
compelled to allow the matter to stand over ;
but I have not the slightest doubt, from the
general feeling of the Assembly, that very little
difficulty will be experienced in dealing with
the question referred to at an early period
during the next session.” In the following
year, on September 5, 1889, Mr. Gillies wrote
again : —“ I have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 30th ultimo, in
reference to the question of the disputed
boundary-line between Victoria and South
Australia. You will have received my tele-
gram of the same date, and I now beg to ex-
press my regret that up to the present time it
has been found impossible to bring the matter
before the Legislature during this session, but
it is my intention, as soon as the state of public
business will permit, to submit to Parliament
a resolution on the subject.” Then came a
telegram from the Premier, Adelaide, to the
Premier, Victoria, dated August 30, 1889
“Re disputed boundary—Trust you will
shortly submit promised resolution to Parlia-
ment. Letter following.— John A. Cockbuen.”
The next telegram was from the Premier,
Victoria, to the Premier, South Australia,
dated November 22, 1889, as follows“ Sorry
to inform you that we have lost the motion to
refer the disputed territory to the Privy
Council by three votes; will try again at the
opening of next session, and have reason to
believe will be successful. —D. Gillies.” On
August 12, 1890, Mr. Gillies wrote: —“I have
the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the sth instant, No. 59, with reference to
the question of the disputed boundary between
Victoria and South Australia. The matter
will receive attention as soon as possible.”
On May 20, 1891, Mr. Playford wrote to the
Premier of Victoria;—“l have the honor to’
again bring under your notice the question of
the disputed boundary between this colony
and Victoria, on the subject of which I was
last in communication with you on the 24th
November, 1890 (acknowledged on the 27th
November, 1890), and I shall be glad to hear of
the intention of your Government with refe-
rence to the early introduction into your Par-
liament on its assembling of a motion referring
the matter to the Privy Council.” In his
reply Mr. Munro/ on May 22, 1891, wrote :
“ I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt
of your letter of the 20th instant, relative to
the question of the disputed boundary between
this colony and South Australia, and to state
in reply that the Legislative Assembly of Vic-
toria—led by a Premier who had an over-
whelming majority in the House —declined, on
the 22nd November, 1889, to approve of
the reference of the question to the Privy
Council, and I have no reason to
believe that the House would now re-
verse that decision. Moreover, as the all-
important question of federation is receiving
the attention of the Parliaments of all
the colonies, it would, in my opinion,
be unwise to revive the boundary
question at. the present time.” The
following correspondence took place:—
“Chief Secretary’s Office, Adelaide, June 8,
1891. Sir—Referring to your letter of the
22nd May, relative to the question of the dis-
puted boundary between this colony and Vic-
toria, in which you say you have no reason to
believe the Legislative Assembly would reverse
its decision of the 22nd November, 1889, de-
clining to approve of the reference of the ques-
tion to the Privy Council, I would remind you
that, after the motion was lost by three votes
in 1889, Mr. Gillies stated in his telegram of
November 22 that he would try again at the
opening of the following session, and had
reason to believe he would be successful. This
Government therefore respectfully urges that
the question be again submitted to your Par-
liament with the view of having the matter
amicably settled.— l have, &c., T. Playfobd.”
“ Premier’s Office, Melbourne, June 12, 1891.
Sir —I have the honor to acknowledge the re-
ceipt of your letter of the Bth inst., again
asking that the question of the disputed boun-
dary between Victoria and South Australia
may be resubmitted to Parliament. With re-
ference to your remark that, after the motion
was lost by three votes in 1889, Mr. Gillies
stated in his telegram of November 22nd that
lie would try again at the opening of the fol-
lowing session, and had reason to believe he
would be successful, I beg to remind you that,
as a matter of fact, Mr. Gillies did not re-
submit the question to the Legislative As-
sembly. I feel satisfied that a motion for a
reference of the matter to the Privy Council
could not at the present time be carried, and I
regret therefore that I cannot take the action you
desire.—l have, &c., James Munro, Premier.”
Then came a letter from Sir John Downer,
dated November 5, 1892, concluding as follows:
—“ There is one other matter to which I wish
to call your attention. Persons living on the
boundary of Victoria and South Australia are
being put to great trouble and expense when
crossing the border to visit their friends
through your new Custom regulations. Regu-
lations for Customs matters, no doubt, have to
be strict and rigidly enforced, but it should not
be impossible for those charged with their
execution to prevent these rules being applied
to cases altogether apart from their object.”
After some further correspondence came a
letter from Mr. Shiels, Premier of Victoria,
dated December 21, 1892, which finished as
follows: —“While, however, I regret that I
cannot undertake to comply with the request
contained in your letter, I would suggest that
it might be desirable, in view of the position
that Sonth Australia has taken up, and out of
abundant caution, that a joint application of
the two colonies should be made to the Imperial
Parliament for the passing of an Act to re-
move the doubts of South Australia as to the
boundary-line. I shall be very happy to co-
operate with you in this application, which
would, I think, be a fitting conclusion of the
matter, redounding to the credit of both
colonies, not incompatible with their dignity,
and sure to cement the friendship between
them.” That was the result after 24 years of
negotiation ; and for many of those years Vic-
toria had continuously said she would carry out
her promises to agree to a submission to the
Privy Council; it was a sublime instance of
audacity. Then came a letter from Sir John
Downer, dated January 18, 1893, written in
a lucid and convincing manner, which made
it impossible to misunderstand it, frcm which
he would read the following;—“I have the
honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 21st December last, on the subject
of the boundary-line between your colony and
South Australia, and have to express my
profound regret that after Victoria having
been the first to propose the settlement of the
dispute by reference to the Privy Council,
after having from time to time recognised anti
agreed to this method of settling the question,
and after having made an agreement with the
Government of this colony in respect to the
erection and working of a railway-station at


Serviceton, the basis of which was the settle-
ment of this long-pending dispute, you should
have arrived at the conclusion that justice,
equity, and loyalty to your own colony re-
quired you to resist any attempt to test whether
the claim is sound or not. Before dealing with
the whole question, as I propose to do, permit
me to suggest that the relative areas of the
territory of the two colonies can scarcely be
said to be any justification for the taking and
retention by the one colony of the estate of the
other. The facts have been stated and restated
time after time, but at the risk of repetition I
will nevertheless restate them once more. It
is necessary to do this, for running through the
Victorian side of this correspondence is the
initial mistake that the boundary fixed
by Mr. Wade in 1847 was then intended
and has ever since been acted on as final.
Then the letter set out what were the facts of
the case. It continued thus: —“ A meeting
took place in Melbourne on January 28, 1885,
at which the Hon. T. Playford and others
were present, as representing this colony, and
Mr. Speight, the chairman of the Victorian
Railway Commissioners, and others, as repre-
senting Victoria. At that meeting matters in
connection with the railway were discussed
and an agreement was arrived at which was
duly minuted. By paragraph 7 of those
minutes it was agreed that a joint station
should be provided near the border, and its
cost, together with cost of working and main-
tenance, should be borne in equal proportion
by the two Governments ; and, by paragraph
8, that this was to be without prejudice to the
dispute as to the border line, and in the event
of that question being settled it was agreed
that the colony which is decided to own the
land upon which the station is situated
shall reimburse the other its share of
the capital contributed for its con-
struction, and thereafter, in lieu of
providing half the capital, the colony so re-
lieved shall pay a rent, equivalent to 4 per
cent, per annum on such half share plus its
share of the cost of working and maintenance.
The site agreed upon was at Serviceton, on
the disputed territory, and the whole basis of
this agreement was that there was a dispute of
which both parties were to facilitate the settle-
ment, and that the capital payments should
only be interim pending that determination.
On the Bth May, 1885, the Victorian Railway
Commissioners wrote this colony stating that
the memorandum of January 28th had been
approved by the Victorian Government, with
the exception of clause 8, which it was thought
desirable should be expunged, as in railway
management no question of doubtful boun-
daries between the two colonies should
be imported, and stating that, as
to that clause, if the contingency
ever arose it could be considered by
itself. In this alteration the Government of
South Australia agreed. . . . Singularly
enough, too, on the same date on which your
last letter was written, December 21,1892,'there
was sent to our Commissioners of Railways a
letter from the Railway Commissioners of Vic-
toria requiring payment of £41,879 Is. 9d. for
the joint construction and working of the
Serviceton railway-station. In other words,
on the same day the Government of Victoria
repudiate the existence of any reasonable dis-
pute as to the territory on which the
Serviceton station is built, decline to carry
out the endeavor to carry out the
solemn obligations of their predecessors
in office to join South Australia in
obtaining a settlement of that dispute, and
yet in the same breath demand from South
Australia payment in respect of expenditure
on property the ownership of which was at the
root of the agreement as to the capital ex-
pended. It is true that on the suggestion of
your Government paragraph 8 of the minute
of January, 1885, was expunged on the ground
that in railway management no question of
boundaries between the two colonies should be
imported, but it was also expunged on the
further suggestion that when the contingency
therein provided for should arise it could be
considered by itself. How does your Govern-
ment now propose to consider it ? Simply by
repudiating its existence and declining to carry
out the compact entered into originally on your
own proposal, subsequently and most care-
fully repeated, and made the basis on which the
station was built at Serviceton, and on which
this colony agreed to contribute to its cost. I
am satisfied that great pressure of public
business has prevented you from exhaustively
investigating the position of this matter, and
that your attention has not been sufficiently
called to the actions of your predecessors. The
question is a serious and not a trivial one. If
our views on the subject are correct —and of
their soundness we entertain no doubt —Vic-
toria is exercising jurisdiction over territory
outside of her limits, and the question is bound
to be raised, even without our assistance, on
some future occasion where crime or trespass
has been committed on the disputed territory.
The appeal will then certainly be permitted,
and Victoria will no longer be able to rely on
possession instead of title. There is no diffi-
culty in taking action so as to ensure a decision
in the courts of Victoria and South Australia
or both, and by appeal from those courts
obtaining the decision of the Privy Council;
but, as I ventured to urge upon you pre-
viously, such action is scarcely compatible
with the dignity of colonies under the
same Crown, and desiring to remain
on friendly terms with each other.
The position South Australia has taken has
been consistent throughout. There is, in the
words of one of your Chief Secretaries, ‘no
dispute about the facts; the question is en-
tirely one of law, and is a proper one for the
original jurisdiction of the Privy Council.’ If
you refuse us this simple act of courtesy and
justice, and persist in repudiating the obliga-
tions of your colony, we shall certainly take
our own course and that without further delay
to get the matter decided, and shall meanwhile
decline to recognise the agreement as to the
Serviceton station as binding in the face of
your repudiation of the compact that was the
basis of that arrangement. In the concluding
paragraphs of your letter you suggest that out
of abundant caution a joint application of the
two colonies should be made to the Imperial
Parliament for an Act to remove the doubts
of South Australia as to the boundary
line. If your proposal is that Im-
perial Parliament should simply pass an
Act affirming the boundary as claimed by Vic-
toria, I unhesitatingly decline it, but if you
are willing that the whole question should be
dealt with and finally set at rest by the
Imperial Parliament, then I entirely agree with
the suggestion, and think with you that there
would be in this ‘ a fitting conclusion of the
matter redounding to the credit of both colonies
not incompatible with their dignity and sure to
cement the friendship between them.’” On
January 28 of the present year Mr. J. B. Pat-
terson, the Premier of Victoria, wrote: —“As
early as possible the question will be taken
into consideration, and I will inform you of
the decision of the Cabinet upon it.” On the
12th June, 1893, the then Premier of
South Australia, Sir John Downer,
telegraphed : —“Kindly oblige me with
reply at once re disputed boundary,
as otherwise I have no alternative but
to take action.” —J. W. Downer. Then
he came to the very last telegram from


the Premier of Victoria, dated June 14,1893,
which read thus:—“ Regret that owing to pre-
parations for opening of session, and state of
financial matters claiming our attention, it is
not possible at the present juncture to enter
upon the consideration of the matters referred
to in your telegram. B. O’Loghlen, for
Premier.” After 24 years of beseeching and
praying the other colony to do something;
after twelve years of promises of definite action,
Victoria now told them that they were not in
a position even to begin to consider the matter.
That telegram finished the history of the
tedious official correspondence on the
matter. In the official correspondence
which had been read Victoria took
the ground that the Governments of that
colony had never in any way recognised
the actual 141st meridian as the boundary, and
had always acted as if the line surveyed by
Mr. Wade was the undisputed boundary.
There was evidence against this, and he could
not find anything to support it in the Victorian
Acts. He was not going all through the
official acts of the Governments of Victoria,
but the following would be sufficient to show
that Victoria had fully understood that
Wade’s line was not the true boundary.
In the schedule to the Victorian Electoral
Act of 1865, No. 279, the district of Follett
was described as “ bounded on the west by the
141st meridian, being the line dividing the
colony of Victoria from South Australia,” and
on the same page the district of Wimmera was
described as bounded “on the west by the
South Australian frontier,” which must also
mean the 141st meridian. The Act of the Parlia-
ment of Victoria called the“ Local Government
Act.” No. 506 of 1874, in its second schedule
defined the boundaries of various shires and
road districts, and on page 321, in describing
the boundaries of the shire of Kowree it used
the words “to a point on the western
boundary of the colony, three miles north-
east of Lake Cadmite,” which could only
mean the 141st meridian and not Wade’s line.
The same schedule in defining the shire of
Wimmera (page 338) spoke of the western
boundary of Victoria being “ three miles north-
east of Lake Cadmus.” After enquiry he had
found that “ Cadmus was a misprint for Lake
Cadnite, at Prances, and that the point men-
tioned in the Victorian Act exactly
coincided with the 141st meridian, and not
with Wade’s line. In Act 580 of 1876 he
found a reference to the boundary-line between
Victoria and South Australia. Several other
Victorian Acts of Parliament all stated the
boundary to be the 141st meridian of east
longitude. Another matter which might be
mentioned was that ever since this dispute
originated Royal Commissions of the Governors
of Victoria and South Australia had all
stated this meridian as the boundary-line
of both colonies. He had managed also to
see three official maps which were prepared in
the Lands Office in Melbourne, all of which dis-
tinctly showed that Victoria had known
all along that the 141st meridian was
not the boundary over which it claimed
to exercise jurisdiction. In Hayter’s “Vic-
torian Year-book” for 1892 there was a
map of the colony of Victoria prefixed to
the first volume, distinctly showing the
two boundary lines. The line which South
Australia contends is the proper line is marked
141st degree of longitude, while the other line
which is claimed by Victoria as the proper
line is marked “Boundary line with South
Australia marked by Messrs. Wade & White,
1847-1849.” This showed that the true boun-
dary was recognised in Victoria. On page 7
of the same volume, in speaking of the boun-
daries of Victoria, Mr, Hayter'says:—■“ On the
west it is bounded by South Australia, the
dividing line being about 242 geographical
miles in length, approximating to the position
of the 141st meridian of east longitude.”
That would finish all he had to say on the first
branch of his subject. He had mentioned
many things which would have been quite un-
necessary if he had been speaking to members
who had all fully understood what had tran-
spired in the past. When he had given notice
of this motion he found that there were in the
House a considerable number—in fact he feared
a majority—who took up the position that for
the sake of intercolonial courtesy it would be a
deplorable thing to go to law with Victoria. It
was therefore probable that an amendment
would have been moved and carried against
him in favor of continuing negotiations with
Victoria in the hope of getting her to carry out
the promise to refer the matter to the Privy
Council, because hon. members could
not be expected to have been previously
aware of all this mass of details
which he had placed before them. He had
decided, therefore, to refer to every occasion
where a promise had been made by Victoria,
and to every occasion where such promise had
been postponed or repudiated. There was a
limit beyond which patience became foolish-
ness. He did think that the time had not been
wasted in this matter, because it was now im-
possible to imagine any hon. member
who had listened to him supporting an
amendment such as he had indicated. Coming
to the second branch of his subject—
the present position of the dispute—it might
almost be described as being the same as it was
in 1869, notwithstanding all the labor expended
in endeavors to settle it. The position was
now worse indeed, for the increase of popula-
tion on both sides of the border had greatly in-
tensified the evils which were complained of
20 years ago. It is still true that crimes, even
up to murder, may any day be com-
mitted there with the possibility of the
perpetrator escaping punishment because the
court which tried him might be found to have
dealt with offences committed in another
country, and the knowledge of this possibility
had a tendency to induce the committing of
crimes there in the same way that before inter-
colonial debts were recoverable assaults on
escaping South Australian debtors were fre-
quently committed on the disputed territory
by persons who relied on the general
belief that the legal position was
too complicated to make it sure
that the offenders would be punished.
Ten years or so ago he had known events of
this kind reported to the police by the assaulted
persons, who received the reply that owing to
the affair having taken place on the disputed
territory it might be as well to let it drop.
The present position also injured trade. The
residents of the border districts of both colonies
admitted they were injured by the settlement
of this strip of country being delayed on ac-
count of the doubt felt by Victoria as to her
right to dispose of the land, and the consequent
temporary manner of dealing with it. From
the same cause arose doubts as to the legality
of various other matters affected by laws which
differed in the two colonies. In a word, it was
indisputable that the present position was
highly unsatisfactory in many ways, and one
which it would benefit us to have cleai-ly defined
even at considerable cost. He could not
believe that anyone who took the trouble to
make himself acquainted with the past history
of the dispute and the present condition of thie
question could be in favor of allowing the
matter to remain as it is. The only question
with those who investigated the subject would
be as to the best mode of action, and this
brought him to the third branch of his remarks.
Since this controversy began young men had
31


grown old, and others who had taken part in
it had ended their lives and their troubles.
Looking back at what had been done, viewing
in the volumes ot “ Hansard ” these ghosts ot
the hopes of the past, it might seem useless to
try what so many had failed to do. But lie-
proposed that the Government should try in a
different manner to what had hitherto been
done. In the past South Australia had been
trying (if this colony’s contention was correct)
to induce Victoria to initiate proceedings
against herself, which was very much like a
creditor occupying 20 years politely requesting
his debtor to issue a writ against himself. The
unwilling debtor would not directly refuse,
for fear that doing so would cause the
other side to start proceedings, but he
would procrastinate as much as possible
in the hope that the Statute of Limitations
would run in his favor. Something like this
had happened with Victoria, but there was the
difference that the Statute of Limitations did
not run in this case. The joint reference to the
Privy Council, as at first agreed toby Victoria,
had many things in its favor from the view of
intercolonial courtesy and friendship, but it
might have had the drawback of complicating
the legal proceedings by an argument as to
whether the Privy Council had an original
jurisdiction in such cases, and if so how it was
to be exercised. Adopting the proposal in
the motion and obtaining the opinion of
the Privy Council in its ordinary appel-
late jurisdiction would prevent any trouble
of that kind. It was obviously futile to attempt
to end the matter by continuing to make re-
presentations to Victoria, as had been done
during the last 24 years, and the end of which
was that after all those years Victoria on June
4, 1893, said she was not prepared even to enter
upon the consideration of the question. There
was only one other way, and that was to ap-
peal against a decision of the colonial courts,
if one should be given, upholding the Vic-
torian pretensions in the matter. The pro-
ceedings should be taken after due notice to
Victoria, and for the express purpose of obtain-
ing a binding settlement of this matter from
the tribunal recognised by Victoria to be the
proper body to settle it. There need be no
stealthiness or force, nothing unneighborly.
They would only take the steps necessary to
enable the law courts to give a decision
on a point of law, which it seemed
from the experience of the past could
not be brought before the courts without
such preliminary steps. No doubt the Govern-
ment would approve the motion, although they
would not care to move it, and they would
hardly be likely to take the action indicated in
it without the direction of Parliament; but if
the motion were carried, knowing they had
the support of the House, the Government
with confidence could take all the necessary
steps to obtain the opinion of the Privy
Council as to which colony these 600 square
miles or so of country belonged. He did not
wish in the motion to bind the Government
down to details of their action. At the same
time he wanted the motion to be definite
enough to cause the Government to go straight
forward with the appeal when once the proceed-
ings were commenced. The motion suggested
one of two courses. If it were carried he had
no doubt the present Attorney-General would
adopt the course best suited to the circum-
stances. He indicated a number of methods
in which the question could be brought before
the courts of either of the colonies, so as to
secure an appeal to the Privy Council.
One way which might be desirable would
be for the Government to inform the
Victorian Government that on a fixed day
they would send, say, £SOO or £I,OOO worth of
highly-dutiable goods—say tobacco or spirits—
to Serviceton or some other part of the dis-
puted territory as an assertion of the claim of
South Australia that that country is within
South Australia. It was a remote possibility
that Victoria would decide to ignore this
action. In that case the Government would
obtain the amount of duty on the goods,
and repeat the operation until Victoria
did notice it. Nearly certainly Victoria
would seize the goods for non-payment of
Victorian duty, and would prosecute the officer
sent with them for smuggling. In the
inferior Victorian court a conviction would
almost as a matter of course be, obtained, but
the Government should have the defendant
represented there by good counsel to raise all
the necessary points, and then an appeal from
the conviction should be made to the superior
Victorian courts, and the first steps should be
so taken as to give the right of appeal. Having
taken care that the Government were properly
represented by counsel, the question could then
be fully argued, and in the case of a decision
adverse to the claim of South Australia the
amount of goods he had suggested should be
taken over would he thought give the right of
appeal to the Privy Council, which should
at once follow. (Sir J. W. Downer—“ They
might give an appeal.”) No; an appeal
would come as a matter of right if the value of
the goods was high enough. This was a detail
that need not be carefully examined at the
present stage, but in passing he might
mention that by section 15 ot Act 83 of
9 Geo. IV., appeals from the colonies to the
Privy Council were to be made according to
regulations to be made by the Supreme Courts
of the colonies. The Imperial Order in Coun-
cil of June 9, 1860, regulating Victorian apeals,
fixed £SOO as the appealable amount, but sec-
tion 231 of the Victorian Supreme Court Act,
No. 1,142 of 1890, mentioned £I,OOO as the
appealable amount. However, there was no
need to clear up that question now. Or instead
of doing as just suggested the officer in charge
of the goods might be instructed to resist
seizure of the goods, and if any force were
used, as there must be under those circum-
stances, an action for assault or some other
civil claim could easily be brought and heard
in the South Australian Courts, which might
be the better way. In any case the precise
course to be followed should be settled
by the counsel retained to advise the
Government on the subject. Having
regard to the importance of the issue
involved care should be taken to retain able
counsel at every stage. He did not want to
go into details, but of course the person sent
with the goods should be a Government
official, with an understanding that he would
be fully indemnified against every contingency,
so that no fear of personal loss or injury should
cause a variation in the programme laid out
for him. If the motion were carried every-
thing should be done carefully and firmly.
Only in this way could a final decision of the
dispute be obtained ; an end put to
present troubles, and the dangers which now
threatened to attend the future removed.
(Mr. Caldwell—“ But what about federation?”
The federation of Australia would be a good
which would overbalance many minor ills, and
his only regret in moving the motion was that
some, viewing it superficially, might think it
tended against federation. It did not. The
carrying of the Commonwealth Bill would
have removed the daily irritation and serious
hampering of trade caused by the collection of
duties on the border, but the other disadvan-
tages arising from the disputed ownership of
this strip of land would remain. Crimes
might still go unpunished if committed there
because of want of jurisdiction in the court
which tried the criminal, and settlement would
32


still be retarded by the uncertainty of owner-
ship. The adoption of this motion would assist
federation by removing from two of the colonies
a source of trouble which at any time unex-
pected events might change into a serious dis-
pute. As to the result if the motion were
carried into effect. Either decision of the
Privy Council would be beneficial to South
Australia, and indeed to both colonies, as the
past and present state of the question had pre-
vented the land being properly utilised, to the
direct loss of the people of both countries. If
the decision was in favor of South Australia the
benefit would be obvious; if in favor of Victoria
she would at once settle the country in the same
manner as the rest of that colony, a proceed-
ing that would be followed by an increase of
trade to our border towns and indirectly to the
colony generally far exceeding any cost the
proceedings might involve. Justified by the
facts he had related in the first part of his
speech, supported by the reasons he had after-
wards advanced, and hoping that within their
time people would be able to look back from
the national life of a united Australia to this
motion as having happily settled a dispute in
the infancy of their country, he moved the
motion.
Advertiser Print, Adelaide.
33


