

The Defence of Australia,
and
The Singapore Base
Issued by the Victorian Branch
of the Navy League
1924
ROBERTSON & MULLENS LTD.
MELBOURNE


The Defence of Australia,
and
The Singapore Base
Reprinted from various sources
Issued by the Victorian Branch of the Navy League
The Navy League is a patriotic organisation
whose objects are to urge upon the Government
of the day, and upon all citizens of the Empire,
the supreme importance of complete naval
protection of British subjects and British
commerce throughout the World; the main-
tenance of British prestige on every sea and
in every port of the World; and the develop-
ment of the Air Force, and its co-ordination
with the Royal Navy, so that all the elements
necessary to modern naval strength may
be at the disposal of the Admiralty
Address ;
*
VICTORIAN BRANCH OF THE NAVY LEAGUE
BOX 99, G.P.O.
MELBOURNE




FOREWORD.
The Committee of the Victorian Branch of the Navy League
takes the view that the time is opportune to issue to its members and
to the public the considered opinion of the Executive of the League,
both in London and here, on the problem of Empire defence, and
especially its bearing upon the defence of those portions of the Empire
situated in the Western and Southern Pacific, and upon the protection
of the Eastern trade routes.
Having regard to the interests of Australia, and the serious con-
sequences to her welfare and risk to her continuance as a white man’s
country, if these interests are neglected, the Committee desires to
place before members and the public the arguments in favor of a naval
base at Singapore, and to emphasise the vital necessity of Australia
taking her full share in the defence of this portion of the Empire,
with or without the establishment of this base.
We must all realise that should the Empire collapse, Australia
goes under with the rest, as she is absolutely powerless to protect her-
self, and that it is only by making an effort, proportionate to the
issues at stake, to help the Mother country in defending her, that she
can hope to retain her identity and remain as she is at present—a
sanctuary for the white race.
The insecurity of Australia, arising from her geographical posi-
tion, her lack of population, her military unpreparedness, and the
financial embarrassment of the Empire, is obvious from the speeches
and extracts from press articles collected in this pamphlet; and they
are presented to members and the public with the hope that they may
arouse general interest in, and studious consideration of, the questions
involved, and may form the basis of a sound public opinion in relation
to the problem of the defence of Australia.
(Signed)
W. J. SCHUTT, President.
(The Hon. Mr. Justice Schutt.)
WM. CRESWELL.
(Vice-Admiral Sir Wm. Creswell,
K.C.M.G., K. 8.8., R.N.,
retired.)
E. F. MITCHELL.
(Sir Edward Mitchell, K.C.,
K.C.M.G.)
ALEX. LEEPBR.
(M.A., LL.D.)
M. M. BRODIE.
(Messrs. John Sanderson & Co.)
P. S. WEBSTER.
M.D., Hon. Sec. of Branch.)
(On behalf of the Committee of the Victorian Branch of the Navy
League.)




THE NAVY LEAGUE’S WARNING.
(From “The Navy,” April, 1924)
The reported decision of the Government to suspend the con-
struction of the naval base at Singapore compels the Navy League
once more to warn the public of the grave danger to the Empire in-
volved in this neglect of our wide Imperial interests.
The decision of the Government to proceed with Sir Samuel
Hoare’s schemes for increasing the Air Force shows that they are not
entirely indifferent to the claims of national defence, and not entirely
victims to the delusion that the way to security lies through helpless-
ness.
The Navy League, of course, applauds their decision to render the
heart of the Empire immune, if it may be, from devastating air attacks.
That is a primary duty. But how are we benefited by this security
if we are left liable to have our essential supplies of food and raw
materials cut off by attacks on our commerce in distant seas, which we
are left helpless to resist?
The paralysis of all industry at home, and slow starvation through
the cutting off of our supplies of wheat and meat would be no less
painful an end than extermination by high explosives or poison gas.
Defence against air raids and defence against slow strangulation
by raids on commerce are not alternatives, but complementary one to
another.
Has the Government forgotten that it has a double danger to
meet ?
(1) The danger of air attacks against our cities and ports.
(2) The danger of the destruction of our sea-borne com-
merce.
If, despite the assumption that the best defence is defencelessness,
they are still convinced of the possibility of danger from the air, how
can they appear to believe that there is no danger of attack on the
seas ? Why should they imagine—it is certainly not the case —that
France will see no menace in our air preparations, and that Japan will
see a menace in immobile defences at Singapore? A dockyard can
make no attack, and the Japanese, who, for years, have viewed our
position at Hong Kong with equanimity, are not likely to be disturbed
by our providing ourselves with an alternative fleet base over 1,400
miles further from their coasts. The plea that the construction of a
naval base at Singapore is likely to create an atmosphere inimical to
disarmament is specious but unconvincing.
We have, every week, to import about six million tons of food to
the approximate value of £9,500,000, and about twenty million tons
of raw material to the value of over £8,000,000. To enable these sup-
plies to be brought to our shores, we have every day at sea 1,400
British merchant ships of 3,000 tons and over, scattered over trade
routes 80,000 miles in length. In addition to the ships actually at
sea, there are over 1,400 other British ships loading or unloading in
harbour in various parts of the world at the same time. At any
given moment there is at least £180,000,000 worth of British trade
afloat Bast of Suez, of which £157,000,000 is in what may be called
the Singapore sphere of influence. Prom that area we draw 98 per


cent, of our supplies of tea, 97 per cent, of our jute, 96 per cent,
of our zinc ore, 90 per cent, of our rubber, 89 per cent, of our wool,
77 per cent, of our hemp, 63 per cent, of our rice, 57 per cent, of
our tin, 52 per cent, of our cheese, 48 per cent, of our butter, and
a large proportion of our frozen meat, oils for food, &e., and also
many other necessary materials for peace or war. Every ship on
the Eastern trade makes on an average, five voyages out and five
home every year. Thus the 297 ships trading in the India area alone
may be said to have an annual floating worth of over £800,000,000,
which it is the business of the Navy to protect.
What the effect would be of leaving this vast trade unprotected
we may see from the experience of the late war. The Emden in under
two months sank 17 ships whose hulls and cargoes were valued at
£2,200,000; the Moewe sank 22 ships on one cruise and 12 on another.
This, too, happened at a time when there was a large number of
cruisers, not only British, but also Japanese and French, guarding
the trade routes.
Is the sum of £11,000,000, spread over a period of years, for the
construction of the Singapore Base—which is equivalent to about
one farthing per annum on the income tax—too great a premium to
ask for the safeguarding of these vital Imperial interests?
In a conflict in which the enemy has not only cruisers and sub-
marines, but also a battle-fleet in the contested area, our light cruisers
would be powerless to protect floating trade, unless they, in their
turn, had the support of heavy ships, and they cannot have such
support unless there is a base in that area where heavy ships can
dock and repair and obtain the necessary stores. Expert naval
opinion has selected Singapore as the best base for the purpose, since
it closes the route to the west and flanks that to the Australasian
Dominions. No other position can so completely meet the needs of
a fleet operating in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, and, if Singapore
is not made available, the fleet will have no base nearer than Malta,
which means that it cannot operate in Eastern waters at all.
Moreover, we must not look on the question narrowly as a matter
of our sea-borne trade alone. If the Royal Navy cannot operate in
Eastern waters, the Australasian Dominions are left defenceless, an
easy prey to the attack of any enemy possessed of a battle-fleet and
bases within striking distance. The most profound belief in the
goodwill of the Pacific Powers does not justify us in this act of
desertion. Next to the “golden link of the Crown,” the Navy is the
strongest link in the ties which bind the Dominions to the Mother
Country. Hitherto, it has sheltered them, more or less completely,
from attack, even though its main strength has been thousands of
miles away, because it has stood between them and the main force
of a potential enemy. If the potential enemy be nearer to their
doors than the protecting naval force, and if that protecting force
be paralysed for lack of a base within covering distance, the most
profound anxiety must he aroused in the minds of our fellow-citizens
overseas which no pious belief in the force of a good example will
allay.
(Signed) Cyril S. Cobb,
Chairman.
Gerald Fiennes,
Yiee-'Chairman.
On behalf of the Executive Committee of the Navy League.
6


NAVAL NEEDS FIRST.
(From “The Navy,” April, 1924)
“Few more lucid or convincing manifestoes have emanated from
the Navy League,” writes the “Army, Navy and Air Force Gazette,”
“than that setting forth the need for bringing the Singapore Base
up to date. Sir Cyril Cobb and Mr. Gerard Fiennes deserve the
thanks of all patriotic men and women for their admirable summary
of the reasOns which have led expert naval opinion to select Singapore
for the purpose of a docking and fuelling station in the Bast. The
danger of air attacks against our cities and ports, as has been already
emphasised in these Columns, cannot possibly be greater than the
destruction of our sea-borne commerce, upon which we depend for our
very existence. Yet there are those who imagine that Prance will
see no menace in our additional air preparations, but that Japan will
see a menace in the fixed defences at Singapore. To refuse to pro-
vide the Fleet with a base from which it can operate in Eastern waters
is the first step towards losing Australia and New Zealand.”
PROTESTS FROM THE DOMINION GOVERNMENTS.
March 11th, 1924.
The Governor-General of New Zealand to the Secretary of State for
the Colonies.
Please communicate following message to Prime Minister from
my Prime Minister. With reference to the decision arrived at by
His Majesty’s Government in regard to proposed Singapore naval
base conveyed in your telegram of 6th March, I regret exceedingly
that it is not the intention of the Government of United Kingdom
to proceed with this proposal, which is looked upon as one
of the most important connected with the defence of the Empire. It
has been stated in no uncertain terms by the foremost naval authori-
ties available that, without a properly equipped base, a modern fleet
cannot operate, and, in the opinion of these authorities, for the pro-
tection of those portions of the Empire which are situated in the
Pacific and Indian Oceans there is no place so suitable as that which
may be provided at Singapore. This matter intensely concerns
Australia, India, New Zealand and a number of Crown Colonies who
are looking to present British Government to remember that every
citizen of the Empire and every country of the Empire are entitled
to protection from possibility of attack by a foreign foe. It is well
to remember here that Singapore is intended certainly not for offen-
sive but for defensive purposes and that no more of a threat would
be entailed to Japan by the establishment of a naval base at Singa-
pore than is entailed to the United States of America or any other
foreign power by the existence of Gibraltar.
Last session the New Zealand Parliament, as an earnest of its
anxiety that the fortification of Singapore should be proceeded with,
voted one hundred thousand pounds, and it will not stop at that.
In recent years America has fortified Pearl Harbour in the North
Pacific and it is now said by well qualified naval experts to be impreg-
nable, and the naval position of America has been strengthened accord-
ingly. The United States of America is fortunately a friendly
nation and will remain as such for centuries to come so far as it
is possible to judge, and I hope for all time. Separated from the
7


heart of the Empire by thirteen thousand or fourteen thousand
miles of sea, we in New Zealand realise what it means to be insuffi-
ciently protected. We have not forgotten what was suffered by
the Royal Navy and the British Mercantile Marine in the Pacific
during the years of the Great War, and we had hoped that the
lesson taught then would not be so quickly forgotten.
You say that your Government stands for International co-
operation through an enlarged and strengthened League of Nations.
I feel that I must reply to that by saying that it may turn out to
have been a pity that the League was ever brought into being if the
defence of the Empire is to depend upon the League of Nations only.
The very existence of the Empire depends on the Imperial Navy,
and if the Navy is to operate successfully in the event of war, it
must have suitable bases where repairs may be effected and from
which to work. Malta is the nearest suitable base at present and it is
6,000 miles away, and, therefore, for the purposes of capital ships
in either the Pacific or Indian Oceans it is of no value. It has been
said by an eminent authority that “Unless such a base as that con-
templated at Singapore is established it will be an absolute impos-
sibility for the majority of Empire capital ships to operate to the
eastward of Suez, for the simple reason that they cannot dock either
for the purpose of cleaning and so keeping their speed or of being
repaired.” It may also be pointed out that although the League
of Nations is undoubtedly an influence for peace, hostile action as
between nations has not so far been prevented by it.
Owing to the alteration in ship designs since the Great War, I
may remind you that docks which before 1914 would have taken
certain classes of warships, will not now accommodate ships of similar
tonnage, and so the present standard of naval efficiency cannot be
maintained without effect being given to the proposals regarding
Singapore.
I protest earnestly on behalf of New Zealand against the aban-
donment of the proposal to make Singapore a safe and strong naval
station because I believe that the Empire will stand as long as
Britain holds the supremacy of the sea, but, if Naval supremacy
is lost by Britain, the Empire may fall, to the detriment of humanity
as a whole as well as of its own people, and it is surely the duty of
the British Parliament and British Ministers to see that there will
be no danger of such a catastrophe so far as it is humanly possible
to prevent it.
JELLICOE.
The Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies. {March 11th, 1924.)
My Prime Minister sends the following message: Singapore
Base. Your two telegrams of March sth and 6th. My Govern-
ment has most carefully considered draft statement of policy pre-
pared by you for announcement in Parliament. The sentiment
underlying your declaration that you stand for a “policy of Inter-
nationa,! co-operation through the strengthened and enlarged League
of Nations, the settlement of disputes by judicial arbitration and
.conciliation, and the creation of conditions which will make possible
a comprehensive agreement on limitation of armament” is one which
we cordially endorse.
We in Australia are essentially a peace-loving people, and we
have shown that we desire a better understanding among the nations
8


and a definite reduction of armaments on every possible occasion
at the meetings of the League of Nations, at the Washington Con-
ference, and by our prompt compliance with all resolutions arising
therefrom. We are attempting to develop a vast territory with a
mere handful of people and our economic circumstances are those
peculiar to every young community in such a position. This impels
us to devote as much of our money and energy as possible to per-
manent re-productive works rather than to armaments, quite apart
from our deep-rooted national conviction, intensified by experiences
and sacrifices in the late war, that the time has come when mankind
should substitute arbitrament of reason for that of force.
We are in sympathy, therefore, with the great ideals expressed
in your telegrams from every standpoint and we will continue to
work for their realisation.
The methods suggested by you are, however, in the carefully
considered view of my Government such as will have precisely the
opposite effect, and we feel that the prospects of ultimately achieving
that aim for which we are all assiduously working will in fact be
seriously jeopardised.
We believe that the existence and prestige of the British Empire
has been and is the greatest factor in the maintenance of the peace
of the world.
To the active support backed by prestige and strength of the
British Empire has been due the measure of success which has been
achieved by the League of Nations since its inception.
Our strength relative to other great Powers has been the basis
of the influence for peace which we have wielded in the councils of
the nations and through the League of Nations.
That strength has depended mainly on the British Navy, its
power and mobility. We are convinced a base in the Pacific is
imperative for that mobility.
The existence and prestige of the Empire will be imperilled
without it. We believe that such a result would be a menace to the
peace of the world and a fatal blow to the League of Nations.
Your view that confidence must be established and that this can
only be achieved by allaying the International anxieties and sus-
picions which exist to-day is one in which we also concur. We
cannot agree, however, that the establishment of that confidence would
be any more hampered by the prudent step of establishing Singapore
base for the protection of the Empire’s trade and possessions in
the Pacific than by the other prudent step which your Government
is undertaking to increase Britain’s Air Forces as a protection against
air attack.
Further, we would point out that it was at the Washington Con-
ference, which arose primarily out of Pacific problems, that the
greatest contribution yet made to disarmament was effected. At
that Conference a stage of mutual understanding and trust, remark-
able in the circumstances and unprecedented in history, was reached
by the nations there represented. This result was achieved in spite
of the fact that all the nations represented at the Conference knew
well that it was Britain’s intention to proceed with the construction of
the base at Singapore, and that, because of that well-known intention
of Britain, Singapore was excluded from the area where fortifications
could not be erected.
9


The arrangement concluded at Washington for the reduction of
armaments was reached notwithstanding the knowledge of Britain’s
intention to proceed with a prudent measure of self-protection, and
my Government does not believe that a further reduction of arma-
ments, which all of us so greatly desire, will be prevented by this
prudent measure being taken at the present time.
We think, on the contrary, that, if the proposal, which the highest
naval authorities of the Empire support as a necessary defensive
measure, is abandoned by your Government, incalculable harm will
be done to the Empire’s prestige, the confidence of smaller nations
will be shattered* the ambitions of lesser powers will be increased,
and deep distrust will be caused throughout the whole Empire. Not
by actions having such results as these can we hope to bring about
further reductions in armaments.
Further, unless we have a base in the Pacific, that quota of
capital ships permitted by the Washington Conference cannot be
maintained by Britain in these now important waters.
That Conference never contemplated this eventuality, the occur-
rence of which would necessarily destroy the influence and power of
the British Empire in the Pacific to secure further reductions of naval
armaments.
While, therefore, we appreciate your desire to promote a friendly
understanding amongst the nations, we do not agree that the carrying
out of a programme so long and widely known and so essential to
altered circumstances would reflect on your good faith, or that it
would jeopardise the establishment of that confidence necessary to
success.
As a more practical contribution to the principles which you
have enunciated and with which we cordially agree, we suggest that
the construction of the base should be immediately proceeded with,
but that, should a suitable opportunity offer itself, the abandonment
of the base should be used as a means of reaching an agreement for
further mutual reductions of armaments.
Therefore, on behalf of our Commonwealth, which has on every
possible occasion proved its loyalty to the Empire, we urge you even
at this late hour to reconsider your decision.
The question of the cost of the base has not been referred to
by me, because I believe your determination has been reached on
the basis of principle and not of expenditure. But I wish to make
it clear that its obligation to contribute towards the cost of the base
is recognised by Australia, and it is the intention of my Government
to submit to Parliament, as soon as it meets, proposals for a sub-
stantial Australian contribution.
GOVERNOR-GENERAL.
SINGAPORE: A NECESSARY BASE.
(From ‘‘The Times” Weekly Edition, March 6th, 1924.)
After the war the Pacific Ocean acquired a new importance.
The world-problems of the future were seen to be centred in the
forces of growth, expansion, and conflict that are latent in its coasts
and its islands. It was natural, then, that the first great extra-
European Conference should have met to discuss primarily Pacific
problems. It is difficult for us here in busy, distracted, problem-
breeding Europe to envisage the Pacific questions in perspective.
10


But there, without a doubt, the great world-issues of the future will
be decided—the clash of Asiatic with Western civilisation; a vast,
chaotic, fabulously rich Eepublic into which foreign commercial
interests are penetrating, each one a rival with the other; an island
State which has a perpetual problem of over-population, and an
island Continent which has a perpetual problem of under-population.
These are some of the issues at stake, and in their solution Britain
has a vital interest.
From the West, Singapore is the gateway to the Pacific. In
the words of Admiral Field, commanding the Special Service Squad-
ron now in Australian waters, it resembles a pass through an other-
wise impassable mountain range. It is almost the literal truth to
say that every ship proceeding to Australia from the West must
pass Singapore, whether its mission be commercial or warlike. A
fleet attacking Australia from South Africa could not sail straight
across the Southern Indian Ocean; it would hardly arrive in condition
to fight. It would have to replenish its supplies first. The lay mind
does not always realise that a fleet on the high seas is like an army
on the march —it has to halt at intervals.
This axiom gives Singapore its importance. It is a natural
strategic and mercantile base. It is regularly visited by 50 different
lines of ocean-going steamers. Strategically it covers the approaches
to India from the east, as well as to Australasia from the west; it
flanks the approach to Australia from the north; it protects the
sources of oil supply in Burma; it is the nearest suitable base even
for the Anglo-Persian oilfields.
Oil fuel having now taken the place of coal in all the important
units of our sea forces, it becomes of paramount importance not
only to secure the sources of its supply, but to establish entrepots
for its storage. Oil cannot be dumped on the ground like coal.
That is the reason why provision must be made beforehand. If
Singapore is to be an adequate base the construction of enormous
fuel storehouses must be taken in hand now. The use of oil-carriers
at sea is extremely limited, and for the purposes of this article must
be left out of account.
FAR EASTERN INTERESTS.
And it would be wrong to assume that Singapore is only needed
if this country becomes involved in war in the Far East. Other
countries may become involved in war—and British shipping may
be the greatest sufferer. No country that has such interests in Far
Eastern waters can afford not to be in a position to defend them.
The value of British (and Dominion) hulls and cargoes carried on
any one day on the waters between India and the eastern shores of
the Pacific is estimated at £180,000,000. The total annual value of
the trade carried in the area protected from Singapore is £890,000,000.
All this merchandise —as well as the ships—is insured. Insurance
rates vary directly with the risks. Security means the saving of
thousands of pounds. There is not a merchant engaged in trade
with China, Japan, the Bast Indies, Australia, and even India who
will not give unstinted support to any scheme for the proper protec-
tion of British trade. And their losses in a war crisis would not be
theirs alone, but would afflict the whole community.
For this island lives on its trade, and the safety of the great
trade routes is as essential to its life as the circulation of blood is
necessary to the human body. We are fed from overseas; and the
prime duty of the Navy is to protect the sea routes. As matters
11


stand at present it is a melancholy fact that no British fleet could
effectively operate in the Pacific. With no base nearer than Malta
for docking and repairs, the slightest damage to any ship would send
her on a return journey of several weeks before she could again put
in an appearance on the scene of action. A fleet cannot operate
without a base any more than a motor-car can run indefinitely with-
out a visit to a garage. Considering that the whole safety of the
Empire depends upon the Navy, it is doubtful whether, in present
circumstances, a Government would be justified in dispatching a fleet
to Eastern waters at a time of crisis. Britain would therefore be
paralysed there. She might not be directly involved in the quarrel.
But she would have to rely on the indulgence of other countries for
the immunity of her trade, the safety of Australia, and the defence
of her Par Eastern possessions—a quite intolerable position for a
great country. Moreover, she could expect to exercise but little
influence on the course of events; her efforts for peace would be
not much regarded if they were known to be only pious adjurations
and nothing more.
IN THE EVENT OF WAR.
As for the event of Britain herself becoming involved in war,
the case hardly needs discussion. The lessons of the recent war are
still fresh in the public mind. The Pacific and Indian Oceans were
the happy hunting ground of the raider. The Bmden, the Wolf,
and the Moewe all did most of their damage there. The first named
alone destroyed 70,000 tons of British shipping in seven weeks. The
Matunga, with Australian reinforcements for New Guinea abroad,
was captured within a week’s steaming from Sydney. Twenty-two
ships, most of them carrying meat for England, were sunk off the
New Zealand coast. —and these are but examples taken at random.
12


The disaster of Coronel might never have occurred had we possessed
an adequate Pacific base.
And it should be noted that the dispersal of the British fleet in
Mediterranean and Par Eastern waters is a reversion to normal. It
is the natural distribution, now that the German menace has been
removed. The British Navy was concentrated in the North Sea by
the foresight of Lord Fisher in 1912. But it is well to remember
that in 1911 it was decided at the Imperial Conference that there was
to be a joint Empire Pacific fleet, each unit to consist of one capital
ship and three cruisers. Then, owing to the change of plan made
in the following year, the New Zealand was called to serve in home
waters, the Indomitable was not sent out (except on a visit), and
only the Australia remained there. And at that time Japan was
our Ally- Nobody then thought that a fleet to protect British
interests was a threat to Japan, nor is there any reason to suppose it
now.
THE WASHINGTON AGREEMENT.
It is hardly rational to argue—as some even in the House of
Commons have argued—that because Singapore is not far beyond
the limit of the agreed unfortified area it is, therefore, a violation of
the spirit of the Washington Agreement to turn it into a first-class
modern naval base. The Washington Conference consisted of naval
experts, and it is not flattering to them to suppose that when the limit
of' fortification line was drawn at llOdeg. east longitude they did
not realise that Britain reserved the right to fortify Singapore. And
to the representatives of the British Dominions we are pledged abso-
lutely to construct a base there. We have been committed since
1921. It would be a violation of the understanding reached at two
separate Imperial Conferences, as well as at Washington, to abandon
the scheme.
QUESTION OF GOST.
Finally, there is the question of cost. The estimates for the first
year, 1923-24, were originally £200,000. This was reduced to some-
thing between £150,000 and £160,000 by the generosity of the Govern-
ment of the Straits Settlements, which presented the necessary land
—2,250 acres for the naval base and 597 acres for an aerodrome.
The total cost is officially estimated at £10,500,000 for the naval base,
as apart from any military defence works which will be necessary for
its protection. Spread over a period of ten years, and regarded as
a premium for the security of national interests, this is an extremely
low rate of insurance. Moreover, Australia has promised to con-
tribute; New Zealand has already voted £IOO,OOO. For the first
two years only clearing and preparatory work is possible. The
estimates for the coming financial year are in the neighbourhood of
£150,000.
NAVAL POLICY.
SPEECH BY LORD BEATTY.
(From “The Navy,” December 20th, 1923)
The following speech made by Admiral Lord Beatty at the Lord
Mayor’s banquet at the Guildhall on the 9th ult., is considered by
the Executive Committee of the Navy League to be of the utmost
importance. A verbatim report is accordingly reproduced here so
that Members of the League may have an opportunity of studying
it in its entirety.
13


Admiral of the Fleet Lord Beatty said: —
It is a great privilege to respond to the toast of the Navy on this
distinguished occasion. You will wish me to be brief, but I feel
safe in assuming that your interest in the well-being and efficiency
of the Navy is as great to-day as it has ever been in the past, and that
you will therefore desire me to touch upon some of the questions
which are most prominently before us at the present time.
At the Washington Conference the strength of the Navies of
the Great Powers was definitely laid down, so far as capital ships
and aircraft carriers were concerned. It was recognised that our
peculiar situation as a scattered Empire admitted of special treatment
in the matter of cruisers. The lines of communication between the
great Dominions, India, the Colonies, the Mother Country, and each
other lie upon the sea, and for their protection cruisers are all-
important.
The approximate length of the British trade routes is 80,000
miles. At any given moment there are over 1,000 British merchant
ships scattered over these routes, and, as attack may be made at any
point of the 80,000 miles, it will be realised what a gigantic task is
the protection of shipping in war time, and how impossible it is to
carry it out without an adequate number of cruisers. Owing to the
need for economy, however, our cruiser-building programme has not
kept pace with our needs. The older vessels are wearing out, and
they must be replaced by new and up-to-date ships. The Prime
Minister has already announced the forthcoming replacement of the
County class, which were first laid down specially for trade protection
in 1899.
THE CAPITAL SHIP.
I think it would be as well to say something about the type of
vessel about which there has been so much controversy. What is
a capital ship? It seems to me that it can best be defined as a
ship which combines the greatest offensive powers with powers of
defence which make it capable of withstanding attack from all other
types and weapons that can be brought against it. It must, in
addition, possess speed and good sea-keeping qualities. The capital
ship of to-day has to meet very different forms of attack from those
to which it was exposed a few years ago. Not only have guns and
torpedoes developed immensely, but submarines and aircraft are addi-
tional weapons to contend with. The gun has greater velocity,
the shell has greater bursting charge, and the protecting armour has
had to be increased accordingly.
The increased efficiency of the torpedo has led to the successful
adoption of new methods of under-water protection. The advent of
the submarine has increased the liability of ships to torpedo attack
and this has necessitated the development of anti-submarine measures
to counter it. We have made great progress, and the race between
the submarine and anti-submarine measures is somewhat similar to
that between the gun and the armour. To-day the development of
anti-submarine devices is more than keeping pace with the submarine,
so much so that to the Power in command of the surface of the sea
the submarine is not a great menace. To a Power weak on the surface
of the sea it is a serious menace.
AIR ATTACK.
Then we come to the question of air attack on the capital ship,
and the means for countering and defeating it. The improvement in
armour protection against the gun is effective against the bomb, and
14


the underwater protection against the torpedo is equally effective
against aircraft bombs bursting close alongside a ship. Anti-aircraft
fire has made great strides, and we should be able to rely on our own
Fleet aircraft for counter-attack. The decision that capital ships
can be equipped to withstand all these forms of attack has not been
reached without the most careful investigation, or without giving every
consideration to the points which have been urged against it by
those who hold that the day of the large surface ship is past. The
decision is based upon experiment and exhaustive trial, fortified by
the best naval opinion available, and the advice of all officers who
have held important command within the last ten years, the period
during which the hew menaces have developed. Naval constructors
corroborate the naval opinion, and their views are in turn confirmed
by the decisions reached in the United States and Japan.
The capital ship, that is to say, the most powerful ship afloat, is
the basis of sea power'; it is the unit upon the support of which
depends the freedom of action pf every less powerful type of craft;
it is a match for any ship or weapon that can be brought against it.
In the distant past the capital ship was the trireme; to-day it is the
battleship; to-morrow it may be something different, something that
can fly, dive, or perform other evolutions which to-day seem
impossible.
To turn again to the air. Nowhere is the importance of this
arm more fully recognised than in the Navy. It is not too much to
say that in the future no fleet, no ship, will be fully equipped without
aircraft. They are becoming an additional indispensable weapon
of the fleet, as indispensable as guns or torpedoes, and as much a part
of a ship’s equipment. To command a fleet in the future, an officer’s
knowledge of the value and use of aircraft must be as intimate as
his knowledge of the value and use of gun, torpedo, and submarine.
The aeroplane has definite functions in the gunnery organisation of
each ship. It may well be that the Commander-in-Chief and his
staff will be quartered on board an aircraft carrier. During opera-
tions Staff officers in aeroplanes, far in advance of the Fleet, should
be able to give information enabling him to dispose his forces to the
best strategic and tactical advantage. Victory may well depend
upon this.
It must be remembered that shore-based aircraft can function
only in comparatively harrow waters. The great oceans which carry
our trade and communications are as free from their influences as
ever. As in the case of the submarine, it is only the Power which
commands the sea that can secure the full use and freedom of action
of aircraft borne in aircraft carriers and in other vessels of the fleet.
It is therefore imperative that the air arm of the Navy should be
developed, unhampered, side by side with the gunnery arm, the tor-
pedo arm, and the other arms which go to make up the efficiency
of the fleet; and that a proper proportion of the personnel of the
Navy should be devoted to its development, as is the case with other
arms.
SINGAPORE.
Perhaps I may be permitted to say a word about Singapore.
This project of developing Singapore, or I might say putting it in
order, has been criticised as if it were something new. This is by
no means the case. For many years it has been a base, recognised
by the more astute as being the best strategical position in the Far
Bast. The Western Pacific has long been a station for strong British
forces, and the need for strength is surely no less to-day than in the
15


past. Our possessions are no less, their value is ever increasing.
The Great Dominions of Australia and New Zealand have grown in
population and prosperity. They require protection as much as or
more than in the past. The same may be said of India and the Crown
Colonies. If those responsible for our destinies were to say that
we can afford to rely for existence upon the good will of others, then
Singapore would not be required; but if insurance is wise, if our
interests are to be properly safeguarded, then Singapore must be
brought up to date. A modern fleet cannot operate without a
properly equipped base. The nearest existing base which possesses
the necessary facilities is Malta, 6,000 miles away.
There are critics who say, "Yes, we admit the necessity for an
adequate base in the Pacific, but we do not agree with the selection
of Singapore as the ideal situation for it.” Let them look at the
map. They will find no base in such a good strategical position for
covering those portions of the Empire which lie in the Pacific and
Indian Oceans and protecting the trade routes between them and
the rest of the world. The naval forces of the Empire include the
naval forces provided by the Dominions, and it does not require
much imagination to look forward to the day when the Dominions,
as they grow in power and wealth, will not only assist in guarding
the sea communications in the vicinity of their own coasts but will
provide a quota of the main fleet, which is the basis of our sea power
and which forms the support for the squadrons operating on the dis-
tant ocean routes. This envisages the development of Dominion
navies, and I wish to make it perfectly clear that the Admiralty
are definitely in favour of this policy and will do all in their power
to assist in the development of such naval forces as the Dominions
may feel able to create.
There is, however, an even more vital question than ships and
armaments. I refer to the personnel. That personnel must be
sufficient in numbers, and its high standard of efficiency must be
maintained. The post-war reductions have reached a point where
a halt must be called. If a 5—5—3 ratio be taken for personnel,
as for capital ships, then we are at present below our numbers. Our
larger requirements in cruisers render this shortage more pronounced,
and some expansion will be necessary. Of the efficiency of the
personnel t its discipline and spirit at the present moment, I can speak
with enthusiasm and pride. Their well-being and contentment must
be maintained, and the conditions of service must be such as to
attract the best we have got. We must remember, also, the intimate
connection between the active service personnel and the trained
personnel of the mercantile marine and trawler reserve. The access
of strength to the Navy in the late war by existence in peace of
those magnificent seamen, with the instinct and understanding of the
sea, was indeed a tremendous factor. Sea knowledge and sea train-
ing must be kept alive in this country in time of peace. Then, if
war be again forced upon us, there will be available a great reserve
of trained seamen to strengthen the Navy in its task of controlling
the seas.
EXTRACT FROM ARTICLE IN “SATURDAY REVIEW.”
(From "The Navy,” August, 1923)
That the development of Singapore is dictated by the soundest
strategy cannot be questioned. The Admiralty, unlike their critics,
appreciate that an improvement in aeroplane design is not the late
16


war’s only legacy. From the naval point of view the war may be said
to have reproduced the political situation of the year 1900. Ten years
ago the disposition of our naval forces was dictated by the maritime
strength of Germany and by the Anglo-Japanese Treaty. To-day,
neither the German Navy nor the Treaty exists, and we have no
choice but to return to the dispositions which obtained when the
present century opened. There are some who consider that the
maintenance of a fleet in the Far East is provocation to Japan,
and they share with the “Skibbereen Eagle” the illusion that nations
can be held in check by editorial fulminations. Others, again, while
admitting the desirability of a Par-Eastern squadron, deny the
necessity for storing and docking facilities nearer at hand than Malta,
or else they suggest that the fleet shall carry with it a floating dock,
even as an Englishman, according to Americans, travels with his
bath. Objection is also taken to the provision of shore tanks for
the storage of oil, since, according to the critics, “oilers” can at
all times accompany the fleet. It may, therefore, be as well to
mention that the original cost of a floating dock is 65 per cent, of
that of a graving dock; that a further 25 per cent, would be expended
in towing the dock to its station; that the cost of its upkeep is immea-
surably greater than that of a graving dock and its life little longer
than that of a battleship. Further, a battleship, after a year out
of dock, finds her radius of action reduced by 40 per cent., and her
loss of speed impairs the tactical efficiency of the whole fleet. Docked
at Singapore she need not be out of action for more than a week;
but if she were sent to Malta her services would be lost for at least
a month. Lastly, the presence of oilers, as Von Spec found, greatly
hampers a fleet when in touch with the enemy and their own con-
sumption of fuel very soon represents a serious depletion of the
available supplies.
Space and political considerations alike forbid the elaboration
of local strategical questions. Our aim has been to expose the fallacy
of the stock objections raised. But no one who glances at the map
and bears in mind our interests in those regions can fail to appreciate
the importance of Singapore or its geographical advantages as com-
pared with Hong-Kong or any port in Australia. Financially, the
heart of the Empire may be in London, but the time will come when
the possession of Singapore will seem to us essential to our Imperial
existence.
EXTRACT FROM SPEECHES IN HOUSE OF
COMMONS ON MARCH 18th AND 25th, 1924.
(From “The Navy,” April, 1924)
Mr. Ambry : If I am not wearying the House, I would like to say
a few words on the very serious decision which the Government
apparently have taken in regard to Singapore. I would like to
say, in the first place, that that decision is entirely inconsistent
with the general line which they have taken on all these problems
of defence, and indeed with the general line of their Naval policy.
Look at the statement of the First Lord, in which it is announced
that one of the things now being done is the reconcentration of the
Navy in the Mediterranean, as being the more normal position. Why
is the Mediterranean the more normal position for our Navy? Is
it because we have any fear of aggression on the part of France or
Italy against ourselves? It has nothing to do with either of them.
17


It has to do with the fact that the “middle sea” is the geographical
centre of the main highway of the British Empire, which stretches
across the Atlantic to this country, thence to the Straits of Gibraltar,
through the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, across the Indian Ocean
and through the Straits of Malacca and Singapore to the Pacific and
to Australia. That is the main highway to our Empire, and when
our Navy is now reduced to a single battle fleet it is naturally placed
in the centre of that great sea route, so that if required it could be
sent at once in whatever direction might be necessary. The position
of Malta as our great Naval centre has nothing to do with its
geographical relationship to Italy. It has everything to do with its
geographical relationship to Gibraltar and Plymouth, to Bermuda
and Halifax in the West, and to the Suez Canal across the Indian
Ocean to Singapore and to Fremantle in the East! With our
territories lying at each end and on both sides of that route, we are
entitled to expect that our Navy should be able to move freely between
those territories of our own Empire.
We had that mobility before the War. We were always free
until a few years ago to move our fleets from end to end of that
line. Until less than 20 years ago one of our biggest battle fleets
was always in the Pacific waters; our Far East squadron, which was,
next to the Mediterranean, the most powerful of our squadrons. As
recently as the Imperial Conferences, of 1909 and 1911, it was agreed
that we should build up a Pacific fleet of the Empire, composed of
three fleet units, each containing one capital ship and three other
cruisers. The headquarters was to have been at Singapore. We
had that idea when we were allies of Japan, and at a time when we
were practically allies of Russia, and when nobody suggested that
there was any menace in that part of the world. Even then we
thought it desirable, and the events which have happened since have
shown that we were right, to maintain a fleet in Eastern waters.
We withdrew the main part of that fleet under pressure of the last
two years of concentration before the Great War, and because of
that we suffered very seriously. The escape of Von Spee’s squadron
would never have taken place if the Indomitable and New Zealand
had been in China waters, and we should not have had the
disaster of Coronel, and should not have been compelled to detach
two capital ships from the North Sea at a critical moment to make
good that disaster.
All that the late Government were aiming at doing was to restore
that mobility, in virtue of the fact that the War brought about two
great changes, affecting the mobility of the Fleet, to one of which
the hon. Member has already referred. That is supersession of
coal by oil. The other, to which he did not refer, is the size of
the ships, which was enormously affected by the necessity of bulging
them in order to deal with the submarine, a fact which affects the
docking not only of battleships but also of battle-cruisers and air-
craft carriers. What is very interesting and curious is that the
present Government are going on with our policy not only with regard
to concentration in the Mediterranean, but also with regard to the
oil-fuel stations. In these very Estimates there is a sum of -£200,900
for the provision of oil fuel at Singapore. Though the mobility
of our Navy on our great main sea route is apparently going to be
preserved by supplying our ships with oil, we are apparently not
going to help their mobility by enabling them to be fitted or repaired.
They can have oil, but if any work is necessary they have got to go
back to Western waters, all the way to Malta, a journey of several
18


weeks, and they might very well sink before that could be done.
The course now taken by the Government on this matter is inconsis-
tent. The Prime Minister said on that question:
“Are we going to be told—and I would like a straight answer on this
point—that the method of bringing about disarmament and carrying out
pledges is to allow the Navy to disappear by wastage from the bottom?”
What about allowing your Navy to disappear from off that half of
the face of the globe by wastage and obsolescence of our docks?
This provision of necessary repair facilities on the main highroad
of our Empire is just as much a matter of replacement as the
building of new ships. The things stand or fall together. They
are all part of the policy of making the fullest use of our greatly
reduced Navy.
It may be asked why Singapore in particular? I need not
give an elaborate answer. I will say briefly only this: Singapore,
like Suez, like Gibraltar, like the Panama Canal to the United States,
is one of the key passages of the world. It is the natural and only
convenient gateway to the Indian Ocean. It covers the whole Indian
Ocean against any raiding from without. I have noticed in the tone
of many of the arguments on the subject a sort of suggestion that
we were putting down an aggressive base in a Japanese part of
the world. It is many thousands of miles from Japan. Singapore
is essentially in a British part of the world. It is actually the point
of the richest and most progressive parts of the Empire. It is the key
to the Indian Ocean, round which lies three-quarters of the land terri-
tory of the Empire. The great Southern Dominions, India, and our
East African possessions lie around that ocean. Three-quarters of
the population of the Empire is around it also. We have not a single
base in all that vast region at which a modern ship could be fitted or
repaired.
As was stated in an answer to a question the other day, there
passes through that ocean every year something like £1,000,000,000
worth of our traffic and a great deal of other traffic belonging to the
rest of the Empire. Something like £160,000,000 worth of our ships
and cargo is afloat in that ocean at any minute of the day. Singapore
is the one point from which the whole of that area can be effectively
defended and protected. More than that, if Singapore were an
enemy base, there is no other point from which any part of that
great area could be protected. It is also the only station on the
way to Australia and New Zealand by which the Fleet can move to
their help. You cannot steam a fleet either from the Panama Canal
or the Cape across to Australia and New Zealand. The only route
by which help can come to the Southern Dominions is by way of
Singapore. Once the Fleet is at Singapore it already covers the
approach to these Dominions, and is in the best position to provide
them with security.
Now we are told that the provision of a base in our waters, in
British territory, territory that has been ours more than a century,
is a menace to Japan. Ido wish that people who suggest that would
look at a large scale map. It is no more a menace to Japan than
Plymouth is a menace to the United States or Key West to us.
Singapore is not a menace to Japan. After all, if we wanted a
menace to Japan, why give up that splendid defensive position at
Hong Kong? We are told, however, that if not a menace to Japan,
it shows a distrust of her. The Prime Minister knows that that
argument can be used about every measure of defence. We cannot
19


have air squadrons without being 1 accused of showing distrust to
Prance. As the right hon. Gentleman said very well himself the
other day, we can never protect ourselves against misunderstanding
and foolish conclusions. But I would like to say that the need of
Singapore is not connected with Japan only. I pointed out just
now that in any war, except one with Germany, we should have to
deal with cruiser raids on a far more serious scale than in the last
War. What is the base from which we can meet those cruisers?
What is the position from which we can hope to keep cruisers out
of the Pacific or out of the Indian Ocean ? Singapore. In any war
Singapore is the obvious cruiser centre, and it is not merely a
question of a war with Japan.
But, when we are talking of the imaginary danger of wounding
the susceptibilities of a foreign Power, is not there a real danger
which we are ignoring—the danger of mortally wounding the sus-
ceptibilities of our own fellow-citizens in the Dominions? This
matter of Singapore was arrived at by agreement with the Dominions.
I notice in the First Lord’s statement that he gives a good deal of
space to the conclusions of the Imperial Conference. He gives the
general principles which the Conference laid down as to the desir-
ability of adequate naval bases. But he leaves out what the Resolu-
tion of the Conference goes on to say in the very next paragraph that
in the application of those principles to the several parts of the Empire
concerned:
“the Conference takes note of the deep interest of the Commonwealth of
Australia, the Dominion of New Zealand, and India in the provision of a
naval base at Singapore as essential for ensuring the mobility necessary
to provide the security of the territories and trade of the Empire in
Eastern waters.”
That is the conclusion that is now lightly thrown aside. I ask the
House to consider what that means. It means that we say to the
Dominions, “In the hour of danger we are no longer prepared to
help you; we deny ourselves access to your aid. When we are
thinking of danger to London, of course, we make preparations in
the air, because we cannot afford to run risks. But when it is your
existence that is at stake we are not willing to run the risk.”
There is this further consideration; Is it not desirable sometimes
to look a little ahead? Is it possible that, taking a long view, the
naval defence of this great Empire can be maintained indefinitely
by the taxpayers of this little island, with all their obligations in
domestic matters and with the added obligation of air defence?
That security can be attained only by the co-operation of all parts
of the Empire in building up their naval forces on such lines that
in the hour of danger they can form part of a single, united Empire
Fleet. That is possible only if they can come together, can reach
each other, and that presupposes a route along which they can move
towards each other’s support. By dropping this project of Singa-
pore, the Government are practically denouncing all co-operation
with the Empire in future. Ido ask the Government to pause
before they come to a decision of such momentous importance. I
think I can say that, whatever decision the House may reach to-day,
when we on this side of the House are in power again we shall not lose
an instant in resuming this scheme.
Sir Robert Horne: I beg to move to leave out “£3,080,000,”
and to insert instead thereof “£3,079,900.”
The object with which I am moving this Amendment is to take
exception to the policy which the Government have announced with
20


regard to the island of Singapore. The subject is in itself one of
sufficient importance to warrant another debate, following that which
took place last week, but in addition to the gravity of the decision
which has been taken, there are circumstances making it specially
necessary at the present time that the House of Commons should
give very grave consideration to the views which have been urged.
Hon. and right hon. Members are now in possession of certain com-
munications which have taken place between His Majesty’s Govern-
ment and the representatives of our great Dominions. Their
interest in this matter is very obvious. They themselves, or at
least some of them, are much more concerned than, in the ordinary
sense, we here might be regarded as being, and so much importance
was attached to this great question that, at the last Imperial Con-
ference, the representatives of the Dominions passed a Resolution
stating in very explicit and definite terms their views in regard to
the necessity of the fortification and extension of the docks at Singa-
pore. These views expressed at the Imperial Conference have been
greatly emphasised in the document now before the House of
Commons.
Before I proceed to point out some of the opinions which have
been expressed, I should like to refer to a matter which I confess some-
what startles me. ,¥e were informed that His Majesty’s Government
were consulting with the representatives of the Dominions upon this
question, but I confess I have never seen consultation take a more
discourteous form. What His Majesty’s Government did was to
announce to the Dominions that they had come to a decision, without
communicating to them the view which they arrived at, and so far
from consulting them, having, announced their view they proceeded to
give the Dominions the opportunity only of making protests. No
chance was afforded of doing anything to alter the judgment of His
Majesty’s Government before it had been finally formed. Now,
when we get the result of the communications from the Dominions,
what we find is this. The great Dominion of Canada does not feel
she can pronounce any opinion at all. On the other hand, the oldest
of our Colonies, Newfoundland, very strongly expresses its protest
against the course which His. Majesty’s Government propose to take.
The Government of South Africa indicate their view that this is a
favorable opportunity to make the gesture of which the Prime Minister
has spoken. On the other hand, the Dominions which are mainly
concerned, New Zealand and the Commonwealth of Australia, have
entered not only a most emphatic protest against this policy, but have
expressed their dismay that such a judgment should be arrived at
by His Majesty’s Government in the centre of the Empire. Ido
not stop at the moment to read the form in which these protests are
expressed, but I should like, if I may, at this stage to read what
Mr. Bruce, the Prime Minister of Australia, says:
“We think that if a proposal which the highest naval authorities of
the Empire support as a necessary defensive Measure is abandoned by
your Government, incalculable harm will be done to the Empire’s prestige.
The confidence of the smaller nations will be shattered, the ambitions of
lesser Powers will be increased, and deep distrust will be caused throughout
the whole Empire.” ,
I cannot imagine a protest expressed in graver or more solemn lan-
guage, and, of course, as the House well knows, these Dominions are
prepared to make their contributions to the expenses of the measures
which are required to be taken at Singapore. New Zealand has
already voted £IOO,OOO for the purpose, and Mr. Bruce has expressed
21


the intention of Australia to give a very substantial contribution.
As be states in the document now before the House, theirs is a small
community struggling at the present time to develop their country,
and therefore not in the position to afford very large sums for arma-
ments. He says:
“We are attempting to develop a vast territory with a mere handful
of people, and our economic circumstances are those peculiar to every young
community in such a position. This compels us to devote as much money
and energy as possible to permanent reproductive works rather than to
armaments.”
That is quite true, hut he goes on to say that the neglect of defensive
measures will be the downfall, as he thinks, of the Empire to which
Australia is at the present time proud to belong. There is another
circumstance which adds to our anxiety at the present time, and
which makes a review of the whole position by the House of Commons
most necessary. I refer to the fact disclosed by the Prime Minister
in the course of his speech last Tuesday, and confirmed in more
strenuous language by the Civil Lord of the Admiralty, that the Sea
Lords entirely disapprove of the course which His Majesty’s Govern-
ment have taken.
What he did say to the House was that Singapore was the place
for such a base. He used the phrase, “second to none in those waters
for the purpose,” and went on further to state his view that for all
purposes, both of offence and defence, Singapore was a situation of
the very highest importance in those seas. Accordingly, I do not
require to prove anv case against the Government in that connection,
and if the House will allow me for a moment I would like to say a word
as to how the picture of the world situation strikes my mind at the
present moment. We have a vast Empire, but it is very widespread,
and it is, if I may say so, a sprawling Empire. It cannot be an
Empire at all unless you get an absolutely safe means of communica-
tion from one end of it to the other, and, in particular, it is of the
first moment that you should be able to depend upon the great sea
routes which unite the various parts of the Dominions. There is only
one means of such communication, and that is the British Navy. The
British Navy is not merely the pride of all British citizens wherever
they are on the face of the globe, but it is the real link which connects
all our Dominions. You will find in what Mr. Massey says an eloquent
statement as to the view which our people overseas take of the position
of the British Navy, and what a calamity they would regard it, if in
any part of the great seas of the world it should be found impossible
for the British Navy to operate. There is no doubt at all that if you
once reach a position in which the British Navy is unable to guard
your various peoples, you put a very severe strain on some of the links
which bind some of our Colonies and Dominions to us.
The British Navy can only operate if you have places at which
your ships can refuel, and refit, and repair, and two such examples
you can readily find in Gibraltar and Malta. The third of the great
trio which have acted as these points in the past has been Singapore,
which occupies one of the most important places on the earth’s surface,
so far as we are concerned and so far as our interests go. It dominates
seas on the perimeter of which you have Australia, and New Zealand
and India, territories which represent three-fourths of all the British
territories in the world, and which carry three-fourths of all the
population over which the King reigns. If you abandon Singapore,
or if you make Singapore too weak to serve your purpose, it is per-
fectly plain that there is no means of defence whatsoever for the great
22


countries to which I have referred. What is your next nearest naval
base ? It is Malta, which is 6,000 miles away from Singapore.
If you leave Singapore to get into a condition in which it becomes
ineffective as a naval base, you are in effect saying to the Dominions:
“We are no longer in a position to defend you should any action be
taken against you,” and it really means, to all intents and purposes,
that you wash your hands of any possible defence so far as that por-
tion of your Empire is concerned. That, in the military sense; but let
me refer to another matter which perhaps in peace time appeals more
to one’s judgment. These seas in which Singapore is carry every
year £1,000,000,000 worth of cargo to Great Britain. Ido not sup-
pose that that could be said of any other seas in the world. They
carry practically all the rubber that comes to us, practically all the
jute, all the hemp, all the wool, all the zinc ore, and many other com-
modities which are of the first essential to our ordinary manufacturing
industries. At any day in the year there would be afloat upon that
sea something over £150,000,000 worth of ships and cargoes belonging
to Great Britain. I suggest to the House that that is a very sufficient
reason for making efficient the naval base from which you propose to
defend interests so immense and vital to your very existence.
What we wish to have done at Singapore at the present time is
nothing more than this; it is to bring it up into the efficient condition
in which it was before the war, relatively to the vessels which then
required the use of its harbours. As everyone knows, there has been
a great increase in the size of ships in recent years, and what has
happened is that a dock which previously was efficient for its purpose
is now not nearly large enough to take any battle-cruisers of the new
type, and still less those bulged capital ships which are supposed to be
thus protected against the submarine. The docks cannot even take
in our ordinary aeroplane carriers, and the result is that none of our
great vessels upon which a fleet depends could be repaired or refitted
at Singapore so long as it is in its present condition. It cannot, in
fact, take in anything larger than a light cruiser. I venture to sug-
gest to the House that there is nothing very extreme in the suggestion
that, having a base of that kind in these waters of such vast import-
ance, you should at least make it efficient for your purposes, rather
than have one which is totally inadequate for modern needs.
The Government have accepted the view put before them by their
naval advisers, and have formed the opinion that, upon quite other
grounds, they should resist that advice. They make no mention of the
expense, they take no account of the question of the size of the ships
which are to use these docks, but they plume themselves upon a view
much higher than that which they expect to appeal to the minds of
ordinary men. They tell us that their attitude in International
matters is one of peaceful co-operation, and that if they embark upon
this expenditure at Singapore, they will give an impression of bad
faith to those whom they are endeavouring to persuade at the present
time to abandon armaments altogether. They say that this is a time
to make a moral gesture to the world, and that if we go on with these
works at Singapore we shall be doing something that is provocative. I
confess that I entirely fail to understand the theory that any of the
operations proposed at Singapore can be provocative to anybody.
Lieut.-Commander Bubney: The Prime Minister, as I under-
stand it, has decided to postpone the Singapore Base for a sufficient
period to allow him to investigate the possibilities of International
23


disarmament. He definitely stated in his speech in this House on the
18th instant—and this has also been mentioned by the Parliamentary
Secretary—that:
“Should the practical necessity of putting such strategy into opera-
tion”—
that is, the construction of the Singapore Base—
“arise by reason of the condition of world politics and a return to attempts
to provide Imperial security primarily by armaments, the whole question
would have to be reconsidered. But in the opinion of His Majesty’s Govern-
ment that has not now arisen.” [Official Report, 18th March, 1924; col.
321, Vol. 171.]
That is the Prime Minister’s view, and that is the view of the Govern-
ment. As far as the Prime Minister is concerned, I think his pro-
posals are destructive in two directions. They are destructive of that
feeling of confidence which Australia and New Zealand have hitherto
had in our practical determination in this country to secure their
safety and security; and, secondly, I think they are destructive in the
sense that they jeopardise the safety of the Empire in the event of a
war, and are even more destructive from the point of view of economics.
They relegate the £55,000,000 per annum which we are now spending
on the Navy to a form of security which has only half that amount of
value, because, with our new vessels, we shall not have that mobility
of the Fleet which we otherwise should have, and the activities of the
British Navy will be confined to the Atlantic Ocean. It will not be
able to operate in the Pacific Ocean.
We have also to consider, so far as the East is concerned, the fact
that we have a re-Orientation of naval power, and our Eastern
Empire must depend for the present on our naval power, and not
upon our aerial power. We have had a re-Orientation of that kind
before. In 1904, Lord Fisher, with the genius that was his, foresaw
what was happening in Germany. He withdrew the China Fleet,
reduced the Mediterranean Fleet, and concentrated them in Home
waters; hut at the same time—and this is important—he reduced
Trincomalee and Hong Kong, shut down Esquimault, and built Rosyth.
That is to say, he had to carry out a re-Orientation of naval ships coin-
cidentally with a re-Orientation of the bases upon which those ships
depend. What is the position to-day? The position is exactly the
same. We have a re-Orientation of naval power, and I would say in
passing that that re-Orientation of power is not at our behest, but
is imposed upon us by other nations. We have to place our ships
strategically in the position that is most suitable from a strategic
point of view, and from a strategic point of view only. The Naval
Staff cannot allow themselves to consider whether one country is
friendly or not; they have to consider what may happen in the worst
possible case, and the whole of our strategic dispositions have to be
carried out on that basis.
Viscount Curzon : I have listened with the greatest possible in-
terest to all the speeches made this afternoon. Therefore, I can claim
to have taken considerable interest in the subject. We heard, first,
the astonishing speech from the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ad-
miralty. I say—and I challenge the Front Bench on this—that the
Parliamentary Secretary to the Admiralty has given false information
to the House this afternoon. He said that all our aircraft carriers,
except one, could use the existing dock at Singapore. I challenge
that statement. I am perfectly certain that the Furious, the
24


Courageous, and the Glorious, now being converted, and the Eagle
cannot get into that dock, and I very much doubt whether the Hermes
can.
I have already had an answer from the Admiralty to the effect
that no bulged ships can use the existing dock at Singapore. Now the
hon. Gentleman has told us that every aircraft carrier, except one,
can use this dock. I challenge that in the light of information already
given, in view of the fact that the Furious, one of our largest aircraft
carriers, is a bulged ship. I say that the Furious cannot use it, and
also that the Glorious and the Courageous, will not be able to use
that dock. ■
Another astonishing statement which the Parliamentary Secretary
to the Admiralty made was that you could protect the trade in the
East by means of cruisers alone. I think his statement amounted to
something to that effect. That is one of the points with which I wish
to deal this evening. How could you possibly pit a cruiser of any
description against a capital ship? How could you pit a cruiser,
carrying 6-inch or 8-inch guns, against a battle-cruiser carrying 14-
ineh guns? It cannot be done. A light cruiser in such a situation
would simply have to turn tail and clear out of it as fast as she could,
if, indeed, she could get away, because everybody who knows anything
about the sea is aware that, if there is anything like a heavy sea on,
the lighter ship feels it far more than the heavier ship. To try to
protect our trade by means of light cruisers is quite impossible. There-
fore, I maintain that it is wrong that the right hon. Gentleman should
come and tell the House that you do not want a dock at Singapore
because you do not want the capital ships.
I have paid very careful attention to that expert naval opinion
which says that we should not go on with Singapore, that it is waste,
criminal lunacy, and so forth. But only two naval experts have used
such words. One is Admiral Mark Kerr, and the other is Sir Percy
Scott. When the Prime Minister held up Sir Percy Scott as an
expert in this House the other day, he absolutely insulted the Royal
Navy by doing so. Sir Percy Scott has left no stone unturned
during the last year or two, ever since Admiral Lord Fisher died, to
run down the Navy and belittle it on every possible occasion. He has
been challenged. I have challenged him myself, not here, but outside,
to open debate before an expert audience, and what did he do ? He
ran away. I asked him to debate this question of Singapore.
Admiral Mark Kerr came and debated it, but Sir Percy Scott ran
away. He was invited to appear before Mr. BOnar Law’s committee
on the capital ship, but he declined. In fact, he ran away. He
always funs away, and he will not substantiate his statements before
any conference. These are the only naval experts and flag-officers
who have raised their voices "against Singapore.
Hon. Gentlemen opposite should not forget what so nearly hap-
pened in the late war, that we were nearly brought to our knees by
the German menace and blockade; and even in the Grand Fleet we
had only seven days’ fuel oil left. That was what the submarine
did for the Grand Fleet. If this was. the case in the Fleet, it must
have been pretty serious in the country.
We have the menace from the air. We have menace to the trade
routes overseas. There is the European menace, and the increasing air
forces. At once there is the threat at home and overseas. There is
the equal possibility of a danger to our great Dominions. Are we to
turn round and say: “Yes, we know you are in danger, but we are
not prepared to do anything; we are prepared to put up a moral
25


gesture.” What is a moral gesture to the Dominions? What is a
moral gesture to the world? You say to them: “Oh, yes, we are
going to make great moral gestures to show others how anxious we
are for disarmament,” and therefore we cannot take the obvious and
neeessary step in the case of Singapore. “We shall show others how
much we are to be believed.” We turn round to the Dominions with
another moral gesture, but what does it mean to them? You had their
help over here in the war, and now in peace time you say, “We are not
going to do the obvious thing for you.”
A good deal has been said this afternoon about the possibility
of the Fleet going Bast. I would submit to hon. Members opposite
that, unless they have a base East of Suez to be used in times of war,
the main battle fleet cannot possibly fight Bast of Suez. What is
the effect of that? You hand over at least half—the hon. Gentle-
man thb Member for Maidstone (Commander Bellairs) said two-
thirds of the sea —but at least you hand over power over half the
world to a foreign Power. Supposing in that event that foreign
Power decides to take action. Supposing that Power desires Singa-
pore, look what inevitably happens! The battle fleet cannot move
Bast of Suez, and everything—East Africa, India, Australia, New
Zealand and our Dominions—must go. The Parliamentary Secretary
to the Admiralty quoted from a Leader of the Opposition, I think
it was in Australia, this afternoon. I wonder what that friend in
Australia would say to the Japanese if they were to say: “Will you
allow us to send in some Japanese emigrants?” Would he allow
them to come in? If not, how is he going to keep them out? There
is only one way; to show them that you are a country able to close
the door and to say “No.” I would really ask the hon. Gentleman
to put it to his friend in Australia, what is the policy going to be if
the Japanese put forward any request to be allowed to send
Japanese emigrants to Australia if you deny half the world to our
Navy? Look at what you are spending on the Fleet at
£55,800,000. That is only to be spent on defending half the world.
Hon. Gentlemen and right hon. Gentlemen opposite are in favour of
economy, but if the Fleet is to be used for only half the world surely
that raises the value (?“relative cost.”—Editor) of the Fleet.
You cannot send your Fleet to any part of the world unless you
have a repairing base to which it can go in case of need. I ask hon.
Members who are keen on economy not to forget that point.
I submit that the Government is gambling on the maintenance
of peace, and that the stake is the whole future, not only of this
country alone, but of the entire Empire. This policy has been pre-
sented and supported by amateurs; no expert naval opinion sup-
ports it whatever. The Government has completely disregarded
the advice of the Naval Staff. This is being done as a political
move, and for no other reason. We know the old saying that
morality varies with climate. It almost seems as though politics
vary with climate, for, as you go Bast, you have a different policy
from that which you have when it comes to the defence of this
country. I say that the Government is quite reckless for the
country and the Empire, and that it has deliberately flouted
the opinion of the Dominions. I say that peace can be maintained
if your policy is clear, and if you are strong enough to speak in the
name of peace. Great Britain is one of the pillars of the League of
Nations, and the reason for that is that we have the ability to speak
with force in world affairs. If you allow foreign countries to think
that pacifists in this country can speak for the Empire, you will in


volve us in war; you are asking for trouble. If you doubt it, I
would only ask you to turn up what happened before the Crimea,
what happened before the Boer War, and what happened before the
late War. I hope hon. Members will keep as open a mind as they
can till the end of this Debate, and not lightly cast any vote against
this project of Singapore.
Mb. Ameby: Singapore has been described by the Prime Minis-
ter as a position second to none from a point of view of defensive
warfare. lam glad he put in the necessary words, ‘ ‘ defensive war-
fare. ’ ’ There is only one point in regard to which both he and the
Parliamentary Secretary, and—if I may so—the right hon. and
learned Gentleman who has just sat down—seem to be under a mis-
understanding. It is that bringing Singapore up to date is only
required for sending out great battleships. It is perfectly true
that no battleship, great or small, will go out to the Bast unless you
modernise Singapore, and it is equally true that, quite apart from
fleet action, quite apart from the possibility of war with Japan, that
in any war for the protection of our trade, we shall require some-
thing far more effective than the present commercial dock at Singa-
pore. The Parliamentary Secretary said that we built our cruisers,
and that those cruisers could look after this trade, police the seas
and the Indian Ocean without the help of Singapore. I would ask
hon. Gentlemen opposite to visualise the actual situation. There
is at Singapore, in the commercial harbour, one dock—one dock
only—which can hold the larger size of light cruiser, and for that
matter the larger size of commercial ship, but cannot hold a large
aircraft carrier, or a battleship, let alone a battle-cruiser. Visualise
that situation in a war. You have there a vast traffic, the natural
flow through the Straits of 18 million tons flowing in the year; in
time of war you have not one great British harbour. You will have
merchant ships in a sinking condition struggling home from Singa-
pore. Cruisers injured in action have one dock only to accommodate
them. There is no great harbour there, and so far from there being
room for the re-fitting and repairing of cruisers, there is not enough
accommodation to deal even with the mercantile demands.
Again, a mercantile dock is not necessarily suitable for repair-
ing a damaged cruiser, because it has not the requisite machinery
for dealing with naval affairs as distinct from commercial affairs,
but even in dealing with commerce raiding and cruisers should we
not be able to back up our cruisers with battle-cruisers? It will be
remembered that we had to send out battle-cruisers to the Falkland
Islands. It is well known that in one action during the last War
our ships spent all their ammunition, and therefore is it not neces-
sary to have in that part of the world accommodation to supply the
needs of both our battleships and our cruisers? All these things
have been left out of consideration in the reply which was given by
the Parliamentary Secretary to the Admiralty.
This accommodation is required for the purposes of ordinary
mobility not only of our battleships, but of our cruisers. For such
purposes our docks were regarded as perfectly normal up to the last
moment of the great concentration against Germany, and we want
to replace our dockyard position in the East to what it was before
the Great War. There is just this difference, that as a result of the
Washington Treaty, instead of replacing our dockyard capacity at
Hong Kong, which might conceivably be regarded as being within
such range of Japan as to be used for purposes of aggression, we
have gone back another 1400 miles to make it clear that our only
purpose was defence.
27


If we are to deal with the problem of Imperial Defence at a
reasonable cost, it can only be by building up gradually full and
adequate co-operation. This policy of Singapore was part of a
policy of making it easy and natural for the Dominions to co-operate
with us in the defence of the Empire. Without it there is no basis
for Imperial co-operation. We hear a great deal of gesture in this
discussion. Singapore, at any rate, was a gesture to the Dominions,
which made it clear to them that we stood by them, and made it
easier for their Governments to go to their Parliaments and ask
them to stand by us. Mr. Massey, in the telegram he sent in answer
to the Government’s ultimatum, replied that every citizen and every
country of the Empire was entitled to protection from the possi-
bility of attack by a foreign foe. That precisely was the foundation
on which we wished to build up a policy of Imperial co-operation.
That is the policy the Government has thrown aside, and it says
to-day that not only for the years which we may reasonably hope
to be years of peace, but for an indefinite time, three-quarters of the
Empire, and all the immense trade of the Empire in Southern
waters, are to be left absolutely defenceless. On the strategical
side, at any rate, the situation is perfectly clear. The Government,
in spite of the advice of those in whose advice they profess to have
the fullest confidence, are prepared to leave three-quarters Of the
British Empire absolutely defenceless, and to let the British flag
exist on sufferance in two of the greatest oceans of the world. That
is a very grave responsibility.
The Washington Conference succeeded because it dealt in a
definite maimer with a definite menace—the definite menace of
building great fleets of warships enormously powerful and enor-
mously costly. It dealt with that first of all by reducing the num-
bers of those ships to fixed relative proportions. I venture to say
that we would never have succeeded in doing so if we had not made
it clear ourselves by laying down four super “Hoods,” and being
ready to lay down as many more as were necessary, and that while
we wanted peace we were equally prepared to defend our position
in the world. You have got to show your moral sincerity definitely
in the whole of your policy. You have to make those with whom
you are dealing understand that you are as sincere in your determi-
nation to preserve your position in the world as you are sincere in
your determination to work for peace, and it was because there was
no doubt of our sincerity in both aspects that we were able to bring
about that beneficent agreement. The moment you let any doubt
or suspicion spring up as to your real motive, or that you are acting
from weakness or want of courage, or from some political exigency
at home, your whole influence is thrown away. That is what I
charge against the Government.
The world will not believe—certainly our Dominions will not
believe; —that it is peace alone that has inspired the gesture in re-
spect of Singapore when it has not inspired it in respect of aero-
planes or cruisers. The other thing which we achieved at Washing-
ton, while limiting offensive armaments, was to create a zone of
self-denial by interposing that great area over which battle fleets
cannot move, and to make all arrangements Outside that zone neces-
sarily defensive in character. What we are doing at Singapore, I
venture to say, is carrying out to the full and exactly in the spirit,
the intention of Washington. We are doing there exactly what
the Japanese are doing in their own home waters, and what the
Americans are doing in their own territory on the Eastern side of


British
Empire
U.S.
Japan
Battleships ..
18
18
6
Battle cruisers
4
—
4
Cruisers ..
2
10
■
Light Cruisers
48
15
17
Armoured coast defence vessels and monitors ..
5
—
3
Aircraft carriers
4
2
1
Flotilla leaders
16
—,
—
Torpedo boat destroyers
186
309
78
Torpedo boats
•
■
—
Submarines : .
61
115
44
Sloops
, 36
—
—
Coastal motor boats
29
2
2
Gunboats and despatch vessels
—
4
3
River gunboats
16
2
8
BUILDING
AND PROJECTED.
British ,
Battleships
Empire
U.S.
Japan
Light cruisers
11
12
Cruiser minelayers ..
1
—
—
Aircraft carriers
2
2
Flotilla leaders
2
— ' -
Torpedo boat destroyers
. .. 3
—
28
Submarines
7
ii
33
that great zone. The policy of Washington was to limit the
strength of the offensive while guarding the strength of the defen-
sive. The policy now is to throw aside our defensive weapons,
while at the same time, going on with weapons that, at any rate,
can be used for offensive purposes.
THE WORLD’S NAVIES.
(From “The Navy,” April, 1924.)
A return issued by the Admiralty last night enables a com-
parison to be made of the naval strength of the three chief naval
Powers as follows:
The war vessels building for the British Empire include two
battleships each of 35,000 tons displacement, “Nelson” and “Rod-
ney,” the date of laying down being 1922,
THE NAVY’S OIL SUPPLY.
FUEL BASES NEEDED AT HOME AND ABROAD.
By HECTOR C. BYWATER.
(From “The Navy,” April, 1924.)
In that highly interesting publication, “Particulars of British
War Vessels,” issued by the Admiralty, which anyone may pur-
chase for 10/-, all essential characteristics of H.M. ships are set forth
in tabular form, such as the dates of laying dowm and launch,
dimensions, speed, armament, and fuel stowage. The last-named
is, perhaps, the most significant column in the tables, for it shows
how absolutely dependent the modern British Navy is on oil fuel.
Glancing down, this column we find that the ten largest battleships
burn nothing but oil, and that each has a stowage capacity of 3,400
tons. After these come eight older battleships, representing the
Iron Duke and King George V. class, which burn coal and
oil. The first four each stow 3,250 tons of coal and 1,050 tons of
29


oil, while the King George V. ships take 3,150 tons of coal and
850 tons of oil apiece. Upon the completion of the new
battleships, Nelson and Rodney, the King George V. class
is to be scrapped, so that eventually there will be only four
coal-burning battleships left in the Navy. Of the four battle-
cruisers, the Hood, Renown and Repulse burn oil only
(stowage capacity 4,000, 4,289, and 4,234 tons respectively), but
the Tiger consumes both coal and oil, carrying 2,800 tons of solid
and 3,480 tons of liquid fuel, though there is a foot-note to the effect
that “total amount of fuel to be carried not to exceed 4,900 tons.”
The only ships in the “Cruiser” category are the Courageous
and Glorious, burning oil, of which they carry 3,250 tons apiece.
Turning to the light cruisers, we find 35 of them designed on an
“all oil” basis, and II for mixed firing, but of these latter the four
Hawkins class carry almost twice as much oil as coal. For all
practical purposes, therefore, the British fleet of cruising ships may
be regarded-as an oil-burning force, especially as the vessels which
rely chiefly on coal are of an obsolete type which will, no doubt, be
scrapped before many years are over. After light cruisers come
the aircraft carriers, six in number, all of which have oil-fired
boilers. The Hermes can stow 2,000 tons of oil, the Eagle
3,750, the Furious 3,393, the .Argus 2,000, the Ark Royal
500, and the Pegasus 360 tons.
The next twelve pages in the list are occupied by flotilla leaders
and destroyers, about 190 all told. These boats, without a single
exception, are oil-burners. The smallest destroyers stow about 230
tons of fuel, and the big flotilla leaders 500 tons. Sixty-six sub-
marines are shown in the list, all of which are driven by oil: the
majority having internal-combustion engines, but the “K” boats
have steam machinery fed by oil-burning boilers. Only in the
sloops, mine-sweepers, depot ships and gunboats is coal used in the
furnaces, and even the latest river gunboats carry more liquid fuel
than solid.
It is evident from the foregoing survey that virtually the whole
combatant strength of the British Navy consists of vessels which
depend for their movement on oil. That being so, it is obvious that
an assured and adequate supply of this fuel in peace and war is a
matter of vital importance. It is not sufficient to provide large
reserves of the precious liquid at the home ports, for the stowage
capacity of the greatest man-of-war is limited, and ships ordered
on foreign service must be sure of finding fresh supplies waiting for
them overseas. The Admiralty have had this problem under con-
sideration for many years, and the oil-storage policy they adopted
subsequent to the war is designed to ensure to the Navy of to-day
and to-morrow the same degree of world-wide mobility which
British warships enjoyed during the long reign of King Coal.
This policy was outlined in Parliament on May 24th, 1921, by
Commander Byres-Monsell, then Civil Lord of the Admiralty,
whose speech is summarised in Brassey’s Naval and Shipping
Annual of that year. At that moment, he said, “the Board were
actually paying less money for oil than for coal, taking into con-
sideration the respective calorific values. Further, where they had
to handle three tons of coal they had now to handle two tons of
oil, and the handling of oil was much easier than that of coal, since
it could be carried by means of a pipe-line, instead of by the most
laborious process of filling coal, hoisting it on board, and putting it
down into an almost inaccessible stokehold. Further, the efficiency
30


of oil was very much higher than that of coal. For instance, to re-
fuel destroyers, which burnt coal, they had to travel to some port
and go through the laborious process indicated, but oil-burning
destroyers had only to go alongside a battleship, and in two hours
their stowage could be filled with oil. As to the smaller space re-
quired for oil stowage, ‘although that may seem a small thing, it
is of vital importance to-day, when one of our greatest difficulties
is that of fitting ships of ever-increasing size into existing docks,
by which an enormous amount of money is saved.’ Lastly, there
was the large reduction in personnel in oil-burning as compared
with coal-burning vessels. ”
In the Works Vote of 1921, oil storage was the item involving
the heaviest expenditure. Two years beforehand the Cabinet had
authorised the creation of an Admiralty reserve at home, to be com-
pleted by 1929. On the foreign stations it was proposed to provide
only for the ordinary peace requirements of ships attached thereto,
the question of developing storage facilities at these bases being
reserved for discussion at the Imperial Conference. Money was
asked for oil storage at the Cape of Good Hope, at the Falkland
Islands, at Gibraltar, at Hong Kong, at Jamaica, at Malta, at Port
Said, at Eangoon, at Sierra Leone, and at Singapore. In the follow-
ing year (1922) provision was made for similar facilities at Aden,
Ceylon, and Suez, and for additional tanks at Rangoon and Singa-
pore, as also for the continuance of work on the oil bases on the
Clyde and at Plymouth and Portland. In presenting this Vote, the
Civil Lord spoke of “this absolutely vital service,’’ reminding the
House that the security of the British Empire and the policing of
the seas might depend in future more upon the efficiency of the
Fleet than upon a great numerical superiority. To be efficient, the
Fleet bad to be mobile, and to be mobile it needed oil tanks in every
part of the world to which it might be called.
For reasons of economy this programme of oil-fuel storage at
home and overseas had been slowed down, but in announcing a re-
duction of £500,000, in the estimates for 1922, the First Lord stated
that the Admiralty did not take this step without considerable
anxiety, “which will, they believe, be shared by all -who realise the
extent to which the mobility of the chief units of the British Fleet
is restricted under existing conditions, owing to the absence of the
necessary oil-fuelling bases.” As the Navy Estimates for 1924-25
have not been promulgated at this writing, it is not known whether
any further reduction has taken place in the Vote for oil storage.
Among the material factors which contributed to the winning
of the war, oil deserves to take high rank. The efficiency of patrol
work in the North Sea and other naval war zones was due in large
measure to the fact that a considerable proportion of the craft en-
gaged in it were oil-burners, which could therefore be re-fuelled
with ease and celerity. The presence of oil-burning battleships
like the “Queen Elizabeths” and “Royal Sovereigns,” and of oil-
burning cruisers like the “C” and “D” ships, endowed the Grand
Fleet with a power of mobility which it would not otherwise have
possessed. But notwithstanding that home waters constituted the
main theatre of war, and that the Grand Fleet’s bases were thus
within comparatively easy reach of the terminal ports where
tankers from Persia, the Bast Indies, and the American Continent
arrived, there was one period at which the Navy’s stocks of oil
reached a dangerously low ebb. This was in 1917, when a great
many tankers were falling victims to the German U-boats. Admiral
31


Jellieoe states in his book, “The Crisis of the Naval War,” that the
normal reserve of some five or six months was reduced to one of
about eight weeks, and it became necessary to issue orders limiting
the speed of oil-burning warships except in cases of emergency.
“Such an order in war was a matter of much gravity; the great
majority of our light cruisers and destroyers were fitted to burn
oil fuel only, as well as our latest and most powerful battleships.”
Gradually the crisis was overcome by various expedients, but at
one period the danger of an oil shortage was very grave, and had
it materialised the- consequences must have been disastrous.
The provision of adequate oil reserves at home and abroad is
every bit as essential to the future efficiency of the Navy as men,
ships and docks. That the next naval war will he fought exclu-
sively by oil-burning ships is certain, and woe betide the fleet which
lacks an ample continuous supply of this fuel. The critical moment
of action might find it immobilised, and incapable of putting to sea.
During the coal era the British Navy had the use of a series of
bunkering stations situated at regular intervals along the main
ocean highways, thanks to which it possessed a freedom of move-
ment enjoyed by no other fleet. It is the aim of the naval authori-
ties to duplicate these coaling stations by oil bases. Unless this
policy is carried out the Navy will be unable to perform its function
of safeguarding the Empire.
