

THE BANKERS’
CONSPIRACY !
WHICH STARTED THE WORLD CRISIS
By
ARTHUR KITSON
President of “ The National Money Service ”
Author of "A Letter to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales on the
World Crisis ", “A Scientific Solution of the Morey
Question", "A Fraudulent Standard ", “ Trade Fallacies",
" Unemployment, its Cause, and a Remedy ", etc.




THE BANKERS’ CONSPIRACY!
WHICH STARTED THE WORLD CRISIS.




THE BANKERS’
CONSPIRACY!
WHICH STARTED THE WORLD CRISIS
By
ARTHUR KITSON
President of “The National Money Service ", &c.
Author of “A Letter to H.R.H. the Prince of
Wales on the World Crisis", " A Scientific
Solution of the Money Question ”, "A Fraudulent
Standard ", " Trade Fallacies ”, " Unemployment
—lts Cause and a Remedy ”, etc.
Second Impression
LONDON: ELLIOT STOCK
(Props.-. SIDNEY KIEK & SON, LTD.)
16 & 17 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
1933


MADE IN ENGLAND


CONTENTS
PAGE
CONCERNING THE AUTHOR AND HIS WORK :
AN APPRECIATION (BY A FRIEND) - - 7
FOREWORD ----2 J
THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE COM-
MITTEE ON CURRENCY IN 1918 - - 45
THE PERSONS APPOINTED - - 45
SYNOPSIS OF THE CUNLIFFE COMMITTEE’S
REPORT - - - - 47
A CRITICISM OF THE FIRST INTERIM REPORT
OF THE COMMITTEE ON CURRENCY AND
FOREIGN EXCHANGES - - - 49
THE COMMITTEE’S REPORT A VERY BIASED
ONE - - - - 5 5
THE COMMITTEE’S FALSE ASSUMPTIONS - 56
THE BANK CHARTER ACT BASED ON A
GROSS FALLACY - - - 59
QUANTITY MONEY THEORY VERSUS QUALITY
THEORY - - - - 63
MONEY AS A DENOMINATOR OF VALUES - 65
MONEY IS NECESSARILY NATIONAL AND NOT
INTERNATIONAL - - -66
“ STORE OF VALUE ” ABSURDITY - - 68
FALLACIES AND DANGERS OF THE BANK
CHARTER ACT - - - - 71
SIR EDWARD HOLDEN’S EXPOSURE OF THE
GOLD STANDARD - - - 75


PAGE
EVIL EFFECTS OF LONDON’S FREE GOLD
MARKET - - - - I 79
THE PROBLEM OF POVERTY IN THE MIDST
OF PLENTY - - - - 82
THE RATIONAL REMEDY FOR INFLATION - 83
DEAR, SCARCE MONEY, RUINOUS TO TRADE 89
WORLD PRICE THEORIES AND FREE TRADE
PAUPERIZES LABOUR - - - 90
THE FOREIGN TRADE FALLACY - - 9 1
CURRENCY DEFLATION MEANS ROBBERY - 9 1
THE GOLD STANDARD IS A DEVICE FOR
CONTROLLING TRADE - - - 93
PAPER MONEY SUPERIOR TO GOLD - 94
CONCLUSION - - 96
CONCLUSION - - - - 98


CONCERNING THE AUTHOR
AND HIS WORK
An Appreciation by
A FRIEND OF MONETARY REFORM
As a protest against those Statesmen and Bankers
who have asserted that “No one could possibly
have foretold the present World Crisis ”, I and a
few others have urged the republication of Mr.
Arthur Kitson’s Criticism of the Cunliffe Currency
Committee’s Report, the recommendations of which
the Lloyd George Coalition Government adopted.
This Criticism was originally printed at the expense
of Mr. Kitson, and copies furnished to every member
of that committee in January, 1919, before the
committee had made its final report. The Criticism
was given in place of oral testimony which Mr.
Kitson was invited to contribute.
It will be seen that Mr. Kitson gave ample warn-
ings of the inevitable results of the committee’s
recommendations and foretold the present crisis.
But this is only one of many similar predictions made
by this writer during the paSt forty years.
Mr. Kitson is generally recognized as the pioneer
of monetary reform wherever the English tongue is
spoken, and even in France and Germany his name
is known as the pioneer of the New Economics.
Only one familiar with the history of this move-
ment in this country, and in America since 1890, can


fully appreciate the services he has rendered on
behalf of mankind.
Juft now, whilft the World’s delegates are as-
sembled to discuss the subjeft which Mr. Kitson
has made his life’s Study, and whilst they are endeavour-
ing to find a way out of the morass into which their
gold Standard policies have driven them, and against
which Mr. Kitson has been warning the world for
over forty years, it seems opportune and right that
the public should know more of the unselfish
labours of one who has sacrificed so much on their
behalf.
The paSl few years has witnessed the produ&ion
of scores of books on the financial evils from which
we are all suffering; and many writers are posing
as the only true prophets and saviours of society
by reproducing the ideas of one who had written his
firft principles of the new science long before they
were even heard of. It was in 1894 that Mr. Kitson’s
Scientific Solution of the Money Question was firft pub-
lished, foretelling all the evils of the paft thirty years,
including the Great War and the present Crisis !
During these years he has fought—almoft single-
handed—the Money Power, for a cause which he
knew and was warned would bring him trouble,
entailing a life of sacrifice and ending moft probably
in ruin. In spite of every obftacle placed in his
path, he has continued his work, but at what a
cost I
Various offers were made him for the purpose of
getting him to discontinue his attacks upon the Gold
Standard. He might have received a princely income
for life. He would have escaped several ordeals
through which he has been compelled to pass as a


consequence of his persistence in championing what
he believes to be the people’s cause. Had he taken
the orthodox view and sided with the bankers he
would have been acclaimed as a great Economist. But
he has remained true to his faith and principles.
In season and out of season he has preached the
destruction of what the late Lord Bryce termed
Man’s most dangerous and insidious enemy—the
“ Money-Power ”, and proclaimed the gospel of the
‘ New Economics ’ which he outlined in his first
work, A Scientific Solution of the Money Question .
In this book he showed that the instrument of
this group, who were and are Still out for World
domination, is Gold.
Its publication brought its author world-wide
recognition. It was favourably and unfavourably
reviewed by hundreds of journals and newspapers
throughout America, where it was first published.
At that time, 1893-5, Mr, Kitson was Starting his
business career in America as an engineer, where he
later became known as the Engineer-Economist.
He built up several large industries, mainly in con-
nexion with his own inventions. His system of
lighting, known throughout the world as the “ Kitson
Light ”, at one time gave employment to over 30,000
workmen. Kitson Lighting Companies were formed
in thirty-five different countries. He gave the free
use of his system to the Lighthouse Authorities of
this country, and his light became known as “ The
Mariners’ Friend ”. Among his many achievements
in this field were the fighting of the Trans-Siberian
Railway, and those of India, Austria, Hungary,
Roumania, and other countries. He was one of
the pioneers in telephony, having superintended the


construction of many hundred miles of lines in the
Western States of U.S.A. He purchased the Daimler
patents and business in America from the estate of
William Steinway of New York, and organized the
Daimler Motor Car industry before the name of Ford
had been heard of. He ereCled the first incandescent
electric plant in the City of Philadelphia, and in
Atlantic City, New Jersey. He assisted Brush in
his experiments in elcCtric work, and at one time
had charge of the laboratory of the Western EleCtric
Manufacturing Co. in New York. He has received
hundreds of patents for his many inventions in all
branches of Engineering.
He was for several years a member of the famous
Franklin Institute of Philadelphia, and of the Com-
mittee of the Sciences and Arts. From this society
he received the Medal of Merit for his inventions in
artificial lighting. He also received medals and the
highest awards at many of the International Ex-
hibitions, including Paris (1901), Philadelphia (1900),
Dresden (1903), Athens, Greece (1904), Cape Town
(1905), Wellington, N.Z. (1905), Milan, Italy (1906),
India (19x1).
During all these years of Strenuous business he
kept up his interest in his favourite diversion —
music.
It is not generally known that in his young days
he contemplated making music his life’s Study, and
gave up his first business to follow his heart’s choice.
But circumstances threw him back into his engineer-
ing profession. Fie organized the first May Musical
Festival held in the State of lowa (1884), and trained
a chorus of five hundred voices. The Festival lasted
three days, and was highly successful. Mr. Kitson not


only assisted in the musical performances (presiding
at the organ), but financed the undertaking.
To return to Mr. Kitson’s work for monetary
reform.
At the time his first book appeared, America
was engaged in the financial Struggle over bi-metallism.
Of this, Mr. Kitson wrote that of the two systems,
bi-metallism is saner than mono-metallism, because
it furnished a broader basis and a more generous
supply of money. But money metallism, he said,
is barbaric, and should be relegated to the scrap-
heap !
Commenting on this phase of the subject, the
reviewer of his book in the Philadelphia Bulletin
(of March 29, 1895), wrote as follows: “ JuSt
now the mercantile community is deeply perturbed
over the Struggle of mono-metallism and bi-metal-
lism. That Struggle would sink into nothingness
the moment we realized Mr. Kitson’s ideal of a paper
currency based solely upon public confidence and
redeemable in the general wealth of the nation. The
ratio of silver to gold would speedily settle itself if
both were demonetized: and after all, does not
the fa£t that the legislative power can establish an
arbitrary ratio for the coined metals prove con-
clusively that their purchasing power is something
wholly apart from their values as commodities ?
This is the very point that Mr. Kitson seeks to
establish.”
We are hearing juSt now much about “ Social
Credit ”, as though it were a very recent discovery.
But Mr. Kitson was advocating Social Credit long
before any of these modern writers were even heard
of. And this Credit Power was recognized by the


French Economist, P. J. Proudhon, whose system
of Mutual Banking was Started in Paris during the
’forties. Mr. Kitson quotes Proudhon as the author
of this system. “ Money is a social instrument and
morally belongs to the people.” “ Money is merely
a title to wealth.” “It is redeemed every time it is
accepted by the public for goods and services and
needs no gold redemption,” are among Mr. Kitson’s
teachings.
The publication of this work brought our author
in personal relationship with Bryan, the Democratic
candidate for the Presidency in 1896, and the champion
of bi-metallism. In an article Mr. Kitson contri-
buted to the Fortnightly Review, following Mr. Bryan’s
death, he tells of his conversations with this dis-
tinguished statesman, which led Mr. Kitson to
Slump the State of Pennsylvania in his behalf.
Bryan recognized that the real issue of that cam-
paign was the use of the National Credit, which he
promised that the Government should control if
re were ele&ed. The fight was Bryan versus Wall
Street. Mr. Kitson’s book was quoted frequently
in both houses of Congress during this campaign.
On one occasion an all-day debate was arranged
between Mr. Kitson and the American PoSt-MaSler
Geaeral, Charles Emory Smith, before the members
of the New Century Club, Philadelphia.
This debate opened at ix a.m. and continued
until 5 p.m., during which, special editions of the
press were issued.
Dr. John Kelly, the well-known American scien-
tist and Economist, wrote our author: “I con-
gratulate you upon having written the beSt book
on money in the English—if not in any—language.


I am going to do what I vety seldom do—read it
again.”
It was at this same time (the early ’nineties),
that Robert Blatchford, the author of Merrie England ,
wrote as follows : “ I can say with much pleasure
that the presentation of Political Economy in the
firft few chapters is masterly. It is the best Econ-
omic book, the fullest, deepest and truest I have
ever read.”
The book was adopted by two American pro-
fessors as a text-book for their Students, but the
financial supporters of these colleges finally had both
the books and the professors expelled.
Among the many correspondents who wrote
appreciatively were the philosopher, Herbert Spencer,
Arthur (afterwards Lord Arthur) Balfour, the Finance
Minister of Austria and famous Economist—Boehme-
Bawerke, and the Chinese Minister, Li Hung Chang.
After his return to this country, Mr. Kitson
published a revised edition of his American work.
This was published, by Grant Richards under the
title of The Money Question in 1903. It was extensively
reviewed by the leading papers throughout the
country. In 1905 Mr. Kitson Started the first League
in this country for monetary and banking reform.
This was followed by his publishing The Open Re-
view, a monthly journal devoted to Currency Reform.
Mr. Kitson both edited and financed it.
Meetings of this Society were held at the New
Reform Club, Adelphi Terrace, London, Among
the members were several who have since published
their own books on this subj eft; such as Alfred
Wigglesworth, joint author with his brother of
The Gold Tangle ; Henry M. Meulen, author of


Economic Justice by Money Reform ; H. Isaacs, author
of The Menace of the Money Power ; and Mark B.
Major, who wrote Britain’s Destiny.
In 1911, Mr. Kitson wrote an Open Letter to
the Chancellor, Mr, Lloyd George, warning him of
the dangers of the gold Standard money system, and
prophesying its collapse in the event of a great war.
He predicted that we should then be compelled to
employ a paper money as our currency, based on the
national credit. This was published by Dent & Sons
as a pamphlet in 1911.
During the War, Mr. Kitson wrote and lectured
frequently in time snatched from his engineering
work, his factories being engaged on munition work.
Numerous articles from him appeared in Land and
Water, the Times (Trade Supplement), The National
Review, The Nineteenth Century, The English Review,
and hundreds of articles and letters he contributed
to the daily press all over the country.
In 1917 he published two works, entitled Trade
Fallacies and A Fraudulent Standard, both published
by King & Son.
It was through reading the latter that the famous
Oxford scientist, Professor Frederick Soddy, became
interested in monetary reform, and led him to write
his well-known books; the principal work entitled,
Wealth, Virtual Wealth and Debt, he dedicated to Mr.
Kitson. In 1917, in conjunction with several Mid-
land manufacturers, Mr. Kitson organized the Bank-
ing and Currency Reform League of Birmingham.
Meetings of this League were held at the Birmingham
Business Club and at the Chamber of Commerce.
In 1918 Mr. Kitson was invited to Stand for
Central Nottingham as Parliamentary candidate on


behalf of the National Party. His election address
contained a serious indictment of the Banking system,
and a warning as to the intentions of the City of
London money merchants to revive the gold Standard
at an early date. He then predicted the disasters
which this country would suffer if the bankers’ plot
was allowed to mature.
He has been connected with practically every
association having for its objedt the elimination
of gold and of the private monopoly of money, for
the paSl thirty years.
He has been President of the Banking and Cur-
rency Reform League, both in London and Birming-
ham, The Economic Freedom League, The Mone-
tary Reform Association of Manchester, The National
Money Service, The New Europe Group, The
Eleventh Hour Movement, and several others of a
similar character.
In a recent publication by the Monetary Reform
Association of America, the following appears:
“ Without his name ” (Arthur Kitson’s) “ the history
of the crusade for Monetary and Economic Reform
cannot be written.” Mr. Marshall Hattersley, in his
book. This Age of Plenty , acclaims Mr. Kitson as
“ the Doyen of the band ” of the “ New Econo-
mists ”, to which Professor Soddy and C. H. Douglas
are connedted.
In an open letter to the Rt. Hon. R. B. Bennett,
the Prime Minister of Canada, dated July, 1932,
Gerald G. McGeer, K.C., a famous Canadian financial
writer, says : “In recent years, men like Maynard
Keynes and Dr. R. Eisler have emphasized the wisdom
that Arthur Kitson has been propounding for up-
wards of forty years. In his first book, he declared;
B


The gold Standard means inevitable war. The
children born of it are fire and sword, red ruin and
the breaking up of laws’.” Twenty years later, the
war of the ages vindicated his prophecy.
“Again in 1918, Mr. Kitson wrote: ‘The war
debt has been incurred in cheap pounds, and honeSl
dealing requires repayment in pounds and in com-
modities of the same value as when the debt was
incurred. If, however, the value of money is raised
as it was following the Napoleonic wars and the
American Civil War by returning to gold, if the
plotters succeed in persuading the Government to
accede to their demands, it will mean the complete
enslavement of the people to a soulless money des-
potism for ages or compulsory repudiation of
debt.’ ”
Mr. McGeer adds: “ That ominous prophecy
has been vindicated beyond question by the events
that are taking place. Men with the prescience of
Arthur Kitson should not be lightly regarded when
they offer advice in the hour of real crisis.”
The late Lord Milner referred to Mr. Kitson as
“ The Prince Rupert of Finance.”
The late Editor of the National Review, L. J. Maxse,
in a letter to a correspondent dated November 30,
1931, wrote: “I much appreciate the letter you
were good enough to write me on the 23rd Novem-
ber expressing your approval of Mr. Arthur Kitson’s
efforts in the National Review elucidating the Currency
question. I must say he has shewn extraordinary pre-
science for many years in the warnings he has issued
against the blunders we have made. Whether he
will now get a hearing from the powers that be, I
cannot guess. There is not a little ‘ amour propre ’


in these matters, and the City big-wigs do not like
admitting they have blundered.”
In the November 1931 issue of the same Review.
under the title of “ Honour to whom Honour is
due,” there appeared the following :
“ For more than thirty years Mr. Kitson has been
carrying on at his own expense, educational work,
endeavouring to expose the superstition and ignor-
ance of those who have hitherto championed this
ruinous (gold Standard) policy. It is not generally
known—and I am violating no confidence in Stating
—that Mr. Kitson has not only given years of his
time and energies freely in this cause on behalf of
the British public, but has spent over £ 20,000 of
his own money in publishing literature and distribut-
ing it throughout the country.”
The Web of Finance * contains the following :
“ Arthur Kitson is the ‘ father ’ of modern bank-
ing reform. Engineer, Whitworth scholar. Managing
Director of the Kitson Engineering Co. Ltd., patentee
of over five hundred inventions. Our moSt adlive
and effective critic of the existing financial systems.”
One characteristic of our author deserves mention-
ing. He has always been willing to accord a place
of honour and recognition to any and every other
writer and worker in this field of reform so long as
he believed them to be honestly desirous of aiding
humanity. It will be remembered that he gave
recognition to the proposals of Messrs. Douglas &
Orage in the articles he contributed to the Times
Trade Supplement in 1920, juSl after the publication
of Major Douglas’s first book, which called forth
a letter of gratitude from that writer, that Mr. Kitson
* By Hugh P. Vowles.


had “ restored his (Douglas’s) faith in human nature,”
in putting forward his proposals in place of his own.
These articles were afterwards published in book
form, entitled, Unemployment: Its Cause 'and a Remedy.
It was at one time listed in the New Age.
Of Mr. Kitson’s efforts to enlist the support of
one or other of the Political parties, one could write
a whole volume. Thousands still remember his
numerous contributions to the Clarion of Robert
Blatchford, commencing about 1900. These were
usually on financial subjects. He also wrote many
articles for the New Age during the Editorship of
Mr. Orage. This gentleman once suggested that
the Fabian Society should get Mr. Kitson to give
them instruction in money and banking. He gave
many lectures to the various branches of the In-
dependent Labour Party all over the country. He
urged the Labour leaders —notably Keir Hardie,
Ramsay MacDonald, George Barnes, Lansbury and
others—to Study the money question as the moSl
important in the economic world. All this was
long before the War.
He wrote to Joseph Chamberlain during his
Tariff campaign telling him that tariffs without money
reform were no remedy for trade depression. He
wrote to WinSlon Churchill to say that trade could
never be “ free ” so long as the mechanism of trade
was held as a private monopoly. His Open Letter to
Lloyd George, published in 1911, contains a complete
treatise on monetary science. It covered 76 pages,
with more than 30,000 words.
His series of articles in the Times Trade Supple-
ment during the last year of the war were reprinted in
book form together with the reply by Mr. Hartley


Withers, who was chosen by the Times Editor to
destroy Kitson’s “ heresies Those who are fond
of literary duels should read this volume —which may
Still be obtained from the author. Mr. Kitson was
able to expose most eifectively the complete bank-
ruptcy of the orthodox economists. In a special
editorial (Oct., 1918) the Editor of the Times Supple-
ment referred to Mr. Kitson as “ the brilliant author ”
who “ attacks our banking system ”. He added
“ Mr. Kitson writes vigorously. He thinks we are
wrong not only in administrative methods, but in the
principles on which the whole system is founded . . .
Mr. Kitson’s business reputation and record are
known to the world. It would be absurd to pretend
to ignore a successful business man who finds other
business men eager to attend his lectures and hear
his views on those problems to which he has devoted
so much Study ”. It was said that the circulation of
the Times Trade Supplement was considerably increased
as the result of Mr. Kitson’s articles.
Two years ago, at the request of a group of busi-
ness men, Mr. Kitson wrote a letter to H.R.H. the
Prince of Wales on the World Crisis which the Prince
acknowledged and read. This has had a wide circula-
tion throughout Great Britain and Canada. It deals
with the cause of the crisis and offers an immediate
remedy—although—as the writer says, the measures ad
vised would need further consideration at a later period.
And here it should be said, that, whilst offering
certain policies as a Stimulant to industry which is
suffering from anaemia through the loss of so much of
its life-blood during the deflation period, Mr. Kitson has
always disclaimed any intention of prescribing a per-
manent remedy. In a recent letter on this subject he says :


“ I am always amused when I read or hear of a
permanent remedy for the world’s economic ills, and
especially when economists talk of ‘ fixed and immutable
laws ’ governing trade, and society. Society is an
organism, and is constantly changing, and the policies
which may operate favourably at one Stage of society’s
development may become disastrous at another Stage.
This is one of the causes of the present troubles.
Man’s laws are Static and should become obsolete
at the end of a certain period. To-day we are governed
by the ignorance and superstition of the dead past,
which have been incorporated in our written Statutes.
And in face of this, the public are continually told
that they are a ‘ self-governing ’ people. I am an
old inventor, and my experience has taught me that
one can never obtain perfeftion in one operation.
This is only obtained by patient and continued trials,
alterations, and improvements. So it muSl be with
any financial or trade policy. We muSl try schemes
and see how they work before we can know that
they are beneficial. I could prescribe a dozen methods
for ridding the world of its evils, but nobody could
guarantee which would prove the beSl in practice
until after their trial. The man who claims he can
cure the world with one prescription never yet tried,
should be regarded as either an ignoramus or a
charlatan.”
As to the principles taught by Mr. Kitson in his
many writings, they cover the entire ground of
economic science.
It is a great misfortune to the world that moSl of
his books are out of print. He has been urged
frequently to republish his first work after bringing
it up-to-date. But burdens have been thrown on


his shoulders, and responsibilities which have taken
up most of his time, and would have crushed the
majority of much younger men. Briefly, it may be
said that Mr. Kitson has always insisted that a true
science of economics must necessarily harmonize with
ethics. The question “Is it right ” should apply
to an economic policy or system to the same extent
as to an aft of conduft. He claims that an immoral
policy muSt be uneconomic. Hence he condemns
interest (usury) showing that it is economically
ruinous to society and forbidden by every religion.
In fact, the immorality of interest became so, because
of its economic effefts.
He shows that produftion and consumption are
really one complete cycle and not economically two
diSlinft and separate processes. He sets this out
clearly in his first book.
He also defines Social credit, and shows that
money really represents the credit of society.
He exposes the fallacies of “ intrinsic values ”
and a “ Standard of value ”. “ One might as well
talk of a Standard of love,” he writes. He denounces
the gold Standard as “ the greatest fraud ever per-
petrated on mankind ”. The fallacy of the Gresham
law he exposed, which led Professor Ross of the
Leland Stanford University, California, to write that
this was an “ eye-opener ” to him.
His merciless criticism of the orthodox teachings
on the gold Standard compelled the leading writers
to alter their definitions. They no longer talk of
the gold Standard having “ the same properties as
the commodities it has to measure ”, which was in
all the text-books when Mr. Kitson commenced
writing on this subjeft,


He showed that values could only be expressed
by numbers —not by substances. “ Values are
estimated ” he wrote, “ not measured “ The
term measure applies to physical things and involves
physical operations. Estimates are purely mental.
If I give a yard-Slick to each of a dozen boys of average
intelligence and ask them to measure the length and
width of a building, they will all give me a correft
answer and the same result. But if I give to a dozen
of the most brainy economists, a £ Standard of value ’,
and ask them to measure the value of the same build-
ing, not one of them can perform this task. Not one
of them could use such a Standard, and even if they
gave me their estimation, probably no two would
agree on the figures.”
In his criticism of Mallock’s article on Karl Marx,
which he published in the first number of his Open
Review (May, 1909), Mr. Kitson foreshadowed the
age of leisure, when machinery would ultimately
displace human labour. “ The claim of the poorer
classes to a share of the wealth will have to be admitted
on the ground of mere social welfare, or else the
alternative position will have to be recognised, viz.,
that the introduftion of labour-saving inventions is
a system of wholesale murder and must be prohibited.”
In May, 1930, Mr. Kitson appeared as a witness
before the MacMillan Committee at Westminster. He
was the only witness before that body who was able
to tell them that all the evils which they were appointed
to investigate he had foretold in his written evidence
submitted to the Cunliffe Currency Committee in
January, 1919 —which is the subjeft-matter of this
publication.
He has debated the whole money question with


Sir Josiah Stamp at the Imperial Industries Club,
and with Professor Gregory at the London School
of Economics.
I once asked Mr. Kitson if he had ever calculated
the number of speeches, lectures, and talks on money
reform he had delivered to public audiences. I
suggested an average of one a week during the whole
forty-year period. He thought this would prove an
#i%&r-eStimate.
Three years ago he was the gueSl of the German
Economic Society at their conference at Bergen.
This lasted an entire week, during which he delivered
five addresses which were published conspicuously
in the leading German papers throughout that country.
In the Deutscher Verkehersverein journal, Mr. Arthur
Kitson’s name is coupled with that of the greatest
German political Economist, Friedrich List.
In spite of his long period of service, Mr. Kitson is
Still working as energetically as ever. He is, I learn,
engaged in writing his complete life Story, which will
prove of great interest to thousands. The Story of
his persecution, the many attempts to ruin him and
divert him from what he regards as his chief mission
on earth, will be found to be an extraordinary one,
in which comedy and tragedy have been curiously
interwoven. May he be spared to fulfil his mission
completely.
A. F.




THE BANKERS’ CONSPIRACY
FOREWORD
Judged by its efiefts upon the industrial and social
affairs of Great Britain, The Cunliffe Currency Com-
mittee’s Report, issued in the month of August, 1918,
is the moSl important document of the late War
and post-War periods.
This document advised the adoption of certain
monetary policies which were accepted by the Coali-
tion Government of Mr. Lloyd George in 1920,
under the Chancellorship of Mr. (now Sir) AuSlen
Chamberlain, and is direftly responsible for the moSl
disastrous period in the industrial history of this
country.
Notwithstanding the ruinous results of the
deflationary policy recommended in this report during
the years immediately following its adoption, Mr.
WinSlon Churchill intensified these evils by establish-
ing the Gold Standard in 1925, which precipitated
the great Strike of 1926.
In 1924 another committee was appointed com-
posed of Sir AuSlen Chamberlain (Chairman), Mr.
Gaspard Farrer (Banker), Mr. A. C. Pigou, Professor
of Economics at Cambridge, and the two Treasury
Officials, Sir John Bradbury and Sir Otto Ernst
Niemeyer to report on the terms and conditions for
handing over the control of the Currency note issues


to the Bank of England as recommended by the
Cunliffe Committee.
If the present World Crisis can be traced to the Cur-
rency deflation policy pursued by the Central Banks of the
great industrial nations since the War, Great Britain
must be held mainly responsible for having taken the lead
in the adoption of this suicidal measure. And the men
who should be held responsible to the British people for
urging the Government to embark on this reactionary course
are the members of these two committees.
I was one of the very few manufacturers invited
to give evidence before the Currency Committee;
and after carefully Studying their report, I dictated the
Criticism contained in the following pages. Printed
copies of this were presented to the members in
place of oral testimony in the month of January, 1919.
The final report of this committee was issued in
December of the same year. No attempt whatever
was made by the Committee to answer this Criticism—
notwithstanding that I deliberately challenged the
truth of many of their assertions and impugned the
theories upon which the policies they recommended
are based. After the past thirteen years experience,
I am content to leave to my readers the decision as
to the truth of my Criticism.
Readers of this book will be able to form their
own judgment as to whether I, or the members of
this Committee, prophesied falsely, and whether the
orthodox teachings of our Treasury officials and
bankers as set forth in the Committee’s Report are
trustworthy.
In every branch of human Study experience is
the only reliable teSt of theories. The experience of
this country since the adoption by the Government


of the Report, has surely demonstrated the ruinous
effects of the financial policies recommended by the
Committee. Indeed, the results have proved so
appalling, that even many of those who originally
advocated the re-eSlablishment of the Gold Standard
monetary system, like Sir Basil Blackett, and endorsed
the Committee’s Report, like Lord d’Abernon, have
become critics of this system.
The Gold Standard, re-eSlablished in 1925, after
inflifting untold losses upon our industrial classes and
taxpayers, had to be abandoned six years later to
save the country from ruin.
The same policies as those recommended by the
Committee have also been tried in other countries
since the War and with similarly ruinous results;
hence the present World Crisis ! By the universal
adoption of the Gold Standard after its recommenda-
tion by the Cunliffe Committee which was one of
the main policies advocated by the League of Nations,
an irresponsible super-Government was created, com-
posed of a group of International Bankers. It required
only a few years to prove the utter incapacity of these
men to manage the world’s financial affairs, and if
the people of all civilized countries are not yet con-
vinced of the terrible dangers attending the supremacy
of the banking interests, there will be a repetition of
the economic disasters of the paSl few years—but of
a much more intensive character.
The present Governor of the Bank of England is
one of the few members of this group candid enough
to admit that the present situation is “ beyond him ”,
and that he can see no solution. And yet he seems
unable to realise that the present Crisis is almost
entirely due to the policy he and his associates


abroad have been pursuing for some years past!
In sheer despair, the politicians and bankers
responsible for the crisis have called a World Con-
ference to meet in London, in the hope that what each
Government has been unable to achieve singly for
its own people, may be accomplished collectively for
the whole world. I venture to predict that this
Conference will prove as futile as the Disarmament
Conference * The money crisis is a local and national
question, and should be settled by each Government
for its own people respectively.
Money is not international, and the attempt to
make it so is part of a deep-laid plot on the part of
certain international financiers to control the world
politically, industrially, and financially, by means of
the Bank of International Settlements established
recently at Bale.
If this Conference results in the adoption of an
International Money system, the masses of mankind
will be enslaved to a soulless despotism, and it will
result in further wars. It will compel the workers of
all countries to engage in a sordid, cut-throat wage
competition, which will reduce them all to the lowest
level of bare existence ! The World will then be
engaged in a life and death scramble for money !
The only alternative to this will be raising the world’s
tariff barriers !
It has been asserted by several of our political and
financial leaders that the disasters we are now
experiencing were not and could not have been fore-
seen by anyone.
Those who have the patience to read the following
* This was written several weeks before the Conference had assembled.
(Author.)


pages will be able to judge to what extent these
assertions are true. Years before the War, I ventured
to predict the general ruin and social misery the
world’s monetary systems based on the Gold Standard
would inevitably create. In my first work, entitled
A Scientific Solution of the Money Question , written in
1894, 1 wrote as follows :
“ The Gold Standard means inevitable war.
Nations cannot possibly exist for long under it.”
“ The Children born of it are fire and sword,
Red ruin, and the breaking up of laws.”
“ The repudiation of debt will become inevitable.
Nations muSl Strangle this monster or it will Strangle
them. The gold debts of the world cannot be
redeemed in gold. Although gold does not enter
in the slightest degree into those things that sustain
life, by building Industry upon this fickle basis, our
civilization is in danger of being swept away. It is
not a mere abSlradl question of Economics. It does
not merely concern Statesmen, and Students of Finance.
It is the greatest moral, the greatest social question
which mankind has ever had to consider. It concerns
the lives, fortunes and happiness of every human
being in society, and of generations yet unborn. All
other questions sink into insignificance compared to
this one. It is the ‘ fin du siecle ’ problem, and our
answer to it will determine the character of the drama
we shall shortly have to witness, and upon which the
curtain of the twentieth century is about to rise.”
In my work entitled, A Fraudulent Standard, pub-
lished in 1917, I warned the public of the projected
crime which our leading financiers were contemplat-
ing, viz., raising the value of the pound Sterling and
consequently increasing the burdens of all War


debts, and the value of the War Bonds. I wrote as
follows :
“ If the value of the pound is raised as suggested,
if the bankers succeed in persuading the Government
to accede to their demands, it will mean either the
complete enslavement of the people of this country
to a soulless money despotism for ages, or com-
pulsory repudiation of the debt. . . . Raising the
value of money means trade depression, lock-outs,
Strikes, Starvation, pauperism and riots with the
possibility of civil war.”
Its first effeft was the Coal Strike of 1926, costing
hundreds of millions of pounds.
We have been saved from a civil war only by the
granting of the dole to the unemployed, which has
been an insurance premium to prevent this national
disaster.
In November, 1911, I addressed an open letter to
Mr. Lloyd George (who was then Chancellor of the
Exchequer) on the subj eft of Strikes and Bank
Failures, which was published by Messrs. Dent
& Sons in the same year, in which I endeavoured
to point out the dangers and the weaknesses of our
monetary and banking system, at that pre-war period.
The following are a few extrafts from that letter :
“ It is as certain as that the sun will rise to-morrow,
that in a great crisis we shall be compelled to suspend
our Bank Charter Act and accommodate ourselves to
paper money. Has this not already saved our industries
and trade three times in succession since this Aft was
passed ? Why should the industrial progress of the
world be continually held back by this employment
of gold ? Why should the efforts of mankind to reach
a higher degree of physical comfort and a higher


plane of civilization be impeded by this artificial
obstruction ? Is gold really necessary for trade ?
What is there to prevent a group of financiers cornering
a large amount of gold for the purpose of bringing
down the prices of goods and shares, and then having
purchased what they require, unloading and flooding
the gold market in order to enhance prices ? The
industries of the world have become the shuttle-cocks
which our international financiers play with by means
of the golden battledores provided by the nation’s
money laws.” “ Suppose the commercial nations of
the world established an International bank at the
Hague under the protection of the Peace Society.
Could not all international balances of trade be
adjusted by simple bookkeeping ? Might not all
the gold coin and bullion of the world be buried under
the bank, where it need never again be disturbed ?
Might not Prometheus be saved his useless labour
of continually digging gold out of one part of the
earth and burying it in another ? Would not such an
international bank tend to preserve the peace of the
world by dethroning gold ? ”
“ Under the gold Standard bankers are compelled
to reSlriCt trade and industry unduly in order to main-
tain the safety of their institutions.” “ Monetary
and land monopolies are the parents of usury.” “ The
Bank of England inflicts far more injury upon British
trade than all the foreign trade tariffs of the world
combined ”.
Similar warnings and predictions were made by
me in many articles published before, during and
immediately after the War, in various journals includ-
ing Land and Water, The London Times Trade Supple-
ment, the National Review, The Nineteenth Century
c


Review, The English Review, The Westminster Review, and
other well-known publications. I addressed scores
of meetings of the Chambers of Commerce, Rotary
Clubs and Business Organizations throughout this
country, and in Dublin and Belfast. Prior to the War,
in conjunction with a few friends, I formed the first
Banking and Currency Reform League in London in
1907, and Started a monthly magazine devoted to
monetary and banking reform known as The Open
Review, which I edited and financed. Every effort
was made to interest our political leaders in this great
subjeft, and I addressed numerous meetings of the
Independent Labour Party in London and elsewhere.
Some of these meetings were attended by the late
Keir Hardie, Mr Ramsay MacDonald, Mr George
Barnes and other well-known Labour Leaders. I
contributed many articles to the Labour journals from
1899 until after the War, notably to The Clarion,
edited by Robert Blatchford, The New Age, edited by
A. R. Orage, The Labour Leader, Justice and Forward.
Early in the War, in conjunction with Mr. Wilfrid
Hill, the first President of the Birmingham Business
Club, and Mr. Ernest Payton, the Financial DireClor of
the Austin Motor Company, I formed The Banking
and Currency Reform League of Birmingham, under
the auspices of which, numerous meetings were held
both in London and in the Provinces for the purpose
of warning the public and the Government against the
policy which I foresaw the London Bankers would
endeavour to establish as soon as Peace was declared.
Among our members were Lord Desborough, the
late Moreton Frewen, M.P., and T. B. JohnSton,
Esq., the well-known pottery manufacturer of Bristol,
who organized several meetings for us at Bristol and


elsewhere. This League entertained the late Sir
Edward Holden —the founder of the Midland Bank—
at the last luncheon party he ever attended —at the
conclusion of which he gave us a most interesting
account of the way the War had been financed.
He was a severe critic of the Bank of England and
of the Bank Charter Act. As our League advocated
the repeal of the Aft, Sir Edward gave us his support,
although he did not endorse our entire programme.
In his speech at the luncheon referred to, at which
I presided and which was given at the Savoy Hotel,
London, Sir Edward Slated that “ with nine-tenths
of Kitson’s gospel lam in full accord ”. I had had the
privilege, on several former occasions, of discussing
the financial situation with him, and he agreed as to
the dangers of the adoption of a monetary deflation
policy after the War, to which he was entirely opposed.
In consequence of his critical attitude towards the
policy of the Bank of England, he became (as he once
told me) “ the beSl-hated man in the City of London ” !
I mention these particulars in order to show how
baseless have been the assertions of certain statesmen
and bankers that “ the present crisis was not and could
not have been foreseen by anyone ” !
Moreover, it required no exceptional gift of fore-
sight to foretell the inevitable consequences of the
revival of the gold Standard after the War, and of the
scarce-dear-money policy which has been pursued by
the Bank of England with the approval of the Treasury
officials and of our Chancellors, during moSt of the
poSl-war period. Any intelligent reader of the
industrial and financial history of this country for the
last century could as readily have predifted the
present period as the writer himself. Dozens of


examples of the ruinous results of money and credit
contraction could be mentioned from the experiences
of the various industrial nations within living memory.
But the best illustration is the poSl-war period after
the Battle of Waterloo. As the direft result of Lord
Liverpool’s and Sir Robert Peel’s Gold Standard
policy, this country experienced thirty years of
industrial depression and unemployment culminating
in the “ hungry forties ”. And as Disraeli Slated on
several occasions, England was only saved from final
ruin by two accidents, viz., the discovery of gold in
California and Australia in 1849 and 1850, which, by
providing a large increase in the volume of money
(which to-day would be termed “ inflation ”) reversed
the policy of Peel, and brought about an era of
prosperity.
Similarly the demonetization of silver after the
Franco-German War, resulted in currency deflation
with the accompanying evils of low prices, trade
depression, unemployment and general social misery
universally. Civilization was once more saved by
the currency expansion brought about by the gold
discoveries in South Africa.
It may be Slated as a general truth, that currency
expansion—whether in the form of the precious metals or
legal tender paper money —has always promoted industrial
prosperity. On the other hand, every period of currency
contraction—especially when enforced by legislation—has
resulted in industrial stagnation and social misery. No
country has ever succeeded in restoring prosperity without
an increase in the purchasing power of the public.
Orthodox writers are fond of dwelling on the
disasters accompanying periods of monetary inflation,
such as occurred in Germany after the War and in


Russia after the Revolution. These writers are
careful to avoid mentioning that in both these cases
the inflation was deliberate on the part of the authori-
ties ; and in the one case was adopted to get rid of
Germany’s internal War debts, and in the case of
Russia to destroy the private traders by making the
rouble valueless. The increase of money supplies for the
sole purpose of assisting trade and production has always
proved beneficial to mankind.
Monetary inflation may be beneficial as well as an
evil, and in the case of Germany it proved ruinous
to the rentier class, and to the idle rich. But it was
during this period that the German manufacturers
were able to re-design their works and install the
most up-to-date machinery, with the result that to-day
Germany is the beSl-equipped nation in the world for
production of manufactured goods. Inflation has
never ruined any nation. On the other hand, monetary
deflation ruins the wealth-producing classes upon
whom the very existence of a country depends, and
if this policy is continued, is bound to bring that
country to destitution.
The monetary system as advocated in the Report
of the Cunlifle Committee, and as practised by the
Bank of England for the paSl ten years, belongs to
the age of scarcity when trade was a mere bagatelle
to what it has since become. When Sir Robert Peel
introduced the Bank Charter Act of 1844, England
was the only country using exclusively gold as the
basis for its currency. Other nations employed
silver, although paper money was extensively used
in America.
Scientific discoveries and inventions during the
past half-century have revolutionized the world’s


economic system, and the present crisis with which the
world is now afflicted, is due to the attempt of Govern-
ments and international bankers to employ an
antiquated currency system to function in the present
age of plenty. It is analogous to the London Water
Companies trying to use the same-sized water mains
employed a century ago for distributing water to
London’s present population.
Lord D’Abernon —who was formerly a banker—
has described the present crisis as a “ money crisis ”.
He adds, “ It is the Stupidest and moSl gratuitous in
history. All the essential circumstances —except finan-
cial wisdom, favour an era of prosperity and well-
being. Crops are more abundant than ever before.
Science has developed production beyond all prece-
dent : inventiveness has discovered new processes
in industry, increasing the power of man over Nature,
enabling him to produce far more at less coSt. But the
incapacity to adjust vehicle to burden, and means of
payment to requirements, has brought about a crisis,
so that many are Starving in a world of plenty, while
all are oppressed with the same sense of depression
and of inability to meet the situation. The explanation
of this anomaly is that the machinery for distributing
the products of labour has proved quite inadequate.”
Money is the life-blood of trade and commerce, and
unless there is an ample supply to meet the growing
demands of trade, enterprise is checked, trade is
depressed and the public are unable to secure and to
enjoy the abundance of the necessaries and good
things of life which inventors and scientists have been
able to provide. The eminent Oxford scientist.
Professor Frederick Soddy, Slates that the Gold
Standard monetary system has wrecked a scientific


age! Whereas modern science and inventions have
harnessed the forces of Nature to man’s control, so
that an abundance of every form of wealth can be
readily provided, the world’s bankers have Stepped in
and placed a barrier between production and consump-
tion. They have not been content to take their share
of modern wealth production—great as it has been—
but they have refused to allow the masses of mankind
to receive theirs, and to participate in the wonderful
results. In consequence, millions of pounds worth
of products have been destroyed. Corn has been used
for fuel. Coffee has been thrown into the sea. Fruit
has been allowed to rot. Hundreds of tons of fish
have been thrown overboard. In faCt, the world’s
productive capacity has been slackened to a mere
fraction of what it could have been, by the refusal
of the bankers to furnish the public with enough
tickets (which we call money) to enable the producing
classes to distribute the wealth produced.
So important is money to our economic life, that
Sir Archibald Alison in his History of Europe attributes
the “ thousand-year-night of Europe ”, commencing
with the fall of the Roman Empire, to the absence
of money, which was destroyed or loSl during the
barbaric invasions.
During this long dark period, civilization declined,
and praClically everything of a co-operative character
which required the use of money, such as co-operative
manufactures, road construction, bridge building,
etc., almost entirely ceased.
The same writer also attributes the great awakening
of the 13 th and 16th Centuries, known as the Renais-
sance—during which trade and learning and civiliza-
tion were revived —to the discovery of silver in the


Peruvian mines, which gave to the world a medium
of exchange.
It is worth while to notice the names and profes-
sions of the members of this Cunliffe Committee.
It will be seen that with the exception of Sir John
(now Lord) Bradbury, Professor Pigou and Mr.
Upcott, every member was connected with the bank-
ing profession. Moreover, it is well known that
the Treasury officials work always in harmony with
the policy of the London bankers. So much is this the
case, that we have recently seen several of them —
including Sir John (now Lord) Bradbury, and Sir
Otto ErnSl Niemeyer, who also occupied a very
important and influential position in the Treasury
both during and after the War —becoming dire&ors
of banking institutions.
Not a single representative of manufacture, agri-
culture, or labour was invited to become a member of
this Currency Committee.
In no other business or profession—save that of
banking—would the Government of any civilized
country so brazenly offend the public sense of justice
as to appoint a committee composed exclusively, or
even mainly, of members engaged in that particular
business, to determine the legal privileges which such
a business should enjoy.
What would the public say if the Government of
this country were to appoint a committee drawn
exclusively from the Brewers or Whisky Distillers
Association to determine the character of our licensing
laws; or a committee composed exclusively of
criminals to determine the criminal laws ?
And yet this sacrifice of the public interests on
behalf of the money-lending profession has been the


policy of every British Government for the laSl century!
What is the reason for this ? It is due largely to the
supreme influence of the Treasury department in
Governmental affairs. Every Department of State
requires money for its administration, and the entire
financial affairs of Government are dominated by
the Treasury—the permanent officials of which are
selefted on account of their orthodox views and their
willingness to carry out the policy of Threadneedle
and Lombard Streets. So notorious has this obsequious-
ness of the Treasury officials to the London bankers
become, that the Treasury is sometimes spoken of as
“ the West End branch of the Bank of England ”.
It is equally notorious that we have no political
leader or Statesman in this country who has the know-
ledge and the courage to oppose these permanent
officials of the Treasury Department. We have seen
but recently the Prime Minister—Mr. Ramsay Mac-
Donald-—obeying the call of the Governor of the
Bank of England as obediently as an ordinary bank
messenger boy! We have witnessed a shameful
surrender of British interests to the United States
over the debt question by a former Prime Minister
—Mr. Stanley Baldwin—at the bidding of the same
representative of private vested interests—Mr.
Montagu Norman. We have recently seen the
Government reimbursing the shareholders of the
Bank at the expense of the Taxpayers for losses
incurred on their foreign loans to Austria.
Nor is this humiliating spectacle confined wholly
to this country. Two years ago Sir Otto ErnSt
Niemeyer, a dire&or of the Bank of England, under-
took a visit to Australia to inStruft the people of that
self-governing Colony as to the financial policy they


must carry out in order to meet the wishes of the
London group of money-lenders I And with the
exception of the former Premier—William Hughes—
the Australian Politicians and Government officials
.adually received this impudent address with all
humility and a promise to obey the instructions !
One wonders whether the spirit of independence
and freedom with which the Anglo-Saxon race was
once possessed, and for which it was famous, has been
destroyed by this modern spirit of commercialism.
Since commencing this Foreword, I have read with
great pleasure the declaration of the London Chamber
of Commerce and the Federation of British Industries
protesting against the re-eSlablishment of the gold
Standard. In spite of all the undeniable disasters and
general social misery which this fraudulent system has
created, the international bankers, constituting what
is known as the “ Money-Power ”, are Still plotting
to restore gold as the god of all wealth !
They know that only by means of a commodity-
standard which they are able to control, will they
dominate the world’s industries and trade, which is
their ultimate objed.
Ample warnings of the debt-slavery which the
use of gold as the basis for money inflids have been
sounded from many quarters of late years ; but the
moSl effedive Statement is contained in the 20th
Protocol of the Learned Elders of Zion,* as translated
by the late Vidor E. Marsden, formerly correspondent
of the Morning Post.
“ You are aware that the gold Standard has been the
ruin of the States which adopted it, for it has not been
* Published by The Britons Pub. Society 40, Great Ormond Street,
London W.C. 1.


able to satisfy the demands for money, the more so
that we have removed gold from circulation as far
as possible.”
“ Economic crimes have been produced by us for
the Gentiles by no other means than the withdrawal
of money from circulation.”
Here we have a deliberate admission of what is
the policy of the leading international Jewish bankers
—a policy which has been carried out in the United
States and in France during the last few years.
In Protocol No. 22 occurs the following :
“ In our hands is the greatest power of our day—
gold.” Considering that these Protocols were found
in the British Museum eight years before the War,
they may be regarded as absolutely prophetic, and are
being carried out by the Money-Power in every
particular.
In his Modern Democracies the late Lord Bryce said :
“ Democracy has no more persistent or insidious
foe than the money-power, to which it may say, as
Dante said when he reached in his journey through
Hell the dwelling of the God of Riches, ‘ Here we
found Wealth, the great enemy ’. That enemy is
formidable because he works secretly by persuasion or
deceit, rather than by force, and so takes men unawares.
He is a danger to good government everywhere.”
“ The truth seems to be that democracy has only
one marked advantage over other governments in
defending itself against the submarine warfare which
wealth can wage, viz., publicity, and the force of
public opinion. So long as ministers can be interro-
gated in an assembly, so long as the press is free to
call attention to alleged scandals and require explana-
tions from persons suspefted of an improper use of


money, or an improper submission to its influences,
so long will the people be at least warned of the
dangers that threaten them. If they refuse to take the
warnings, they are already untrue to the duties that
freedom prescribes.”
Unfortunately, the safeguards of public freedom
—publicity and the force of public opinion—are
rapidly being controlled by the Money-Power. The
press of this country is almost entirely in the hands
of the banking interests, whilst the Cinema and the
Radio are also similarly controlled. It is also known
that questions regarding the policy and constitution
of the Bank of England which affeit the public wel-
fare, are not allowed to be put in the House of Com-
mons, by a recent ruling of the Speaker.
Here is a private trading company to which has
been given, by Mr. Baldwin’s Government, the
absolute control of the public’s money system; a
corporation owned by a number of shareholders
who are under no obligation to publish their names
or holdings; a company that can adopt any policy
its directors see fit; that is under no obligation to
meet the needs of British trade and industry; that is
international in character; that has the power to
loan and does actually loan British credit to foreign
countries to build up rival industries to those of this
country; that can raise or lower the Bank Rate for
its own interests, and so penalize the British public;
that can depress trade and increase unemployment
or revive trade and reduce unemployment, without
any interference from the Government, and without
any obligation to explain its conduit!
And this international corporation rules the
British Nation, whose people have proclaimed for


the laSl two centuries that they “ never never will
be slaves ”.
The control of money means the control of human
life. Without money a man loses his right to life
and freedom. In the eyes of the law, being without
visible means of support is a crime. All debts —
including rates and taxes —are payable, not in goods,
which the people are free to produce, but—in an
instrument which no man is permitted to create
outside of the banker. And although the Govern-
ment demands a revenue in currency of over seven
hundred million pounds per annum, it makes no
effort to provide the public with the necessary volume,
nor does it obligate the Bank of England—to which
it has handed over this priceless monopoly—to do so.
As Sir Basil Blackett (a director of the Bank of
England, and a former advocate of the Cunliffe
Committee’s Report) has recently written in his
book. Planned Money :
“ When it is remembered that Kings and govern-
ments have, throughout the ages, insisted with
jealous care on their prerogative of issuing money
and controlling currency within their jurisdiction,
it is somewhat Strange to find modern States accepting
as axiomatic, a limitation of their sovereignty in the
sphere of money, so far-reaching in its effeCts on their
own powers and on the daily lives of their citizens,
as is involved in their agreeing to conform in all
circumstances to a Standard of value over which
they have no control.”
Fortunately for civilization, the world’s economic
disasters have compelled thousands of intelligent
people to Study this money problem —which has


hitherto been purposely shrouded in myStery by the
leaders of finance and their paid hirelings—the
City Editors and the Economists. The International
Bankers’ game is being exposed to the public of all
nations.
“We cannot allow our economic life to be con-
trolled by that small group of men whose chief out-
look upon the social welfare is tindured by the fad
that they can make huge profits from the lending of
money and the marketing of securities —an outlook
which deserves the adjedives ‘ selfish ’ and ‘ oppor-
tunist ’.”
This quotation from a recent work by President
Roosevelt is the moSl hopeful outlook both for the
American public and for the world at large. Will
our politicians have the intelligence and the wisdom
to follow the President’s lead ? I doubt it.


COMMITTEE ON CURRENCY AND FOREIGN
EXCHANGES AFTER THE WAR
The Committee whose names are mentioned below,
were appointed by the Treasury “to consider the
various problems which will arise in connexion
with currency, and the foreign exchanges, during
the period of reconstruction, and report upon the
Steps required to bring about the restoration of
normal conditions in due course.”
The following words were subsequently added:
“ and to consider the working of the Bank Aft, 1844,
and the constitution and functions of the Bank of
England with a view to recommending any altera-
tions which may appear to them to be necessary
or desirable.”
The constitution of the Committee was as follows:
Chairman Lord Cunliffe, G.8.E., Governor of the
Bank of England.
Sir Charles Addis, Hong Kong and Shang-
hai Banking Corp.
The Hon. Rupert Beckett, Beckett & Co.,
Bankers.
Sir John Bradbury, K.C.8., Secretary to
the Treasury.
G. C. Cassels, Esq., Bank of Montreal.
Gaspard Farrer, Esq., Baring and Co.,
Bankers.


The Hon. Herbert Gibbs, Anthony Gibbs
& Sons, Bankers.
W. H. N. Goschen, Esq., Chairman of the
Clearing Bankers’ Committee.
Lord Inchcape of Strathnaver, G.C.M.G.,
K.C.5.1.jK.C.1.E., Chairman, National Pro-
vincial Bank.
R. W. Jeans, Esq., Bank of Australasia.
A. C. Pigou, Esq., M.A., Professor of
Political Economy, Cambridge University.
G. F. Stewart, Esq., D.L., F. 5.1., Ex-
Governor of the Bank of Ireland.
William Wallace, Esq., Royal Bank of
Scotland.
Mr. G. C. Upcott, of the Treasury and
Ministry of ReconStru&ion.
Date of Appointment, January 1918.


SYNOPSIS OF THE CUNLIFFE COMMITTEE’S
REPORT
The Committee gave a review of the currency system
before the War as established by the Bank Charter
Aft of 1844. This system was endorsed by the
Committee, the members of which evidently believed
that the end and aim of the monetary and banking
system of this country should be “ the maintenance
of a complete and effeftive gold Standard The
Committee advised the restoration of the gold Standard
at the pre-War parity “ without delay Their one
fear was “ the expansion of credit and a foreign drain
of gold which might jeopardize the convertibility
of our note issue, and the international trade position
of the country They also advised “ the repayment
by the Government of a large portion of the Govern-
ment’s securities held by the Banks ” : and also
“ the creation of an adequate sinking fund out of
revenue They further advised against the recon-
Slrudion policies which had been promised by Mr.
Lloyd George as Prime Minister, on the ground
that such policies would require “ the creation of
new credit which would interfere with the restoration
of the gold Standard This caution was made
particularly applicable to the proposed housing and
other development schemes!
The Committee further recommended that the
gold reserve held by the Bank of England as the


normal minimum amount should be £150,000,000.
The use of gold for our home trade was considered
unnecessary, and the Fiduciary issue of notes was
to be limited by law and controlled by the Bank of
England. This Fiduciary issue was “to be limited
to an amount which experience shows to be consistent
with the maintenance of the central gold reserve of
£150,000,000 The Treasury notes which functioned
during and after the War were to be retired and
replaced by Bank of England notes. The State was
to cease to interfere with the monetary issues, and
the Bank of England to be restored to its preWar
position in possession of the monopoly of the money
supplies and dictator of the Bank Rate.
The final report of this Committee issued in the
month of December, 1919, confirmed the First
Interim Report.
The above suggestions were carried out in detail
by the Conservative Government of Mr. Stanley
Baldwin, under the Chancellorship of Mr. WinSton
Churchill, who re-eStablished the Gold Standard in
1925, and handed over the control of the National
Credit to the Bank of England in 1928. The Fidu-
ciary Issue was finally fixed at the amount of
£260,000,000.


A CRITICISM OF THE FIRST INTERIM
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
CURRENCY AND FOREIGN EXCHANGES
PRESIDED OVER BY LORD CUNLIFFE, G.B.E.
(Governor of the Bank of England)
INTRODUCTION
Before dealing direftly with the Committee’s
Report, I desire to call particular attention to the
Committee’s terms of appointment. These terms
do not appear to have called forth the criticism they
merit, for they certainly disclose as great a confusion
of ideas and an incoherency of thought on the part
of their author or authors as one could well im-
agine. The Committee seem to have surmounted
the difficulty by ignoring what many people would
regard as the most important part of the terms. These
terms embrace six diStinft inquiries each of which
is sufficiently important to warrant a separate report.
The Committee are asked (i) “to consider the
various problems which will arise in connexion
with Currency and (2) the Foreign Exchanges during
the period of Reconstruction and (3) report upon
the Steps required to bring about the restoration of
normal conditions in due course, and (4) to con-
sider the working of the Bank A6l: of 1844, and
(5) the Constitution and functions of the Bank of


England with a view (6) to recommending any
alterations which may appear to them to be necessary
or desirable.” Number (i and z) inquiries have no
necessary relation to, or connexion with, number
(3). Numbers (4) and (5) may be classified as historic,
whilst number (6) suggests that number (3) is not
essential. It will be noticed that inquiry numbers
(1 and 2) speak of “ the period of ReconSlru&ion ”
without any attempt to define the nature and scope
of the Reconstruction that is to be undertaken.
Anything more beautifully indefinite or hazy it
would be impossible to conceive. The genius res-
ponsible for drafting these terms evidently sees no
difference between financing the construction of a
Municipal Market House and the re-building of all
the devastated towns and villages in France and
Belgium. Surely something more definite than “ the
period of Reconstruction ” should have been given.
Again, this so-called “ period of Reconstruction,”
judging by the various schemes put forward by the
Ministry of Reconstruction, will necessarily be quite
abnormal, and the Currency system which functioned
under normal pre-War conditions, will certainly
prove inadequate for such extraordinary needs.
Again, what sense is there in asking the Committee
to recommend alterations in the Currency and Banking
laws if the aim of the Government is to restore pre-
War conditions which were largely the result of those
laws ? If alterations and changes in the Bank ACI and
in the Constitution and functions of the Bank of
England are to be made, “ the restoration of normal
conditions ” will not be effected.
Dealing direCtiy with the Report, it is evident
that the Committee have praCtically ignored inquiry


numbers (i) and (2) and have concentrated their
attention upon number (3). The Committee Strongly
urge the restoration of our pre-War currency system.
May I ask if the members of the Committee have
really given serious thought to what “ the restoration
of normal conditions ” implies ?
It is generally admitted that our present National
obligations necessitate a very substantial increase in
our annual output of wealth over that of pre-War
times. If we are to remain solvent, if we are to with-
stand the foreign economic rivalry and pressure
with which we are threatened, it requires no argu-
ment to prove that our pre-War currency will not
suffice to enable us to create the surplus wealth
needed. Our pre-War currency was barely sufficient
for our pre-War turn-over. “ Restoration of normal
conditions ” means reSlriftion of output to pre-War
volumes. It means the abandonment of all or most
of the Government’s ReconSlruftion and Housing
schemes, the repudiation of our War Debt, interest
payments, war pensions, land schemes, and scores
of similar proje&s and undertakings. It also means
the restoration of low wages with armies of unem-
ployed. Are these the conditions the Government
and the Committee are anxious to restore ?
Had those responsible for appointing the Com-
mittee possessed anything like an elementary know-
ledge of monetary science and its relation to trade
and industry, they would have outlined—first, the
reconStruftion work required to be undertaken;
second, the amount or volume of output necessary
to maintain the full and regular employment of
labour; third, the maximum annual amount needed
to meet the National obligations and then have asked


the Committee to advise as to the best method of
financing these operations and obligations.
As it is, the Committee evidently find themselves
somewhat in the air, and in attempting to answer the
various and conflicting questions raised, they have
entirely reversed the logical order of things. They
are in the position of an engineer who is asked to
design a bridge to carry all the traffic of two neigh-
bouring towns across a wide river which separates
them, without his knowing what the nature and
volume of the traffic is or is likely to be. Imagine
such an one designing and building the bridge without
regard to the normal traffic, and then informing the
public that their trade muSl be limited to the capacity
and Strength of the bridge ! Such a procedure seems
somewhat similar to the line taken by the Committee.
Indeed, the Committee’s method —considering the
vaSt consequences depending upon the currency
system provided—is far more irrational. For with-
out attempting to ascertain the currency needs of the
ensuing period, they have prescribed what that
system should be and coolly inform the public that
the trade and industries of Great Britain must be
limited to the capacity of their pre-determined system !
The gist of the Committee’s Report is that instead
of the Government providing a safe elastic currency
which shall at all times be sufficient to meet the
growing needs of trade, the whole of the productive
and business operations of the British people are
to be regulated by and limited to such currency
supplies as Nature, the gold miners, cosmopolitan
gold gamblers, foreign governments and our own
Bankers are able and willing to provide I So far as
the British public, and particularly the industrial


and trading classes are concerned, they are to have
no voice whatever in determining what these supplies
are to be ! The Report speaks with evident approval
of the effects of the Bank Aft of 1844 in checking
“ undue expansion of credit But nowhere do the
Committee attempt to define what they mean by
“ undue expansion Do they mean only such credit
as may be put to non-produftive uses, and do they
favour the creation of as much credit as may be
required for produftive purposes ? Or is the “ undue
expansion of credit ” determined not by the oppor-
tunities for its profitable employment but by the
amount of gold available for its redemption ? It is
evident that the latter is the true interpretation, for
it is well known that the creation of bank credit in
this country depends entirely upon the nature of
the security offered and not upon the uses to which
it is to be put. The gambler who offers gilt-edged
securities can secure a bank loan where the manu-
fafturer who can offer nothing better than a faftory
equipped with produftive plant and machinery, would
be refused. In financial parlance, therefore, “ the
undue expansion of credit ” which the Bank Aft has
served to Stifle, means such credit as would be in
excess of that proportion which the bankers decide
shall be maintained between gold and credit.
The system advocated by the Committee has
therefore no relation whatever to the needs which
muSl arise if the full employment of all the prime
faftors in the produftion of wealth which this country
possesses, is undertaken. On the contrary, what
the Committee say in effeft is ; “No matter what
may be the economic and commercial requirements
of the inhabitants of these islands, regardless of the


extent to which the land, labour and capital of Great
Britain are capable of being usefully and profitably
employed, only such a proportion of such require-
ments shall be' supplied, and only such an amount
of those faCtors shall be used as our pre-War financial
system is able to furnish.”
“ The Nation’s toes will have to be amputated in
order to make the feet fit the boots we have provided !
In short, we propose that the future economic con-
dition of this country, its industrial progress, its
safety and Strength, its population and their well-
being shall be dependent not upon the industry,
intelligence, inventive genius, activities, and moral
qualities of the people, but upon the accidents of
gold discoveries and gold mining, the currency needs
of foreign powers, upon foreign political events, and
the gambling operations of money brokers ! ” A
Strange combination of conditions and events indeed,
upon which to Slake a nation’s economic existence!
May I venture at this point to mention certain
faCts which the Committee in their eagerness to
restore pre-War conditions appear to have overlooked
—faCts which one is almost ashamed to mention.
The wealth of a nation is due and proportional
to the industrial, the productive activities of its
inhabitants. Money, currency and banking expedi-
ents are not, per se, wealth, but merely claims to
wealth, nor are they in any sense productive in char-
acter, but are merely convenient means and methods
of exchanging and distributing wealth. Hence the
virtues of any banking or currency system should
be judged according as and to the degree to which
the system contributes to and facilitates production
and trade.


And the system which enables or permits the
production and distribution of the greatest volume
of wealth and thereby contributes to the well-being
of the greatest number of the population, should
be regarded as the best, and vice versa. It seems
hardly necessary to add that finance should function
solely as the servant or the tool of trade and not
assume the role of controller. It is from this Stand-
point that I propose to deal in detail with the Report.
THE COMMITTEE’S REPORT, A VERY BIASED ONE
The first impression the reader of the Report
receives is, that the Committee have dealt almost
exclusively with one side and—from the Standpoint
of the national interests—the least important side
of the subjefts. That the private interests of the
banking and money-lending classes are to be con-
sidered, may be admitted, but that these interests
should be regarded as of supreme importance, that
those of all other classes should be subordinated to
them, and that the Government should be asked to
legislate solely in favour of a numerically insignificant
class and against those of all other classes of this
realm, is a proposal that can only be regarded as
both preposterous and ridiculous.
Although the Report omits diredt reference to
such private interests, it is difficult to understand
what other class can possibly benefit from the estab-
lishment of a system which furnishes an admittedly
inadequate currency supply. To the man with plenty
of credit for hire, a scarcity of legal currency may
be a desirable condition, since it ensures to him a


constant and profitable market. But to the trader,
producer, and general user of credit, a scarcity of
money is certainly undesirable.
Under the plea of maintaining the gold Standard,
the desirability of reducing and restricting the fiduciary
note issue, of keeping the business of banking free
from State interference, it would seem that the real
objeft aimed at in the Report is to place within the
control of the London Bankers a practical monopoly
of the nation’s currency and credit, so that the entire
industrial and commercial life of the people will be
at the mercy of a small group of financiers —a group
which is becoming smaller in number, year by year,
as the process of bank amalgamations continue.
And although the law may reSlrift this process within
certain limits, it will Still be possible for the bankers
to form a secret Money TruSt as powerful and far
more dangerous than that which threatened the
industrial freedom of the United States for several
years under the management of the late Pierpont
Morgan.
Possibly the fact that the Committee is composed
almost exclusively of gentlemen connected with banks
and financial institutions, may account for this extra-
ordinarily biased Report.
THE COMMITTEE’S FALSE ASSUMPTIONS
The recommendations of the Committee are
based upon various assumptions for which no proofs
are offered, and which I venture to say are entirely
erroneous. For instance, it is assumed (a) that such
measures of prosperity as were enjoyed by the nation


in pre-War times were entirely due to the gold Stan-
dard currency and Bank Aft of 1844, (b) that the
financial safety and Stability of the banks is ensured
by the adoption of the gold Standard, that the
working of the Bank Aft has been on the whole
favourable to British trade, (d) that dear money and
cheap commodities are desirable and economically
beneficial, (e) that the great rise in prices during the
war is wholly due to credit and currency inflation,
i.e., excessive issues of treasury notes and bank credit
due to Government borrowings, (f) that our economic
well-being is dependent upon and should be governed
by the foreign exchanges, (g) that our market prices
for goods ought to be made to correspond with
the level of what the Committee term “ the World’s
Market for the same goods,” (h) that the mainten-
ance of a free gold market for the convenience of
foreign financiers is beneficial to British trade and
industries, (i) that our foreign trade depends entirely
upon our maintaining the gold Standard for our
domestic currency, (j) that our welfare depends
wholly upon the volume of our foreign trade, and
that this depends upon maintaining our legal tender
at par or in our favour with the foreign exchanges,
(k) that the gold Standard system is founded upon a
well-eSlablished scientific and indisputable principle,
(l) that the qualitative theory of money upon which
the Bank Aft was originally founded is Still to be
regarded as scientifically sound. These are a few
of the very many assumptions upon which the Com-
mittee’s Report is based.
I maintain and shall endeavour to prove that not only
are these assumptions unfounded, but in nearly every in-
stance they are the exact opposite of the truth.


Let us first consider the gold Standard theory
itself, because if this can be demonstrated to be fal-
lacious the entire currency system advocated by the
Committee ipuSl necessarily be unsound.
In his celebrated speech delivered on May 6, 1844,
in the House of Commons, on the renewal of the
Bank Charter, Sir Robert Peel defined the English
monetary pound as “ a certain quantity of gold with
a mark upon it to determine its weight and fineness,
and that the engagement to pay a pound means
nothing and can mean nothing else than the promise
to pay to the holder when he demands it, that definite
quantity of gold.” The whole foundation of the
Bank Aft of 1844 and of what is known as the “ gold-
Slandard ” currency system reSts upon that assump-
tion. The relation of gold to currency was established
by the Bank Aft at the rate of £3 17s. io|d. per
ounce.
In endeavouring to prove to the House the
scientific correftness of his definition of the pound,
Sir Robert Peel traced its origin to the pound of
silver which was employed from early Norman
times. But in doing so, he merely shewed that in
an age when credit was praftically unknown, all
trade was necessarily effefted upon the barter principle
and that the precious metals were the moSt convenient
for this purpose. Silver and gold were thus employed
not as currency in the sense in which every trader of
to-day understands the term, but as the standard
exchange commodities for facilitating barter. Sir Robert
Peel confounded two quite diSlinft and independent
transaftions, viz., barter, and purchase by means of
credit.


THE BANK CHARTER’S ACT BASED ON A
GROSS FALLACY
Let us however put Sir Robert’s definition to
the teSt. If the monetary pound means nothing
else than so much gold with the mark upon it—in
other words, the golden sovereign—then the legaliza-
tion of monetary payments in anything else but
golden sovereigns, must necessarily be considered as
legalized robbery. And yet in this very same Bank
Aft, Sir Robert authorized the issue of £14,000,000
of Bank notes by the Bank of England without any
gold backing whatever. If Sir Robert Peel really
believed in the gold Standard principle as he defined
it, in foisting £14,000,000 of paper money upon the
British public, he was guilty of enafting one of the
moSt impudent and fraudulent legislative measures
ever inflifted upon a long-suffering public!
Again, if the pound “ means nothing and can
mean nothing else ” than the legal quantity of gold
associated with the golden sovereign, viz., 113 grains,
it follows that £1,000,000 must mean 1,000,000
sovereigns containing 1,000,000 times 113 grains of
gold, or, in round numbers, 10 tons. Hence
£8,000,000,000 —the amount of our War Debt —
must mean this number of golden sovereigns or
8,000,000,000 times 113 grains of gold, which is
roughly equivalent to 80,000 tons of gold.
Now the estimated quantity of gold available
throughout the whole World, is not more than one-
third of the sum representing our War Debt. Sup-
posing that the World’s gold supply should be sud-
denly increased to three times its present volume, is


it reasonable to suppose that this increase would
not affeft its value ? We have only to imagine what
would happen to prices and in fad: to our currency
and banking system if the country was suddenly
flooded with 8,000,000,000 sovereigns ! And if the
Government were able to secure possession of this
flood of golden coins, and commenced paying off the
National Debt by transferring them to the subscribers
to the War Loan, we should doubtless witness a
panic such as has never yet been seen! No doubt
this redudio ad absurdum illustration may seem
somewhat fantastic, but it is no more so than the
legalized definition of our monetary pound which
even now finds general acceptance.
My point is this. By applying Sir Robert Peel’s
definition of the pound to any large sums representing
say the War Debt, our National wealth or any large
aggregation of capital, the monetary sums in which
they are expressed become absurd and meaningless.
If our War Debt (represented by the expression
£8,000,000,000) adually Stands for 8,000,000,000
legal golden pounds and is to be repaid on this basis,
the subscribers have been shamefully cheated, because
the War Debt as it Stands and as it was subscribed to,
represents a far greater value than 8,000,000,000
sovereigns would be worth if they were suddenly
produced. Indeed, it is safe to say that under present
conditions 500,000,000 golden sovereigns would be
worth more than 8,000,000,000, for the same reason
that a shower of rain is worth more than a flood. The
one represents wealth, whilst the other is a calamity.
Of course the only rational meaning that can be
given to such monetary expressions as £8,000,000,000,
is 8,000,000,000 times the purchasing power of the pound


at the time the debt or estimate was made. But
8.000. sovereigns would not be worth
8.000. times the value of one pound when
there are only 300,000,000 pounds in circulation!
The theory which apparently held sway amongst
financiers practically the world over when Sir Robert
Peel introduced his famous Bank Aft, was known
as the qualitative or commodity money theory. It was
held that the value or purchasing power of money
was due to the metal composing it or in which it
was legally convertible. Gold was then supposed
to have a “ fixed value ” the world over, and it was
thought that in order that our foreign trade should
prosper, our money muft be universally acceptable.
And since a nation’s legal tender laws could only
be enforced within the area over which such laws
extend, it followed that the only way our money
could be given foreign circulation, was by making it
out of some valuable commodity, such as gold, which
was held in universal esteem.
It will be seen that this qualitative or commodity-
money theory originated with and pertains exclusively
to barter, the exchange of one commodity for another
commodity of equal value. It was only after civiliza-
tion had so far advanced and the Stability of society
and Government evolved to the point where contrafts
and business promises were recognized as legally
binding and enforceable, that the organization of
credit became possible. And with the organization
of credit, and the establishment of credit banking,
an entirely new monetary system was evolved, based
upon an entirely different principle.
The credit system —although in existence in certain
countries ages ago —has only become the safe and


potent instrument of finance as we know it within
the paSt century and more particularly during the last
half-century. But in an age when mutual trust be-
tween man and man was uncertain and unreliable,
it is easy to understand how important became the
use of a valuable token or instrument of exchange
which would command its face value at all times and
places without the force of law. Hence the con-
venience of gold.
Prior to the passage of the Bank Aft, trade was
a comparatively modeSt affair to what we are ac-
customed to, and the amount of currency needed was
similarly insignificant. The production of gold prior
to the discoveries in Australia and California was
also a small affair. Hence, since the variations in the
gold supplies and demand were comparatively small,
it may have seemed to the bankers of Peel’s time that
gold really had some magic power of preserving what
they termed its “ fixity of value ”. With the demand
fairly constant and the supply Slriftly limited, gold
was not subjeft to the fluctuations we have known
during the paSt thirty years, nor could its effefts
upon commerce and society have been so serious.
With the enormous development of trade and
credit, and the intimate connection and relation of
all parts of the globe (due to telegraphy and rapid
transportation), currency and the precious metals
particularly, are subjected to forces and fluctuations
connected with the organization of large aggregations
of capital, utterly unknown and inconceivable at
the time of the passage of Peel’s Bank Aft. And it
has been found that an entirely different theory is
required to explain modern monetary operations
from that which seemed satisfactory in Peel’s time.


QUANTITY MONEY THEORY VERSUS
QUALITY THEORY
The modem and generally accepted theory of
monetary science is known as the quantitative theory,
which asserts that the value of the money unit is
determined by the number of units in circulation
multiplied by their velocity of circulation. This
theory is in direft opposition to the old barter or
commodity-money theory. For it claims that quantity
and not quality controls the value of money. Hence
it is absolutely immaterial so far as value is concerned,
whether a nation employs paper money or gold and
silver coins so long as the number of units in circulation
is the same in both cases.
Under the qualitative or commodity-money
theory, gold funftions by weight, whilst under the
quantitative theory, gold coins function solely by
number. And this quantity theory is supported in
praftice in whatever direction it may be applied.
Take, for example, the question of inflation. What
else is this but a question of an excessive quantity of
money—of claims to wealth? Quality doesn’t enter
into it. We have witnessed during the War, examples
of gold inflation where certain Governments were
seriously considering prohibiting further imports of
gold. The Bank of Sweden was authorized by the
Swedish Government to refuse to exchange its notes
for gold during the period of the War.
It Stands to reason that since money is merely a
claim to wealth —goods or services—its purchasing
power muSl be determined by the number of claims
offered in relation to the wealth available. And it
E


cannot possibly make any difference whether these
claims are engraven on parchment notes, on silver or
on gold, so long as all are equally valid claims in the
eyes of the law. If any witness appeared before the
Committee and seriously told them that the success
of a game of cards depended entirely upon the quality
of the material of which the counters were made,
the Committee would doubtless question his sanity.
But this Statement is not a whit more absurd than the
commodity-money theory upon which Peel’s Bank
Aft was drawn, and which the Committee whole-
heartedly and unanimously endorse. There is, more-
over, a contradiftion involved in the term “ gold-
currency inflation ” if such currency is wealth. An
inflation of wealth is what all nations are seeking.
How can it be regarded as an evil ?
Further proof of the truth of the quantitative
theory of money is found when considering one of
its chief funftions, viz. : the expression or (as it is
often termed) “ the measurement ” of values. Ex-
change-values which money expresses are purely
quantitative and are expressed and can only be ex-
pressed numerically. The values of things are always
indicated by such questions as “ how much money ? ”
or “ how many pounds ? ” not “ what quality of
money ? ” nor “ what kind of pounds ? ” To tell
the average man that a Dreadnought is worth 20 tons
of gold, would fail to enlighten him as to its monetary
value. But to say that it cost £ 2,000,000 enables
him to compare this with other coSlly things of which
he has knowledge. Nor is it necessary to tell him
what the pound is. To inform him that the legal
gold-pound contains 113 grains of pure gold would
only confuse him. Indeed it is questionable whether


one person in a hundred thousand could tell the
legal-tender value of our monetary unit in gold
without looking it up in a text-book.
MONEY AS A DENOMINATOR OF VALUES
Money has been defined as the denominator of
values, and its use in this sense is evidenced by the
fa& that we are able to compare the exchange-values
of commodities with one another by simply expressing
them in monetary terms. For example, if copper is
lifted at £l6O per ton, pig iron at £lO, gold at
£3 17s. io|d. per ounce, wheat at 50s. per quarter,
a tool-maker’s services at 2s. per hour, an opera
singer’s at £lOO per performance, and a suit of clothes
at £6 6s. od., we know at once the exchange relations
of all these various goods and services to one another
without having to inquire what the monetary pound really
is. Now what is the real denominator of values ?
Is it gold or is it the legal unit of purchasing power
in terms of which all our exchangeable wealth is
estimated ? Evidently it is the latter, otherwise
between any two gold-ftandard countries, exchange
should always remain at par. But the monetary
units of gold-ftandard countries are termed dollars,
marks, crowns, roubles, etc., not one of which has
ever been represented by a gold coin. If gold was
really the unit, it would be defined in all countries
not as pounds, dollars and francs, but in terms of
physical measurement, such as ounces, grammes.
Indeed we might, so far as the convenience of the
value denominator is concerned, replace the “ pound ”
by the term X, without affecting the results.


No better proof of the falsity of the gold-Standard-
currency theory is needed than the fact that a given
weight of gold has different degrees of purchasing
power in different countries whose currencies are
legally based upon gold and where no restrictions
are placed upon its export. As a commodity, one
ounce of British gold plus the coSl of carriage and
insurance equals an ounce of gold in America.
Similarly one ounce of American gold, after allowing
similar coSts of transportation, etc., should equal
one ounce of gold in London. But the values of the
monetary units (pounds and dollars) of the two
countries vary out of all proportion to their trans-
portation charges, showing that gold coins are sub-
jected to laws different from those affeCfing the mere
commodity. The chief disturbing faCtor is credit,
including paper currency. And since the amount
of such credit and paper currency varies in different
countries as well as the intensity of the demand for
purchasing power, it follows that the relations of
the monetary units of such countries to one another
muSt be continually changing, for it should be remem-
bered that credit and paper currency affcCi prices and
therefore the purchasing power of gold coins the
same as the addition of a similar volume of gold
currency, which is a further demonstration of the
truth of the Quantity Theory.
MONEY IS NECESSARY NATIONAL AND
NOT INTERNATIONAL
The Committee —like Sir Robert Peel—have failed
to notice the fad that the circulation of legal tender
is limited to the country in which such laws arc


operative. Legal tender can never go abroad as legal
tender. It is like a monarch whose power and prero-
gatives are circumscribed by the frontiers of his
realm. The moment he leaves his country and Steps
upon foreign soil he leaves behind him all his regal
powers and rights, and becomes an ordinary civilian,
subjeCt to the rules of the country in which he happens
to be travelling or Slaying. So it is with money—
especially golden coins. The English golden pound
is an instrument possessing certain privileges and
powers conferred upon it by our legal tender laws.
These privileges are valid however only as long as
it retains its form and coinage marks, and so long as
it remains within the jurisdiction of British laws.
Melt it into a button, destroy its inscriptions, reduce
it to a mere mass of metal and its monetary functions
disappear. It is no longer legal tender. And it can
only regain its position as money by undergoing
re-coinage. Similarly, the moment it leaves this
country and reaches foreign soil it loses its legal
tender privileges and is reduced to a mere commodity,
and can only regain its power either by undergoing
remonetization under the laws of the country in
which it is to circulate, or by returning to its own
country —all of which proves that it is not the gold
but the legal process of coinage that creates the
money. Hence the purchasing power of gold is
due —not to its commodity uses in the Arts and
Crafts but —to the legal tender laws of all nations.
Demonetize gold and its value would fall like that
of silver during the 90’s !
The unfortunate attempt to make the supply of
our legal tender dependent upon the foreign exchanges
has probably been one of the moSl disastrous experi-
ments ever recorded in the history of an industrial


people. And it seems unbelievable that had Sir
Robert Peel and his friends understood the real
difference between credit and barter, between home
and foreign trade, they would have enafted the
Bank Aft with its foolish and dangerous provisions
and reStriftions ! It surely needs no lengthy dis-
cussion to prove that whilst foreign trade is necessarily
barter, home trade is condufted entirely upon a
credit basis—and whilst gold as a commodity is no
doubt useful in the settlement of foreign trade
balances, it serves no more useful funftion in our
domestic currency than the Treasury Notes. On the
contrary, its adoption for legal tender creates an
entirely false impression in the minds of the public,
and tends to prejudice our people against the employ-
ment of credit currency without which our industrial
and commercial life would soon come to a Standstill.
After being driven from one position to another,
after their arguments and pleas for the necessity of a
gold currency have been utterly refuted, the advocates
of the gold Standard finally take refuge in the doftrine
of acceptability. They said—and they Still say —
that a sound currency must be one that is universally
acceptable. The answer to this is that since each
nation has its own particular legal tender laws and
since money is solely the creation of law, there is no
money answering to this condition. Nor can there
be until the world accepts one and the same currency
law.
“ STORE OF VALUE ” ABSURDITY
When the late Lord Goschen suggested the
adoption of the one-pound and ten-shilling notes, he
was met with the same foolish cry. He was told


that the average British citizen, accustomed all his
life to “ good sound honed British gold,” would
never agree to use cheap paper money. This claim
has however been definitely knocked out by the
experience of the pad four and a half years.
There remains one other Slock argument in
favour of the use of gold currency with which to
deal. We are told that a necessary qualification for
a sound currency is that it must be “ a Store of value
Gold sovereigns, we are informed, possess this
qualification. The gold they contain is, per se, the
equivalent in value of the goods they purchase. If
this were true, it would show that the gold currency
system was merely an elaborated form of barter—a
relic of barbarism. But the whole claim is false for
the following reasons ; (a) If the gold in a sovereign
is per se worth what the sovereign will purchase, the
coinage and legal tender laws add nothing whatever
to the commodity value of the metal. It means that
if the World’s Governments were suddenly to
demonetize gold, its value would not be affeded. In
other words, it means that gold is the only commodity
on earth that is not affeded by the law of supply and
demand ! And if this is true, there cannot possibly
be any such phenomenon as gold inflation, which,
as old Euclid would say, “is absurd ! ” Moreover,
the demonetization of silver in the 90’s and its rapid
fall in value, was a sufficient objed-lesson to show
the effed of legal tender laws upon the values of the
precious metals, (b) If the legal tender privileges
accorded to gold fail to add anything to its value, it
follows that similar privileges conferred upon silver,
copper, and paper, cannot add anything to their re-
spective values, a conclusion which is contrary to


the truth and to the experience of all nations, (c)
Since coinage laws do affeft the value of gold by
creating a universal demand for the metal, it is diffi-
cult to distinguish between its commodity and its
money values. All we know is that so long as the
latter equals or exceeds the former, gold remains
in circulation. But whenever the commodity value
becomes supreme, gold disappears from circulation
as has happened in this country since the War Started.
Gold —like man—cannot serve two masters. If
money is its master, it will function as money only,
and if the Arts become its master it will cease to
circulate as currency and will join the Arts to which
it properly belongs by reason of its physical qualities.
This is the essence of Gresham’s Law. (d) A com-
modity can only be regarded and accepted as a “ Store
of value ” so long as such is available. If I take a
sovereign on account of its gold, i.e., for its physical
properties, I must be free to use the gold, otherwise
I might as well buy a “ gold brick! ” But the law
forbids one to deface the coins of the realm. In
short, the attempt to use this “ Store of value ”
makes one a criminal. Evidently therefore the law
does not regard this property as an essential one.
(e) The employment of Treasury Notes, token coins
and credit generally, is sufficient evidence that the
“ Store of value ” claim is all “ moonshine ”. All
that the public ask in connexion with currency is
that the law shall regard it as legal tender, valid for
the payment of all debt, public and private. To
burden currency with “ Stores of value ” is a waste
of labour and good material, and merely tends to
hamper trade and reStrift industry. It would be
juSl as reasonable to make postage Stamps, railway,


theatre, and pawn tickets out of the precious metals,
as to use them for monetary purposes.
FALLACIES AND VALUES OF THE BANK
CHARTER ACT
The fallacies underlying the Bank Aft of 1844
are further illustrated when we review the history
of its workings. The Committee have fairly des-
cribed its operations in Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive, so
far as banking operations are concerned, but they
carefully omit any and all reference to its industrial
and social effefts. If the movements of gold were
merely mechanical in effeft, if they resulted only in
increasing or decreasing banking operations and
bank dividends, this subjeft would excite very little
interest. But the Committee forget that behind these
gold operations Stand the interests, the industries,
the trade, the lives of 40 millions of people—that
the very existence of Great Britain is bound up with
its Currency System! And when they calmly advise
the Government to re-eStablish a system which has
collapsed whenever it has been subjefted to any
abnormal Strain, when they assert that the principle
of this Aft “ has upon the whole been justified by
experience ” and should therefore be maintained,
one can only gasp at such a display of either callous-
ness or ignorance!
On no less than four different occasions the pro-
visions of this Bank Aft have failed, and the nation
has only been saved from bankruptcy by the sus-
pension of the very principle and reSlriftions which
the Currency Committee now assert are essential to


our national well-being ! Is it not true that this Aft
has subjefted us to the moSt variable bank rate in
the world ? Is it not a faft that no London Banker
dare give long-time credit necessary for building up
industry because of the instability and uncertainty of
our gold basis ? Has not our free gold market intro-
duced a feeling of uncertainty in all our undertakings ?
Is not the industrial prosperity of this country placed
largely at the mercy of foreign events, and of foreign
bankers and speculators by this Bank Aft ? And
has it not proved of far greater benefit to foreign
producers and traders than to the British public ?
It muSt surely be known to the Committee that
whenever disturbances have occurred in foreign
countries—such as the Currency panic of 1907 in
New York—the British commercial and industrial
classes have been penalized by the very principle the
Committee endorse. For ten weeks during that crisis,
the London bank rate Stood at 7 per cent., costing
us upwards of £350,000, per week, by reason of the
Bankers sending gold to New York to assist a gang
of Cosmopolitan money dealers, whose gambling
operations had fomented all the trouble! The
Committee can hardly be ignorant of the way in
which the British public are taxed to enable foreigners
to secure gold for their industrial and trading opera-
tions—such as the Argentine wheat growers and the
Egyptian cotton planters in order to move their
crops ? It is also well known that Germany’s in-
dustrial progress was largely due to the financial
help afforded her by the London banks.
Anyone who has Studied our financial methods
know, that London’s position as the world’s money


market has been purchased, and is maintained at a
fabulous cost which the wealth-producing classes of
Great Britain have been and are compelled to pay !
In no other great industrial nation in the world is
the ordinary producer and trader so badly handi-
capped by his own bankers, through difficulty in
obtaining financial assistance, and the uncertainty of
retaining such help, as in this country that boaSls
of being the world’s money centre! And all this is
primarily due to Peel’s Bank Aft, a measure which
is international in charafter and anti-British in its
results.
The disastrous effefts of the Bank Aft upon our
trade and industries are graphically shown by the
following diagram of the inverted pyramid :
The figure (i) shows the relation of gold to credit,
and of credit to trade. It will be seen that the pro-
portion of credit to gold is necessarily very great


in order to meet the needs of commerce. And the
greater this disproportion, the more disastrous are
the results from gold exports. When gold is exported,
it becomes necessary for the Bankers to curtail credit
in order to preserve the normal ratio between gold
and credit. What are the results ? Since most of
our home trade is built upon credit, the curtailment
of credit means the curtailment of output. It in-
volves the redu&ion or destruction of all such trade
and production which has to depend upon the use
of such credit. As Sir Edward Holden once put it,
“ business is carried on by means of loans, loans
create credits, the Standby for the protection of
credits is gold, and therefore gold controls trade.”
What does this mean ? It means that if Japan wants
to increase her Navy, Argentina to remove her wheat
crops, or the Huns wish to prepare for another war,
they can send to London—direClly or indireClly—
and secure gold which immediately causes a rise in
the bank rate (which operates not merely against
foreigners but against British borrowers) and neces-
sitates a curtailment of the “ undue expansion of
credit.” The result is that the Manchester cotton
spinners, the Northampton shoe manufacturers, the
Luton hat makers, the Clyde and Tyne shipbuilders,
the builders of houses, the farmers, in faft, all classes
depending upon bank loans, muSl slacken production,
and curtail their output and hundreds and thousands
of employees are discharged or put on short time !
Of course the degree and extent of such curtail-
ment depends upon the amount of the gold exports
and the time required to replenish the banks’ gold
reserves. But it glands to reason that the mere know-
ledge that such gold exports are possible at any


moment, prevents our bankers from offering those
credit facilities which are necessary for enterprise
and the building up of trade and industries. And it
is because our trade rivals, Germany and the United
States, have refused to sacrifice their domestic trade
and industries by making the volume of their legal
tender and credit dependent upon the necessities,
wishes and caprices of foreign traders and bankers,
and by protecting their gold market from the raids
of foreign bankers, that they have accomplished
almost as much in a single generation as British industry
has achieved in a century.
SIR EDWARD HOLDEN’S EXPOSURE OF THE GOLD
STANDARD
I would like particularly to call the Committee’s
attention to the address of Sir Edward Holden on
the “ Depreciation of Securities in regard to Gold ”,
delivered before the Liverpool Bankers’ Institute,
December 18, 1907, juSt after the American Currency
panic. I know of no clearer exposure of the suicidal
principle of our Bank Act, a principle that is mainly
responsible for the mad Struggle for gold which has
characterized our modern industrial era. And when
we consider how little real necessity there is for this
metal, that apart from certain arts such as dentistry
and the jewellry industry, it serves no useful purpose
which a nation’s credit cannot as well supply, that the
bulk of the gold when mined is buried in the vaults
of banking institutions, one can only regard the laws
which have forced its use upon civilization, as the
produft of the grossest ignorance and superstition.


Sir Edward Holden in a series of triangles illustrates
the relation between credit, loans, and cash reserves
as follows :
He says : “ The right side of the triangle (Fig. 2)
represents the loans of the whole of the banks, and
the left side represents the credits created by these
loans, and the base the cash balance or reserves. If
then, you draw a line from the left of the base, and
equal to the base, you get the cash credits in existence.
If the loans and credits as represented by the two sides
of the triangle were the only two elements which
bankers had to take into consideration, then there
would be no necessity for them to reSlrift their loans
at all, and traders could increase their businesses and
obtain loans ad libitum. But there is another element,
and a most important one, to be taken into considera-
tion, and it is the fact that all the credits as represented
by the left-hand side of the triangle and the line
drawn from the base, are practically payable on demand


and in gold, assuming of course, that Bank of England
notes represent gold. Every banker muSl, therefore,
make up his mind by what amount his credits are
liable to be diminished, both in ordinary and
extraordinary times, and when he has thus made
up his mind, he ought to keep that amount of
available resources in gold, or in a means of obtaining
gold.
“ Let us consider, then, that the base of the triangle
consists of gold, and it is the ratio of the base of the
triangle to the total credits (both created and cash
credits) which reStrifts bankers from increasing unduly
their loans. If business increases unduly, and if
bankers continue to increase the loan side of the
triangle, of course concurrently increasing their
credits, and not being able to increase the gold base
of the triangle, then evidently they are getting into
danger, and the only judicious course which they can
pursue is to curtail their loans, curtailing an undue
increase of business, which curtail these credits and
thus re-eStablish the ratio.
“You see here the direft connexion between trade
on the one hand and gold on the other, and that it is
not so much the produ&ion of gold as the amount
of gold which can be obtained for the purpose of
increasing the bankers’ reserves. I venture to think
that the above explanation will enable you to come to
the conclusion that, if the gold base of the triangle
cannot be increased, then the danger spot is the
loan.
“ I want you to remember that the banking
system of every country has its triangle, and that the
principles enunciated above exist in every triangle
of every system based on gold in the world; that


being so, it is clear, generally speaking, that the
business of the world is carried on by means of
loans, that loans create credits, that the standby
for the protection of credits is gold, and that therefore
gold controls trade.
“ It may happen that the trade of one country
grows by leaps and bounds, the loans and credits,
of course, following, while the trade of other countries
remains normal. What, then, takes place ? The gold
base of the triangle of the former becomes too small,
and it is necessary to enlarge it. How is the increase
effefted ? It is effected by the representative bank of
the more prosperous country attacking the gold
bases of the triangles of other countries, and the
instrument by which the attack is made is the rate of
discount. By this means gold will be attracted from
the bases of the triangles of other countries, and
unless those bases are too great for the adequate
protection of the credits, the representative banks of
those countries will meet the attack by also putting
up their rates. But it may happen that the trade of
every country has increased by leaps and bounds, and
that all loans and credits have also increased. Then
the fight begins with each country putting up its
rate, first to prevent its base being diminished, and
secondly, to increase it if possible. Hence we have
the English rate at 7 per cent., the German rate at
7 1 per cent., the Austrian rate at 6 per cent., the French
rate at 4 per cent., the Italian rate at 5 J per cent., the
Russian rate at i\ per cent., but as the United States
have no central Bank, there is no official rate for that
country.”
Here is a frank avowal on the part of the world’s
leading banker, that trade and commerce are ever at


the mercy of the manipulators of gold, that long-
continued industrial prosperity is impossible because
of the restrictions imposed upon exchange by our
legal tender system, and that the gold basis is a brake
upon the wheel of industry, which is continually
checking the pace of production! Here also is the
explanation of the phenomenon that periods of
prosperity are inevitably followed by periods of
depression!
Increased trade demands increased banking facili-
ties—increased loans—but the moment credit is
increased to meet this demand, the gold reserves ate
Strained, the bank rate is raised, loans are called in,
the brake is applied to the wheels of industry, produc-
tion is checked, employees are discharged, enterprise
is discouraged, and the extra demand for money and
credit which prosperous times require, is choked off!
In short, our financial system destroys prosperity,
and reduces trade to the amount of gold available!
So that the mechanism of exchange, instead of facili-
tating trade, actually checks it! It first Stimulates
industry and then destroys it. Talk of a vicious
circle ! Here we have it in its most dangerous form !
The gold basis has become both the life and death of trade !
EVIL EFFECTS OF LONDON’S FREE GOLD MARKET
As to the effeft of our free gold market upon
securities, some years ago the Bankers’ Magazine gave
a Startling example of the depreciation in the prices
of 325 of our representative investments caused by the
withdrawal of £11,000,000, in gold from the Bank of
England by a- group of American Financiers. The
F


transfer of this amount from London to New York
during the period of a few weeks caused a fall of
prices equivalent to £115,500,000! whilst the
absorption of'the same gold in New York caused a
corresponding advance in the prices of certain Ameri-
can securities. By first selling English securities and
buying American, they had merely to transfer so
much gold and afterwards reverse these transactions
by buying and selling respectively and the game was
won ! As a well-known financial writer Stated at the
time “ These speculators were playing upon two tables
at the same time—one in London and the other in
New York—with the certainty of winning on both ! ”
It is asserted by the Committee that the raising of
the Bank rate “ had the immediate efleft of retaining
money here which would otherwise have been
remitted abroad and of attracting remittances from
abroad to take advantage of the higher rate, thus
checking the outflow of gold and even reversing the
Stream.” This theory has been seriously questioned
upon more than one occasion. It was disputed by
the late Arthur Lee (a Member of the London Chamber
of Commerce and at one time President of the Bristol
Chamber) at a meeting of the former, presided over
by the late Lord Avebury in November, 1907, immed-
ately after the American currency panic. Mr. Lee
showed by Statistics that the maximum amount of
gold that could have been attracted by the 7% rate
during those ten weeks was less than £300,000, The
larger sums came from South Africa in the ordinary
course of business without regard to the bank rate,
but moSt of all from the Bank of France, at the urgent
solicitation of the Bank of England to restore confi-
dence and put an end to a condition which might
easily have developed into a panic.


But it is absurd to suppose that the export of gold
can always be Stopped by the mere aft of increasing
the rate of discount x%or 2%. When gold is exported
for reasons similar to those which occasioned its
demand in 1907, or for such speculative operations
as already described, the difference of 1 % or 2 % or
even s%is of little importance. In the meantime such
advances in the rate spell the suicide of British
industry! Moreover, is it not conceivable that cir-
cumstances might make it a very profitable transaftion
on the part of one of our trade rivals to ruin our
trade by denuding us entirely of our gold reserves ?
A 10% bank rate if continued would suffice to bring
us to our knees and might prove a boon to our rivals !
It was at this same meeting of the London Chamber
of Commerce that Mr. Arthur Lee replied to Lord
Avebury, who had congratulated his fellow bankers
and the nation on “ the ease with which the banks
had weathered the Storm.” Mr. Lee said : “ Yes, you
weathered the Storm, but at whose expense ? It is very
well to talk of weathering the Storm when you have
the privilege of taxing the British public ! ” Continu-
ing, he asked these gentlemen if they realized what it
had coSl this country to enable them to “ weather the
Storm ” during those fateful ten weeks ? He estimated
the additional coSt in interest charges alone exceeded
£2,500,000. But this was the smallest portion of
the coSls. A 7% bank rate curtails trade and puts a
Slop to scores of undertakings. By destroying or
weakening confidence, it depresses the entire trade
of the nation, and it takes weeks and often months to
restore confidence when so weakened. Such losses
are simply incalculable.
In my work entitled, A Fraudulent Standard (pub-
lished by King & Son), there is a table which shows


the close relationship between the scarcity of legal
tender (gold) and the number of bankruptcies through-
out the country as published by the Board of Trade,
and I would respeftfully call the Committee’s attention
to the diagram opposite page 85 in Chapter VI of
the above work. It fully bears out my contention that
the Bank Aft has been a barrier to our industrial
advancement.
THE PROBLEM OF POVERTY IN THE
MIDST OF PLENTY
There is one problem which I suggest the Com-
mittee would do well to Study, viz., “ How is it that
the percentage of poverty and unemployment in this
country has been so great during the paSt century,
considering that there has always been an abundance
of the unemployed prime faftors of wealth produftion ?
“ Why has wealth been so comparatively scarce
whilst the main faftors in its produftion have been so
plentiful ? ” I venture to say that a careful and impar-
tial investigation of this problem will bring the Com-
mittee to the conclusion that it is due mainly to the
scarcity of legal purchasing power. By making
money coStly and scarce, our financial system has
curtailed demand and made produftion unprofitable
below a certain level, and therefore has doomed
myriads to an existence on the very verge of Starva-
tion ! Money in the hands of the needy is a demand
for commodities, and demand is the parent of supply,
and therefore employment.
Under a thoroughly scientific economic system,
every man and woman would, by the simple aft of


consuming commodities, create a demand for regular
employment. By expending his or her earnings in
buying food, clothing and other necessities, a regular
demand would be set up ensuring constant employ-
ment. But this desirable condition can only be
brought about with an adequate currency supply.
Confirmation of this is found in our last few years
of experience with paper money —which the Com-
mittee condemn. We have witnessed one of the moSt
astounding and successful experiments in the history
of this country. In spite of the gigantic war in which
millions of our men have been transferred from
productive employment to the destructive work of
warfare, the nation has not only carried on its industries
at full swing, but, if we regard the production of
munitions as wealth, we have greatly increased the
volume of our output.
Involuntary idleness has disappeared ! Poverty
has been almost exterminated, and the working
classes were never so prosperous. All this has been
accomplished by the use of an abundance of paper
money issued against the National Credit. It would
have been absolutely impossible to carry out all these
industrial operations with a gold currency or upon
the gold basis, as the Committee well know.
THE RATIONAL REMEDY FOR INFLATION
With the enormous increase of wealth needed to meet
our national obligations, is not the present paper
currency better adapted for our industrial and trade
needs than a restricted gold Standard currency ? What
are the objections ? The public is told by financial


writers that the present inflation of prices is the greatest
possible evil and the Committee report that this is due
to the Government borrowing from the banks and to
the excessive issue of Treasury Notes. Are these
statements correih ? Let us see.
The inflation of prices arises usually from an
increase in the normal ratio of claims to wealth
(currency) to the amount of wealth available to
meet such claims. This may happen either by an
excessive issue of currency or by a diminution of
wealth.
During a period of warfare —such as that juft
experienced—the inflation of prices cannot possibly
be avoided under our induftrial syftem, for the follow-
ing reasons. A large proportion of our induftrial
population were engaged in manufafturing munitions
winch were sent abroad to be deftroyed. The wealth
of this country has not been augmented the fraftion
of one per cent, by reason of all the millions of pounds
worth of guns, shells, battleships, submarines, rifles,
etc., turned out during the paft four and a half years.
We might as well have dumped all the produ&s of
all our munition works into the ocean all these years,
so far as our present economic condition is concerned.
Now it takes as much currency to finance the manu-
fafture of the munitions of death as it does the muni-
tions of life. Wages and salaries muft be paid,
material purchased, and dividends are diftributed
the same in both cases—except, that war-wages and
dividends have all been higher than those in peace
times. In the meantime the produftion and impor-
tation of food and other necessities has necessarily
been reftrifted. Hence we have had on the one side
a great increase in the number of claims for goods


(currency), with a decrease of supplies to meet such
claims. Hence the evitable rise in prices.
But how else could the War have been financed ?
It has been suggested that the Government might
have increased taxation, which would have reduced
the demand for goods. To what extent this taxation
could have so aCted, it is difficult to say. But if it
had been carried to the point of depriving the people
of purchasing necessities for maintaining their health
and enabling us all to carry on, it would have worked
disastrously. In any event, such increases of taxation
could not possibly have had any very serious effeCt
upon prices without creating far greater evils than
inflation.
Let us suppose that instead of devoting half our
national energies to war and the manufacture of its
implements, the same energies had been employed in
producing wealth —rebuilding our towns, providing
proper housing accommodation for our population,
making new roads, improving our canals and trans-
portation service, putting more land under culti-
vation, etc., etc. And suppose the Government
had issued the same amount of currency and credit
in connexion with all these improvements. What
would the results have been ? Would there have
been any such inflation of prices ? Would not the
manufacturers have increased their output in pro-
portion to the increased effective demand which
this currency represents ?
It seems to me there can be no doubt as to the
answer. The industrial experience of all nations
proves that under free conditions industry can always
keep pace with the natural demand of the people
for the necessities and most of the luxuries of life.,


The trouble hitherto has been to make the effective
demand equal to the natural demand. See how
quickly production overtook the increased demand
made effective- by the gold discoveries of Australia
and California in the early fifties ! And witness how
these discoveries which led to an increase of currency
in this country put an end to the “ hungry forties ”
—a period of terrible industrial misery and Starvation,
which had been brought about largely by the con-
traction of the currency by Lord Liverpool and
Sir Robert Peel after the Napoleonic Wars!
After moSl of the great wars of the paSt, nations
have experienced long periods of industrial Stagnation
and social distress resulting from unemployment. It
occurred —as Slated above—in Europe and particularly
in Great Britain at the end of the French Wars and
again in the United States after their Civil War.
And to those who have given thought and Study
to this subjeCt it is evident that the real cause of such
Stagnation has been the contraction of the currency
which had been created and was necessary to carry
on such wars.
What is the proper remedy for such inflation ?
I would give the same answer as that given by the
Flemish Merchants to Colbert when he asked how
he could improve their trade—“ Laissez le faire ! ”
If the Government and the bankers will let the
Treasury notes alone, and supply the country with
all the credit needed for the vaSl increase in pro-
duction of which it is capable, prices will gradually
fall by the increase of wealth. The disproportion
between currency and goods, between demand and
supply, will become smaller as wealth increases, and
the purchasing power of money will gradually


increase. This is the natural and rational remedy for
the inflation of prices.
On the other hand, to forcibly contract the cur-
rency as suggested by the Committee, will check
produ&ion, destroy confidence, render the recon-
struction undertakings difficult if not impossible,
and probably lead to very serious social and political
disorder. That way madness lies !
JuSl here I desire to call the attention of the
Committee to a most excellent article in the Quarterly
Review for this month (January, 1919), entitled “ The
Currency Note in Relation to Banking and the Ex-
changes ”, by Dr. Wm. A. Shaw, in which the writer
proves that the rise in prices up to November, 1916,
(which was about 100%) was not due to any over
issue of Treasury Notes. Dr. Shaw shows that the
currency at that date “ was back again to its ante-
bellum normal or level, so far as mere quantity is
concerned.” The difference was, that during this
first period of the war, we had achieved a transition
from a metal to a paper currency. He adds : “ I
wish to clear the ground of a prevalent and persistent
misconception. The advocates of a metallic currency
have attacked the currency note and have assailed
the policy of the Treasury on the plea or pretext that
it has led to inflation and that the issue of prices of
commodities has resulted therefrom. This argument
falls to the ground at a glance ” (referring to the
comparison of the index numbers with the total
notes issues). Dr. Shaw suggests that the rise in
prices has, since November, 1916, necessitated an
increase in currency notes instead of the increase
in currency notes having created the rise in prices !
The latter part of this same article bears out to


a large extent the views I have herein set forth.
Coming from a gentleman with wide banking experi-
ence (Dr. Shaw is, I believe, connected with the
lonian Banking Co.*), these opinions are all the more
satisfactory. “ The great desideratum of any currency
system,” says Dr. Shaw, “ is not that it should con-
form to a creed, but that it should conform to in-
dustrial conditions, that it should be automatically
expansible and contractible and at all times sufficient
to carry the total Strain of the nation’s productive
activity. This one desideratum the currency note
possesses, whereas gold does not. . . . After only
four years experience of paper, nobody in England
wants to go back to gold, and nobody dreams of
demanding convertibility into gold.”
In connetion with Dr. Shaw’s article, I would
recommend a careful perusal of the memorandum
on currency relating to Greece, prepared for M.
Venizelos, the Premier of Greece, by the President
(Mr. Falconer Larkworthy), and the Directors of the
lonian Bank as well as Mr. Larkworthy’s speeches,
in which the principle of Peel’s Bank Aft is demon-
strated to be fallacious.
The significant fact ought not to be overlooked,
that in spite of Sir Robert Peel’s definition of the
pound and his insistence that the basis of all our
currency muSl be gold, the Bank Aft actually made
the National Credit the final foundation upon which
the currency has rested. Thanks to our free gold
market, there was never any certainty and certainly
no absolute protection against the export of every
* Dr. Shaw was and still is Editor of The Calendar of Treasury-
Records at H. M. Public Records Office, He was not connected with
any Bank.


ounce of gold we possessed. And whenever this
occurred we were left with the £ 14,000,000 (since
increased to £18,450,000) of Bank of England notes
based upon the National Credit, together with our
silver and copper token currency as our sole legal
tender. Evidently, therefore, these credit notes as our
laSl refuge have always constituted the real and final
foundation of the currency system as established by
the Bank Aft.
DEAR SCARCE MONEY RUINOUS TO TRADE
The theory that dear money (which means re-
latively scarce money) is beneficial to trade and
commerce, is one of those amazing theories that
obtain general credence only because they are seldom
if ever challenged, and because the subjeft is so little
understood. Scarce money necessarily means a
scarcity of effeftive demand for goods, and therefore
a scarcity of employment for labour. Moreover,
since the producers of all commodities, save gold
only, are compelled to buy money with their products,
it would seem a complete reversal of the ordinary
trade practice to advise a man to patronize that market
in which he gets the least amount of money for his
goods and services. And yet this is praftically the
advice which the Committee offer to the British
public in their Report to the Government. If it
were not so terribly serious and dangerous a menace
to our economic future, it would be ludicrous 1
Of course the cheque system which the Committee
endorse has saved this country from the industrial
eclipse which would long since have overtaken us
under a rigid application of the Bank Aft principle.


Our trade and industries have had to depend upon a
very precarious credit system with a constantly
fluctuating base, which, whilst enabling the largest
of our manufacturers and merchants to succeed, has
Stifled enterprise and ruined hundreds and thousands
of small traders by checking what the Committee
calls “ undue expansion of credit
WORLD PRICE THEORIES AND FREE TRADE
PAUPERIZES LABOUR
The theory that our market prices for goods
ought to correspond to the level of “ the world’s
market for the same goods ” is no doubt a good
doCtrine from the Standpoint of the gold miner and
merchant who is anxious to secure the largest possible
purchasing power for his commodity. But it is
certainly against the interests of the British wealth
producers, for it means that they muSt compete with
the lowest paid labour of the world and with the
State-aided industries of foreign rivals.
The Committee is evidently in favour of a resump-
tion of our pre-War free-import policy, which was
rapidly converting this country from a great industrial
and produCHve nation into a nation of traders, carriers,
shippers, bankers, money changers, usurers and
pawnbrokers. No nation can continue to survive
and retain its economic supremacy or independence
by building its trade and economic system upon
foreign production. Our security depends upon our
own production. Moreover, the exposure of Germany’s
methods of “ peaceful penetration ” should have
opened the eyes of the Committee to the dangers of


our pre-War system. In his great work entitled,
Germany’s Commercial Grip on the World, Professor
Hauser (of Dijon University) shows that had our
enemy continued his trade and financial methods of
“ peaceful penetration,” instead of outraging humanity
by his military adventure, he might have controlled
the world’s wealth within the next twenty years !
THE FOREIGN TRADE FALLACY
The Committee—like Sir Robert Peel—evidently
regard the foreign trade of Great Britain as the moSt
important branch of our economic system, and seem
to be willing to sacrifice all other interests for the
purpose of Strengthening and increasing such trade.
No doubt to cosmopolitan financiers and shipowners,
foreign trade assumes exaggerated proportions. It is
unfortunate that we have no very reliable Statistics
relating to our home trade, but if we may judge from
the credit operations engaged and contrast these
with the amount of our foreign trade, there is every
indication that the home trade is enormously greater
in volume and employs a far larger army of workers
than all the foreign trade we have had or are ever
likely to secure. The Committee’s proposals therefore
mean that we should continue, as in pre-War times,
to sacrifice the greater for the smaller !
CURRENCY DEFLATION MEANS ROBBERY
There is one feature in the recommendations of the
Committee which has either escaped their notice or
upon which they prefer to remain silent. In advising
the restoration of the gold Standard they are advising


the Government to increase the National Debt and
so add to the burdens of taxation which the British
public will have to bear. At present our national
debt approximates -£8,000,000,000! But what are
these pounds and with what were they subscribed ?
The Committee muSl know that the War loans were
subscribed in “ cheap ” pounds, approximating in
value to only one-half of the pre-War pounds. Hence
our war debt, expressed in pre-War pounds, would
be less than -£4,000,000,000 ! By restoring the gold
Standard, the public debt would therefore be doubled
and become -£8,000,000,000 at pre-War value ! Hence
every taxpayer would be compelled to pay at least
twice the amount of taxes in his own products and
services by reason of the Committee’s recommenda-
tions. Very nice for the big money-lenders and war
loan subscribers, but rather hard on the wealth
producers and taxpayers !
When the American Greenback Party once pro-
posed to pay off the American National Debt in paper
money, a cry of horror went up from all the money-
dealers and bankers at the shockingly immoral crime
contemplated of paying the public debt in a de-
preciated currency —notwithstanding the fad: that a
large proportion of the American National Debt had
arisen from loans made with the self-same cheap
paper money. But these same gentlemen later man-
aged to sneak a bill through Congress which compelled
the American people to repay their War debt in an
appreciated currency worth three times that in which
most of the debt was contracted !
The obvious lesson to be learnt from this and
similar experiences in connection with the creation
and payment of National Debts is, that whilst it is


very dishonest on the part of a Government to attempt
to settle such debts in money of less purchasing
power than that subscribed, it is perfe&ly juSl and
honeSt for the holders of Government bonds to
demand payment in money of much greater value
than that loaned ! In other words, the money-lenders’
code of morals—which the Committee apparently
endorse—is, that whilst it is very wicked for debtors
to defraud their creditors, creditors are quite justified
in robbing their debtors. This seems to be the moral
basis of the gold Standard.
Confidence is the basis of successful banking and
of all monetary systems. Destroy confidence and
you aim a blow at the very heart of a nation’s econ-
omic prosperity. By raising the cry of inflation and
questioning the Treasury note issues, the Committee
have done a very serious disservice to their country.
The adoption of these notes by the public was a
great Step in our economic progress. To adopt a
cheap exchange-medium which has worked very
satisfactorily in place of a coStly one which was always
in danger of a collapse, represented a vaSl saving of
labour and expensive material. Having won this
Step in replacing gold with the National Credit, it
seems almost criminal folly for any body of men to
attempt to destroy the public confidence in such an
obviously progressive economic policy.
THE GOLD STANDARD IS A DEVICE FOR
CONTROLLING TRADE
The adoption of gold as the world’s money metal
was not brought about through any general desire


on the part of the people. On the contrary, it has
been exclusively the work of a few financiers, inter-
ested in the national debts of all countries. The
general public live in blissful ignorance of the whole
subj eft of finance and of the manner in which the
wealth of money-lenders is augmented at the public
expense by the manipulation of currency and credit.
Gold was selefted as the money metal because of
its known scarcity, and not on account of its physical
qualities which would not save it from demonetiza-
tion if its produftion ever threatened to become
excessive. The physical qualities of silver are similar
to those of gold, but the world’s money-lenders gave
it short shrift after the discoveries in Nevada and
Mexico.
PAPER MONEY SUPERIOR TO GOLD
Since the value of money is governed by its
quantity, is not a paper currency a far more rational
system for maintaining a fixed standard than a metal
the supply of which is largely dependent upon chance
discoveries and accidents ? A paper currency can
be easily controlled and its issues regulated to the
public needs. It responds instantly to the variations
in demand, and could be made to conform to a
praftically constant index number. No such result
is possible under the gold Standard.
The benefits which would result from the establish-
ment of a purely national paper currency are simply
incalculable. Among these, however, may be men-
tioned (a) A very much lower bank rate than we have
had for many years. There is no reason why the
public should pay more than 2% for bank loans.


(b) The Bank Rate could be made constant.
(c) Ample facilities could be provided for all pro-
ductive undertakings without any “ undue expansion
of credit.”
(d) Our currency supplies would not be affefted by
foreign crises nor by the financial wants of foreign
rivals. Whilst under the gold Standard we are in
danger of losing our gold, foreigners would have
no use for our notes and hence they would not be
exported.
(e) A national paper currency forms a natural pro-
tection for our home trade and would serve to check
dumping. Under the gold Standard our foreign
rivals are able to manipulate prices by merely ex-
porting gold.
It is suggested by the Committee that our foreign
trade depends upon our maintaining the gold Standard
for our national currency. There is no real basis
for this Statement. The United States had little
difficulty in maintaining her foreign trade during the
period of her paper money system. Moreover, trade
between countries, some using silver and others gold
and paper, has been maintained for many years.
Since foreign trade is barter, balances would continue
to be settled in gold as at present by weight, even if
we adopted a purely paper currency. And the re-
lation of the national paper currency, to gold would
be solved exaCtly the same way as its relation to any
other commodity. There is no more reason why
such a currency should be maintained at a parity
with gold, than with coal, iron, wheat or any other
commodity. What is needed is a currency system
which will maintain the general price level of all
commodities as constant as possible.
G


CONCLUSION
I have endeavoured to deal with the Report of
the Committee solely from the Standpoint of our
national interests, which are bound up with its pro-
ductive industries. The Committee have taken it
for granted that the whole aim of our national policy
should be the maintenance of the gold Standard. But
nowhere have they shown that this institution is
essential to the real prosperity of our people. The
maintenance of London’s position as the world’s
money market is a poor substitute for any one of our
great industries. Better a thousand times that London
should lose its financial prestige than that Britain
should sacrifice her iron, Steel, engineering, electrical
or ship-building industries. Would America or
Germany have willingly exchanged any one of her
Staple industries to become the world’s money-
lending centre ? Such a choice is unthinkable. And
it has yet to be demonstrated that London’s financial
position adds in any way to the industrial or trading
facilities of England. On the contrary, we know
that this position has been purchased and is main-
tained at the expense of our trade and industries
as already explained.
In our political history as a nation we are juSt
now at the cross-roads, one of which leads to untold
prosperity, whilst the other takes us back to our pre-
War conditions of social unreSl, class inequalities and
antagonism, with the extremes of the wealthy few
and the vaSt masses of our people always within
sight of Starvation. We can only follow the former
road by discarding our economic fallacies, which


necessarily lead to failures, by abandoning the super-
stition which has made a fetish of gold, and by allow-
ing ourselves to be guided by science, by justice, and
by intelligence, instead of tradition and selfish class
interests. The Committee’s recommendations lead
entirely in the opposite direction. The Government
cannot adopt those recommendations without violat-
ing the recent pledges given to the people by the
Prime Minister and his associates. Our economic
position to-day is as critical as was our military
position when the Prime Minister uttered his famous
admonition : “We muSl either go on or go under ! ”
We cannot possibly “ go on ” in the sense of re-
constructing and developing our trade and industries,
with a scarcity of money —which the Committee
recommend. It is therefore the bounden and patriotic
duty of those who really understand this great question
and foresee the dangers and perils to which our
economic future will be exposed by a return to our
pre-War currency system, to do all in their power
to prevent the adoption by the Government of
the Committee’s Report!


CONCLUSION
Those who have had the patience to read the previous
pages, which were didated at the time when the con-
clusion of the Great War was Still uncertain and the
results of that stupendous conflift unknown, must
admit that my forecast of the economic consequences
of the bankers’ monetary policies have unhappily been
fulfilled.
The moSl disturbing feature of the present outlook,
however, is, that the experiences of the paSt few years
have apparently taught our leading politicians and
their advisers —the Treasury officials —nothing. We
are again being threatened with a revival of the Gold
Standard which has been our undoing on many
occasions. The question arises: “ Were these policies
recommended and adopted as part of a deliberate
conspiracy to enable a group of international bankers
to control the world’s affairs, as outlined in the
Protocols of the learned Elders of Zion ? Or are
they the result of sheer Stupidity and crass ignor-
ance ? ” In either case, one thing is certain, viz. :
the persons responsible for enforcing these measures
as well as those now urging their re-adoption, should
be removed from any position in Government affairs
where their influence has any weight in adminis-
tration. We may forgive a man who advises a policy
resulting in disaster through an error of judgment.
But the man who continues to offer such advice time
after time, in spite of the teachings of experience as
to its dangers, should be regarded as either a lunatic
or a criminal.


When we see Government officials pursuing
policies injurious to the public interests—although
favourable to certain private vested interests—when
we witness these same officials accepting directorships
at the hands of these private corporations after these
policies have become law through their efforts, what
are we to say ? Do not these men lay themselves
open to suspicion as having received compensation
for betraying their public trust ?
The suppression of the Treasury note system in
favour of the present promissory notes of the Bank
of England was one of the worst aCts of our poSl-war
administrations.
This system which functioned so perfectly during
our greatest crisis, after the gold basis currency had
collapsed (as soon as the shadow of war first appeared),
has been moSl admirably described by Dr. Wm. A.
Shaw, in his well-known work entitled The Theory
and Principles of Central Banking, , as follows :
“Great Britain, during the years 1915-16, dis-
covered the true principles of State issue of paper
money, and benefited unspeakably by it all through
the Great War. But so little did she understand what
she had done, that, after thirteen years of the practice
of an automatic, self-regulating issue of full price
Slate paper money, she surrendered the right once
more to a Monopoly Bank in 1928. . . . From the
moment of that discovery until 1928, England
afforded an illustration of the true or ideal paper
money and its principles, viz. : a State issued paper
money of full face value, guaranteed by a full cover
redemption fund composed of securities, issued
automatically, retired automatically, self-regulating,
never redundant, never deficient, neutral in its effeCt


on prices, but rising equal to any Strain upon it;
guaranteed against debasement by the State which
issues it, and incapable of debasement by the com-
munity which purchases and uses it. The Treasury
note answered this definition in every point. . . .
The control of the amount actually in circulation thus
lay entirely in the hands of the community and was
determined by the community’s need for currency
and its ability to pay for it. Neither the State nor
the Bank of England had any control over the amount
in circulation. ... It increased in amount when
required by the expansion of industry or of prices,
and it decreased in amount with their contraction.
It bore all the Strain of the war time by its automatic
expansion, and then with the slump it automatically
contracted. It was de facto inconvertible, and there-
fore had no relationship to any gold cover, and was
not affefted in any way by the fortunes of gold. . . .
It was, therefore, not a source of inflation or de-
flation ; its own movements were the consequence
and effect, not the cause, of price movements . . .”
Here was a system for employing the National
Credit for productive purposes which belonged to
the public, and could be used by the Government
without any coSls for interest charges; and yet our
Government allowed this safest and finest currency
system the world has ever known to be deliberately
destroyed for the benefit of the London Bankers,
and to enable the private trading company—the Bank
of England—to issue its own promissory notes
without any obligation on the part of the bank to
redeem them.
Not only did the Treasury note system function


satisfactorily without any gold backing or redemption
promises, but these notes were far more Stable than
the American dollars with nearly one-half of the
world’s gold supplies behind them.
And if only our Governing officials had had the
intelligence to employ a larger volume of these notes
—instead of making their National bond issues for
money which did not exist, but which was created
by the banks in the form of bank credits issued against
the security of these bonds, the War could have
been financed —except for goods purchased abroad
—without burdening the taxpayers with ruinous
interest charges. Nor would there have been neces-
sarily any greater inflation of prices under this plan
than occurred under the bond issue scheme.
And whilst the Government is searching every
pocket, endeavouring to find fresh sources of revenue,
they have in front of them an almost inexhaustible
mine, from which to obtain enough to meet the
national requirements merely by issuing fresh pur-
chasing power and thus reviving trade and industry,
reducing unemployment, and allaying the present
crisis. But the mere display of the bankers bogey—
inflation—is quite sufficient to frighten our spineless
leaders to refrain from adopting the one and only
remedy for our present economic troubles.
Never was a people so readily deceived nor so
easily subdued as the British public of the present
period. All one has to do is to raise the cry
“ inflation ”, and Straightway all classes turn aside
from the only road leading to safety, plenty, peace
and happiness. Fortunately for our trans-Atlantic
neighbours, they have at laSl found a man as President
who understands the bankers’ game, and is not
afraid of their shouts and threats.


There is but one remedy for the World Crisis,
viz.: an increase of the money supplies—not in the
banks—but in the pockets of the people, enabling
them to buy more goods. The present problem is
not one of production as it was a century ago. It
is wholly one of consumption—which depends upon
an adequate supply and a proper distribution of money.
The poSl-war period, ushered in an entirely new
era, unlike any former period in the world’s history;
a period in which man’s inventive genius has placed
within mankind’s reach boundless wealth, sufficient
for every inhabitant of this planet to enjoy life with-
out encroaching upon supplies needed by any of his
fellows; a period in which Nature’s powers have
been harnessed to machinery for furnishing all the
necessaries and moSl of the so-called luxuries of life,
thereby releasing man from the original curse. And
yet amidst all this abundance, we are inundated with
myriads of Starving, ragged people all because our
officials have not the intelligence to see that the old
economic theories have become fallacies, the old
monetary and banking systems unworkable, and
that juSt as our productive methods to which we owe
this Age of plenty have been revolutionized, so our
entire economic system must be reorganized.
" New times demand new measures and new men.
The World advances and in time
Outgrows the laws that in our father’s days were best.
And doubtless after us, some purer scheme
Will be shaped out by wiser men than we'.
Made wiser by the steady growth of truth.”
Printed in Great Britain for Elliot Stock, Publisher , 16 & 17, Paternoster Row,
London, E.C., by M. F. Robinson & Co,, Ltd., at the Library Press, Lowestoft


2s. 6d.
NET.
