

I ' ' ' \ ■ /A ) i tAlv , ? i
\'p - \ < v -J •• X:\ I | O- c! \
OLONIES
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES
.■s s ' - \
AT TIIE
international (Mtriiion, Jo ml on,
1862.
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORTS OF THE JURORS
AND OTHER INFORMATION
TAKEN FROM OFFICIAL SOURCES.
COMPILED BY
J. a. KNIGHT,
(Secretary for Victoria at the International Exhibition, 18G2 .■ for Victoria at the Dublin Exhibition,
1865 and to the Intercolonial Exhibition, 1866 J
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE COMMISSIONERS FOR PROMOTING THE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION OF AUSTRALASIA
TO BE HELD AT MELBOURNE, 1866.
Cj) autfjontg:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE




AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES
AT THE
Jntermitimral ttibitimr, Somlcm, .
1862.
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORTS OF THE JURORS
AND OTHER INFORMATION
TAKEN FROM OFFICIAL SOURCES
COMPILED BY
J. G . KNIGHT, F.R.1.8.A..,
(Secretary for Victoria at the International Exhibition, 1862; for Victoria at the Dublin Exhibition,
1865 ; and to the Intercolonial Exhibition, 1866. )
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE COMMISSIONERS FOR PROMOTING- THE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION OE AUSTRALASIA
TO BE HELD AT MELBOURNE, 1 866.
Bg autfioritg:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.




r //
D- L l 1
In directing the attention of the colonists of New South Wales, South
Australia, Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, and
Victoria to the reports and awards made by the jurors of the Inter-
national Exhibition of 1862, in favour of the above countries, I am
induced to believe that the information herein contained will go far to
illustrate the great national advantages to be derived from such exhibi-
tions. These great periodical festivals of industry and progress are
now understood to be the best mediums for giving world-wide celebrity
to all useful productions. The life blood of success in trade, commerce,
and the arts is publicity, and exhibitions are pre-eminently useful in
imparting information in this most popular form. Hence the great
manufacturing houses throughout the world do not hesitate in spending
thousands of pounds in getting up a show-case or trophy of goods for
an exhibition. Experience has shown that Exhibitions afford the
cheapest and most .effective means of advertising, without which, in
some form or other, but few people engaged in trade and commerce
at the present day meet with success. National Exhibitions are
gigantic illustrated advertisements, and advertising, if conducted with
ordinary judgment, pays handsomely for the outlay incurred.
J. G. KNIGHT.
Melbourne, January, 1866.
[Second Edition.]




Mr. Hollingshead in his admirably written History of Exhibitions
which forms the introduction to the Illustrated Catalogue of the Inter-
national Exhibition of 1862, has the following observations on the
Colonies:— #
In 1851 the colonies were as a whole almost unrepresented. The notice
given was too short; the undertaking was hurried ; the project was quite new
and not clearly understood, and moreover, most of the colonies were scarcely in a
position to go to much expense for contributions. The East India Company,
however, made a noble display, and some few of the British colonies a respectable
appearance in 1851, and also at Paris in 1855. According to the latest official
returns the aggregate population of the colonies and possessions under British rule
exceeds 195,000,000, of which the great bulk 185,000,000 are distributed over
British India. In these colonies a total revenue is raised of about £44,000,000,
and the yearly value of the external trade, imports and exports, is upwards of
£176,000,000. It appears from the official reports that out of 23,575 superficial
feet of horizontal net space allotted to the British colonies in 1851, but 6,180 feet
were occupied. The only colonies then specially represented were—Canada, which
made a good display; a few objects indirectly sent for exhibition from Nova Scotia,
New Brunswick, Newfoundland, and Bermuda. Erom the West Indies a small
collection was sent from the Bahamas and a few odds and ends from Antigua and
Barbados. Trinidad and British Guiana were *well represented. Of the African
colonies, the Cape was the only one that sent a collection; a few objects illustrating
the products of St. Helena and the west coast of Africa were shown by London
merchants and individual exhibitors in England.
Of the Eastern colonies the Mauritius sent but little ; but a fair collection
was transmitted from Ceylon.
In 1851 the Australasian colonies were but poorly represented, although a
few made some efforts to put in an appearance. The New South \yales and Tas-
manian collections were creditable, and a few things were sent from South Australia
and New Zealand. With the exception of a small collection from Malta, this formed
the aggregate of the colonial efforts.
At the Paris Exhibition in 1855 the few colonies that did send articles made
a very satisfactory display. Canada especially obtained honour, for its varied
collections, which occupied upwards of 3000 feet of space, contributed by about
three hundred and fifty exhibitors. Jamaica covered an area of about 500 feet,
and British Guiana 350, whilst Barbados and the Bahamas were the only West
Indian colonies that sent. Ceylon occupied nearly as much space as Demerara,
and the Mauritius sent a small collection.


The Australian colonies on that occasion were very well represented, although
one or two did not show. Two hundred and fifty-one exhibitors from New South
Wales occupied 871 square feet ; one hundred and eighteen exhibitors from Tas-
mania 429 feet ; thirty-six from Victoria 289 feet, and ten from Neiv Zealand 117
feet. The ofiicial returns show that the twelve British colonies which exhibited
products at Paris in 1855 filled about 500 feet more space than all the colonies
which were represented in 1851.
Most of the industrial divisions in the Exhibition of 1862 are well filled by
nearly all the colonies exhibiting, and the collection of raw produce is particularly
rich and interesting. The Australian colonies exhibit one of the most extensive
and finest collections of the whole group, and on the collecting, arranging, and
despatching of these a very large amount of money has been expended.
New South Wales has a beautifully arranged collection of its gold products
from all the principal fields in the several shapes of nuggets, quartz, grain gold,
washing stuff, coin from the Sydney mint, &c. It sends an excellent assortment
of Australian wines, the best of its wools and fleeces, and cloth made from them,
stuffed alpacas and the shorn fleeces of the flocks now in the colony, coal,
minerals, native woods, and various agricultural produce and manufactures.
Queensland, which appears for the first time in Europe, has come forward
most creditably with its ornamental and useful woods, wool, cotton, and tropical
products.
South Australia is principally strong in its rich minerals, products of copper
and lead, and malachite manufactures, and its wheat and flour, for which it has
always been noted.
Western Australia also sends specimens of woods, in which it is especially
rich ; some of the spars and planks being very fine. Its other products assimilate
to those already mentioned.
Victoria has gone to great expense to forward an enormous collection : the
only difficulty being to find room 'for one-half the goods sent. One of the most
striking objects is a gilded obelisk representing the actual amount of gold found in
the colony since 1851, about 800 tons, or £103,000,000 sterling. Its manufactures
and general industry are well represented, and a more extensive and varied collection
has never before been sent from any British colony to Europe.
Tasmania sends, besides its wool, manufactures, and agricultural produce, a
noble trophy, rising 90 or 100 feet, made of its native woods, with a circular stair-
case in the interior, two whale-boats with all their gear are slung from it, and a
fine native spar, surmounted with a flag, rises from the centre.
New Zealand sends from several of its provinces wool, wood, coal, gold, and
agricultural produce.
In the Handbook to the Industrial Department of the International
Exhibition, 1862, by Robert Hunt, Esq., F.R.S., the learned author
says :
It is a fact, rendered evident by the history of human progress, that while
any people are excited to exercises of the mind, they advance ; but, whenever any
lethargy depresses the mental powers, or sensual passions disturb them, they


retrograde in the scale of civilization. By the Infinite Mind, matter was organized
into a living creation—and that life was regulated, in His highest work, by the
infusion of a power, gifted with the attribute of thought. Thought is the motive
power by which man is moved onward. As the heat which urges forward the
locomotive engine is originally derived from the sun, so the impelling force which
raises mankind above the animal existences is a gift from God. That gift, if
properly employed, imparts an influence by which dead matter can be changed into
forms of beauty ; —by which man can recombine the elements, thus creating new
conditions ; —by which he can control the mighty forces employed to regulate the
great phenomena of nature, and use them as ministers of his will.
In the International Exhibition we have a splendid manifestation of this.
We may study here the gradual strengthening of thought, and the increased power
gained by its healthful exercise. We may discover, —if we will but endeavour to
read the Exhibition by the simple and pure light of that truth which exists in
every man, —where there is an advance, and where the movement has been a retro-
grade one.
It must be allowed that education in a wrong direction too frequently destroys
this power, or throws a coloured cloud around it, by which the meretricious is made
to appear the beautiful ; and, under the cloak of fashion, a monstrous development
is palmed upon up as a mould of symmetry—a form of grace.
Pass, however, amidst the crowds which throng the Exhibition building, on
its busiest days, and mark with care those things which attract the attention of the
multitude. It will then be found that there is a latent power, which is strong to
resist the influences of fashion, and which causes the eye to dwell upon those
objects which reflect back, as it were, the light of that thought which has been
expended in their creation.
Erom the metalliferous ores which are exhibited by each country in its Ist
class, we are enabled to proceed by tolerably easy steps to the metallurgical
products, and from them to the metallic manufactures, until in the western annex
we may look with surprise on machines which are so entirely the creations of
intense thought, that they appear almost to think themselves.
The 2nd class informs us of the composition of matter, and teaches us how
we may recombine the elements, and produce new things. We are instructed that,
from a block of coal, we may .obtain not only light and heat, but fragrant essences
and brilliant dyes. Again, we are instructed that the Earth holds things yet
undiscovered, which may become most useful to man. The metal of clay,—
aluminium, —has just taken its place among the elements of manufacture ; but
thalium, an entirely new discovery, a metal resembling lead, is here for the first
time shown to the world. The vegetable and the animal kingdoms contribute to our
gathering. The fibres are well displayed, and we have in many of the foreign and
colonial departments fine examples of those vegetable products, and of the uses
to which they are applied. Grains, seeds, nuts, barks, and woods tell us a strik-
ing tale of the fertility of the earth ; and we find many beautiful examples of the
useful ends, and the ornamental purposes to which they are applied. The animal
products are not so numerous; but with their many applications they form
interesting and instructive groups.


Upon these three classes, and the class devoted to philosophical instruments,
every result which is exhibited depends. Let us look at any of the collections of
metal manufactures, whether they include the precious metals and their imitations,
or the humbler forms which the so-called, baser metals are moulded into : let us
examine the works of the potter—from the most delicate porcelain, ornamented in
the highest art, to the vase of terra cotta —the pitcher of yet humbler clay, down
to the common brick. Let us move amongst the productions of the loom ; from the
gauzes, which might drape the sylph of a poet’s dream, to the woollen cloths which
are well devised to enable man to endure the transitions of climate. In each and
in all we shall find, at every step, the dependence of the manufacturer on the
unobtrusive teachings of science.
The Exhibition of 1862 has a large leaven of the commercial element in it,
and without this it would never have quickened into existence. Every one must
have heard it called a vast bazaar—a great shop. If it had not been this, it
would have been nothing. Men have spent their thousands, and racked their brains
to produce something which, from its excellence, would be certain of realizing a
money value. And this is not confined to the mere manufacture : it is equally the
case with the poetic creation of the painter ; and the sculptor chisels his marble
into a Sibyl, a Cleopatra, or a Venus, that he may realize fame and wealth.
Referring to the Australasian colonies in the introduction of his
book, Mr. Hunt observes :
Tasmania rears aloft her spars, and leads us to her mineral and other pro-
ductions, which though so crowded as to demand a little labor, will well reward
the industry of any one.
Victoria shows us the mass of gold which has been produced since 1851, in
the pyramid which rises into the Eastern Dome, while in a case below the Dais, is
indeed a remarkable collection of the precious metal. This energetic colony displays
the elements of a future greatness, in the zeal with which the collection exhibited
has been brought together, and in the character of the products exhibited.
South Australia occupies the North-east corner from the Eastern Dome :
the minerals displayed are remarkable, the woods are valuable ; and, indeed, all
her productions are of great commercial interest. ,
New South Wales follows the next in order along the Nave. Gold again
glitters in our eyes ; numerous minerals are shown ; vegetable products assume a
place of importance ; and the animal kingdom is well represented.
New Zealand is placed under the gallery fronting the Nave. The gold from
Otago is the most prominent object.
Western Australia has her collection behind that of New Zealand : and
Queensland has its place immediately behind New South Wales. Such is the
interesting group with which are comprehended a set of colonies which will
probably rise into empires, and perpetuate and extend the civilization they have
derived from the parent country.


In the second volume of Mr. Hunt’s work, a large space, is devoted
to a review of the productions of the Australasian colonies ; under that
heading, he observes :
The Australian colonies occupy prominent places in the International
Exhibition. At the principal entrance in the Eastern Dome, the gold pyramid
from Victoria greets the visitor, and shows the exact bulk of gold produced in that
colony since the last Exhibition —nearly 800 tons ; valued at £104,649,728. It is
a pyramid 44| feet high, and 10 feet square at the base ; and no other country in
the world could show a similar amount of productiveness in the precious metals.
In the East Transept, again, Tasmania invites attention by an attractive timber
trophy. Both New South Wales and New Zealand occupy places of honor, having
a frontage in the Nave ; South Australia, and Queensland, and Western Australia
are also well placed in the building, and we are glad to perceive that the contents
of the courts are attracting a very large number of the visitors ; and the result of
their examination of the many rich products here displayed cannot fail to be highly
advantageous to the respective colonies.
The British visitor seldom takes stock of the colonial possessions of the
Empire, and the condition of these, as regards their progress, is usually roughly
estimated rather by current facts and figures than by any careful comparison of
the present and the past, from products exhibited. The material wealth of the
world and the influences of commerce and civilization progress so rapidly, that a
backward glance of some years into the past creates surprise even in the most
unreflecting mind. What amazing strides have the colonies, individually and
collectively, made in the last ten years ! —an advance in every element of prosperity
certainly unequalled in any other quarter.
. The population of the Australian colonies has more than doubled in the
decade, the chief addition being made by more than half a million of emigrants
from the United Kingdom. The progressive increase of the population has been
great in all the colonies ; but Victoria, from the influence of its gold fields, shows
the largest increase, having advanced from 77,345 souls in 1850, to 530,262 in 1859.
Some important territorial changes have taken place in Australia since 1851, which
require preliminary notice. The settlement of Port Phillip, which had, in 1851,
only just been created into a separate colony, has now become the principal colony
of the group. The northern portion of New South Wales, formerly known as
Moreton Bay, has, within the last two years, been separated, and made an inde-
pendent colony, under the name of Queensland ; and by the energy of its Governor
and leading men, is making great strides in progress, and attracting a large share
of notice at home. Norfolk Island, formerly a convict settlement and dependency
of New South Wales, has been colonized by the Pitcairn Islanders, about two
hundred in number, to whom a romantic interest attaches, as the descendants of
the mutineers of the Bounty, and who had kept up their primitive simplicity and
isolation, until they had outgrown the limits of their former island home. Van
Diemen’s Land, having ceased to be a convict colony, has changed its name to
Tasmania —certainly a more euphonious title. Tn New Zealand, Canterbury and
several other new settlements have been founded, and many new provinces created.


The land under cultivation in Australia has more than doubled in the ten
years ; and it is satisfactory to find that the greatest progress in this respect has
been made in Victoria, notwithstanding the general attractions of the gold fields.
This colony bids fair, before long, to be self-supporting, in an agricultural point of
view, as regards grain, forage, and root-crops, for which it has hitherto drawn
largely upon the surrounding colonies. The live-stock in the colonies have also
about doubled, with the exception of sheep, which have increased more slowly.
There are two causes for this—the larger demand for slaughter, owing to the
increased population, and the deficiency of shepherds and pastoral labor generally.
The clip of wool has, however, by no means declined ;on the contrary, there is an
advance of nearly 50 per cent, in the shipments in the last ten years, of which
more than one-third is exported by Victoria.
Another most important Australian product is its gold ; and this, though
chiefly concentrated in Victoria, is also obtained in smaller quantities in four of
the other colonies. It is computed, on good authority, that witiiin the last ten
years more than £120,000,000 sterling of gold has been obtained in Australia.
To these gold discoveries, Australia owes much of her existing prosperity and
population.
The following is a summary of the awards granted to the Australasian
colonies :
Medals. Hon. Mention.
New South Wales
-
-
- 76
51
Victoria
-
-
- Ill
84
Queensland -
-
- 26
20
South Australia -
-
-
24
11
Western Australia
-
-
14
12
Tasmania -
26
26
New Zealand
-
-
33
10
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Number of Exhibitors, 77.
Situation on Class. — North-east Transept, west side, at the corner of the Eastern
Dome, between New South Wales and Victoria.
The mineral collection from this, the second in point of time of our Australian
colonies, is well marked in the International Exhibition by its copper ores. The
exhibitors of minerals are : The English and Australian Copper Company, The
South Australian Mining Association, Wheal Ellen Mining Company, Cumberland
Mining Company, Great Northern Mining Company, Wallaroo Mining Company,
Wirra Wilha Mining Company, Worthing Mining Company, Preaminna Mining
Company, Duryea Mining Company, Kapunda Mining Company, Mount Rose Mine,
and the Cornwall Mining Company, who exhibit a block of ore weighing - 6 tons,
which serves to illustrate the peculiar character of these mineral formations.


Then there are individual exhibitors, Dr, Englehart, Dr. Mauran, Mr. Rollison,
E. V, Rodda, J. Kellet, and R. S. Crabb. Mr. Graham, whose name does not
appear in the catalogue of the International Exhibition, being the exhibitor of the
fine malachite table, at the entrance of the court from the Transept. A brief
account of those mines sending examples of their produce is all that can be given.
Burra-Burra Mines. —These remarkable mines were first worked in 1845,
and they are an extraordinary example of successful mining speculation. On the
sth of September, 1845, a few tradesmen in Adelaide subscribed £12,320, with
which the works were commenced. The first returns were as follows:
Tons. Cwt.
September 30 th, 1846 .... 6,359 10 copper ore.
1847 - - - 10,794 17 „
„ 1848 - - - 12,791 11
„ 1849 - - - 7,789 16
„ 1850 - - - 16,692 9 „
Making a total in 5 years of - - 56,428 2 „
varying in quality from ore containing 30 per cent, of copper to much that produces
70 per cent, of that metal. The money value of this is £738,108.
In 1851, the discovery of gold in the neighbouring colonies of South Wales
and Victoria, attracted all classes, and more especially miners, from their usual
occupations, and the number of hands employed at the mines was reduced from
1,042 t 6 100. Eventually the pumping engines were stopped and the mine
allowed to fill with water. It was not until January, 1855, that work was
resumed. With increasing depth, the cost of production of course increases, and
the margin of profit is lessened. There does not appear, however, to be any falling
off in the supply of ore, and the operations of the mine have proceeded with
undiminished activity, with a vast amount of benefit to' the colony at large, and
with satisfactory profits to the proprietors. The annual yield of ore, for many
years past, has averaged from 10,000 to 13,000 tons, of from 22 to 23 per
cent, of .copper ; in round numbers, about 2,500 tons of metallic copper,
worth to the colony, at least, £225,000 per annum The direct expenditure
of the concern within the province, since its commencement, amounts to
£1,640,000, of which upwards of £1,000,000 has been expended in wages alone.
The gross profit stands at £836,000, of which £677,600 has been divided amongst
the shareholders, £147,840 added to the capital stock, and 10,560 remains undivided.
The greatest number of hands employed was during the year 1859, when it
amounted to 1,170 individuals. The wages paid to the workmen, of course, vary
according to the state of the labor market. Common laborers’ wages have fluc-
tuated from 255. to 40s. per week ; miners, from 355. to 60s per week —tributers
making very much more occasionally ; mechanics, from 425. to 112 s. per week.
This great mineral deposit exhibits some peculiarities. Although the
miners and the proprietors speak of working on lodes, these are of a very different
character from the copper lodes of the primary rocks of this country. In a great
basin, formed in an amphitheatre of hills, an immense deposit of clay—the result
of the decomposition of the clay-slate—has taken place : this, under conditions


which we are not enabled to determine, became also the reservoir for the reception
of copper. In all probability it was first deposited in the pure metallic state—a
fine example of the electrotype process of Nature. During this process, the so-
called veins spread themselves through the soft clay in various directions, in pre-
cisely the same manner as we may, by carrying the terminal wires of a voltaic
battery into a mass of clay saturated with sulphate of copper, form a curious
arborescent mass. By the action of the oxygen contained in the water, this copper
becomes oxidized by the slow process which gives rise to the very beautiful crystals
of red oxide of copper, and from this state it passes into the blue and green car-
bonates, under the action of carbonic acid, the difference in the colour of the two
arising from the quantity of water in combination.
The malachites, which are extensively employed for ornamental purposes,
and of which the table forms a fine example, are carbonates of copper ; and speci-
mens selected from the Burra-Burra mines are sold for this purpose.
The Kapunda Mines are situated in the county of Light, about fifty miles
north-east of Adelaide. They were first discovered in the year 1843, by Chas.
Samuel Bagot, Esq., now of London, also by Francis Stacker Dutton, Esq. The
ore was cropping out on the surface, and was discovered during a search for some
straying sheep. The land was then unsurveyed, and the property of the Crown,
forming a part of Captain Bagot’s sheep run.
The workings have been continued, with a few intermissions, until the
present time.
The ores comprise almost every variety, as yellow ore or pyrites, blue and
green carbonates, muriates, grey and black sulphides, oxides, bell-metal and
peacock ores, and native copper, or malleable. The percentage, also, varies much,
from 66 downwards.
All the ores raised are now reduced to fine copper before shipment : 595
tons were shipped in 1861. The expenditure during the year being £48,300 ; the
greater portion of which is circulated on the spot for wages, fuel, &c. ; £8,713 was
paid for fuel for the smelting works ; timber being alone used.
Wallaroo Mines.— The most prolific mines yet opened are not more than six
miles from Wallaroo Bay, from which they took their name, and the character of
the country rendered cartage peculiarly light and easy. How far inland over the
surface of Yorke’s Peninsula the valuable lodes run is still uncertain ; but even if
all the 27,000 acres of mineral claims, which cover so large a space on our land-
office maps, were to prove available, the greatest distance of land carriage to which
the ore would be exposed would be about fifteen miles—the average width of the
entire peninsula not exceeding twice that distance
At the various workings of the Wallaroo mines, the total quantity of ore
raised up to the 31st January, 1861, was 1 1,370 tons—of which 5,370 have been
shipped to Melbourne and Sydney ; about 6,000 tons remaining at the mines and
at the Wallaroo Smelting Works. These works at present include ten reducing
lurnaces and three refineries; and ten extra reducing furnaces are in process
of erection. The ores have averaged from 15 to 25 per cent, in richness.
Altogether there are about 400 men directly employed at these workings ;
besides which there are about ninety men employed by the same proprietary


at their smelting works at Wallaroo, which are not, however, as yet in full
operation. The average wages of miners at these mines are from 455. to 60s.
per week. Ordinary laborers earn 355. per week. Two steam-engines, of a united
power of about 180 horses, are already employed here, and three more, of a united
power of 195 horses, have been ordered in addition
The works of the Cornwall Mining Company are the next of importance.
Arrangements have just been completed to erect ore-reducing works at the New
Cornwall Mines. At these works, the ore will be treated by a process recently
patented by Mr. R. V. Rodda. The ore is converted into metallic copper before
dressing. Specimens illustrating the process have been forwarded to the Inter-
national Exhibition.
The workings of the Duryea Mining Company are situated about three miles
to the southward of Kadina, and a considerable expenditure has already taken
place upon the ground.
The company commenced work at Wallaroo, and at 18 feet below the sur
face, found green carbonate of copper. At 21 feet below surface, drives were made
in various directions, in each copper was cut, all dipping down. At about 25 feet,
water was cut.
Another shaft (.the Duryea) was then commenced, and at 10 fathoms 3 feet,
a fine course of mundic with black quartz was cut, and underlying a fine lode of
black ore was cut, 7 feet to 8 feet 6 inches thick, dipping down to the south.
Specimens of this ore were assayed, and found to contain 64 per cent, of copper.
The water making very freely, a fine high-pressure horizontal engine was erected,
and an engine-shaft has been sunk to the depth of 15 fathoms. At 12 fathoms, a
drive was made from the Duryea shaft to the engine-shaft, in which two winzes
have been sunk, one 9 fathoms and the other 4 fathoms. From these winzes, rich
black ore has been raised, yielding from 52 to per cent, of copper. Specimens
of all these ores are exhibited.
Several mines have been opened “in the far north ’’--that is, in the tract
of country north of Port Augusta; but though several of them are of high promise,
want of capital, and the difficulty of getting the ore down to the shipping-place,
till better means of transit are supplied, have caused the suspension of almost all
mining operations in that direction, with the exception of those carried on by the
Great Northern Mining Company , who exhibit.
This company is composed of an English proprietary, whose property
consist of eleven mineral leases, about 290 miles to the north of Port Augusta.
The management is by a London board of directors, with a committee of manage-
ment in Adelaide. The subscribed capital is £160,000, of which £BO,OOO are paid
up. The working operations .of the company in the colony commenced in June,
1860, and have been prosecuted with considerable vigour and success. The
operations have hitherto been carried on without the aid of machinery ; but it is
now found requisite to erect a steam-engine, whims, and ore-crushers, which it is
calculated will be completed in May, and tend greatly to increase the produce of
the mines.
The committee have shipped to England 600 tons of ore, and have now in
course of shipment 90 to 100 tons. The character of the ores hitherto sent away


has been that of the usual carbonates and grey ores, giving a high produce, say
from 27 to 30, and some as high as 40 per cent.
Near Strathalbyn, several mines producing copper and lead were opened
many years since, and considerable returns made from them. More recently, the
Wheal Ellen Mine, in the same locality, producing lead, silver, copper, with gold
in the gossans, has commenced. Carbonate of lead, galena, and a pig of lead,
produced by the smelting works on the mine, are exhibited.
The following are the characteristic specimens from these mines Bed
oxide of copper. Green carbonate of copper. Blue carbonate of copper. Red
oxide and carbonate combined. Red oxide and blue carbonate. Strata in which
the minerals occur. Native copper. Malachite and red oxide of copper. Fibrous
malachite. Cabinet specimens of these are arranged in the glass case in great
numbers. The specimens of malachite, and of purple carbonate of copper, are very
remarkable natural productions.
Beyond these, the galena and carbonate of lead show the importance of this
mineral colony.
Vegetable Products.
Wheat.— For some time after the foundation of the colony, it was gravely
alleged by many people that the country was altogether unadapted to the growth
of wheat. At the Great Exhibition of 1851, South Australia took the prize for
having grown the finest wheat in the world, and thousands of acres are now an-
nually devoted to the production of this grain. The contest between New South
Wales and South Australia on the present occasion was a keen and close one, but
was won by the latter colony ; the respective weights being, New South Wales,
68 lbs. South Australia, 68 lbs. 1 oz„ to the bushel. The South Australian wheats
are generally admitted to he beautiful samples, they carried of five prize medals,
and one was given for flour. Mr. Dougald Campbell has made an analysis of an
average of twelve samples of wheat and of eight samples of South Australian flour,
shown in the International Exhibition. The average weight of wheat was 65|- lbs.
The percentage of flour was 83*5, and of bran 16 5. From containing only this
small quantity of bran, it is a necessary conclusion that this wheat will yield a
higher percentage of the finer flours, when ground and dressed in the usual manner,
than wheats having a higher percentage of bran. The moisture or water in the
wheat when dried at 212° Fahr. is only 12*57 per cent., whereas in wheat of this
country it varies according to season and other causes from about 15 to 20 per cent.
The dry matter, in which are included the nitrogen and ash, is 87*43 percent.
The nitrogen in the wheat when, deprived of moisture amounts to 2*oB per cent.,
and in its ordinary state, to I*9l per cent. This represents in the one case 12*96
percent., and in the other 11*28 per cent, of gluten and albumen. The South
Australian has therefore much the advantage over the English wheats, but in
some points more than others. Oats and barley also received honorable mention.
Wine. —As the eldest colony, New South Wales took the lead in vine-
growing, and produced samples which have been brought into comparison with
first-class wines in Europe, and have stood the test of that ordeal. Adelaide,
following in the wake of the elder colony, has imported thence the varieties of
grapes there found suited to the Australian climates, as well as the best kinds


grown in Spain. The greatest obstacles which the South Australian vine-growers
have had to contend with, in extending their vineyards, has been the abstraction
of nearly all the available labor in the colony by the gold diggings in Victoria and
New South Wales.
In the cellars of the best vine-growers, may be tasted samples equal to any
wines of their class to be found in any part of the world.
We may particularly instance a pure Riesling wine, made by Mr. Joseph
Gilbert, at Pensev Yale, and a red wine resembling Burgundy, the produce of the
same vineyard, of which he has, we believe, samples from every vintage since
1852 ; also a pure Riesling wine, and an Espanoir and a Muscatel, made by Mr.
Henry Evans at Evandale ; a Shiraz and Donzelino, a superior claret, and an
excellent Yerdeilho, made by Mr. Patrick Auld at the Auldana vineyard ; and a
particular delicate fragrant, and grateful wine, something between port and
sauterne, made by Mr. Picton at the Clarendon vineyard. Mr. Waterhouse at
Highescombe, on an elevated site among the hills near the sources of the Torrens,
makes a red wine resembling Burgundy, which has a high reputation in the
colony. Samples of the above-named wines, as well as many others, are shown in
the International Exhibition.
South Australia carried off four medals for wines, against seven given to
New South Wales, and one to Western Australia.
The capabilities of the colony are further shown by Muscatel raisins,
almonds, dried apricots, jams, biscuits, and a small collection of native woods.
There are some stuffed birds, insects, and other objects of natural history. South
Australia is a large wool-producing colony, as there are about 8,000,000 head of
sheep pastured there, but there are only six or eight exhibitors. The most impor-
tant samples are fleeces sent by Messrs. W. Peacock and Sons and Mr. J. Burnett.
Mr. J. F. Haigh exhibits fleeces of Angora and Alpaca wool, from animals
reared by him in the colony.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Number of Exhibitors, 68.
Situation in Building.— The Western Australian collection will be found to the
North-west of the Eastern Dome, and between those of New Zealand and
Natal.
The Colony of Western Australia, as defined by Her Majesty’s Commission, includes all that
portion of New Holland situated to the westward of 129° E. longitude; its greatest length is, therefore,
1,280 miles from north to south, and 800 miles from east to west. The City of Perth is situated in
latitude 32° south.
The mineral productions of the colony claim our first attention. The
specimens of copper and lead ore from Wanerenooka, Wheal Fortune, Wheal Arrino,
and Geraldine mines appear to prove the existence of an important mining district.
Wanerenooka copper-mine has already furnished upwards of 1,450 tons of
copper-ore, which has realised nearly £20,000.
The last sales of ore were at Swansea in April last, and realised an average
of £22 per ton for ore of 22 per cent.


The country is well adapted for mining speculations. It is well watered, and
there is sufficient firing to last for many years. There is an abundance of clay fit
for bricks. Limestone in the vicinity of the company’s property is also procurable.
Wheal Fortune Copper Mine.— The names of the mines in our colonies are
not unfrequently derived from familiar mines in this country. Hence it is that
we find corruptions repeated at the Antipodes which have unfortunately been
admitted at home.
Wheal is a very common prefix to the names of Cornish mines. In old
Cornish, Huel signified a pit or a mine. This became confounded with the Anglo-
Saxon Weal, for wealth or well-doing, and hence eventually the word wheal now
used ; so that in the above name we have the indication of its being a mine at the
beginning, and most improperly repeated at the end. It is a curious fact that in
many of the non-metalliferous districts of this country, the term wheal has led
people to suppose it meant a mine worked with a wheel.
The above mine was first opened in the beginning of the year 1859, the
grant of land on which it is situated in the Victoria district originally belonging to
five shareholders, who subscribed a capital of £1,500 for the purchase of the land,
and to ascertain its mineral worth, —both lead and copper ores being supposed to
exist in large quantities.
The quantity of ore sold in England from this mine up to the present time
has been 550 tons of copper and 160 tons of lead ore ; the net proceeds of which, as
shown by the accounts rendered, have amounted to £9,195, after paying freight,
insurance, commission, and other expenses.
Wheal Arrino is situated on the Upper Irwin, about forty miles from a
shipping port at the mouth of the Irwin River. It was discovered in the year 1860,
and purchased by the present proprietors. The appearances of this mine give
great indications of its being a very extensive deposit of rich ore. The specimen
sent is from the surface, and it is said to be traced without breaking the ground
600 feet long, and 8 feet wide, and the lode is visible for several miles. The cftlonial
authorities inform us the country is rich and grassy, and abounds with fine timber,
well adapted for all mining purposes.
Geraldine lead and copper mines are situated on a bend of the Murchison River,
Western Australia. These mines are, in a direct' line, about thirty-six miles from
their shipping port—Port Gregory. The lead mines only have been worked to
any extent ; the copper only sufficiently so to prove that good ore exists in several
parts of the property. The lead lode, called the Champion lode, has been traced
and opened on upwards of 300 fathoms, and small winzes sunk on the lode at
various parts, out of which large quantities of ore have been taken, varying in
richness from 70 to 86 per cent, of pure lead. One or two small shipments of the
ore have been sent to England on trial ; the last one of 64 tons averaged per
cent, of pure lead, and sold for £l3 per ton for the lead alone. With these few
exceptions, the ore has been roughly smelted on the spot, and disposed of in the
Singapore and Batavia markets to the Chinese, who buy it in the pig for rolling
thin for lining tea-chests. The prices have varied from £25 to 32 per ton ; and
the lead always commands a preference in the market on account of its extreme
ductility.


Iron ores have been contributed to this collection from Albany and Bunbury,
these partaking of the same character as the black metallic sand of Taranaki.
Magnetic iron ore is sent from Cotes on the Northam Road, about thirty miles
east of Perth. The Royal Engineer Department of Freemantle send a bar of iron,
reduced from magnetic iron ore, found on the Northam Road. This bar was
proved in conjunction with one of iron of commerce, and with one of Swedish—
both the latter being reduced from flat iron in order to assimilate them. The
result was a deflexion of about five to eight in favour of the Western Australian iron.
The—so-called—porcelain clay should rather be named potter’s clay. It
may however prove to be the clay of decomposed granite, though its appearance
is rather that of clay slate. The crucible exhibited as made from it seems to be of
good quality.
Wilgi is sent by the Central Committee from Perth. They say of it—wilgi,
an ochrish clay, which, when burned in the fire, turns to a bright brick-dust colour.
With this, either in a dry powdered state, or saturated with grease, the Aborigines,
both men and woman, are fond of rubbing themselves over. In fact, no native
considers himself properly attired unless well clothed with grease and wilgi. It is
supposed to be a valuable pigment.
Amongst the rocks an asbestiform variety is sent; of this the exhibitor
writes : —I send you, for exhibition purposes, specimens of a curious formation of
rock in which asbestos forms an ingredient. The principal part of the rock looks
like steatite. It is so soft, that it may be cut into any shape with an axe ; but soft
as it is, it seems to undergo as little change from the weather as granite or whin-
stone. This may prove to be a very useful discovery.
This colony has not made so good a display of vegetable and animal pro-
ducts as it might have done. Some collections of furs and dressed skins, feathers
and feather ornaments, shells, work and chess-tables of inlaid native woods, a pretty
cabinet, native weapons, barks and fibres, are shown. The bark of the tea-tree, a
species of Melaleuca, easily reducible to pulp, is recommended as a paper material.
Although cotton is not shown, a Western Australian Cotton Company, with a large
capital, has been formed in London.
Mr. J. G. Carr exhibits gum and resins from the manna-tree, a species of
acacia, and from the Xanthorrhcea australis, Mr. Barton from the red-gum tree
{Eucalyptus resimfera), and Mr. J. Drummond from the root and leaves of the
“ Boro Blackboy ” {Xanthorrhcea Drummondii), which grows from 20 to 30 feet
high, and produces more resin than any of the other species From its tenacity, it
is used by the natives in making their hatchets, hammers, &c., and in fixing the
glass to their spears. A pocket of native hops, Erythrcea australis, is also worth
notice, and we must not omit to mention an excellent prepared seaweed, the
Eucheuma speciosa, rewarded with a medal, which is said to make an excellent
jelly. There are other edible articles of colonial produce in emu eggs, reported to
be excellent food ; olive oil, preserved fruits, meat and fish, including kangaroo
tail, mullet, whiting, salmon, schnapper, &c.
Woods.— The principal timber trees of this colony are of the Eucalyptus or
myrtle family. Those chiefly valuable for ship-building purposes are known by
the native names of the jarrah and tooart.


Of these woods it was stated, a few years ago, by Admiral Sir James
Stirling, before a Committee of the House of Commons, that there is sufficient in
the colony of Western Australia to build at least twenty British navies.
None of the other Australian colonies possesses timber of similar character
to the jarrah (Eucalyptus rostrata), or endowed with equally valuable properties.
The jarrah is remarkable for its enduring qualities, for its resistance to
decay—setting at defiance time, weather, water, the white ant, and the sea-worm.
One of the pieces of wood exhibited (No. 20) is a pile from a jetty in the sea at
Freeman tie, where it remained during a period of twenty-nine years. The lower
portion w r as under water, exposed to the attacks of the sea-worm, which in those
seas destroys every other kind of wood in a very short time ; the middle was
between wind and water, submerged or exposed with every change of tide ; the
upper portion was always exposed to the action of the weather, to the intense sun
of summer, and the long-continued rains of winter.
Another piece of the same species of wood (No. 39) has been buried under-
ground for thirty-one years untouched by the white ant, which in a few months
destroys every other kind of wood so circumstanced. For this valuable quality,
the jarrah is now much sought after for railway sleepers in the other Australian
colonies and in India.
The jarrah, when better known, will doubtless be found available in the
ports and dockyards of the United Kingdom for piles, dock-gates, and other
purposes, for which kyanised woods have been found inefficient. It is also
admirably adapted for keel-pieces, kelsons, and other heavy parts of ship-
building.
The tooart, an analogous wood to the blue-gum, which grows in the southern
parts of the colony in vast forests and to an enormous size, are equally valuable
for many purposes of ship-building. The grain of each is remarkably close ; the
wood is as hard as box, and it has been found capable of enduring, without splitting
or rending, a great amount of heat ; it is not only well adapted for capstans, wind-
lasses, &c., but also for engine-rooms arid other parts of steam-ships exposed to the
action of .fire.
Both the tooart and jarrah were used to a small extent in the construction
of H.M.S. “Hannibal,” and the former wood especially met with high encomiums
from the Surveyors of the Admiralty. The colonists, however, to whom both
woods are familiar, are inclined to give the highest praise to the jarrah, which is
useful for so many purposes.
Vessels of considerable burthen have been built almost entirely of this wood,
the peculiar properties of which render copper sheathing unnecessary.
The sandalwood of Western Australia has long formed a valuable article of
export to Singapore and China.
A tree of the Eucalyptus species, and of the size of an apple tree, is called
by the colonists raspberry jam (specimen No. 30), from the similary of its scent to
that preserve. It is a handsome wood, well fitted for cabinet purposes.
The easuarina, or shea-oak, is used for axe-handles, the spokes and felloes
of wheels, and other purposes of husbandry.


Ihe white-gum is employed for similar purposes. This and other woods of
a like texture are used tor tram lines whenever they are required for temporary
purposes.
The only other hard wood of the colony here represented is the morrel, a
species of Eucalyptus with a rough bark, which, on account of its elasticity, is
found useful for light shafts.
Wines. —The cultivation of the vine has for some years engaged the atten-
tion of a small portion of the colonists of Western Australia.
The rapid growth of the plant in all parts of the colony, irrespective of
soil and the luxurious and bountiful produce of fruit, has proved that so far as
quantity and ..quality of grapes are concerned, the colony stands second to no part
of the world.
In regard to the quality of wine that has hitherto been produced, it is
somewhat difficult to speak in high terms of praise. It must be remembered that
till within the past five years the manufacture of wine has been carried on more in
the shape of an experiment than as a matter of export.
Those persons who have succeeded in producing a liquid of a palatable
nature have realized a price bordering on that paid for imported wines, and have
consequently increased their vineyards to a considerable extent, and are making
from four to five thousand gallons annually, for which they are enabled to secure a
ready and remunerative price. At the same time, others who have not been so
successful have mixed spirits to a considerable extent with their wines, with a view
to its sale among the lower classes ; but, in general, the wines so treated have not
been improved by the admixture.
That Western Australia can and will produce rvines of a very superior
quality, there is little doubt . its climate and soil are in every way suited to the
culture of the vine, for which care and attention are alone required. The art of
manufacturing good wine, suitable for an export trade, and such as will rather
improve than deteriorate by a sea voyage, is one that time and experience can
alone teach.
It is hoped that many months will not elapse before some German vigtierons
are introduced. This has been tried in South Australia with great effect and
success, and the quality of the wine there produced has been such as to create a
large demand for the article.
The vine may be considered in full bearing the third year from its planting,
and will produce from three to twelve hundred gallons ot wine per acre, varying
according to the soil and description of wine.
Wool. — The first sheep introduced into Western Australia came with the
early settlers from England, and were kept on the banks of the Swan until the
discovery of the York district. Among them were several Saxony rams, the wool
of which was exceedingly fine, but was found to get short and not well adapted to
the climate.
The commencement of sheep-keeping in Western Australia, on any scale,
must he dated from the opening of the York district in 1832, when Messrs. Bland
and Trimmer drove a flock to the district, where they were found to thrive remark-
ably well. The sheep were chiefly of the Merino breed, the wool was fine in quality,
B 2


and appeared rather to improve, but from the want of pure-bred rams the flocks
became intermixed with those imported from the neighboring colonies, being a
mixed breed not so fine as the Merino, but somewhat longer in staple, but not
commanding so good a price as the original Merino breed. The size of the carcase
of the Merino was also thought too small when fresh meat was at a high price, and
it was therefore considered an object to combine weight of carcase with the
production of wool. With this object some very fine Cotswold rams of great size
were imported, but only two succeeded in reaching the York district : from these
numbers were bred; but the wool become coarse and hairy, and they were found
anything but desirable to breed from for wool. A number of Southdown ewes were
imported, but were not found to do well—either the climate or the grasses did not
suit them ; they became plethoric, would not breed well, and subsequently died, and
have become extinct. Subsequently an entirely new breed was imported by Mr.
Lander, known as Lord Western’s breed, being a number of crosses between the
Merino and Leicester. These sheep appeared to be suited both to the climate and
the circumstances of the colony, as they combine pureness of quality with length of
staple and large carcase. The wool of this description has always commanded good
prices, while the meat is free from the coarseness of the large kinds of sheep in
general. Many improvements in the weight of the fleece and length of staple have
from time to time been imported. Some splendid rams of this description were
imported a few years ago by Mr. G. Shenton, and sold at upwards of £3O per head ;
and more recently some exceedingly fine rams of the Romney Marsh breed have
occupied much attention.
It would appear that the climate of Western Australia is very favorable to
the growth of wool ; its tendency being rather to become of finer texture and
more soft. This probably arises from the amount of animal soap generated during
the summer months.
As far as experience goes, it would seem that the long-staple wool, combined
with fineness, is the description which is most likely to command a good price ; but
in an article which varies so much according to the demand at the time, it is
impossible to place any certain value on any particular description of wool.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Number of Exhibitors, 470.
Situation in Building —Under the stairs of the North Gallery, near the East
Dome and Nave.
The eastern part of Australia was discovered by Cook in his first voyage in
1770. The bold character of the coast, and the broken outline of inland mountain,
seen from the deck of the Endeavour, recalled to his recollection the well-known
features of South Wales, and suggested the somewhat infelicitous, but now familiar,
name of New South Wales.
The mineral collection from this colony is of much interest. A case of gold
specimens is exhibited by Lady Cooper ; and the Royal Mint of Sydney sends


forty-eight samples of gold characteristic of the gold fields of this colony. Also a
series of the various deposits met with in search for gold. There are many speci-
mens of auriferous quartz of varied qualities. The production of gold has been as
follows :
Gold. —ln 1851, the colony exported gold to the value of £468,336, in 1852
to the value of £2,660,946, in 1853 to the value of £1,781,172. In the five following
years (1854 to 1858), owing to the superior richness of the Victorian discoveries,
the gold mining languished in New South Wales, the average not exceeding £600,000
per annum. Ip 1859 the yield increased to £1,698,078, and in 1860 to £1,876,049.
In ten years the colony exported £3,281,000 ounces troy, representing a value of
£ 11,683,857 sterling.
In 1861 the exports were as follows :
Gold in Baks exported prom New South Wales.
Ounces. £
British Colonies ------ 14,683 58,076
Suez and Aden - - - - - - 22,848 91,812
Totals - - - 37,531 149,888
Gold in Dust.
Ounces. £
United Kingdom 37 134
Victoria ------- 120 350
Other British Colonies - 17,291 64,085
Suez and Aden - - 371 1,484
Totals - - - 17,819 66,053
Gold in Specie, the Value alone given
United Kingdom ------- 241,043
Victoria - -- -- -- -- 809,640
New Zealand - -- -- -- - 1,000
Other British Colonies - - - - - 38,100
United States - -- -- -- - 150
Suez and Aden ------- - 397,200
Other Foreign Countries ------ 1,700
Totals - - - - 4,488,833
Coals. —The limits of the great coal-field of New South Wales are at present
imperfectly known ; it is found to extend into Queensland, and to reappear in
Tasmania, but it has not been practically opened out in either of these colonies.
The mines now in operation are situate at or in the neighborhood of Newcastle, at
the mouth of the Hunter, 60 miles north of Sydney, and at Bellambi, 40 miles to
the south of that city. The total produce of coal in the last ten years has been
1,780,000 tons, of which more than one half has been shipped to India, China, and
the neighboring colonies.
The present appliances of the collieries in work are equal to the production
and shipment of 20,000 tons weekly, and the average price for good screened coal
at Newcastle is 12s. to 14s per ton.


Mr. W. Keene, the Government inspector of coal-fields, contributes a good
map and sections, with examples of the super and sub-carboniferous rocks ; and
the coal measures presenting eleven different seams for working, all of which are,
more or less, worked at various levels—from 450 feet below to 1500 feet above
the sea.
The first, second, and third seams are worked in the Illawarra district, at
Mount Keira, Bellambi, and Bulli ; the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and
eighth seams are worked at Newcastle and Wallsend, and at Minmi and Tomago,
on the Hunter River ; the ninth, tenth, and eleventh at East and West Maitland.
The Australian Agricultural Company frequently ship 500 tons a day, and
can readily supply a larger demand. The Wallsend Colliery sends coal to the
wharf at the rate of 500 tons or more daily. The Minnie Colliery Company raise
about 300 tons a day. The Tornago Company supply from 100 to 150 tons daily.
The coal brought down from the mountain side varies from 100 to 200 daily.
The total produce of coal in the last ten years has been 1,780,000 tons.
Lon. —lron is exhibited from the Fitzroy Iron Mine, where it lies in a com-
pact mass, and extends to a considerable depth. As visible on the surface, it covers
an area of about 16 acres. At a distance of one mile and a half from the iron, there
have been found four seams of coal, in a sinking of 100 feet, one being 4 feet in
thickness. There are in the immediate vicinity beds of excellent fire-clay, several
feet in depth, from which the best class of fire-brick, and most enduring crucibles,
have been made. The ore of this mine is not an iron-stone, such as is ordinarily
met with in mines of iron, but an iron ore, combined with the oxide of several other
metals, as nickel, rhodium, manganese. One feature of these ores is particularly
striking. They are readily reduced to the metallic state ; the earthy matter with
which they are combined forming a slag without the addition of a flux.
The magnetic iron ore, exhibited by the Australian Agricultural Company, is
from their estate, 4 miles south-west of Stroud, about 24 miles from the harbor of
Port Stephens, and 10 miles from the head of the navigation on the Karuah River.
The vein which has been laid open is 5,000 feet in length, 20 feet in width, and 2
feet 3 inches in thickness, with an easy inclination to the sides of the hill. The
following are the results of a rough analysis of the ore, performed at the Sydney
Branch of the Royal Mint, 1856 :
Metallic iron
-
-
-
- 55‘5 per cent.
Silica -
-
-
-
- 16-4 „
Alumina and lime -
-
-
-
7-8 „
Oxygen-
' -
-
-
- 21-0 „
Copper. —Copper ores are exhibited from the Ophir Copper Mine, in the
county of Bathurst, from the Old Oakey Creek Copper Mine, now known as the
Cadiangullong Mine, from the Carangara Copper Mine, the Carcoar Mine, and from
the Molong and Canobolas Copper Mines.
The specimens of lead and silver ore sent for exhibition are very small ; one
is from Manar, near Goulburn, another from Burrow a, and a third from Johbins’
mine near Yass. Mrs. Gordon describes her specimens as taken from a shaft sunk


at Manar upon the banks of Reedy Creek, which is a continuation of the Maloon
Creek joining the Long Swamp, and ultimately running into the Shoalhaven River
at Tarbert. The shaft has been sunk to a depth of 80 feet. Veins or lodes can be
traced for a considerable distance on both sides of the creek.
Marbles, building-stones, and clays are also exhibited.
This colony makes a very complete display. Here manufactures and, to a
considerable extent, the fine arts are represented, in addition to an admirable
selection illustrative of the natural produce of the country. That many branches
of manufacture are very creditably carried on is evident from the contents of this
Court, and especially so in the excellent woollen fabrics which are exhibited.
There were at the end of 1860 not less than 938 mills and factories at work, and
these comprised the manufacture of steam-engines, hardware, cloth and tweeds,
leather, soap, candles, refined sugar, and pottery. Of the value of this colony to
the mother country some idea may be formed from the fact that since the last
Exhibition it has purchased goods from this country to the value of thirty-three
millions, and has sent us its produce in return to the value of twenty millions.
The most important feature in the court of New South Wales is undoubtedly
that of the wool and woollen cloths made from it. There are seven specimens of
fleece wool washed on sheep’s back, nine of scoured wool, and ten in grease. Beef
and tallow are shown, and there are two jars of tallow from the newly introduced
alpaca ; one of pomade from this animal is exhibited by the Commissioners for the
New South Wales Exhibition. In its pastoral industry, this colony takes the lead
of all the others. In 1860, the colony exported over twelve millions of pounds of
wool, of the value of nearly a million and a quarter. The extent of the pastoral
industry of the five colonies will be seen from the following table :
Colony.
New South Wales -
-
Sheep.
- 6,119,163
Cattle.
2,408,586
Horses.
251,497
Victoria -
-
- 6,794,127
683,534
62.288
Queensland
-
- 3,449,350
432,893
23,505
South Australia
-
- 2,824,811
278,265
49,899
Tasmania
-
- 1,700,930
83,366
21,034
General Totals - - 19,888,381 3,886,641 314,722
For this vast amount of wealth Australia is mainly indebted to Capt.
Macarthur, who, about the close of the last century, introduced into New South
Wales, from the Cape of Good Hope, three rams and five ewes of Spanish merino
blood. A cross with the coarse wool sheep of the colony, was obtained, and the
result exceeded his most sanguine expectations, and he earnestly impressed upon
the Government at home the importance of encouraging the growth of fine wool by
making grants of unoccupied lands to the flockmasters. It is worth while at the
present time to record that, at the period when the merino sheep were first intro-
duced, there were but 1,531 sheep, 227 cattle, and 57 horses in the colony. Captain
Macarthur’s report to Lord Hobart, the then Secretary, concluded with these words,
which attest the foresight and enterprise of one whose name deserves to be held in
honor among Australians :—
“ Captain Macarthur is so convinced of the practicability of supplying the
country with any quantity of fine wool it may require, that he is earnestly solicitous


to prosecute this, as it appears to him, important object; and, on his return to
New South Wales, to devote his whole attention to accelerate its complete attain-
ment. All the risk attendant on the undertaking he will cheerfully bear—he will
require no pecuniary aid—and all the encouragement he humbly solicits is the
protection of Government, and permission to occupy a sufficient tract of unoccupied
land to feed his flocks.”
There are specimens of the wool and of the cloth made of the fleeces of the
alpaca.
A very great attraction in the New South Wales Court is the group of stuffed
alpacas from the flock of Mr. Ledger, introduced into the colony at great labor and
expense. The stuffed specimens represent the pure alpaca and the pure llama, and
the four stages of breeding—the last cross having all the characteristics of the pure
alpaca : these are interesting to naturalists, who have hitherto denied the possi-
bility of the production of the pure alpaca from the crossing of the alpaca and
the llama and also to manufacturers, as showing the animal which produces a
wool that in a few years will doubtless constitute one of the principal sources of
Australian wealth.
The following are the particulars of the animals : No. 1 is a brown and white
pure-bred female llama, aged five years three months ; No. 2, a grey pure male
alpaca, aged two years nine months ; No. 3, a black, cross between similiar animals
to Nos. 1 and 2, age two years nine and a half months ; No. 4, a brown, from dam
similar to No. 3 by sire ditto No. 2, age one year eight months ; No. 5. a brown,
from dam similar to No. 4, by sire ditto to No. 2, age one year three months ; No.
6, a black, from dam similar to No. 5, by sire ditto No. 2, age seven months ; and
No. 7, a lamb, suckling, from dam similar to No. 6, by sire ditto to No. 2, age three
months. It will be observed that the llama is the largest-framed animal, has short
coarse wool, legs, belly, head, and face bare, long neck, with very short wool : ears
large. The pure alpaca has a smaller body ; finer, heavier, and longer staple of
wool ; head and face covered ; short ears ; and this animal was not by any means
a first-class one of its kind, having been selected on account of color ; although pure
bred, he was not such as would be recommended to be bred from. The specimen No.
6 shows a great difference in this stage of cross breeding, the face being more
covered than in the sire. The lamb, which is a suckling, was infirm, and was
killed by Mr. Ledger, more to complete the group than anything else ; yet its fleece
will attract attention from its extreme softness.
Wood. —The timber of the colony is represented by more than three hundred
specimens. Most of these have one side polished to show the grain, the other being
left in a rough state, as sawn or split. Most of the specimens were unfortunately
shipped in an unseasoned, green state, and they show cracks in various parts,
and others are very much warped. Under such circumstances, justice is not done
to the merits of the wood. The cedar attains noble proportions in the colony. It
is extensively used in joiners’ and cabinetwork, is largely exported to the neigh-
boring colonies, and is favorably known in this country. There is a boat made of
this wood shown, and beautiful doors and table tops. The fig-tree also grows to
enormous dimensions ; the largest one that has been actually measured had a girth
of 86 feet. All the varieties of the giant Eucalyptus, or myrtle, are shown—there


are 124 specimens : this wood is admirably adapted for knees and ship timber, for
building purposes, wheelwright’s work, and railway sleepers One of these trees
-was found in full vigour, and with no external symptoms ot decay, 41 feet in girth,
with the bole of immense height. There is one specimen of the white myrtle
description, the largest of which measured 127 feet in girth. The woods from the
northern district are finer than those of the south. The wooded district of the
north occupies both sides of the Clarence River for upwards of sixty miles, and the
number of species of trees and the size to which many of these attain, especially on
the table-land are-extraordinary. Some of the red cedars have been found ten feet
in diameter, and yielding 30,000 feet of saleable wood. Many varieties of the
Myrtacece are shown ; they attain to the lordly height of over 100 feet, and range
from 4to 5 feet in diameter. Instances are cited of this wood remaining perfectly
sound after having been for thirty years worked up as ribs of vessels.
The Araucaria Cunninghamii is a noble tree which grows in the greatest pro-
fusion in all the brush forests on the Richmond ; the timber from the inland or
mountain brushes is preferred to that from the coast. It is exported to Sydney in
large quantities, the sawyers receiving at the present time £2 10s. per thousand
feet. Some trees will yield as much as ten thousand feet of saleable timber. Spars
for ships may be obtained in any quantity, from 80 to 100 feet in length : in some
instances, the tree attains a height of at least 150 feet, and from 4 to 5 feet in
diameter. Here, as in the southern districts, the red cedar thrives in a remarkable
manner. The wood is used very largely for all kinds of purposes ; it is easily
worked, and in dry situations is very durable. A good specimen of this wood is
equal in quality to the best mahogany, to which it is very similar in appearance.
The tree grows to an enormous size on the table-land of the Richmond, from which,
and the adjoining district of the Tweed, the principal supply is now obtained. One
tree, lately cut down at Lismoie, measured 10 feet in diameter at the base, and was
calculated to yield 30,000 feet of saleable timber.
One description of wood, the Pittosporum undulatum, a common tree in the
brushes of Illawarra, has been favorably reported upon by Mr. Delamotte, for its
suitability for wood engraving. For best descriptions of cabinetwork, the speci-
mens No. 73, Stenocarpus sail gnus, beefwood ; No. 85, Acacia sp., swallow; No. 85b,
Acacia sp., silver ; 100 Frenela sp., cypress or pine ; 101, Casuarina suberosa,
beetwood or shingle oak —are well fitted. \ arious articles of furniture, made from
these and other specimens of woods in the southern and northern collection, are
exhibited in this court. There are twenty-one varieties of the Eucalyptus which
are to be tested for strength ; they are—White ironbark, broad-leaved ironbark,
ironbark, narrow-leaved ironbark, box of Illawarra, bastard box, a variety of
gum, blue-gum, &c.
A number of specimens, showing the great durability of this wood, are shown.
Among these there are two posts of the stringybark, placed in the ground in 1815,
forty-six years since, still sound and perfect ; posts of the narrow-leaved ironbaik,
also placed in the ground in 1815, forty-six years ago ; section of post in the ground
since 1821, forty years old ; anda butt of post in the ground since 1823, thirty-eight
years old, each of these being certified and exhibited by Sir William Macarthur.
A piece of timber from the hull of the steamer William the Fourth , certified and


exhibited by Mr. Edye Manning, is shown ; it is one of the variations of the spotted
gum. With the exception of some slight, charring on the mere surface of the
timber in the immediate vicinity of the boilers, the entire fabric of this vessel is as
substantial and sound as when she was built in the year 1830. There are also
turpentine wood, cut down and constantly exposed to atmospheric action for
upwards of twenty-nine years ; black-butt, cut down and exposed to damp for
fifteen years ; mahogany, cut down and used as part of a fence to a vineyard and
paddock for about seventeen years; ironbark, cut down in 1836, and constantly
exposed to atmospheric action till September, 1861, or twenty-five years ; ash, used
as part of a mill, and exposed to all weathers for about fifteen years ; and blood-
wood, which has been under ground twenty years.
In the three articles of wool, gold, and timber, which form the staple products
of the colony, New South Wales makes an admirable display.
New South Wales has nine contributions of very excellent samples of all
varieties of cotton, and has the honor of exhibiting one which has been valued by
the jurors at 4s. per lb. There is also a very good fair Orleans, worth at the present
time 14d. per lb. and this variety is likely to be fairly tried in the colony, and
about 200 acres are to be planted this year.
There may be at present about five acres under cultivation for cotton ; but
if the results are satisfactory, extension will be rapid, as the colonists are quite
aware of the important trade which is now open to universal competition.
(76), From Clarence River ; very good fair Orleans ; worth, per lb., 13d. to 14d.
(77), From Hunter River.
(78) From Hunter River ; very red Sea Island, long and strong.
(79) From Hunter River, latitude 32° S.—Long beautiful Sea Island,
worth 3s,
(81a), Prom Hunter River, latitude 32° S.—Long beautiful Sea Island,
worth 3s.
(81b), Kidney seed, very good cotton, worth 18d.
(81c), Rather high-colored Sea Island, worth 2s. 6d.
(81d), Valued at 4s. ; and it is worthy of note that this sample was grown
about fifty miles inland, which, being so far from the sea, may be taken as a proof
of the suitableness of the climate and soil of New South Wales for Sea Island
cotton.
(83), Very good (green seed) ; fully equal to fair Orleans, 14d. or more.
(83a), Very good Sea Island, worth 3s. to 4s.
VICTOR I A.
Number of Exhibitors, 542.
Situation in Building. —ln the North-eastern Transept near the Dais of the
Eastern Dome, and in a court under the gallery between South Australia and Nova
Scotia.
The district of Port Phillip (subsequently named Victoria, in honor of Her
Majesty) was separated from New South Wales on the first day of July, 1851.


The progress which has been made since that time is somewhat remarkable,
and this colony now advances with singular energy in every department of
industry. The peculiar features of this advance may be studied in the photogra-
phic portraits of the natives exhibited, and in the pictures of Melbourne as it was
and is. The characteristic scenery is faithfully delineated, with much artistic
skill, in the series of paintings in oil and water colors, which are hung in the
Transept. Mr. G. Rowe’s collection has been well described by the Jurors, as
“ faithful and beautiful delineations of the country, workings, and other relations
of the gold fields.”
Mr. Brough Smyth aids in conveying to all a correct idea of the colony in his
topographical delineation of various mining districts, with the lines of gold-bearing
veins and runs. Mr. Alfred Selwyn instructs us on the Geological formations of
the colony, the survey being under his direction : he exhibits a map of the work
already done.
Professor McCoy aids in this work by his collection of fossils, which illus-
trates the order of the sedimentary rocks ; and he exhibits some admirably
engraved plates of fossils. Mr. Daintree has some well selected photographs which
are directed to the same end ; they are strikingly illustrative of Victorian geology.
There are other exhibitors .of the same order. Mr. Davison has a detailed
survey on a large scale of one of the richest gold fields of the colony.
Of the mineral character of Victoria there is not space to speak in this small
work. Of mining, Mr. R. Brough Smyth writes, in his admirable paper on
“ Mining and Statistics of Gold ”
“ Mining in the Colony of Victoria is confined almost exclusively to the
working of, and the extraction of gold from, the auriferous rocks. The extra-
ordinary richness of the gold fields, absorbing nearly all the available labor in the
country, has to a certain extent prevented the exploration of the deposits of tin,
antimony, iron ore, and coal, which are known to exist ; but now that the gold
fever has passed its climax, the attention of capitalists is directed to other mineral
resources, and if in this paper, they occupy but a limited space, and appear unim-
portant, there is yet reason to believe that in a short time they will be largely
developed, and afford employment to a great number of persons.”
To the paper quoted, the interested inquirer is referred.
To gold, especially in connection with this colony, some space must be
devoted.
The quantity of gold exported from Victoria between October Ist, 1851, and
October Ist, 1861, amounted to 26,162,432 ounces troy, equal to 800 tons 17 cwt.
3 qrs. 7 lbs., the value of which is £104,649,728. The pyramid which stands under
the Eastern Dome was designed by Mr. Knight, F.1.8.A., to show the compara-
tively small space which such a quantity of gold would occupy. The measurement
of the figure is only cubic feet, yet the value thereby represented is one-
eighth of the national debt of Great Britain.
Since the pyramid was designed, the gold fields of Victoria have yielded a
further quantity of 35 tons 10 cwt. 2 qrs, 6 lbs., the value of which is £4,642,328
sterling. This is computed to the 19th April, 1862. Since this latter date another
return has been received to the 12th of May, which gives an additional quantity


of 138,003 ounces, value £552,012. Models of the principal “ nuggets,” or lumps
of gold, which have been found in Victoria, are shown in low relief, on the lower
portion of the pyramid. The pyramid is 44 feet 9| inches high, and 10 feet square
at its base.
Silver. —Silver is found in considerable quantities in the quartz reefs at St.
Arnaud and other places.
Tin Ore. —Black sand, containing a large percentage of tin, is abundant in
the Ovens district, Taradale, Strathbogie, &c. Dalgetty and Co. are exhibitors.
Antimony. —Antimony containing gold is found in large quantities at Heath-
cote ; a block ot antimony weighing half a ton stands at the foot of the pyramid.
Iron. —lron ore is plentiful ; thousands of tons of rich ore are lying upon the
surface of the ground at Sandhurst. Specimens of the ore are exhibited in the
department. A remarkable mass of meteoric iron containing nickel is exhibited
by Professor .J. Abel, of Ballarat, on the Dais of the Eastern Dome.
Kaolin. —Fine beds of kaolin are to be met with in various parts of the
colony—a sample block from Bulla is exhibited The clay from this place is now
being maufactured into different articles by a Melbourne company.
There are numerous exhibitors of auriferous washdirt ; and considerable
quantities of quartz have been sent to the Exhibition, which is stamped in the
open court at certain times of the day.
Australian Gold-washing Machinery. —ln the North Open Court of the Eastern
Annex, and the North-eastern Transept, will be found an interesting illustra-
tion of the machinery and implements required, consisting of—
A set of twelve stamp-heads, driven by a small horizontal turbine ; the
stamps have iron shafts. The stamped stuff is carried out through gratings, and
the whole arrangements are such as to allow of working through a large amount
of stuff daily. The slimes are carried over a slightly inclined table, arranged in
steps, which are covered with rough woollen cloths to catch the gold. The tail
slimes pass over into a catch-pit, where a portion of their contents can be collected
for further treatment.
A barrel mounted like those used in the European amalgamation process.
Model of three stamp-heads, in which the cam works in a slot or opening
made in the iron stamper beam.
An iron grinding and amalgamating machine, modified from the Mexican
arrastra. This is a circular trough of cast iron, of a s / shaped section, in which
a number of grinding pieces of iron of a similar shape are dragged round by a
system of rotatory arms.
An hydraulic filter for filtering fluid amalgam, made like the hydrostatic
coffee pots, in which the filter is placed on a cylinder which fits closely into, and is
lowered to, the bottom of the receiving vessel. The filter is formed of buckskin leather.
When the fluid amalgam has been put into the filtering vessel, the latter is hoisted
tip by a small windlass, and the small vacuum produced by the separation of the
two vessels causes the mercury to be driven through the leather by the excess of
the outer pressure.
A eentrifugual separator, with four rotatory conical tables, resembling the
round huddle, which are used with coarse woollen cloth coverings.


Puddling machines for working up auriferous clays.
Cradles, and other simple gold-washing machines.
Diamonds. —The diamond is said to occur in the Ovens district, and the
local newspapers report that thirteen stones have been found near Beechworth.
Machinery is about to be erected for washing the gravels where the stones have
been found. Mr. Crisp (512) is an exhibitor of a diamond and some precious stones.
Topaz, fyc, —The topaz is found in the Ararat district, at Castlemaine,
Beechworth, &c. Fine stones, very suitable for optical purposes, have been
obtained near Pleasant Creek, a tributary of the River Wimmera. Sapphires,
zircons, &c., are found at Castlemaine and other gold fields.
Coal. —The coal-bearing rocks in Victoria occupy an area equal to about
3,000 square miles, or 1,920,000 acres. These rocks occur in Gipps Land, in the
counties of Mornington, Grant, Bourke, and Polwarth, and in the Portland Bay
district. Very few .seams of coal have been discovered ; and respecting those there
is scarcely any information available as to whetiier or not they can be economically
worked. The seams at Cape Patterson vary in thickness from a few inches to 3
feet 9 inches. The Victoria Coal Company have applied to the Government, and
received permission to raise 500 tons of coal ; and if their adventure be pursued, it
will tend to develop that coal-field, and show whether or not the working of such
coal seams can be profitably pursued at present.
Lignite has been'found near Ballarat, and in other parts of the colony, but it
is not worked.
A sample of coal, found at the surface about 10 miles from Geelong, is
exhibited by Mr. Wm. Nixon.
The extent of the collection of products of this fine and productive colony may
be estimated by the enumeration of space which it occupies, compared with its
neighbors of the antipodes. Victoria covers, in four different allotments, 5,665
superficial feet. The others cover the following areas
Feet.
New South Wales
.
- 2,500
South Australia
- 1,800
Queensland
-
- 1,462
West Australia
-
625
Tasmania
-
- 1,600
New Zealand
-
625
Pastoral Industry —The propagation of live-stock, for which the climate and
rich natural pasturage of Victoria offers eminent advantages, was the first colonial
interest which attained great magnitude. The extent of land occupied for grazing
was approximately ascertained in 1856 to amount to 32,326,468 acres. In that
year 1,174 licenses were issued. In 1860, in spite of the quantity of land sold
during the previous four years, the number of squatters’ occupation licenses had
increased to 1,223. The aggregate shipments of wool, tallow, hides, and skins,
have amounted in money value, from 1837 (the foundation of the settlement) to
the end of 1860, to not less than £20,358,306. In 1860, the exports were
24,274,000 lbs. of wool, valued at £2,025,066 ; 788,144 lbs. of tallow valued, at
jE 18,269, and hide and skins to the value of £144,236.


Fruits and Vegetables. — There is a fine collection of coloured gypsum casts of
fruits, vegetables, and edible roots, showing the size to which these attain in the
colony. The demand for fruit and vegetables, and the eminent capabilities of the
soil and climate for bringing such productions to perfection, have had the effect of
causing about 7,300 acres to be laid out as orchards and market-gardens, making
an increase in three years of nearly 2,500 acres, or upwards of a third.
Manufactures.-- The efforts of the people of Victoria have hitherto naturally
been exerted rather to the production of the raw material than in manufacturing
industry ; but the latter has not been altogether neglected, as the returns for 1860
exhibit no less than 474 mills and maufactories of various kinds in active operation.
Of these, those connected with or dependent upon agriculture, numbered 129, and
consisted of 94 mills for grinding and dressing grain, 86 of which were worked by
steam, 7 by water, and 1 by wind, 1 oatmeal manufactory, 3 bread and biscuit
manufactories, 20 agricultural implement manufactories, 7 steam chaff-cutting
machines, and 4 bone-manure manufactories. Those working upon raw materials,
the production of the pastoral interest, numbered 67, and consisted of 28 tanneries,
21 soap and candle manufactories, 15 fellmongers and curriers, 2 woolstaplers and
washers, and 1 woollen flock factory. Works for the manufacture or preparing of
food, the raw material not being the produce of agriculture, and for the manu-
facture of articles of drink, amounted to 77, as under -—1 sugar refinery and
distillery, 2 steam coffee and spice mills, 2 ice manufactories, 38 breweries, 25
ginger-beer and soda-water manufactories, 7 cordial manufactories, and 2 cider
manufactories. The number of works for the making of building materials and for
carrying on plastic manufactures was 127, as follows : —64 saw mills, 8 limekilns,
50 brick-yards, 4 drain-pipe and tile manufactories, and 1 pottery. The machine
manufactories and those for working in brass and iron numbered 33, consisting of
20 iron, brass, and copper foundries, 2 iron rolling factories, 6 millwrights’ and
machinists’, 1 saw-making, 1 wire-working, 1 chain, 1 lead-pipe, and l boiler
manufactory. The following miscellaneous works and manufactories were also
returned : 21 coach-factories, 1 railway-carriage factory, 3 organ and pianoforte-
builders, 6 ship and boat-builders’ yards, 5 gasometers, 2 electro-platers, 2 curled
hair factories, and 1 scale-maker.
Professor Mueller, F.Ii.S., the colonial botanist, thus speaks of the vegetation
of the colony :—“ A stately fan-palm ( Livislonia australis ) raises its lofty, slender
stems to a height of 80 feet, attaining there, for the noble order which it represents,
the most southward extended geographical latitude. Its terminal bud affords the
palm-cabbage, whilst the leaves are much sought as material for the manufacture
of hats.
Vast spaces of the scrub country are ornamented with varied plants of the
utmost gavness, or covered with peculiar species of Eucalypti. The mallee-trees,
which, under the permanent occupation of the land are likely to disappear, but
which are yielding now to the nomadic hunter, by their long horizontal retentive
roots, the means of obtaining water in an otherwise waterless desert, and which
invested at the summer season with the saccharine cup-like coverings of a half-
developed psyllidious insect, furnish, together with the roots of various plants,
the gum of various Acacia and Pittosporum acacioides, the sugary exudations of


Myospurum platycarpum the fruits of Nitraria and Santalum acuminatum (the
Quandong), additional means of subsistence to the aboriginal inhabitants of the soil.
The pyramidical sandaric pine ( Callitris verrucosa ) and the weeping Exocarpus
agreeably interrupt the monotony of the scrub-landscape. The fragrant myall-
wood, yielded in these parts of our colony by Acacia homalophylla, is one of our
mostvalued ornamental timbers. The red-gum tree ( Eucalyptus rostrata ) indicates,
as almost everywhere throughout the country, in long scattered lines, the course of
creeks here subject to exsiccation. Beyond the ordinary means of pastoral culti-
vation, much might be effected for the improvement of these parts of the country.
The distribution of the date, which in some of the arid parts of Egypt, Arabia, and
Persia, forms a considerable share of subsistence for the inhabitants, could perma-
nently be effected. The sugar millet, a plant well calculated to resist the drought,
and furnishing its luxuriant foliage during the hottest season, could readily and
extensively be reared. The carob tree, on which, although originally introduced
from South Europe, many of the South American pasture tenants are to a
certain extent depending as a fodder fruit, could, no doubt, with many perennial
economic grasses and herbs, be naturalized. All the culture plants of Middle
and South Europe may be produced in copiousness and with facility ; and
how far agriculture and horticulture have, in a country comparatively
so young, opened the paths ta permanent prosperity, may be estimated by
reference to the able statistic tables furnished on this occasion by the
Registrar-General of the colony. Although the cultivation of the vine com-
pared to the growth of cereals, has remained hitherto in arrear, it has, never-
theless, been established by indisputable facts, that Victoria is not surpassed by
many countries in the production of superior grapes for wine, which certainly at a
future epoch, will take its place not only for principal home consumption, but also
for commercial export. The growth of the vine in our latitude is one of remarkable
celerity, and the yield of many sorts under experienced management most prolific.
Perhaps an important branch of industry is open for future skill and exertions in the
production of silk ; copious plantations recently formed of the quickly growing
Chinese mulberry tree, testify that many of our colonists are persuaded of the great
importance of encouraging this branch of rural economy.
The timber resources of our colony are almost unbounded, although our
forests are devoid of the larger coniferous trees. Eucalypti, often of colossal size and
of great durability, including vast quantities of the blue-gum tree ( Eucalyptus
ylobulus), will yield in future their timber also for foreign markets, whenever the
ramifications of the railway system shall have brought the interior more widely
into contact with the harbors and coasts.
One species of Eucalyptus, the stringybark tree ( Eucalyptus obliqua or
Eucalyptus fabrorum) affords in its fissile wood vast materials for shingles : this tree,
indeed, constituting in very extensive mountain districts the principal part of the
forests. Hence, it is not improbable that its bark, which is readily seperable, thick
and fibrous, although not tenacious, will not merely continue to supply the roof for
the first rustic dwelling of the settlers, but may eventually he drawn into use for
the manufacture of a coarse paper, although neither this nor other native products
are likely to yield a paper material comparable to the available maize straw.


The principal tree and shrub vegetation being myrtaceous, it may be
anticipated to what an unlimited extent the volatile oil of these plants could be
obtained for technological purposes.
Eucalyptus leaves were for several years employed for making gas to light
one of our country towns. The Eucalyptus furnishes also the Australian Kino
resin in unbounded quantity. The tanners’ bark, principally employed in this
colony, is yielded by various Acacia (A. mollissima, A.dealbata, A. pycantha), and
can be gathered in large quantities.
Under the name of quandong nuts, the seeds of Santalum acuminatum are
strung for bracelets ; and specimens set in gold are shown in the New South Wales
and Queensland collections. The sandalwood is a small tree, peculiar to the
desert tracts, bearing an edible fruit, colonially called native peach. The fruit is
of an agreeable acidulous taste, and usually every alternate year richly produced.
Jam made of it is shown. The kernel of the fruit is edible and oily. Two other
curious native products are the subterraneous fungus, usually called “ native bread”
( Mylitta Australis Berk.), occasionally ploughed up, which, by boiling, is rendered
available for food.
Nardoo Fruit and Flour. —Sporangia of Marsilea quadrifolia , Lin., var., hirsuta,
abundant in many depressed places subject to inundation, especially on the Murray
River and its tributaries. Cakes are prepared from the pounded sporangia by the
natives and it was upon this food that several of the last exploration party into
the interior sustained life for some time.
Woods. —The collection of colonial woods embraces more than one hundred
specimens, duly named and described ; wood specimens in book form, walking-
sticks, gun-stocks, chess-boards, work-tables, frames, paper-knives, myallwood
pipes, and other illustrations of the woods.
The exhibition affords numerous illustrations of the indigenous materials for
various industrial appliances, for the purposes of furniture, and for smaller articles
of turnery, and ornamental workmanship. The admirable adaptations of blackwood
(Acacia melanoxylon ) to light and heavy framing of every description to the
naves and rims of wheels, and to innumerable specimens of cabinetwork of the
highest excellence, are seen to great advantage, and obtained universal commen-
dation. Numerous elegant pieces of ornamental work also displayed the peculiar
beauty and figure, the closeness of grain, and, in some cases, revealed the fragrant
odours of the smaller woods, and showed how well they are deserving of more
extensive notice than they have hitherto received. Many of these lesser timber
trees are comparatively unknown, and difficulties in the want of proper roads and
available means of transport, have prevented the various treasures of the forests
becoming readily accessible to the requirements of the artizans.
Fibres. —In fibrous materials there is little calling for passing notice. There
is an Australian perennial flax shown, which, it appears, is not unfrequent in the
colony.
Essential Oils. —The distilled oils shown seem to open up a field of investi-
gation for the perfumer. There are oils shown from sassafras (Atherosperma
moschata, Etiostemon squameus, Correa spcciosa), from eleven species of Eucalypti,
six specimens of Melaleuca, four species of Mentha, and oil of Piltosporum undulatum.


The leaves for the Eucalyptus oils are in the vastest quantity obtainable through-
out the whole country, although, for the respective kinds, often only in certain
districts. The Australian mint can be gathered in unlimited quantities along most
of the rivers of Victoria. Mentha gracilis, grandijlora, and saturnioides, occur in
many parts of the colony. The flowers from which the Pittosporum oil was obtained-
can hardly be collected remuneratively on the ranges ; but the tree may be
cultivated with great facility, and furnishes a profusion of flowers of an almost
jessamine-like scent, desirable for distillation. On the proportionate yield
of oil from these, its qualities, and the important uses to which they may be applied,
the very interesting report of the local jury, appended to the Victoria Catalogue,
may be consulted.
llesins. —All the Eucalyptus resins, of which there are many shown, are
largely and cheap available : they are, for their astringent properties, employed in
medicine with kino and catechu. The resin of E. viminalis, or the manna tree in
its decomposed state, furnishes a real pigment.
Natural History. —There is a very fine natural history collection, contributed
chiefly by the University of Melbourne. In connection with this subject we quote
the following remarks, by Professor McCoy, Director of the Museum there, and
Professor of Natural History :
“In the class of fishes many species remain yet to he determined. The more
important species used as food are the ‘schnapper’ of colonists ( Pagrus unicolor, )
abundant, and often of great size, with large numbers Of which the market is
regularly supplied, and which is caught and dried in great quantities by the
Chinese fishermen in Hobson’s Bay, and supplied to their countrymen on the
various gold fields. The next most important species, from its being almost equally
abundant at times in the market, and of equally large size and superior flavor, is
the great cod-perch, the ‘Murray cod’ of colonists (the Grystes Peeli of Mitchell,
or Oligorus Macquariensis of modern writers). A very much larger (occasionally
five feet in length), and finer fish for the table, only an occasional visitor, however,
is the ‘ king fish ’ of colonists, which seems completely identical with the great
‘maigre’ of the Mediterranean ( Scicena aquila). Dr. Gunther, the most recent
European writer on Ichthyology, in his general catalogue of Acanthopterygian
Eishes states that the family Scicenidce, to which the fish belongs, has never been
found in Australia. The fishes commonly called ‘ mullet’ ( Dajanus Diemensis ), and
‘ whiting ’ by the colonists, Sillago punctata, are common in the fish shops for the
table, together with three species of ‘ flat-head ’ ( Platycephalus nematophthalmus,
P. tasmanius, and P. Icevigatus ), which are caught abundantly in the Bay
at all times. Another tolerably good table fish is known to the colonists
and is found in the market under the name of ‘ Pike,’ though, like all the
other fishes bearing the names of English species it has little resemblance
and no affinity to the fish of that name in Europe—lt is the JSphyrcena obtu-
sata and S. Novce Hollindice. The so called ‘ herring ’ of the fishermen, is the
Centropristis Georgianus, with which the market is also abundantly supplied.
The ‘ baracoota,’ which visits us regularly, and is in some request for the table, is
certainly the Cape of Good Hope Thyrsites atun. The small ling, the Lota Breviu-
scula, is occasionally procured for food on the coast, but is chiefly remarkable for


the old full grown fish (about a foot long), having, two or three years ago, been
stated by some fishermen to be the young of the great Newfoundland cod ; it was
in vain that I pointed out the generic difference in the number of the fins, &c. ;
and that those supposed young were really adult, ‘practical men ’ carried conviction
so far with them, that the merchants of the town subscribed some hundreds of
pounds, twice, to fit out a vessel to commence a great cod-fishing, on a supposed
cod-bank a few miles out, as a mercantile speculation. The dory ( Zeus faber ) is a
rare visitant, and whether as delicious here as in Europe, I cannot say, A gar-fish
(Hemirhamphus ), a tunny ( Thyunus ), and an eel ( Murcena ), are also commonly used
for food. Amongst useful fishes not good for food may be mentioned the common
European sun-fish ( Orthagoriscus mola ), as not uncommonly caught in the bay, for
its large supply of oil.
“ Of Crustacea few kinds are used for food in Victoria : there are no true
lobsters and no crabs fit for the table ; but a spiny cray-fish, of about the same size
and shape as the English species, is very common at the Heads, and is supplied
abundantly to the market ; it is nearly or quite identical with the H, annulicornis :
the gigantic Murray River cray-fish (the Astacoides serratus') is now sent down
alive in great numbers to the market for the table ; the smaller river cray-fish (the
Astacoides quinquecarinatus') is also often eaten in the country, but is not sent to
market; it forms the chief food of the so called ‘ Murray cod,’ from the stomach of
one of which I took twenty nearly perfect.
TASMANIA.
Number of Exhibitors, 148, who exhibit articles to the number of 668.
Situation in Building. —Centre of North-east Transept.
The Colony of Tasmania occupies a prominent position in the centre of the
North-east Transept, on the northern side of the Dome, and is both strikingly and
appropriately represented by a lofty and not inelegant trophy, formed of indigenous
timbers of the island ; the design and material for the construction of which were
transmitted to England from that distant dependency.
Tasmania, formerly known as Van Diemen’s Land, is a somewhat escutcheon-
shaped island, nearly as large as Ireland, lying about 120 miles south of the south-
eastern corner of the Australian Continent. Its area comprises about 16 millions
of acres, or about 25,000 square miles. It is of 165 miles average length, and 155
miles average breadth, and has 700 miles of coast line, exclusive of small islands
and indentations. The central part of the island consists of a table-land, averaging
at least 3,000 feet above the level of the sea, on which are seven lakes, varying in
size from 2,500 acres to 50,000 acres, and containing an aggregate of nearly 112,000
acres of fresh water.
Coal.— Mr. C. Gould, an enterprising young geologist, who -was educated on
the Geological Survey of the United Kingdom, after having been a student in the


Government School of Mines, has contributed to this Exhibition an interesting
series of coals.
Coal exists in nearly every part of Tasmania. The main portion of the fuel
used in Hobart Town is derived from mines at New Town, in the close vicinity of
the capital, and from Tasman’s Peninsula ; but it is generally believed that coal
beds of far greater value than those, which have been worked principally on account
of their easy accessibility, exist in other parts of the island. The series of
specimens from Mount Nicholas will illustrate the coal bed to which public attention
has recently been most particularly directed.
The same seam crops out near Fingal and at various other parts, but the
main seam is that now illustrated by samples from different portions of it. This
coal bed is estimated to occupy an area of about 14 miles, on the northern side of
the Break-o’-Day plains. Various other portions of the bed are equally accessible,
but although they are mostly bituminous they are inferior in thickness to the
Killymoon seam. Bituminous coal samples are also furnished from the coal bed of
the Douglas river and from Long Point, both on the east coast. The coal from
both these districts is good, and the coal bed from which they are taken is said to
extend over an area of about 15 miles, and the seam at the Douglas river to be above 8
feet thick. At Long Point it is 6 feet 10 inches' thick, very bituminous, and within
an easy distance of the shipping place. Beds in the Mersey river have also been
found. The coal is very bituminous, is used by the coasting steamers and in
Launceston, and has recently been exported to Victoria.
The bituminous coal from Hamilton is said to be very good. It lies about
40 feet deep, in a seam 4 feet 6 inches thick, and has been used, and favorably
reported on, by the Derwent steamers.
The anthracite coal is abundant on the southern side of the island, and speci-
mens are exhibited from New Town, Tasman’s Peninsula, Adventure Bay (Bruni
Island), Three-Hut Point in D’Entrecasteaux Channel. Four collieries are repre-
sented in the specimens from New Town, near Hobart Town. The seam is from
3 feet 6 inches to 4 feet 6 inches thick, is worked by a shaft 25 yards deep, and
within about 100 yards of the water’s edge.
The coal formation on the south side of the island extends round the mouth
of the Huon to S W. Cape, within which range many deposits have been discovered.
Gold. —The small portion of Tasmanian gold exhibited has been collected by
Mr. James Grant, of Fingal, within a few months, from the few diggers who are
surfacing and prospecting about Fingal. More gold from that district is in the
Hobart Town Banks, and might have been purchased for exhibition ; but although,
according to geographical and geological analogies, Tasmania ought to possess the
precious metal in abundance, it has not yet been discovered in paying quantities,
and the portion exhibited will give a fair notion of all the gold hitherto found. To
stimulate exploration, the Colonial Government has just offered a reward of £20,000
for the discovery of a payable gold field. Gold has been found, principally of the
character of that exhibited, in many parts of the island which are widely distant
from each other.
Although in a new colony there may be some advantages in the excitement
arising from the discovery of a paying gold field, the propriety of unsettling the


steadier industry of the people, by the offer of such a reward, is very problematical.
Auriferous quartz is also exhibited.
Gems, fyc. —As showing the geological and mineralogical character of the
locality, Mr. J. Milligan sends to the exhibition topazes, jacinths, beryl, cairngorm,
opal, cornelian, rock-crystal, garnet, schorl, hornstone, and other rocks.
Lead, Copper and Iron. —Galena and copper ore have been found in different
parts of Tasmania, but not hitherto in any considerable quantity. Iron ore abounds
all over the colony. At Ilfracombe, eight miles from the Tamar, there are immense
masses of rich ore, similar to that now exhibited, which jvill, doubtless, some day
prove highly advantageous to the colony, in connection with the vast coal-fields of
the east coast.
At the distance of eight miles from Port Dalrymple (the Tamar), in Van
Diemen’s Land, considerable quantities of iron ore have been discovered on the
surface, which upon analysis in this country, have been found to consist of pure
protoxide of iron (similar to the black iron ore of Sweden) and furnishing a very
pure and malleable metal.
Mr. C. Gould is also a contributor of a very interesting geological collection,
and some maps, illustrating his arduous labors, in the execution of which it was
long feared he had perished. Fortunately, those fears have been dissipated by
his return from the bush. Long may he live in health to pursue his useful
labors.
The ladies of Tasmania have been contributors to the interesting collection
gathered in the Transept of the Exhibition Building.
A reference to the drawings of Mrs. Charles Meredith and Mrs. Allport, the
embroidery of Mrs. Burgess, the bouquets of sea-weed and shell-work of Miss
Collins and of Mrs. Cook, the wax fruit models of Mrs. Luckman, and the
ornamental feather work of Mrs. Crowther, sen., —all on purely Tasmanian
subjects—will amply prove that, whilst cultivating business habits of practical
utility, the fair Tasmanians by no means undervalue those pleasing and elegant
accomplishments which diffuse an atmosphere of cheerfulness around the enjoy-
ments of home, and elevate and purify the graceful amenities of social life.
Woods. —The Tasmanian Court, partitioned off on one side from Nova Scotia,
and on the other from Victoria, and walled in at either end with planks and panels
of highly polished furniture, and cabinet woods of the island, has proved one of the
most attractive and numerously frequented in the building. Though darkened to
some extent by enclosure on all its four sides, and by its ambitious trophy and
gallery overhead, it has gained wall space from the former, and has acquired
additional horizontal area, and an imposing appearance and character, from the
latter. Within the enclosure the tower of the trophy, resting upon a foundation of
solid masonry, passes through a platform of squared logs, heavy planks and ship
timbers, floored over with stringybark boards, and is then seen to rise through the
gallery with a spiral staircase in its centre, and to culminate in a flag-staff and
loyal British ensign, near the highest part of the roof.
The pedestal, a parallelogram of 30 X 20 feet, by 12 to 15 feet in height, has
a framework of timbers of great value for house-building, ship-building, engineering
works, and for general carpentry : the gallery is floored with boards of blue-gum


timber, and the circular staircase, which is formed of the beautifully white wood
of the plain Huon pine, so famed for its durability, is lined with ship’s planks of
great width, consisting of stringybark, and of the white and blue gum. On every
hand, within the pedestal and around its walls are displayed specimens of ship’s
knees and crooks of a gigantic size, and which previous to the application of iron
must have proved invaluable, keel-pieces, heavy planking, railway-sleepers, naves,
felloes and spokes for carriage and waggon wheels, handspikes, axe and pick
handles, staves for casks, shingles for roofing, park paling from 15 feet in length
and 20 inches in width downwards, besides ordinary scantlings of market timber,
and a considerable number of the furniture and cabinet woods of the island,
polished on one side to show their hard, close grain, and rich and varied markings
and venation, of which the following are more especially deserving of notice :
ironwood, Notelcea ligustrina; muskwood, Eurybia argophylla; blackwood, Acacia
melanoxylon; myrtlewood, Fagus Cunninghamii; Huon pine, Dacrydium Franklinii >'
a pre-eminently fine-figured plank of the last- named has recommend itself to the
fine taste and sound judgment of Sir George Beaumont, by whom it has been
secured for artistic purposes. There are also exhibited in this apartment some
creditable examples of basket-work, with a bundle of peeled willows, together with
carpenter’s bench-screws made of sassafras wood, &c. ; and here it may be
remarked that the comparatively soft but close, clear, and even grain of the sassa-
fras timber is said to adapt it singularly well for sounding-boards of pianos, &c.
In the colony it is chiefly employed as flooring-boards, and for the manufacture of
shoe-lasts, &c.
The access to this apartment within the pedestal of the Tasmanian trophy is
by a wide doorway and short flight of steps, on either side of which stard at each
end respectively, a pair of huge oil casks (tun butts) of blackwood, and water casks
of silver wattle, supporting two lower jaws of the sperm whale with the points
upwards and their double row of trenchant teeth towards the spectator. Adjoining
these are samples of sperm oil, black-whale oil, porpoise oil, with casks for bread,
beef, &c., and suspended by davits from the gallery above, are two exquisitely
finished whaling boats, built of Huon pine, with their gear complete. These boats
were designed and executed respectively by Mr. Chandler and Mr. Miller, of
Hobart Town, and in workmanship are models of the craftsman’s art.
The whaling trade, as a branch of Tasmanian industry, yielding to the colony
about £60,000 a year, and training up a race of hardy sailors for her future marine,
has been well and faithfully illustrated.
We understand that one of the whale-boats has been secured by Lord
Willoughby D’Eresby to be used as an adjunct to yachting operations.
There are some elegant and useful articles of furniture exhibited in the
eastern end of the court ; amongst them a handsome wardrobe of Hu on pine, a
davenport of muskwood, a bureau of myrtlewood, an oval table of blackwood,
London made, and a round table of muskwood made in the colony, which has
gained from the jurors an honorable mention.
Along with the woods are shown a few gums and gum resins, a long series of
vegetable fibres well adapted for the manufacture of paper, and a few specimens of
barks used in medicine.


The Wools exhibited in this court, though not so varied and numerous as
might have been expected, represent respectively flocks of 5,000 to 25,000 sheep
and upwards, and for fineness of fibre and character of staple, stand very high in
the estimation of brokers and wool-staplers. The colour and style of getting up of
these wools have been generally admired, and is most creditable to the colony.
Medals have been awarded to nearly all the exhibitors.
There are amongst the cereals which are shown at the same end of the court,
some capital samples of wheat, barley, and oats. The wheat weighs from 65 lbs. to
66 lbs. per bushel, the barley about 54 lbs., and the oats give the astonishing weight
of 51 lbs. 10 oz., as officially determined in the Exhibition Building. But the
weight alone does not sufficiently indicate the valuable qualities of these grains,
for the production of which soil and climate are equally favorable. There are also
exhibited in this Court, filberts, almonds, walnuts, and sundry preserved fruits,
besides a splendid series of models in wax, of apples and pears, an illustration of
the character of the soil and climate of Tasmania, and of the English habits and
pursuits which engage the time and attention of emigrants, and in which they
appear to be so successful in their home in the far South.
Along the walls on each side of the Court, around the balustrade of the
gallery, are hung rich wrappers for carriage and railway use, and for couches, &c.
made of indigenous furs of the Island. And at the western side of the Court are
several cases attractively filled with muff's, boas, collarets, &c , all of which appear
to have found a ready market ; opening out to the hunter in Tasmania a new, if
not an enhanced, prospect of gain.
Mr. Milligan exhibits a very few choice and valuable Tasmanian shells.
There is a large collection of bird skins, shown by Mrs. Crowther, together
with ornamental feather mats, screens, &c.
There are also in the west end of the court, and in the gallery, several hand-
some glazed cases of Huon pine, containing the more rare animals, and a number
of the birds of the island, fairly stuffed and mounted—the animals in rather a
bold style.
There are two cases of remarkably soft and pliable leather made of Kangaroo
and Wallaby skins, with boots and shoes of the same ; some excellent kip leather,
sheepskins variously prepared, &c.
Hung round the walls are stereoscopic views of scenery in the island, taken
by Mr. M. Allport ; and portraits of the Aboriginal inhabitants, taken by the
Bishop of the diocese, who is now in England.
There are a few pieces of exquisitely embroidered work of an original charac-
ter, by Mrs. Burgess, and there is a water-color drawing on ivory, by Mrs. Allport.
But the visitor to this end of the court ought not to leave it without giving
special attention to the long series of delicately finished drawings in water colors*
executed in her usual felicitous and artistic style, by Mrs. Charles Meredith, whose
name is so well known in connection with Tasmania. The subject of her pencil and
brushes on the present occasion is botanical ; and very faithfully and beautifully she
has rendered for our examination and quiet enjoyment here, the fair flowers which
nature has scattered so freely over the picturesque landscape of Tasmania, on the
opposite side of the globe.


It is said that these drawings are intended to embellish a second volume of
“Bush Friends in Tasmania we trust it may soon make its appearance, since it
cannot fail to be worthy the fame of its fair authoress, and to afford gratification
to those who may peruse it.
Near Mrs. Meredith’s paintings, there are some interesting colored sketches
of scenery on the north coast of Tasmania, by Mr. J. Stuttered.
In the gallery will be found, besides the objects enumerated, a few small but
elegant articles of furniture, some unique turnery, specimens of bookbinding, and
some really excellent sea biscuits, &c.
Taken as a whole, the exhibition of products from Tasmania does credit to the
gentlemen to whom their collection and care have been intrusted. Abounding in
magnificent timber, in coal and iron, in wool, oil, and grain, she possesses all the
elements of expansion and of national wealth. Her insular position and fine
harbors, also, must give to her inhabitants a bias to maritime adventure: it requires,
therefore, but little foresight to say that there is reserved for her in the far future,
a numerous population, manufactures, commerce, and naval power. She will
prosper if she always acquits herself as well as she has done on the present occasion.
QUEENSLAND.
Number of Exhibitors.
Situation in Building. —Adjoining New South Wales, near North-east Transept /
hut to the west of Victoria and New South Wales.
The mineral products of Queensland are quite insignificant, being indeed
represented by one ton of copper ore.
Cotton. —Samples of Queensland cotton, from various localities, hundreds of
miles apart, are shown in the present exhibition, conveying the gratifying fact
that Sea Island cotton, of fine texture and quality, can not only be grown in the
neighborhoods of Brisbane, Maryborough, Gladstone, and Kockhampton, but also
upon the elevated table-lands of the colony : one sample, picked from plants grown
in a garden at Camboon, upon the Upper Dawson River; a distance of 200 miles
from the sea-board, rivals in texture that grown upon the coast.
This interesting fact will give the manufacturers of England some idea of the
vastness of the Queensland cotton-field, and show them that there is a colony in
Australia from whence a supply of this staple, equal to any demand, can be fur-
nished, so soon as capital and labor are introduced into it for the purpose.
The specimens of Upland cotton, although few, are remarkably fine, and were
grown on the coast country. They have a Sea-Island gloss, very unlike the coarse,
hairy appearance of the same varieties met with from other parts of the world.
Mr. Thomas Bazley, writing to his Excellency Sir George Bowen, says :
“To illustrate the practical benefit to be derived from the supply of cotton
as well as sheep’s wool from Australia, I have had a few dresses manufactured
from the beautifully fine lace thread, No. 250, which I spun from Queensland


cotton, and this has been blended with fine yarn made from the wool of the sheep
of your colony, and the experiment being most successful, the result is a fabric of
close resemblance in softness and beauty to cashmere.”
There cannot be a doubt that the people of this enterprising colony can and
will send us large supplies of Sea Island cotton.
Judging from the samples exhibited, in the form of a large bale of Sea Island
cotton, and various cases of excellent samples contributed by numerous exhibitors,
it would appear that there must be a large extent of land being put under
cultivation, principally, if not entirely, of the *Sea Island variety. The samples of
Sea Island cotton from the Australian colonies are far superior to cotton of the
same varieties from any other part of the world exhibited.
They most decidedly give a preference in Queensland to the Sea Island, for
whilst there are fifteen exhibitors of that description, there are only two of the New
Orleans variety, which, however, are particularly good samples, so much so that we
would recommend the Queensland people to try both the New Orleans and also
Egyptian, for it is quite possible that the return per acre of those sorts may be even
more profitable than Sea Island.
The commissioner, Mr. Marsh, states that the cost of cultivation is about £9
per acre, and that the land is very well adapted to cotton culture.
The probable export this year will be about 200 bales, and the future
production will entirely depend on the supply of labor. Coolie labor is not allowed,
but Chinese laborers are admitted. The commissioner fears that cotton will not
pay for the cost of land and labor.
Arrowroot. —Some tons of this article were manufactured last year in the
neighborhood of Brisbane and Maryborough. Some of the samples are generally
considered to be equal to the best Bermuda arrowroot ; and the reasonableness of
its price per pound, and its superior quality, justify the conclusion that it may
become an article of considerable export to the neighboring colonies.
Independent of the produce obtained from the root, those tubers which, from
size and imperfection, are not suitable for manufacture, as well as the stalks and
leaves, possess very fattening qualities, and are adapted for feeding pigs and other
domestic animals.
Maize. —The cultivation of maize in Queensland has been more general than
any other crop, the returns from the rich brush land situated upon the river’s bank
being very prolific and remunerating. One great advantage attached to the culti-
vation of this crop is, that the planting extends over a large space of time, say
from the middle of September until the middle of January, the early crop being
pulled before Christmas, and the late sowing about the latter end of May. Maize
grows equally well upon the table-lands as upon the eastern coast, one sample
having been grown about 1,600 feet above the level of the sea.
Sugar. —The remarkably fine sugar-canes exhibited, and rewarded with a
medal, were grown at Cleveland, on the coast, and in the Botanic Gardens in
Brisbane, and are said to be fully equal to any grown in the Mauritius.
The sample of rum exhibited is the first spirit made from the sugar-cane in
Queensland. There can be but little doubt that sugar-growing will form one of
the industrial occupations of the colony in the course of a few years.


Coffee. —The sample of coffee forwarded is the produce of one tree, growing
but a few yards from the banks of the Brisbane river. The commissioners conceive
this sample, although small, to be highly important, since it proves that the soil of
Queensland is adapted to the growth of the coffee -tree, and furnishes an additional
illustration of the capabilities of the colony.
Wool. —Wool forms the principal export of Queensland to the extent of
upwards of 5,000,000 lbs.
The number of sheep in the colony, on April 7th, 1861, amounted to 3,500,000.
Silk, —The samples of silk, although not large in quantity, are of the finest
quality. Only recently have attempts been made to produce this article, and the
success that has been already achieved is highly encouraging. The climate of the
colony is admirably adapted to the growth of the mulberry and other plants
suitable as food for the silkworm ; and there is every inducement to prosecute this
important and highly interesting branch of industry.
Dugong Oil. —This oil is procured from the blubber of the Halicora Dugong,
which is found in great numbers in Moreton Bay, Wide Bay, and other northern
harbors. It is exhibited as a new therapeutic agent, and as a substitute for cod-
liver oil. The distinction between this and the cod-liver oil is that it contains no
iodine, but it possessses all the advantages of the cod-liver oil without its unpleasant
smell. The lean portion of the flesh of the animal is excellent eating, the
Aborigines being excessively fond of it, absolutely gorging themselves with the
food when they are so fortunate as to capture one in their fishing expeditions. The
skin, which is nearly half an inch thick, can be converted into a gelatine or glue.
The bones of the dugong are hard and firm, and take a polish equal to ivory.
Specimens of the animal have been caught in Moreton Bay weighing from five to
six hundredweight ; the fat or blubber yielding from five to seven gallons of oil.
There is a miscellaneous series which possess considerable interest, such as
Aboriginal decorations and weapons. Mrs. Marsh contributes a sachet made of
Queensland woods, brooches of white topaz found at Moreton Bay, and bracelets of
myall. The Natural History of the colony is illustrated by cases of stuffed birds
and beasts. The water mole ( Ornithorinchus ) and the Australian hedgehog are
interesting specimens. There are several photographs of good character, a map of
the colony, and specimens of printing, all showing that the advantages of the
mother country are gradually aiding in the advancement of the colony.
NEW ZEALAND.
Number of Exhibitors Auckland, 78 ; Nelson, 20 ; Otago, 1 ; Wellington, 14.
Situation in Building.— Under North Gallery, fronting Nave, to the west of New
South Wales,
The mineral collection from New Zealand is by no means large. There is an
interesting case of gold specimens from Otago, consisting of 500 ounces of gold ;
some gold from Tarawiti; gold and auriferous quartz from the Waiaw, Coromandel
Harbour, and auriferous sand from Kapanga.


Copper ores are sent by the Great Barrier Company. Coal is exhibited from
Kupa-Kupa, Waikato, and also from the west coast.
We have the following returns of New Zealand gold : —On the 22nd and 28th
of November, and on the 15tli of December last, the escort conveyed respectively,
21,000, 15,000, and 14,000 ozs. The total amount of gold brought down by escort up
to the 20th of December last, is 191,831 ozs., value of about £738,550.
There is but a small display of wools ; kauri-gum is shown, and New Zealand
flax ; photographic views are rather plentiful. Unlike the other Australian colonies,
no special or descriptive catalogue of the collection is published. The beautiful
woods are however well represented ; there are some pretty cabinets and tables of
inlaid woods ; samples of wood cut in the shape of books, are extremely highly
polished to throw up the grain ; and opening with hinges at the back, the interior
shows not only the natural, or unpolished appearance of the wood, but in the
sunken cavities, the bark, the leaves, and in some instances the fruit, flower, or
seed of each specimen.
Besides fleece and other samples of wool, there is cloth made of Nelson wool,
much used, especially for volunteers’ uniforms ; it wears well, and the retail price
is 6s. per yard. Scoured wool, prepared for Nelson cloth manufacture. Hinau
bark (Eleocarpus hinau), used in dying the Nelson cloth, dyes a brown-black
color.
Preparations of New Zealand flax ( Phormium tenax ) for paper manufacture,
and for fibrous manufacture, are shown. Hops, wheat, oats, &c , are included in the
exhibits.
photographic and panoramic views of scenery, and reference and geological
maps should not be overlooked.
New Zealand obtained four medals for wood, one for machine-made buckets,
two for wood-carving, one for wood-turning, and one for a 100-table, besides seven
for rope, flax, and dyeing bark. There are also four medals given for wool, one for
oats, and two for kauri-gums, besides two for collections of ferns.
Messrs. Combes and Daldy, of Auckland, show some excellent strong cotton,
very clean, and worth 13d. to 15d. per lb., collected in the South Sea Islands. Mr.
E, King also sends a sample from the Eejee Islands of very good strong cotton,
fully equal to middling Orleans, at 13d. per lb.
The exhibitors do not give any information respecting the quantities which
could be produced ; there can, however, be no doubt about the qualities being very
good.
There are some interesting views of the boiling springs. These are described
by Mr. Heaphy.
TheTarata Boiling Springs, Rota Mahana, New Zealand , —The Crater Hill is
about 100 feet high, and has broken out on the north-west side. The water descends
by a series of marble-like terraces, formed of the siliceous deposits of the water.
Many of these terraces are hollowed out, and contain pools of a beautifully blue
water, varying in color from an opal blue to the tint given by sulphate of copper,
as seen in the bottles in a druggist’s window. Several of the pools are of a semi-
circular form, and stand like the marble basin of an artificial fountain ; the deposit
forming a boss or rim projecting outwards, and hanging down with stalactites.


The Manuku shrub (Leptospermum scoparium ) grows freely in the midst of the
deposit, and appears to derive a peculiar greenness from the warm moisture of the
air. Enormous volumes of steam of a dull green color hang about the crater, and
envelope the boiling reservoir. From a tepid temperature at the base of the hill,
the water becomes gradually warmer on ascending, and the natives choose the
most agreeable bath, and remain in it for hours at a time. The volume of water,
the masses of steam, and the degree of heat, are very much increased during
continuous easterly winds.
Intermittent geysers, and jets of steam, with noises like those of the workings
of numerous high-pressure steam engines, occur at intervals over the country from
Tongariro volcano to Rotorua, a distance of 70 miles.
From these there are siliceous incrustations exhibited.
Sulphurs are exhibited from White Island crater.
White Island (Whalcari), an active volcano in latitude 37° 30' N., and longi-
tude 177° 12' E., lies off the depth of the Bay of Plenty, 28 miles from the shore.
It is about three miles in circumference, and 860 feet high; the base of the crater
is li miles in circuit, and level with the sea; in the centre is a boiling spring
about 100 yards in circumference, sending volumes of steam full 2,000 feet high in
calm weather ; round the edges of the crater are numerous small geysers, sounding
like so many high-pressure engines, and emitting steam with such velocity, that a
stone thrown into the vortex would immediately be shot into the air.
Here and there are lakes of sulphurous water, dormant; but the whole island
is so heated as to make it dangerous to walk.
The following pages contain the awards and remarks of the jurors
upon the various objects exhibited by the several colonies ; they are
given verbatim :
EXHIBITORS IN CLASS I.
Mining, Quarrying, Metallurgy, and Mineral Products.
Colony.
Number of
Honorable
Total Number of
Exhibitors.
Medals.
Mentions.
Awards.
New South Wales
58
6
3
9
Queensland ...
3
18
14
32
Victoria
106
South Australia
19
4
6
10
Western Australia
18
...
1
1
Tasmania ...
21
4
...
4
New Zealand
33
4
1
5
New South Wales.— A medal was awarded to Mr. A. McLean, the Surveyor-
General, for his new map of the colony, representing the outlines of its gold fields.


Victoria . —Great activity has been shown by the Government of this colony,
in aiding the development of its astonishing mineral resources, by calling into play
the zeal and labor of several skilful explorers and surveyors, whose productions
attest the industry exercised by them within the last ten years.
Medals were awarded by the jury to Mr. Selwyn (93) for the beautiful
geological map, on the scale of two inches to the mile, now completed over a very
large area. Besides the ordinary geological indications, a marvellous amount of
work is shown in the tracing, of the auriferous veins, quaintly termed reefs in the
colony, which, with a general direction nearly north and south, occur in such
numbers, that from fifteen to twenty are commonly shown to exist within the
breadth of a mile.
Mr. Brough Smyth (92), for maps of special mining localities, viz , the
Ballarat and Castlemaine districts, showing the range of the auriferous veins and
runs.
Mr. Kobert Davidson (485), for a large and very detailed survey of the rich
gold field at Ballarat, showing interestingly how different in direction are the
present valleys from the old channels, or gold-bearing “leads.”
Mr. G. Kowe (476), for drawings of the country, which give an admirable
insight into the character of the district, of its workings.
Mr. B. Daintree (268), for photographs which illustrate the nature of the
rocks, the fossils, and the general appearance of the physical features of the colony.
Professor McCoy (486), who has for many years labored with success in his
vocation, for a collection of fossils, which serve to explain and fix the succession of
the sedimentary rocks.
New Zealand. —The various settlements in these interesting islands have
made a remarkable progress within the last few years, notwithstanding the
pressure of certain adverse circumstances ; and in nothing, perhaps, is their
advance more clearly marked than in some of the descriptive maps now exhibited.
Mr. Heaphy, of Auckland, contributes a geological map of the province, with
some interesting drawings of very remarkable hot springs and other volcanic
phenomena, and a general illustrative collection of rocks.
The Provincial Government of Nelson have also sent a collection, principally
of gold and coal, but accompanied by a valuable map, the work of Doctor Hoch-
stetter, the geologist, who sailed in the Austrian frigate Novara, on her exploring
voyage. Medals were awarded to both of these exhibitors.
Tasmania has also constituted a geological survey ; and whilst we shall
afterwards have to refer to collections in which coal and building stones are the
most prominent articles, it may here be stated that a medal was awarded to Mr.
C, Gould, not only for the collection of mineral substances, but especially for the
portions of his geological map now commencing to be constructed.
ll. —Non-Metallic Mineral Substances, Coal excepted.
That the attention of the British colonies has of late been directed to this
class of materials, will be seen from the following list of exhibitors, selected by the
jury as worthy of medals and honorable mention :
South Australia . —Mr. Priest, for slabs of slate (47).


Victoria. —Victoria Kaolin Company (98), the first parties to discover and
work for china-clay in the colony.
J. G. Knight (63), for a series of the building stones of the colony.
New South Wales. —Mr. A. Dawson (288), who has exhibited a series of
a similar kind from his own province.
Mr. W. Patten (285), who has prepared a series of polished marbles of the
country of Argyle.
Under the head of the working of mines, the jurors report as
follows respecting the Australian colonies :
A few mining plans, accompanying specimens of ores, need scarcely to be
noticed as containing anything new or unusual. The Colony of Victoria alone has
sent over a number of objects to represent the great gold-producing industry
which has sprung into existence since our last great Exhibition. Some of these,
of model representations of diggings and small mines, attest the industry of the
constructors, but nothing more. Others are the apparatus employed for washing
and extracting the gold, pug-mills, amalgamators, grinders, and stamps. The
forms are all familiar to those already conversant with mining machinery, and
some of the details of stamp-mills show that the same appliances experimented on
in Europe spring up again at the antipodes.
A medal was awarded by the jury to the Commissioners of the Victorian
Exhibition (236), for showing us, by a full-sized battery of eight heads, the kind
of stamps in action at the Clunes gold mines, where the lifters working in brasses,
mahogany “ coffer,” and wrought-iron cams, are some of the features of slight
difference from our common European stamps.
At the outset of the gold discoveries, it was held by some that grinding as by
edge runners and arrastras, by others that crushing between cast-iron rolls, as
usual with copper and lead ores, would be the best means of triturating the gold-
bearing stone ; but since large quantities have now to be dealt with, the same
results come out as were proved in Europe a hundred years ago, and it is curious
to see a machine brought from the other side of the world so similar to the
hundreds of stamps which discourse their peculiar music in our Cornish tin
districts.
IV. —Coal and other Mineral Fuels.
New South Wales . —After many years of up-hill work on a small scale, the
extensive coal areas of this colony are actively worked at several points, and the
zeal of Mr. W. Keene, the Government examiner of coal fields, well deserved
the medal awarded to his elaborate section and specimens.
To the Australian Agricultural Company a similar honor was awarded, as
the representative of coal mining on a large scale at the Australian Newcastle,
and other places on the Hunter River.
This company, as well as several others, have sent examples of a very well-
looking coal, which, with proper arrangements for the boiler fires, makes a good
steam fuel, and is sold at 13s. to 14s. 6d per ton. The works of several of the com-
panies are so far developed, that they can raise from 100 to 500 tons each per
diem, and have the advantage of being opened at a very trifling distance from the


shipping staiths. Mr. Keene recognises eleven distinct seams, and most of those
now in work are from six to nine feet in thickness.
Victoria. —Levy and Sons (68), prove to us the existence of a dense and
bright coal at Cape Patterson, but have not accompanied their specimens with
explanatory documents.
Tasmania. —Both the Commissioners (194) and Mr. Gould, the geological
surveyor, include specimens of coals among the general collections for which
samples were awarded to them. The samples appear to be of fair quality, but
further details must be obtained from the survey now in progress before an
opinion can be formed of their value on a large scale. Certain of the seams were
discovered long since, and before 1851 small workings had been commenced by the
Douglas River Coal Company, who were in that year exhibitors.
Gold Workings.
New South Wales. —Since the great discovery of gold in May, 1851, it has
transpired that specimens had been picked up by shepherds, built into bridges, and
even collected and brought away twenty years ago by Count Strzelecki, without
general attention having been attracted to the subject. The gold fields, patchy
and irregular, have been vigorously hunted up, and are found generally to overlie
granitic rocks and quartz-bearing schists, whilst but small quantities have
rewarded the exploring of alluvium which overlies serpentine, and green stone, and
the grits of the carboniferous series. In 1851 the colony exported gold to the
value of £461,366 ; in 1853, £1,781,172. Then followed several years in which the
production languished. In 1859 the value of the gold was £1,698,078 ; in 1860,
£1,876,049 ; in the ten years the total quantity was 3,281,000 ozs. troy, repi-esent-
ing the value of £11,683,857. The jury examined, with particular interest, the
collections of the following exhibitors The Royal Mint, Sydney (312-3-4),
samples of the varieties of gold taken from different districts, forty-eight in
number, with the value per ounce after melting, ranging between £2 15s. 6d. for
654 parts of gold in 1000, to £4 3s. 7d. for 984 in 1000. In addition to these are
two cases containing, in regular order, examples of the various materials sunk
through in getting at the gold, from the surface down to the bed-rock, at a number
of different localities. This representation of the succession of the beds, extending
sometimes to fifty or sixty feet deep, is rendered especially interesting by an
account of the proportion of the gold to the washdirt, and the statistics of the
locality.
J. C. Law (420), exhibits a very intelligible model of working stream gold, as
practised at the Sofala Diggings, while Lady Cowper (265) sends a number of well
selected specimens of the native gold of the colony, some of which are more or less
crystalline, and contrast well with the rounded lumps often exhibited for their
mere value.
Victoria.
The marvellous production of this colony is represented on a corresponding
scale. Mr. Knight (63), architect, has directed the construction of the tall pyramid
which represents the volume of the total amount of gold which has been raised in
the colony; and the Victorian Government (97), the Bank of Australasia (3), and


the Colonial Bank of Australasia (4), are overwhelming in their display of many
thousands of pounds worth of washed drift gold, mostly in the scale or spangle form,
with a few of the pebble lumps, and a comparatively very small number of crystals,
generally rhombic-dodecahedrons. With materials of very trifling value in com-
parison, Mr. Burkitt (14) has prepared a very neat and instructive mechanical
analysis of a shovelful of washdirt, or the gold-bearing drift from the Ovens, from
which he has sorted out and shown separately the gold, the tinstone, the zircon,
and the other less valuable sands which go to make up the entire mass which has
to be washed. A full series of such substances, including a number of gems, but
concerning which no exact data are given, is shown by Mr, W. J. Turner (95).
Medals were awarded to all the above, and honorable mentions to the following
five, who, although merely sending a cask or two of very raw material, viz., the
auriferous drift or dirt, in the rough, present by it an indication of works con-
ducted with great perseverance by the sinking of shafts to a depth previously un-
known in stream working, and through beds of basaltic lava. The Great Republic
Mining Company (34), who have sunk 292 feet deep, through two beds of basalt; the
Royal Saxon Company (35), Inkerman Lead, are 300 feet deep, twp beds of basalt
have been passed through ; Prince of Wales Company (36), Cobbler’s Lead,
Ballarat; Nelson Company (37), Sebastopol Hill, 378 feet deep, with four layers
of basalt ; and the Camp Company (44), and Cobbler’s Lead, who are 400 feet deep
through three layers of basalt. No less than 91,887 persons are stated to be
occupied in alluvial workings, aided by 311 engines, with a total power of 4,398
horses. Besides these, 18,339 persons are engaged in the mining of auriferous
veins, with 465 engines of 7,365 aggregate horse-power. The produce of some of
the auriferous lodes, which in such great numbers course nearly with the cleavage
of the schists, is exhibited by four parties, to whom medals were awarded. The
Bank of New South Wales (5), who exhibit very fine specimens of gold in the
matrix ; Clark and Sons (23), show samples from a systematically conducted mine,
the Ajax ; the Clunes Mining Company (30), who sent twenty-five tons from their
extensive workings in the quartzose veins ; and the Black Hill Quartz Mining
Company (17), who have also forwarded a similar large amount as an example of a
veinstone of low produce which they nevertheless work with success. In connec-
tion with this branch of industry, now rapidly acquiring a high degree of impor-
tance, it was thought right to give honorable mention, to the exhibitors of
unusually fine specimens of auriferous veinstone : Messrs. Baillie and Butters (9),
J. Benyon, of Tarnagulla (15), G. Foord (54), and Paul Joske (61), were so awarded,
and to the Bendigo Mining Company (12), honorable mention was awarded for a
carefully made section, representing.the workings on a gold-bearing lode
A medal was presented to the Victorian Commissioners for their erection of
a battery of stamps to illustrate the extraction of gold, as practised at certain mines
of the district. The modification by which these stamps differ from those
employed in Cornwall and on the continent are very slight, and are probably no
improvement. At present, indeed, the minimum value for gold of a stone which
bears the expense of working and stamping is not so low in the best mines of
Australia as in Brazil, and much less so than in Hungary. In the Report of the
Mining Surveyors for 1860, we find the details for Ballarat and five other districts


of the number of tons stamped, the entire produce, and the average produce per
ton for each of the numerous divisions. The total, shows that there were stamped
86,594 tons of vein stuff, and that the average produce was 18 dwts. 22 grs. of gold
per ton. Considering the number of men employed, the entire quantity stamped
in the colony appears but small. It is, in fact, about the same as the total work
of two or three of the Cornish tin mines together, or of the Schemnitz works in
Hungary, and is less than the quantity stamped by the single mine of St. John del
Rey.
New Zealand.
For numerous examples of the gold of the Otago fields, alluvial deposits,
medals were awarded to the Bank of New Zealand (1), and to Mr. M. Holmes (1),
Otago.
South Australia.
The Burra Burra (49), a great mine before 1851, has had rivals springing up
around it, who even exceed it in the magnitude of the rocks of ore under which the
boards of the colonial courts are groaning. Medals were confefred on the company
owning this successful mine, as exhibitors of a series of the cuprites and carbonate
of copper which appear so commonly in that colony, on Ivapunda (08), for similar
ores, from shallow levels which appear to be passing into black oxide and copper
pyrites at thirty and fifty fathoms deep ; and on Wallaroo (53), for great gossany
masses, M'ith some copper pyrites, the produce of new discoveries. But besides
these, and fully as noticeable for their size, were the blocks of gossany ore, of the
Cornwall Mining Company (60), Great Northern (52), and Worthing Company (55);
and a mention was also awarded to Mr. R. Rodda, for novelty in the mode of
treating copper ore.
Victoria.
The Victorian Tin was represented by sundry samples. The jurors report,
that with respect to the Ovens district at one time it was asserted, that any
quantity of tin stone could be raised, but the export has been extremely irregular,
and has only now and then reached 500 to 600 tons per year.
New South Wales.
A number of copper veins have been opened upon in this colony, partly by
mere exploratory work, and partly by regular levels, and many hundreds of tons
of ore have been raised, but they have, nevertheless, for various reasons languished.
At the Canobolas mine, from which specimens are sent by Mr. S. Samuel (272),
and at the Carcoar and Cadiangallong or Oakey Creek mine the lodes run east and
west, at the Carangara and the Ophir mines they are north and south. From the
latter Mr. Christoe exhibits ores and smelted copper, although it would appear that
both mine and smelting furnaces are now idle.
The progress of the colonies in metallurgical operations is evinced among
other things by the samples of lead ores and metallic lead smelted in their respec-
tive districts, by Huel Ellen Mining Company of South Australia, and by Eoley
and Company in Canada, to both of whom medals were awarded.


The adjoined list of awards to colonial exhibitors is extracted from
the list of awards attached to the Report upon Mining, Quarrying,
Metallurgy, and Mineral Products :
MEDALS.
New South Wales. —(3o9), Australian Agricultural Company, for fine speci-
mens of good coal, representing their workings on an extensive scale.
(288), Dawson, A., for a collection illustrating the various building stones
of the colony.
(296 and 316), W. Keene, for his persevering labor in making the collection
of coal, rocks, and fossils, of several localities, illustrated by a map and section.
(420), J. C. Lowe, for hils excellent model, explanatory of the progress of
working stream gold.
(444), McLean (Surveyor General), for his new map of the colony and the
outlines thereon, of its general gold fields,
z (312, 313, and 314), Royal Mint, for admirably arranged and instructive
series of samples of gold and of the beds passed through in the sinking.
In New Zealand, to the Bank of New Zealand, for valuable series of the
varieties of gold from the Otago fields; to C. Heaphy, for his collections, and
Geological Map of Auckland, and his drawings of volcanic rocks and hot springs.
M, Holmes, for his interesting specimens and views of local scenery ; and to
the Nelson Government, for their collection, and the production of the geological
map by Mr. Hochstetter.
South Australia. —The Burra Burra Mining Company, for their fine instruc-
tive series of copper ores.
The Kapunda Mining Company, for an instructive collection of copper ores,
smelting products, and copper.
Wallaroo Mining Company, for specimens of copper ore, representing a new
and important district.
Wheal Ellen Mining Company, for fine specimens of lead ores, and lead
smelted in the colony.
Tasmania. —(l23-177), J. E. Calder, for an instructive series of rocks
building stones, and fossils of the colony.
(194-212), Commissioners of Tasmania, for series of specimens, especially for
those of coal and marble.
(410-436), C. Gould, for collection and his arduous labors in developing the
geological structure of Tasmania.
(509-541), J, Milligan, for his collections, and his merit as a geological
pioneer in Tasmania.
Victoria —£ 3), Bank of Australasia, for extensive and interesting series of
specimens of gold.
(5), Bank of New South Wales, for fine specimens of gold in the matrix.
(17), Black Hill Mining Company, for quartzose stuff of low produce, skill-
fully and successfully worked.
Clunes Mining Company, for auriferous vein stuff illustrating the produce of
their extensive workings.


(14), A. H. Burkitt, for his neat and instructive analysis of auriferous drift.
(23), Clark and Sons, for well selected and fine specimens, illustrating the
produce of a well worked mine.
(4), Colonial Bank of Australasia, for exhibition of different varieties of gold
chiefly in drift.
(236), Commissioners of Victorian Exhibition, for the well mounted stamps
sent by them to illustrate the extraction of gold by stamping and amalgamation.
(268), R. Daintree, for photographs of rocks, fossils, and scenery, illustrative
of Victorian geology.
(485), R. Davidson, for detail survey on a very large scale of one of the richest
goldfields of the colony.
(63), J. G. Knight, for the pyramid instructively representing the total quantity
of gold raised in Victoria, and for the specimens of the building stones of the colony,
illustrated by a treatise.
(486), Professor Fred. McCoy, for collection of fossils, illustrating the order of
the sedimentary rocks, and for good engraved plates of fossils.
(476), G. Rowe, for faithful and beautiful delineation of the country, workings,
and other relations of the gold fields.
(93), A. Selwyn, for the progress of his survey, alike important to the colony
and to all geologists.
(92), Brough Smyth, for the topographical delineation of various mining
districts, with the lines of the gold-bearing veins and runs.
(95), W. J. Turner, for an extensive exhibition of precious stones of the colony*
gold, tin, and other minerals.
(98), Victoria Kaolin Company, for enterprise in the discovery and develop-
ment of the first kaolin found in the colony.
(97), Victoria Government, for the well managed gold statistics of the colony,
and their valuable exhibition of gold specimens.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales. —(26s), Lady Cooper, for exhibition of interesting series of
gold specimens of the colony.
(285), W. Patten, for the collection of polished marbles from the County of
Argyle.
(272), S. Samuel, for his zeal in sending specimens of copper ore and copper.
New Zealand. — (ll), J. Cadman, for an interesting series of the rocks of the
colony.
South Australia. —(60), Cornwall Mining Company, for very large specimens of
gossany copper ore.
(52), Great Northern Mining Company, for a fine specimen of nearly pure
oxide of copper.
(59), Mount Rise Mining Company, for fine specimens of copper ore.
(47), T. Priest, for exhibiting slabs of slate from the quarries of Montara.
(64), R. V. Rodda, for novel experiments in the treatment of copper ores.
(55), Worthing Mining Company, for a collection of copper ores and smelting
products.


Victoria. —(l), Professor J. Abel, for the exhibition of amass of meteoric iron
of great size.
(9), Baillie and Butters, for fine specimens of auriferous veins, and of various
minerals.
(18), Beech worth Local Committee, for illustrative set of specimens.
(12), Bendigo Mining Company, for their instructive section.
(18), J. Benyon, for his rich specimens of auriferous vein stone.
(44), Camp Company, for their zeal displayed in exhibiting samples from their
deep sinkings.
Catherine Reef Mining Company, for zeal in sending a large quantity of
auriferous vein stone.
(54), G. Foord, for the interest of his collections.
(55), G. Gething, for the care bestowed in forwarding interesting crystallized
specimens.
(34), Great Republic Gold Mining Company, for their zeal displayed in ex-
hibiting samples from the deep sinkings.
(61), Paul Joske, for rich specimens of gold in the matrix.
(37), Nelson Gold Mining Company, for their zeal displayed in exhibiting
samples from their deep sinkings. <
Prince of Wales Gold Mining Company, for their zeal displayed in exhibiting
samples from their deep sinkings.
Koyal Saxon Gold Mining Company, for their zeal displayed in exhibitind
samples from their deep sinkings.
Western Australia. —(7), A. Shenton, for a collection of fossils showing the
existence of rocks of secondary age in Western Australia.
CLASS lI.—SECTION A.
Chemical Products and Processes.
In this section a medal was awarded to (124), G. Praagst, Williamstown,
Victoria, for secondary products obtained in the manufacturing of gas from wood ;
and Mr. Holdsworth received honorable mention for samples of pyroxylic spirit.
No prizes were given for manure, as without special analysis the jurors could give
no opinion as to their efficacy.
New South Wales. — (2lo), H. Bell, Sydney, exhibits bone manure.
New Zealand. —(73), Combes, Daldy, and Burtt, guano from the South Sea
Islands.
(74), Burtt, guano.
Section B.—Medical and Pharmaceutical Products and Processes.
Miss March, of Queensland, has honorable mention for Australian manna.
CLASS 111. —SECTION A.
Agricultural Produce.
South Australia sent eleven samples of wheat, one of barley, and eight of
flour, six medals w’tere awarded for wheat and flour, and the whole of the others
were commended. The heaviest wheat weighed 68 lbs. 10 oz., and the barley 56 lbs.
12 oz. per bushel.


Western Australia has ten exhibitors, who chiefly show wheat ; one sample
weighing 70 lbs., and another 66 lbs. per bushel, have received medals ; one of
65 lbs. has been commended.
The wheats from South and West Australia, though extremely good, and
calculated to maintain the reputation acquired by the cultivators in 1851, are
surpassed in excellence by the wheats from Victoria.
Victoria shows the most select collection in the exhibition of the ordinarily
cultivated grains. There are fifty-two exhibitors, chiefly of wheat, but also of
barley, oats, and flour. The heaviest wheat weighs 68| lbs. per bushel, and the
larger proportion from 66 lbs. to 68 lbs. per bushel ; it is not only in the weight,
however, but the general perfection of the grain that is so commendable. The oats
are also very fine, weighing 49 lbs. 4 oz. ; and, although, we may in this country
surpass the quality of the barley exhibited, we do not often equal the weight, viz.,
58 lbs. 5 oz. per bushel. Two barrels of oatmeal are very fine, and altogether this
exhibition has impressed the minds of the jurors with the great agricultural
capabilities of the colony. The Victorian Exhibition Commissioners show a large
collection of colored plaster casts, illustrative of the fruits and vegetables of the
colony, consisting of apples, pears, cherries, plums, strawberries, figs, oranges,
melons, and an assortment of vegetables, for which a medal has been awarded. To
this colony altogether have been awarded twenty-eight medals, and twenty com-
mendations.
New South Wales is represented by twenty-six exhibitors, chiefly of Indian-
corn, wheat, and flour; the heaviest wheat weighing 68 lbs. per bushel. The
samples of wheat grown and exhibited by J. and W. Macarthur are very fine;
some of the Indian-corn and field-beans are excellent. There is also a fine sample
of rye-grass named Italicum, but without the awn, with a fine color and free from
the seeds of weeds. Eour medals and two commendations have been awarded
among the exhibitors.
New Zealand. —The provinces of Auckland and Nelson have sent some
good samples of wheat and oats. There is also a sample of the Californian prairee
grass (Bromus unioloides) grown at Auckland. A medal has been awarded for the
oats from Nelson, and three commendations among the other exhibitors.
Queensland has twelve exhibitors, chiefly of cereals, one of them showing
rice ; a medal has been awarded for a fine sample of maize, and five commendations
amongst the others for excellence of quality.
Tasmania. —Among thirty exhibitors, chiefly of cereals and flour, there is
one fine sample of oats, weighing 51 lbs. 10 ozs. to the bushel, the heaviest in the
exhibition. There are also some fine samples of wheat. Six medals and seven
commendations have been awarded among the exhibitors.
The following is a list of colonial exhibitors in Class 111, Section
A (Agricultural Produce), who obtained medals: —
New South Wales. —(6l), T. Chappel, for excellent wheat.
(58), J. S. Clements, for excellent wheat.
(60), G. E. Loder, for excellent wheat.


(47), J. and W. Macarthur, for excellent maize and wheat.
(54), May and Bourne, for excellent maize.
New Zealand. —(l6), D. Monro, for excellent grain, garden and field seeds.
South Australia (25), Allan Bell, wheat, exceedingly good.
(36), W. Duffield, superior flour.
(23) J. Dunn, wheat and flour exceedingly good.
(38), Harrison Brothers, for excellent quality of flour.
(24) J. Hay, for excellent quality of wheat.
(30), Waddell, for excellent quality of wheat.
Victoria. —(lB), Beech wood Local Committee, for excellent Lammas wheat.
(133), R. Clarke, barrel flour, excellence of quality.
(129), G. Bencraft, oatmeal, excellence of quality.
(521) R. Dyer, for black oats, very good.
(128), John Ford, flour, excellence of quality.
(142), J. Fry, flour, excellence of quality.
(145) T. Grant, for Victorian prize barley, excellence of quality.
(146) Green, for wheat and flour, excellence of quality.
(522) M. D’Arcy, for wheat, excellence of quality.
(526) Hadley and Co., flour, excellence of quality.
(149), T. H. Hadley and Co., flour, excellence of quality.
(527) D. Johnston, wheat, excellence of quality.
(547), Kyneton Agricultural Association, oats and barley, excellence of
quality.
(152), D. Kinnersley, for Victorian prize oats and wheat, excellence of quality.
(529), S. Kitson, wheat, excellence of quality.
(518), McCaskill, for wheat, excellence of quality.
(186), Dr. F. Mueller, for collection of gypsum models of the fruits and
vegetables of the colony. Exceedingly interesting.
(535) A. Patten, wheat, excellence of quality.
(534), A. Patterson, wheat, excellence of quality.
(536) B. C. Porter, wheat, excellence of quality.
(156), S. Ramsden, for flour, bran, and wheat, excellence of quality.
(537) G. H. Simpson, wheat, excellence of quality.
Steam mills, Cornucopia, flour, excellence of quality.
(538) W. Thomson, wheat, excellence of quality.
(540), A. Westlake, wheat, excellence of quality.
(164), J. Wilkie and Co., for Tuscan wheat, excellence of quality.
Western Australia.— (s4), W. P. Clifton, for extraordinary sample of wheat.
(68,) Muir and Sons, for excellent wheat.
Queensland. —Fitzallen, for maize, excellent quality.
Tasmania.— Commissioners for Tasmania, for very interesting collection of
Agricultural Produce.
C. F. Cresswell, for excellent wheat.
G. H. Lindley, for barley of excellent quality.


J. Marshall, for excellence of wheat, barley, and oats.
J. L. Smith, for oats, very superior quality.
G. Wilson, for wheat and oats of excellent quality.
HONORABLE MENTIONS
New South Wales. —(53,) Anderson Campbell and Co., for their samples of
wheat and maize- flour.
New Zealand.— (7s), Mrs. Fox, drawings of New Zealand flora.
(62), Dr, Horne, ferns.
(15), H. Redwood, jun., wheat, goodness of quality.
South Australia. —(32), G. Cant, barley, goodness of quality.
Tasmania. —(4o2), P. H. Gell, for excellent wheat.
(405), J. Gibson, for oats, goodness of quality.
(657), G. Marshall, for wheat, goodness of quality.
(553), E. Noake, for flour, goodness of quality.
(572), R. Ritchie, for oatmeal and groats, goodness of quality.
(581), J. Scott, for flour, goodness of quality.
(658), J. Smith, for wheat, goodness of quality.
(644), J. Wright, for wheat, goodness of quality.
Victoria. —(sls), S. Attwood, wheat, goodness of quality.
(130), Bayles and Co., two bags of wheat, goodness of quality.
(517), R. and J. Buchanan, wheat, for No. 1 goodness of quality,
(516), Benjamin N. Butcher, wheat, goodness of quality.
(520), J. H. Connor, wheat, goodness of quality.
(546), Delany, barley, goodness of quality.
(138), J. Dewar, wheat, goodness of quality.
(136), Rev. J. Docker, wheat, goodness of quality.
(141), J. F. Fallon, wheat, goodness of quality.
(140), J. Finlay, oats, goodness of quality.
(523), J. Forrest, wheat, goodness of quality.
(525), A. and B. Hancock, wheat, goodness of quality.
(543) T. Haynes, white wheat, goodness of quality.
(531) W. McAlpine, wheat, goodness of quality.
(544) Moine Mills, wheat, goodness of quality.
(530), J. Morgan, wheat, goodness of quality.
(532) W. J. Morrison, wheat, goodness of quality.
(160), Sandhurst Local Committee, maize, goodness of quality.
(539), T. Yearing, wheat, goodness of quality.
Western Australia.— (sB), S. S. Parker, for wheat, goodness o quality.
Queensland. —(20), Commissioners for Exhibition, -wheat and barley, as fair
samples.
(34), J. Fleming, for flour, goodness of quality,
(45 and 46), W. Hill, for rice, fair quality.
(43), Hon. L. Hope, for rice, fair quality.


CLASS lII.—SECTION B.
Drysaltery, Grocery, and Preparations of Food as sold for
Consumption.
The Colonial Teas consist of two samples, one from Natal and the other
from Victoria.
Arrowroot and Farinas.— The colonies have contributed a great variety of
starches and arrowroots of excellent quality, among those which may be specially
mentioned are the true arrowroots (maranta arundinacea) from Jamaica and
Queensland, and Canna arrowroot from Queensland, many tons of which were
manufactured last year in the neighbourhood of Brisbane and Maryborough. The
samples of the true white arrowroot from Queensland were equal to the best kinds
of the Bermuda, and medals were awarded to H. and J. Stewart and C. Coxon, of
that colony. A medal was also awarded to Mr. Robertson of New South Wales.
Very good samples of Canna arrowroot were likewise exhibited from Victoria.
This variety of arrowroot is now however of little value in the English market on
account of the abundance of supply.
Sugars. —The exhibition of sugar from New South Wales is confined to that
manufactured by the Australian Sugar Refining Company, from sugar of low
quality imported into the colony. It is well manufactured and deserving of reward.
Preserved Fruits.— Jams and jellies have been furnished in excellent con-
dition by several exhibitors from the colonies of Tasmania, Queensland, and New
South Wales. The pine apple jam, granadilla jelly, and citron marmalade from
Queensland are especially good.
Preserved Meats, Sfc.— ln the British colonies, the number of exhibitors were
few, but the foods exhibited were generally deserving of commendation. They
indicate a desire on the part of the colonists to furnish to the mother country
those articles of diet which were in abundance in their several districts.
Kangaroo hams and steamer, and boiled beef were sent from Tasmania. From
New South Wales there were specimens of salted ox tongues and salted beefs of
good quality. They were cured by James Battley and Henry Bell, of Sydney, and
the beef could be sold in England at less than 4d. per lb. In most cases, the
articles were excellently well preserved, and it would seem that they could be
supplied at a very moderate price. These facts deserve attention, for they show
that we have in our colonies a means of supplying animal food to the English
market in great abundance.
MEDALS.
New South Wales.—( 4o2), Australian Sugar Company, sugar, excellence of
manufacture. .
(229), J. Battley, preserved ox tongues and beef, goodness of quality and
lowness of price.
(205), N orrie, honey, excellence of quality.
(88), W. Robertson, arrowroot, excellence of quality.


Tasmania.— {2l and 26), Mrs. Allport, preserved fruits as jams, excellence of
quality.
(337) C. F. Cresswell, preserved fruits as jams, excellence of quality.
(338) Mrs. S. Crouch, kangaroo steamer, excellence of quality.
Queensland. —(27), C. Coxon, excellence of quality of arrowroot.
(25), H. Stewart, arrowroot, excellence of quality.
(22), J. Stewart, arrowroot, excellence of quality.
Victoria —(137), C. and J. Dennys, dried meats and meat biscuits for expor-
tation, excellence of quality and utility.
(150), J. Johnson, mess-beef, excellence of quality.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales —(227), H. Bell, preserved beef, goodness of quality and
lowness of price.
(400) Biddle Brothers, confectionery, goodness of quality.
(401) W. G. Cates, confectionery, goodness of quality.
(403), Saclier and Josselyn, preserved fruits, goodness of quality.
(180)* Captain W. Thornton, cayenne pepper, goodness of quality.
(177), J. Wright, cayenne pepper, goodness of quality.
New Zealand. —(76), Combes and Daldy, coffee, new production.
Queensland. —Attorney-General, good quality of arrowroot.
South Australia. —(42), J. Campbell, muscatel raisins and almonds, as a new
product of the Colony.
Tasmania— { 39B), A. H. Einlayson, sea biscuits, goodness of quality.
(481), R McCracken, boiled beef, preserved, goodness of quality.
(643), J. J. Wilson, preserved fruits, goodness of quality.
Victoria. —(111), E. Caulfield, olive oils, as a new product from that colony.
(143), Fordham, preserved fruits, goodness of quality.
(144), Green, Rawden, mess-beef, goodness of quality.
(153), W. Lawrence, cheese, goodness of quality.
(200), F. Muller, teas, as a new product from that colony.
Smith and Sons, biscuits, goodness of quality.
(161), R. Stewart, preserved fruits, goodness of quality.
(185), E. Zorne, tomato sauce, goodness of quality.
Western Australia, —(60), J. Hardy, muscatel raisins, as a new product of
the colony.
CLASS lII.—SECTION C.
Wines, Spirits, Beer, and other Drinks, and Tobacco.
The Australian colonies rank next in importance to the Cape in the culti-
vation of the vine ; but, owing to its comparatively recent introduction in these
countries, the yield is yet very small, and quite insufficient for the home supply,
the bulk of the wine used in Australia being still imported from Europe. It is
not likely, therefore, that for some years wine can be an article of much export.
It is, however, interesting to watch the progress of the cultivation, and to observe


the peculiar development of the vine. In this respect, there is, as might be
expected in dealing with an area almost continental, and considering the numerous
varieties of the vine that have been introduced from all parts of Europe, an
infinite variety in the produce. We there find wines of the character of the
German wines, others again more resembling the French wines, whilst some have
the substance and body of the wines of Spain. With care and time, there is every
prospect of these colonies becoming the great wine-growing countries of that part
of the world.
Australia.
Messrs. Clark and Prestwich report as under:—
The wines generally of all the Australian colonies exhibited on this occasion
are of .much promise. They show, in many cases, great care in their preparation,
and are pure and good. To produce, however, the higher classes of wines, time
for the wines to mature, and long experience in the niceties of management, are
indispensable. The red wines, as a rule, were not at all so good as the white.
They require more care in the management. There are, however, exceptions,
which prove that the rule is not absolute. In almost all the samples, there was
an absence of any unpleasant gout de terroir.
South Australia. —Fourteen exhibitors ; twenty-six samples. In character,
some of the wines of this colony closely resemble the Rhenish wines, while others
approximate more to the finer descriptions of white Portugal wines, and the red
wines of the Rhone. A few present more distinctive features, attributable to pecu-
liarities of soil and climate. The following were selected as deserving medals :
(5), J. Gilbert, for white wines, Riesling, 1854 and 1852 ; Verdeilho, 1852.
(8), P. Auld, for Donzelinho, 1860, red; Yerdeilho, 1860, white; Palomino
Blanco, 1859, red.
(15), U. Bandall, for Carbonet, 1860, red ; Shiraz, 1860, red.
(14), G. H. Barnard, for red wine, 1860.
The following were deemed deserving of honorable mention: —
(13), C. Hills, for Yerdeilho, 1858.
(19), B. H. Babbage, ditto, 1859.
W. Green and E. Hector also show some pleasant white wines.
Western Australia. —Four exhibitors; twelve samples. These wines generally
want more care in their preparation. Some rich wines are of good promise. A
medal was awarded to Mr. Thomas Little, of Dardanup (51), for two samples of
light red sweet Frontignac, of 1860 and 1861. Also to the exhibitors of two
samples of good dry, sound red wines, but the bottles were without labels or
numbers.
Victoria. —Nineteen exhibitors; thirty-five samples. The plantations in this
colony are all of recent date. No wine older than 1858 was shown, the bulk of the
samples being of the vintages 1860 and 1861. Such wines necessarily taste to dis-
advantage, and some are on the fret. Nevertheless, as in the other Australian
colonies, they promise well, the white wines showing better than the red. These


latter require more care. That good red wines can, however, be produced, is
evident from the samples of Weber Brothers’ Hermitage, of the vintage 1860.
Medals were awarded to—
(179), Messrs. Mate and Co., for their Reisling and Muscat of 1861.
(183) Messrs Weber Brothers, of Geelong, for their Chasselas and Sweet-
water white wines, and their red Hermitage,
(184) Mr. 11. S. Walsh, of Hawthorn, for his Hock-like white Longfield.
The wines were also commended of—
(181), Mr. M. Passelaigue, both red and white.
(166), The Albury and Murray River Agricultural Society, for the same.
Queensland— One exhibitor; three samples. Wines of M. Lade (57) may be
mentioned as pleasant sound wines, resembling some of the Lisbon wines ; but they
were too sweet for general and common use. One sample of the Surrendon wine
was successful in its pine-apple flavour.
New South Wales. —Twenty-one exhibitors ; sixty-three samples. The wines
in this colony have had the advantage of greater age, and many of them showed
much care in their preparations. The jury were furnished with a well-classified
list, and the samples were submitted in good order.
Medals awarded to —
(118), Messrs. J. and W. Macarthur, of Camden, for a very good show of
white wines, especially noticing Nos. 119, 121, 129, 133, which were pure and ex-
cellent ; also the Muscat, No. 172. The red wines were not so successful, wanting
body and character.
(139), Mr. G. Pile, Amontillado, a very clean well-flavored wine, closely
resembling the Spanish wine.
(149), Mr. H. Lindemann, white Cawarra, an excellent firm wine, of marked
character.
(155), Sir D. Cooper, white Cawarra, a pure, light, pleasant wine; and No.
157, a good white wine of 1858 ; No. 158, a wine resembling old Hock ; and 153 a,
Irrawang, 1856. . . .
(164), Mr. J. M. Sanger, white Auscarol, a good stout wine of original
character ; and 163, called Tokay.
The Jury also commended —
(174), Mr. J. E. Blake, white Kaludah, 1836, a well-flavored, well-made wine.
(140, 141, 142), Mrs: Bettington, good white and red wines.
(156), Mr. A. Windeyer, red Hermitage, a stout good wine ; and 147, a good
light white wine.
Mr. Schubach, for his Malbec, 1861.
(151) Hon. C. Cooper, for his Wivenhoe Madeira.
(152) T. S. Mort, for his white Irrawang.


New South Wales had seven exhibitors of spirits, liqueurs, and made wines, to
whom were awarded three medals. Some of the wines and liqueurs are deserving
of praise, and special mention should be made of the purity of the rum and silent
spirit exhibited by the Australian Sugar Company, Sydney (402), as extremely
good specimens of what may be produced.
Tasmania exhibited a specimen of alcohol and one of liqueur, and Queensland
a specimen of wine, and were awarded medals in each case, as the specimens were
highly creditable and deserving of praise.
The following is the list of colonial awards for wines, spirits, beer,
and other drinks, and tobacco :
Medals were given to the following exhibitors :
New South Wales.— ( 4o2), Australian Sugar Company, rum, silent spirit,
general excellence —clear and very good—very clean and fine.
(181), J. Church, leaf tobacco and negrohead, very fine, well grown and sound
leaf, quality excellent, make good. . -
(155), Sir D. Cooper, white wine, excellence of quality.
(149), H. Lindemann, white wine, excellence of quality.
(118), J. and W. Macarthur, white wine, excellence of quality.
(172), H. M. Farquhar, Muscat wine, excellence of quality.
(182), J. McCormack, leaf tobacco, sound, well grown leaf, quality good.
(188), Peter Miller, raspberry wine (1858), good, and full of character.
(436), .J. D. Monk, vinegar, general excellence.
(139), G. Tile, wine, general excellence.
(164), J. M. Sanger, white wine, general excellence.
Queensland. —(46), W. Hill, leaf tobacco, Turkey kind, well grown, sound and
good.
(57), J. Lade, pine-apple wine, general excellence.
(83), Shozet, leaf tobacco, well developed, sound and good.
South Australia. —(B), P. Auld, red and white wines, general excellence.
(14), G. H. Barnard, red wine (1860), general excellence.
(5), J Gilbert, white wines, general excellence.
(15), D. Randall, red wines (1860), general excellence.
Tasmania.— (2B), Mrs. Allport, Tasminette liqueur, general excellence.
(632), W. G. Weaver, alcohol, clean and very good.
Victoria. —(127), T. Aitken, ale, sound and good.
(422), Crompton, excellent quality of leaf and manufactured tobacco.
(199), Loughman and Co., excellent quality of tobacco in the leaf.
(179), Mate and Co., red wines of 1861, general excellence.
(184), H. S. Walsh, white wines, general excellence.
(183), Weber Brothers, red and white wines, general excellence.
Western Australia.— ( sl), Thomas Little, samples of red wines of 1860 and
1861, general excellence.


HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales. —(l4o, 141), Mrs. Bettington, white and red wine, goodness
of quality.
J. E. Blake, white wine of 1856, goodness of quality.
(189), J. V. Lavers, ginger-wine, goodness of quality.
(447), Sir W. Macarthur, cherry-brandy, goodness of quality.
(176), C. Schubach, wine of 1861, goodness of quality.
(147), A. Windeyer, red wine, goodness of quality.
Queensland. —(57), T. Lade, wines, goodness of quality.
South Australia. —(l9), B. H. Babbage, Verdeilho (1859), goodness of quality.
(6), W. Green, light white wine, goodness of quality.
E. Hector, light white wine, goodness of quality.
(13), C. Hills, Verdeilho (1858), goodness of quality.
Victoria. —(l66), Albury and Murray River Agricultural Society, red and
white wines, goodness of quality.
(181), M. Passelaigue, red and white wines, goodness of quality.
(160), Sandhurst Local Committee, quality of tobacco in the leaf.
CLASS IV.—SECTION A.
Oils, Pat, and Wax, and their Products.
The wax produced in the Colony of Queensland is remarkably hard, well
bleached and brittle, two medals and an honorable mention have been recommended
to the exhibitors.
In this department, honorable mentions have been awarded as under.
New South Wales. —J. Batley, Sydney, for beef and mutton tallow of excellent
quality.
H. Bell, for several samples of neat’s-foot oil, very well made.
William Harbottle, for excellent whale and dugong oils.
Charles Ledger, for alpaca tallow, very white and hard, and of which the
mel ing point is the same as that of mutton tallow.
Queensland. —W. J. Costin, for good dugong oil.
Amongst the products manufactured from fatty bodies, a medal was awarded
to (451), Quelch Brothers, Victoria, for a very fine collection of candles made
from pressed and bleached tallow.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
South Australia. —J. A. Phillips, for a sample of wax perfectly refined.
Victoria.— (424), Downie and Murphy, for a fine collection of candles of pressed
and bleached tallow.
Under the heading of soaps, the jurors report that the British colonies furnish
nothing calling for especial notice. W. H. Burford, South Australia, sends three
samples of yellow soap.


New South Wales. —There are two exhibitors, W. Enevis and W. Kirchner,
who both exhibit yellow soap of good quality.
New Zealand. —From the Province of Auckland there is one exhibitor, J.
Goodfellow, who shows a sample of curd soap (with blotches) of disagreeable
odour, but well manufactured, possibly made with some cheap oil produced in the
colony.
J. B. and J. Holds worth, from the Province of Wellington, contribute a
specimen of well made yellow soap.
Queensland.— R. Douglas sends a sample of brown yellow soap.
Honorable mention was awarded to the Tasmanian Commissioners for wax
models of apples and pears of colonial growth.
CLASS IV.—SECTION B.
Other Animal Substances used in Manufacture.
The number of exhibitors of glue, or of the materials for its preparation,
from the British possessions abroad was very small, and these were chiefly from
the Australian colonies.
In Victoria Messrs. J. Mackmeikan and Co., of Flemington (201), displayed
an extensive assortment of glue, and of the materials from which it is prepared,
viz., hones, skins and hoofs. Although the glue itself could not be regarded as of
the first quality, seeing that it had green tinge, unpleasant smell when melted, and
afforded a good deal of matter soluble in cold water, the entire exhibition was very
praiseworthy and regarded well worthy of a medal. It is probable that in so warm
a climate, except perhaps at limited seasons of the year, it may he found more
profitable to export the raw materials, there obtainable, doubtless, in large quanti-
ties, than to attempt the manufacture of glue from them on the spot.
The only other samples of colonial glue brought under the notice of the jury
were that furnished by W- S. Button, of Tasmania (122), of lair, but still not
prime quality, and by. C. Fitts, from Victoria (428), with respect to which the
same observation will apply. To these exhibitors honorable mention was very
cordially awarded. . . .
Under the head of shells, the jurors report, that in the Tasmanian court also
was a considerable display of beautiful ornaments in the shape of necklaces,
bracelets, &c., made of a small turreted shell, a species of Elenchus, which, when
deprived of its outer covering or epidermis, exhibits a brilliant green nacreous
colour which together with the form of the shell, renders it peculiarly adapted to
the purpose to which it is applied. To this collection a medal was awarded..
Milk Cocoons. —Very few specimens of colonial silk were to be seen in the
exhibition. The jurors state in their report, that there are four samples of the
cocoon of the China silkworm, sent by exhibitors in New South Wales, they were
pointed in form and poor in silk. The worms are fed on the leaves of the black
mulberry, although the white mulberry has been successfully introduced. There
was also one Victorian exhibitor. ,
From New South Wales there are four exhibitors of cocoons of small size of
the China silkworms, pointed in form and poor in silk. The worms were fed


principally upon the black mulberry, although the white mulberry has now been
so successfully introduced. The Colony of Victoria affords one exhibitor.
An inferior kind of sponge was exhibited from New South Wales by Mr. H.
Moss, Shoalhaven (196.)
CLASS XIII.
Wool.
On this important staple the jurors remark —
The wools of New South Wales maintain their high character for the best
clothing properties, but in point of assortment, wash, and soundness of staple com-
bined with strength, they are behind their younger rivals in Victoria.
The samples of wool from Victoria are extremely numerous, and in all
respects admirable. The utmost care appears to have been bestowed on the
classification and the washing of the wools, whose condition otherwise satisfactorily
shows the general good management of the flocks. The wools from Tasmania are
very excellent, but few in number, though sufficient to show the capability of that
colony for the production of very valuable wool.
The new Colony of Queensland produces very good wool; but the specimens
exhibited indicate perhaps more attention to the weight of fleece than to fineness
of quality. It is however right to state that some of the finest specimens from
this colony were, unfortunately, lost on their way to the exhibition.
Alpaca and Angora Wools.
Of these products, Mr. Thomas Clayton reports that the specimens of alpaca
exhibited in the Peru courts were good, and of pure breed. But, with respect to
those grown in Victoria, he regrets that the same cannot be said. The animals,
he observes, require further crossing—perhaps three or four times more—before
the pure wool will be obtained.
The specimens of angora wool, or mohair, the growth of the same colony,
were fair and good. Its increased production in the colony appears to be highly
desirable, seeing that the demand for it is good, and the price about 3s. per lb.,
with a probability of its remaining about the same.
The following is a statement of the number of exhibitors of wool for different
countries:—
Great Britain ...
36
Natal
6
Eva
2
Algeria ... .....
37
France
41
New Caledonia ...
3
Spain
19
Portugal
11
Zollverein
24
31
New South Wales. —(248), Clive,
scoured wool.
New South Wales
28
South Australia...
7
Queensland
11
Tasmania
18
West Australia
... 1
Victoria
76
New Zealand
... 6
Uruguay
... 6
Austria
... 46
s.
ailton and Trail, very fine quality of
MEDALS,
Clive, Hamilton
(240), E. K. Cox, for excellent combing wool
(251), G. H. Cox and A. B. Cox, very fine quality of scoured wool and in grease.


(244), Dangar and Co., for fineness of quality and clothing properties of wool.
(264), Sir S. A. Donaldson, for fineness of quality and good clothing proper-
ties of wool.
(245), Thomas Hayes, for well scoured skin wool.
(264), C. Ledger, for the introduction of alpacas and specimens of their
produce.
(242), Lord and Ramsay, for fineness of quality and good clothing properties
of wool.
(241), Edward Marlay, ram's fleeces in grease, for fine quality.
(238), Riley and Bloomfield, for fineness of quality and good clothing pro-
perties of wool.
(241 a), Sir W. Verner, Bart., fine clothing properties of wool.
New Zealand- (45), Hunter, for Eastwold fleeces of fine quality.
(47), G. Moore, for Leicester fleeces of fine quality.
Bev. G. Morgan, for mixed breed fleeces of fine quality.
(38), Rev. J. Morgan, for excellent quality of wool.
Queensland.—{ B), F. and F. Bigge, for excellent quality and healthy growth of
(48), Hodgson and Watts, for excellent quality and healthy growth of wool.
(63), H. Marsh, M.P., for excellent quality and healthy growth of wool.
South Australia. (71), A. Anderson, for excellent clothing character of wool.
(74) Bowman Brothers, for excellent combing properties of wool.
Colonial Government, excellence of quality of samples of Angora wool.
(75) J. Murray, for excellent quality and size of ram’s fleeces in grease.
Tasmania— (30), Morton Allport, for specimens of shells.
(664), William Archer, for excellence of quality of lamb’s-wool.
(190), G. C. Clark, for excellent quality and wash of wool.
(469), R. Q. Kermode, for excellence of wash and quality of wool.
(663), Malahide Estate, for excellent combining properties of wool.
(590), P. T. Smith, for excellence of wash wool.
Victoria. —(lB7), Acclimatisation Society, excellence of quality of samples of
Angora wool.
(31), John Bell, ram’s fleeces, for breeding qualities.
(38), G. Bon, for length, condition, and general combining properties of wool
(62), brand “ E’s Plains,” for length, condition, and general combing properties
of wool.
(11), G. A. Brown, for length condition and general combing properties of
wool.
(4), T. C. Brooke, for length, condition, and general combing properties of
wool.
(72), S. Corrigan, scoured fleeces, excellence of quality.
(2), J. L. Currie, for length, condition, and general combing properties of
wool.
(47), William Degraves, for length, condition, and general combing properties
of wool.


(46), Dennis Brothers, for length, condition, and general combing properties
of wool.
(66), Elder and Son, for length, condition, and general combing properties of
(20). G. Gill, for excellence of quality, scoured lamb’s-wool.
(26), Charles Gray, for length, condition, and general combining properties of
wool.
(6), T. and S Learmonth, for length, condition, and general combining pro-
perties of wool.
(201), James Macmeikan and Co., glue and exhibition of materials from
which it is prepared (bones, skins, and hoofs).
(57), McLewrwen, excellence of quality of wool.
(29), H. Oddy, for excellence of quality, scoured lamb’s-wool.
(27), J. Parker, excellence of quality of wool.
(35), John Ritchie, excellent combing properties of wool from sheep crossed
with Leicesters.
(50), A. S. Robertson, for length, condition, and general combing properties of
(43), J. W. Rout, for length, condition, and general combing properties of
(64), P. Russell, for length, condition, and general combining properties of
wool.
(16), Robert Simson, for excellence of quality of wools.
(59), W. Skene, for length, condition, and general combining properties of
(71), T. B. (care of Commissioners), scoured fleeces, excellence of quality.
(76), Willis and Swanston, for length, condition, and general combing pro-
perties of wool.
HONORABLE MENTIONS,
New South Wales.— { 2s6), Captain Hamilton, quality of fleeces in grease.
New Zealand.—{Zb), Runciman, for Leicester and Merino cross fleeces.
(12), Taylor and Company, for Merino and Hampshire Down fleeces.
South Australia.— (73), P. Kelly, good quality of fleeces.
Tasmania. —(122), W. S. Button, good quality of glue.
(489), J. McLanachan, for good quality of fleeces.
Victoria. —(33), A. Anderson, goodness of quality of fleeces.
(69), John Bell, goodness of quality of fleeces.
(63), brand “ W. R. Plains,” goodness of quality of fleeces.
(72), S. Corrigan, goodness of quality of fleeces.
(428), C. Fitts, good quality of specimens of glue.
(32), Thos. Russell and Company, goodness of quality of fleeces.
(39), John Ware, goodness of quality of fleeces.


CLASS IV.—SECTION C.
Vegetable Substances used in Manufactures.
Cotton. —The cottons from Queensland have excited more interest than perhaps
any other in the Exhibition : not many samples are shown, but they are of excellent
quality, and are brought forward in a business like manner, which indicates that
the colonists contemplate cotton as a crop rather than as a curiosity of cultivation.
Two samples exhibited, one by W. Cairncross, of Balimba, the other by Mr. Rode,
of Kedron Brook, these were each valued by Mr. Bazley, who acted as “ Expert ”
for the jury, at 3s. 6d. per pound, and another sample shown by Mr. Stewart,
valued at 3s. per pound, were of the fine silky long staple, known as Sea Island—
from the seed of which variety they were raised —a very superior quality. New
Orleans is also shown by Mr. W. Hill, of the Botanic Garden, valued at 3s. 3d.
per pound.
The good marketable character of the Queensland cottons is so apparent,
that it can only be a question of cost in cultivation and transit, the quality is
equal to anything elsewhere produced. Besides the fine Queensland cottons, the
sister colony of New South Wales sends an admirable illustration of its cotton-
producing powers. One sample, equal to the best Sea Island produce, was grown
by Mr. J. B. Nowlan, on the Hunter River, at a distance of more than fifty miles
from the sea. The staple of this sample is extremely fine and long, it was grown
from Sea Island seed. Another of the same kind, but of lower quality, is sent by
the same grower, worth 2s. 6d. per lb. ; and a fine sample worth 3s. per lb., grown
by Mr. J. Ireland, is shown by Mr. G. Vinden ; another worth 3s. 6d. per lb ,
grown up the Hunter River, at Osterley, in lat. 32° S., is of excellent quality.
Two or three good Orleans sorts indicate that that more generally useful staple
could easily be raised in this colony.
Flax— Prom New South Wales, Messrs. J. and W. Macarthur have sent a
well dressed and very good sample of flax (107), prepared from the native plant
(Linum anyustifolium); this was sufficiently good to induce the jury to believe, that
at no distant period, it may become an important product of the colony. The
same species of flax is shown by Mr. Buckhouse, Tasmania (36), of very good
quality ; and also from Queensland we have a sample of excellent flax, well pre-
pared, which we have reason to believe is also from the above species. In Victoria
also, Mr. Murphy exhibits another good specimen of this su-called native flax
(202).
Other Fibres. —Erom Western Australia came only three fibres deserving
notice. The first, a bale of silver-wattle bark, from Wm Padbury, of Perth,
which, seemed to be admirably adapted for the manufacture of paper ; a parcel of
the bark of the “ paper-bark tea-tree,” a species of Melaleuca, also well worth the
notice of paper-makers, from the local committee, Perth ; and a quantity of the
material called “fibrous rush,” from the banks of Swan River, used on the spot
for cordage, but no value commercially.
The miscellaneous fibres of New South Wales present no features of par-
ticular interest, being all prepared from the barks of trees ; they are not likely ever
to compete 1 with the staple fibres of Europe for textile purposes. All of them


however, are equal to the bark of Bronponetia papyrifera , used so largely in India
and China for making paper ; and when the proper method for reducing fibrous
barks to paper pulp is used, these will be in demand. A few fibres are exhibited
from Queensland, those from the banana (Musa texilis) by J Warner and P. W-
Thompson, and New Zealand flax (Phormium tenax), by the Hon. L Hope, are of
good quality for rope-making'; but. the Kurrajong fibre (Hibiscus liliaceus), from
M. Thozet, could only be used for paper. The small collection of prepared fibres
of different plants, by Mr. W. Hill, of the Botanic Gardens, is a good indication
of that experimental spirit so desirable in our colonies.
The woods of several of the British colonies were especially examined by
the vice-chairman of the class, W. W. Saunders, Esq., and Dr. Joseph Hooker.
The following is the report written by the latter gentleman which we give without
alteration, as we are desirous not to impair the value of their remarks :
New Zealand. —There are twelve exhibitors from these colonies —from Nelson
one ; from Auckland ten ; and from Otago one.
The finest collection is that of E Baigent, sen., of Nelson, who sends fifteen
logs, some of them six feet long, including renier, totana, red pine, and a trunk of
fuchsia six feet long and fifteen inches diameter. The totana wood, cut near the
base of the tree, exhibits a beautiful figure.
The Manakan Saw Mill Company of Auckland, send thirteen fine long slabs.
C. Ring, of Auckland, sends a magnificent slab of mottled kauri, of which
the sapwood is actually blackened with fungus spawn and the heartwood un-
touched. This form of kauri, called “ mottled,” is not well known in this country,
and is of the greatest beauty in furniture work.
The Commissioners of New .Zealand send a collection of thirty-nine woods
in the form of boxes, cor taining inside, the leaves, flowers, and bark.
Dr. Richarson, of Otago, contributes a log of ribbonwood, but without
further information as to the tree producing it, its height, duration, and other
qualities.
There is a large collection of small specimens of woods from Wellington,
badly selected and prepared.
Tasmania. —A splendid and most important collection is exhibited, the con-
tribution of twenty-three individuals ; the specimens in general of great size,
well-selected, seasoned, and cut, scientifically named, and accompanied with
manufactured articles showing their application. There is a want, however, of
good catalogues and of information as to the trees in general, their prevalence,
duration, growth, &c. Of the exhibitors, the jury have selected as worthy of
awards—
Jas. Boyd, who, in addition to a splendid series of woods, exhibits a book of
named dried specimens, which however, would have been of far greater value if
they had been taken from plants in flower or fruit,
Also, in the Horticultural Society’s gardens, a magnificent spar of swamp
gum (Eucalyptus viminalis), 230 feet in length, it is cut in lengths of 10 feet.
W. L Crowther, for a very large collection of colonial woods.
The Government of the colony for their trophy of large specimens of wood.


Mr. John Abbott, for park palings of stringybark wood eight inches broad,
and cask staves of wattle wood.
R. Pybus, for specimens of beams of peppermint-gum, which had been in the
ground for thirty-five years.
Similar specimens were exhibited by W. Proctor and F. Cox, that had been
respectively twenty-nine and twenty-five years exposed.
J. McGregor, for well-seasoned ship’s knees and timbers of blue-gum that
had been ten years cut.
, Amongst the woods of Tasmania to which the jury would call special atten-
tion are:—Blue-gum ( Eucalyptus globulus ) and stringy bark (E. giganteus) as the
cheapest and most generally useful woods in the colony, attaining great size
and yielding ship’s knees of any dimension and in any quantity from their branches
and buttresses, as also for the enormous lengths of plank they afford, of which the
exhibited specimens are 80 and 90 feet in length. The stringybark is very durable,
as was shown on pulling down the old court house at Hobart Town, when the
timbers, forty years old, were found to be as sound as when put in. It also splits
well, yielding palings 20 inches broad. Near the base, the wood assumes a beautiful
wary figure, which is admirably adapted for furniture, and is very ornamental.
The blue-gum is in great demand for railway-sleepers, felloes of wheels, &c.
Blackwood (Acacia mclanoxylon) is hardly inferior in value to stringybark
for ship’s knees and lengths of plank.
White-gum (Eucalyptus vuninalis) ranks in these respects with blackwood.
Fagus Cunninghamii —A hard richly coloured furniture wood, the warty
protuberances on whose trunk afford a most beautiful figure, as do slabs which
may be procured 6 feet long in any quantity.
Eurybia argyrophylla (Muskwood)—An excellent wood, works well, may be
had to any quantity and in slabs of 18 to 36 inches diameter, it has a beautiful
figure.
Huon pine ( Dacrydium Franklinii) —This is in every way a wood of the very
highest merit, of gigantic size, easily worked, exquisite colour, and the old timber
so hard that the fallen trees lie in the damp forests for many years without rotting.
The aroma is said to keep off insects. The beautiful marking of the butt, roots,
&c., is peculiar, and quite unrivalled for pale cabinetwork. The wood works well,
and for boat-building cannot be surpassed.
Pittosporum bicoloi —A yellowish white, very hard wood, ot uniform textuie
and colour, once used for clubs by the natives. It turns well and should be tested
for wood-engraving.
Notelcea ligustrina —Heartwood, very hard, and yields a very peculiar figure.
Beyera viscosa (Pinkwood) is remarkable for hardness and uniformity of
colour and grain ; is of a very pale reddish mahogany hue.
Bedfordia salicina (Dogwood)—A hard, pale brown, well mottled wood, good
for furniture.
Atherosperma moschata (Sassafras) said to be peculiarly well adapted lor sound-
ing boards of musical instruments.
Black and silver wattles are both used extensively for casks, and supply
planks of great size and excellent quality.


Two ferns, Dicksonia antarctica and Alsophila Australis are both remarkable
for the very peculiar markings of the wood when divested of the brown matted
rootlets and bases of the leaf stalks. Though not apparently adapted to any
special purpose, they could no doubt be introduced into cabinetwork with great
effect,
Victoria. —A magnificent collection, formed mainly under the
superintendence of Dr. Mueller, colonial botanist, specimens very large,
many 8 feet long slabs, of which there are seventy. Other exhibitors
send superb logs and planks. Many splendid specimens are in an out-
house, there not being room for them in the exhibition. Among the
most remarkable are —
Eucalyptus sideroxylon (Ironbark). —A beautiful wood of fine'rich colour, like
mahogany, with good figure, and takes a fine polish.
Lomatia Frazeri. —A light wood, and very hard, with a beautiful small figure,
works well
Fagus Cunninghamii.—A very fine slab of this tree, which is common in
Tasmania, but very local in Victoria.
Eucalyptus fissilis.— Splits into thinest pales throughout whole length of trunk,
hence supplying laths and palings of the very best description.
Eucalyptus rostrata —A curious hard wood, remarkable for the conical pro-
jections from the sapwood into the bark, and for the inner or older layers of wood
into the next younger or outer layers.
Acacia melanoxylon. —Called both lightwood and blackwood, because the colour
of the wood varies according to situation.
Casuarina cristata. —A very hard open-grained wood of same character as
others of the genus.
Panax Murayi.— Lightest wood in the colony, cuts well, soft inside, becomes
very dense outside as the wood dries, whence the sapwood is often harder than the
heartwood.
Banksia serrata— A purplish mahogany coloured wood of remarkable colour
coarse, open grain, strong, forms a mottled figure in certain sections. Used for
window frames.
Callitris verrucosa, called camphor wood from its smell. Specimen, a splendid
quadrant log, but figure and colour not so good as in New South Wales specimen ;
most dense wood of any Australian conifer, and works easily.
Callitriscupressiformis (Mountain Cypress).—Much the same character and
smell as C. verrucosa , but paler colour, probably the same species and differences due
to locality as with Acacia melanoxylon.
Stenocarpus longifolius. —Small wood, very hard close-grained, with good
mahogany colour and fine figure.
Monotoca elliptica. —Small tree, wood excellent for planes and other carpentry
tools, works well and is indeed superior to English beech for such purposes.
Smith Brothers, Ballarat, send five noble slabs of Ballarat gum tree, 8 feet by 3.
Rev. Dr. Backhaus sends magnificent slabs, 22 and 24 feet long of Euca-
lyptus dealbata and E. sideroxylon.


A small cabinet is exhibited in this court, containing book-formed boxes of
twenty-four Victoria woods, showing all sections, surfaces, and figures of each wood.
New South Wales.—A very beautiful, carefully selected and complete collec-
tion, consisting of partly polished slabs in fine condition, with bark on each edge,
all scientifically named, and accompanied with a very important catalogue of their
history, uses, dimensions, &c. The value of both collections is greatly enhanced
by the exertions of Mr. C. Moore, of the Sydney Botanical Gardens, who has
scientifically named both The collection of Sir W. Macarthur, assisted by Messrs.
Hill and Hanagan, and the Rev. J. Hassall, all from the Southern Districts of the
colony. This consists of 193 slabs, three feet long. A very few cut rather green.
Amongst the most important are the Eucalypti.
Elooded-gum (not of Camden), Eucalyptus, species not given. Remarkable
for durability as a ship timber. Specimen from a steamer built of it in 1831,
which has been plying incessantly ever since, and is as sound throughout as
when built. Ship’s knees are supplied in any quantity and size by the branches.
Stenocarpus salignus (Beefwood or Silky Oak). —A slab of this is of extreme
beauty for the uniformity of the pale red brown mottled colour, with an undulating
figure perfectly uniform, hard texture, easity worked —altogether one of the most
beautiful woods in the whole Exhibition and of the highest merit.
Cryptocarya speciosa. —The wood of this is highly prized for decking ships in
Australia, owing to its resistance of the exposure to sun and wet, but the colour is
bad, and it appears inferior to our Norway plank.
Acacia pendula. —A nice dark wood, very common, well adapted for furniture,
works well.
Duboisia myoporoides (Cork tree, from the bark). —Apparently a good wood
for turning and carving, much of the nature of good poplar ; hardly hard enough
perhaps, for wood-engraving, but worth trying.
Pittosporum undulalum. —Wood small, but excellent for turning, and appa-
rently adapted for wood-engraving.
Eucalyptus (Ironbark of Illawarra).—A most durable wood of indestructible
properties, but too heavy for ordinary purposes, and cross-grained. Posts exhibi-
ted of this have stood exposed in the ground for forty years, and are scarcely
even corroded on the surface in any pait. Also yields excellent knees.
Syncarpia sp. (Turpentine tree). —A heavy, good wood, procurable of any size,
the tree being of the largest dimensions. It is so full of resinous matter that it
wholly resists both damp and white ant. It is the best wood for railway-sleepers,
and posts of it have stood for twenty years.
Eucalyptus (Red Mahogany).-A capital wood, of fair colour and appearance,
useful for most ordinary purposes.
Eucalyptus (Stringybark).—Celebrated for the excellence of the treenails it
yields, which are exported to England in large quantities.
Ceratopetalum opetalum. —Appears to be good wood, is in general use for coach-
building, and is said to be peculiarly well adapted for sounding boards for musical
instruments, stethoscopes, and similar purposes.
Tristania laurina (Water-gum). —A close-grained tough wood, extensively
used for all machinery purposes, and apparently well adapted for the same.


Podocarpus spinulosus (Pine or White Pine).—A close-grained but easily worked
cabinetwood of considerable value, some slabs further display a good figure for
ornamental purposes.
The collection of Mr. Charles Moore, Superintendent of the Government
Botanical Gardens, at Sydney, all from the northern districts, consists of 116
polished slabs, as good as, and similar to the last described, but rather smaller.
Amongst these the jury notice chiefly such woods as are not found in the collection
of the southern districts.
Araucaria Cunninghamii (Cypress pine, or Moreton Bay pine).—This well
known and superb tree requires no detailed notice. It yields spars 80 to 100 feet
long, and one tree has been known to yield 10,0J0 feet of timber. A noble speci-
men is exhibited, which is remarkable for the peculiar figure set up, by a series of
remote small pea-shaped pale clouded knots, arranged in quincunx order, somewhat
like drops of rain in general effect, and not easily described. The sapwood
appears peculiarly liable to rot.
Ficus macrophylla. —A softish wood of a pale brown colour, with a beautiful
wavy figure of a darker brown. It occurs of immense size, the trunks being ten to
fifteen feet in diameter, with immense buttresses.
Evodia erythrococca. —A most delicately coloured and beautiful wood of a
uniform pale colour, very hard and close-grained, \ r ery box-like in appearance, and
is likely to be used in wood-engraving. Bark remarkable for its pungency, like
Cayenne pepper.
Flindersia Greavesii is described as the monarch of the northern forests, and
an invaluable Avood for general purposes.
Synceum glandulosum ? (Rosewood).— Heartwood of extraordinary beauty, of a
richer colour than the finest rosewood, and clouding off into the rich yellow sap-
wood in the most delicate wreaths. The heartwood is not broad, but nothing can
be more beautiful.
Castanos permum Australis.— Much praised as a useful furniture wood, and for
general purposes; of immense size. When cut, if yields a very good figure of pale
brown color.
Cedrela Australis.— Too well known to require any comments. The specimens
are numerous and admirable. A sideboard-top. made of veneers of root pieces, is of
astonishing and perfect beauty, and resembles a rich marble.
Oupania Australis.— Timber not used, but it appears that if properly cut it
would yield an excellent figure for cabinetwork. It is a hard, rough, durable timber.
W. Tuckey, Frenela verrucosa. —Two superb slabs, said to be of this tree, are
in the New South Wales court, cut on the Murray. The figuring, of extraordinary
beauty, closely resembles in all respects that of Octodine Blackliousii in the Queens-
land collection.
Rhus rhodanthum. —Wood yields an excellent yellow die. It is of a brownish
colour, with silky lustre.
A small collection of very indifferent specimens of woods used for ordinary
household purposes, is exhibited by A. Dawson, colonial architect.
A superb ship’s knee of ironbark. weighing 19 cwt., is exhibited by Mr,
Cuthbert.


South Australia. — No woods of any consequence.
J. Mellor—A coach wheel made with spokes, naves, and felloes of eight woods,
all well adapted for such purposes.
Queensland. —Two principal collections exhibited, one by Mr. W. Hill, the
general produce of the colony ; the other by Mr. Thozet, from Rockhampton, a
tropical climate.
All these woods contrast remarkably with Hew South Wales ones, in the
more spongy character of many, and the presence of fungus in very many samples,
thus wholly destroying their value.
Collection of 156 woods of Queensland, exhibited by Walter Hill, director of
the Botanical gardens at Brisbane. This is a very fine collection, and does great
credit to the author, both on account of the number of valuable woods, and the
excellence of the naming. It suffers, as observed above, by many specimens being
dry-rotted.
Araucaria Bidwillii. —This noble tree is now well known; fine specimens are
exhibited, but they are not so cut as to show the figuring described in the accom-
panying report.
Eucalyptus { Black Ironbark).— Apparently a wood of great merit for strength
and durability, very hard, of good colour, but enormously heavy.
Daiosonia Brownii A gigantic tree of free-working lightwood, apparently
brittle and of quick growth.
Octodini BachhousiL—A coniferous wood of remarkable character—for the
great size of the superbly figured slabs that it yields under certain conditions of
growth. In such specimens, the heartwood extends nearly across the bole, having
a narrow white defined sapwood. The colour is a rich brown, with large bold
waves of a darker brown, bold cloudness and nipples and ribands. This is indeed
a superb and very peculiar wood.
Citrus Australis.— An orangewood of the same character as the common
orange, close-grained equal texture, good pale colour, and silky lustre.
Pseudalangium towentosum.— A small tree, with dull yellow brown heartwood,
clouded with a nearly black elegant figure. It is hard and close-grained.
Melaleuca sp.—A small tree, with flaky bark, and wood of extraordinary
hardness and density, polishing like marble. Heartwood of a brown purplish colour.
The Rockhampton collection of 24 small specimens, with dried specimen
accompanying. All are furniture woods; the locality, far within the tropics,
is a new one ; contributed by M. Thozet.
Eremophila Ingnoniflora.-A small tree, with fragrant, elegantly marked wood,
with pretty green and yellowish figure. If yell cut, would produce a good bold
figure.
Eremophila Mitchellii.—A similar wood, but browner figure ; not so decided,
but colour betley.
Mapa. —A small ebony.
Ezora, n. sp.— Wood of a fine rich orange yellow hue, uniform colour, and
beautiful texture.
Bauhinia Hookeri.- Specimen bad, but heart wood apparently good.


Heterodendron diversifolium. —Very hard close-grained wood, lovely dark
rosewood colour, apparently the same as Synceum glandulosum of New South Wales.
Amongst some unnamed specimens of Queensland woods are (18 bis), the
same as (68), a very remarkable wood, of bright orange yellow colour, fine-
grained, and good for parquetry, &c. It is not the Busheckia (68) of Hill’s Brisbane
collection.
A paling of ironbark, exposed 24 years, and absolutely uninjured.
Western Australia. —W. Chifton sends a fine log of myallwood, together with
good specimens of sandalwood and satin wood ; also the naves and spokes of white
gum, and three samples of wood suitable for wheelwright’s use.
The Engineer Department at Freemantle (26) sends two piles of a bridge,
made of jarrahwood, that had been exposed for seventeen years in water and
sand, and of which the morticed ends were wholly untouched by any signs of decay.
Also a noble burrs of the same tree, five feet across, and seven inches thick.
G. Whitfield (33), sends five good planks, 4 feet by 1 foot 6 inches, polished,
of Eucalypti, with specimens of leaves attached.
E. Newman (19) sends a pile of jarrahwood, ten feet long by six thick, that
had formed part of a jetty built in 1832, and was removed in 1861. Neither sap-
wood nor heartwood were injured by the teredo, which had attempted in vain to
bore into it.
A noble log of sandalwood, weighing 454 lbs., sent-by Mr. Carr (20), is one
of the most remarkable specimens seen in this country : it is eight feet long and
one in diameter.
T. Smith (23) sends two fine planks of jarrahwood, nine feet by three, and
two inches thick, and ten others in the Horticultural Society's Garden.
The Central Committee (25) sends a burr of the same wood, five across and
six inches thick. '
Vegetable Exudations.
A collection of Australian gums is shown by A. Phillips, of South Australia,
and another collection is shown by the Local Commissioners of Victoria, and one
from Western Australia, by J. G. C. Carr. It is a matter of regret that these
collections are not accompanied by any information regarding their utility, or even
as to the amount which can be supplied. Colonists do not seem to be aware
of the importance of the last point; for however valuable a new article may be,
our manufacturers will not take it up unless assured of a regular supply.
Tanning Materials.
From New South Wales, specimens of the hark of the nettle tree ( Urtica
yigas), and of the sycamore ( Brachickyton luridum ), recommended for tanning, are
sent by Mr. Thomas Bawden (97), and appear to be well adapted for the purpose;
and the tea-tree bark ( Melaleuca uncinata ) and fish-wattle hark ( Acacia sp.) are
sent by Mr. E. S. Hill from Queensland. Two kinds of tanning harks are also sent
by Mr. W. Hill, the intelligent curator of the Botanic Gardens at Brisbane. All
of these barks are rich in tanning; but it will require the adoption of some


method of grinding and compressing, or making of an extract in the colony to
enable them to be profitably used in Europe.
The same may be said of the tanning barks of Tasmania, of which a few
specimens are exhibited. The most valuable of these is that of the black wattle,
which is common on the dry, stony hills of the colony; and the others are the
silver wattle and the blackwood tree. These are sent by Mr. John Abbott and
the Commissioners for Tasmania.
From Western Australia we have three kinds of bark sent, together with
some very practical proof of their value, in a series of tanned skins, of excellent
quality, for sole and upper leather, and for harness. The barks are black wattle,
jam wattle, and manna. The exhibitor is Mr. Ranford, who states that by the
common process, with hand labor only, the sole leather, with these materials,
requires about six months, and the dressed leather about three months, in pre-
paration.
CLASS IV. —SECTION C.
Miscellaneous Objects.
Beautiful bracelets, consisting of beads turned in the sweet-scented myall
wood, mounted in gold, are shown in the department of Queensland, by Mrs.
Marsh, of that colony; and a very interesting exhibit is sent by Miss Marsh, in
the shape of several bottles filled with a curious saccharine exudation, or manna,
from Eucalyptus manifera.
Beautifully made pipes, many of them richly mounted, of the sweet-scented
myallwood, are exhibited in the department of Victoria, by H. C. Arnold and
Messrs. Levy Brothers.
In the Colony of Western Australia is a remarkable sea-weed of a very
gelatinous character ( Euchemia speciosa ), which enters into the culinary arrange-
ments of the colonists for making jelly, &c. A similar gelatinous sea-weed is also
exhibited in the Tasmanian court, by Mr. James Boyd, which appears to possess
very useful qualities.
We were informed that the beautifully prepared and extensive collection of
woods from the southern districts of New South Wales, exhibited by Sir W.
Macarthur, owes its great scientific value largely to the assistance afforded by the
Rev. J. Plassall and Messrs. Hill and Hanaghan ; whilst those of the northern dis-
tricts are equally well shown by Mr. Charles Moore. Messrs. Walter and Thozet
deserve the same praise for their respective collections of the timber woods of
Queensland.
E. W. Rudder, of New South Wales, sends an extensive series of the gums,
dyes, &c., of the colony, usefully illustrated with examples of their applications,
especially with respect to the dyeing materials. J. A. Phillips sends a collection
of the resins and gums of Australia.
Mr. Harris, of Victoria, sends a collection from his colony, comprising the
gums, resins, and dyes, including some curious lichens, fibres, &c. ; and from the
same colony, a lady, Mrs. Wilkie, has sent two rather extensive and very valuable
collections of the marine algas of scientific interest.


The collection of gums and resins from Western Australia is contributed by
Mr. J. G. C. Carr.
In section C of class IY. medals were awarded as follows :
New South Wales. —Thomas Bawden, for nettle-tree and sycamore bark for
tanning.
T. A. Blackett, for carved cedar font.
J. S. Calvert, for vegetable fibres, proposed as materials for paper-making.
Mrs. Clay, for plaited work of cabbage palm leaves.
Professor De la Motte, for blocks of “ Pittosporum undulatum,” prepared for
wood-engraving.
Miss Kate English, for articles of plaited work of cabbage palm.
J. H. Ferris, for wood-carving (picture frame).
Garrard, for collection of vegetable fibres and mats made by Aborigines.
Governor of the Randwick Asylum, for plaits made of the leaves of the
cabbage palm.
Rev. J. Hassall and Hill, for the assistance they afforded in the very com-
plete, extensive,' and beautiful scientifically named collection of the woods ol the
southern districts, exhibited by Sir W. Macarthur.
Edwin Hickey, for fine cotton, value 3s. 6d. per lb.
E. S. Hill, for a collection of tanning barks and vegetable fibres.
A. A. Leycester, for a fishing-rod made of speckled wood.
J. and W. Macarthur, for prepared fibres of native araidese.
Sir W. Macarthur, for axe-handles made from different kinds of tough
timber, and for specimens of timber, fibres, gums, and of walking-sticks of the
Arsca speciosa.
Charles Moore, for similar valuable collection, northern districts.
Archibald Murray, for carving in Australian corkwood, representing the
Platycerium grande.
J. B. Nolan, for cotton of very fine quality, value 4s. per lb.
Randwick Asylum, for plaited work of leaves of the cabbage palm.
E. W. Rudder, for a large collection of gums and dyeing materials, with
illustrations of colours produced in cotton, silk, wool, &c.
G. Yinden, for fine cotton, value 3s. 6d. per lb.
New Zealand. —Baigent, sen., for fine logs and slabs of the trees of that
colony, including a fuchsia trunk nine feet high, and an inch and a half in
diameter.
R. Blearzard, for machine-made buckets from “Kaikatea” wood, varnished
with kaUri-gum varnish.
Blick Brothers, for a bark called “hinau” ( Elceocarpus hinau), used for dyeing
brown and black.
Sir Charles Clifford, for a collection of the ferns of the colony.
Combes and Daldy, for a very fine specimen of kauri gum.
Commissioners of Auckland, for a collection of thirty-nine woods of the
colony, in the form of boxes containing the leaves.


C. Elliott, for a tea-poy of native woods, well carved.
Ellis, for cotton-stand and vase turned in native woods.
Dr. Horne, for a collection of the ferns of the colony.
W. King, for cotton-wool, grown by the exhibitors in the Ovalan, Fiji
Islands, value Is. Id. per lb.
Lloyd Neil, for prepared New Zealand flax.
Manakan Saw Mills, for fine slabs of the timber of Auckland.
W. Matthews, for door-mats made from the native basts.
Luke Nattras, for specimens of New Zealand flax prepared for paper-making.
J. Probert, for prepared New Zealand flax.
Rev. A. Purchas and J. Ninnes, for machine-dressed New Zealand flax.
C Ring, for a magnificent plank of the mottled kauri.
A. Scott, for remarkable specimens of kauri-gum.
Rev. R. Taylor, for matting bags of native materials.
Rev. C. Yoelckner, for mats and baskets, and a collection of native manu-
factures of New Zealand flax, chiefly native dresses.
W. White, for carving in hardwood.
Jonas Woodward, for a collection of the ferns of the colony,
Queensland. —W. Cairncross, for cotton from Sea Island seed, value 3s. 3d.
per lb.
W. Hill, for fine long-staple cotton, value 3s. 3d. per lb., and for a collec-
tion of barks for tanning, and other useful vegetable products, naturalised and
indigenous; and for a very extensive and well-named collection of woods of
the colony.
Mrs. Hodgson, for an application of the “ quandong” {Fusavus acuminatus )
seeds to jewellery purposes.
Hon. H. L. Hope, sugar-canes fresh, and for Sea Island cotton.
Mr. Justice Lutwyche, native woods ; for specimens of turnery in native
woods.
Miss Marsh, for excellent specimens of the manna of Eucalyptus manifera.
Mrs. Marsh, for turnery in myallwood (bracelets mounted in gold).
Rode, cotton ; for cotton from Sea Island seed, value 3s. 6d. per lb.
H. Stewart, for cotton from Sea Island seed, value 3s. 3d. per lb.
Thozet, a valuable collection of woods of Rockhampton ; also, honorable
mention for cotton from New Orleans seed, &c., from Sea Island seed.
South Australia. —F. G. Hales, for excellent specimens of turnery in native
woods.
J. A. Phillips, for a collection of Australian gums.
Tasmania. —Jno. Abbott, for tanning bark.
R. Backhouse, for flax in the straw.
James Boyd, for a gelatinous sea-weed (Gracillaria conferroides), which yields
an abundance of jelly ; and for a splendid series of large specimens of the woods
of the islands, including a spar of swamp-gum ( Eucalyptus viminalis ) 230 feet long,
cut in lengths.
Miss Collins, for collection of marine alga;.


The Commissioners, for collection of tanning barks.
W. Cowburn, for wicker baskets of various kinds.
W. L. Crowther, for a very large collection of fine specimens of wood.
R. C. Gunn, for wood used in perfumery.
Mrs. C. Meredith, for currajong bark for paper.
W. Powell, for turned vase of musk wood, and collection of walking sticks.
Hon. J. H. Wedge, for a grass prepared for paper-making.
Victoria. —Alcock and Co., for turnery in the colonial hard woods.
H. C. Arnold, for a large exhibition of pipes of excellent workmanship, from
the myallwood (Acacia homalophylla.)
W. Champ, for coir mats, wood turnery, &c., made in the Penitentiary.
Mr. Harris, for collection of lichens, fibres, gums, resins, and other useful
vegetable products.
Levy Brothers, for richly mounted myallwood pipes.
Dr. Mueller, for a magnificent, scientifically named collection of the woods of
the colony.
John Perry, for bent timber for carriages.
Dr. Robertson, for collection of gums, resins, &c.
T. Scheckel, for basketwork, various.
Skeats and Swinbourne, for machine-wrought wood mouldings.
Smith Brothers, for splendid planks of gum trees, including two upwards of
90 feet in length,
Mrs. Wilkie, for two collections of marine algae.
W. Williams, for machine-wrought timber for carriage-building.
Western Australia.— J. G. C. Carr, a collection of native gums and resins,
J. Carson, cask made of casuarina.
Central Committee of Perth, a collection of valuable materials, consisting of
specimens of timber and hardwood turnery.
G. Clifton, for the sea-weed ( Euchemia speciosa ), prepared for making jelly and
for culinary purposes ; and for an interesting collection of materials for netting
and fishing,
W. P. Chifton, for felloes and other parts of wheels, staves, slabs, and
specimens of timber ; and for fine logs of myall, sandal, and satin wood.
W. Joyce, shea-oak shingles for roofing.
W. Padbury, silver-wattle bark, apparently an excellent material for
cordage and paper.
B. B. Ranford, collection of native tanning barks.
Royal Engineer Department, for piles of jarrahwood (Eucalyptus mahagoni)
that had been seventeen years in sand and water.
G. T. Whitfield, for polished planks of five species of Eucalyptus.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales. —Cuthbert, for a very large ship’s knee of ironbark,
weighing 19 cwt., of excellent quality.
R. Fogwell, for line cotton, value 3s.
W. Tuckey, for two fine slabs of Callitus verrucosa polished, and of great beauty.


New Zealand.— Rev. J. Morgan, for toatoa bark for dyeing red.
Nelson Chamber of Commerce, for collection of specimens of prepared New
Zealand flax by different producers.
Rev. E. Taylor, for collection of textile fibres.
Queensland. —Mr. Cleary, for long-staple cotton, value 3s.
W. Hill, sugar-cane (fresh) of large size
Mr. King, for long-staple cotton, value 3s.
Mrs. Sutherland, for cotton from Sea Island seed, value 3s, which if better
cleaned, would be 3s. 6d.
P. W. Thompson, for cotton from Sea Island seed, which if better cleaned,
would be worth 3s.
South Australia—3. Mellor, for a coach-wheel made with eight woods of the
colony.
Tasmania—3. Abbott, for excellent wattlewood staves and park palings of
unprecedented length, breadth, and quality.
J. McGregor, for excellent ship’s knees and timbers.
R. Pybus, for beams of peppermint-gum, which had resisted the action of
damp ground for thirty-five years, and for grass-tree gum.
E. W. Sharland, for gum of the wattle tree.
Victoria.— Dr. Blackhaus, for immense slabs, twenty-two to twenty-four feet
long, of Eucalyptus dealbata and E. sideroxylon.
D. Connor, for resins and vegetable extracts.
G. Fletcher, for resins of Eucalypti, various.
Western Australia—3. G. C. Carr, for a log of sandalwood, weighing 454 lbs.
E. Newman, for a pile of jarrahwood that had formed part of a jetty, of
which the sap and lieartwood had both resisted the attacks of the teredo for
twenty-nine years.
T. Smith, for magnificent planks of jarrahwood.
CLASS IV.—SECTION D
Perfumery.
Australia.— The Colony of Victoria shows some very interesting specimens of
new essential oils, distilled by two Melbourne chemists (Messrs. Bosisto and John-
son), under the superintendence of Dr. Mueller, the able Director of the Botanical
Gardens. These oils are principally extracted from the leaves of the trees of the
Eucalyptus family, which abound in Australia, and from a variety of native plants,
including some of mint tribe. Although they are represented as intended to be
used for dissolving resins and making varnishes, it appeared to us that some of
them possessed a sufficiently grateful fragrance to render them available for per-
fumery purposes. If such be the case, it will prove a great boon to perfumers, on
account of their cheapness and abundance, for in the course of time the supply can
be unlimited, and the price quoted for some of them now, viz, 6s. per gallon, is
about quarter of the cost of the commonest essential oil used for scenting soap.


Among the numerous specimens shown, the following seemed the most
fragrant the Eucalyptus amygdalina (Tasmanian peppermint), Eucalyptus
octorata, E. globulus (blue-gum), Atlierosperma moschatum, Melaleuca ericifolia,
and the Aridtemos squameus. We tried an experiment with the essential
oil of E. amygdalina which has a strange flavor, partaking at the same time
of nutmegs and peppermint, and we obtained the following results :—3 ounces of
the oil were sufficient to scent very strongly 8 lbs. of soap at a cost of Is. 4d. per
lb. The perfume produced by this oil alone would however be considered by
some more peculiar than agreeable, and we obtained a much better result by com-
bining it in a second experiment with oils of cassia, cloves, and lavender, which
mixture yielded a very pleasant fragrance. We have therefore every reason to
think that soap-makers would find great advantage in using those new essential
oils, and especially that of E. amygdalina which is yielded most abundantly by that
tree, 3 lbs. of oil being obtained by distillation of 1 cwt. of leaves, The specimens
of essential oils of peppermint (Mentha Australis ) are very fair, and could find a
market in Europe, provided they can compete with others in price We were
shown, also, a sample of emu fat, a grease of very fine grain, which could he
adapted for perfumery purposes, if procurable in quantities worth exporting.
From New South Wales we have a small but interesting collection of essential
oils, comprising that of orange and orange flowers of the edible orange tree ( Citrus
aurantium ), not equal, however, to those made from the bitter orange tree (Citrus
bigarradia ), and that of the Eucalyptus citriodora, which bears a strong resemblance
to the citronella grown in the East and West Indies, and might be used as a sub-
stitute. A very fine grease taken from the alpaca was also exhibited, and may
become a useful article to perfumers, when the herd of those animals reaches the
proportions it is expected to attain.
Queensland sends us a very good toilet soap, made from the oil of the dugong
fish, said to abound on the Australian coast, and a very pretty casket made of myall
wood ( Acacia pendula) which has an intense and a delightful smell of violets. This
tree is very plentiful in all parts of Australia ; and when the remarkable property
it possesses becomes known to European manufacturers, the wood will no doubt be
in great request for making glove, handkerchief, and other fancy boxes ; for as
long as it remains unpolished it preserves this remarkable fragrance of violets,
which does not occur with such perfection in any other known substance.
In Tasmania we find the tonga bean wood (Alyscia buxifolia), which has an
odour similar to that of the tonquin bean, and the muskwood, which might be
perhaps applied to perfumery purposes, the silver wattle (Acacia dealbata ) is also
very common in this island, and the colonists may one day turn their attention to
gather the flowers, which much resemble those of the cassia (Acacia farnesiana) so
useful to perfumers. The Eucalyptus amygdalina and other fragrant species like-
wise abound in Tasmania.
MEDALS.
Victoria. —J. Bosisto, a very interesting collection of essential oils, distilled
from Australian leaves and plants.


New South Wales. —J. S. Norrie,essential oils extracted for the first time from
native flowers and plants.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
Queensland. —R. Illidge, dugong-oil soap.
Mrs. Marsh, myallwood sachet.
New South Wales. —C. Ledger, alpaca pomade.
Victoria. —W. Johnson, new essential oil.
CLASS VI.
Carriages not connected with Rail or Tramroads.
In the Victoria department is shown a well-balanced car, such as are
generally used for passenger traffic in the streets of its towns. Although rather
heavy and cumbersome to London eyes, accustomed to neatness and high finish,
it is probably well adapted for its purpose, especially as regards the ingenious
canopy roof, which can readily be set up or lowered, as the passengers may prefer.
The contribution of woods grown in the English colonies, and the arrange-
ment of many of them for exhibition, deserve the highest praise ; but it is unfor-
tunate that many of the specimens are sent over unseasoned. The following list
includes many useful varieties, but time and experiment alone can decide which
are best adapted for particular uses :
Tasmania. —Blue-gum, for wheel-felloes and shafts. Myrtle panels, stringy-
bark felloes.
Mr. W. L. Crowther, timber-merchant, Hobart Town, would execute orders.
Victoria. —Red-gum naves, ironbark spokes, blackwood felloes, stringybark
felloes.
Queensland. —Beech, blue-gum, cypress pine, stringybark, ironwood, red iron-
bark, black ironbark, forest oak, blue-gum, silky oak, jambosa, much like lance-
wood,
New South Wales. —Cherry, buranna, forest-oak, flooded-gum, red-box, More-
ton Bay chesnut, yellow-box of Camden, hickory, spotted-gum, water-gum, sallow
black wattle, blue-gum, white myrtle much like lancewood, teakwood, red iron-
bark, swamp mahogany.
N w Zealand. —Kaurie panels, footboards, &c ; tanekaha common panels,
ribbonwood, mairi kohekohe, white teatree, marpow, totara panels, &c., rimu
panels, &c.
Western Australia. —Jarrah, a very hard wood, much like mahogany in
appearance ; tooarta wood, of excessive weight and strength, fit tor hard-working
waggon-wheels.
CLASS VII.—SECTION A.
Machinery employed in Spinning and Weaving.
HONORABLE MENTION.
Victoria. —J. A. Kay, for his sewing-machine ; the cheapness and extreme
simplicity of construction.


CLASS VIII.
Machinery in General.
MEDALS.
Victoria. — Commissioners of Victoriam Exhibition, quartz-crushing machine;
efficiency, good adaptation, practical utility.
R. Harper, working model of coffee-roaster; good design, practical utility.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
O. Bobart, model of puddling machine.
J. Meredith, model of an improved gold amalgamator.
Mr. Strachan, model of a bush-fire extinguisher.
R. W. Thomson, gold-amalgam filter.
J. H. White, fire-hoze nozzles, junctions, &c.
CLASS IX.
Agricultural and Horticultural Implements and Machines
South Australia.—' There is here exhibited Ridley’s reaper, for which a medal
is awarded to J. Mellor, the exhibitor. It receives the straw of the standing crop
upon a long-toothed horizontal comb, from which revolving beaters strip the ears
thus caught, which, half thrashed, are thrown behind into a roomy box, while the
straw thus beheaded is left trodden and beaten on the ground.
Victoria. —Messrs. Robinson and Co., of Melbourne, received a medal for their
reaper with revolving rakes which sweep the platform on which the cut grain falls;
an extremely well made and ingenious implement, which has been introduced into
this country by both Messrs. Ransomes, of Ipswich, and Mr. Samuelson, of
Banbury, and promises to be a useful addition to our harvesting implements.
Messrs. Henderson and Bett, of South Yarra, exhibit a well made plough for
which they receive honorable mention.
Western Australia. —Honorable mention is awarded to C. King, for wheels of
native gum wood.
CLASS X.—SECTION A
Civil Engineering and Building Contrivances
To the New South Wales Government has been awarded a medal for the
great utility of the Pitzroy Government Dock, and to Mr. Hunt, also of New
South Wales, a medal for the public benefit arising from the dock constructed by
him.
Victoria exhibited a large and interesting collection of building stones, for
which a medal was awarded to Mr. J. G. Knight ; and honorable mention to the
Beechworth Local Committee, for the good quality of the building stones
exhibited by them ; and to the Victoria Kaolin Company, for the very fine
specimens of that valuable material exhibited by them, which must eventually be
extensively and advantageously used.
From Queensland, Mr. J. Petrie sent a collection of building stones, for the
good quality of which an honorable mention has been awarded.


South Australia contributes good slabs of slate, indicating that further working-
will develop better qualities, and for these honorable mention has been awarded
to Mr. T. Priest.
To the Commissioners of Tasmania has also been awarded honorable mention
for an extensive collection of building stones of every variety.
To F. G. Goodsell, of New South Wales, honorable mention was given for
stock bricks —good quality of material.
In the Victoria department, the following weie awarded honorable mention—
John Glew, for bricks and tiles of good quality.
T. Kelly, stoneware drain-tiles of superior quality.
Sandhurst Local Committee, bricks and tiles of good quality and low price.
F. Stieling, fire-bricks of good quality.
CLASS XI.—SECTION C.
Arms and Ordnance.
Honorable mention was awarded to W. Jennings, of New South Wales, for the
good workmanship of the sword blade exhibited by him.
And to the Government of Victoria for their interesting collection of
Aboriginal arms.
CLASS XII.—SECTIONS B & C.
Life-boats, Barges, Ship’s Tackle, Etc.
In the Australian colonies generally, and especially in Tasmania, and at
Sydney, there are many well-built boats of good form, and well adapted to the
fisheries in those seas; but the only specimens exhibited are two whale-boats, by
the Commissioners for Tasmania (194, 339), the production of the best builders of
Hobart Town (Chandler and Miller). These boats are of colonial wood, the
harpoons and all the requisite fishing gear being fitted by colonial workmen. A
medal has been deservedly awarded to this creditable contribution.
In connection with Tasmania, whale fishing is a branch of colonial industry-
deserving mention. The fishing ground extends from the shores of this noble
island to the antarctic regions, and attracts many foreign whale ships, which
rendezvous at Hobart Town. The value of the produce from South whale fishery,
exported in 1861 was £60,350. At the present time, there are twenty-five vessels,
with an aggregate tonnage of 5,746 tons engaged in whaling from the port of
Hobart Town, and 131 whale-boats (including fifty-one spare ones), identical in
all respects to those exhibited, are attached to these twenty-five vessels, each boat
costing, when fitted complete, about £7O. The boats of the Tasmanian fleet find
employment for about 700 men. A colonial writer, in treating of this branch of
industry, observes: “Whale fishing is sometimes attended with great hardship,
hut being looked on as a colossal aquatic sport, and combining the excitement of
bold and perilous adventure with the contingency of a good prize, and promotion
according to merit, it has always been a favorite pursuit with the young
Tasmanians, from whom might be selected some of the smartest boatmen in the
world.”


Life-boats. —In the British colonies there are three life-boats at the Cape
of Good Hope on the plan of the Life-boat Institution; one at Mauritius; one
at Ceylon; two at Sydney, New Soutli Wales; two in South Australia; and,
it is understood, six are stationed on the coast of Victoria (each station being also
supplied with rocket and mortar apparatus), built at the marine yard of the
province, Melbourne, from drawings sent out by the National Life-boat Institution.
One of these boats was instrumental, on the 13th August, 1859, in saving nineteen
persons from the steamship Admella wrecked on that coast. Captain Ferguson,
we believe, the active and intelligent Harbor Master at Melbourne, exhibits the
model of one of these life-boats (Victoria, 250), for which the jury have awarded
honorable mention, to mark their appreciation of colonial efforts in this good
cause.
MEDALS.
New South Wales —A. Reynolds, for a cedar boat of excellent workmanship
and construction.
New Zealand. —Neil Lloyd, for strong serviceable rope.
Tasmania. —For well-built and furnished whale-boats.
honorable mlntion.
Victoria. —Captain Ferguson, for a model of a life-boat, representing the life-
boat system on the coast of Victoria.
CLASS XIV.
Photography and Photographic Apparatus
MEDALS.
New South Wales. —E. Dalton, for excellent photographic portraits of the
Aborigines.
Freeman Brothers, for an excellent collection of photographs.
Victoria. —R. Daintree, for an extensive series of photographs illustrative of
the colony.
E. Haigh, for stereoscopic and other views in the colony, excellent in photo-
graphic treatment.
C. Nettleton, for excellence of photographic views in the colony.
J. W. Osborne, for the photo-lithographic process invented and patented
by himself.
honorable mentions.
New South Wales.— F. B. Gale, for portraits of Aborigines on glass.
Hetzer, for excellent photography, especially his studies of trees.
Major Wingate, for his panoramic view in the colony.
New Zealand. —J. N. Crombie, for views in the colony.
Queensland.— G. Challinor, for excellence of photographs.
J. W. Wild, for excellence of photographs.
South Australia. —Mrs. Camfield, ethnological studies of the Aborigines.


Tasmania. —M. Allport, for interesting pictures exhibited, including stereo-
scopic views.
Victoria. —Bachelder and O’Neil, for photographs of volunteers.
Charlier, for portraits of the Aborigines of the colony.
Cox and Luken, for photographic excellence.
Davis, for excellence of photographs in Melbourne and Fitzroy.
Johnston and Co., for a collection of photographic views.
CLASS XVI.
Musical Instruments.
HONORABLE MENTION.
New South Wales. —J. Wainwright, for a fine and beautifully made flute.
This is a Nicholson flute ; but considering its quality and finish as a colonial pro-
duction, the jury desired to mark their estimation of it by an honorable mention.
CLASS XVIII
Cotton.
MEDAL.
New South Wales.— J. B. Nowlan, for splendid cotton.
J. M. Ireland, for good useful cotton.
Hickey, for very good useful cotton.
Queensland. —W. Cairncross, for splendid cotton.
Rade, for very good cotton.
Thozet, for very good cotton.
CLASS XXI.
Woollen and Worsted, including Mixed Fabrics generally.
medals.
New South Wales.— To the Government *of, for exhibiting many excellent
specimens of cloths, beavers, stuff goods, shawls, &c„ manufactured entirely of wool
grown in the colony, with a view of showing the various classes of goods it is
suited to produce without admixture with the wool of any other country.
Queensland— To the Government of, for an excellent collection of woollen
and stuff goods, manufactured entirely of wool produced in the colony, with a view
to show the various purposes to which it is suited, unmixed with any other wool.
Victoria. —To the Government of, for a beautiful display of woollen and
stuff goods, shawls, manufactured from wool, the produce of the colony, and exhibited
with a view to show the beautiful fabrics that may be produced from it without
admixture of the wools of any other country. >
F 2


CLASS XXV.—SECTION A.
Skins and Furs.
In 1851 there were seventeen English exhibitors of furs, nineteen colonial, and
fifteen foreign ; in the present Exhibition, eighteeen English, forty-one colonial,
and eighty-six fireign.
New South Wales has but two exhibitors, who show a few specimens of
ornithorynchus and native cat of comparative little value.
From Queensland some opossum wrappers are shown as used by the natives.
In the Tasmanian collection, the Commissioners for the colony and private
exhibitors have made an excellent display of indigenous skins; they comprise the
kangaroo, wallaby, wombat, opossum, native cat, native tiger, and ornithorynchus.
The native tiger skins are scarce ; they are applicable for hearth-rugs or mats.
The ornithorynchus are also rare ; they make up prettily into muffs and cuffs.
The skin of the kangaroo is more valuable for leather than for its fur ; but that of
the brush kangaroo, which is less woolly, would be useful for carriage wrappers.
The opossum, wombat, and wallaby are admirably light, and the fur being very
thick, renders them invaluable for native clothing and the use of the colonists.
These skins although not high priced, do not possess sufficient beauty to enter
into competition with our cheaper European furs. The chief application in this
country is for carriage wrappers. Opossums skins can be purchased in the colony
for ss. per dozen.
Medals were awarded to the Commissioners for Tasmania for an interesting
and instructive collection of indigenous skins.
HONORABLE MENTIONS,
Tasmania. —J. Boyd, for good specimens of indigenous skins.
Miss C. A. C. Clark, for a good specimen of opossum-fur rugs.
Mrs. I)u Croz, for a fine specimen of native-cat rugs.
C. Gould, for specimens of indigenous skins.
A. J. Horne, for specimens of skins and furs.
CLASS XXV.—SECTION B.
Feathers and Manufactures from Hair.
HONORABLE MENTION.
Victoria. —J. Robertson, well and carefully dyed emu feathers.
CLASS XXVI.—SECTION A.
Leather and Manufactures of Leather,
The number of awards of both kinds to British exhibitors is a safe test by
which to judge, and the reasons for making those awards a better criterion on
which public opinion can be formed, than any that can be offered beside as to


the beauty, value, or usefulness of the various kinds of leather produced in the
British dominions. Of the colonies, the Jury observe, that considerable advance
has been made towards producing articles that may one day rival the products of
the mother country —the useful articles for daily use or consumption taking of
course a precedence over the ornamental or the beautiful. The manufactures of
Nova Scotia are highly satisfactory, as are those of New South Wales. A medal
has been awarded to Exhibitor 269, and honorable mention to others. The firm of
Hall and Anderson exhibit a series of varied goods, some of which are scarcely
below the standard of European excellence. The Jury are gratified in being able
to give unqualified praise to the general superior tanning of New Zealand, New
South Wales, and of Western Australia. The productions of Victoria are highly
commended.
MEDALS.
New South Wales. —Hall and Anderson, varied excellence of their manufac-
ture in harness and other leathers, of which they have an extraordinary variety.
Victoria. —J. Clark, general good assortment of leather and superior
currying.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales.—J. E. Begg, varied good work, and sole-leather tanned.
J. G. Goodluck, curried hides.
J. Smith, good dressed leather.
Victoria. —Brearley Brothers, general excellence.
CLASS XXVI. SECTION B.
Saddlery and Harness.
MEDALS.
New South Wales. —J. Brush, lady’s saddle of comparative excellence.
Victoria. —Lade and Sanders, saddles for ladies and gentlemen, of creditable
workmanship.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales. —Hall and Anderson, saddles and bridles, for highly
creditable workmanship.
Hinton Brothers, saddle, for good work.
McCall, D., saddle, for good work.
Victoria. —McFarlane and Sons, camels’ shoes, and general travelling
equipage; useful contrivances.
CLASS XXVII.—SECTION B.
Bonnets and General Millinery.
Australia hats and plaiting of the fibre of the cabbage-tree are exhibited in
this class. It is probable that the production of these articles will be of importance
to the colony as a source of employment for the rural population.


Victoria exhibits feathers from the emu and albatross, intended as ornaments
for ladies’ head-dresses. There are also specimens of hats, beautifully arranged,
which are dyed by a fluid extracted from sea-weed. The whole exhibition of this
colony is worthy of notice.
MEDALS.
Victoria.— W. Champ, cabbage-tree hats, of good manufacture, especially the
straw plaitings.
Haslem, cabbage-tree hats, good manufacture.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales. —Farmer and Painter, cabbage-tree hats, well made, and of
good colour.
By Destitute Children, cabbage-tree plait; plaiting well made, and of good
colour.
Duffin, cabbage-tree plait, good manufacture.
Victoria. —Mrs. Beal, flowers from sea-weed ; for ingenuity and beauty.
Ford Brothers, patent washing braid hats; originality and novelty.
Mrs. King, straw bonnets and hats, good manufacture and colour.
CLASS XXVII.—SECTION D.
Boots and Shoes.
In this class the Colonies of New South Wales and Queensland were the only
ones which obtained awards.
MEDAL.
New South Wales. —J. Lobb, good work, and first-class materials.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales.— C. Bovis, good stout work in boots.
Queensland.— T. Gray, boots and shoes ; good strong suitable work and
materials.
CLASS XXVIII.—SECTION B.
Stationery.
In account books there was no novelty of manufacture, but great perfection
was evinced in the goods exhibited by a manufacturer in Ireland, Messrs. Marcus,
Ward and Co., of Belfast, while the exhibits from English makers were highly
creditable. Messrs. Sheriff and Downing (New South Wales) exhibited specimens
in which the printing, ruling, and binding were very good.
MEDAL.
New South Wales. —Sands and Kenny, “ stud books,” and other account books,
particularly well made.
HONORABLE MENTION.
New South Wales.— C. L. Bernicke, good account books.


CLASS XXVIII.—SECTION C.
Plate, Letterpress, and other Modes oe Printing.
From the British colonies and dependencies, the exhibition in the departments
of printing and binding are very satisfactory. New South Wales and Victoria
furnished the largest portions, but other colonies contributed. All the specimens
sent were good. As may be readily supposed, it was not in sumptuous display,
but in articles of substantial use that the efforts of the colonial tradesmen were
made. Account books well ruled and printed, and on good paper, form a prominent
part of their contributions. But the most remarkable is the number of large well-
filled newspapers, of the week ending, January 25, 1862, in Victoria, form a
tolerably thick folio volume. One of the specimens, The Ovens and Muiray
Advertiser, being printed on cloth, one copy being exhibited printed in gold, silver,
red and blue, on a fine linen, glazed.
The number and variety of these newspapers, the large proportion of
advertisements which occupy their columns, the variety of type employed in dis-
playing them, are deeply interesting, as showing a great and early development of
a highly civilized state of society in so young a colony, though not attaining a very
elevated rank as mere printing, when compared with the production of printers at
home. The newspapers of Victoria, however, may well sustain a comparison with
many of those of the continent of Europe as regards printing and the amount of
intelligence, while they greatly exceed most of them in size. Victoria indeed,
sends very commendable specimens of most departments of printing and binding.
It shows music, chromo-lithography, colour printing, and a page of the paper
stereotyping process already described. A specimen is also sent of its postage
stamps, of which there are seven in different colours, of value from one penny to
two shillings. Another observable production of Victoria is what is styled the
Progress Map of the Geological Survey of Victoria, by Mr. A. R. C. Selwyn, the
Government Geologist. It is on a very large scale, and is printed in small divisions
in chromo-lithography, each division requiring on an average six distinct workings.
South Australia exhibits two daily and two weekly newspapers, the notes and
proceedings in the local parliament to the end of 1861, a set of reports of the debates
(a South Australian Hansard) and a set of the acts of its parliament from the
commencement, also a map of the colony, and a plan of the town of Adelaide.
Queensland furnishes an almanac.
CLASS XXVIII.—SECTION D.
Bookbinding.
MEDALS.
New South Wales.— G. H. Rees, for very good bookbinding.
Sheriff and Downing, for account books and binding.
Victoria. —W. Detmold, very good bookbinding.
Government Printing Office, for printing and bookbinding.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales. —Sands and Kenny, for account books.
Victoria. —Richard, for bookbinding.


CLASS XXIX.
Educational Works, Etc.—Appliances.
English Colonies —The attention of the jury has been necessarily attached by
the remarkable evidence afforded in the exhibition, of the growth of several English
colonies in wealth, in population and in enterprise. In so far as class XXIX is
concerned, the objects exhibited in the colonial department are chiefly collections
illustrating the flora of particular districts, or classified collections of their animal
and mineral products. Some of these collections are as meritorious for their
scientific arrangement, as they are interesting for their commercial importance,
and for the promise of material prosperity which they afford. Medals have been
awarded to the colonial committees by whom these collections have been prepared,
in Jamaica, in New Brunswick, in South Australia, and in British Guiana. But
it has been especially gratifying to the jury to notice that in several remarkable
instances public instruction has progressed pari passa with the development of
commercial resources and that in one or two of them, the amount of zeal and care
devoted to the intellectual culture of a rising colony, has greatly exceeded that
which is exhibited in many older countries. A notable example of this is to be
found in the Colony of Victoria. In the court devoted to the display of the pro-
ducts of the colony, there is a large volume, every page of which is of vellum,
illuminated with singular taste and skill, and presenting almost as great a variety
of design as is to be found in the most elaborate missals of the middle ages. This
volume, the production of a number of colonial artists, contains information kindly
furnished by Sir Redmond Barry, the Commissioner of Victoria; it appears that
the population amounted in 1836 only to 177 persons, in 1851 it had reached
77,345, and had increased in 1861 to the number of 540,322. Primary and
secondary instruction is for the most part given under the denominational and
national school boards. In 1851, the total number of schools was 129, and of
scholars 7060 ; in 1861, the schools were found to have increased to 886, the scholars
to 51,668. The cost of sustaining these schools is defrayed partially by the
Government, which contributed in 1860, no less a sum than £110,155, and partly
by school fees and voluntary contributions, which amounted to £61,452. It is
believed that there are few of the Victorian children who do not acquire some
degree of scholastic instruction, and very vigorous efforts are being made by the
various denominations and others, to secure a system at once, just, firm, and
economical, that shall furnish for every child in the community capable of securing
instruction, a good intellectual, moral, and religious education. All the religious
denominations have Sunday schools, and night schools have been established for
adults in various parts of the colony. There are mechanics’ institutions, and
philosophic and literary societies to the number of nearly fifty, in Melbourne and
its suburbs alone. A magnificent building, photographs of which are exhibited
in the Victoria court, was erected in 1856 in Melbourne, at a cost of £36,000,
and opened as a public library. In 1860, it contained 22,024 volumes, classified and
arranged on a plan designed to promote systematic study, and it received no less
than 162,115 readers. A University has also been founded, which in the course
of six years has made considerable progress ; during the last year it had thirty-six
matriculated students, fifty-three attending lectures in law, and fifteen in attend-


ance at the civil engineering and surveying classes. The scheme of academical
instruction prescribed to candidates for degrees, is very comprehensive, and the
examinations, as far as may be gathered from the papers and documents displayed
at the exhibition, are of a very high and severe character.
medals.
South Australia.— General Committee, for the merit of a collection of stuffed
birds and reptiles in illustration of natural history.
W. Halloran, for his hortus siccus of wild plants ; Jones, for his stuffed birds.
Tasmania. —Mrs. B. Crowther, for her collection of birds.
Charles Gould, for his collection of animal skins and geological map.
Mrs. Meredith, for her botanic drawings.
Victoria. —Acclimatization Society of Victoria, for the fine collection of
natural history, and for the utility of their labors in general.
Rev. W. C. Howard and P. Bookey, for their collections of birds and reptiles.
Professor McCoy, for the excellence of a collection of Australian insects.
Western Australia. —Rev. A. Ducane, for his collection of dried plants.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
*New South Wales. —T. W. Crawley, for his collection of birds.
G. Kreft, for his collection of reptiles.
Victoria. —E. H. Dunn, for his collection of snakes and lizards.
G. Fulker, for his collection of stuffed fish.
Charles Ledger, for his co-operation in the labors of the Society of Acclima-
tization of Victoria.
Western Australia, —M. G. Chifton, for his collection of shells.
CLASS XXX.—SECTION A & B.
Furniture and Upholstery, Paper-hanging, Etc.
The different branches of industry, which have for their province household
furniture and the decoration of public and private buildings, are indebted to the
fine arts for a great part of their merit.
It is only by the aid of the fine arts that they can achieve rapid improvement
and obtain lasting success.
The principles which should guide the manufacturer of household furniture
are so very clear, that a simple exposition of them is sufficient to secure for them
the general assent. Household furniture being destined to satisfy well known wants,
must above all things he useful and comfortable ; in a word, must he perfectly
adapted to the particular purpose for which each article is intended. It would be
next to an absurdity to sacrifice convenience to elegance. The richest carving and
gilding could never make a bed good if it were so constructed that nobody could sleep
on it. It is only when all the conditions of utility and convenience have been fully
attended to that the aid of art begins to be called for ; but then its task becomes
simple. A piece of furniture well adapted to its object is easily adorned, and from
its very usefulness derives often an elegance peculiarly its own. It is rare, we
might say it is almost impossible, that a very convenient form be not agreeable, for
when reason is fully satisfied the eye is generally pleased. Taste is akin to good
sense, and one cannot he offended without injuring the other.


New South Wales. —The excellent choice of wood, and the good execution of the
furniture exhibited by Mr. Tuckey distinguish their production in a special manner
above those exhibited by the other manufacturers of the colony.
New Zealand. —The 100-table of New Zealand wood, exhibited by Mr. Mason,
is remarkable for good execution and excellent employment of native woods well
selected.
HONORABLE MENTIONS.
New South Wales.— W. Jones and Son, for their cypress cabinet, &c.
Laing, for his large doors, which are well designed and admirably executed.
Tasmania.— J. Milligan, for an inlaid table of native woods of excellent
workmanship.
Victoria. —Thwaites & Son, cabinet, for excellence of workmanship.
Western Australia. —A cabinet inlaid with native wood, executed by the con-
victs of Western Australia, was remarked and considered worthy of an honorable
mention.
CLASS XXXI.
Manufactures in Iron, Copper, Etc., and General Hardware
MEDAL.
Victoria. —Hughes and Harvey, for improvement in the construction of milk
cans (Fletcher’s patent).
HONORABLE MENTION.
John Macilwraith, for introducing the manufacture of lead pipe into the colony.
CLASS XXXIII.
Works in Precious Metals and their Imitations and Jewellery.
medal.
New South Wales . —Julius Hogarth, for work creditable to the colony.
Sir J. F. Young, Bart., for encouragement given to the industry of South
Wales. The emu and kangaroo in Australian gold are truthfully modelled and
carefully chased.
Victoria. —The Jury regret that on the occasion of their visit the arrange-
ment of the Victorian Exhibition was not perfected, or they would have made
awards for No. 542, a gold cup, by D. Benjamin, of Melbourne, presented to C. J.
La Trobe, Esq., the first Lieutenant-Governor of the colony. Castlemaine, pre-
sented to J. V. A. Bruce, Esq., the contractor of the Melbourne and Murray River
railway, by the workmen employed by him. Both these works are highly creditable
to the colony ; in tlie former, the figures of colonists and natives are characteris-
tically modelled. Some brooches exhibited are also creditable works.
South Australia. —Schomberg, for a group in silver, creditable work.
CLASS XXXV.
Pottery.
F. Hirschi (Victoria, 409), some samples of terracotta, by this manufacturer,
deserve special commendation. Two vases were selected by the Council of the
South Kensington Museum as worthy of being grouped with the National Collection
of Pottery,


The following particulars of floor-space occupied by the colonies of
the British Empire, will best explain the position taken by the Austral-
asian Group at the Exhibition of 1862 :
Superficial
Feet.
Victoria, in four different allotments ... ... ... ... 5,665
New South Wales ... ... ... ... ... ••• 2,500
South Australia ... ... ... ... ... ••• 1,800
Queensland ... .. ... ... ... ••• 1,462
West Australia ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 625
Tasmania ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 1,600
New Zealand ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 625
Total, superficial feet
... 13,677
East Indian Colonies (exclusive of India').
Ceylon, Mauritius, Straits settlements, Hong Kong, Labuan
South African Colonies.
Cape Colony, Kaffraria, Natal
West African Colonies.
Sierra Leone, Gambia, Golden Coast, St, Helena
Mediterranean Colonies.
Gibraltar, Malta, lonian Islands, Aden, Heligoland, Falkland
Islands
North American Group.
Canada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward’s Island,
Newfoundland, Bermuda, Vancouver, British Columbia
West Indies.
British Honduras, British Guiana, Jamaica, Bahamas, Turk’s
Island, Trinidad, Barbados, Grenada, Tobago, St. Vincent, St.
Lucia, Antigua, Montserrat, St. Kitts, Nevis, Virgin Islands,
Dominica
Showing that the Australasian colonies occupied more than one and a
half times the space allotted to all the other British colonies (with the
exception of India) put together.




ADDENDA.
The Colony of Victoria at the Dublin International
Exhibition, 1865.
The following Report by Mr. C. E. Overy, the gentleman placed
in charge of the Victorian Collection by Tyndall Bright, Esquire, the
Commissioner representing the Board appointed by the Government of
Victoria to promote the objects of the Dublin Exhibition, forms a fitting
conclusion to the remarks already given :
To the Committee appointed by the Government op Victoria
TO PROMOTE THE OBJECTS OP THE DUBLIN EXHIBITION.
Gentlemen,
I have the honor and pleasure of handing you the following report on the
awards of the Jurors in reference to the Victorian exhibits. I find by the colonial
catalogue that at the International Exhibition, London, 1862, there were 542
exhibitors to whom were awarded 111 medals and 92 honorable mentions, being
relatively to the number of exhibitors 20'4 per cent, of the former, and 16 9 per
cent, of tha latter. At the present Exhibition 141 exhibitors are represented, to
whom have been awarded 34 medals and 62 honorable mentions, being 24-1 per
cent, of the former, and 43-9 per cent, of the latter, establishing a most satisfactory
advance on the London figures.
The reason for this great excess of mentions is that in some sections the
Jurors would only award medals where there was conspicuous merit, and the con-
sequence is that in many instances honorable mentions here are equal to some of
the medals of 1862. For example, the pyramid, according to the rules of the
London Exhibition, should have received a medal, also the very fine and carefully
prepared samples of gold-dust, nuggets, &c. I took every precaution in seeing
that the Jurors saw all the goods, and explained everything as far as my limited
instructions would allow. The instructions, said to have been sent in the Great
Britain, were either lost or not forwarded ; and in consequence of this miscarriage,
it will be more difficult to get samples in exchange for the colony at the close of the
Exhibition, as I shall be compelled to wait until the last moment to see if duplicate
instructions arrive. At the time the Jurors were going round, I discovered that
they were in many instances very difficult to get together, they being professors
and men of business, and their time in consequence valuable ; this being the case


I took the precaution of sending in lists of the goods for each section whenever the
Jurors were announced to go round. I also kept duplicate lists for them, which
I handed to them when they arrived, containing more particulars than could
be allowed in the official catalogue ; by doing this, I not only prevented the
goods from being overlooked, but was enabled to take notes as the Jurors went
on, thinking, perhaps a few remarks would,not be uninteresting to some of the
exhibitors ; this information I should have forwarded long since, but as the
awards could not be published until all the reports were in (the last report did
not go into the office until the 30th of September), I was obliged to keep what
information I had as strictly private.
The following are the awards and opinions of the Jurors
Bank of Australasia. —The Jurors could not, according to their rules, give a
medal for the collection of gold-dust, as they considered that, although very nicely
prepared for exhibition, it was, after all, a matter of capital with the bank, they
not being the actual finders; and, in fairness to other exhibitors in this section,
an honorable mention only was awarded “ for the fine series of samples of gold.”
Union Bank of Australia. —For the reasons just stated, the Jurors awarded
an honorable mention “ for samples of Victoria and New Zealand gold.”
Amos, Robert. —The samples were considered good; but, as the Jurors pre-
sumed that there was no new process used in the rolling, they could only award an
honorable mention “ for exhibition of iron of excellent quality.”
Barnard, W. —The smelted tin was considered good, and the Jury awarded
an honorable mention “ for stream and smelted tin.”
Bland, R. H. —Not an illustrative collection, and therefore only obtained
honorable mention “ for auriferous quartz from the Clunes Mining Company.”
Clarke, William, jun. —These specimens were considered good, and of much
more importance than the last. The Jurors awarded an honorable mention “ for
specimens of silver ore.”
Cornwall, A. —Considered well made, and entitled to an honorable mention
“ for collection of glazed earthenware.”
Dermott, Messrs. —This collection, although smaller,’was much admired for
the beauty and richness of some of the specimens, and the Jurors awarded an
honorable mention “ for specimens of gold and auriferous quartz.”
Gibbs, B. R. —Some of the specimens were considered very f interesting,
especially the piece of a tree found amongst the washdirt at so great a depth (460
feet). Honorable mention awarded “for specimens of gold and auriferous quartz.”
Glew, John. —The specimens were considered very well made, the bricks
being very solid. Honorable mention “ for ornamental bricks and clay.”
Humffray, J. B. —The slates were too thick, and could obtain no mention in
consequence.
Knight, J. G., F R. 1 ., B.A. —The pyramid much admired, but could obtain
no mention for it, as it was only a model of the one at the Exhibition of ’62 ; but,
as the stones were a very interesting collection, the Jurors awarded an honorable
mention “ for building stones.”
Lang and Co. —Considered very nice specimens. Honorable mention “ for
exhibition of various limestones.”
Latham and Watson, Messrs. —As full particulars were given, the specimens
formed a very interesting collection, and the Jurors awarded a medal “ for a well-
selected and instructive collection of auriferous quartz, &c.” This is the only
medal awarded for minerals in the Victorian department.


Latrobe Tin Mining Company. —A very small, but considered an interesting
collection. Honorable mention “ for exhibition of tin ores” awarded.
Mclllwraith and Co —The sheets and pipes being very well made, the Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “ for manufactured sheet lead and pipes.”
Marks, George. —Honorable mention “ for collection of drain pipes and
pottery.”
O'Malley, M. —The collection being large and very interesting, the Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “ for exhibition of auriferous ores.”
Strong, Mr. —The specimens were considered exceedingly good, aud entitled
to an honorable mention “ for fine specimens of antimony ores.”
Lyons, J. C. —Lignite, considered important from the fact of the bed being
over 115 feet thick. Honorable mention “ for lignite and manures.”
It will be observed from the previous remarks that Medals for mineral sub-
stances were exceedingly difficult to obtain, and unless a collection was very
complete, there was no chance whatever of obtaining the distinction.
Boardman, P.— Samples of the essential oils were given to the Jurors for
examination; and finding them very good, especially the peppermint, they
awarded a medal “ for collection of essential oils.”
Bosisto, J. This interesting collection of gums, essential oils, &c., was
carefully examined by the Jurors ; and taking into consideration the quality and
importance of the same, they awarded a medal “ for collection of essential oils.”
Hall, J. —Arrowroot, very good, but could not expect any mention for a
small sample.
Hart, Thomas. —Galls, very fine, but the Jurors could not mention them.
Hood and Co. —From the remarks of the Jurors made in my presence, I
discovered that they intended only giving an honorable mention for the case; but,
as I considered the chemicals deserved more than this, I looked out for the Jurors
next morning, and succeeded in finding one of the gentlemen, to whom I explained
the matter, and he very kindly visited the Victorian department, when I opened
the case, and we went through the things together. After carefully re-examining
this case, and everything else in the chemical section contained in the Victorian
department, he told me that he would explain the oversight (caused in the hurry
of business) to the other Jurors as soon as they met that morning, and no doubt
they would return and again look over the goods in their section. As soon as
they met, the gentleman laid the case before them, and they came and re-examined
all the goods, and took samples for leisure examination of all oils, &c., of import-
ance, and were pleased to award medals that I could not have otherwise obtained.
For Messrs. Hood and Co.’s collection, they would, had it not been against the
rules of the Juries, have awarded a medal for soap, and another for chemicals;
but, as it was, they awarded a medal “ for superior collection of chemicals, and
for soap preparation for sheep-washing.”
Hobson’s Bay Soap and Candle Company.— The sample of tallow was con-
sidered exceedingly good, and the soaps well made, and the collection entitled to a
medal “ for superior soap and tallow.”
Macdonald, C. —The samples of salt manufactured by the above were con-
sidered good, and the Jurors awarded an honorable mention “for samples of
curing-salt from Lake Bolac.”
Macmeikan, James, and Co.— l fully expected a “ mention” at least for this
collection, and was much disappointed, when I saw the awards, at not finding one,
I wrote to the Superintendent concerning this collection, and other exhibitors so
circumstanced. A copy of the letter will be found in another part of this report.
As we have had a grain and fruit show at the Exhibition, I endeavoured to get the
manures in, and get a medal or “ mention” one way or another, but found the
Jurors for the show would not take individual exhibitors from the colonies, as the


goods had had medals, &c., awarded already where there was merit; so I was
obliged to put in the whole collection of grain, peas, and manures, as exhibiting on
behalf of the Colony of Victoria, and by so doing, obtained the only special medal,
I believe, of the Exhibition, “for highly creditable collection of grain, seeds,
modelled fruit, manures, &c.” In making up the samples of manures for analysis,
I was careful in taking them from a good depth in the bags, so that the analyses
should tell as well, as possible. I also took great pains in explaining that the
manures had obtained a gold medal in ’62 ; and also took the precaution of
sending two or three circulars in the parcel, so that the fact might be fully
impressed on their minds; but, after all this trouble, I am very sorry to report
that the Jurors made no award.
Slater, W. H. —This collection although small, was considered important and
entitled to a medal “ for collection of essential oils.”
Allan and Baldry, Messrs. —The flour was considered well prepared and very
rich in gluten, and fully deserved a medal “for excellent quality of flour.”
Anderson, Tf illiam. —The sample of wheat considered very good, and the Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat.”
Buchanan, James. —Sample very good and entitled to an honorable mention
“ for good quality of wheat.”
Connor, J. H. —-Spring wheat very good, and barley fair, and the Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat and barley.”
Clark, A., and Co. —The spring wheat and oats being very large and good, the
Jurors awarded a medal “for excellent quality of spring wheat, oats, and barley.”
Coffey, Jeremiah. —The samples sent were supposed to be, if anything, the
best in the building, and therefore the Jurors awarded a medal “ for excellent
quality of wheat.”
Dyer, Robert. —The oats fair, but could not be mentioned.
Dewar, William.— Honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat.”
Dewar, John. —Considered very good, and also entitled to an honorable men-
tion “for good quality of wheat.”
Foord, J. —Flour very good, but could not get it mentioned.
Graham, J. —On reweighing the samples, it was found that the white Tuscan
wheat was 66 T 2 g lbs. per bushel instead of lbs. ; and the white Lammas was
found to be 67 lbs. instead of 68 lbs.; the Jurors however considered it fully enti-
tled to an honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat.”
Hancock, A. P. —Awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat.”
Junior, David. —Considered fair, but could not get the oats mentioned.
McLaren. W. —Seed good, clean, and entitled to an honorable mention.
Maunder, G. —Jurors awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of
wheat.”
Matthews, W. —Wheat good and oats fair ; honorable mention awarded “ for
good quality of wheat and oats.”
Ovens and Murray Agricultural Society. —A nice collection of grain and flour,
and fully entitled to a medal “ for wheat, oats, and flour.”
Officer, John. —Very good samples; honorable mention awarded “for good
quality of wheat.”
Reynolds, J. N. —Samples good ; Jury awarded honorable mention “ for good
quality of oats and barley.”
Sheedy, M. —Sample very good and fully entitled to an honorable mention
“ for good quality of wheat.”
Thompson, John. —Jury awarded an honorable mention “for good quality of
wheat.”


Bencraft, George.— l am much disappointed in being obliged to report that
no award has been made for this complete collection. I took every pains in send-
ing down samples to be cooked for the jury dinner, and also for leisure examina-
tion, and I have had the Jurors’ reports and notes looked carefully over, but no
mention can be found. The Jurors will not re-examine an article of this description
unless they find some note in their books that has been overlooked.
.It w iH be seen from the following remarks that I did all I could both with
the jurors and official staff.
In order to save the last mail, I got the privilege of seeing the printed proofs
of the juror’s awards (this was considered a very great favor and only to be
obtained through the influence of Mr. Bright, of Liverpool, and Mr. Simmonds, the
Colonial Superintendent, and then only on condition that the information should
be kept strictly private, and only sent to the Colony, as the awards were not to be
published until the 2nd of October). On carefully examining the proofs, to my
surprise, I could discover no mention of either Messrs. Macmeikan and Co.’s, Mr.
F. Fordham’s, or Mr. Bencraft’s goods, and the following is a copy of a letter sent
by me to the General Superintendent who had the whole management of the
juries :
J. F. Islin, Esq.
“ Sir,
“ On looking over the lists of awards which you were kind enough to allow
me to inspect, I have been much surprised at the omission of all mention of several
exhibits of acknowledged excellence, and which I was led to expect would receive
marked consideration at the hands of the Jurors. For example, in section 2, James
Macmeikan and Co , Flemington, superphosphate manures, charcoal puff, coal
dust, &c., have been completely left out, although for the same goods they obtained
a gold medal at the International Exhibition, London, 1862, and a first-class
certificate at the Victorian Exhibition, held in the same year ; in section 3,
George Bencraft, Melbourne, prize oatmeal, groats, and patent barley, is similarly
circumstanced, as is also Frank Fordham, Emerald Hill, assorted oilman’s stores,
pickles, sauces, jams, &c.
“ I have rendered every assistance in my power to the Jurors by sending
them samples of the exhibits in my department for leisure examination, by
directing their special attention to exhibits the excellence of which had been
unavoidably overlooked, and even in obtaining a reinspection of exhibits by tbe
Juries, who were glad of the opportunity afforded for the revision of their notes.
More than this I could not do ; and I am satisfied that great disappointment will
be felt in the colony by some of the exhibitors when the awards are published.
My object in addressing you on the subject is to ask whether you will be kind
enough to ascertain if such instances as I have specified have been omitted
through inadvertence, and, if so, to exercise the influence you undoubtedly possess
to get some recognition of the articles from the Juries.
“ Apologising for thus troubling you on a matter of little general interest to
the Exhibition, but of great consequence to some of the exhibitors,
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servant,
“(Signed) C. S. OVERY.”
The morning after sending in the above note, I saw Mr. Islin, and he
informed me that he could not get all the Jurors together again, but had caused
the notes and reports of the Jurors to be carefully overlooked. He had also made
enquiries of the only two Jurors then remaining in Dublin, and had discovered
that they did intend awarding a medal to Mr. Fordham, but could say nothing
about either Mr. Bencraft’s or Messrs. Macmeikan and Co.’s goods, owing to the
length of time that had elapsed.
Fordham, Frank. —After much trouble, a medal was awarded “ for excellence
of quality of pickles and jams.”


Smith and Son.— Some of the biscuits were found to have a peculiar oily
flavour; but the Jurors, taking into consideration the distance the goods had
travelled, awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of biscuits.”
Erie, Munn, and Young.— You will doubtless have heard by the time you
receive this that the Glencove Maizena Company have been not only trying to
stop me exhibiting the Australian product, but also to prevent Messrs. Urie,
Munn, and Young, taking a medal for the same. However, the Lord Chancellor
would not prevent me exhibiting, and the Exhibition Committee would not inter-
fere with the awards of the Jurors ; so I hope to have the pleasure of sending the
medal awarded “ for excellent quality of Australian maizena” by the next mail.
Bignell, H. —The cask was opened for the Jurors, and samples sent to the
Jury dinner ; but, previously to the dinner, I took the precaution to have the
samples of beef soaked in clean water for at least thirty-six hours, in order to get
the salt out; and I am glad to say that it succeeded so well, that it was not only
mild and exceedingly tender, but that it was much better than the salt beef
obtained in this country, and the Jurors awarded a medal “for excellent quality of
meat and neat's-foot oil.”
Crofts, J. —The butter was not opened until the last moment, and the flavor
was found to be rather salt, and not so good as was anticipated. The cheese was
better, and the Jury awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of cheese.”
Watson and Paterson.— The beef and bacon were treated in the same way as
Mr. Bignell’s, and found to be quite as mild and tender. It is thought here that a
good trade might be done in this article if it could be forwarded at a reasonable
price. The Jurors awarded a medal “ for excellent quality of beef and bacon.”
Victoria Sugar Company .— The samples of sugar were considered very good,
and the white spirit and rum fair. The Jurors awarded a medal “ for excellent
quality of sugar,” and honorable mention “ for white spirit and rum.”
Dunn, R. and Co. —The gin and whiskey opened well, and the Jurors awarded
a medal “ for excellent quality of whiskey and gin.”
Martin, P. J. —The cask of ale was very bright, but a little hard. The bottled
stout opened well however, and the Jurors awarded a medal “for excellent quality
of stout.”
Wild, Edward. —The bottled ale opened well and was nice and bright ; the
bottled stout opened very fair and the Jurors awarded a medal “for excellent
quality of ale,” and honorable mention “ for good quality of stout.”
Ear del, H.— The Burgundy opened fair, also the Closter ; but the Closter of
1862 had gone off a little. The Jurors, taking into consideration the distance the
samples had travelled, awarded an honorable mention “ for good collection of wines.”
Everest, J. T. I have much pleasure in reporting that all the samples opened
well and the Jurors were pleased to award a medal “for excellent quality of
Mataro, Carignan, and Hermitage wines,” and honorable mention “ for general
collection.”
Maplestone, O. —These samples opened rather better, and the Jurors awarded
an honorable mention “ for good quality of wines.”
Pettavel, D. —Samples opened fair, Ho. 3 being the best, and the Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of wines.”
Rau, H.— These, if anything, opened better than the last, and the Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “for good quality of white wine.”
Schubach, Sebastian.— The samples of Tokay did not open well, but the other
wines opened pretty fair, the Reisling and Verdeilho being the best, and Jurors
awarded an honorable mention “for good quality of Verdeilho and Reisling.”
Weber Brothers— The Hermitage and Burgundy opened badly, but tbe
Chasselas was very good, and the Jurors awarded an Honorable Mention “for good
quality of wine marked A.,” this being the Chasselas.


Loughnan Brothers. —Samples of the different kinds of tobacco were sent
down, and the Jurors, considering that there was much praise due, were pleased 'to
award a medal “for colonial-grown and manufactured tobacco.”
Moss, White, and Co., Messrs. —These cigars proved to be far superior to any
others in the colonial gallery, and the Jurors considered them fully entitled to, and
awarded, a medal “ for excellent quality of cigars.”
Owen, Dudgeon, and Arnell, Messrs. —This was considered a very nice collection,
and the samples being very good, the Jurors awarded a medal “for excellent
quality of colonial-grown and manufactured tobacco and snuff's.”
Todt, Mr. —This being the best collection of the kind in the building, the
Jurors were pleased to award a medal to Mr. Todt “for his collection of fruits,
vegetables, &c.”
Cunningham and Macredie Jurors awarded a medal “ for twenty-four very-
line prize fleeces of wool.”
Acclimatization Society of Victoria. —The samples were considered exceedingly
fine, and the Jurors awarded a medal “for alpaca and angora goats hair.
Timbrell, Mrs. —Silk and sheepskin imitation wicker baskets were much
admired, and’ the silk collection having evidently been prepared with much care
and skill, the Jurors were pleased to award a medal “ for fine collection of cocoons
and silk,” and honorable mention “for sheepskin ornamental work.”
Alcock and Co. —The polished slabs and stand of turned woods were con-
sidered very good, and the Jurors were pleased to award a medal “for polished
slabs of wood.”
Arnold. C— This being a very large and varied collection of well-finished
pipes, the Jurors awarded a medal “for collection of well-made pipes of the
wood of the Acacia homalophylla, or sweet-scented myallwood.”
Anderson and Wright.— The planks were considered very fine specimens, and
the Jurors awarded a Medal “for planks of colonial woods.”
Mueller, Dr., F.R.S These woods were considered a very interesting collec -
tion, and the Jurors awarded an honorable mention “for small collection of.
colonial woods.”
Champ, Colonel,— Hats, blankets, and rugs, considered very good, and the
Jurors awarded an honorable mention “ for blankets and rugs, creditable to the
colony.”
Davis, Finlayson, and Hutcheson. —Very good shoddy, and the Jurors awaided
an honorable mention “ for good quality of manufactured woollen flocks.”
Clark and Son. —Samples of leather, very good, but almost too expensive for
this market. Jury have awarded a medal “ for a good assortment of leathers, and
for excellence of currying.”
Dillon, James.— Jury have awarded an honorable mention “for well prepared
cat-skins for furriers’ use.”
Robertson, John.— The feathers, being beautifully dyed, were much admired
by the Jurors, who were pleased to award a medal “for very well dyed emu
feathers.”
Letheby. Mrs.— Articles of this description, although much admired, could not,
as a rule, get a medal. The Jurors awarded an honorable mention tor good
ornamental leather-work.”
Cornell, F. —The views exceedingly good, and the Jurors awarded an
honorable mention “ for good manipulation. ’
Liqar, C. W. —The importance of Osborne’s process was well appreciated by
the Jurors, who awarded a medal “ for maps of Victoria gold-fields, obtained by
the photo-lithographic process of W. Osborne.” -
v V -A


Nettleton, C. —Views good, and the Jurors have awarded an honorable
mention “ for good manipulation.”
Selwyn, A. 11. C. —This is the best map of the kind in the building, and the
Jurors were pleased to award a medal to Mr. Selwyn “ for his most admirable
and valuable geological map of parts of the colony.”
Cole, Benjamin. —Honorable mention “ for good quality of white peas.”
Kinnersley, David. —Sample considered good, and the Jurors awarded an
honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat.”
Stewart Brothers. —Sample very fair, and honorable mention awarded “ for
good quality of oats.”
Rowe, J. P. —Jurors awarded an honorable mention “for good quality of
wool.”
Anderson Brothers. —Sample of white Tuscan wheat, considered very good,
and the Jurors awarded an honorable mention “ for good quality of wheat.”
Cox, W. —Malting barley, good, and the Jurors awarded an honorable
mention “for good barley.”
Law, Somner, and Co. —Considered a nice collection, and the Jurors awarded
an honorable mention “for good quality of seeds.”
Orlebar, Mr. —The cheese was not good, but the wheat was considered entitled
to an honorable mention “for good quality of wheat.”
Turner, J. ll. —The case of beautifully washed wools arrived two or three
days after the Jurors in section 4 had finished their labours. I tried to get them
to meet again, but was informed that, as the wools were only washed and the
collection small, they were not of sufficient importance to call a meeting of Jurors
for this case alone; however, as I considered that the case deserved some re-
cognition, I endeavoured to get other juries to take it in their sections, and suc-
ceeded in getting the case examined by the worsted Jurors, who seemed well
acquainted with the importance of wool-washing in Victoria, and were pleased to
award a medal “for excellent quality of washed wools.”
Wright, T. —Sample of barley, considered very fair, and the Jurors awarded
an honorable mention “for good quality of barley.”
It will be seen from the foregoing remarks that we have had some rather
hard fighting, and I am glad to say that the number of awards in the Victorian
department has far exceeded any other in the colonial gallery.
Canada has 24 medals and 25 honorable mentions,
Nova Scotia has 21 medals and 21 honorable mentions,
Victoria has 34 medals and 62 honorable mentions,
also one special medal, making in all 35, giving 11 more medals and 37 honorable
mentions than Canada.
I cannot conclude this report without directing your attention to the great
pains which the Jurors took in the execution of their arduous and difficult task.
It is no easy matter, even in the absence of distracting influences, to decide
satisfactorily as to relative merit, when all the competing objects*are of a high
degree of excellence, and the difficulty is consequently greatly increased when
decisions have to be made under circumstances of great excitement and in presence
of conflicting interests. As has already been stated, I have on more than one
occasion considered it my duty to urge the claims of the Victorian exhibitors with
some degree of pertinacity, but it is gratifying to state, that my representations
were always received by the Jurors in the best possible spirit. The Jurors in
section 2 (chemical) were particularly obliging, as were those in sections 1 and 3;
the duties of the latter were of a most disagreable character, involving the tasting
of a miscellaneous collection of food substances, frequently resulting in the tem-


porary derangement of individual health ; and it is only surprising that the Jurors
have been able to decide on the merits of such a variety of exhibits, the judging of
which the senses of taste and smell had to be continuously exercised. On the
whole I trust that the Committee will be satisfied with the number and rank of
the awards in the Victorian department, and have the honor to remain,
Gentlemen,
Your most obedient servant,
October 18, 1865, CHARLES S. OVERY.
The following extracts, taken from the reports of the Jurors of the
Dublin Exhibition, confirm the remarks of Mr. Overy, and fully reward
the enterprising colonists who exhibited on that occasion :
SECTION 3.
Substances used as Food.
None of the articles shown in this section possess greater interest than the
seeds. The specimens contributed from the Colony of Victoria embrace wheat,
oats, barley, Indian corn, flax, tares, beans, peas, and prairie grass. Of these, the
leguminous seeds are of excellent quality; the oats and barley are, on the whole,
only of mediocre quality; but the wheat is particularly good; of a fine color,
with smooth skin, and on the average weighing sixty-eight pounds per bushel,
this Australian wheat will some day become a favorite with the British miller and
public. The flour prepared from this wheat is of good quality, and is particularly
rich in gluten. It consequently would prove a good “ muscle-forming” food. The
millers of Victoria appear to be very skilful in their business, for this flour is
exceedingly fine, and the “ sharps” have been deprived of every trace of farina.
The foods and beverages contributed by this colony include arrowroot, groats,
bread, biscuits, maizena, maccaroni, semolina, vermicelli, pickles, sauces, butter,
cheese, bacon, beef, confectionery, porter, ale, whiskey, wine, white spirit, rum,
treacle, and sugar. One of the most interesting articles in the Victorian collection
is the “ mess- beef.” It has been simply well salted and carefully packed in casks.
After two days’ steep it retains but a small proportion of salt, and possesses an
excellent flavor, as well as being tender. This meat is a far more palatable food
than the jerked beef which hitherto has been imported from South America; and
if it were imported in sufficient quantity, and offered at a moderate price—say 4d.
per pound—it would be certain to command a large sale. The Colony of Victoria
is one of the most distant dependencies of the British Crown ; and when beef can
be conveyed without deterioration from a region so remote to this country, it
seems strange that colonies nearer home should not supply the mother country with
this prized commodity. Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick have extensive
pastures on which vast quantities of animal food could be cheaply produced. As
the sea passage between these countries and our own occupies less than a fort-
night, beef and mutton could be imported from them in winter in a fresh state, or
but slightly pickled. At present, the demand for animal food is very great; and
as the supplies of it are likely to be seriously diminished by the ravages of the
cattle plague, a useful hint might be taken from the fact that good corned beef
can be obtained from Australia, Australia sends salted beef of such good quality,
that it might easily be palmed off as of home preparation. In the matter of wine,
there is a manifest improvement since 1862, both in character, variety, and
manufacture. The malt liquors and whiskey, also, are on a par with the British.
The other colonies are not nearly so well represented in this section as
Victoria.
By Authority: John ITbee.es, Government Printer, Melbourne.








■


