

£>PrrV)
(iiruiGious pahs
THIRD EDITION.
Box is
THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH uaihduc,
and THE CHURCH OF ROME.
Extracts and Notes by a British Layman.
“ The Apostles and about one hundred and twenty disciples, men and
women, met in an upper room at Jerusalem, and Peter stood up in the
midst and preached to them.”—(Acts i. 13-15.)
“ Barnabas and Saul assembled with the Church and taught much
people. And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.”
(Acts xi. 26.) This shows the first named Christians as a Church,
was at Antioch. No less than ten Councils were held there between
A.n. 252 and A.D. 480, and the Church acknowledged no ecclesiastical sub-
mission to any other see in the world. “ Barnabas and Saul assembled
themselves with the Church for a whole year and taught much people.
“The Emperor Justinian repaired the city in a.d. 529 and called it
Theopolis—that is ‘ The City of God.’ (Oalmet’s Dictionary of the
Bible.) Tertullian, a.d. 190, states, “ Places inaccessible to the Romans
are subdued to Christ; ” and Origen, a.d. 240, states that “ The Church
in the British Isles holds the religion of Christ.” British bishops were
present at the Church Councils held at Arminium, a.d. 3>) 9 . The
Saxon conquest was complete and pagan darkness reigned in great
part of Britain. Two young men from Britain, of fair complexion,
were offered for sale in the slave market at Rome. Pope Gregory the
Great saw them, and being interested in their appearance and nation
he organised a Roman Catholic Mission with Augustine to proceed to
Britain, a.d. 596. About seven years after the landing of Augustine
the ancient Welsh British Church, with their biahopa and clergy, met
Augustine in conferonee.
St. Jerome in 386 retired to Bethlehem, Pilgrims from the British
Isles visited him there, (see Roman Society by S. Dill, 1899).
Archbishop Parker, Primate in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth— one
of the preservers of that time of the Independence of Canterbury
against Papal Rome— he partly rested his argument on the
independence of the early British Church. (See E. A. Freeman’s
Historical Essays, page 316, 1892.)
CLONFERT CATHEDRAL was built a.d. 558, 39 years before
St. Augustine landed in England, this Cathedral is one of the
smallest, yet one of the most beautifffrand ancient hist oric Cathedrals
in the three Kingdoms ; before Trinity College, Dublin, was founded,
Clonfert was proposed as a site for a University, being in the Centre
of Ireland. The Cathedral has existed as a place of worship until
1900, and still exists, and they are collecting money to repair it.
The British never accepted the Law of Rome, and never saw a
Papal Roman Empire existing in Great Britian.
“I discovered that the so-called Roman Catholic, w T as not even the
Latin Church, and less the Roman; and that the Papacy as we
understand the term now, so far from being Apostolic or Primitive,
was later than Gregory the First.”: (See “National Review,” June,
iqoo, page, 589, and papers by Arthur Galton in the same Review,
from April to July, 1900.) * See page 13.
U, A 1 Ioo*>
r j


When Augustine landed in Britain, a.d. 597, he found no less than
seven Bishops and one Archbishop in existence, and that “the British
Church had customs which the Roman Church had followed until a.d.
458 ; and that it knew nothing of Romanism previous to that date.
Subsequent to that date, the Church of Rome had introduced changes
with which the British Church refused to conform, or to submit to its
supremacy. On the contrary, the foreign bishops became Anglicised ;
but neither priest nor people became subservient to Rome although
for some years it was in communion with—but never under the control
of—Rome.* (G. H. F. Nye, “Church and Her History,” 1892.)
“An ancient church has been discovered at Oilchester in a.d. 1890,
which has its apse to the west, but otherwise resembles, in places, the
numerous chapels of the 4th and sth centuries in Syria. The British
examples can hardly be later than 410 a.D. and therefore two centuries
before the mission of Augustine.” (Edinburgh Review , Jan., 1895.)
During more than six hundred years from the time of Tacitus the
historian in the Ist century, who mentioned the strange way in which
they (the Irish) affected even the organization of the early Christian
Church, which to a very large extent was shaped in Ireland after the
habits and ideas of the tribes and septs. Its great monastic institu-
tions were “essential clans,” and abbots were rulers in virtue of their
birth after the manner of succession which prevailed among their
chiefs and kings.” {Edinburgh Review , April, 1885.)
In fact it is highly probable that the Christian Churches in early
Ireland were founded upon a model of which the New Testament
affords several examples. For instance : “ Greet Priscilla and Aquila,
my helpers in Christ Jesus. Likewise greet the Church that is in
their house.”—Romans xvi. 1-5.
“ And all the brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of
Galatia.”—(Gal. i. 2.) (And be it remembered the Galatians, like the
Irish, were of Celtic origin.)
“Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nyraphas, and the
Church which is in his house.”- (Colossians iv. 15.)
Ireland, since abandoning the old Irish Church, forms an almost soli-
tary example of a nation in which national interest and national pride
are sacrificed to Romanism.f
The grant of Ireland by Pope Adrian was but the seal of approbation
to the conquest by the Normans. Celtic Ireland was neither Papal
nor inclined to submit itself to the Papacy until Henry 11. riveted the
Romish yoke upon it.
* “Communion” does not necessarily imply either union or submission, e.g. the
Episcopal Church in America was in communion with the Church of England,
yet was in no way controlled or ruled by it.
flrishmen in ordinary business will not buy before search as to facts and value
of the goods ; how much more is it necessary to search the Bible to see that his
religious belief is in accordance with the Holy Book? (See Acts xviii. 11)
“If the blind lead the blind they both fall into the ditch.” (Matt, xv, 14)
“ Eyes have they and will not see ; ears have they and will not hear,”


The definition of the term “ Catholic ” (or Universal) cannot be ex-
clusively applied to any local church (or assembly of believers). The
Greek Church, the English Church, the Roman Church, the Churches
iu Asia, Alexandria and Antioch have definite meaning and location,
but the “ Church Catholic” embraces the professing members of Christ
throughout the world of every kindred and every tribe. (See Acts ix.
31, xi. 26 j Gal. i. 2 ; Mark ix. 38-40 ; Rom. xi. 13 ; Matt. viii. 14.)
Creeds are essential to the various churches, being a definition and a
declaration as to what an adherent must accept, and subscribe to, as the
basis of his belief.
THE CREED OF THE ANCIENT CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
As Composed at
The Council of Nice, A.D, 325,
Recapitulated by
The Council of Constantinople, A.D. 381
The Councilof Ephesus, A.D. 431
The Council of Chalcedon, A.D. 451
Proved to have continued unchanged by
The Council of Trent, Feb. 4, A.D. 1546.
This was the Creed of the Christian Church up to December 9th, 1564.
This was the Creed of St. Patrick and is now the Creed of the Protestant
Church of the United Kingdom.
THE CREED OF THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
of all things visible and invisible.
And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of His
Father beiore all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God,
Begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made : Who for us men, and for our salvation came down from heaven, and
was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man, and
was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, and
the third day He rose again according to the Scriptures; He ascended into heaven,
and sitteth on the right hand of the Father. And lie shall come again with glory
to judge both the quick and the dead : Whose kingdom shall have no end.
And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceedeth
from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, who spake by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholic
and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins, and
I look for the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen
XII. NOVEL ARTICLES
Added to this Ancient Creed by Pope Pius IV.
And Published as the New Creed of the Modern Church of Rome, December 9th,
A.D. 1664.
This Creed was not known in the Christian Church until December
9th, 1564. It was never heard of by St. Patrick, and yet it is now
the Creed of the Church of Rome.
See page u of Appendix for “The Inventions of Rome.’’
Dean Merivale, Paganism was assimilated, not extirpated yb the
Church of Rome,”


Header, which is the New Creed, and which is the Old One ?—which
ic the New Church, and which is the Old One ?
Surely you must see and acknowledge from the above, that the Creed
of the Church of Rome, composed a.d. 1564, is the New Creed , and that
the Creed received by Catholic Protestants, and composed a.d. 325, is
the Old Creed!
I.—l most steadfastly admit and embrace Apostolic.il and Ecclesiastical Traditions
and all other observances and constitutions of the same Church.
lI,—I also admit the Holy Scripture, according to that sense which our Holy
mother the Church has held and does hold, to which it belongs to judge of the
true sense and interpretation of the Scriptures ; neither will I ever take and
interpret them otherwise than according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.
lII.—I also profess, that there are truly and properly ceven Sacraments of the
new law, instituted by Jesus Christ, our Lord, and necessary for the salvation of
mankind, though not all for every one ; to wit. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony, and that they confer grace;
and that of these, Baptism, Confirmation and Orders cannot be reiterated withou i
sacrilege ; and I alto receive and admit the received end approved ceremonies of
the Catholic Church, used in the solemn administration of all the aforesaid
Sacraments.
IV.—I embrace and receive all and every ono of the things which have been
defined and declared in the Holy Council of Trent, concerning original ein and
justification.
V.—l profess, likewise, that in tho mass there is offered to God a true, proper
and propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead ; and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist there are trr I y, really and substantially the body and
blood, together with the soul and divimuy of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that
there is made a conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the body,
and of the whole substance of the wine into the blood ; which conversion the
Catholic Church calls transubstantiatiou. I also confess, that under either kind
alone, Christ is received whole and entire, and a true sacrament.
VI.—I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory, and that the souls therein
detained are helped by the suSrages of the faithful.
Vll.—Likewise, that the saints, reigning together with Christ, are to b e
honored and invocated ; and that they offer prayers to God for us and that their
relics are to be held in veneration.
VIIL—I most firmly assert that the images of Christ of the Mother of God,
ever virgin, and also of other saints, may be had and retained ; and that due
honour and veneration are to be given them.
IX.—I also affirm that the power of indulgences was left by Christ in the
Church, and that the use of them is most wholesome to Christian people.
X.—l acknowledge the Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church for the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches ; and I promise and swear true obedience to
the Bishop of Rome, Successor to St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ.
XI.—I likewise undoubtedly receive and profess all other things delivered,
defined and declared by the Sacred Canons and General Councils, and particularly
by the Holy Council of Trent; and. I condemn, reject and anathematize all
things contrary thereto, and all Heresies which tho Church has condemned,
rejected and anathematized.


XII.—I, N. X, Jo at till'. present freely profess and sincerely hold this true
Catholic faith, without which no one can be saved ; and I promise most con-
stantly to retain and confess th- same entire and inviolate, with God s assistance
to the end of my life. And I will take care, as far as in me lies , that it shall be
held, taught and preached by my subjects , or by those the care oj whom shall upP er '
tain to me in my office ; this I vow , promise and swear—so help me God and these
holy Gospels.*
LET ALL WHO READ THIS PAPER ATTEND TO THE FACTS IT
CONTAINS, AND THEY WILL AT ONCE UNDERSTAND THE TRUE
AND OLDEST CHURCH -CATHOLIC.
“ How is the true and ancient Church known ?
By holding the true and ancient faith
How is the new Church known ?
holding the new faith.
Then it follows that whatever Church holds the true and ancient
faith, which can to be proved to be so by Councils, and can stand the
test of the Scriptures, this is the true and ancient Church.
And whatever Church holds the new faith, that can neither stand
the test of proof by Councils, nor by the Scriptures, this is the new
Church.
What then is the true and ancient faith ?
Let us now ask was this whole Creed composed or known at the
first General Council ? No. The Church of England Creed, that is the
first part, was composed at the Council of Nice, establishing and ex-
panding the Apostles’ Creed, and thence called the Nicene Creed, a.d.
325.
The latter Creed, that of Pope Pius IV., a.d. 1564, was never heard
of in the Church at that time.
Thm—Was it composed at the second General Council, the Council of
Constantinople? No. This Council, held a.d. 381, recited and
improved again the Nicene Creed, but never heard of this new Creed.
Let us go to the third General Council, the Council of Ephesus, held
A.D. 431, and let us ask which of these Creeds was held by that
Council? Hear the very words of the Council itself. The Nicene
Creed, that is the first Creed, is read aloud ; circumstances are related
of some who attempted to alter it; then the Council decrees as follows.
DECREE OF THE COUNCIL OF EPHESUS.
“ These things having been read, the Holy Synod decreed, that it
should be lawful for no one to profess, to write or to compose, any
other form of faith than that defined by the Holy Fathers, who, with
the Holy Ghost, had been assembled at Nice.
•The word, in Italic institute this Creed the oath of all Roman Catholic Priests, Professor*
and Bishops—who must take it, and these are used when it is administered to them.


“ But those who shall have dared to compose, or to profess, or to
offer, any other form of Faith to those wishing to be converted to the
acknowledgment of the truth, whether from Paganism or from Judaism,
or from any sort of heresy, that these, if they were Bishops or Clergy-
men, that the Bishops should be deposed from their Episcopacy, and
the Clergy from their clerical office; but that if they were laymen they
should be subjected to an ‘anathema.’” Mansi., vol. hi., p. 1362,
We see this Creed, then, established up to the year 431.
Now we shall see the Decree of the next General Council, that of
Chalcedon, in the year 451, and see which of these Creeds was set forth
there:—
EXTRACT FROM THE COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON.
“ The Catholic faith delivered by the Holy 318 Fathers (viz., at
Nice), and by the Holy 150 Fathers (viz., at Constantinople), also by
the other most Holy and glorious Father (viz., at Ephesus), we guard,
and according to that we believe. The most Rev. Bishops exclaimed,
‘No person makes any other exposition of faith. We neither attempt
nor dare to do so. For the Fathers have taught, and writings preserved
those things which have been set forth by them ; and other than these
we cannot speak.
“ Those principles which have been set forth are sufficient; it is not
lawful to make any other exposition.”
We learn then from the Council of Chalcedon, that this was the
faith of the Church for four hundred and fifty-one years after our
Lord.
Now, we havs another infallible witness, to prove that it had never
been changed up to the year 1546. This witness the Church of Rome
must admit, for it is no less than her own Council of Trent. This
Council, in the Session held February 4th, 1546, declares as follows:
EXTRACT FROM THE THIRD SESSION OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT,
FEBRUARY 4, 1546.
“ In the name of the Holy and undivided Trinity of the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
“ 'I his holy, oecumenical, and general synod of Trent, lawfully assem-
bled in the Holy Ghost, the same three Legates of the Apostolical See
presiding in it, considering the magnitude of the subjects to be treated,
especially of those contained under these two heads, the extirpation of
Heresies, and the reformation of morals, on account of which chiefly it
has been assembled j but acknowledging with the Apostle that it has
not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with Spiritual wickedness in
Heavenly places. With the same Apostle it exhorts all and every one,
in the first place, that they should be strong in the Lord and in the
power of His might; in all things taking the shield of faith by which
they can quench all the fiery darts of the most wicked ; and that they
should take the helmet of the hope of salvation, with the sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God.


“ Therefore, that this its pious solicitude may have its beginning and
continuance by the Grace of God, it determines and decrees that before
all things the Confession of Faith is to be premised, following in this
the examples of the Fathers, who in their Sacred Councils were accus-
tomed to oppose this shield against all Heresies, in the beginning of
their actions, by which alone they both sometimes drew Infidels to the
faith, vanquished Heretics and confirmed the Faithful.
“ Wherefore it (the Council) commands that this Creed, which the
Holy Roman Church uses as that summary in which all ivho process
the Faith of Christ necessarily agree , and that firm and only foundation
against which the gates oj Hell shall nearer prevail , shall be lead in those
words in which it is read in all the Churches, which is as follows :
Then it recites the Nicene Creed, and not one Article of the New
Creed.
Now, mark these witnesses for the truth of the Creed.
We have first the Council of Nice, establishing and expanding the
Creed from the days of the Apostles, a.d. 325.
Then, this confirmed by the Council of Constantinople, a.d. 381.
Then, again, both by the Council of Ephesus, a.d. 431.
Then, again, these three by the Council of Chalcedon, a.d. 451.
We have the-Council of Ephesus denouncing those with an anathema
who shall dare to alter it, add to, or take from it.
Then we have the Council of Trent proving them all, asserting not
only that this was the true faith of the whole Christian Church, but
that it was “ the firm and only foundation oj faith against which the
gates of hell shall never prevail /' and this to the year of our Lord 1546.
Now which of these Creeds do these five Councils prove to be the
true Creed of the ancient Holy Catholic Church to the year 1546 ?
What Church holds it, and throws open the Bible to prove its truth to
the people ?
The first Creed only, the Apostolic Nicene Creed, is proved that of
the Holy Catholic Church.
This is the Creed of the Church of England , she throws open the
Bible to prove its truth to the people.
Whence came this New Creed then with its twelve Novel Articles ?
What Council set it up? What Council published it 1 What ancient
Church professed it? In what records of the Catholic Church is it to
be found ? Where did it originate ? What Church maintains it now ?
and does she throw open the Bible to prove it to the people ?
No Council ever set it up. No Council ever published it. It was
never seen in any book of the ancient Catholic Church. The Council
of Ephesus pronounced a curse on any who should ever publish any
such. The Council of Trent disowns it in the Creed she and
declar es the Old Creed to be the “ firm and only foundation of faith,


again?t which the gates of hell shall never prevail; ” and this in a.b.
1546, the very year that Luther died. This was the faith of the
Christian Church before Luther, and it is the faith of every true
Christian this day.
These twelve articles of this New Creed were first published in the
year 1564, by the Pope at Rome, who calls himself the vicar of Christ
on earth.
This is the Creed of the Church of Rome : she has turned from the
ancient faith to this novel Creed and she fears that the people should
read the Bible , or their children be taught it, because these principles oj
their new Creed are not to be found in the Word of God ”
“ Prove all things. Hold fast that which is good.”—(1 Thessalonians
v. 21.)
In order that we Protestants for all time may truly worship in the
Church Universal, in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, our fore-
fathers sacrificed their lives and their all, thereby protesting against the
very erorrs and corruptions which in these clays hordes of priests, and
laymen too, are striving to perpetuate.
The latest illustration is supplied in the Argus of the 12th of
August, 1895, where Archbishop Carr is reported as saying in a lecture
on “ the Catholic (Romish ?) Church and the Bible,” that the Roman
Catholic Church, from the earliest times “ had made enactments
enforcing the fullest education in scriptural knowledge for aspirants to
her priesthood.” •
Infinitely wiser and more scriptural is the Protestant teaching, that
this priceless knowledge should be shared by all mankind, and not
remain the exclusive possession of a professional class.
* “Search the Scriptures,”—John v. 39.
“They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched
the Scriptures daily.”—Acts xvii. 11.
The books of the Old and New Testament were first written in
Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee, Syriac, the language then spoken in Judea.
If written in any other language it should agree with the before-
mentioned if correct as to the part written.
“ There is the same conviction that, taken with all its difficulties,
the Bible is still the Book of books to all mankind, the fountain and
the bulwark of truth and holiness, the guide.both of LEARNED and
UNLEARNED into communion of thought and feeling. There is
the same quiet confidence that, standing high above the human specula-
tions which have gathered round it, it contains treasures of wisdom,
justice, toleration, freedom and love, which have never yet been exhaus-
ted.”—(Dean Stanley.)
*Many Priests say, “Read not the Scripture, for it is a sin to
take their dictum as to what you read and believe.” Believe
Christ the True Teacher, and not false Teachers.
It is clear that in all civilised cities, there are whole colonies—principally of
the feminine sex—of what may be called predestined dupes. They have the
helplessness of childhood without, alas! its innocency. They are mere food tor the
prowling rogues that hunt for their prey in human life as sharks do in the sea-
depths. And the most deadly of all rogues is the one who plays on the religious
sensibilities—or rather on the superstitious fears of his victims.


APPENDIX.
THE TEACHING of
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND is DEFINITE.
Vide the FOLLOWING ARTICLES.
Article 22. — ‘‘The Roman Doctrine concerning
Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and Adoration, as well of Images as
of Reliques,” and “also the Invocation of Saints is a fond thing vainly
invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the Word of God.”
Article 28, (Clause 2). —“Transubstantiation the said change of
the substance of Bread and Wine), in the Supper of the Lord, cannot
be proved by Holy Writ ; but is repugnant to the plain words of
Scripture,—overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament—and hath given
occasion to many superstitions.”
Article 28, (Clause 4.) —“The Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was
not by Christ’s ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up or
worshipped.” “ The Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in
their natural substances.” (See Clause end of Communion Service
of the Rubric.)
Article 31. —“The Sacrifice of Masses (query as to the author-
ity by an Anglican High Church Priest, or other person for
manufacturing from dough or any other substance,
divine or human body ?) in which it was commonly said that the
Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead (these Priestly
pretences in making a show of doing something—that no
power on earth can do —for Masses said for the dead or
buried, in order to release them from a place over which
no living person has control, the management of the be-
yond being subject to laws which transcend any pretence
of man to fathom),] to have remission of pain or guilt, were
blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits.”
* IS Dr. Temple, Archbishop of Canterbury to be trusted, when
he asserts, “To pray for the dead is not forbidden So
according to his dictum it is allowable to insert. . . . Matter
after the document has been duly executed without the sanction of
the legal party to the said document.”
*There is something very wong going on in the instrument of Logic if it turns
out such conclusions from such premises, especially from such persons.


UNION—NOT with ROME.
As her Dogmas are unsuitable to the British People.
The following extracts from ‘‘The Pope and the Council,” by
Janus, 1869, in a great measure shews the Church and System
which Newman, Pusey, and their High Church followers were and
are trying to get the people to embrace, in order to overthrow the
British Power, that all may become slaves of foreign tyranny :
The (Roman) Church presumes with a Foreign Semi-Potentate
at their head to have ‘‘the right of employing external coercion; she
has direct and indirect temporal powers Power of civil
and corporal punishments The Church (Roman) has an
external jurisdiction She can impose temporal punish-
ment.”
(For further particulars as to the presumption of the Roman
Catholic Church, see Pamphlet “Ultra - Ritualism,” Third
Edition, pages 22 and continued.)
Rome is the seat of Political Cunning Organization, aiming at
universal control in civil and religious matters. An enemy to the
welfare of the people of the British Empire. In civil matters the
intelligent citizens of the Church of Rome as a rule are clever, in
social, municipal, political affairs are also able persons, but in religious
matters are wilfully blind.
“Rome is infallible, Rome is eternal,
Rome is unchangeable, cruel and strong;
Leagued with legions of darkness infernal,
Crushing the right and upholding the wrong.”
And this is the Church which Newmanites, Puseyites, and their
High Church followers try to get the people into.
The Church of England has protested from its foundation
against :
1. The Roman corruptions 01 doctrine and suppression of
the Scriptures.
2. The Papal assumption of Spiritual and Temporal Power,
3, Its usurped authority to persecute to destruction all who
question its assumptions.
4. The establishment of Ceremonies, Institutions, Orders
and False Doctrines, which have resulted in the
Enslavement, Oppression and Degradation of the
People and Nations under its control, and th
Enrichment and Demoralisation of its own Hierachy.
The Church of England adopted and adhered to the grand Christian
Motto : — “Civil and Religious Liberty all over the World,”
of this she has been the faithful supporter, with the evident sanction
of God, she has steadily increased in Power, Dominion, Wealth, and
Intelligence.
“There is no principal on which the Protestant Church can be
permanently upheld, but that it is the Church which teaches the
truth.”—W. E. Gladstone, in the House of Parliament.


THE INVENTIONS OF ROME.
PAGAN and PAPAL
Dates of the Adoption of the New Doctrines and Ceremonies h\ the
Church of Rome. The Dogmatic Acts of this Church exceed
Comprehension and Contradict Reason.
I. Invocation of Saints - - 375
2. Prayers for the Dead - - 400
3, Worship in an Unknown
Tongue - 600
4. Supremacy of the Pope - 606
5. Worship of the Cross, Images
and Relics - - - 787
6. Constrained Celibacy of the
Clergy - - ' • - ipoo
7. Canonisation of Saints - 1000
8. Infallibility of the Church - 1076
9. Chaplets .... 1090
10. Sacrifice of the Mass - - noo
11. Seven Sacraments - - 1160
12. Transubstantiation - - 12x5
13, Confession .... 1215
14. Elevation of the Host - - 1220
15. Ringing of a little Bell at
the Mass - - - 1227
(The early Christians, as has been s
(The Papacy, with its Pope, like
openly.)
16. Corpus Cliristi Day - - 1264
17. Procession of the Sacrament 1336
18. Withholding the Cup from
the Laity - - - HG
19. Purgatory 1438
20. Tradition - 154-6
21. Apocryphal Books - - 1547
22. Priestly intention necessary
to the validity of a Sacra-
ment .... 1547
23. Venial Sins ... 1563
24. Sale of Indulgences - - 1563
25. Creed of Pope Pius IV., in
which 12 new Articles of
Faith were added to the
Nicene Creed, composed
a.d. 325 - - * - 1564
26. Immaculate Conception - 1856
27. Infallibility of the Pope - 1870
id, assembled the Catacombs.)
noxious weeds, at a later date, in Rome
UNION with the CHRISTIAN CHURCH
CATHOLIC IS DESIRED
On the lines laid down by the 19TH ARTICLE OF THE
CHURCH OE ENGLAND
Article 19.—“ The Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation
of faithful men in which the pure Word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered ac-
cording to Christ’s Ordinances in all those things of
necessity are requisite to the same.”
“As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and
Antioch have erred ; so also the Chdrch of Rome hath
erred, not only in their living and manner ol ceremonies,
but also in Matter of Faith.”


Each branch of the Christian Church Catholic joining in union,
arranging the non-essentials among themselves of Church Govern-
ment ; whether by Presbytery, Epi-copacy, or other Christian Mode.
See John, 15-5. —“I am the vine, ye arc the branches. He that
abideth in Me and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit, for
without Me ye can do nothing.”
St. Luke Gospel, 9 Chap., 49-50 verses:—St. John said to Jesus,“We
saw one working in Thy (Christ’s) name, and we forbade him, because
hefolloweth not with us”; and Jesus said unto him, “Forbid him not;
for he that is not against us, is for us.”
BAPTISM.
Regeneration.
Titus, 3 c. 5 v., Refers to a change of profession.
Matt., 19 c. 28 v., Refers to a change of state. (Calmet’s Dictionary
of the Holy Bible.)
John, 3 c. 5-6 v., —Jesus said, “Except a man be born of water and
of the spirit. . . . That which is born of flesh, is flesh, and that
which is born of spirit, is spirit.”
THE LORD’S SUPPER.
. . . “The Lord Tesus the same night in which He was betrayed
took bread, and when He had given thanks, He broke it, and said :
Take, cat, this is My body, which is broken for you, this do in
remembrance of Me. After the same manner He took the cup, when
He had supped, saying : This cup is the new testament in my blood,
this do ye. as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of Me. For as often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death
till He come.” Corin.. nc. 24-26 v.
The interpolation of anything into it which is not directed is, in
substance and in lact, a departure from “what is directed.” It is
inconsistent that abolished ceremonies may be re-introduced or
revived by “the minister” or the bishop at his pleasure, merely
because there are no negative words in the Rubric that they are
not to be used. (See page 406, in the memorials Lord Chancellor
the late Earl of Selbourne.)
The wonder is that, men of liberal education, as Oxford men must
be, can accept as facts the spurious likenesses of Our Blessed Lord,
when a veil has been thrown historically over his personal appearance,
and were only made in visible Church Ornaments after centuries of
corruption. This is applicable to the Constantine Cross, which is
certainly not the cross of the Roman Empire, but a Pagan in-
troduction, and this seems designed to render any breach of the
Second Commandment fully apparent.


speaking, it is from the year 800 a.d., when a King of
the Franks was crowned Emperor of the Romans by Pope Leo. 111 -»
that the beginning of the Holy Roman Empire must be dated.
When King Charles had knelt in the Church, as soon as he rose,
the Pope placed a crown on the King’s head.”—See “Holy Roman, 1
by James Bryce, D.C.L., pages 3-48-60.
“There was not a single Latin Cross before the days of
Constantine. The earliest known Latin Cross is 451 a.d.” — Sec
“Life of Lives,” by F. W. Farrar, 1900.
UNION of the CHRISTIAN CHURCHES.
Religious -life and opinions need not necessarily be all of one
pattern in minor matters. The only Rubric of the New Testament
is, “Let all things be done decently and in order” (Ist Cor., xiv c.
40 v.). Logic can but give instruments to faith and history
materials, and deeper than either logic or history can reach is the
living faith to which they are but handmaids of Christian Unity.
The rule of the Rubric is a domestic rule of the Church of
England. Anglican history and the equity of the case are for me con-
clusive that it is not a rule to be pressed against Christian guests
from other Communions, at what is after all, not our table, but the
Lord’s.—(Acts, 11 c., 42 v. ; Ist Cor., x c., 16-17 v.) —Handley
Dunelm (Bishop of Durham).
Evangelical Non-conformists worked hand in hand with the
Church Evangelical Clergy, but the movement was individualistic,
When Bishop Perowne some ten years ago took part with Non-
conformist Ministers in the Re-union Conference at Grindenwald,
it was asserted that Christian fellowship must be based on the true
Word of God, and that the true goal of their life and ministry is
independent of system and ceremonial. When the differences
which divide will be seen to be of secondary importance, and will
not be allowed to be a hindrance to brotherhood and co-operation.
Sects will continue in our great Christian Commonwealth just as in
the Church generally, but they seek opportunities of aiding each
other in unity of love and good works. —Dean of Ripon,
(W. H. Fremantle).
Can we draw still nearer together, can anything in the nature of
a fusion be effected between some, at least, of the sundered
fragments of the Christian body, that Visible Church which is a
congregation of faithful men in which the pure Word of God is
preached according to Christ’s Ordinance. —(Acts, 2 c., 42 v. ; Ist
Cor., x c,, 16-17 v. ; Matt., xxvi c., 26-29 v.)—Dean °I Durham,
(G. W. Kitchen).


I entirely agree with the late Bishop Lightfoot’s contention, that
we have no right to Un-church other Christian Communities
differently organised.—Dean of Ely, (Chas. W. Stubbs).*
It is right that all Biblical Christians within its organisation are a
part of the Church, and this is in perfect agreement with the 19th
Article, viz. : —“The Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of
faithful men in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ’s Ordinances
in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.”
Dr. ]. Guiness Rogers.—“l can conceive,” said the late Bishop of
London in a private letter to myself a year ago, “If a Christian
Commonwealth, consisting of bodies of believers, and with opinions
of their own about matters of organisation, understanding one
another, and respecting one another, yet concious of a common
purpose which transcends all human methods. I cannot doubt
there are multitudes in all Churches who would regard this as
the ideal of the Holy Catholic Church,! its members are all those
whom the Lord Jesus Christ received. Not in historical descent,
not even in doctrinal argument, still less in modes of organisation,
but in spirit. The common aim is to cultivate the Mind of
Christ, and to do His will, and cease from strife and faction.”
National Federation of Free Churches at Cardiff. Great move-
ments are like great men. It will not be correctly described as a
Confederation of Churches, since it owes its own existence, not to
any official action on the part of the Representative Assemblies of
different Churches, but to spontaneous efforts of individuals, not
lacking in attachment to their own Churches.—( Vide “The Nine-
teenth Century Review” on this matter.
I he Wesleyan Church Meeting in Liverpool, England, the Rev.
Hugh McNeil, late Dean of Ripon, had been invited to attend and
address the Meeting. After he had spoken, a Member of the
Wesleyan body rose up from among the audience and said, “How
is it that you have not given us the pleasure of your company before
this,’’He replied, “Simply because 1 was never previously invited.”
SIMULTANEOUS MISSION.
Mr. W. E. Gcil.—“The fruit of the Spirit was love. That did
away with Church quarrels. They needed men to-day, men of
iron, men of steel, men of principle, who fight for God and fight to
the death.”— Argus, April 26th, 1902.
*Vide “Contemporary Review,” January, 1902, re above matter.
JNol Roman Catholic that claims power over all adherents to the Roman
faith, civil and religious. Vide page 10.


“Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto
thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before
many witnesses.”—ist Timothy, iv c., 12 v.
It was and it is, with the High Church followers of Manning,
Pusey, and Newman, in their efforts to “Romanise and Paganise”
the English Church, and thus lead towards becoming slaves to the
Pope, and subject to his caprice, having surrendered their all to his
dictum in carrying out Papistical Dogmas.
T. H. Huxley states that persons are beginning to see the fact
that in matters of belief it is of infinite importance to range them-
selves under their National Banners. Roman Cardinals were more
familiar with Virgil, than with Isaiah, and they laboured to re-paganise
Rome. —{Vide Essays, pages 192 and 210, vol. 3.)
The Rev. J. Wilson, Archdeacon of Manchester, replying to the
Honorary Church Wardens, stated, “That the duty imposed upon
the Wardens was to complain to the Bishop, after that, all further
responsibility rested with the Bishop.” (Absurd if so, as we do not
believe in the infallibility of either Pope, Bishop, or other hier-
archy.) The Bishop knowing of this reply, instead of com-
municating at once with the Honorary Wardens, and pointing out
the correct way to proceed with the case, did not do so. Now, the
Bishop and Archdeacon are paid officials to administer their duty
truly. What should we think of the Attorney and Solicitor-
Generals acting in a similar manner with the Cabinet, and yet
working in the interest of a Foreign Sovereign corrupting the
British Army ? Compare them with the immediate action taken by
Lord Roberts—as soon as it came under his notice of the wrong-
doings of British Soldiers, he did not snub the officers for bringing
the case under his notice, but at once gave the necessary informa-
tion, and ordered a court-martial to be held, &c.
Beware of dishonest or false Officials, Lay, Clerical and others of
the present day. We may have such men as the noted Judge
Jefferies and Bishop Bonner growing up among us ; with the
kindred party exerting themselves to “Romanise and Paganise” the
English Church, and there are some people very indifferent, servile
courtiers, neither hot nor cold.
“Go to the ant thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise.” —
Prov. v c., 6v. “So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither
hot nor cold, I will spue thee out of my mouth.” —Rev., in c., 15 v.
Spoken of those who are careless about salvation, or who stand
neuter in religion. (George Wall, Minister of the Gospel. —
Vide Vol. 1, page 258. Printed and published by Clear and Son,
No. 101 Deansgate, Manchester, Eng. a.d. 1826.)


Mr. Henry Reeve, C. 8., D.C.L., who held the office of Clerk of
Appeals and Registrar to the Privy Council, and for over 50 years
was in office, has stated, “It would be well for a suitable Lay
person to review the woiks of Manning, Pusey, and Newman, and
expose their dishonest dealings.” See also “National Review,”
March, 1899, “Secret Societies in the Church of England, as to the
exposure of the dishonest and double dealings of that party.”
In the memorials of the late Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Sel-
borne, who was a highly distinguished Churchman and an active
personal worker in church and schools— indeed in every good
work—the following significant passages occur :
The interpolation of anything into it which is not directed is,
in substance and in fact, a departure from “what is directed.”
It is inconsistent that abolished ceremonies may be re-introduced or
revived by “the minister” or the bishop at his pleasure, merely
because there are no negative words in the Rubric that they are
not to be used (see page 406).
“Some Clergy really seem to think they can make or unmake
legal jurisdiction at their pleasure, which enables them to dispense
with all legal methods.” Vol. 1, page 403.
In the year 1845, Mr. Oakely, a minister of the Church of
England, declared in a letter to the Vice-Chancellor that “ he held
all the Roman doctrines,” and subsequently, in a letter to the Bishop
of London, he repeats the same statement. On June 30th, Sir
Herbert Jenner Furst, Dean of Arches, revoked that gentleman’s
license. The Judge held that “if any Roman doctrine was opposed
to the doctrine of the Thirty-Nine Articles, Mr. Oakely must,
according to his own statement, hold it, and that such teaching was
inconsistent with his engagement as a minister of the Church of
England.”
* Respecting the term Church, he did not mean this or that body
of exclusive claimants, but to the many folds in one true flock ; in
the language of our Prayer Book, the blessed company of all the
faithful people ; all true Christians dispersed throughout the world;
all who in every place call on the Name cf our Lord Jesus Christ—
both theirs and ours.
“ God give us men ; A time like this demands
Great hearts, strong minds, true faith, and willing hands ;
Men whom lust of office does not kill ;
Men whom spoils of office cannot buy ;
Men who possess conviction and a will ;
Men who have honour, men who dare not lie.”
See The Life of Lives,” F. W. Farrar, 1900. pp. 228, 436.
Printed for the Publisher by the Hart Printing Company, 386 Flinders Street. Melbourne,
where copies of the pamphlet may be had at the following rates per 100, 15/-; per 1000, £250
For dishonest and double dealings of Pusey & Co. and the High Church Party, see 3rd edition
“ Ultra-Ritualism,” price per 1000 £3 12 6; per 100 £i 7 6.
Also see “ National Review,” March, 1899 ,as to their dishonest and double dealings—Secret
Societies in the Church.
