





THE
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURIST
AND
COLONISTS’ GUIDE.
Plain Words on Station, Farm and Garden Work, Dairying,
Ensilage Making, Poultry Farming, Seed Growing, Frdit
Preserving, Diseases of Plants and Animals, &c.,
with Directions for Treating Wounds,
Snake-bite, &c., &c., with
Calendar of Field and Garden Work, fro® January to December.
BY ANGUS MACKAY, F.C.S.,
INSTRUCTOR IN AGRICULTURE, TECHNICAL COLLEGE, SYDNEY,
Author of “The Sugar Cane in Australia,” Elements of Australian Agriculture,”
“Analyses of Grazing, Farm, and Garden Soils of N.5.W.,” &c., &c.
Sydney, N. S. Wales :
J. W. R. CLARKE, BOOKSELLER AND PUBLISHER, GEORGE STREET.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
IS9O
[SECOND EDITION.-10/6.]


PRINTED BY H. GARFORTII,
50 LIVERPOOL STREET WEST, SYDNEY.


PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION.
This work is simply an arrangement of every-day Colonial Experience
in Bush Life, Stock Raising, Farming, Gardening, Dairying, House-
keeping, and kindred subjects. Throughout, the leading effort is to
connect the systems of Agriculture, including Stock Farming and Gar-
dening, as followed in the Old Land, with what is gradually proving to
be the best practice in the warmer sections of Australia. In arranging
the work the author had no beaten track to follow. The materials, in
so far as their direct application to this climate is concerned, are gathered
from the every-day labors going on in various parts of the country, and
from the practical knowledge of the author himself. The track of the
settler in new country, whichever branch of life he may choose, is rugged
at best, and the assistance that can be given by those who have travelled
in advance and earned experience on the journey, cannot fail to be ser-
viceable.
Although the bulk of the contents of this volume were written with a
view to their ultimate publication in book form, there is no desire to
supplant any of the valuable works at the disposal of the agricultural
reader. The author could wish that such works as those of Lindley,
Loudon, Stephens, Johnston, Burn, Morton, Youatt, Gamgee, Mechi,
and the several excellent journals that devote space to agricultural sub-
jects, were more extensively studied by his fellow workers. The object
in view is to furnish a connecting link between the practice of the
Mother Country and America, as laid down in the standard works, with
the practice found applicable in semi-tropical Australia. In treating of
grain crops, for instance, the desire is merely to connect the seasons
and the necessary alterations in detail with the practice followed in
older countries. The same system is followed in the articles upon Stock
Farming and Fruit Growing. Each article, at the same time, being, as
a rule, sufficiently full to form a comprehensive guide in itself.
Although Agriculture—in which term every branch of the business
of Cultivation and the treatment of Live Stock is included—differs
in this country materially from similar pursuits as carried on in Europe,
the basis of the' industry remains the same. The effects of a plentiful
and continuous supply of rich feed upon stock, and clean, active culti-
vation upon rich soil, are almost alike in every case. The care and
experience, and above all the skilful application of labor that make
Agriculture a safe and profitable business in other countries, all do
much to make it successful here. Capital, also, it will be found, is as
necessary here as in other countries ; the differences that exist in this
respect are less than is generally supposed, and only favor those who
bring to their work brain as well as muscle-force, and ability, as well
as the desire to labor. A man, to flourish in this country, must not
be above pulling off his coat.
The articles upon Budding, Grafting, and other means of propa-
gation, will, it is trusted, tend in no inconsiderable degree to the
cultivation of Fruit throughout the country. With the aid of the
illustrations given, and directions as to the proper time and condition


for operating, with ordinary skill and care, there need be comparatively
little difficulty in budding or grafting the better sorts of fruits upon
any suitable stocks available.
Machinery, implements, and the various mechanical appliances that
do much to simplify labor and reduce the expenses of colonists, have
received considerable attention. In the use of machinery, steam, and
horse power, the author feels assured, comes the surest way out of the
labor difficulties that beset colonists in every pursuit they enter upon.
The papers upon “ Medical Help in Time of Need” were an after-
thought—the result of recommendations from correspondents in various
parts of the country, that information should be given for the treat-
ment, with such appliances as are likely to be available, in cases of
Accidents, Wounds, Burns, Scalds, Drowning, Snake-Bite, Poisoning,
etc. The especial thanks of the author are due to a medical friend who
revised and aided him materially in this part of the work.
Throughout there has been an effort to avoid semi-scientific terms,
and to make the work acceptable and useful to those engaged in all the
departments of agriculture, and to residents in the country districts
generally. To what extent he has succeeded, the reception of the work
will prove ; and with this understanding the author places “ The
Semi-Tropical Agriculturist and Colonists’ Guide” at the disposal of
the public.
Enoggera, Queensland, March, 1875.
PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.
On returning from a Commission to the United States and the West In-
dies, the author was asked to prepare a second edition early in 1880 :
but he had not opportunity for doing so till now. Since the time men-
tioned the work has been practically out of print, and had become
scarce and dear. It is now re-arranged, so as to be suitable for teach-
ing purposes, while still continuing to be the guide for practical work,
as designed in the first instance.
Several new chapters are added, bringing us up to what is going on at
the present time in dairying, ensilage-making, poultry farming, seed
growing, &c., and special chapters concerning our soils, native grasses,
&c., of which much less was known when the first edition was pub-
lished.
The thanks of the author are tendered very heartily to the officers of
the Education Department, and to their chief (the Hon. J. H. Car-
ruthers, M. P.) for recommending the work as suitable for students in the
advanced classes for agricultural instruction in the National Schools.
As now arranged, it really contains a series of lessons for an entire
course of teaching upon the lines followed with so much success in the
Sydney Technical College. The practical part of the work, and those
divisions which have so long been followed, as affording seasonable use-
ful information concerning the working of soils and crops, have been
carefully revised and added to with the hope that they may prove as
useful as formerly.
Balmain, N. S. Wales, February, 1890.


CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. — Introductory to Australian Agriculture : The Land,
The Seasons, The Climate, Dry and Wet Seasons, Semi-Tropical
Seasons, Life in the Bush, To make Agriculture Pay 9-15
CHAP. ll.— Selecting and Classifying Land : Sources of Soils,
Analyses of N. S. Wales Soils, Materials Available for Plant and
Animal Food, How Crops are Built Up, Some Representative Soils,
Fire and Water Tests for Soils, Poverty of Soil versus “Blights,”
Peculiarities of our Soils, Stubborn Soils, Approach of Pine Scrub,
Clearing Land 16-23
CHAP. lll.— Fences and Fencing ; Wire as Fencing Material, Post-
and-Rail, Chock-and-Log, Stub, Basket, Snake, Zigzag, and Brush
Fences, Contracts for Fencing, Falling Timber 28-33
CHAP. IV.— Draining for Health and Cultivation ; How the
Land is Affected by Draining—Stone, Slab, Pipe, and other Drains ;
Cost of Draining; Effect upon Human Health, Cattle, Soil, Crops,
Pasture, &c 33-38
CHAP. V.— Cultivating Land : The Objects Aimed At, How Crops
Fail and How Improved ; Effects of Burning, Ploughs and Ploughing
(illustrated), Points in Ploughing, Draught in Ploughing, Subsoil
Ploughing, Grubbers and Cultivators, Harrows and Harrowing (illus-
trated) 38-52
CHAP. Vl. —Grain Crops of Australia : Seed per Acre, Plants per
Acre, Maize or Corn, The Grain Weevil, Barns for Corn, Measuring
Corn, Wheat as a Crop, Science in Wheat-Farming, Wheat Rust,
Barley as a Crop, Oats, Rye, Buckwheat, Rape, &c 52-68
CHAP. Vll.— The Potato Tribe and Root Crops : Potato Culture in
Cold and Warm Districts, To Make Sure of a Crop, The Sweet
Potato, Yams, other Root Crops 68-72
CHAP. Vlll.— Semi-Tropical Crops : The Sugar-Cane—Varieties and
Cultivation of Cane, Yield of Sugar ; Tobacco as an Australian
Product—What is Necessary to Make a Crop, Enemies of Tobacco,
Manufacture, Snuff, &o. ; Arrowroot Culture and Manufacture ;
Millet, Sorghum, Broom-Corn ... 72-88


CHAP. IX.— Products We Might Grow ; Chicory, Ginger, Pre-
served Ginger, Hops, Tea, Coffee, Cocoa, Cacao, Chocolate, Cotton,
Bice, Silk, and Silk-worms ' 88-102
CHAP. X.— Botation in Colonial Agriculture : Combinations of
Grass, Stock, and Crops, What Different Crops Take from the
Soil 102-104
CHAP. Xl.— Oil-yielding Crops: Percentage of Oil from Seeds,
The Olive, Olive Oil, Castor Oil, The Pea or Ground Nut, Cotton-
Seed Oil, The Sunflower, Lintseed 104-108
CHAP. Xll.— Fibre-yielding Crops : Flax, or Linseed, Sida Betusa
or Queensland Hemp, Banana Fibres, Extracting Fibres .... 108-111
CHAP. XIII. — Making and Using Manures : The Materials Avail-
able, Green Manuring, The Compost Heap, Effects on Crops, 111-116
CHAP. XlV.— Harvesting and Other Machinery : Eequire-
ments for Colonial Use, Australian and European Farm Practice,
Keep Tools and Implements in Good Order, Harvesting Machinery
(illustrated) 116-120
CHAP. XV. Lite Stock in Australia : Grazing-Farming,
Leave Fancy Stock Alone ; Sheep and Wool; The Leading Breeds of
Cattle—Shorthorns, Herefords, Devon, Polleys, Crosses, Dairying
Breeds 121-129
CHAP. XVI.-— Sheep and Wool : The Merino, Climate and Wool,
Classes of Wool—Long Wools, Leicesters, Lincolns, Cotswolds,
Bomney Marsh ; Sheep for Mutton—Southdowns, Cheviots, Crosses ;
Sheep for the Farmer, Classifying Wool (illustrated), Combing and
Other Wools, The Bight Stamp of Cross-bred Wools 129-138
CHAP. XVll.— lndigenous Grasses and Fodder Plants : What
the Grasses Indicate, Some Leading’ Grasses, Their Great Value,
A Decisive Test, How the Grasses Fail, How Becover Strength, Fat-
tening Qualities, Grasses Indicate the Seasons, Classifying Country
by the Grasses, How to Improve the Pastures, Irrigation and the
Native Grasses, Ensilage or Hay, Trifolium Plants, Fodder from
Trees, Winter and Spring Herbs, Diseases of the Grasses, Malignant
Weeds 138-148
CHAP. XVlll.— Australian Timber Trees : As Indicators of Soil,
Soft and Hardwood Trees, Uses of Various Trees, Efforts Made at
the State Nursery, Gosford, &c 148-149
CHAP. XlX.— Medicinal Plants : The Gums, Opium Poppy,
Chinchona, Quinine, Sarsaparilla, Bhubarb, Turmeric,Liquorice, Cin-
namon, Pepper amd Other Mints, Aloes, Pepper-yielding Plants,
Native Bramble, &c 149-157


CHAP. XX.— The Dairying Interests : Dairy Cattle—Ayrshires,
Jerseys and Alderneys, Devons, Shorthorns, Australian Crosses,
Milk-giving Indications (illustrated), Milk and Butter, How
to Milk, The Factory System, Cream-separating Machines, From
Cream to Butter, Churns, Butter-workers (illustrated), Cheese-
making, First-class Cheese, Science in the Dairy, Curd-cutters,
Grinders, &0., Points in Cheese-making, Chemistry of the Operations ;
Points in Dairying, Bad Flavors, What Feed has to do with It,
The Pharaoh Stamp of Cattle Still Around 157-177
CHAP. XXI. — Siloing and Ensilage, Hay, &c. ; Silos, Crops for
Ensilage, The Silo or Stack, Ensilage from Native Herbage, Cost
of Ensilage, Hay-making, Other Crops Available, Warmth and
Feeding -- ••• 177-185
CHAP. XXII. —The Horse in Australia : Clydesdales, Breeding
Horses, Draught Horses, Hacks, Coachers Selecting a Horse,
Training Horses 185-191
CHAP. XXIII.— The Pig; To Raise and to Use Him: Peculi-
arities of the Animal, Varieties, Berkshires, Royal Alberts, The
Small China, the Large China, Pig Feeding, Breeding. Good Pork,
and How To Cure It — Killing, Cutting Up (illustrated), Curing
for Hams and Bacon, The Family Pig, Pickling, American Method,
Sugar Curing, Diseases of Pigs 191-198
CHAP. XXIV. —The Poultry Yard : Can I Succeed with Fowls? —
The Sorts to Keep, Roosts, &c., Time for Hatching, Chickens,
Laying, Egg-laying Capacity, Feeding and Laying, Diseases of
Fowls, Vermin, Ducks, Geese, Turkeys, About Incubators, Does it
Pay ? 199-207
CHAP. XXV. The Home Garden : For Vegetables, Fruits,
Flowers ; Land for the Garden, Setting out, Cultivating, Pruning;
Varieties of Fruits ; Grape - growing and Wine - making ; Semi-
Tropical Fruits, Budding, Grafting, &o. The Kitchen Garden :
What is Necessary for Success, Summer and Winter Crops.
Flower Gardening : Soil and Situation, Frames and Shade,
Gardening for Health. The Bush House ... 207-229
CHAP. XXVl. —lnsects and other Pests : What is being done to
Check them ; Use of Washes, Sprays, and Poisons; Aphis, Blight,
Phylloxera, Odium, Gum Disease, Flies Attacking Fruits... 229-231
CHAP. XXVll. —Diseases of Animals : To keep Disease in Check,
Colonial Experiences, The Animal Pulse, The Digestive System,
Physicing, Plcuro, To Get and Use Virus for Inoculating, Dairy
Cows, Blackleg, Cancers, Worms, Red-water, Milk Fever, “Spring-
ing,” Hoven, Worms in Sheep, Poison Plants, Treating Pigs,
Ticks 231-219
CHAP. XXVIII. — Preparing Bread and Meat: Good Bread and
How to Make It, The Oven, Flour, Yeast, Baking, Self-raising Flour,
Maize Bread, Porridge, Puddings, &c. Good Meat and How to
Cure It ; Killing and Cutting up Beef, Taking off the Hide, Salting,
Tanning, Sheep Skins, Kangaroo,Wallaby, and Possum Skins, 219-2G3


CHAP. XXlX.— Preserving Feuits, &c. : Canning, Drying, Bottling,
Candying various Fruits, Figs, Raisins; Packing and Shipping; the
Natural Flavors and Essences of Fruits, Vegetables, &c. ... 263-270
CHAP. XXX. — Seed Farming: Seed Improvement, Openings for the
Business, The Nature of Perfect Seed, Wheat, Maize, Other Grains,
Potatoes, &o 270-276
CHAP. XXXI. — Water in Dey Places : Storing Surface Water,
Indications of Water, Pumping, Lifting, Tube Wells, Deep Wells,
Capacity for Tanks, Irrigation, &c 277-282
CHAP. XXXll.— Medical Help in Emergencies : Accidents in the
Bush, Snake Bite, Wounds, A Colonial “ Pain Paint,” Poisoning,
Drowning, Sunstroke, Starvation, &c 282-296
CHAP. XXXIII.—UsuaI Weather, and Reminders for Field and Garden
Operations from January to December ; Troubles with Seed; Measur-
ing the Area under Cultivation ; Watering Plants ; Seasons for Budding
and Grafting; Setting out Trees and Shrubs; Trapping Rabbits;
Making Soap and Candles; Rough Paint for Rough Work; The Time
to Tackle Insect and other Pests ; Hatching Chickens in Hot Weather;
The Pig as a “ Farm Hand,” &c., &c. 297-328
The Conditions and Prospects op Agriculture 328-330
Works on Ageioulture 331
EARLIEST CULTIVATING IMPLEMENT,
From which has been developed the plough, hoe, and kindred tools,
found with others (some having been bored for handles) in the
great peat bogs of Abbeville, France.


AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE.
I.—INTRODUCTORY.
THE LAND.
“The best is the cheapest,” In no walk of life has this
truth more force than in that pertaining to land. Com-
paratively, it matters little which department of Agriculture
we enter into : whether that of the farmer pure and simple,
the grazier or squatter, the gardener, or a combination of two
or more of those somewhat divided pursuits, we find that the
prospects favor the men who have the best land. This
matter, consequently, of close examination of the nature and
quality of the soil, is most important. And as we come more
closely to examine the matter, it is found that good agricul-
tural land is good for whatever branch we may take it up,
always providing the situation, surroundings, and extent of
land are suitable for the object in view.
The native grasses, herbs, shrubs, and trees offer a capital index
to the quality of the soils in which they grow. It is simply
impossible to find a heavy growth of rich herbs and grass upon
poor land. The timber in itself also forms a good guide. The
softer woods are on rich soil, the harder on poorer soil.
Taking, then, the land in its native state, there is less differ-
ence in the best soils suited for the purposes of the grazier, the
farmer, or the gardener, than might at first appear. They all
require soil rich in the elements that produce rich grass, and
with the exception of the scrub, brush, and other lands, so
heavily timbered that there is no grass whatever, the best
naturally-grassed lands are the best, as a rule. In taking up
land that has been in use, the plants or crops growing upon it
aid very much in coming to a decision regarding its present
state, and the kind of treatment it has received. When the
country is open, and used for grazing only, the grasses and
herbs offer as good an indication of its capabilities as the
animals feeding upon the land. The dense thick growth of
herbage, closely matted together and fresh-looking, tells an
unmistakable tale of the natural wealth of the soil. The first


symptoms of decay are, undue preponderance of long, coarse
grasses, which during the winter months become dry, brittle,
and of dark brown color. There is but little nourishment in
them. Weeds, coarse thistles of various kinds, sorrel, pim-
pernel, and shrubby, weedy plants generally, tell their own
tale of overstocking, and of poverty that nothing short of long
and absolute rest can bring back into a state of fertility. In
the sections of country longest settled, but too much land
in this state can be seen. It is neither profitable to the
farmer, grazier, nor gardener. Worn-out land is a millstone
round the neck of the man who owns it; and neglected land
is but a stage better ; we can only bring it into fertility by
clean cultivation and manuring.
Whether we grow wheat, oats, barley, or maize, cotton or
sugar-cane, bananas, apples, or other fruits, the prospects of
success are greatly in favor of the man who commences with
naturally rich land. Not that we are disposed to underrate
what can be done by skill and judicious improvement. But,
under the most favorable circumstances, land improvement is
costly, and still favors him who has the best land to operate
on. This we find to be true all over the country, in the grain-
growing as well as the sugar-producing districts. Drainage is
amongst the most valuable of land improvements; but it is
costly, and we would give the preference to the land that
requires least artificial drainage. As a rule, soil that is
liberally mixed with sand is less costly in working than very
stiff or clayey soils. We would also give the preference to
land that will allow most horse labor, and has no more fall
than is necessary to carry off water readily. The less it is cut
up with gullies or water-courses, the more profitably it can be
worked.
THE SEASONS —THE CLIMATE.
Australia, to those who know little or nothing of the
country, is a land of perpetual summer, subject to terrific
floods and excessive droughts—the latter, as a whole, prevailing.
This belief is not confined to persons in other countries, whose
knowledge of Australia has been acquired from books of the
kind which state that flowers have no odors in Australia, that
birds do not sing here, and other absurd things. Colonists,
old colonists among them, have opinions of the country and
the climate that differ but slightly from the foregoing. One
reason for this belief is the extraordinary similarity of the


climate of the seaboard towns, considering the distance they
are apart. Take Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, the
whole year round, and the climate is wonderfully alike; nor
does it change to anything like the degree the situation of
these places would warrant us in believing. As we travel
northwards to Newcastle, Grafton, Brisbane, Mackay, Towns-
ville, the change is just a little more decided. There is a little
more winter in the southern sections, a little more summer iii
the northern. The cultivation of sugar-cane has shown, to an
extent unthought of before, that in Australia the frosts of the
winter season are felt for hundreds of miles within the tropics.
But leaving the coast, and travelling inland, the common
opinion that perpetual summer prevails is soon dissipated ;
and very often in a manner that is telling. A hundred miles
inland from the coast, unless in low-lying situations sheltered
by mountain ranges from the west, the winter season is very
decided. Frosts prevail in these inland districts all over the
country, even to the centre of Australia. In the south, and
as far north as the Queensland border, snow is common during
the months of July and August. In Queensland, the climate
inland more than 100 miles from the_ sea can only be con-
sidered semi-tropical in so far as the summer months are
concerned. The cold of winter is very decided, and the sum-
mer vegetation dies off. It is well to understand this fact.
It is the key to the serious misunderstandings that exist
regarding the nature of the country, and the but too prevalent
impression that the climate is very dry and uniformly hot.
Seasons. —For practical purposes, the seasons may be
divided as follows: —Spring: August, September, October.
Summer: November, December, January; in -wet seasons,
February is added to the summer, and in the northern sec-
tions of the country is often the most decidedly hot month of
the whole. March and April are autumn months, in so far as
the bulk of the indigenous grasses ripen and go to seed during
this time. May, June, and July are the winter months. The
seasons vary to some extent according to latitude, but climatic
influences are due in a still greater degree to local causes, to
the existence of ranges of mountains running parallel with the
sea, to the direction of the prevailing winds, and the quarter
from which the rains come, that modify the force of high
winds. It is no mere figure of speech to say that within six
six hours’ ride by rail from any of the large cities, we reach
places that differ as much from the semi-tropical summer of


the coast as the Highlands of Scotland differ from the midland
counties of England. Travel where we will the same pecu-
liarity is found ; the seasons, the rainfall, and the local
productions are modified by the formation of the country to a
much greater degree than is observable in other climates.
Dry and Wet Seasons. —Droughts have been experienced
in this country. 1828, 1838, 1849, 1862, 1878, were seasons
of this kind. The average rainfall of the coast country may
be taken as between 40 and 50 inches; and here again the
fall is found to be due more to local surroundings than to
latitude. Inland the rainfall is less, but the same rule holds
good with sufficient certainty to justify great care on the part
of any one who desires to choose a location for any particular
description of agriculture. Thus, for instance, sections of the
hill districts, on the slopes of the Dividing Range, are found
suitable for' all kinds of European grain ; the average rainfall
there is about 30 inches; while other places, at nearly the same
distance from the sea, have scarcely one halt the rainfall.
And. so it is all over the country ; local knowledge is of great
value; for places are found at no great distance apart where
the seasons, the cold, heat, and rainfall are essentially different.
Still, these peculiarities are merged in the leading seasons of
the country which mark the time of spring, summer, autumn,
and winter with a degree of accuracy which does not seem to
be generally understood. In so far as the grass vegetation is.
concerned, the seasons are unmistakable, and in neglecting
what they teach we are but shutting our eyes to facts, and
complaining against conditions of climate over which we have
no control, but concerning the effects of which we can do
much. The great bulk of the grasses do die during the winter
months. In sheltered places this is scarcely noticed. The
grass merely goes to seed, stands like so much hay, and makes
tolerable food for stock—it keeps life in them at least. .So
the case stands during the winter. In such places the soil-
heat does not fall lower than 50°, and as soon as rain falls in
the spring months, young grass displaces the old, and so the
seasons run into each other. But where frosts occur the case
is very different. Its first effect is to reduce the indigenous
grasses to dust, or dry woody particles; its next is to lower
the soil-heat below the point at which indigenous vegetation
grows vigorously. When the rain falls at this stage—while
the soil is cold —the evil is aggravated. The soil takes longer
to rise in heat when wet, and the land continues bare of grass


until the temperature is sufficiently high to cause a spring, so
that the growing season is shorter.
It is in noting this peculiarity that we see the adaptability
of the climate for cultivating European grasses and forage
plants. During the cooler, damp season of the winter, that
destroys the indigenous grasses, wheat, oats, barley, rye, spelt,
turnips, and the annual grasses of Europe, generally thrive
freely in good soil, and form a sufficient basis for feeding pur-
poses. During a moist spring the growth of the cultivated
grasses is very strong, while the same weather that makes
them grow keeps down the heat that is necessary for the
vigorous growth of the indigenous grasses ; but by combining
the two, that is, cultivated pasture with the indigenous, the
seasons are very rare indeed in which continuous growth can
not be maintained all the year round.
Semi-tropical Seasons. —ln the true semi-tropical sections
of the country, including the sea-board northwards from
Sydney, the whole of the settled portions of Queensland, and
the Northern Territory of South Australia, the seasons may
be still further divided. In these warmer sections there are,
in reality, two growing seasons in the year. One commences
as the temperature moderates in March, and continues through
the winter months. It is during this time that European
grains and vegetables are grown, and in sheltered situations,
where the soil is rich, they come to extraordinary perfection
during this short season. In favorite places the time of
growth for grains and vegetables is extended through Septem-
ber and October. In other places in the North, rains fall in
April and May, and semi-tropical vegetation, such as cotton,
corn, &c., does very well when planted at that time. The true
tropical spring of the country commences in October and
November, and summer continues until march. In very,
warm, moist localities, such as the Tweed, in New South Wales,
and Mackay, Mooroochie, and other places on the northern
coast of Queensland, the season of growth runs right through
the year; the best time for sowing and harvesting being
selected in accordance with the usual rainfall of the locality.
There is but one planting season for fruit culture—April,
May, to August—according to locality. Fruits come into leaf
in the true spring of the country, and mature during the
summer.
LIFE IN THE BUSH.
It is, doubtless, wisely ordered that other people’s losses


shall weigh lightly on our hearts ; were it otherwise, every phil-
anthropic mind must often be plunged into profound melan-
choly by the thoughts of the immense amount of enjoyment
which is allowed to run to waste. That multitudes of human
beings should walk the face of this fair earth, year after year,
with shaded eyes is truly deplorable. Yerily, there seems
pressing need of a new apostle to go to and fro in the land,
preaching everywhere what Ruskin calls the “ duty of
delight.”
The capacity to see the wonders and beauties of nature is
just as much a matter of cultivation as a love of any other
desirable mental state, and its attainment must always form
an essential part of every liberal education. Undoubtedly
“ the coming man and woman will be no less
Alive to gent influence
Of landscape and of sky,
than to human interests. Nor will the enjoyment of the
visible universe consist of mere vague sentimental emotion,
but will grow out of an intelligent understanding of its in-
visible laws. There seems to be a general belief that there
exists a natural antagonism between poetry and science—that
the mind which is always peering into Nature’s mysteries
must, of necessity, have little taste for her beauties. Never
was there a greater mistake. Let any one who imagines that
devotion to science is death to all esthetic pleasure read the
writings of Hugh Miller, and see how the keenest apprecia-
tion of natural beauty may go hand in hand with a love for
the useful, for what finds bread and butter, even for pro-
found research, and also how what might at first sight seem
the very driest bones of scientific facts may, by the touch of
a master hand, be clothed with the rarest grace. Every
•department of the great Creator’s work becomes doubly beau-
tiful in the eyes of one who has learned something of the man-
ner of His working. Take, for instance, the vegetable king-
dom. What a new world of delight is opened to every lover
of trees, plants, and flowers, by the study of their modes
of growth and development! How each variety of grass,
each plant and shrub, and towering tree has a history full of
significance to him who can follow its career from the first
tiny cell! How even the humblest plant becomes interesting
when we come to know its ways ! Then, too, it is curious to
see how all forms of life are subject to the same general laws.
Let those who are blessed with disagreebale relations find con


solation in the fact that the gardener, whose life is rendered well
nigh a burden by the encroachments of the persistent “ pig-
weed,” might lighten his labours by interesting speculations
on the mysterious arrangement which makes this pest own
sister to that delight of the eyes, the gorgeous portulacca.
That any life should ever be allowed to grow stale, flat,
and unprofitable when there is so much to learn and enjoy,
is one of the mysteries. I would that every settler in the
land were master of all his possessions, that his little deeds
might signify to him not simply so much grass, corn, or
mineral land, but an estate rich in far higher possibilities—
that his acres might yield him not grain and potatoes only,
but also plentiful harvests of mental delights.
TO MAKE AGRICULTURE PAY.
But to get to the first requirements for comfort and success,
we see that agriculture, look at what branch of the occupation
we may, to make it pay, must be followed as a business;
that skill, capital, and perseverance are all necessary. It is
one of the serious mistakes in connection with colonial life
that men enter upon grazing and farming without any special
training or knowledge of what they undertake. Agriculture
is the only business into which men enter largely upon these
terms, and it is no matter of surprise, therefore, that many
fail, and that others complain about want of success. When
a man has plenty of money he may be able to buy experience,
but it is very expensive. In other cases men commence
without either capital or skill, but with strength, courage, and
perseverance, and above all with tact to take advantage of
every circumstance in their favor that presents itself. They
gradually make headway. The colonies are dotted with
successful men who have commenced in this latter way. They
are certainly more numerous than the successful men who
have purchased their experience. But at a glance it will be
seen that the talents thus brought to bear would have gone
far to carry a man successfully through any pursuit. And
such is the fact: There are few occupations that call for
more skilful perseverance than agriculture. On the other
hand, with these requisites, there are few that offer safer
prospects of making an independent livelihood.


II.—SELECTING AND CLASSIFYING LAND.
In the chapter upon native vegetation, and what it in-
dicates, we may see how useful and valuable is the knowledge
thus offered. Meantime, we have available the means which
science with practice places at our disposal for showing the
quality of our soil. The chemical analysis is an immense
help in this direction, but it must be something more than a
mere laboratory analysis. Inspection of the mechanical con-
dition is necessary, and of the geological formation. When a
knowledge of the peculiarities of the indigenous vegetation is
also brought to bear, there is a closer approach to certainty in
our work. By analysis of soil we get at its various parts by
separating them, in the mechanical or practical and the chemi-
cal sense, and can come to very definite conclusions regarding
the suitability of any soil for grazing or cultivation purposes.
This knowledge has been applied extensively in the mother-
land ; but, hitherto, little systematic public attention has been
given to it in this country. There is no room for doubt that
the agricultural interests have suffered from this neglect. Men
in all branches of the producing industries find that the re-
turns in fruits, field crops, and grass for live stock, are not
what they were. Had the soil been analyzed in years gone
past, it would have been seen that in several particulars there
is marked deficiency of a few essential ingredients in our soils,
and these becoming lowered in quantity by continuous grazing,
or by yielding crops of wheat, hay, grapes, &c., account for the
soil becoming less and less productive. Plants live like other
things, and the soil must supply the basis of the means of life
—that is, the plant food—otherwise there must be poor grass
or short crops, or no crops at all, and the attendant risks of
disease and bitter disappointment.
Sources of Soils.— The rocks are the sources of all soils,
but, as explained by the following figures, representing an-
alyses of four of the leading formations of N. S. Wales, the
soils differ very much in the proportions of plant food they
hold for the use of plants. In Australia the disintegration, or
breaking up of the rocks, is going on very rapidly, the agents
being rain, air, &c. The very excellent geological maps of the
colony, and the geological works published by Mr. Wilkinson
(geological surveyor), Professor Liversidge, and Messrs. Oox
and Ratte, afford much and very interesting information on
that subject. The soils referred to have been analyzed me


Available for Plant Food.*
Rich Loam
(Manning).
i Rich “Clay”
i (Gunnedah).
Sandy Loam
(Hawkesbury).
Poor Sandy
(Pine Scrub).
Vegetable matter and moisture ...
20-40
11-9.8
3 50
2-00
Nitrogen = ammonia
■10
•07
•01
Traces
Carbonic acid
Traces
•97
Lime
1-40
1-22
Traces
0-2
Magnesia
Traces
•18
Traces
Potash
.90
•09
•05
Traces
Sodium chloride (salt)
•20
•07
•06
■02
Phosphoric acid
•08
•03
Traces
Traces
Sulphuric acid ...
•0!
•04
Traces
•01
Not Readily Available.
Sandy matters (silica)
56-50
66-05
94T0
93 75
Clay matters (alumina) and iron...
19-60
14-52
1-00
4,00
-
99-19
95-17
98-72
99-80
Capacity for absorbing water
o
4
4
4
Capacity for retaining water
5
3
o
0
lOt
7
6
4
f The standard 10 is a perfect soil for absorbing and retaining moisture. •
chanically (in the farming sense) and chemically, and tested
for their capacity to absorb and hold water, in the manner
suitable for vegetable life. The figures represent each soil
divided into 100 parts of the whole, which affords an easily
understood basis for calculation and comparison :
The Material foe Making Grass and Crops. —For gra-
zing and for cultivation one of the most important substances
—indeed, the most important part of the soil —is the vege-
table or organic matter. This vegetable matter contains the
available nitrogen, or ammonia, which plays such an impor-
tant part in building up plant life. When this is suffi-
ciently abundant, the best grasses and the most plentiful
crops can be got. In this climate it contains most of the
plant food in such condition that the roots of plants can
take it up at once, and enables them further to take all the
* This table, and the analyses of soils that follow, are from “ Grazing,
Farm, and Garden Soils of New South Wales,” Is. 6d., from booksellers.


mineral food they can reach in the soil and the subsoil. But
this matter is not very abundant, though the rocks are always
preparing more. By cultivation, by rotation of crops, by
manuring, and by resting or fallowing the land, the process of
making plant food is quickened. The soils having the most
vegetable matter take in the rain-water most readily, and hold
it longest for the use of crops or grass, as the case may be.
This, in dealing with Australian soils, the analyses going on
prove, is a rule almost without an exception, and it proves con-
clusively how destructive is the custom of burning the grass,
or indeed any vegetable matter on the land. We have none
to spare for the purpose.
Lime. —The next consituent of the soil requiring attention
is lime. It exerts marked effects in preparing the food of
plants. When it is almost absent, or the proportion is low,
say less than represented in the analysis as - 2 that the soil is
very slow in yielding crops, and the indigenous vegetation is
poor. The application of lime, in sufficient quantity for grass
and crops, is one of the least costly of soil improvements,
and one of the most effective.
Magnesia is an alkaline earth, in much the same sense as
lime. It is not a scarce ingredient in New South Wales soils,
as a rule.
Potash is a most essential part of plant life. Where it
is scarce, the indigenous vegetation, both grass and timber, is
poor and coarse. Bruit trees, as a rule, search greedily after
potash ; the success of potato crops and tobacco, is dependent
upon it. Wool also absorbs much potash, and a deficiency in
sheep feed is quickly seen in less and less yolk in the wool.
Soda has, to some extent, the same characteristics as pot-
ash in plant life; but, unlike potash, soda is not uniformly
present in the ash of healthy crops. Potash also acts as a
substitute for soda in manurial operations, but soda is not
found to act for potash in ordinary crops.
Chloride of Sodium (common salt) is abundant in our soils
as a rule, and supplies the soda that is necessary.
Phosphorus, as Phosphates, being in combination with
other substances, is not plentiful in our soils, with rare
exceptions. In conjunction with lime, the phosphates form
bone, and not a few of the defects in grazing and dairying
country can be traced to scarcity of these materials. Wheat


is very heavy on phosphates, an ordinary crop of 30 bushels
absorbing some 25 lbs., a demand which but few of our soils
can supply for many successive crops. But, like lime, the
phosphates can be easily made good to naturally fair soils.
Sulphur, or Sulphuric Acid, is an essential to plant life
It is not scarce in our soils as a rule.
Iron is abundant in all the leading soil formations.
It enters both into plant and animal life (as do all the other
substances mentioned). But iron may be of a bad character,
and too abundant and injurious, as it is in reality in many
of our shale and volcanic soils, where they are of clayey
nature and wet. Drainage is the certain and the only remedy
remedy in such cases.
Silica, or sandy matter, is very abundant in all our soils.
It is the material that gives stiffness to grass, straw, &c.
There is no nourishment in it as a part of feed.
Alumina, or Clay Matter, enters into the composition of
but few plants. Its use is to aid in forming the soil, in which
the roots of plants search for and obtain their food.
What Chemistry Tells Us.—The foregoing are, practically,
all the materials with which the agriculturist need make him-
self acquainted, as plant foods that he must have present in
the desired proportions, or he cannot get the quality of grass,
crops, or fruit trees he aims at. When in the accompanying
analyses the presence of potash, the phosphates, and sul-
phuric acid, are indicated by “ Traces,” there is, for the
time, likely to be a sufficiency of these substances for grasses
and fruits, but not for grain or root crops, and they should be
supplied with other manures. Mere “Traces” of lime are
not sufficient for grass or any other purpose, the following
table will afford data of the materials taken out of the soil by
ordinary crops. When compared with the preceding table of
soil analyses, and with the various analyses of soils, it will be
seen which are suitable, and which must have the necessary
manures in order to aid them to make crops.
Some Representative Soils of N. S. Wales. —A few of
the analyses made for the little work, “ Grazing, Farm, and
Garden Soils of N. S. Wales,” are here appended : The first
soil dealt with was taken from the excellently worked garden
of Mr. H. Heard, some three miles from the pretty town of
Eyde, on the Parramatta River. It is typical of a very large


Crop.
Yif.ld.
S
O
£
Phosphoric
Acid.
Lime.
<S
a
rt
Potash.
Soda.
Sulphuric
Acid.
Chlorine.
Silica.
Wheat
30 bushels (with straw)
lbs.
46
lbs.
25
lbs.
11
lbs.
8
lbs.
28
lbs.
5
lbs.
5
lbs.
0
lbs.
100
Maize ;
50 bushels ... ...
48
12
3
6
12
i
i
0
140
Barley
28 bushels
45
16
19
12
20
6
4
3
90
Oats
33 bushels
50
19
15
11
43
11
7
0
86
Rye
26J bushels
35
13
16
5
30
6
4
2
80
Lucerne
20 tons green or 4 tons hay ...
215
53
301
36
157
7
38
12
12
Clover
12 tons green or 24 tons hay
134
40
142
51
143
7
13
16
11
Native Grasses ...
10 tons green or 2 tons hay...
61
19
36
11
70
3
11
14
125
Potatoes
5 tons
70
12
7
8
120
11
8
6
10
Sweet Do.
10 tons, and 5 tons tops
55
10
5
10
70
10
9
8
10
Buckwheat
24 bushels (1,200 lbs.)
45
18
12
4
160
20
13
2
8
HOW CROPS ARE BUILT UP.


Water and organic matter
13-560
Sandy matter, or silica
79-647
Clay, or alumina, and iron
...
5-303
Lime
0-023
Magnesia
0-012
Potasli ... ...
0072
Soda...
0020
Chloride sodium ...
0047
Phosphoric oxide
0042
Sulphuric oxide
0-024
Moisture ...
1-160
Nitrogen (in the organic matter), 0-163.
Capacity for absorbing and retaining moisture, 7.
area of the metropolitan shale series, and soils especially of
the Hyde, Lane Cove, Seven Hills, and Parramatta districts.
The red color is due to iron. It is a good sound loam, and
seems more clayey in composition than analysis shows the
state to be in reality. Three analyses were made of soils from
Mr. Heard’s land. The first is given in full. It is the virgin
soil; the others are from parts of the orchard which offered
the peculiarities mentioned. The native timbers in the district
include the eucalyptus generally, the original gum and box
trees having been of great size. Oak, cherry, hickory, and
black-butt are still seen. The timber growth shows a na-
turally well-drained and fairly strong soil. The analyses give
similar results, and show, further, what ingredients are likely
to give out first by cropping, and the manures necessary.
Until cleared of the native timber, which is heavy,
and which costs from £7 to £lO per acre, there is very
little pasture land; but the leading grasses present in-
dicate the character of the soil very clearly. The geological
formation is Hawkesbury sandstone, under the shale beds,
which vary in quality :
This is really an excellent garden soil, as will be seen more
clearly by comparison with others. The small proportion of
lime is its greatest defect. This soil, for the purpose to which
it is put, will repay a dressing of 2 tons of quick lime per acre
as a first dressing, and then say 15 cwt. each third year. When
lime is being applied, other manures can be dispensed with for
that season. There is just about enough potash in it to give a
first, perhaps a second, fair crop of potatoes. Where oats or
corn, are grown, rich phosphatic (bones) and nitrogenous
manures should show the effects of their presence.
21
SELECTING AND CLASSIFYING LAND.


Organic matter and water
6-00
Silica
85-00
Alumina and iron
5-00
Lime
0-90
Magnesia
Traces
Potash
0 05
Chloride sodium
0-06
Phosphates
Nitrogen = ammonia, '16.
Capacity for absorbing and retaining moisture, 8.
Traces
Organic matter and moisture
15'60
Silica
66 00
Alumina and iron (very little iron)
16 00
Carbonic acid
0'02
Lime ...>
1-15
Magnesia
0 02
Potash
0-15
Chloride sodium
0-50
Phosphoric acid
0-08
Sulphuric acid
0-02
Nitrogen = ammonia, 0'44.
Capacity for absorbing and retaining moisture, 10.
Goulburn Soil.—From a paddock of Mr. Grunsell, and
adjoining his fine garden.. The soil is alluvial, and is of
excellent quality for both cultivation and grass, being a
mixture of silurian with trap rock soil, granite, and limestone,
brought down by the Mulwarrie River. Analysis shows ;
This land, for fruit-growing purposes, has sufficient alkalies,
and should be excellent for grass. Nitrogenous manure of
any kind would be advantageous, and for potatoes, potash
would be helpful.
Lucerne Soils of the Hunter Valley.—From undisturbed
alluvial deposits below the line of cultivation, and near the
bridge, West Maitland :
This soil, taken as a whole, is of the very richest character.
It shows ammonia very freely, and being naturally well
drained to a depth of 20 feet or more, and with its
heavy lime and alkali supplies, it has all the advantages of
very first-class soil for bearing extra heavy crops. The fertility
can be easily maintained, and at no great outlay for fer-
tilizers or labor. Should the proportion of organic matter be
allowed to wear down, the soil will become heavier to work
and less productive.


Organic matter and moisture
10-00
Silica ...
77-00
Alumnia and iron
12-50
Lime
0-05
Potash
Trace
Chloride sodium
0 02
Sulphuric oxide ...
Trace
Phosphates
Trace
Magnesia
Nitrogen = ammonia, 1-5.
Capacity for absorbing and retaining moisture, 9.
o-os
Organic matter and water... ... ...
5-510
Silica
87-730
Alumina and iron
4 080
Lime
0-630
Magnesia ...
0012
Potash
0-020
Soda and chloride sodium
0-063
Phosphoric oxide
0014
Sulphuric oxide
0 031
Moisture ...
1-870
Nitrogen = ammonia, 0'112.
Capacity for absorbing and retaining moisture, 9
New England Soil.—From near Exhibition Paddock, Armi-
dale.—Fair soil for fruit; grasses very excellent for dairying,
for butter especially ;
Suitable Soil for Irrigation—From cultivation land of Mr.
Fuss, some two miles from Narrabri. Soil alluvial, and of
great depth. Quality apparently uniform to river level, about
thirty feet below soil surface. -A very quick soil during rainy
weather, or under irrigation. The Namoi is a muddy river,
bringing down debris of claystone, shale, and slate, rotten
basalt, <fec., which deposits rich material by floods or irrigation.
The capillary attraction of the soil on the river bank is equal
to raising the water in wells from five to seven feet above level
of the river. There can be no layers of clay in the soil under
such circumstances. It is an exceptionally capable soil for
irrigation, for gardening, or for grass, provided there is ample
water available for dry spells. In the mechanical sense this
soil is perfect:—
A Soil Capable of Immense Improvement.—From portion
of the Government Lands at Rookwood, some 10 miles from
Sydney, and suitable for an Agricultural School or College.
The formation is of the Wianamatta shales series. Until
cleared there was very little grass upon the land :


Organic matter and moisture 14"20 -
Silica
76-00
Alumina and iron
... 9-10
Lime
0-01
Magnesia
... Paint traces
Phosphates
Traces.
Potash
Traces.
Chloride sodium
0 02
Sulphuric acid
None.
Nitrogen=ammonia, 0‘15.
Capacity for absorbing and retaining moisture, 5.
The subsoil is stiff clay, the first six inches red, and bearing
oxidised iron; under that, white clay in a bad state, from the
presence of unoxidised iron; but analysis shows considerable
traces of alkalies, magnesian earth, &c. Draining should
improve this soil very much ; without drainage, but little can
be expected from it. As an experiment, a portion of the land
under grass, drained to a depth of 3 ft., with 2-inch and H
inch pipes. Representative rocks mostly ironstone. Indi-
cations of volcanic action.
Fire and Water Tests for Soils. —Two diagram sketches
are given, illustrative of how soils can be tested for vegetable
matter. In the first a
weighed portion of dry
soil, usually 100 grains, is
being tested by fire. The
operation is best performed
in a calcining dish (cost
9d.), which withstands the
heat of a Bunsen burner,
spirit lamp or candle, until,
all the vegetable matter is
incinerated or expelled,
and not by heat too fierce
at any time. When the
operation is complete the
FIRE TEST FOR SOIL &c.
soil is reweighed. The difference shows the quantity of
organic matter, with moisture (even from air-dried soil) which
was in it. Anything over eight parts of the 100, expelled by
heat, shows such proportion of vegetable matter as indicates
a soil of good quality in that respect. By reference to the
various analyses and the accompanying notes, this test of the
proportion of vegetable matter will be still more apparent.
Testing for Water Capacity. —The second figure shows


another effective, though simple, method for testing the
TESTING SOIL
FOR WATER CAPACITY.
capacity of soils for absorbing water.
Glass vessels answer best for this test,
so that we may see what is going on;
but other vessels of the same form may
be made to do duty. 10 ounces of air-
dried soil answers very well. A glass
funnel, or filler, with an ordinary paper
filter, is placed in the cylinder, as
shown. Then the soil to be tested is
put in the funnel, the paper preventing
it from passing through. Then gently
pour water upon the soil. A fairly
good loam, with say 10 per cent, of
vegetable matter, will be found to
absorb the water freely, and will take
up and hold, by capillary attraction,
over one-half its own weight, or, say
the 10 ozs. of soil will take in and hold
in suspension 6 ozs. of water. A rich
loamy soil, having over 18 per cent, of
vegetable matter in its composition,
will absorb 8 ozs. of water. In practice it is found that the
soil which takes in water most readily by this test gives it off
most slowly by evaporation. Hence their value in a climate
where so much of the success of agriculture of all kinds is
dependent upon the capacity of the soil to absorb rain and to
resist dry spells.
Peculiarities of our Soils. —There is now opportunity for
seeing what is the real character of nearly one hundred of our
soils—fairly representative soils, as explained. Of course, a
great deal more could be done, and, as a truth, much more
work of the kind should be done : this is a commencement
only. Hundreds of analyses would not reach all the changes
in soil formation of the country ; but in this commencement
there is enough to prove that there is not the very great
diversity in quality which was very generally supposed. Main
features of our soil are wonderfully alike in many respects,
and in soils taken from locations hundreds of miles apart.
There is also, and it is said with decided regret, marked
uniformity in a deficiency of necessary materials characteristic
of even rich grazing; and cultivation soils. The ingredients
o o O
are not numerous, fortunately ; but as the absence of even one


is quickly felt, poverty of grass and crops must result, unless
the deficiency is made good. The marked deficiencies are in
the alkalies, alkaline earths, and phosphates, all of which can
be made good in such quantity as warrants their use for
profitable agriculture. Their absence, in not a few cases,
accounts, in unmistakable manner, for the falling-off of both
grass and crops—and not them only, but for deterioration of
the live stock on the land, which suffers very soon from ab-
sence of bone-forming material. The dairying districts also
suffer from this cause.
Poverty of Soil v. “Blights.”—From several of the soils
of which analyses were made, heavy crops of corn, wheat,
barley, tobacco, roots, etc,, were got in years gone by. Thirty
to forty bushels of wheat, eight tons potatoes, eighty bushels
of corn, and up to 1,500 lbs. tobacco were got per acre while
the land was in full vigour. This went on from three to ten
years, then the crops began to be lighter and lighter ; and
then—and this is heard in many of the older settlements—
“ The blight fell upon the land ; and since that happened, it is
no use cropping. We may get a bit of corn, and the grass, but
nothing else.” “ Blights” are attributed to numbers of causes
—to long-continued dry weather; to grasshoppers and cater-
pillars ; to insects, westerly winds, and various other causes,
all of which are annoyances, and the cause of loss here as they
are in all other agricultural countries. But soil impoverish-
ment accounts for no small portion of such pests, and there is
ground for confidence that, as more attention is paid to the
state of the soil, and the conditions of insect life, we will be
the better able to ward off the enemies always on the watch
to ravage suffering vegetation.
What Skill has Done.—There are exceptions to the long
list of complaints, and men amongst us who have been
sufficiently successful all along to give confidence that when
the better system becomes more general, agriculture must
make the advance so very earnestly desired all over the
country. These men have treated their land usually from the
outset with consideration and judgment. The effects of skill
are very clearly defined in many quarters. There is grazing
land to-day which is as good, possibly better, than it was fifty
years ago; and farms, orchards, and vineyards which have
improved in quality and condition of soil by the system of
treatment and cropping followed. We can hope that the
better system is to extend from this time forward.


Stubborn Soils Approach of Pine Scrub. There is
another feature brought to light by systematic analysis,, and
that is the insolubility or stubbornness to yield up plant food
of much of our soil, in comparison with soils in other countries.
The agents used to dissolve the soils and to get at the propor-
tion of material available for plant food, are water and acids.
The process is a simple matter, but the results are disap-
pointing at first. Even the richer soils, from the volcanic and
granitic formations, are found to yield up their plant food but
slowly. The poorer soils—the shale clay soils, and the tertiary
and sedimentary soils of the west and north-west—are still
more stubborn, and the fact accounts for no small share of the
pine scrub growth or approach to barrenness which is falling
upon vast areas of the pastoral lands of the country. The
agencies of Nature—rain, carbonic acid, and oxygen—act but
slowly upon those poorer, sandy, silicious soils, and unless
where husbanded with care and skill, the vegetable matter—
the main support of grasses of all sorts—is soon worn out.
As the grasses fail pine growth advances, and immense areas
are being, overrun, the trouble arising in no small degree from
this very cause. It is Nature’s process for restoring the
balance and again coating the surface with the vegetable or
organic matter of which it has been denuded by grazing, and
still more rapidly by burning. When the two agencies work
together, it is a literal case of burning the candle at both ends.
CLEARING LAND.
Ringing, or Ring-barking Trees, has proved beneficial in
some cases, and anything but beneficial in others. If grass is
the only object in view, and the land is at all liable to visi-
tations of frost, then some of the timber, say from twenty to
thirty trees to the acre, should be left alive. The vitality of
the others can be destroyed at any time of the year by cutting
out a ring of bark all round each tree, at least three inches
wide, and down into the firm hard wood. All the under-
growth, including ferns and young saplings, should be grubbed
out, for they do more to prevent grass from growing than the
larger and deeper rooting trees. One of the annoyances of
ringing is the getting rid of the bark, branches, and timber as
they fall. On moderately timbered land that has been ring-
barked, eight, ten, or more years elapse ere all this dead
stuff is got rid of, and in every case it is desirable to calculate
whether it would not be cheaper to cut down and burn the


timber at once, rather than ring it. What is left standing is
always dangerous and unsightly ; and there is no room for
doubting that the falling stuff injures the grass for years, and
should fire get amongst it, the grass suffers. A few living
trees should be left upon grazing land, for shade and to ward
off some portion of the frost that cuts up the grass in propor-
tion to the manner in which it is exposed.
Clearing Off Timber, &c, —Experience is everything in fall-
ing scrub or any dense growth of timber that has of necessity
to be burnt off. The winter season—June, July and August
—is the time for this work. The blacks, in the less populous
parts of the country, are expert at it. They cut down the vines
and light timber first, then tumble the heavy stuff on top, lop-
ping off the branches to get the whole mass as close as possible.
Bushmen follow the same plan. Then the stuff is allowed to
lie until it is perfectly dry. This brings us into November,
when the weather is usually very dry ; then the mass is fired,
and when the packing has been sufficiently close the fire
carries off all except the trunks of the big trees. These are
then rolled together and burnt, and corn, sugar-cane, or other
crops planted at once, right in the ashes. As much as 110
bushels of corn per acre have been got in this way.
III.—FENCES AND FENCING.
Fencing is of first importance to the agriculturist, whether
he be squatter, farmer, or gardener. Proper fences enable
him to get the benefit of all his grass; to have it eaten down
even and clean ; to enrich any desired piece of land ; to work
his stock at the lowest cost, and to preserve his crops. The
kind of fence best for each locality depends upon the nature of
the timber, or other material, and the labor available. A
thoroughly colonial fence is made of wire-netting, fixed to
split posts. The posts are set in the ground 8 feet apart, and
2 feet deep; then three barbed wires are stretched and fixed
to the posts by staples, and wire-netting, 2 inches mesh,
is fastened to the wire and the posts. To prevent rabbits, &c.,
getting under the netting, it is set in a trench 3 inches
or so under the surface. This fence then presents 5| feet
of wire-netting. The cost is from 7s. fid. to 10s. per rod.
Post and rail fences of ironbark, bloodwood, blue or red
gum, or other hardwood, are very durable. Three-rail fences


Average Weight, Strength
and Length of
Fencing Wire.
Wire
Gauge.
Diameter.
Weight of a
Mile
Length of
Cwt.
Breaking
Strain.
cwt. qrs.
lbs.
Yards.
lbs.
0 ...
0 040
13
3
12
127
7280
1 ...
0-300
10
3
12
162
5650
2 ...
0-280
9
1
IS
187
4930
3 ...
0-260
8
0
21
215
4250
4 ...
0-240
6
3
17
255
3620
5 ...
0-220
5
3
6
303
3040
6 ...
0-200
4
3
14
361
2510
7 ...
0-185
4
0
13
428
2220
8 ...
0-170
3
1
23
509
1840
9 ...
0-155
2
3
15
609
1560
10 ...
0-140
o
1
12
747
1280
11 ...
0-125
i
3
14
939
1000
12 ...
0-110
i
1
18
1244
800
13 ...
0-095
i
0
12
1589
568
14 ...
0-085
0
3
13
2031
456
15 ...
0-075
0
2
19
2608
352
16 ...
0-065
0
o
0
3473
264
of this kind cost from 4s. fid. to 7s. per rod, according to
location. Two-rail fences are about Is. per rod less.
An effective close-paling fence is made by sinking posts
nine feet apart, put on one top rail, and open a trench about
six inches deep between the posts, set the bottom ends of the
palings in the trench, letting the tops rest against the rail.
In stiff soil, well rammed againist the palings, it is not neces-
sary to nail the palings. This fence costs from 12s. to 20s.
per chain.
Wire is sold by the hundredweight and ton. Prices vary
according to the gauges. Nos. 6,7, 8, and 9 are favourite sizes
tor sheep fences, and answer very well, with a top rail, for
cattle and horses :
Stretching and Tying Wire.—The strainer shown consists of a
mowing-machine finger bolted to a stout stick; one curved as
shown in the above en-
graving is preferable to a
straight one, as it will not
turn in the hand. When
using it, the wire is held
firmly in the slot of the
finger, and may be easily
stretched by applying the
stick as a lever.
A HOME-MADE STRAINER.


A POWERFUL WIRE STRAINER—MARTIN'S LEVER.
Wire Fences.—Six wires of No. 6, with the posts a rod
apart, make a good cattle and sheep fence, if spaced thus:—
Lower wire 10 inches from the ground ; first space, 41 inches;
second, 4J inches; third, 5£ inches; fourth, 10 inches; and
the top space, 12 inches. Two wire bands at equal distances
should connect all the wires in each panel, by being passed
round each, and then staked to the ground. The above dis-
tance is better than having posts placed nine feet apart. This
description of fence has been proved most effective on a
large scale. Posts are bored with less labor when put in a
gauged frame, and when the auger has a winch handle. A
good “bush” strainer is a round piece of wood, three or four
inches in diameter and three feet long. This is turned by a
pin, worked in a hole, near each end. The wire is thus made
to coil round the centre, and the power is quite sufficient.
The posts ought to be two feet in the ground, and the straining-
posts four feet, a foot in diameter, and twenty rods apart.
A man can sink twenty-five holes a day in ordinary soils. The
straining-post is secured by a stay resting on a notch in a
block sunk in the ground; the stay can be moved forward as
the work proceeds, two being used alternately. The wire
should be so tough as to coil closely round itself without giving
way. The prevailing opinion is, that the posts last longer if
placed “butt up.” The fence mentioned may be put up,
under ordinary circumstances, at a total cost of £BO a mile.
Neither the ground auger for making post-holes nor the driv-
ing of posts by hand has been found to work particularly well.


Of the cheaper kinds of fences in use, P. R. Gordon, Esq.,
the Queensland Chief Inspector of Sheep, says : “ Fences vary
in cost, according to prices of wire, timber, and labor available,
&c. The cost mentioned may serve for approximate guidance.
With a 2241 b. locomotive pile-driver, for driving posts, a six-
wire fence (No. 9 wire) with strong top-rail, cost £6l per
mile; same description (No. 12 wire), £52 ; sub-division fence,
five wires (No. 9), without top-rail, £34 per mile ; same de-
scription (No. 12 wire) £25.
Chock-and-Log Fences.—To be sheep-proof, the chocks are
not more than six inches in diameter, and the fence for sheep
need not be more than three and a half feet, and for cattle four
feet high. A fence of this description, where the wages of la-
borers are twenty shillings a week, and timber convenient, may
cost from £3O to £4O per mile, and in stringy-bark, or thickly-
timbered country, from £2O to £25 per mile. As a proof of
its strength, a fence of this description, built of pine logs,
formed the stockyards of Ulupna, one of the Royal Bank
Stations, and stood the test of many years, notwithstanding
that the herd was one of the most rowdy description.
“ Billabong Fence” (first erected by Mr. Rawdon F. Greene
on the Billabong Run) is formed by laying on the ground a
large log, generally not less than 18 inches in diameter ; an
other large log is placed on the top of this ; two strong cross
legs, from four and-a-half to five feet long, are then put on
the ground (one on either side of the logs), and crossed on the
top of the second log, at a distance of about twelve feet apart;
and in the fork formed by these cross-legs is laid another log,
of from six to nine inches in diameter, which firmly binds the
two first logs and forms the upper rail of the fence. This
description of fence costs in average timbered country, from
£36 to £4O per mile, and in stringy-bark or pine country,
about £25 per mile.
“ Stubb Fence”—is a favorite with sheep owners, and costs
from £22 to £25 per mile. It is formed thus : —Blocks or
chocks about a foot in diameter are laid along the ground,
across which two heavy logs, each not less than one foot in
diameter, are laid along parallel to each other, and from one to
two feet apart. The tops of the trees cut down for the pur-
pose of procuring these logs, are then cut in lengths of four or
five feet, and planted between these parallel logs, slanting at
an angle of about twenty degrees. This is a most substantial
fence, both sheep and cattle proof, and excepting casualties in


the shape of fire, will stand a number of years without repair.
Another and cheaper variety of this fence is made by allowing
the leaves to remain on the uprights, and it then takes the
name of “ Log and bush.”
Double Post and Bail, with Saplings.—This style of fence is
more frequently used for sheep yard than for paddock fencing.
It is formed by sinking two posts in the ground, about six inches
apart, at intervals of from twelve to fifteen feet. Saplings of
any diameter not exceeding eight inches are then dropped
between the posts, and when built up to the height of about
four the posts are secured together at the top by wire,
hoop, green hide, or, in some instances, stringy-bark.
Virginian Snake, or Zigzag Fence—has been extensively
used in some parts of Victoria, and when constructed of heavy
timber is a substantial fence. It is made by embedding the
butt end of one tree in a notch cut for the purpose in the top
end of another, laying them along the ground in a zigzag form,
so that each log intersects the entire line at an angle of forty-
five degrees. When the logs have been piled up to the desired
height, cross-legs and a heavy top-rail are then put up as in the
“ Billabong” fence, so as to bind the whole.
“ Basket” Fence will be found serviceable to those residing in
scrubby or brigalow country. It is made by driving five feet
six inch stakes in the ground with mauls, to a depth of 9to
12 inches, and four feet six inches apart; saplings from about
two inches in diameter are then closely entwined with the
stakes to a height of four feet six inches. It can be strength-
ened by staying it at intervals with strong forks ; or, if erected
in scrub, stumps of saplings should be made available where
practicable instead of driven stakes. This fence can be run up
rapidly, at a cost of about £25 per mile.
“ Brush Fence” is that most commonly erected on sheep
runs. Two descriptions are in use ; the first being formed by
cutting down the trees along the line of fence, laying down the
butts, as well as any dead timber which may be lying about as
a foundation; and making it up to the height of four or five
feet with the brush obtained from the trees just cut down.
This is the same as the ordinary brush fence used in the con-
struction of sheep yards, and may be erected at as low a rate
as £7 in thickly timbered country, and £ls in ordinary bush
land. The other description of brush fence is formed by cutting
down a tree, drawing it by means of a strong team of bullocks
on to the line, and chopping off only such branches as rise to a


height of over seven feet. The next tree is then drawn on and
placed so that its branches commence to form part of the fence
immediately where the branches of the first tree left off, and
so on throughout. This fence will cost from £ls to £22 per
mile, and being very broad will not require “ topping up” for
several years. Division boundary fences are frequently erected
of this description of material in Victoria, and are perfectly
cattle-proof.
Contracts for Fencing.—A written agreement between the
parties concerned is in all cases desirable. In timbered country,
the contract should specify by whom the line is to be cleared,
and the width of the clearing ; dead timber should never be
allowed to remain within five feet of a fence. Also the height
of the posts out of the ground; their depth in the ground
(usually two feet) ; the size of the rails ; whether posts are to
be barked (always desirable); arrange for slip-rails and gates ;
whether any of the stuff is to be hauled upon the line by the
owner; and, if possible, the timber to be used should be speci-
fied. Towards the erection of boundary fences it is usual for
all parties concerned to pay equal shares. The law provides
that this shall be done, but a written understanding between
the parties is more satisfactory.
Falling Timber.—The autumn is the best time to fell timber
for posts, rails, vine stakes, or for building. At that season
the new wood has arrived at maturity, and there is less sap
and soft matter in the timber than there is at any other season of
the year. This matter when exposed to the influence of the
weather hastens the decay of timber. If timber be fallen and
split up in autumn, the seasoning process is much more gradual
and perfect, because the weather is cooler, and the grain of
the timber contracts more equally and uniformly, rendering
the timber more porous, but less cracked. Fencing stuff made
from almost any of our trees, if felled and split in autumn,
outlasts any other stuff from the same timber cut at different
season. Timber cut in autumn is not so subject to either dry-rot
or the attacks from grubs or white ants.
IV.—DRAINING FOR HEALTH AND
CULTIVATION.
Comparatively, it matters little which branch of agriculture


we look into. It is all-important to know the state of the
soil with respect to drainage. It has been demonstrated
beyond doubt that freedom from or liability to attacks of dis-
ease amongst animals (not excepting man) as well as vegetables,
depends greatly upon the facility with which water passes
through the soil. Fevers of various kinds have been traced
directly to the presence of dampness, or to water stagnating
in the soil, and it should be amongst the first considerations
of the man about to build, that the place upon which his
house is to stand should be drained sufficiently to allow
water to pass through it without stoppage. Stables, stock-
yards, barns and sheds should be equally well placed. If
located in damp situations the life and health of the ani-
mals is not only jeopardised, but grain, roots, harness, and
other material are liable to destruction from mildew and rot
during the
prevalence of
damp wea-
ther. Black-
leg in cattle is
traceable
direct ly t o
camping in
damp situa-
tions; and
there are
those who be-
lieve that
pleuro - pneu-
monia has
a similar
origin. Fluke
SOIL OPENED FOR DRAINING.
and other worm diseases in sheep spread with fearful rapidity
in damp locations. In arranging a homestead, therefore, be it
large or small, it is of importance, first, to have the buildings
upon well-drained land; and, second, to fence off dry places, or
at least so arrange the land that the occupants of the paddocks
shall have dry places for camping during wet weather. In
addition to this, much can be done in the way of rough im-
provement by draining off surface water from all but the
places reserved for water. The effects of cutting a ditch
through a piece of naturally wet land are very great; reeds
and coarse grasses give place to finer qualities, and what may


have been a dangerous swamp in wet weather, becomes
valuable grazing or cultivation land in all weathers; but
especially valuable during dry spells. When underground
draining is adopted, the improvement is very marked. On
cultivated land in warm climates we see great results follow
this kind of improvement. It not only tends to make the
soil workable
and capable of
bearing crops du-
ring wet seasons,
but in dry sea-
sons the drained
land holds out
better than un-
drained land of
DRAINING OR DITCHING FLOUGH.
the same character. Again, in warm climates, salts of iron,
and other poisonous salts, common in new soils, may be present,
particularly those tending to clay, and it is found that by means
of drains these salts are carried off or fall below the arable
level, and so cease to injure cultivated crops. Whether natu-
rally or by artificial means, soil to be of its true value to the
cultivator should be porous to the depth of from two to three
feet to admit water to filter through it, and with free egress
for any surplus water, so that no water can rest or be allowed
to accumulate in the subsoil touched by cultivated crops.
When water saturates a soil, its first effect is to expel the
air which it contains and the gases which may have generated
in it. But as the water moves along in the soil, it is followed by
fresh atmospheric air, the oxygen in which at one stimulates
into activity fresh developments of carbonic acid, furnishing a
fresh supply of food for plants. There are some subsoils
naturally porous, and which admit the
water to pass downwards and drain off ;
but the majority of subsoils are hard and
tenacious ; and in land which abounds in
iron, hard layers are gradually formed.
These layers, prevent water and the roots
of plants from penetrating. When rain
falls, the shallow surface is soon satu-
rated, and is either washed into ruts
or it remains wet until evaporation has
dried it up. The effect is destructive to
DRAINS.
vegetation. Evaporation produces cold, and the land is


chilled below the vegetating point, and
putrefaction in such a soil takes the
place of that more perfect oxidation
which constitutes decomposition or de-
cay, and the result is as already
stated, the absorbtion by the putrid
substance of the oxygen required to
fertilise the land. Various sorts of
drains are put down for agricultural pur-
poses. Three are shown. The first is
laid with stones, with saplings, or with
slabs, so arranged as to allow water
DRAIN PIPES.
to flow freely at the bottom. B has a tile drain; c a pipe
drain, laid on the bottom as shown. The leading principle
of all drains is alike, that is, they should be so arranged,
and the material into and from which the water is to pass
should be so laid that water can pass through freely. The
depth at which drains can act most effectively depends upon
the nature of the soils and the character of the cultivation.
When gardening is attempted in soil which is not sufficiently
open to allow the roots to penetrate freely, the orchard dies
off, no pruning or dressing will keep the trees alive. The
systematic analyses carried out in the Technical College, Sydney,
show plainly how the unoxidised iron in the soil has done
very serious injury. Apart from the prejudicial effect of the
presence of protoxide of iron, a soil in this natural state, even if
the surface soil is good and dry, never exhibits but a minimum
of fertility. In hot and dry seasons the water
baking yet harder the subsoil, and chilling the land. Oxida-
tion is but imperfectly carried out; and, despite the application
of manure, vegetation languishes. Draining suddenly changes
all this, and brings the soil into a condition to render a grateful
return for the care of the agriculturist. Most conclusive tests
in draining have been carried out in order to see—lst.,
whether drains four feet deep or drains two feet deep
are the more effective ; and 2ndly, the distance from which
water flows into drains laid in stiff soil. Drains were
dug four feet deep in a piece of pasture, and at the bot-
tom were laid pipes of one inch bore. On these was
rammed hard clay two feet deep, and on the clay was laid
another row of inch pipes, and the trench was filled up to the
surface. The result was that after heavy rain the lower or
four-feet tiles not only commenced running first, but the flow
36
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE.


of water was much greater than from the upper tier, and con-
tinued longer. But this was not all. Another drain of four
feet was opened parallel with the other, at twenty-four feet
distance, and arranged in the same way. It then appeared
that the first drain was drawing off the water to the distance of
twenty-four feet. Experience has proved that a soil gorged
with water cannot perfect crops ; that excess of water is an
impediment to the due mechanical division of the active soil;
that it diminisnes the fertilising power of any species of man-
ure; that it lowers the temperature of the mass of the soil;
that it precludes the free entrance and exchange of the atmos-
pheric air ; that it prevents the free descent of rain through
the soil. These amongst other truisms concerning drainage
are as effective in warm as colder climates.
Various materials are used for drains in the colonies, in-
including slabs of hardwood, saplings, bushes, stones, drain-
tiles, and pipes. The last make, beyond a doubt, the best
underground drains, but slabs and stones are proportionately
valuable, where they can be got easily ; slabs being especially
so in heavy land with but little fall, owing to the capacity of
the wide drains made with them to carry off quantities of
water and to admit air. At Eookwood very good drains have
been made by laying down short pieces of tee-tree.
The cost of draining and the distances apart found most
effective differ very much. In places where considerable quan-
tities of this work are done, drains three feet deep and formed
of a single slab covering the lowest six inches (made narrower
on purpose) have been put down at a total cost of ss. per
chain ; that is, 66 feet of drain. The price, then, varies accord-
ing to the material used and the nature of the land, from ss.
to £1 per chain. In a big job of 2-inch pipe draining, done
in East Moreton, the cost (men working at 6s. per day and
rations) proved to be 9s. Bd. per chain. One and 2-inch pipe
drains, laid 3ft. deep in stiff, shaley soil at Rookwood, cost 10s.
per chain.
As it is in other countries, so it is here, various distances
and depths are in favor. Perhaps the most general depth for
field crops is three feet. Drains at this depth, and 20 feet
apart, make an improvement upon land that becomes more and
more marked year after year. But distance and depth in this
matter must be regulated by the nature of the soil. Fifteen
feet apart is found quite far enough apart in draining stiff clay
soils, while 33 feet apart is found effective in sandy loams.


NUMBER OF DRAIN-PIPES REQUIRED PER ACRE.
Drains
10 feet
apart.
Drains
1 12 feet
apart.
Drains
1 15 feet
apart.
Drains
17 feet
apart.
Drains
18 feet
apart.
Drains
20 feet
apart.
4356
3C30
2904
2562
2420
2178
To facilitate the getting together of material for draining, the
following table may be useful. The pipes referred to are each
one foot in length. In slab draining the slabs are commonly
four feet long, so that one slab would represent four
pipes :
The cost and weight of pipes vary so much that it would not
be safe to quote them. But at present, 1-inch pipes are selling
at from 28s. to 355. per 1000; pipes of that size weigh about
per foot.
V.—CULTIVATING LAND.
The Objects Aimed At.—ln cultivating land three main
objects are aimed at: to maintain the soil in the best condi-
tion for plant life ; to keep it loose and clean; and keep up or
improve its quality.
How Crops Fail, and How Improved.—lt is from the using
up of the more valuable substances of all soils, the nitrates and
phosphates—potash and lime especially—that wheat, if grown
during successive years, fails, even on rich land, to yield the
heavy crops got at first. The poorer lands are quickly ex-
hausted by wheat; but by the use of lime, superphosphate, or
bone-dust, with any other manure that can be got, and applied
to the soil carefully, such land as we have in the wheat dis-
tricts, and especially in the volcanic formations, may continue
rich all through a lifetime, and be better at the end than at
the beginning. Should this matter be neglected, the same
results must follow here' as in other lands that have been
exhausted, and are no longer fit for wheat. Maize, the next
crop dealt with, is easier upon the soil, as it gets more of its
food from the air, as broad-leaved plants do. But maize is just
so much the less valuable as a bread-corn in proportion to the
lesser quantity of material it takes out of the soil. The same
thing occurs as between the value of lucerne, clover, rye-grass,


&c., and indigenous grasses, the very best o£ which are poorer
in bone and muscle-forming material in comparison with the
cultivated grasses. The native grasses, however, are very valu-
able where pasture only is the object in view. But they also
SuS'er when grazed down year after year, and when nothing is
returned to the land. Analyses shows the changes going on
very clearly, and enables men to see—what is being felt on over
large tracts of country —that the native pastures are not what
they were. But there is the remedy for grass as well as for
crops, and it is encouraging to find that pastoralists as well as
others are applying the remedy, by cultivating feed and allow-
ing their sheep and stock to have a spell at it occasionally. By
such means, and by systematically resting paddocks, the native
pastures are improved, and the horrors of exhaustion of the
country are checked. Barley is • a crop that deserves to be
more general. \Ye have just the right climate for it over large
areas of country. Malting barley requires either limestone
country or marl. But by attention to liming, really prime malt-
ing barley should be produced here in any desired quantity.
For dairying purposes, rye, with vetches, is very desirable.
For milk and for butter-making this is a first-rate feed, and
well adapted to the soil and climate.
Potatoes, like wheat, draw heavily upon the constituents of
the vegetable matter, the potash, and the lime in the soil.
Many might have noticed that new and rich land gave one,
two, or more heavy crops of fine potatoes, then they fell off
in quality as well as quantity. The -reason is the using up by
the crop of the vegetable matter and the potash. There is no
room for a single doubt on these points, and when the facts
are seen to, and the necessary fertilizers applied, potatoes in
any quantity—and of very superior quality—can be grown
here. In fact, it is a positive sin, in the face of what is known
of agriculture in these days, that potatoes, in all-sufficient
quantities, are not produced in the colder districts, and fair re-
turns in other parts. To help the crop, all the vegetable matter
obtainable, all the leaf mould, all the wood ashes, and, if pos-
sible, some potash fertilizer, should be added to the manure
heap prepared specially for potatoes. They well deserve such
attention. The case of Ireland may be instanced, where, as
well as in other parts of the old land, the potato had become
such a martyr to disease in years gone past that it was said
over and over again that the crop was done. But science and
skill came to the aid of the potato-growers; and what is the


case now 1 Heavier and better crops of potatoes than ever are
produced—crops up to 15 and 18 tons per acre. We certainly
can learn much from the grand old land, and from the splendid
men who devote such care and skill to agriculture over there.
When studying the careful plodding, with which such magni-
ficent work as the Woburn experiments were carried on, to
test the quality of crops for feeding and the manures got by
stock under varying conditions, it might well kill the conceit
that we have nothing to learn from the old land.
Effects of Burning.—Some eighty analyses of soils of New
South Wales, made with the special object of tracing changes
going on, afford very fair criterions of the soils of the colony.
Those soils are not by any means of such great diversity as
appears to be generally supposed. But in all the analyses
made not a single soil has been found which has, or ever
appears to have had, any vegetable matter in it that could be
burned icith advantage to the soil. Grass-burning has been a
fearful cause of destruction on the grazing lands ■ and stubble-
burning has been only the less destructive on farming land by
reason of the smaller quantity burned. If exception could be
made to the terribly suggestive facts of the preceding para-
graph, it might be found in the extraordinarily rich grazing
soil from near Coopernook, Manning River, heavy soil from
near Gunnedah, Namoi River, and rich volcanic and limestone
loam from Tumut Plains. Each of these soils is rich in
vegetable matter ; upon that their fertility is dependent; and
after testing them closely for their capacity to absorb rain-
water, and to hold moisture in suspension during dry weather
—for each of which qualities they stand in the very first rank
—it is seen that even they have no vegetable matter that
could be spared for burning without injury to the fertility of
the soil. The conclusion, then, is inevitable, that where
burning can be avoided it should be by every possible means.
Ploughs and Ploughing. —Many implements have been
tried, and many efforts made to do the work of the plough by
other means. The times were when the spade was considered
a formidatile rival, and in the description of work for which
the plough was considered best suited. Enthusiastic ad-
mirers wrote essays upon “ spade culture,” and the vast
improvement it would confer upon mankind. But that time
has gone, and for ever, from all but the inner recesses of
civilisation, where men are considered of no more value than
to compete with horses in turning over the soil. Not that we


•would speak slightingly of the spade. It is a good implement
in good hands ; but the same hands might do many times more
work with a well-made plough, and do it as well—better, as
market gardeners near the great cities of Europe and America
believe. And they have about the best opportunities for
judging. In the colonies the plough is the main implement
of culture, and, to the credit of colonists be it added, not only
are the best imported implements of this class popular, but a
degree of skill has been brought to bear upon the plough by
colonial makers that is highly to their credit. Their efforts
have been mainly directed to making ploughs suitable for
the nature of the work to be done. We see the result in the
heavy colonial plough.
This implement is made for breaking up new land, in which
it has to cut through roots, &c., to a depth of eight or ten
inches. This it does in a way that calls out the admiration of
those even who at first look upon the implement as ponderous
and unwieldly. The form adopted, it will be seen, is similar
to that of the ordinary Scotch swing-plough. The breast is
higher, and runs out into a more cutting edge than or-
dinary. The coulter is very heavy and sharp, and there is a
strong draught bar. The dimensions of the plough, as made
by M'Lean, Brisbane, are—length of beam from draught-
bar, 4 feet; handles, from end of mould-board, 7 feet; body,
2 feet; total length, 13 feet; from point of share to end of
mould-board, 5 feet; the coulter is made of 4x 1 inch iron.
Altogether, it is a most suitable implement for breaking up
land. The best ploughs of this description are of iron; but
some prefer wood in the beam and handles. Ten bullocks or
six horses are used for breaking up land. Four acres
per week is fair work. The disk coulter is an improve-
ment for cutting through grass land. The friction wheel
is found to lessen the draught in free loamy soil. The
double mould-board is used for ridging up potatoes, opening
furrows for sugar-cane, corn fodder, &c., and is a de-
cided labor-saving implement. Good as colonial ploughs
are, they can still be improved and made more suitable
for the work to be done, and the horses available for doing
it. In making comparisons, it must not be forgotten that
farmers in the old country have the finest breeds of draught
horses in existence at their disposal; that the climate is pecu-
liarly favorable to very heavy and very powerful horses, and
that, as a rule, the soil farmed by them is heavier than the
D


soil of this country. While clays prevail there, and wet soggy
weather, loams more or less sandy, prevail here; and this
climate favors lighter and quicker horses more than those that
are very heavy and powerful. This is the difference we have
to note in arriving at the most suitable implements for this
country. Our heavy ploughs for breaking up are probably as
good as the best implements of the kind in any country. They
are made to break or smash through roots, &c., that would
demolish lighter machines ; but this kind of work has only to
be done once, and it is not good farming to do ordinary field
work with a plough weighing SOOlbs., and necessitating a dead-
weight pull of fifteen or twenty stone, when a plough weighing
from 801bs. to lOOlbs. may do the work equally well. These
are the points of value to implement makers and to farmers
alike. To the former the lighter but equally strong implement
means better and more skilful work ; and to the farmer, an im-
plement that does not exhaust the strength of his teams, but
enables him to get through his work with less labor and outlay-
It means profit to both parties.
DOUBLE-FURROW PLOUGH.
Double-furrow, three, and four furrow-ploughs, are coming
into favor, and deservedly so, in the grain-growing districts.
With a team of three horses on a double-furrow plough, nine
or ten acres weekly can be got through comfortably, and the
work is quite as well done as by the single plough. There is
less tramping of horses, and a decided saving of labor.
The steam plough is found suitable for both old land and for


breaking up, and promises to become a powerful aid to semi-
tropical farming.
Various Styles of Ploughing.—First-class ploughing is
seen at times ; but, as a rule, the roughest kind of work passes
muster. The regularly laid out furrow (rectangular) seen in
our illustration, as prepared for grain sowing, is the style of
work most in favor with trained ploughmen. It is the system
adopted for their prize matches by the Royal and Highland
Agricultural Societies, and by colonial agricultural societies
generally. The test of merit is—“ That the plough cut the
sole of the furrow perfectly flat, leave the land side clear and
true, lay the furrow slices with uniformity, with perpendicular
RECTANGULAR FURROW FOR SOWING GRAIN.
cut on land side, and leaving a roomy horse-walk.” The usual
width of furrow is ten inches in width by seven in depth.
The slice is laid up at an angle of about 45° ; this exposes
a large surface to the action of the air, and is found suitable
in old cultivated land, and in soils of uniform richness to the
depth stated. On the whole, it is the system best adapted for
grain crops where the seed is broadcasted.
The crested or peaked furrow is much in favor in Scotland,
and also in the grain-growing sections of the colonies, where
stiff soils or those with more than the average proportion of
strong vegetable matter prevails. The peak of the furrow ex-
poses still more soil to the action of the air, and by dipping
the share downwards at the land side, a depth of 7 or 8 inches
is made at that point.


INVERTED FURROW.
The inverted furrow is a favorite colonial style of ploughing,
and answers very well where the land is not too dirty. On
thin open soils the extra wide furrow is perhaps the best for
general purposes. The rich mould is retained on the surface,
and depth can be obtained by running a subsoil plough or
grubber in the furrow immediately after the plough. Enor-
mous crops of potatoes are grown in rich sod-land by adopting
this plan. The furrows may be drawn 10 x 3, 11 x4,or 14
x 6 inches. The mould-board must be wide and short for this
work, and the ground is gone over very rapidly; one and-a-half
acre per day being nothing unusual for a good man with a good
team. The furrow is turned completely bottom up, and the
thick growth of weeds common on rich semi-tropical soils, are
buried completely. Nothing short of this will serve them, as
their vitality is strong, and they will live again if anything like
a chance is allowed them.
Points in Ploughing.—The history of improvement in
ploughs and ploughing is amongst the curious in agricultural
advancement. The implement as we have it now-a-days is a
direct outcome of scientific skill in the mechanics of agriculture.
The implement is a lever of the first order. It also acts as a
wedge, and when well and proportionately made, is a most
effective and scientifically-arranged implement. At a the
draught of horses or bullocks is brought to bear ; h b are the
handles for the hold of the driver ; c the points of the share
and the coulter. When leverage is required at cor higher up


on the mould-board, power applied at b is very effective. In
good ploughing, the implement should run perfectly true in the
furrow from the draught at a without extra application of
power at h.
The other series of engravings explain how the perfect im-
plement has been developed from the most crude beginnings
SURFACE VIEW OF PLOUGH.
THE PLOUGH—A LEVER.
Ploughs with one or two wheels are the easiest for the inexpe-
rienced. The plough should always be upright in the furrow
while at work. The wheels are for regulating the width and
depth, and for turning the plough round .at each end of the
field. The small, or land wheel, runs on the surface of the
ground, and the higher it is drawn up, the deeper the plough
will work. The large or furrow wheel runs in the furrow,
level with the bottom of the plough, and regulates the with of
the furrow slice. The plough will come out of its work easily
at the end, by a little pressure on the handles whilst the horses
are moving forwards. The plough must not be lifted or carried
round at the end of the work, but must follow the horses or
draught power, and must be turned on the large, not on
the small wheel. A little practice soon enables this to be done
easily. The draught chain at the head of the plough should
be set so that the plough will run straight forward in work,
and the best place will soon be found by trying it in the dif-
ferent positions from the centre either to the right or left. It
can also be raised or lowered for hard or soft land. Two horses
or six bullocks are found sufficient for ordinary work. Yoke


them in pairs. In dry soil the animals should be further from
the plough than in loose or soft soil. Steel breasts or mould-
boards are better than iron ones for stiff soil. The share should
have more or less inclination downwards at the point in pro-
portion to the hardness or softness of the soil. Stiff soils re-
WHEEL PLOUGH, BRITISH STYLE.
quire sharp keen shares; half-worn shares should be kept for
soft soil. Strong sharp coulters are necessary to cut through
the strong, matted grasses of warm climates. In strong grass
land the coulter should have a decided slope forwards at the
point; in clean land it may be almost straight down from
the beam. The point of the coulter should just clear the
share, and always cut in a straight line with the sole of the
plough. When a plough is fitted with two wheels, the
small or land-wheel should be drawn up to the depth re-
quired to be ploughed, and the large or furrow-wheel should
be placed level with the bottom of the plough, and set to the
width of the ploughing, measuring from the land side or slade
of the plough. When a plough is fitted with a land-wheel
only, it must be drawn up to the required depth, the width
being now regulated by the judgment of the ploughman. When
a swing-plough (without wheels) is used the depth and width of
the furrow has to be entirely regulated by the skill of the
ploughman.
Draught in Ploughing.—ln comparison with similar tests
made in England, dynamometer trials at colonial matches say
much for the skill brought to bear by local makers upon
the plough. In vol. I. of “ Transactions of the Agricultural
Society of England,” we have the following figures :- —
The draught in ploughing has been recently experimented
upon in America with the following interesting results ;
1. A deflection of the traces when under draught from
a straight line from shoulder to whippletree, results in a de-
a decided loss of power, and such loss is applied to the galling
and worrying of the horses. 2. The use of a six-inch land-
wheel under the end of the plough-beam, showed a saving


Power Required to Open a Furrow Five Inches Deep and Nine
Inches Wide.
Name of plough.
1
>>
a
<4
CO
Blue Clay.
Loamy Sand.
<5
O
tc
s
o
02
1 Moory Soil.
Average*
St,
St.
st.
st.
st.
st.
Ferguson’s Scotch swing
19
50
19
35
23
29
Clark’s ditto ditto
20
52
17
33
23
29
Hart’s Berkshire, one wheel
14
43
12
23
16
2U
Ransome’s F.F., two wheel
14
43
13
33
14
23i
Ditto ditto, swing
18
44
16
30
21
26
King’s Swing
18
48
15
27
19
25
Ditto, one wheel ...
17
43
17
30
18
25
Rutland, Ransome, two wheels
17
50
16
36
21
28
Old Berkshire wheel plough
23
52
21
36
25
314
Holkham plough, two wheels
18
...
of 14T per cent, of the draught at the average of the trials
made, and in addition gave a more uniform furrow and re-
lieved the ploughman. This saving can be made only when
line of draught is right. 3. The use of the coulter is not
common in America, and this report says its use was, without
exception, attended with a decided loss of force or increased
draught by whatever form of coulter used. The average gain
of draught by dispensing with the coulter was 15'6 per cent.
The coulter invariably
disturbed the line of
draught, resulting in
a furrow of different
dimensions from those
formed without it. 4.
The draught of a
plough decreases in
proportion as width of
furrow increases, until
the normal capacity of
AMERICAN STYLE OF PLOUGH.
the plough is reached, after which it increases again under the
same limitations as in previous case of depth, yet it does not
increase in as rapid a ratio as is seen in case of depth. The
absolute draught in a 15-inch furrow was less than for a 10-
inch furrow.
Plough Shares.—On [stony and sandy soils the share of the


plough wears away very quickly, and time is lost in taking it off
for relaying, sharpening, <tc. The chilled
share is an advantage, so far as the iron
being chilled, or made harder on the
under side than it is on the upper side ;
the share wears sharp until it is worn
out. These shares are coming into very
CILILLED SHARE.
general use.
Subsoil Ploughing. —The value of subsoiling by means
of the plough—of giving as great depth as possible to land
under cultivation without bringing the poorer, raw soil to the
surface—cannot be overrated in a warm climate. The work
is effectively done with the subsoil plough, many forms of
which are made, for one, two, three, and four horses. We
prefer the single horse implement. It is light, handy, and
breaks the soil from 4 to
7 inches deep. A is the
sole of the plough, which
moves the soil ; B the
standard for cutting • and
D is a nut holding the
standard. When run in
the furrow after a plough
turning out a slice 6 inches
SUBSOIL PLOUGH.
deep, a total depth of from 10 to 12 inches is obtained at the
lowest cost of labor. Subsoiling should follow draining ;it is
absolutely valueless unless the water that flows into the soil
moved by the subsoiler is carried off at once. Water allowed to
lodge under such circumstances converts the subsoil into a
sour mud that is destructive to every root that comes into
contact with it. Beneficial, then, as subsoiling is, drainage
—either natural or artificial—should be seen to before it is
attempted. But with combined drainage and subsoiling, we
have the means of growing crops at all seasons, whether they
be very dry or very wet, or the happy medium between the two.
GRUBBERS AND CULTIVATORS.
The plough is a wonderful implement in the hands of a man
who knows how to use and make the most of it. There are
those amongst us who do all the labor of cultivation with the
plough and the harrow, and do it well. But these are excep-
tional cases, and even in them it is questionable whether there
would not be saving of time and labor, and money as a conse


quence, by the use of other implements. It is in this direction
that the colonial farmer has to look for a solution of the labor diffi-
culty that cramps his energies. Of late years grubbers and
cultivators have come much
into favorfor field and garden
work, and they are made for
light and heavy land, with
and without wheels, for grub-
bing out roots, and preparing
land for the plough. In dry
weather, while it is desirable
to keep all the moisture pos-
sible in the soil, the grubber
is of peculiar value. With
it the soil can be loosened to
the required depth, and pre-
pared for seed without turn-
ing over, and consequent
exposure to the air. This
is becoming common practice
in preparing land for wheat
in the Riverina district,
and in other parts where the
PLOUGH CULTIVATOR.
soil is sandy.
Cultivators are also made for one and two horses, and are
in high favor for stirring the surface soil between cane, corn,
and other crops grown in rows.
Surface-stirring is a
most important branch
of the cultivator’s art
—especially important
in hot countries. In
warm, moist weather,
grasses and weeds
spring into shape and
flourish with a degree
of vigor that surprises
European farmers, and
they are no novices in
the warfare with weeds.
EXPANDING CULTIVATOR.
This growth has to be checked promptly for two reasons: Eirst,
weeds cannot exist without injuring the crop ; second, unless
they are destroyed at once they become too powerful for ordinary


treatment, and often cost more than the crop is worth. It is no
work for hand labor, this necessary destruction of weeds. We
are free to confess to a feeling of pain whenever we see a man
at work trying to cultivate with a hoe or hand-tool where a
horse implement would answer as well; it is neither healthful
nor profitable in this climate. The man who attempts to farm
by such means works with heavy odds against his health and
his success. It is very up-hill work to attempt anything in
the way of cultivation more extensive than home gardening
without the aid of horse labor.
HARROWS AND HARROWING.
Of late years, and in warm climates especially, much
attention has been bestowed upon the harrow as an effective
and as a labor-saving imple-
ment. It is not our purpose
to enter at length into a des-
cription of the various im-
plements of this kind ; one
feature was peculiar to them
all until recently; the teeth
were vertical, they entered
the soil in a straight line, or
were curved slightly forward,
MAKE-SHIFT HARROW.
in order that the teeth might bite stiff soil or drag out weeds,
grass, <fec. The work of the harrow is almost identical with that
expected from the gardener’s rake ; it smooths down the rough
places, prepares the soil for seed, and rakes in and covers
the seed. For fining the surface of the soil, the harrow is one
of the very best implements we have, and with the large
number of different
kinds sold, we can
secure an implement
adapted to almost any
kind of work and in
almost any kind of
soil. The improve-
ments made in this
class of implement are
very numerous, and
amongst the more
generally used by our
HOME-MADE HARROW.
best farmers, the zig-zag, disc, and pulverising-harrow, as


well as a variety of others, including the back-tooth harrow,
in which the teeth
•have a slope back-
wards, and do not clog
with grass, ifcc. It is
best to have the soil
prepared in a thor-
oughly fine condition
before sowing orplant-
ing the seed, and then
to keep the soil in
good loose tilth until
the plants have made
PULVERISING HARROW—THE “ACME.”
a sufficient growth to be able to commence using cultivators.
Weeds are much more easily destroyed when young than
after they get a good start to grow, and if the soil is prepared
in a good tilth before planting the seed, in a majority of cases
the harrow will be found the cheapest and best implement
to use in destroying the weeds.
The disc, zig-zag, or pulverising-harrows are good imple-
ments to prepare the soil for seeding wheat, oats, grass, or
other small seeds, though always liable to be choked by grass,
unless well attended to.
When harrowing a field the first time we may go the same
way as the land was ploughed, after which it does good work
to proceed as follows :
Start at corner No. 1
and go straight to corner
No, 2 diagonally across
the field, going back to
No. 3, from 3 to 4, 4 to
5, and sto 6. Keep
right on, and when the
field is done it will be
harrowed over twice,
and every mark will be
diagonal across the field,
which is just as it should
be, whether we mark
for corn, use the check-
row planter, or drill
in wheat. We will thus
finish at AA. A stiff piece of sod cannot be harrowed


Corn for grain
Bushels.
1
Corn for fodder or ensilage
... 2 to
3
Barley, broadcast
... 2 to
3
Barley, in drills
... to
2
Buckwheat
I to
14
Grass, lawn
... 2 to
3
Millet, broadcast
4 to
i
Oats
... 2 to
3
Grass, orchard
... 2 to
3
Potatoes in drills or hills, cut tubers ...
10
Potatoes, cut in single eyes
... 3 to
5
Rye, broadcast
... li to
2
DISC HARROW.
teen acres possibly one-
third more can be done
in a day than by taking
one-half of the field,
harrowing it diagonal-
ly, and then the other
half. It facilitates the
work for the horses.
They first travel on
ground that has been
gone over once; after
a short time they will
properly without going
diagonally across the
furrows, and in the above
plan we are so doing
whenever the drag is in
motion. Another great
advantage, we have only
to turn half about at
every corner. The team
need hardly be stopped
at all. In a field of fif-
ZIGZAG HARROW.
be on where it has been harrowed twice, which makes it easier.
VI—GRAIN CROPS OF AUSTRALIA.
Seed Per Acre. —The following table of seed necessary
per acre is the result of careful observation, and may be found
tolerably correct for average good land in a fair state for the
reception of seed:—


Eye grass
Bushels
2
Vetches
... 2 to 3
Wheat, broadcast
... Ii to 2
Wheat, in drills
i to 1
Beets and Mangel Wurzel
Pounds.
... 4 to 6
Cabbage (to be transplanted)
... I to 1J
Carrot ...
... 2 to 3
Cucumber, in hills
... 1 to 2
Clover, red, broadcast
Clover, white, broadcast
... 15 to 20
... 12 to 16
Clover, white, in drills
8
Lucerne, broadcast
20
Lucerne, drilled...
12
Onion, in drills
5
Parsnip, in drills
... 4 to 5
Rape, in drills
... 5 to 8
Radish, in drills ...
5 to 8
Turnip and Ruta Baga, broadcast
... 3 to 5
Turnip and Ruta Baga, in drills
... 2 to 3
Beans, pole, in hills, 3J x 4
Quarts.
... 8 to 12
Broom, corn, in hills
Sorghum, or Chinese sugar cane
... 10 to 12
... 2 to 3
Feet
assunder.
No. of
Plants.
Feet
assunder.
No. of
Plants.
Feet
assunder
No. of
Plants.
2
10,890
9
537
20
108
3
4,840
2,722
10
433 |
21
98
4
12
302 I
25
69
5
1,742
15
193
30
48
8
680
18
134 (
35
35
Rule. —Multiply the distances into each other, and with the product
divide 43,560 (the number of square feet in an acre), and the quotient is
the number of plants.
Plants per Acre.—The following shows the number of
plants required per acre ;
All the finer grains—wheat, maize, oats, and barley—are
grown extensively, and over a large area of country; and in
their production the conditions of good farming that rule in
other parts of the world tell equally well here. The coarser
grains—rye, here, buckwheat, millet, &c.—are also grown, but
More as articles of curiosity associated with recollections of
other lands than as grain. Rice is a grain differing essentially
from those mentioned, but it also grows freely in the semi-
tropical sections of the coastal country. In cultivating the
richer grains as wheat, maize, and oats, heavy soil, with a pro-
portion of clay answers best. Deep, clean farming also tells its


own unmistakable tale upon each crop j for, although vagaries
do occur, it is seldom indeed that slovenly or thoughtless
farming secures heavier crops than the sound system and
practice which European agriculturists find necessary to se-
cure uniform, good results.
Maize, or Indian Corn.— The leading position is given to
corn, or maize, as the most valuable grain in semi-tropical
countries—the safest as a yielder, and the
most certain of grain crops. Unless some-
thing very unusual happens during the
season, the farmer who sets his mind and
his energies to the production of a big crop
of maize seldom fails in his object. But
there are various ways of making the crop.
We must have suitable seed and suitable
land ; plant at the right time ; cultivate with
as little hand labor as possible ; protect the
grain from vermin out doors and in; and
use or sell it to the best advantage. (See
chapter on bread-making, for how to use
maize as human food.)
The extent of land in this country suitable
for growing maize is very great. Victoria
has considerable tracts where good returns
are gathered, and the whole of the seaboard
country of New South Wales, Queensland,
and the Northern Territory, in so far as
climate is concerned, is a vast corn area,
sufficient to produce grain for millions. The
season for planting extends from August to
January. In warm, sheltered localities in the
Northern districts corn is planted all the
year round, and three distinct crops are
gathered, but not from the same land, of
MAIZE.
course. The usual practice is to sow in August, September,
or October, some of the large varieties for a summer crop,
which is gathered in January or February; and some of the
smaller sorts in December or January for a winter crop,
gathered in April. In the cooler districts but one crop is
grown between October and February. Maize changes in
appearance in different localities, and from this cause favorite
kinds are found in each district ; in reality there are but four
or five varieties; and botanists reduce these again to two.


We will mention five distinct sorts, in so far as the farmer
is concerned, and then proceed to see how they are grown
to the best advantage.
1. The large yellow or whitish corn, with stalks running up
to a height of from 9 to 14 feet; cobs from 10 to 15 inches in
length. There are many sub-varieties in this family, all of
which require from four to five months of tropical weather,
with sun heat from 90° to 120°, and rich soil, to come to
maturity. Under such conditions it yields from 60 to 120
bushels of shelled corn per acre.
2. Small yellow, or flintcorn—very hard grain. Stalks from
sto 7 feet high; cobs from 6to 9 inches long, domes to
maturity in four months, and in cooler weather than the
former. Yield, about one third less than No. 1.
3. White corn (Tuscarora). Stalks about 6 feet high ; cobs
about the middle of the stalk, from 5 to 8 inches in length ;
matures in three months in moderately rich soil; requires hot
weather. Yield, from thirty to forty bushels per acre.
4. White glazed corn (Natal). In habit and size of cob
like No. 3. Grain, hard, tough, and shrivelled; matures in
from 100 to 120 days in temperature ranging between 90"
and 120°.
5. Variegated corn; received here with great promise from
South America ; has not done well.
It can be said with safety that land cannot be too rich nor
too “ active” for maize.
AVe see the truth of this
in the enormous crops
grown upon newly-cleared
scrub land in which, from
the density of timber and
undergrowth burnt upon
the land, the quantity of
potash and other active
salts is excessive, but by
merely scratching in the
seed with a hoe —often
amongst half-burnt logs
and several inches deep of
ashes—crops of from 80
to 120 bushels per acre
CORN WITHOUT MANURE.
are gathered. That is cultivation on new land, however, and
for but a season or two, while the corn has no weeds to contend


with, and is but the first approach to farming. Next to new
land, closely-cropped sod, freshly turned in, gives the heaviest
crops of corn. Then comes regular farming in conjunction with
other crops, and yields in accordance with the richness of the
soil and the skill employed.
In preparing land for corn, as much vegetable matter as
possible should be retained
near the surface; and to
effect this, shallow plough-
ing from three to five
inches deep answers very
well, and particularly so
when a subsoil plough,
plough body, or grubber is
run four or five inches
deeper in the furrow, im-
mediately after the plough,
but merely loosening the
under or subsoil. If there
is couch-grass in the land
it must be dragged out
with the common harrow,
CORN WITH MANURE.
but summer-grass, weeds, &c., should be buried and rotted,
if possible. They make good manure for corn. Where the
land has become rank from the growth of weeds—a common
occurrence in scrub land that has been out of cultivation—from
20 to 50 bushels of lime per acre, scattered on the surface,
makes a capital dressing; wood ashes applied in the same way
are also valuable. Any other manure can be used. No rules
apply to such work, beyond that of keeping the manure as
near the surface as possible, while preventing its exposure
to winds by covering with an inch or two of soil.
Enemies.—Some of the rat kind, that scratch up the
grain; various kinds of ants attack it as the grain be-
comes sweet in the first stages of growth ; and various birds
pull out the young shoots as soon as they appear above
ground. To prevent these ravages, the seed should be coated
with coal tar, a half pint of which coats a bushel of grain, or
enough for an acre. Pour on the tar gently, and stir it with
a fork or stick; it is soon coated all over. Let it stand for an
hour or two, then scatter on wood ashes, and mix with the
grain until it can be handled freely. Then sow. Another
plan is to scatter grain around the edges of the field ; this may


certainly save the crop, but it encourages vermin, all of which
are very shy of the tarred corn.
Cultivation of Maize.—To allow the crop a fair start, it is cus-
tomary in good farming to harrow just before sowing, “that
corn and weeds may have an equal chance,” as the saying is.
Some farmers go a step further than this, and harrow after
the corn is up above ground. Jt seems to be rough prac-
tice with the ordinary vertical-toothed harrow, as a glance at
the form of the teeth will explain ; the crop was torn of neces-
sity, before the weeds could be got out; but still it was con-
sidered better practice than allowing the two to struggle for
mastery, and hand-hoing for corn is out of the question—the
crop would not stand the expense. In America the same diffi-
culty was experienced, and to overcome it the smoothing or
weeding harrow, with teeth sloping backwards, came into use.
This implement does not pull anything from the soil that
roots deeper than an inch or two. It breaks or grinds down,
and makes the soil compact; it rakes the soil, in fact, and is
therefore especially suitable for cultivating. After the seed is
in, the harrows can be passed over the land once or twice
before the plants come above ground (which occurs six or eight
days after sowing), and thus the young weeds, rooting close to
the surface, are rubbed out, and the crop comes up free from
enemies. The harrow is again passed over the corn after it is
fairly started into the blade, and by some growers until it is
ten or twelve inches high, and by this means hand labor is
done away with, and very heavy crops of corn are made. A
good size for this harrow is in sections, 3x3 feet each, with
24 teeth. A pair of light horses take three sections easily
(covering 10 feet in all), and travel over from ten to fifteen
acres per day. Five or six harrowings are found to be enough
for this grain.
There are two established systems of planting corn—in hills,
made by taking out a lift of soil with the hoe from 3 to 4 J feet
apart each way ; in each hole thus made half a dozen or more
seeds are dropped ; from three to six of the plants that come up
are allowed to grow. In cultivating by this system the soil is
drawn up towards the corn as it advances in growth, thus
forming the hills. The plan is the best where the land is new,
and encumbered with burnt logs, roots, &c. Hill planting is
also managed by running out furrows with the plough from four
to five feet apart, then crossing them with furrows about three
feet apart. In the checks or corners thus made, where the
E


furrows cross, the corn is planted, and answers very well when
a little rich manure is scattered over the seed. The other
system is to drill in the seed by machine or hand, and where
horse-labor is available, this is the system that enables men to
do the most work. Where the land is ploughed, as already
described, and smoothed down with the harrow, six acres per
day, in rows from 4 to 5J feet apart, can be put in by a man
with a one-horse machine, without exposing the soil to a dry
atmosphere. As the crop advances, the plants are chipped
out from 6 to 12 inches apart, according to strength of the soil,
and the cultivation is then carried on to maturity with the
harrow, single-horse ploughs, cultivators, or hoes. In other
cases drills are opened with the plough or hoe, seed scattered
in by hand, and,covered with the harrow or hoe, and the crop
worked to maturity as in the preceding plan.
Depth in Planting.—The following is the result of experi-
ment ;—That which was planted at the depth of 1 inch came
up in 8| days, 1J inches came up in 9 J days, 2 inches came up
in 10 days, 2£ inches came up in 11£ days, 3 inches came up
in 12 days, 3 J inches came up in 13 days, 4 inches came up in
13J days. The more shallow the seed was covered, always
provided the soil was moist, the more rapidly the sprout made
his appearance, and the stronger afterwards was the stalk.
The deeper the seed lay, the longer it remained before it came
to the surface. Four inches was seen to be too deep for maize,
and must, therefore, be too deep for smaller grains.
Planting in straight Hows.—The advantages upon having
corn, or indeed any crop,
that it is desirable to culti-
vate between, in straight
rows, needs no recommen-
dation. This straightness
is helped very, much by
making out succeeding rows
while the planting goes on,
and various contrivances are
in use with this object in
CORN MARKER.—1.
view ; one of the simplest and best is herewith illustrated.
It consists of two pieces of plank; these form the middle
set of guides or runners. Upon these pin two straight pieces
of two by four scantling, with each end projecting over the
runner six inches. Two other pieces of plank, like the for-
mer, are procured (to form the outside runners), and one end


of two more pieces of scantling are pinned to each runner;
then these cross beams are connected to the middle pair
by four strong hinges, or instead of hinges the ends of beams
of the outside runners can be made to connect with the
middle ones by holes bored through the ends, and two
iron rods (as shown Fig. 1) passed through, making a very
FIG. 3.
FIG. 2.
strong job. Being so hinged, it well adapts itself to uneven
ground as in Fig. 2, so that while one runner is'on high ground
the other may be in the land furrow. A scat may also be
added, so that the driver may ride or walk as preferred. In
turning around, the two outside runners may be turned up as
in Fig. 3. Of course the width of the runners are made to
suit the required distance of the rows of maize, ifec., marking
out four rows each time.
Harvesting Maize.—Farmers acquainted with this crop
know that it is more difficult to preserve than to grow the
grain during the summer season. Whether one, two, or three
crops are gathered in the course of the year, the main crop
is ripe during the hot months, in January or February, when
the weevil, the pest of pests to the grain farmer in warm
countries, is very active. But before investigating the pro-
clivities of the weevil, it will be well to follow the cobs
from the pulling in the field to the barn. They are shot upon
the floor, the grain being thoroughly protected by the wrappers
around the cobs. These wrappers are stripped or husked
by hand. Any one who has the use of both hands can husk
corn, which is merely tearing the wrappers from the cobs;
but some operators get wonderfully expert at it. An average
day’s work of a good hand (and amongst the best hands
are active young women) may be taken at about 30 bushels of
ears, although over 100 bushels have been got through at
husking matches. The fingers and finger-nails suffer severely
while husking; and it is usually done in spells, in the evenings,
during the heat of the day, &c. To aid in the work,


gloves are made with small hooks at the points of the fingers
and at the palm of the hand. This glove helps the worker
very much, and deserves to be generally adopted.
Shelling Corn. —Maize Fevers.—Very excellent shellers
SHELLING CORN.
POWER CORN-sHELLER.
are made in the colonies. Hand, horse, and steam power are
employed for operating ; and power is necessary, for the work
is hard when done by the hand. The corn should be win-
nowed or cleaned as effectively as possible, in order to look
well when sent to market. While shelling, the fine dust
(fungus dust amongst it) from the sheaths of the cobs, is apt
to get into the throats of the operators. It is disagreeable,
and has caused fevers, by irritation. - The most effective pre-
ventive is to arrange the work and the shellers so as to blow
the dust away from the operators.
The Corn Weevil.—The nature and habits of this mis-
chievous little beetle have been observed closely in the
Technical College experiments, and the class-book used gives
much information on this and kindred subjects. The weevil
is now known to have only a limited range of life. Under
60° the insects are quite sluggish, and if exposed to 120° they
run tor shelter and cooler quarters. They perish in large
numbers at 140°, a heat that is attainable without much
difficulty during our summer months in barns built of iron.
Cold under 45° destroys weevils, and, possibly in time, it
may pay those who store grain in quantity to provide cold
storage. The farmers cannot do that. Sulphur fumes and
other gases also destroy weevils.
Barns for Maize and other Grains.—The frame-work of
an iron barn can be of any kind of wood sufficiently heavy,
and built upon stumps (well tarred) at least four feet above


ground. Iron in sheets 8 ft. long answers very well; about
120 sheets of average gauge run to the ton, and half a ton
makes a barn Bft. high at the sides, 14 ft. wide (two 8-ft. sheets
being used for roofing), and about 26 ft. long. Two sheets
nailed to a hinged frame at each end form the doors; there
might be one or two ventilators on top, but with power to close
them tight when necessary. The floor is of boards, and the
whole is water-tight. During our summer days a temperature
of 150° (or higher, by kindling a fire inside) can be obtained
in a barn of this kind, which heat will destroy or drive
out every thing of the weevil kind that has life. These iron
barns are also rat-proof—when no rubbish is allowed to accu-
mulate under them. They are decidedly the best and simplest
means available for preserving corn from vermin, and a vast
improvement upon the ordinary barns of boards, slabs, or
bark, in which grain becomes prey to enemies of all sorts.
When cobs are stored, racks about 4 feet wide are erected
at each side from floor to roof, and the cobs stored upon
them. This is a capital plan when the crop has to be gathered
in a wet state; it soon dries in a barn sheeted with iron. In
storing shelled grain, it may either be in bins about four
or five feet square, or in masses on the floor. The latter
is the better plan when there is weevil present, as it
can be turned over and exposed with ease. Corn in bulk
can be measured upon the following simple principles :—The
height, length, and width of any given mass of ears mul-
tiplied together give the cubic contents of any solid, or if of
any hollow structure its cubical capacity. If these dimen-
sions are in feet or inches, the contents found are respectively
cubic feet or inches. On an average, two bushels of ears
make a bushel of shelled corn. The cubic foot con-
tains 1728 cubic inches; a bushel 2150 cubic inches, or a
little less than 2£ cubic feet of ears make one bushel of shelled
corn (4300 cubic inches of ears = 2150 of shelled grain). It
is a very safe method, considering that there is a vast differ-
ence in the yield of various kinds of corn, to reduce the con-
tents of the crib to bushels, and then shell one of these bushels
and weigh the product. It is an easy matter then to arrive at
any given bulk of corn within a very small fraction. By allow-
ing say 50 bushels of shelled corn, or 110 bushels of ears to
the acre under this crop, it is a simple matter to arrive at the
size of a barn required.
Wheat is the leading crop over an extensive area of country.


South Australia exports this grain largely; Victoria is also a
heavy producer ; and New South Wales and Queensland grow
sufficient to show the enormous extent of wheat land in Aus-
tralia. It is a winter crop, the seed being sown during the
months of March, April, May ; the harvest is in September,
October, November. Location and the state of the weather—
whether it be dry and unfavorable for sowing, or dropping and
suitable, have much more to do with the getting in of this crop
than in Europe. But each district has its favorite time for
sowing.— say the first or second
half of April, or a little earlier
or later, as the case may be.
There are also favorite varieties
in each district, prominent
amongst which for suitability to
the climate are the Tuscans (for
quickness and heavy crops in
favorable seasons) ; Talavera and
purple straw (favorite with the
millers); Lammas (heavy plump
grain, but disposed to make too
much straw) ; Fenton (velvet or
woolly ear); Bearded wheat from
India and Egypt, are also in
favor. The Egyptian is especially
hardy, and perhaps the safest
WHEAT OATS BARLEY.
wheat for home use on new land. Much depends upon the
climate as to which variety is most suitable, and the safest way
to avoid mistakes is to sow the favorite of the neighbourhood
until a better is found. Regarding hardiness, and freedom from
rust (the enemy of wheat in Australia), the red and bearded var-
ieties are most in favor ; but the millers prefer the plumper and
whiter grains. All wheats give the heaviest crops from rich,
heavy land, and the rule found best with corn—to keep the
vegetable matter as near the surface as possible, apply equally
well with wheat. It is becoming a customary practice to skim,
or merely surface plough land that has been under this crop
previously, or under grass, at such time as will allow the sur-
face coating to rot before sowing the seed; to harrow roughly
twice or thrice, and then sow broadcast at the rate of li to 2
bushels per acre. Thin seeding is much in favor where the
land is rich and quick. The smoothing harrow covers this
grain especially well. Wheat does not demand a moist seed


bed ; but it must be well packed in with the harrow or roller.
Drilling has been tried, and with marked success, and as the
land is brought into better tilth and skilled labor can be easily
obtained, drilling promises to take the lead of all other methods
of sowing.
Steeping the Seed. —To prevent rust,* it is usual to dress or
steep the seed in liquids made up of bluestone, salt and water,
lime and salt, manure-
water, &c. The object
of all steeps is to destroy
the seed of rust, smut,
or other fungus that may
be clinging to the grain.
All the steeps mentioned
are useful, and without
entering into their re-
spective merits, it may
be added that some of
them should be used.
The seed can either be
set into the steep in
baskets, or the liquid
HAND SEED-SOWER
can be sprinkled over the seed, which is all the better of a
dusting with lime or ashes before sowing.
Sheep and Wheat.—To bring land into heart that has be-
come too poor for this grain, the Australian farmer has two
powerful aids in his sheep and cattle. Grass land eaten down
closely (as it generally
is in small paddocks
about the beginning of
the year), when well
worked, offers a fine
seed-bed, and by feed-
ing lucerne with plenty
'of salt, the land soon
regains the strength it
has lost. Where the
land is rank (shown by
BROADCAST SEED-SOWER.
heavy crops of weeds instead of grass, from 10 to 20 bushels
of lime per acre make a suitable dressing ; bone-dust or animal
* The nature and habits of wheat rust in Australia are dealt with and
illustrated in “Elements of Australian Agriculture.”


manure answer for land that is too poor to yield 12 bushels per
acre. When the yield falls below that the land is too poor for
wheat.
Harvesting.—This will be dealt with in special chapter on
machinery.
Science of Wheat Farming.—ln a recent lecture to the
Liverpool Plains Agricultural Association, the author gave
the following particulars of how wheat is built up in the field: —
The nature of wheat—of its component parts—had received
very close attention at the Technical College, and searching
analyses had been made of the different substances contained
in wheat—what substances it obtains from the soil, and what
from the atmosphere. An impression existed that if we had
rain there would sure to be good crops of wheat, but such an
idea was erroneous. Nevertheless, the supply of rain affected
the crops in a great measure. Wheat contained of hydrogen
5 - 54 parts in every hundred, and of oxygen 40 - 32. These were
two of the gases that formed water, it might be rain or irriga-
tion water. So that wheat contains over 45 parts of moisture.
It was necessary to have at least 5 inches of water, and 7
inches would be better, before a crop of wheat, of about 25
bushels to the acre, could be raised. Then, from the air, the
grain absorbed carbon to the extent of 44 - 43 parts to the
hundred. So that altogether from the atmosphere the wheat
obtained over 90 parts of its whole bulk. Thus, it was seen
how bountiful was nature. Of soda, chlorine, sulphuric acid,
magnesia, oxide of iron, and silica (or sand), other ingredients
essential to the growing of wheat, there was an abundance in
this country, while in countries in Europe, oxide of iron and
other substances had to be used as manures. Magnesia was
particularly valuable for malting barley, and no doubt the
rather small quantity of this in the soil was one reason why
barley had not been successfully cultivated in the colony.
There was, therefore, supplied by the soil and climate of this
country, over 94 hundredths of what was required for
ful wheat growing. But the other six parts had to be supplied
by man. The crop exhausted the substances that composed
these six parts more quickly than nature had intended, and
therefore man must supply the deficiency. Nitrogen, or am-
monia, must be supplied. Wheat required it in the proportion
of 2’6 in the 100. The Gas Company of Sydney were sending
away immense quantities of this ammonia, which could be pur-
chased in the colony cheaper than in Britain, where thousands


of pounds worth were purchased yearly. Wheat got some
nitrogen from the atmosphere, but not sufficient to make a pay-
ing crop. Then the wheat required of phosphoric acid 1 - 28
parts, of potash 1 *3, of lime '79. If it were to rain 150 inches
not one particle of these ingredients would be supplied. And
yet, without phosphoric acid and lime it was a simple impos-
sibility to get wheat. But bone manures supplied them. Ho
had noticed that some new land of the Naomi Pastoral Com-
pany had given a yield of 45 bushels to the acre, and the old
land had only yielded 22 bushels. The cause of this was
that there were phosphoric acid and lime in the new land,
whereas it was almost exhausted in the old. Unless the wheat
found these substances in the soil a large crop was not yielded,
and the constitution of the grain deteriorated. This was not
the cause of rust, but there was no doubt that by weaken-
ing the plant it made it more susceptible to the attacks of the
insidious parasite. Thus, by supplying the wheat with the
nourishment it needed, the danger from rust might be averted
with one unfortunate reservation —that if the rust reached its
epidemic form it would infect a whole field no matter what
precautions might have been taken. Wheat was the main food
for the white man, because it contained a large amount of
bone-making substance ; phosphoric acid and lime made bone.
The recommendations made in the lecture referred to, was
earlier sowing and quicker maturing of the crop, with the aid
of stimulating manures, in order to avoid the dangerous time
tor rust—October and November.
Barlf.y. —ln Australia, this is both a summer and a winter
crop. In the wheat districts it is sown a month or so after
that grain—say in June or July. In other places, August is
a favorite month for sowing.’ Many varieties of barley have
been tried. The sorts in general cultivation are Early Eng-
lish, or common ; long-eared, or Nottingham ; Cape ; German,
or Pomeranian ; Chevalier, the best for malting; Bere, or
four-rowed barley. Any good corn land will answer for
barley; and soil too poor for the former can, with careful
treatment, be made to yield fair crops of barley. It is a
deeper rooter, seldom liable to attacks of fungus, and will
stand direct manuring; while, for wheat, manure is best
applied to a preceding crop or by grazing. Barley will not do
with wet at the roots, and is a slow grower and shy bearer
upon clay. In either of these cases the land should be drained.
Plough as deep as possible, and harrow clean before sowing.


Earley, as a crop, follows well after lucerne; it has also done
well when sown after sugar-cane, and is a useful rotation crop
for either cutting green or for grain where horse feed is grown.
It is also a quick useful catch crop for wild, porous land,
intended for cane or other summer crops.
Bere. —This is a variety of barley, and the same treatment
answers. It can be sown from April to July. It is an
almost certain crop on moderately good, well-drained land.
Oats. —One of our most useful crops. Any soil answers,
and rough treatment ; but it requires more rain than wheat,
the yield being in proportion to the richness of the soil and
rainfall. When grown for grain it is a winter crop, sown
in April or May, according to location ; for hay or green feed
it can be sown as a catch crop from March to August. The
varieties in favor are Tartarian, Grey or Angus, Potato, and
Indian—the two former for cool districts, the latter for the
coast and warmer localities. For hay, as much as four bushels
per acre are sown. From a quarter to a half bushel of tares
or vetches per acre make an excellent mixture; to their pre-
sence the extra superiority of oaten hay from certain localities
is traceable. It has been said that the oat does well with
rough treatment. This is owing to the extraordinary strength
and searching powers of the roots ; but good farming, draining,
and manuring, all tell when the crop is harvested. There
is a great deal in sowing also, and in acquaintance with the
rainfall of the locality. The danger of sowing too thick, and
the attendant risk of the crop falling or lodging in wet weather,
are especially to be guarded against.
Eye.— This grain is a favorite with the German colonists.
Otherwise, rye as a crop is neglected. It makes capital bread,
of dark color; it is also used' for poultry and cattle. In
the green state it is amongst the best feed for sheep, and
is worthy of attention where sheep are kept on the farm. Rye
is grown under three names—Broad leaf, Midsummer, and
Tyrolese ; but the varieties run into each other so much
that one description will answer. Any wheat land answers
for rye ; as a rule, the cultivation for wheat answers. The
effects of drilling and after treatment with the harrow 'are
very marked upon this crop, and where it is sown late,
say after June, and comes into contact with the summer
grasses, after-harrowing should not be neglected. Rye is
a good hay crop in wet seasons, when it may be sown as
thickly as may be desired (say five bushels per acre). The


stiffness of the straw prevents it from lodging, and when ha|f
a bushel of tares or vetches are sown with tlusrye, the mix-
ture is excellent for stock feed, or making ensilage. \JJor gram
the same quantity of seed used for oats answers for~-rye_
Drilled in, one and a-half bushel per acre is sufficient. Ergot,
a kind of rust to which rye is subject in Europe, has not been
noticed here.
Buckwheat.— This, like rye, is one of the neglected crops.
Properly speaking, it is not wheat, but is a soft herbaceous
plant of the botanical order polygonacece, of which sorrell is
a representative. But buckwheat is a heavy seed-bearer (from
30 to 60 bushels per acre with fair culture), and the flour
of the seed is of good color, fine, and very wholesome. In
various parts of Germany, and in America, it is in high
favor for making bread and cakes, which, like rye-bread, has
the reputation of being easier of digestion than bread made of
wheat flour. Buckwheat is one of the quickest of grain crops,
and one of the easiest cultivated, but the soil, to give quick
full crops, must be rich in nitrogen and potash. In our
climate it is sow r n, grown, and reaped in some ninety days. It
can be sown any time from June to December; in warm
localities the cooler season is best; in cold locations it may
he either grown as a spring crop, sown in July or August, or
as an autumn crop, sown at the end of February. The treat-
ment of the soil is similar to that for oats, buckwheat being
even better than that crop for fining down rough land, and it
yields well upon land too poor for any other grain. The seed
is sown in drills from 14 to IS inches apart. The author has
grown buckwheat on new and not over-rich forest land only
once ploughed, and while the grass was still green between the
furrow laps. One bushel of seed was sown per acre; the
returns were nearly thirty bushels of seed and several loads of
straw. In harvesting, the grain is very apt to shell out, and
it is well, therefore, to get it into the barn before the grain
is quite dry. It ripens freely after being cut. This crop
is used extensively for green manuring, and is amongst the
best for that purpose. It grows on all soils except those that
are wet. It is also shy of great sun heat, and perishes from
frost.
Rape. —This is a crop that may come into favor, as cattle and
sheep form part of the especial features of Australian agriculture.
It is a winter crop, and most suitable for the colder and richer
downs or open lands. Rich old sod, worked up with the
67
GRAIN CROPS OP AUSTRALIA^


grubber, forms suitable soil for rape; or manure in any shape
can be applied. We know of no crop better adapted for bring-
ing old sheep yards into fit condition for cultivation, or for
yielding grass that may bo eaten. When sown in April the
seed is ripe in August, and the crop is cut by the reaping hook ;
it is dried in the field, and in dry weather can be thrashed out
at once.
VII—THE POTATO TRIBE AND ROOT CROPS.
In this family we recognise the potato proper—the “ Eng-
lish potato,” as it is misnamed ; the Americans term it the
“ Irish potato,” and have much better reason for their choice.
Then there are the sweet potatoes, and the large family of
yams. The common potato
holds the first place in the colo-
nies, as it does in the mother
country and America. In the
cooler districts of Tasmania and
Victoria, and in New South
Wales, enormous crops of pota-
toes are grown. The potato
seems to have found its proper
location near such places as Port
Fairy and Warnambool, where
it is still free from the diseases
that have made it a critical crop
in other parts of the world.
Crops of from fifteen to twenty
tons per acre are not uncommon
in favorite localities. The varie-
tiesgrownarepink-eyes, Brown’s
River, fluke kidneys, regents,
cups, ash-leaf kidneys, and vari-
THE POTATO.
ous other sorts. In the warmer districts the potato is also a
favorite; but there it is a much more uncertain crop; the weight
per acre seldom exceeds 6 tons, and it is found necessary to
change the seed every other season, in some places every season,
drawing the supplies of seed from Tasmania and the other
southern colonies. Several new varieties—Early Rose, Manhat-
tan, Webster’s best, Smith’s early, Somner’s hundredfold, and
others, have been tried; but, with the exception of Early Rose,


growers had soon to fall back upon seed from the cooler lati-
tudes. The Rose, however, has stood the test well, and proved
a quick grower and heavy cropper.
Planting Seasons.—There are two decided planting seasons
for the potato in Australia ; in the cooler districts June and
July are chosen for the first crop, August and September for
the later crop. In the warmer districts February and March
are chosen for a winter crop, July, August, and September
for a summer crop. In close, moist situations, a crop is grown
during the heat of summer, by planting at Christmas time.
In other places wet weather is chosen for planting at any
season. In other respects, the cultivation suitable to the
potato in other countries answers here. The most decisive im-
provement in cultivation is the use of the smoothing harrow,
which is passed over the crop three or four times, once within
a week after planting, and the remainder as the plants come
above ground, and before the last ridging up. This treatment
is especially beneficial with the summer crops ; it keeps the
surface soil loose, and destroys the myriads of weeds that spring
into growth after every shower in warm weather, and which,
if unchecked, destroy the crop.
To Make Sure of a Potato Crop.—The requirements are,
suitable soil, sufficient rain or irrigation, and the necessary
cultivation. The soil must be rich in vegetable matter and
potash material. Exhaustion of the latter is the most common
cause of the crop falling off, but it can be supplied now, from
the potash manures sold for this crop and for tobacco.
The Sweet Potato. —This is the root crop of the semi-
tropical farmer. With care, and certainly at less expense
for seed, it yields from 10 to 20 tons of roots per acre, and
fully as much green feed. Every part of this crop is available
for use; the vines or tops being very valuable feed for dairy
stock, for working cattle, pigs, sheep, and working horses,
four distinct varieties are grown—the white, a long almost
cylindrical root that grows in bunches from the main plant
°nly (this sort is mealy and rich, 'and not very sweet) ; the
large red, a globular-shaped sort, with long trailing vines, a
rather watery potato ; the small red, that forms bunches of
small potatoes wherever the vines touch a spot of unoccupied
ground (this is the best variety for stock-feeding purposes ; it is
an enormous bearer); lastly comes the “ Maltese,” with a ser-
rated leaf, the vines springing in bunches instead of singly
from the main root, as in the other varieties (the roots of this
69
THE POTATO TRIBE AND ROOT CROPS.


sort are mealy, firm, and very rich). All the varieties are
planted and cultivated alike. Two methods are followed for
raising plants, and each gives a different form. The first is by
planting potatoes in rich loamy soil over a hotbed, and is pecu-
liary suitable for locations where it is necessary to carry the
seed long distances. Put in the seed potatoes as soon as the
cold weather is over—say in August. The plants come up in
bunches, and when about six inches long can with ease be
drawn out from the parent potato and set out. The other method
of obtaining plants, and the best, for it gives by far the hardiest
vines, is to leave a few rows of the old potatoes, vines and all,
in the ground ; these when covered up from cold and risk of
injury, commence to shoot as soon as the weather gets
warm. A sprinkle of weak liquid-manure helps them on. As
the vines run out and show white points, or root pens at the
joints, they are cut off in eight or ten-inch lengths, and planted
out at once. Plants of this kind very seldom fail; and if they
or the drawn plants are to be sent to a distance they ought to
be packed in small bundles, wrapped up singly in paper, for
transit. The soil for sweet potatoes need not be very rich, but
it should be worked as deep and fine as possible, and then
thrown up in ridges about three feet apart. Flatten off the
tops of the ridges, and drop the cuttings or sets about a foot
apart. Make holes about three inches deep with the hand, a
piece of wood, or garden trowel. Lay in the sets in the bottom
of the holes ; not straight up and down, but nearly flat, leaving
about one-third of each out of the ground. If the soil is dry,
pour in about a pint of water to each; then put in the soil,
but do not press it hard, and never attempt to water the plants
again. If they fail, replant. But if the soil is clean and well
worked, they are not liable to fail. The plants catch at once,
or fail altogether. When right, they commence to throw out
side shoots from the trailing vine or hulm. The soil should
then be, ridged up around them, the ridges being similar to
those for common potatoes, but in this case larger and higher;
keep working as long as the’ vines will permit of it, leaving the
soil as loose as possible to help the roots travelling in search
of food. On very light soil there is a danger of the potatoes
forming too far down, and being long and thin. To prevent
this, pass a scuffle-hoe, or the broad share of a plough under
the ridges before finishing the cultivation, the object being to
cut the deep roots and force them into forming thick, chunky
potatoes. As this crop advances it covers ridge and furrow
70
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE.


with a mass of vines, from six inches to a foot in thickness ; as
the crop ripens, the potatoes crack and burst the ridges, and
the crowns are often seen in bunches coming up to the surface.
At this stage the big ones can be fossicked out with a stick,
for immediate use, without injuring the growth of their fel-
lows, and the vines can either be thinned out or cut off close
to the crowns of the potatoes, and used for green feed. The
crop is dug, forked, or ploughed out in the same way as com-
mon potatoes. The roots must be handled carefully ; they are
easily injured. In dry soil they are often left in the ground
during winter, and dug as required. They also keep well in
barrels packed amongst sand or ashes ; but they must be kept
dry. Without exception, this is one of the most valuable crops
at the disposal of the semi-tropical farmer, and one that offers
a good field for enterprise in preserving this very valuable and
always acceptable variety of potato.
Yams. —Various sorts of this tuber are grown in the
colonies; the best are those obtained from the South Sea
Islands and from China. They are rough-coated potato-like
tubers, that in favorable soil reach the weight of five to twelve
pounds. They are propagated from the crowns of the tubers,
and also from seed, not unlike small rough potatoes, that grow
freely on the vines above ground. All the varieties are
climbers; some have beauti-
fully colored and spiral vines.
Plant as soon as the soil-heat
reaches 60° in September or
October, in rows about three
feet apart each way. Cover
the plants with soil, and place
a stake from four to six feet
high with each. The plants
are hardy; shoots appear above
ground in 12 or 14 days, and
immediately twist around the
stakes. The crop is ripe when
the vines die back. Yams
generally growdeep in the soil.
To dig them out, two-pronged
forks are used. To facilitate the digging, attempts have been
made to grow yams upon ridges, but the heavy yields are got
from flat planting.
Root Crops.—Mangolds, or mangel-wurzel, of the various
YAMS.


sorts, answer well as a crop in the colder district. They must
have the very richest soil, or manure, equal to 30 loads
or more per acre. Sow in September 4 to 6 lbs. of seed
per acre. Turnips also do well, swedes especially ; great crops
of them are grown as rotation in the Hunter River district.
Sow in September, February, March, about 3 lbs. of seed per
acre; other turnips are grown as garden crops.
VIII.—SEMI-TROPICAL CROPS.
Tiie Sugar Cane. —This is one of the established products
of Australia. The varieties cultivated are numerous, and
differ considerably in different localities. The extent of
country suitable for sugar cane, in so far as climate is
concerned, is enormous. It extends from Sydney northwards,
through the whole coast of Queensland,
the Gulf of Carpentaria, the territory of
South Australia, and probably the North-
western coast will also be found to have
many places adapted to cane cultivation.
The range to which it succeeds inland is
not great—not further than 30 miles
from the sea; the nearer the sea, as a
rule, the better the crop, providing always
that the land is suitable. Experience
has shown that cane likes a moderately,
but not too rich, soil ; both clay and
sandy loams answer ; it requires perfect
drainage and a humid atmosphere.
Several of the varieties withstand a
moderate attack of frost, say a visit of
temperature ranging between 32° and 35°
during the night for a week or so. The
author has grown cane for years in the
Sydney district—the hardy creole variety,
SUGAR CANE.
brought by him from Louisiana, U.S.A. But it does best as a
sugar-yielder when the thermometer keeps above 40° during the
winter season, and sections of this kind—warm and sheltered
from westerly winds—are found around the coasts; while
others, at first sight apparently more favorably situated for
cane, have proved defective and unsuitable, either owing


to visits of frost, heavy winds (that blow down the crop), too
much or too little rain, floods, and other causes, amongst
which defective drainage is a serious drawback. Convenience
of communication by water and land is also essential towards
working cane successfully, for it is a heavy crop (ranging
between 25 and 60 tons to the acre), that it does not answer
to move to any great distance unless smooth-water commu-
nication is available, and the tides are not too strong for
traffic by means of punts. The land for cane should not be
flat, nor very broken. Around the former frosts gather,
water lodges about the roots, and artificial drainage is difficult.
In the latter the cost of working is increased in proportion
to the difficulty of employing horse-labor, and the soil is
washed into ruts by heavy rains. The mode of preparing
land for corn is adapted to cane. The ploughing should
be deep, 10 inches at least; to reach which heavy colonial
ploughs of iron are used, with teams of 10 or 12 bullocks, or
6 horses. Bullocks are best for new land, where roots have to
be encountered in the first deep ploughing. After harrowing,
rolling, cross-ploughing, <bc., until the soil is made fine (abso-
lutely necessary for cane), furrows are run out with ridging
or double ploughs, or ordinary ploughs. The furrows should
be wide—l 2 inches if possible—and deepened by passing
a subsoiler or a grubber through after the plough. These
cane furrows are from 51 to 7ft. apart, according to the
strength of the soil (the stronger, the greater distance neces-
sary), and the description of cane to be planted. In new land
that cannot be ploughed conveniently, holes are made with
pronged hoes, the spade, crowbar, &c. The distance apart
of the holes depends upon the strength of the land and
the cane to be planted in the same way as in furrow-planting.
Varieties of Cane.—There are some 30 varieties of cane
known in Australia, but in their nature and qualities they
may be reduced to four, viz., those that are stripped, or
ribbon canes; Bourbon, and yellow canes generally ; purple
and black canes, which includes the creole ; and Scott’s cane,
or Otaheite. The ribbons are the strongest growers, require
the richest land, and come to maturity in from 12 to 16
months from time of planting. They require space varying
from 21 ft. by 6ft. to 4 ft. by 7 ft. for each plant. Bourbon,
yellow, and green canes come to maturity earlier than the
ribbons, or between 10 and 15 months. They are planted
from 1 ft. by s£ft. to 11 ft. by 6 ft., according to the soil.
p


The black canes are still earlier than the green varieties, and
sre planted at about the same distance.
Planting.—The plants are usually made from the top parts
of the panes, consisting of four or six of the top joints, the buds
or eyes of which are fully developed, or perfect. But any part
of the cane (with four to six perfect buds) answers for plants.
It is all important that the buds are perfect, and that fermen-
tation has not destroyed the-sap. To secure both, the cuttings
have to be handled carefully, and planted as soon as possible ;
although they can be carried long distances by excluding the
air. An average cane-cutting or plant is from 10 to 16 inches
in length, and has four to six joints, with a perfect bud on each.
This plant is laid in the furrow or hole, at distances apart ac-
cording to the variety and soil. They should be laid in carefully
with the buds at the sides, from 4 to 6 inches below the surface
level. Cover them carefully with one or two inches of fine
soil. The shoots come up in from 12 to 20 days. If longer,
the plants should be examined, and replaced it sour or withered.
The after cultivation is to keep the surface soil loose and clean
until the crop shades the land, in say from three to five months.
As they arrive at maturity, the lower leaves droop and die. The
leaves of the black varieties fall off, or come off easily, as do
those of the Bourbon, green, and yellow sorts. The leaves of
the ribbons cling closer.
Harvesting.—When the cane fields have arrived at a fit
stage for the last trashing, or stripping off the dead leaves, the
plants are as thick in the rows as they can well be. The leaves
of the tall-growing varieties meet overhead, and at the sides
the canes form a wall through which an opening can scarcely
be found. Between the rows a man can barely force a pass-
age, while the trash which has collected during the season is
piled up in the centre of the rows, and forms a soft mass from
12 to 20 inches deep. When canes are ripe, the juice is quite
sweet to the taste, and should be of a density of at least 7°.
From 8° to 10° is considered fair density; over that is rich.
Ripe canes should have at least four feet (after cutting off the
green sappy top) fit for the mill.
Weight of Crop.—Thirty tons of ripe cane to the acre is
considered a fair average; and with safety we may take the
average as ranging between 25 and 30 tons. With the best
machinery 80 per cent, of juice is obtained from the canes in
their best condition; but 70 per cent, is a high return. At
that, 25 tons of cane, the juice of which marked 10° upon


Baume’s saccharometer, would give, if the manufacture be as
carefully attended to as the cultivation, 6468 lbs. (about 2 8-9
tons) of dry sugar, and 588 lbs. of molasses ; in the latter case
(30 tons per acre) we may obtain 7763 lbs. (nearly 3 J tons)
of dry sugar, and 705 lbs. of molasses, from an acre of land.
But when the density of the juice is up to 12° Baume, or 22 per
cent, at 25 tons of cane per acre, we might obtain 7906 lbs.
(more than 3(- tons) of dry sugar, and 718 lbs. of molasses, for
one acre; or if at 30 tons of canes per acre, then 9486 lbs.
(nearly 41, tons) of dry sugar, and 862 lbs. of molasses, from
one acre of land. If we go up the scale to 80 percent, of juice,
from 30 tons of canes, at 12° Baume, we arrive at the startling
amount of 11,173 lbs. (or very nearly 5 tons) of dry sugar,
and 994 lbs. of molasses, from one acre of land. These are high
averages, which only the very best cultivation and most careful
manufacture can be expected to reach. They have been reached
in Australia. The time for cutting cane in this country ex-
tends, according to the season, from June to the end of the
year. Canes have been cut later than that, but they have
seldom been profitably manufactured into sugar. Cane-growers
in the far north believe that they will be able to cut earlier
than June, as the winter months have very little effect upon
the growth there. The question is easily settled by the density
of the juice of the cane, which is tested by the saccharometer,
or, as it is sometimes termed, the areometer, an instrument in
general use in this country. The instrument used in the colo-
nies is usually by Baume. It is a hollow tube, graduated into
degrees, commencing at 0 at the top, where it should stand in
pure water of the temperature to which it has been graduated
—Bo° and 85°—which is its test point, and it has an air-bulb,
and a weight-bulb of quicksilver. When placed in juice it rises
according to its density. For testing purposes, from the juice
of a few average canes a glass of liquor is taken, and allowed to
stand a moment or two till settled. The instrument is then
put in, and the density is seen at the point where the surface of
the liquor comes into contact with the figures upon the instru-
ment. In the author’s work on “ Sugar Cane in Australia,”
very full details of sugar-making, from the cane, beet, sorghum,
maize, <tc., are given. It will be found that sugar is made from
juice ranging in density from 4° to 12°. The first is a low den-
sity, at which sugar is with difficulty made. From 8° to 10° is
considered very fair. The theory of the saccharometer is that
each degree represents by weight nineteen parts in 1000, which


is pretty nearly correct, although not exactly in all states of
temperature. It is a highly serviceable instrument, and when
one is used regularly on a plantation very good calculations are
made.
Tobacco. —This is an old Australian crop. Its cultivation
is well understood, and followed extensively in a few localities.
As a crop it pays well. It requires rich soil, close attention,
and steady, clean farming. The varieties grown are Havanah,
Yarra, Virginia, Florida, Connecticut, Maryland, German,
or Cabbage-leaf, Turkey, Bird’s-eye, &c. A fair average yield
is 12 cwt. per acre. Sowing is done from early in August
until the end of the year, and planting-out during September
and October for summer crops ; and again in January and
February for winter crops, in accordance with the seasons
found to answer best in various localities. The varieties are
liable to mix when several are grown together, by bees and
insects hybridising the flowers. Care has, therefore, to be
used when a choice and suitable sort is being grown that it is
kept well apart from other sorts.
Sowing.—Seed, at the rate of an ounce to the acre, is sown
in beds, a good size for which is 3 ft. wide, and any desired
length. Three feet by twelve feet give sufficient plants for an
acre. For a seed-bed select a piece of the richest soil, facing
the morning sun ; dig it a good spade deep, and then spread
over it a layer about six inches thick of dry sticks or brush-
wood, and burn it well down to ashes. By doing this we
destroy seeds of weeds and eggs of insects, as well as eggs of
the ground grub that destroys young plants. A frame with a
bush or a calico covering should be provided, to be used as a
protection against frosts at night, or during cold winds
or heavy rains. The bed is raked very fine ; then an ounce of
seed mixed well with some two quarts of fine sand or ashes is
sown carefully; in this way the seed is much more evenly
distributed than when sown alone. After sowing, with the
back of a spade smooth the bed lightly, and then sprinkle
ashes over it—just sufficient to cover the seed. If the weather
comes dry, mix soot with water, and use it to soak the seed-
beds every other day, either before sunrise or after sunset. If
the plants come up too thickly, drag a bush-broom through
them on a wet day to thin them. When the plants are about
five inches high, and the under leaves begin to turn yellow
and the top ones a dark blue, they are ready for transplanting.


The dangers to young seed plants are fungus growth and
grubs, hence the need of care in preparing the seed bed.
Planting Out.—Let the ground be well worked and har-
rowed fine. In planting out Virginia, Yarra, Havanah,
Cuba, and Turkish, the plants are put in three feet by
two. on rich soil, and closer on poorer soil ; Kentucky, Ger-
man, and Connecticut require four feet by three. Choose
cloudy weather, or the afternoon for planting-out, and if the
seed-beds are dry, water them freely over-night, In raising
the plants, be careful to prevent breakage of the roots, which
are very large ; take up as much earth with them as possible.
In planting make the holes roomy and deep, and be careful
that the root goes straight down without any doubling,
pressing the soil gently with the point of a dibble, or the
fingers against the point of the root. If two or three cloudy
days succeed the planting, the plants will go on well; but
should the sun be very hot, they should be sheltered with
shingles, pieces of bark, etc.
Cultivation.—When the plant is about nine inches high,
commence to use the hoe, cutting out weeds and loosening the
soil. When about a foot high, pull off the under leaves
to about six inches from the ground, which will give room
to draw the earth up to the stem in a round flat-topped
hill; this serves to keep the roots moist. As soon as blossom-
buds appear, pinch out the tops, so as to leave not more
than nine or ten leaves on each plant; at the same time pinch
out all the shoots that are springing from the base of
the leaves, aad all that may be starting from the roots ; this
is done with a view to throw the whole strength of the
plant into the leaves.
Sign of Fitness. —This is a most particular point. The
proper time to cut tobacco is when it is fully charged with
“gum,” &c. In this gum is the “strength” of the tobacco,
and if cut too soon or too late, the real value of the plant
is lost. When ripe, brown or yellow spots appear, and
the leaf gets a brown or yellow tint; it again changes
to a dark deep blue, the leaf becomes thicker, rougher, and
more elastic than at any other time, and on handling we find
it to be quite sticky. At this time it is fully charged
with the true tobacco-gum, and cannot be too quickly cut.
The gum rises beat in close sultry weather ; but if, when it is
just coming on, the weather changes to wet, the gum will go
down, but it returns with fine weather. .


Harvesting.—When the plant is fit to harvest take a sharp-
pointed knife and split the stem down the middle from about
one-third of the top to within about two inches of the bottom ;
then cut it off below the split. Lay the plants on the ground
in rows, and unless the weather is very dry, let them have the
sun on one side for an hour or two, then turn them over and
give them sun on the other side ; if the nights are dewy so much
the better, as the sun and dew together help to mature the
leaf. In very dry weather the crop is cut and brought under
cover at once. If rain should fall, pile the tobacco in heaps
under cover of some sort, but the heaps must afterwards be
spread out again to dry.
Sheds and Appliances for Drying.—These are absolutely
necessary. The shed may be either a mere cover for drying
in the field, or enclosed all round, with windows or loopholes to
admit air when required. Beams are placed across at about
three feet apart—say one, two, or three tiers—according to the
room required, only so far above each other that the tobacco
hung upon one will not touch the next. Prepare a lot of sticks
or split palings, long enough to rest upon two beams, run them
through the slits in the stalks and hang them up to dry, the
thick end upwards ; they must be placed on the sticks so as not
to touch each other. Before threading the tobacco, take each
stalk by the butt end and shake it well, to bring the leaves
well asunder. In wet weather the windows are closed, and
smouldering wood fires are made on the floor of the shed. The
object is to prevent the tobacco turning mouldy, and at the
same time giving it a good color, and also the peculiar flavor
prized by the manufacturers. In dry weather no fires are
wanted, and the windows may be kept open to admit a free
current of air. Tobacco requires hanging in this manner for
three or four weeks. The way to tell when it is dried enough is
to break one of the stalks, and if it breaks off short it is suffi-
ciently done. Wait for a damp day to take it down, when the
leaves will be limp and will not break in handling, or a damp
atmosphere may be got in well enclosed sheds by sprinkling the
floors.
Curing or Sweating the Leaf. —When properly dried the leaf
is put up in bundles, or “ hands,” containing about ten each,
and weighing about half a pound. These are then arranged
for sweating—the size of the heap according to the quantity
of tobacco; the larger the bulk the better it will sweat. Pack
it closely and straight, the butts or tied ends of the “ hands” on


the outsides; and, if necessary, to develop heat in the mass,
keep it pressed as close as possible by means of slabs, bags, <tc.
Watch the bulk well by removing some of the stuff on the top,
and feeling into the centre of the heap, and when it is so hot
that you can scarcely bear your hand in it, the time is come
for shifting. Put the tobacco from the top of the heap by itself,
and that from the centre by itself (that being the most
sweated), then take the sides and bottoms and place them to-
gether. It is then stacked again, putting that which was
before in the centre at the bottom and sides, and that from the
bottom and sides in the middle, more particularly the stalks
that are greenest should be kept in the middle. It should be
done quickly, so as not to let the tobacco get cold, or it may
not sweat as well the second time. Cover over as before; if
done well the tobacco acquires the well known flavor, and be-
comes a beautiful brown color, and is fit for the next oper-
ation.
Stripping and Sorting.—ln arranging the quality of the leaf,
it is classified as near as possible as follows :—The first three
from the bottom of the stalk are No. 1, or best quality; the
next three No. 2 ; and the rest, No. 3. The sorts are selected
because they vary in quality and appearance. Ten or twelve
leaves make a bunch or “ hand,” by twisting a leaf round the
thick end, commencing with the thin end of the leaf, and tuck-
ing the stalk end between the leaves of the “ hand” to keep it
fast. The tobacco is now fit for the manufacturer, and the
sooner it goes to him the better; but if kept on hand for a
time it must be in a dry place, at least three feet above
ground, and not bulked thickly, lest it become partially heated
and turn mouldy.
Late Crops.—A second crop is sometimes gathered. For this,
break off all the shoots that spring from the stool but the
strongest one, and this shoot is treated precisely as the first
crop, with the exception that the leaves are considered all of
one quality. This crop is of less value than the first. After
the second crop is cut the roots are collected and burnt, thus
manuring the ground with the ashes. There is another mode
of obtaining a late crop which is useful when the season proves
too dry for transplanting. Sow the seed in drills, or put in apinch
of seed where each plant is wanted to stand, and thin them out
to the proper distances as soon as large enough. This plan will
come to be extensively adopted in the case of the late crops, on


account of the difficulty of transplanting during the heat of
summer.
Curing in Damp Weather.—One who knows the difficulties
attendant upon curing tobacco in damp weather, and who feels
for those who are so situated, says; I advise all who can to have
something like a stove and flue in their tobacco-curing barns, as
there will be less danger of burning, and the tobacco will be free
from the smell of smoke, soot, itc., and the color more uniform.
But those who cannot have this should make their barns tight
from the ground up for nine or ten feet, and then frequent
openings all round to allow the air to pass freely through the
tobacco while the process of curing is going on, and thus pre-
vent “ house-burn,” as we call it, or curling up with sudden
heat. The number of plants on a stick and distance between
the sticks may vary according to the size of the tobacco —say,
for sticks four and a half feet long, ten plants of small and
eight of large size, and about seven inches between the sticks
for the small, and ten for the large. After the leaf is cured,
the sticks containing the plants may be crowded closer together
to make room for the later cuttings. Then make small fires of
chips or bark, with as little blaze as possible. There should be
a sufficient amount of heat to bring the tobacco into a wilted
state, and when the tails become a little dry and curl up, the
heat may be gradually increased until the leaf is sufficiently
cured to be out of danger of moulding or souring. The leaf
of tobacco should be dried slowly, and the fires kept going re-
gularly day and night. The length of time for drying or curing
will vary, according as the weather may be dry or wet. Much
labor and risk may be saved by scaffolding out in the sun in
fair weather, but care must be exercised that the tobacco is
not caught in the rain.
Enemies.—Tobacco, whilst growing, has several enemies to
contend with—a brown grub, commonly known as “ the cabbage
or ground grub,” which attacks the plants when quite young.
Its habits are as follows : —During the day it is not seen on
the plants, but by scraping or stirring the soil for six or eight
inches around the stem it will be found within half-an-inch of
the surface. At night it pursues its depredations by climbing
the stalks and eating holes in the leaves and occasionally the
stems. This grub generally disappears when the plant is about
a foot high. The best way to prevent it is, when the land is
prepared for planting, to sprinkle over it about a ton
of lime to the acre. Another enemy is a green caterpillar, which


generally makes its appearance with the hot weather. These
can be picked off by hand, and children are best adapted for
the work. Sprinkling the plant with soot assists in keeping
them away. There is sometimes also a small white grub that
eats its way from the root and ascends through the centre of
the stalk; its presence is shown by the bulging or swelling of
the stalk, in which a sort of knot is formed. On seeing this,
open the part with a knife, and pick out the grub ; when this
is removed the plant thrives again. Grasshoppers are, perhaps,
the greatest pests of any, for though cleared off one day a fresh
lot may come on the next. Magpies, or seagulls, are useful for
keeping down insects, and turkeys and fowls generally prevent
many from increasing; but if they come in numbers, young
fowls or turkeys must be let in just before roosting time, and
turned out again as soon as they have got their fill, or the
fowls get sick of grasshoppers.
Fungus Disease, Manures, &c.—The tobacco crops of the
southern districts were attacked during October, 1889, with a
fungus disease, of which the following particulars were sent to
the growers :—“ I have had the diseased leaf sent by you from
Tumut under microscopic observation. It is infected by a
fungus of rather destructive order, although not of the worst
kind. It is a f usisporium according to appearances. Some
three years since, several lots of potatoes in the Shoalhaven
district suffered from a fungus, the habits and growth of which
were very similar to this, a peculiarity in both cases being that
hot, moist weather, usually so fearfully encouraging to fungus
growth, as in wheat rust, does not have an equally stimulating
effect upon this lower order of parasites. From this peculiarity
lam disposed to believe that sharp visits of colder weather,
and possibly, visitations of drying winds, after wet weather,
is the more likely condition of affairs to stimulate this and
kindred pests upon soft-leaved plants, such as tobacco, potatoes,
&o. In the case of the potatoes mentioned, the fungus did
much mischief that season, but has scarcely been noticed since.
Still every precaution should be taken against these pests.
They are around us all the time, only awaiting favorable con-
ditions for spreading. Badly-drained and impoverished land
help these pests to spread. So do checks to growth, arising
from very windy or dry weather. The seed-beds for tobacco
should, in all cases, be seen to with extra care, and changed
every season. In the seedling stages, this crop has always been
subject to attacks from moulds, mildews, &c. The seed-beds


should be well sheltered from winds and rain, and made as
loose and as deep and clean as possible. The bush cover-
ing I find better for seed beds than either glass or calico. It
admits unlimited air, and prevents the heavy hammering of
rain. It is also a good plan to burn a heavy coating of leaf
stuff, twigs, tfcc., on the seed-bed. This leaves potash in quan-
tity, kills weed-seed, the spores of fungus and other things, and
leaves a desirable seed-bed for tobacco or similar seedlings.
As most of these mildews gather strength in the seed-beds, I
thus specially refer to making them up in the best way. To-
bacco, too, must have special manuring. Even your immensely
rich soil about Tumut cannot long do without it. Potash and
nitrogenous stuff (ammonia) are the materials that tobacco
takes out of the soil, and as they become less the quality of the
tobacco is lowered and the risks of disease increase. Angus
Mackay, F. 0.5., Technical College, Sydney.”
Tobacco Manufacture.—Colonial manufacturers follow, as
closely as possible, the American system, and endeavor to
produce tobacco of the same character and appearance. A
steam elevator raises the leaf in bulk to the stemming-room, in
the upper story; and there, in a close little compartment
partitioned off, and rendered as nearly air-tight as possible, the
tobacco is exposed to what the manufacturers term “live
steam”— i.e., a steam bath—until it becomes pliable and in
order for stemming, or having the main stems stripped from
the leaves. It is then taken out and placed in bulk, being
carefully covered with blankets to keep the steam in until it is
distributed to the stemmers—usually women or children, who
take the leaves, which have become soft and pliant, strip
them of the midrib or stem, and tie them in bundles, with
a stem for the band. This stemming or splitting is done by
splitting each leaf downwards from the point, doubling both
halves backwards into the left hand, and stripping out the
stem with the right. The stemmed leaves are then tied up in
bundles, strung on sticks, and hung in the drying-room until
they become perfectly dry, when they are ready for the appli-
cation of the mixture of syrup and liquorice, which imparts to
the plug tobbacco of commerce its sweetness and flavor. In
this factory 200 gallons of sugar-house syrup or molasses are
daily used, and mixed with Spanish liquorice, which has pre-
viously been dissolved. As soon as this concoction attains
a thickish consistency it is poured, boiling hot, into a large
trough, and into this steaming fluid the tobacco is dipped


as fast as it is brought from the drying-room. The leaves must
be bone dry when submitted to the liquorice bath, as the least
dampness will render them white with mould in a few hours, as
hopelessly ruined as the growing plant on which a black frost
has fallen. The heat of the mixture causes the pores of the
leaf to expand, and the sweet syrup, penetrating every fibre,
impregnates it thoroughly. The “ clippings”—as the odds and
ends of the tobacco leaves are termed—are too small to be
dipped with the bundles, and to them the mixture of syrup
and liquorice is applied by means of a watering-pot. From
the vat the dripping bundles are carried out on the flat roof
of the factory, and there exposed to the sun. The common
belief is “ that one day’s sunshine is worth more to tobacco
than anything else we can do for it; it gives a sweetness
which nothing else will. The leaf is next taken into a drying-
room, where the thermometer during the day is kept at 90°.
At night the whole power of the furnace is turned on, and the
heat is so intense that in the morning the room has to be
cooled off before the operatives can enter. When the tobacco
has, under this powerful heat, become perfectly dry, it is
sprinkled with various substances according to the taste of the
users. Spirits of various kinds, flavored with essential oils, are
favorite ingredients ; and thus prepared, and again blanketed,
it is ready for the “ lumpers and twisters,” as the next class
of workmen are styled. Nothing goes by guess in a tobacco
factory; everything is done by rule and measure, and these
rules and measures are themselves carefully tested. Taking a
handful of the prepared leaf, the “ lumper,” with nimble
fingers, rapidly moulds them into shape, and around the lump
thus formed he wraps a virgin leaf, which has undergone
neither the liquorice-bath nor the flavoring process. This is
used for the outside wrapper in order to prevent sticking in
the press. As .fast as the plugs or lumps are made, the
lumper slips them into his gauge, cutting off the superfluous
length with an instrument somewhat resembling a tiny guillo-
tine, weighs them in his scale, adding or removing filling
as they fall short of or exceed the required weight, and when
correct places them in a receptacle provided for that purpose
on the bench in front of him. These lumps are inspected
carefully, and then sent to the press-room, where the plugs are
fitted into the “ shapes”—large shallow pans of iron, sub-
divided into compartments, into which the plugs of tobacco fit.
These “ shapes,” when filled, are placed in a hydraulic press, and


are subjected to a force of 325 tons, which brings two parts of
the “ shape” together, and drives the blocks into which the
upper portion is cut down upon the lumps in the pan below,
making the tobacco as flat as a pancake, and giving it the
form of the plugs of commerce. But when the pressure is re-
moved, and the cakes are taken out, it is found that the side
next the wood is a little ragged at the edges ; so every piece
is turned and put under the press again, that these edges may
be as smooth as the others. Every time the moulds are used
they are carefully oiled to prevent sticking, the best olive being
used. This process over, the plugs are taken to a second row
of presses, where, after having been fitted together on sheets
of tin, as precisely as a lady joins her patchwork, and placed
so that between every two sheets of tobacco comes a sheet of
tin, they are a third time pressed. And now, one reason for
all the great precision taken heretofore in the measurement of
lumps and shapes becomes apparent. These tins are exactly
the shape and size of the bottoms of the cases in which the
tobacco is put up for market, therefore, when the plugs come
to be packed in the cases in which they are shipped from the
factory, they fit in their places nicely. The timber used for
these cases is buttonwood or sycamore, and is imported from
Canada. After packing, the cases are placed for the final corn-
pressure in a third row of presses, where, for protection
against the immense force employed (a force which would else
bend the cases outward in the middle, and crush them into
fragments), they are fitted into what are termed “ billies.” A
billy consists of a case formed of four thick pieces of wood,
turned with great care in a lathe, and bound about with stout
iron bands, which hold them in place, and keep the packing-
cases intact. The application of the hydraulic press to this work
is of comparatively recent date. Previous to its introduction,
the power was obtained by means of the old-fashioned screw-
press, at much greater expense, and with less satisfactory
results than by the present method.
Cut and shag tobaccoes are dried to the proper point upon
sheets of copper. They also have special preparations for
cigarette-leaf and other purposes.
Snuff should be made from tobacco stems and leaves,
ground together in various proportions for different snuffs, and
flavored with any desired oil or essence. Few articles suffer
more from adulteration than snuff, all sorts of chemists’ refuse
matter being found in it.


Arrowroot.— This is amongst the safest of semi-tropical
crops, and one which, with the machinery that the white man
brings to his aid, enables him to compete successfully with
Malays, Indians, negroes, and others who, until late years,
had the production of arrowroot in their own hands. The
article of commerce so extensively used in preparing food for
the sick, and for the finer kinds of cookery, is a pure white flour
or starch. This flour is obtained from two bulbous plants,
named by botanists Maranta arundinacoo and Cana edulis. To
growers they are known as white and purple arrowroot, respec-
tively. In habit there is but little difference in the plants,
and the flour obtained from them is almost identical; but there
is a vast difference in the yield, which is fully one-half heavier
in favor of the purple sort, consequently it has won favor in
Australia, and is grown over an area of country stretching
from Sydney northwards. For this crop, the preparation of
land recommended for corn and sugar-cane is about right. The
crop does best in rich soil, but not where freshly manured.
It comes in as a very good rotation after a heavy crop of corn,
and being light upon the soil (although yielding from 10 to 15
tons of bulbs per acre) it can be grown several seasons in suc-
cession. In the case of the purple variety, the upper surface
of the bulbs, in a heavy crop, appear above the soil. They
vary in size from six inches to twelve inches in circumference,
and may, for all practical purposes, be likened to large potatoes
in appearance.
Cultivation. —The smaller bulbs are used for plants. Wide
furrows about six inches deep are run out about four feet
apart. The bulbs are dropped in about 20 inches apart, and
covered by the plough or hoe. The soil must be warm (say from
65° to 70°), which brings the planting season into September
and October in the cooler sections of the country. The bulbs
are by no means delicate, but they must have heat to grow. In
about 14 days strong spiral shoots appear above ground, and
the soil has to be kept clean as for corn. The plants grow
rapidly. The leaves are broad at the tops, and borne upon
stalks not unlike those of maize. In three months the tops
spread over the whole of the field, and are from three to five
feet in height. The bulbs at the same time are growing in a
cluster around the base of the stems, to which they are firmly
attached. As the cultivation proceeds, the soil is worked up
around the stems. From six to eight months bring the crop
to maturity; a touch of frost aids it, by shrivelling up the


tops and concentrating the starch in the bulbs. In other cases
•when the tops wilt and dry up, the crop is ripe. Forks and
pronged-hoes are used for digging, the work being similar in
many respects to potato-digging, but with the arrowroot
the tops and tubers come out in a mass. The latter are
trimmed in the field, the tops, and as much of the adhering soil
as possible being trimmed off with knives.
Manufacture—The bulbs are washed until they are abso-
lutely clean, and then grated into pulp in a very simple sort of
mill, to make which a sheet of galvanised iron into which holes
have been punched, is nailed upon a round piece or frame of
wood, with the rough or grating surface outwards. This
grater is placed in a hopper or box, and is turned with a
handle. The bulbs must be pressed against the grater, and
there must also be a steady stream of water flowing in with
the bulbs. They are thus quickly reduced to a dark brown
mass of fibry-looking pulp. This pulp is stirred and beaten
about briskly in water, the object being to free the starch that
is held in the cells and fibres; the starch, being the heavier
substance, falls to the bottom, and the fibre and other lighter
substances are gathered or washed off from the surface.
The water has to be changed several times, until the pure
white starch remains in a compact mass at the bottom. This
starch is liable to ferment, and the fibry matter separated from
it is still more liable to ferment. Cool weather (not hotter
than 70° in the shade during the day) is desirable at the time
of manufacturing. Weather of the requisite description is
obtained during May, June, and July, during which season the
arrowroot is at its best stage for manufacturing. After being
stirred until perfectly clean—a simple process, owing to the
weight of the starch always keeping it at the bottom of the
vessels. The starch (now arrowroot) is spread out in the sun,
or in dry rooms, upon cloth, and freed from the last trace of
moisture as rapidly as possible. When perfectly dry, it keeps
in bags, boxes, &c., for years, and is esteemed as food for the
sick and the healthy.
In Australia, machinery of very ingenious construction has
been brought to bear upon the manufacture of this article, the
cost of production being reduced in proportion, while the
quality is improved, as it is scarcely handled from the time of
leaving the field. The Messrs. Grimes are famous for this
article, their arrowroot being used extensively in the colonies,
in England, and other countries. Looking at the manner in


■which the article is made, one cannot be surprised that it wins
favor wherever it is brought into use. Instead of the labo-
rious process of hand-washing and grinding, which is still the
ordinary way of manufacturing this article in the Indies, Cape,
and other places, Australian arrowroot is barely handled from
first to last. The roots are shovelled into a long trough,
through which runs a continuous stream of water. There is
a screw in the trough, with flanges, which turn, roll, and push
the roots about, and keeps gradually working them up to the
upper end all the time. They are perfectly clean by the time
they arrive there, and are pitched (by the screw) in ones, twos,
and threes, upon an endless chain, which lifts them some four-
teen or fifteen feet, and discharges them into the hopper of a
grinding machine. Here they are reduced to pulp, which pulp
by means of a stream of water is discharged into perforated
revolving drums where it is knocked about, beaten and washed,
all to separate the starch from the coarser particles. The
starch, as driven through fine perforations on the outside of
the drums, is then carried in suspension by the water to a
long series of troughs, where it is gradually deposited in a solid
mass, and the water flows off. The arrowroot, now a creamy-
colored starch, is then washed in vats, and becomes almost
white. It is then put into centrifugal machines and freed
from the water. To complete the drying process, the arrow-
root (now beautifully white and sparkling) is laid out in
trays in the sun. When perfectly dry, it is put up in the
bags and packets familiar all over the country, and is ready
for use —a delightful, light, nourishing food for the invalid
as well as the healthy. The yield of bulbs of the purple
variety varies between 10 and 15 tons per acre. A ton of
bulbs gives rather more than one cwt. of manufactured
arrowroot. The white variety is grown and manufactured
in the same way as the purple, but the yield is much less.
Millet, Broom-corn, Sorghum. — Under the names of
millet, sorghum, farmer’s friend, etc., a great variety of grain-
bearing plants are cultivated, but mostly for cutting green for
food. They all require hot weather, and are annual summer
crops sown in the cooler districts, in August to October, and
in the hot districts from April to January. As grain, none of
the millets are used to the extent they deserve ; for in Italy,
parts of Germany, in India, China, and many other countries,
millet seed, ground into meal, is an important portion of the
food of the people. It is inferior for that purpose, but as an


easily grown crop, on any ordinarily good soil, it is worth grow-
ing, first as green feed (it stands cutting four or five times
during the season) and secondly as grain for poultry and pig-
feeding, &c. Some of the varieties also yield sugar (squeezed
out of the cane and manufactured in the same way as cane-
sugar), but it is an inferior article for that purpose, and will
not stand competition with the cane. The soil may be either
stronger medium for these crops. Plough as for a grain crop;
when wanted for cutting green, drill in the seed in rows of 20
inches apart, and cultivate between the rows until the ground
is shaded by the plants. For seed, or cane for sugar, make
drills 3to 4 feet apart; scatter in the seed so that plants may
be obtained about three inches apart when thinned out. When
well cultivated this crop grows very rapidly, and in the course
of four months from planting, assumes the form of canes from
one to two inches in diameter, and from 6 to 12 feet in height.
The canes become brownish as they ripen, and a heavy mass of
seed is borne on the top of each. If seed is the object it is al-
lowed to become dry and hard on the plant If for sugar, the
sap is at its best (from 7° to 9° in density) while the seed is
forming.
Broom-corn is a variety of this family grown the same way
as the latter, and cut while the seed is young, and before the
branching head that supports it becomes brown. This head
makes capital brooms, whisks, <fec.
IX.—PRODUCTS WE MIGHT GROW.
Chicory.— This plant has been cultivated here, as a forage
cropprincipally,for many years. Our Germanand Frenchfellow-
colonists are especially partial to it, and in a few cases have
extended chicory culture to over an acre. As a rule, however,
a few perches only are grown, and used for feeding cattle. Ten
tons of roots per acre is a fair average crop of chicory in Vic-
toria, where it is grown somewhat extensively, and sold to
wholesale coffee dealers at from £3 to £5 per ton. The seed
may be sown either in February or March for a winter crop,
or in September for a summer crop. It vegetates slowly, and
the soil should be perfectly clean to prevent weeds from choking
the young plants. 1 lb. of seed gives plants for about a quar-
ter of an acre. When fit to handle they are set out in rows
two feet by about eight inches ; or the seed can be drilled into


rows two feet apart, and thinned out, like turnips or beets, with
the cultivation of which chicory corresponds, when grown for
roots. If for forage, the seed can be sown broadcast at the rate
of 61bs. to the acre, and the tops can either be picked off or
bladed, or cattle may be turned in to graze them down.
Chicory is of far more value to mow, and consume in stable
or byre, than to graze. It might also be used for ensilage,
and has been used as a pasturage for sheep. A small extent
of chicory ground fattens a large number of sheep. The best
way is to let the plant reach its full growth, the full succu-
lence being retained until the flower-buds appear, in which
state (not being permitted to flower) it has attained its greatest
perfection; it may be then cut oft near the ground, and is
eaten by all kinds of stock with the greatest relish and benefit.
To prepare the chicory-root, it is heated in iron cylinders, which
are kept revolving as in the roasting of coffee. In England
about two pounds of lard are added to every cwt. of chicory
during the roasting process; in France butter is used ; by
this a lustre and color resembling that of coffee is imparted to
it. When roasted, the chicory is ground to powder and mixed
with coffee. Chicory has been supposed by some persons to be
wholesome and nutritive, while others contend that it is
neither one nor the other. The analysis of chicory gives
25 parts watery bitter extractive, three parts resin, besides
sugar, salammoniac, and woody fibre.
Ginger.— This is another of the roots found admirably
adapted to the warmer sections of Australia. Three varieties
are grown, two of them—the white, or narrow-leaved, and the
yellow, or cassumunar —for many years. The third has been
introduced from the East Indies by the Queensland Acclima-
tisation Society, and gives promise of being the best of the
three for the purpose most in favor among colonists, viz.,
to make preserves. The white and yellow are much alike in
habit; the roots of both grow in clumps close to the surface of
the soil, and in dry seasons become tough and fibry, and
therefore not so well adapted for making preserves as the
third, which roots deeper, and is more fleshy and tender. All
the varieties are propagated from knobs or pieces of the roots.
They require very rich, free soil, moist but not wet. Plant
from August to November, putting the sets about one foot
apart each way; if a quantity is grown, the white varieties
answer in rows about twenty inches apart ; the plants being
put in about eight inches apart in the rows. The yellow
G


variety requires a little more space. Merely cover the sets
■with soil-*-old cow manure answers well for the purpose. The
leaves or shoots come above ground in twelve or fourteen days ;
they are at first pointed and reed-like, but soon spread out into
long thickish leaves, not unlike those of arrowroot. The only
cultivation necessary is to keep the surface-soil loose and clean,
and this should be done with a pointed stick or the hand, and
not more than an inch of soil should be stirred. During the
process the plants are all the better of a few shovelfuls of rich
old compost added to the surface; the yield is in proportion to
the richness of the soil. The roots are ripe in about seven
months from the time of planting. Any difference that exists
in ginger is due more to its quality than to any peculiarity in
habit or growth. The white sorts are richest in flavor ; the
smaller or narrow-leaved is that used for the dry ginger of
commerce; for this purpose the roots are allowed to lie in the
ground until the leaf-stalks have withered ; they are then dug
up and washed; the outside skin is then brushed or scraped
off, and the roots are dried in the sun. The best ginger of
this kind is obtained in deep soil that is purposely made richer
about six inches under the surface than it is on the top ; the
roots then grow downwards; they are long and thin, and
break off nicely into the little pieces usual in dry ginger.
Preserved Ginger.— To make preserves, the roots are dug
as soon as they are fully grown, and before the leaves begin to
wither; they are then washed, scraped if necessary, cut into
thin slices of any desired shape, and put into jars with salt
and water for a few hours, or just sufficiently long to take
away any earthy flavor ; then rinse the slices in clean water, and
put them back in the jar with a thin syrup made from white
sugar; change the syrup in three or four days, or as soon as it
shows signs of fermenting ; re-boil it, adding more sugar, and
pour it upon the ginger again. This may have to be done
three or four times, until the ginger has lost all wild flavor,
and is perfectly sweet and aromatic. It can then be covered
up for future use. This is one of the richest and most pleasant
preserves known ; to make it in the highest perfection, and
with the delicious flavor peculiar to Jamaica preserved ginger,
the roots are allowed to remain in the soil through the winter;
they start into fresh growth next season, and in November or
December following, the young off-shoots from the old roots
are dug and preserved as described.
Hops. —Hops of colonial growth are earning a high reputa


tion, and their cultivation is extending in New Zealand, Tas-
mania, Victoria, and South Australia. Latterly this branch of
cultivation is attracting attention in Queensland, and especially
on the Darling Downs, where the climate and soil are found
well adapted to hop culture. The soils most favorable are strong,
deep loams, with a friable subsoil. Such land can be broken
up by the common plough, followed by the subsoil plough.
The “ breaking up” in the first instance may be accompanied by
a coat of manure, however rich almost the ground may appear
to be. The hop is a greedy plant to an excess, and requires
good and generous treatment from the very starting point.
Before planting the “sets,” prepare a compost heap, consisting
of bone-dust, guano, well-rotted manure, in fact, anything and
everything of a decomposable nature. Half-a-bushel of this
may be given to each hole, when prepared and mixed with the
earth, while forming the cone in which the “sets” are to be
placed. Planting six feet by six feet is a handy and sufficient
distance between the hills. It is advisable to have a wide
twelve-feet opening through the middle of the plantation, for a
better supply of air during the stronger growth of the plants.
At the height of twelve feet, when every pole has its thickly-
growing occupant, a full supply of air is absolutely necessary.
In England the disease termed “ fire-blast” is attributed solely to
close planting and want of circulation of air. The hop plant
grows much faster in the colonies than in England, and fre-
quently produces a light crop from the “ set” the first season.
This is considered more disadvantageous than otherwise, as it
exhausts the young plant too much. In England a common
practice is to simply twist the first year’s growth into a bundle
and place a clod upon it, so as to encourage growth in the
roots as much as possible ; but occasionally a short pole of six
or seven feet is made use of where the growth is rank ; one of
the two plans must be adopted, as it is necessary to use the
horse-hoe or chip between the rows whenever the weeds
appear in force. It is a more lazy plan to allow the bines and
lateral shoots to spread out and occupy the ground the first
season, but this has actually been done in a few instances. The
reason for planting the sets in the diverging position men-
tioned, is because the poles are “ pitched” at an angle of about
ten degrees from the vertical; and if the “ sets” are placed with
their crowns towards each other the bines would soon meet,
grow twined together, and as for the first “ tying up,” be an
endless source of trouble and breakage, separating them. When


the plants are poled, which ought to be as soon as the shoots
or bines appear in the yearling plants, the space at level with
the tops of the poles ought to be equally divided. Each plant,
if growing strongly, will be two feet wide alb the way up, and
require as much sun and air as can possibly be provided for it.
Hops begin to flower, or “ bell,” in the colonies about Christ-
mas. In a week or two the seeds may easily be felt between
finger and thumb, and in a month after, if the weather be
favorable, the clusters of flowers will at first become a pale yel-
lowish or straw color, and then a lightish brown. At this stage
they can easily be broken up in the palm of the hand, will emit
the familiar fragrance of the mercantile hop, a,nd now the
sooner they are kiln-dried the better. Gathering hops, or
“ picking” as it is called, is usually done by women and chil-
dren, and always by contract; for this reason it is advisable
to form plantations in localities where such labor is obtainable,
for delay in this operation is ruinous. A grower must have every-
thing in readiness for his harvest; his cribs must be made, and
an oast or kiln prepared. Hops ought to be dried, if possible,
within twelve hours after being picked. This is an important
point, as the aroma of the flower is very volatile, and in it lies the
strength and flavor of the hop. They must not lie either in
large heaps prior to drying, for although of a brownish color
and apparently ripe, they are full of sap, and will “ heat”
readily if thus placed, and materially decrease in value. The
drying must be carried on night and day until all are finished.
The fires (of charcoal) must not be very fierce at first, but the
floorings will need constant stirrings. A great deal will de-
pend upon the weather. When dried sufficiently, they must
not be “pocketed” or packed up immediately, but allowed to
lie for a day or two in order to acquire a certain degree of
toughness, when they can be pressed without going into dust.
Any building, it rather tall and close, will do for a hop-oast; a
floor may be made moveable, so far as the perforated tiles or
horse-hair cloth is concerned, and the furnaces on the ground-
floor can be had portable. As the oast is only used once a year,
and then only for a few days, the building can be utilised as a
barn, store, or any other purpose during the major part of the
year.
Chemistry, Manuring, &c.—Hops contain and require a
large amount of potash. It is calculated that seventeen
pounds are taken off an acre of ground in the seasen’s growth.
Besides the potash, which is principally found in the bine and


leaf, the plant also requires manure containing phosphoric acid,
lime, magnesia, common salt and silica. About three cwt.
phosphoric potash manure will supply the potash. In fact,
according to analysis, this manure contaius 42 per cent, of
organic matter, 15 per cent, superphosphate of lime, besides
other valuable essentials to the composition of the hop plant.
Irrigation is not so actually essential to hops as many sup-
pose. Should the land be well and deeply broken up, the
roots quickly find safe quarters from the danger of our solar
heat; and it must be taken into consideration that when the
poles are well covered with bines, they are very self-protecting;
the evaporation in a hop ground is not nearly so great as that
in a vineyard.
Tea.— Although the tea plant—the shrub or bush which
yields tea in China, Japan, India, Ceylon, and other places—
has been well known in Northern Australia for many years,
it has never come into general cultivation. It is another
instance, and a striking one, of the manner in which we go on
year after year, buying what we could grow. The tea shrub is
quite hardy from the Clarence River northwards. It may be
seen growing in gardens in all sorts of soils ; but, with the
exception of a few “ old folks,” nobody tries to make their own
tea, from a most erroneous idea that there is something very
difficult or very mysterious about it. A correspondent says:—
“ I know many who pay 2s. to 4s. per lb. for tea, and carry it
miles from the stores, who growl at the quality of what they
buy, but they do not make their own tea for all that. Few
grow the plant, although it can be raised from seed without
difficulty. I bought a plant in Brisbane for,2s., and now have
seed enough each year to make a plantation.”
The tea bush is handsome in color, with dark green leaves
like those of the rose ; the flowers are pinkish white, and have
a pleasant odor. When full grown the bush is about three
feet high, nicely rounded in form, and altogether a pretty plant.
A pound or two of leaves can be picked from a three-year-old
plant, and the yield goes on increasing for thirty or more
years. Seed may be sown or young plants set out in the open
ground during August or September. All seeds of this kind
require rich soil. The leaves can be picked during the winter
season. No doubt tea manufacturers have a certain way of
manufacturing, but a Mery good and wholesome tea is made by
putting the green leaves into a shallow preserving pan over a
slow wood fire. When they begin to curl, throw them upon a


table and rub them with the hand into the form of ordinary tea.
Let them stand in a current of air for a few hours, or swing
them about in a basket ; then put the leaves in the pan again,
heat, and roll them as before. Do this four or five times, and
the result is a greenish black tea, of far better quality than the
average post-and-rail compound bought for money.”
Coffee.— This plant has been more extensively grown in
Australia than tea. It has proved delicate in exposed situa-
tions ; but in rich soils, on the sides of hills protected from
westerly gales, it is a hardy, handsome tree, and bears great
quantities of cherry-like fruit which, in its preserved state, we
call coffee. The plants are raised from seed sown in August,
in rows about a foot apart. If the plants are to be removed,
the seeds are sown in pots or boxes. By the following April
the plants are about ten inches in height. Choose wet, sultry,
still weather for transplanting. Coffee does not bear trans-
planting well: the plants wither and die off. To overcome
this difficulty, the seed might be planted three or four at
each place where a tree is wanted. In moist weather, during
August, September, and October, they come above ground in
12 or 14 days. By this plan stronger trees might be obtained.
Unless the soil is very rich and porous—as in the case of what
is known as mountain scrub—the soil for coffee should be
trenched by hand or plough. Set out the plants about eight
feet apart, adding water, manure, &c., as the case may require.
The trees come into bearing in the third or fourth year, by
which time they have grown five or six feet in height, and are
pretty, nicely-balanced bushes, with very handsome foliage.
To force them into fruit, the tops of the leading branches are
pinched or pruned off. This is also done to keep the trees at a
convenient height for pruning. The first crop of berries is
usually straggling, and it is necessary to check all extra growth
in any of the limbs or branches by pruning them out. The
trees usually come into full bearing when five or six years old.
The fruit is in the form of dark purple berries along the limbs.
These berries are ripe when the two beans in the interior of
each move about freely on being pressed with the fingers.
The crop is then ready for gathering. Between the outside
covering of the fruit and the berries is a gummy-like sweetish
substance. To get rid of this, the fruit is allowed to lie in
masses until a slight fermentation sets. in. The mass is then
washed, and the fruit spread out in the sun or shade, as
occasion may require. Around each is a dry, parchment-like


wrapper, and when this is dry the fruit is passed between
rollers that separate the beans from the skins. In dry
weather the berries dry up when exposed freely to the air,
and the tough outside covering can then be removed by
pounding the berries in a mortar, or by passing them between
rollers. We have tried the drying process, and found the
flavor of the coffee (roasted in the usual way) very fine. The
process of separation is completed by winnowing and sifting,
and the beans are put in bags or barrels for export.
Cocoa, Oacao, Chocolate. — Cocoa, from which the choco-
late of commerce is made, is obtained, in the form of seed-pods,
from a handsome tree. In its nature the tree is even more
tropical than coffee, but it may be found, as settlement in-
creases, to fruit in the northern sections of Australia. The
following notes on the subject of the cultivation and preparation
of the cocoa or chocolate plant are from the director of the Royal
Botanic Garden, Perademiya, Ceylon : —“ The seeds should
be sown as soon as possible after they are gathered, as they soon
spoil for germinating upon becoming dry. As germination
soon commences and proceeds very rapidly, and as the young
plants are very impatient of being transplanted, unless with
the adoption of such precautions as to prevent their roots being
in any way injured, arrangements must be made either for
growing the seeds in a nursery, allowing a space of at least a
foot between each seedling, so that they may be subsequently
taken up with the earth about their roots ; or for sowing the
seeds singly in bamboo or other pots ; or for putting two or
three seeds in each place it is intended a tree shall occupy in
the plantation. Cocoa trees in the plantation should stand at
a distance apart of 10-to 15 feet, according to the richness of
the soil, 12 feet being a good average distance. In the fourth
year a fair crop may be expected on good soil. The fruit must
be quite ripe before it is gathered. When ripe it has a pale
yellowish color. After being picked, it is allowed to lie in heaps
for about 24 hours. Then the pods are cut open, and the pulpy
mass of seeds taken out and put into baskets, to be carried to a
sloping paved barbecue or into large open wicker-work baskets to
drain. As soon as this drainage of the acid pulp has ceased, the
mass is emptied into boxes, in which “ terrage,” or the pro-
cess of sweating, is to continue for 36 or 48 hours, and
by no means longer than 60 hours, or the quality of the cocoa
would be impaired. After removal from the sweating-
boxes the seeds must be freed from any extraneous adhering


matter, and spread out loosely to dry in the sun, being turned
over very frequently. This process of drying occupies about
three weeks, and when complete the seeds should be of a fine
dark red color.” The foregoing is the cocoa seed of commerce ;
the produce of a tree, when prepared, ranges from 5 to 8 lbs.
The crop has the advantage of being easily cultivated, and pre-
pared for export by a few hands.
Manufacture.—The manufacture of chocolate from the seed
is an extensive business in England, France, and Germany.
The seeds are first roasted similar to those of coffee, and with
the same object—to draw out the rich aromatic flavor. The
mass is then crushed by a single roller of stone or iron working
in a bed of similar material; the bed is heated slightly as the
process goes on. The paste thus obtained is mixed with honey,
sugar, and other sweet substances in England. In France,
Italy, and Germany, pimento, vanilla, cinnamon, &c., are added,
in accordance with the taste of the consumers. It is then
made up into the little packets familiar to those who use cocoa,
and which furnish an invigorating and healthy beverage. In
cheap chocolates, arrowroot, sago, and similar ingredients are
used.
Cotton.— Large tracts of country have been found suitable
for this crop in Australia, and when the prices are such as
pay, enormous quantities can be produced. The land available
is still more extensive than that for sugar, for cotton answers
in cooler locations and in poorer soil, and answers in the
hottest latitudes. Cotton is grown from seed, and there is
much room for improvement by selecting from the most pro-
ductive plants. The crop matures in from six to nine months,
and is either re-sown, or in districts where frost does not
prevail the plant can be pruned close to the ground, and is
then made to yield two, three, or more crops in succession.
Two leading varieties are grown, viz., uplands or woolly-seed,
and sea island. The latter seed is almost free from wool,
is of a dark brown color, and runs into but few varieties ; the
longest and silkiest fibre is obtained from it, but the variety is
delicate. The woolly-seed has many varieties; it runs into
sorts of greater or less strength, length, and beauty of fibre
wherever grown, and is capable of indefinite improvement by
selections from the best plants in the field. The average yield
of cotton gives twice the weight of seed to the weight of fibre.
Seed, therefore, soon becomes plentiful.
Rice.— The varieties of rice are but few, but the plant


changes considerably according to the soil, location, &c.,
in which it is grown, and the treatment given to it. The rice
of commerce is usually grown in swampy land. There is
another variety, named Mountain Rice, which does tolerably
well on dry land; but it does better when water is applied,
and still better when the surface of the soil is flooded for a
few days. The grains also become similar as they are sub-
jected to similar treatment; so that if they are different
varieties, the difference is but very slight. Both the common
and mountain varieties are annual grain plants, something
like wheat, and have been grown in various parts of Queens-
land, and with sufficient success to warrant a belief that the
climate is adapted to the cultivation of rice. There are vast
areas of soil also well situated with respect to occasional
flooding by brackish or fresh water, for the production of this
crop upon the systems found to give the finest, largest, and
most certain returns. The seed of rice, or paddy, is the un-
dressed grain. It is sown in drills about 15 inches apart,
and comes through the soil like so much grass, and at first it
is not easy to say which is the rice and which weeds ; but in
wet weather the crop shoots ahead. When five or six
inches high, it is an advantage to be able to flood the drills
with water, and allow it to remain for three or four days.
The water kills weeds, and helps the rice wonderfully. It
also affords opportunities for filling up blanks, by lifting
knots of plants (with soil attached) from where they come up
too thick, and tilling up blanks and thin places. After being
thinned out to an average distance of about an inch apart,
two or three hoeings bring the crop to maturity. By dry
cultivation rice is found to ripen sooner than when it is
flooded, but the latter is unmistakably the heavier crop, and
experts say the grain is finer. In America the rice-fields are
flooded at planting time, and to a depth of four or five inches
around the plants as soon as they are high enough to stand it,
and this is repeated at intervals until the crop comes into ear ;
the water nourishes the rice, and kills weeds and grass. It is,
therefore, an object with the planter to cover the latter, as the
operation simplifies and reduces the cost of cultivation. In
favorable seasons and on strong land the roots, in Australia,
are found capable of bearing two crops. The first ripens in
February and March. When ripe, the grain and straw
become yellowish, like wheat, and the tokens of ripeness in
that grain apply to rice. The heads of the first crop are then


cut off—the wheat-stripper should answer for this work, as
the grain stands well up. The second crop (at this stage
looking like half-grown wheat) then springs up, and ripens
in from five to eight weeks. In ordinary farming, the rice is
cut down with reaping-hook, scythe, or machine, bound up in
sheaves, stacked, and thrashed out. The husk sticks very
closely to the grain, and is removed by millstones, set at such
distance apart as to split off the chaff without injuring the
grain. In America, “ hullers” are used for this purpose ; they
cost from £ls to £4O. The rice is then dressed or polished in
machinery less or more expensive. To the perfection of
the machinery employed, the high reputation of American
and Java rice is largely due. The grain is best preserved in
the husk, and is usually sold in that form by the growers.
The crop ranges from 20 to 40 bushels per acre. In Java an
average crop on strong land is given as 600 lbs. of clean rice.
It is one of the best-paying and least-exhausting crops grown,
and in Australia would be harvested at a time when there is
little doing on the cane plantations.
Silk and Silk-worms.— ln the production of silk, the first
consideration is the provision of proper food for the insect from
which it is obtained. The silk-worm is a caterpillar which grows
from the size of about one-eighth of an inch—that at which
it emerges from the egg—to from two and a-half to nearly three
inches long. All the best silk-producing varieties feed upon
the leaves of the mulberry ; and the primary step to take is to
ascertain the best kinds for feeding, regard being had to the
rapid growth of the worm, and the quantity and kind of silk to
be got from it. That found, the next thing is to cultivate them
successfully; and on this point there is great variety of opinion.
In some countries, and we believe in parts of China, as well
as in some portions of Italy, a species of hedge or dwarf
growth is preferred, the trees being kept as shrubs, and the
leaves small. In others, a large growth is encouraged, and the
trees are planted at a moderate distance from each other. The
difference may account for varieties in the modes of feeding,
which in one place is by the summary process of throwing
branches of the trees, with the leaves on, to be stripped by the
worms, on the mats on which they are laid ; and in another by
leaves picked from the trees, and given, either whole or
chopped, to the worms on trays prepared for the purpose. It is
obvious that in this climate the wholesale tearing off of
branches, even from a shrub tree, would soon result in its de


struction; while small-leaved trees would evolve an amount
of labor in picking the leaves that would increase the cost of
production to a perhaps almost prohibitory extent. The ques-
tion, therefore, is, What are the best kinds to grow here for
the purpose 1 Of the great variety of mulberry trees imported
into Australia, five or six seem most suitable. The first is
that known as the morus multicaulis or large-leaved, or, as some
call it, the Chinese mulberry. Its first value is that the worm
seems to prefer the young leaves to those of any other kind ; its
second is its economy in picking, since from the great size of
the leaves a few will feed more than a considerable quantity of
the other species. This, however, only holds good of the first crop
—the second growth is harder and less nutritious ; but by this
time the varieties of the morus alba and morus nigra come into
use, and the silk produced by feeding upon their leaves is said
to be the best. These two kinds again present each two varie-
ties—the rose-leaved and the oak-leaved—the fruit-bearing
morus alba and morus nigra being oak-leaved ones. In rich,
loose soils, leaves of considerable size and great richness of
texture are produced. Generally, the multicaulis begins to bud
early in August, the alba and nigra from a fortnight to a
month later. We may add to these trees the ordinary Cape
mulberry, originally a Chinese sort, for the later stages of the
worm ; and the Indian one for all stages, so far as experience
has yet gone. The English mulberry seems well adapted for
food as the insect matures, but it has not yet been sufficiently
tried. Beyond this, experience tends to prove that it is not
necessary or profitable to go. The other varieties here are
rather objects of curiosity than use.
Silk-worms.—The worms are produced from eggs laid
by the moth the previous season. The conventional or trade
method of dealing with the eggs is to treat a card or cloth
containing eighty square inches as containing an ounce of
what is technically called “ grain,” and an ounce should pro-
duce from 30,000 to 32,000 worms. In Australia, the eggs
commence to hatch out in August, just as the mulberry begins
to break into leaf. The worms generally commence emerging
early in the morning, and continue until afternoon. About
2 o’clock it is advisable to take a smooth, soft feather or
camel's-hair brush, and gently but rapidly sweep the worms
from the card or cloth into a tray. This done, some finely-cut
leaves should be scattered, to which the worms will instantly
crawl, and the first operation is so far complete, care being


taken to mark the date on each tray. The tray will be found
of a convenient size at eighteen inches by fourteen, and is
simply a frame made of pine, 1|- inch by J an inch, the bottom
being of calico or Victoria lawn. It is of course desirable not
to crowd the worms too much ; and eight such trays will be
required for the product of an ounce of grain. The worms
should be fed three or four times a day with finely-cut leaves,
until they have reached their first stage, which will be from
four to five days after hatching. The quantity of leaves for
an ounce will be from lbs. to 3 lbs. per day.
The Silk.—The time at which the spinning stage is
reached is subject to much variety from feeding, from the
weather, and from the kind of worm itself. We have known
the worms matured in thirty-four days; and we have found
them sixty before they began to spin. The average of a good
Japanese, however, may taken, in an ordinary season, at
from forty to fifty-five days. The bivoltines grow more
rapidly than the annual species. When the worms show a
desire to crawl to the sides of the trays, and assume
the transparent tinge of which we have spoken, the time for
their removal has come. The best method of dealing then is
this : A table of moderate size is to be made of a strong frame,
the top being formed of coarse, strong mosquito net. Card-
board sets of cells, each set 144 in number, each cell one inch
square, and an inch and a-half deep, and open at both ends,
are to be procured (they can be got from London for about
eighteen pence each, in quantity), or made, and any practical
sericulturist can supply a pattern. Lay a few of these cell-
cases on the mosquito-net table, and as you gather the spinning
worms from the trays, drop one in each cell. When the set is
full, or when the worms are all got in, if you have not enough
to complete a set, cover the upper side with a piece of mos-
quito net fastened down by weights at the sides, or by placing
another cell-set on top, and then leave the worms. In about
four days you may take the cocoons out ; in two, if necessary,
you may remove the cell-set and hang it up. The object of
using these is twofold : firstly, you keep the worms separate,
and avoid the nuisance of double cocoons; secondly, you can
see what kind of cocoons you have got, and if by accident the
kinds of worms have got mixed in feeding, you can now
separate the sorts. After the fourth day, the cocoons are
ready for the winder.
The Cocoons.—We have now got to the cocoon • then there


comes the question what to do with it. It will be from twelve
to fourteen days before the moth will eat its way out, and in
that interval there is time to determine on one of three pro-
cesses ; to wind the silk off at once ; to dry the cocoon (killing
the grub) for exportation ; to allow the moth to come out, thus
reducing the value of the cocoon for silk production, and allow
it to lay its eggs for sale as grain. As to the first, there are
no winding machines at present available. As to the second,
we believe that the best method of drying cocoons here is by an
adaptation of the common iron oven, taking care that it has
thorough ventilation by a hole or grating at the bottom of the
door, and another at the top of the back. In such an oven,
and With three-inch intervals, fix racks of small bars strong
enough to hold a tray of cocoon. Three of them might well be
so fixed. Lay the cocoons, not more than two deep, on card-
board or chip on these racks, covering the topmost layer with
paper. When the oven is hot enough just to tinge white paper
to a light straw color, it will do. Twenty minutes will kill and
dry the grub. When the cocoons are taken out, they should be
spread in the sun to evaporate any moisture left in the silk.
When thoroughly dry—and that can be told by cutting one
open, when the grub should fall to powder if squeezed—they
can be pressed and packed in bales of lOOlbs. each, for export-
ation. The-price, in Europe, for good clean cocoons is variously
quoted at from 3s. 6d. up to 6s. per lb.
Silk-worms’ Eggs.—The production of “ grain,” as it is
called, has caused more dispute, and the different statements
made in the course of the controversy have led to more disap-
pointment, than can well be imagined. The grain market in
Italy is a very variable one. A great deal depends, not upon
the actual quality of what you send, but upon its accredited
reputation; and again, time is an essential element in success,
To sell grain profitably, it should leave here to reach Italy by
the Suez mail in December, so that it may have the benefit of
the cold. Arriving later, it will run a chance of being crowded
out. In past seasons, some Japanese grain, coming late into the
market, could not be sold at more than eighteen pence an
ounce, and hardly then. From a variety of sources we have
learned, what we believe to be the case, that really good grain
may be expected to fetch, as a permanent price, and for some
years, from 14s. to 15s. per ounce. As to the reports of 245.,
£2 (and we have even read of £6), we leave them to the
belief of the credulous. Exceptional seasons will, of course,


yield exceptional prices, and 20s. per ounce has been paid for
Queensland grain as a sample ; hut it would be absurd folly to
reckon on a higher general rate than that quoted above.
X.—ROTATION IN COLONIAL AGRICULTURE.
Comparatively little has been done in the warmer sections
of the country in the way of rotation, or change of crops. In
the wheat districts the aim of the farmer is to have a fifth of
his cultivation land under wheat; another fifth under maize,
potatoes, beans, etc., and two fifths under lucerne, prairie, or
rye grasses, which do exceedingly well. A knowledge of the
different crops which may succeed each other profitably on the
same land is of as great importance to the skilled colonial as
the European farmer; both aim at a judicious rotation, so as
to obtain the most valuable produce from any given soil in as
quick succession as possible. Thus, wheat, potatoes, grass,
and maize, might be alternating crops in suitable districts.
In other parts, maize might take the place of wheat; and
again, wheat, sheep, and grass form a three-course rotation.
The usual course is to plough one of the cultivated grass
sections for wheat, and the wheat-ground is either allowed to
go to grass, under sheep for one or two seasons, or it is
ploughed up as soon as the crop is off, and worked for the next
crop of maize, beans, potatoes, &c. The lucerne paddock is
seldom profitable after seven or eight years; it is then broken
up and sown with wheat. It would not be advisable to re-sow
the same paddock with lucerne for seven years; another
paddock could be laid down, and new land chosen for it, if
practicable. It is found advisable to dress the lucerne pad-
dock with quick lime before ploughing for wheat; the same
with the prairie grass. The lime acts as a stimulant, but it
may be overdone. Lime newly burnt has an active effect
upon all organic matter, which it reduces or dissolves by taking
from it a portion of the water and of the carbonic acid which
it contains. This circumstance is probably the secret of the
many wonderful effects of lime on certain soils, while it
remains almost inactive in others. Beans (kidney or haricot)
are great bearers, and do well planted with maize every
alternate hill. They can be planted with the corn-planter, are
convenient for cultivation and harvesting with corn, and make
good feed for horses, pigs, &c.


The analysis of soils, added to practical experience in the
field, leads us to perceive that certain crops thrive best after
certain others. A crop which has a fibrous root and throws
up a seed stem with few leaves, thrives best after one which
has a fleshly root and succulent leaves on a branching stem.
Thus wheat thrives after beans, vetches, or clover; barley and
oats after turnips, carrots, or potatoes. Independently of
manure which may be given to the ground, the crops will be
better where the proper succession is attended to, or the needful
manure is given, rather than where plants of a similar kind are
made to follow each other. Of course, the rotation is aided
by proper manuring.
Lucerne, Prairie Grass, <fec.—Prairie is amongst the best
grasses grown here. It runs up to a height of four or five
feet, and makes excellent hay. The land for this grass, as well
as rye grass or lucerne, is prepared as for wheat. 201bs. of
seed of prairie is the usual quantity sown per acre; from 141bs.
to 201bs. of lucerne is sown per acre ; when drilled, 121bs. of
lucerne is ample. The time of sowing is from February to
July. Where the land is very rich, it is found advantageous
to sow one bushel of oats with the lucerne, or rye can be used
in the same way, as a shading crop, for the more delicate
lucerne. As after-cultivation a few turns with the back-
toothed harrow, after cutting down the oats or rye, is found
advantageous with lucerne Both prairie and lucerne grow
through the winter, when other feeds are scarce. Lucerne, in
growing weather, and on rich land, will grow 18 inches in six
weeks, and may be cut as often. An acre of cultivated grass
is better than ten acres uncultivated, and is an immense aid
in dairying, or for stock grazing on the farm. It is well known
that land which has been some years in grass is improved in
fertility, when the stock get some additional feed ; but, if the
grazing is continuous, without any help whatever, the grasses
suffer. The convertible system of husbandry has taken ad-
vantage of this fact, and consists in reproducing a good pasture
without loss of time, after having reaped the benefit of the
fertility imparted to the land during the years when it was
in grass. By making the one subservient to the other, the
farmer gets a better return for his labor. An acre of grazing
land is estimated to produce 2001bs. of meat per annum.
That will give a greater return to the farmer than a crop of
corn, with very little risk.
Cotton answers for a rotation on light land where wheat is


Olive-oil, about 2 gals per tree
Castor-oil seeds
62
Poppy seeds
... 56 to 63
Rape, colwort, and Swedish turnip
33-5
Colza seed
... 36 to 40
Wild mustard, gourd, lemon
30
Hemp-seed
14 to 25
Linseed, flax, or lintseed
... 11 to 22
Sunflower seeds
15
Grape stones
... 14 to 22
Cotton seed
... 10 to 20*
* The heavy percentage of husks in cotton-seed
apparently low percentage of oil.
accounts for the
not grown. Cotton belongs to the natural order Malvacese ;
there is a large amount of that order of plants in these col-
onies, fibre-bearing; they do not impoverish the soil to any
great extent. For a rotation on light lands, maize or barley
should be sown the first year, cotton the second year, and grass
the third and fourth years. The two-year old grass ploughed
up and sown with maize or other corn crop would be a good
rotation for light lands.
Oil and fibre-yielding crops may, where suitable, be brought
in as very desirable rotation crops with wheat, or any of the
other grains, as neither oil nor fibre impoverish the soil.
XI.—OIL-YIELDING CROPS.
Percentage of Oil from Seeds.—The following gives a fair
average percentage of oils obtained from seeds, fruits, &c.,
and may be found useful;
Amongst the reasons for encouraging oil yielding and fibrous
crops, is the fact that they are the least exhausting on the soil.
Analyses show that neither oil nor fibre takes anything which
the agriculturist cannot spare. They are made up principally
of carbon. Hence their excellence as rotation crops.
The Olive.—This is the favorite amongst oil-yielding plants.
There are several varieties, some suitable for strong and others
for lighter land. Cuttings or truncheons are used for plants;
from eight to twelve inches in length is considered a good size ;
and they may be either from the branches or roots. The olive
is also propagated from layers and suckers that spring up
around the parent. It is also grown from seed, by planting
in September. Plants thus obtained are fit for setting out in


the following September. The tree in all its stages suffers
from frost, it is well therefore, to select warm and sheltered
places for it. The olive grafts freely, and the sorts found to
answer best can be increased in this way upon the less desirable
varieties. The trees are planted from sixteen to forty feet
apart, according to variety and strength of the soil. They
require ordinary good cultivation, and manure where the soil
is not strong enough. Pruning is recommended as a means of
inducing fruitfulness, The trees commence to bear in their
fifth or sixth year, and are long lived when justice is done them.
The fruit is of the plum kind, and usually egg-shaped; when
ripe, it is of a reddish color, and is borne in enormous quan-
tities upon the full-bearing trees. It is gathered by hand and
by shaking the trees ; the product in view being a valuable
oil, it is obvious that the cleaner and less bruised the fruit is
the better. The test of ripeness is to press the fruit; when
oil comes freely, it is fit for the press.
Olive Oil.—To make oil, the fruit is ground into pulp, as in
the .case of cocoa; the pulp is put into bags of horsehair, or
any coarse stuff; these bags are put under a screw press, and
the oil forced out. The oil is allowed to run into vessels
containing water, and is skimmed off as soon as the impurities
pressed out with it have separated. A second pressing, per-
haps a third, is obtained by heating the pulp, or sprinkling it
with warm water. Oil of first quality is of greenish color and
of nutty flavor. The coarser sorts are darker in color. To
purify it, olive oil is allowed to stand for three or four months
in jars or tanks, that all impurities may be deposited. The
oil is then put up in bottles for use. The yield of oil varies
very much. Mr. Bernays considers one to two gallons per tree
a fair average, but as high as one cwt. of oil is mentioned as
the product of a famous tree. The pressed pulp, etc., is said
to be valuable as feeding stuff.
Small quantities of Oil.—To those who have a few olive trees
the following brief direction for expressing the oil may be of
use, as by such means a quantity sufficient for home purposes,
of very excellent oil, may be readily obtained. Those who
have once tasted the pure article will not be willing to use
my other if they can help it. Crush the olives in a common
:orn-crusher; put the pulp thus obtained into bags, and press
with lever or screw. The pure oil swims on the top of what is
ihus expressed, and is, after skimming, clarified by filtering
-hrough blotiing-paper, a piece being put into a funnel, or if
n


the quantity is considerable, into a perforated pan, which
answers every purpose; the oil, after thus being filtered, is
ready for use or market. The oilcake is excellent food for
cattle, pigs, or fowls. A lever may be easily made by a stout
piece of sawn or other timber, about 20 feet long, fixed at one
end by a bolt or a stump or post, with a heavy weight at the
other. The bags containing the crushed olive would be put
under the lever a few feet from the fixed end.
Pickled Olives.—For this purpose the fruit is gathered before
quite ripe, and soaked for half a day in lye made of one part
quicklime to six parts wood ashes, with sufficient water to
extract the alkali. The object of this alkaline steep is to
extract a portion of the bitter principle peculiar to the fruit.
After steeping, it is washed in fresh water and then put up
in bottles, with a brine of salt and water, in which aromatic
herbs may also be placed.
Oastor-Oil.— The plant from which the castor-oil of com-
merce is made has long claimed a home for itself in the coast
country of Northern Australia. On the banks of the many
rivers the trees grow in dense masses, and as a dozen trees
throw off about a bushel of seed annually, and each seed makes
a plant that bears within a year, the rate of extension while
it meets suitable soil is prodigious. To succeed as an oil-yielding
crop, the plants require good rich corn-land, prepared as for a
crop of maize. Plant the seed about five feet apart, in rows ;
the rows, for the convenience of cultivation, may be from 10
to 12 feet apart. The seed is hardy, and the young plants
appear above ground in from 10 to 14 days. No other crop
can be sown between the rows, as the castor oil is a decided
surface rooter and rapid grower. The smoothing or back-
toothed harrow, the hoe, or a shallow cultivator is run between
the rows to keep down grass, weeds, etc. With moderately
fair treatment, in six months after planting we have trees
from Bto 12 feet in height. The fruit is borne in clumps of
small rough seed-vessels. As the seed ripens, the vessels
commence to split open. Then is the time to gather. Some
varieties “pop,” or fiy open, and the seed is scattered on the
ground. Others are only forced open with difficulty. It is
the task of each grower to select such seed as will give him a
crop that will neither “ pop ” too soon, nor be too stiff' to
separate from the seed-vessels. The crop is gathered by hand,
and also by stretching a cloth around the tree, and “yanking,”
or jerking off the seed with a stick. As gathered, the seed is


placed in a heap either under shelter in the field, on a verandah,
or in a barn. In any case it must be surrounded with boards
one foot or more in height, that the seeds may not pop over.
To make the stiffer ones fly open, they may be beaten with
anything soft. There is great difference in the yield of different
beans ; those that are solid, and from which the oil oozes
freely on being pressed with the fingers, are the best. They
also vary in size and color; some are beautifully striped and
mottled; of the latter feature nothing can be said; color is
no guide to quality in the castor bean. When very large,
they are frequently hollow in the centre. Those about the
size of common coffee beans are usually the best.
Getting the Oil.—The oil is obtained by bruising or grinding
the seed (we have seen an ordinary large-sized coffee mill used
for the purpose). The pulp is then put into horsehair or other
bags, and the oil extracted by pressure. This is the cold-
drawn oil of commerce. It is also extracted by simmering in
vessels heated by steam or fire, as described in article on
vegetable oils. The residue, or cake, is poisonous,' and must
be kept out of the way of animals.
Poisonous.—The residue of the seeds, after the oil is pressed
out, is poisonous. The seeds, also, are injurious.
The Pea, or Ground Nut — This valuable edible and oil-
yielding plant grows luxuriantly in Northern Australia. It
is a lowly soft plant, not unlike well-grown c'over to the
casual observer. The fruit is found just under the surface of
the soil all round the stem. The pea-nut likes a free rich
sandy loam, without stones, and from its nature it is absolutely
necessary that the soil be kept quite free from weeds. The
seed is in thin-shelled vessels, each containing two seeds, of
grayish white color, about the size of almonds, and of rich
nutty flavor. This seed is planted either singly or in pairs as
dug, and as soon as the soil is sufficiently warm for semi-
tropical vegetation, say in September or October in the cooler,
and two months earlier in warmer localities. Prepare the land
as for corn; harrow very fine; run out shallow furrows from
three to four feet apart. Drop in the seed about ten inches
apart, and cover. Harrow or rake the surface soil three or
four days after planting; in eight or ten days the plants
commence to break through the soil. They come in strong
shoots, not unlike common potatoes, and rapidly develop
clover like leaves and shade the ground. Cultivate as clean
as possible. Flowers come out at the ends of the shoots, and


as they fall the shoots bend down and send out stout feelers,
or roots, that enter the ground. The fruit is borne in bunches
on these feelers, and all round the stem. As the nuts ripen
the leaves decay. In all, the crop occupies the ground from
eight to ten months. The nuts must be gathered during dry
weather, otherwise the color is injured—not a matter of much
moment when it is grown for oil, or for feeding stock; but this
is a crop that ought to find favor for domestic use, and to that
end should be gathered as clean as possible.
The Sunflower.. —The Sunflower is a heavy bearer of seed,
that yields a good oil. It is grown as a summer crop, precisely
in the same way as maize; the seed being borne upon large
circular heads—some of them 12 inches in diameter. The
seed is easily rasped off, and is treated for oil in the same way
as the other seeds referred to.
Linseed, or Lintseed.— This crop is dealt with amongst the
fibre-yielders. The oil is got by pressure like the others.
XII.—FIBRE-YIELDING CROPS.
Australia is peculiarly rich in fibre-yielding plants. The
aboriginal natives make very strong lines, nets, <tc., from the
curriejohng, fig, and many other plants that grow in or on the
borders of creeks and scrubs. As they are of the order of
plants that take very little from the soil, fibre-yielders are
excellent for rotation with wheat, <tc. Of cotton and silk
we have already spoken. New Zealand Flax (phormium
tenax) grows freely all over the colonies, and produces a fibre
of acknowledged value. It requires a rich and rather sandy
soil, in this respect being similar to fibre-yielders generally.
Seed of New Zealand flax vegetates at any time of the year,
and as it seeds freely, even in the warmer latitudes of Queens-
land, its cultivation could be extended rapidly.
Flax, Lintseed or Linseed.— There has, during the past
year, been a good deal said about the possibility of adding flax
as a crop that would pay the cultivator. The following
particulars from Mr. Creighton, of Kyeburn, New Zealand,
who has been experimenting with flax, may be serviceable.
He says : “ The ground selected had been cropped with oats for
five years in succession, and was two years in grass. Two
acres of this land were sown down in flax. These two acres
received no more attention than did the remainder of the


paddock, which consisted of oats. When the flax was ripe, I
cut it with the reaping-machine in the ordinary way, and
stocked it. After it was dried I brought it to the barn and
threshed it with flails, and put it through the fans twice,
cleaning it thoroughly ; afterwards bagged and weighed the
seed, with the result that it yielded 46 bushels and 81b., at
the rate of 601bs. per bushel. On sending it to Dunedin the
seed was purchased at the oil-mills for ss. 9d. per bushel.
The quantity of seed I sowed was 301bs. to the acre. I may
as well mention that the chaff from the crop filled about 50
bags, which, when mixed with oaten chaff, is much relished by
horses and cattle. The fibre is, in my opinion, excellent. It
could be prepared here ready for the market, and shipped in
bales. A portion of it could find a market in the colony in
the manufacture of binding-twine, and in other articles for
which it is in request. Flax may be grown upon almost any
kind of tillable soil, but it does best upon land of firm texture
resting upon a moist subsoil. It is excellent to succeed oats or
potatoes, as it requires the soil to be in fresh condition
without being too rich. Lands newly broken up from pasture
are well adapted to flax, and the seed is sown broadcast, as
with wheat or other grain. It is a hardy plant, and requires
little care in cultivation. The treatment of the crop for fibre
has not been attended to sufficiently in the colonies to speak of
it with confidence.”
Indian Hemps of various kinds—jute, Bengal fibre, &c.,
»fec.—have all been tried, and are found to do as well as in their
native countries. They are summer crops, and grown from
seed.
Sida Retusa, or Queensland Hemp.—This is one of the
best of known fibre-yielders. In the coast districts of New
South Wales it grows like a weed, and becomes a serious nui-
sance where neglected. It is an enormous seed-bearer, and
being perfectly hardy, when it gets possession of a piece of good
land its eradication is a difficult matter. Nothing appears to
injure the plants ; on good land they grow up a dense mass of
straight, supple twigs, about an inch in . diameter at the base,
and tapering away to a point as the tops reach three or four
feet in height. When grown singly sida retusa is a stocky,
branching plant; when in masses, it is a straight, handsome,
single stem, and a literal mass of fibre. Quantities of this fibre
have been manufactured in the same manner as flax fibre in
Ireland, and the yield estimated to be fully up to one-and-a


half ton per acre. The fibre is valued in England at from £3O
to £4O per ton.
Banana Fibres. —Manilla is got from musa textilis. This
variety grows freely along the seaboard and on the banks of
rivers and creeks in the coast country. On an average a full-
grown plant is found to produce 5 lbs. of clean fibre, and in
their own country the best exertions of an experienced work-
man (Indian or Chinese) produce about 12 lbs. of fibre per day.
Their wages are necessarily very low—less than would keep
white men in beef and flour. We fear, therefore, that until
machinery is brought to their aid, Australians will have to
leave Manilla fibre culture to those who work for sd. per day
and think it good wages. It is not agreeable to give up the
matter in this way ; but business is business; if it won’t pay,
our people can have nothing to -do with it.
Pine-apple Fibre.— This is obtained from the leaves of the
pine-apple, and is amongst the finest; and pine-apple cultivation
being capable of extension to any extent, the production of the
fibre is a question that depends upon the introduction of ma-
chinery.
Chinese Grass-Cloth Plant.— Better things are expected
from this plant, as the fibre has a value, with comparative little
labor on the part of the grower. The plant has been grown for
years in public and private gardens. It is healthy, grows
freely from cuttings planted during the spring season, in rows
two feet apart.
Extracting Fibres. —Various methods of separating the
fibres of flax, hemp, <fec., from the glutinous matter with which
they are surrounded, have been adopted in various countries.
In Ireland, Belgium, Holland, and in France the plants,
after being pulled, are dried in the sun, being set up on the root-
end in two thin rows, the top interlacing in the form of the
letter inverted. The sun and air soon thoroughly dry the
stems, and they are then made into sheaves, and the seed
afterwards beaten off. The stems are steeped subsequently.
Another mode in general use in Ireland and in part of
Flanders, is to steep the green stems immediately after they
are pulled. In Flanders the seed is invariably separated from
the stems before the latter are immersed in water. In Ire-
land, although this is practised to some extent, yet the great
bulk of the flax-crop is put in the water at once, with the seed
capsules attached, and consequently there is a very considerable
annual loss to the country by this waste of a most valuable


product of the plant. In the Walloon country of Belgium, in
its eastern provinces, and in the greater part of Germany,
dew-retting is practised. That is, in place of immersing
the stems in water, they are spread thinly on short grass, and
the action of the dews and rains ultimately effect what im-
mersion in a running stream or pool accomplishes in a much
shorter time, namely, the decomposition of the gum which binds
the fibres to the stem and to each other. Fibre obtained by this
method is, however, of very inferior quality and color. If the
fibre of flax be separated from the stem without the decom-
position of this matter, it is found to be loaded with impurities,
which are got rid of afterwards in the wet-spinning, the boiling
of the yarn, the subjection of the woven fabric to the action
of an alkaline lye and the action of the atmosphere, of rains
and of alternate dippings in water, acidulated with sulphuric
acid and of a solution of chloride of lime, which are all required
to perfect the bleaching. The great object, therefore, is to
obtain the fibre as nearly free from all foreign substances as
possible, and consequently the mechanical separation of it
from the woody pith of the stem is not to be recommended.
At various periods attempts have been made to prepare flax
fibre without steeping. Weak acids, solutions of caustic
potash, and of soda, soap, lye, and lime, have all been tried,
but have all been found objectionable.
XIII.—MAKING AND USING MANURE.
This is amongst the most important subjects the Australian
farmer has to consider ; and it is encouraging to note the grow-
ing attention given to it. Let the natural richness of his land
be what it may, the man acts wisely who prepares to manure
from the start. For rich land, the quantity required to keep
up the soil in its best condition is but small, when the right
stuff is supplied. The poorer the land the more manure is re-
quired, and skill is called out more and more to get at the
material of which the soil stands most in need. Skilful man-
uring, with good cultivation, is the safe road to success, and
the only one that enables the farmer to prosper in dry as well
as in wet seasons. There are many sources of manure avail-
able. The best and most effective of all, additional to the com-
post heap, is to combine grazing with farming, and either to
feed stock upon land intended for cultivation, or to lay the


land down in grass and graze it until the piece has received a
thorough coating. This process is followed with absolute suc-
cess as a portion of a course of rotation. On plantations where
cane is grown the same course is followed, by allowing the
land to run into grass, after being cropped for three, four, or
five seasons with cane, and as soon as it has a firm' coating of
sod, to turn cattle upon it for two or three seasons, until
the land is again required for cropping. In the grain districts,
where sheep are kept, this system of manuring is very effect-
ive, and especially so where, in addition to the natural grasses,
the stock get additions of cultivated feed.
The dryness of the atmosphere, and the occurrence of very
heavy rains, are against the making of manure in open yards,
as followed in Europe. But when cattle are put under sheds
at night, this plan becomes successful here. While working
upon this system, and to overcome the, excessive evaporation
prevalent during the autumn months, the liberal application
of dry, loamy soil, to the surface of the yards is decidedly bene-
ficial. This dry soil absorbs the ammonia and other gasses that
are otherwise blown away, and after lying for four or five
months becomes as rich as the very best portions of the heap
upon which the soil is scattered. The free application of dry
soil in covered stockyards and upon manure heaps has this ad-
ditional advantage: the manure can be hauled out on the field
with less loss from evaporation than when the compost has been,
made in the ordinary way. Where cane megass and refuse,
corn stalks, coarse grass, &c., are available, enormous quantities
of manure can be made in this way in the pig pen, or with the
aid of a small lot of working or other cattle that are yarded at
night.
Bone Manure.—Bones, crushed if possible, are a cheap and
plentiful manure in various parts of the country, and are found
to be of decided value for crops upon loamy and sandy soils,
supplying, as they decay, phosphates and lime and small quan-
tities of ammonia. Superphosphate is made by reducing bones
with sulphuric acid. Much experience has been gained in super-
phosphate-making by the advanced students of the Technical
College. One of the best methods for home use is found to be
to reduce the bones as much as possible in size, by breaking,
crushing, &c. Then pack them in a close mass, either in
barrels, boxes, or over a thick foundation of ashes or dry
loamy earth. Then sprinkle water on the bones, day after
day, till fermentation is set up, and the bones absorb no more


water. Then sulphuric acid is added, until the whole is re-
duced to a mass like molasses. Then ashes, soot, or any
vegetable stuff is added, until the whole is in such a dry state
that it can be handled as desired. From 300 to 500 lbs.
of this per acre, used upon grain crops, give excellent results.
By the method here given, from 25 lbs. to 30 lbs. of acid
reduces 100 lbs. of bone.
Guano is somewhat extensively used in the fruit districts.
The very best way of getting the full benefit of guano is to
mix it with three or four times its bulk of good loamy soil (to
prevent evaporation of ammonia), and then apply it by merely
harrowing or chipping it in with the hoe into the surface of
the soil.
Pig-pen, fowl-house, stable, and barn manures of all kinds
are as effective and valuable here as elsewhere ; but in applying
them either on the surface or in the furrow, evaporation has
to be guarded against, and this is most effectively done by
composting the stuff with earth in the compost heap.
Green manuring—the ploughing into the soil of growing
crops—is one of the most certain, as it is one of the always avail-
able means of enriching any moderately good land. Amongst
the plants specially available for this purpose are buckwheat,
oats, cotton, sorghum, corn, peas, and the summer grasses.
There are other sources of supply, and undoubtedly the richest
of all, viz., sea-weeds and ferns. Seed of the common large
fern can be gathered in quantity during December, January,
and February. This seed" will grow on land suitable for culti-
vation, no matter how rough and course it is. The plants grow
rapidly, their roots bring up potash from below, and when
about six inches high the ferns can be ploughed under, and
make a capital manure for oats, wheat, or corn. Cotton-seed,
sown broadcast during the summer months, makes a good
dressing, and one that is quickly available for making an active
seed-bed.
Wood Ashes.—To quicken land, wood ashes are valuable,
and can be applied with confidence of seeing the effects on all
soils rich in vegetable matter ; also on grass land, and land
under fruit that has become foul, the effects of a dressing of
ashes is very marked.
The Australian Compost Heap.—Of dry soil we have already
spoken. It is one of the valuable aids in favor of manure-
making in Australia. Few things will be found to pay better
than a shed under which a dray can travel, and in which soil


can be stored in dry weather, so that it may be kept dry
and fit for use whenever required. Loamy soil is the best for the
purpose. The richer it is in vegetable matter, the better
and more effective it is. With this agent, nothing need
be lost; it absorbs matter of all sorts. A load or two of it
THE AUSTRALIAN COMPOST HEAP.
packed around the carcass of a dead beast prevents all smell,
and affords a compost equal to the richest for many purposes.
It is also the best agent for absorbing night-soil and making
it available for use, and many other purposes that will readily
suggest themselves. The compost heap should be under cover,
if at all practicable, and to prepare for it as much loamy earth,
dried stuff from swamps does splendidly, being rich in vegetable
matter, should be carted up in readiness. As a foundation for
the compost, put down a thick layer of earth (a) ; and on top
of that (6) any weeds, grass, &c., that can be got together, in
order to rot them down, and destroy seeds of weeds, <fec. Then,
any night-soil, or refuse stuff can be added, as at c. Then
more earth (d), and so on, adding layer upon layer, cow-pen,
stable, or other stuff, and making a heap as large as may be
required. If ammonia, in the form of sulphate of ammonia,
now made by the gas companies, is required, or any other rich
fertilising material, it can be first mixed up in the compost heap,
care being taken all through the process to keep a covering of
earth {h hh) all round, to prevent loss. Such a heap as this
does not heat; the earth prevents that, and it can be hauled
out as required for the immediate use of crops.
Lime.—This agent is not used to the extent it ought to be.
Limestone is plentiful in various parts of the country, and yet,
with the exception of the limestone soils, that are by no means
common, the others are very generally deficient in lime. That
lime is indispensable to the fertility of the soil has been


demonstrated by the analyses of soils and crops (see Ohap.
II.), and the universal experience of agriculturists. Dis-
cussion of the relations of lime to soils and to plants and
animals would fill a volume. In many cases the application of
lime is marked in an extraordinary degree. In long-continued
dry weather, stiff and clay lands, on account of the extent to
which they contract, and of the consequent increase of their
tenacity, not only become so hard that they are with difficulty
worked; and, at best, the roots of cane, corn, cotton, grasses,
indeed of all vegetables, penetrate the hard dry soil with great
difficulty, and are exposed and injured by the shrinking and
cracking of the soil. Not only do scientific experiments, but
practical agricultural experiences, demonstrate in the clearest
manner that the addition of lime, gypsum, marl, shells, sea-
sand, or other calcareous manures to soils diminishes their
tenacity in both wet and dry weather, counteracts the ten-
dency to shrink and crack during dry weather, and thus
renders them more easy of cultivation and more suitable
to sustain vegetation. Lime is applied to land in different
forms, as quick, or freshly-slacked lime, and mild or air-
slacked lime. To raw, stiff, newly-drained land, especially
exist in it much of acid organic compounds, it is best
to apply quick lime, that is, caustic hydrate (slacked lime) as
it has a more energetic effect in ameliorating it. Gas-lime that
has been exposed to the air is also valuable in such cases. On
light soils, where there is only small quantity of organic or
vegetable matter for the lime to act on, mild or air-slacked lime
is beneficial. It is best to apply lime frequently and in small
quantities, so as to keep it near the surface and always active,
and always by itself, and not while other manures are being
used. From one to three tons of lime to the acre, in our hot
climate, may be considered an average application. More
may be applied on very strong soil, and less on light land.
Excellent results often follow a first application of lime, but
future dressings may seem to fail to have the same effects.
In these cases green crops should be ploughed in, and other
manures used, when, after a season, lime may be again
applied with profit, and to bring the fresh material into active
service.
Waste in Ordinary Farm Manure. —lt has long been
matter of complaint in countries where farm-yard manures
form the foundation of the general manuring, that there is
such a loss of labor in bringing it into use. Thus, an


ordinary average ton (2240 lbs.) of farm-yard manure, as
made after the careful manner followed in Scottish farming, is
composed as follows : solid matter, 640 lbs., which contains
about 50lbs. of soluble matter; some 1600 lbs. of water make
up the ton. This water is of very little valuae to the farmer
in that country, and he has not the dry soil that is available
for our manure-making. The 50 lbs. mentioned are made up
of ammonia, phosphates, potash, lime, silica, soda, salt, sul-
phuric acid, and carbonic acid, and the value of- the whole
ton of stuff is dependent upon the proportions in which the
first three—ammonia, phosphates, and potash—are in it. We
thus see how the value of manures are reduced to very small
quantities when the right materials are present.
XIV.—HARVESTING AND OTHER MACHINERY.
The colonial farmer has every reason to watch carefully for
every advance that substitutes the labor of horses for that of
men. The horse is his mainstay, and is always available ; he is
easily, and at comparatively little cost, kept in condition for
work at alt times of the year. With his aid, and the imple-
ments already at the disposal of the tiller of the soil, he is able
to act promptly for sowing seed and also against weeds, to bring
his land into condition for planting, and to make it so fit for
harvest machinery that he can get in his crops in much less
time than when hand labor alone has to be depended upon.
There is no better investment in farming than good horses and
effective implements.
Australian Experiences.—The circumstances under which
Australian agriculturists find themselves placed, so different
to those which obtain in other countries, that it is not to be
wondered at if at first they cannot understand our style of
working. It has been a very common complaint with wheat-
growers here that newly-arrived men, professing to be agricul-
tural laborers, are not at all suitable ; but it should be recol-
lected that farming “ at home” is carried out on a more recog-
nised system than is yet usual with us. There is no such thing
there as ploughing four inches deep, and then sowing the seed
and scratching it in with one scrape of the harrows, and no
farmer would think of following a grain crop with grain, with-
out manure. The holdings are small in area and thoroughly
cultivated, the farmer directing every operation. ’ Necessarily


upon these limited areas, and with perfect cultivation, the im-
plements suited to their
work have been perfec-
ted long ago, and each
farmer supplies himself
with a small but efficient
stock of implements. A
farming-man landing up-
on these shores finds
himself altogether in a-
nother set of circumstan-
ces. He is set to work
REAPER AND BINDER AT WORK.
in skimming the surface of the field instead of ploughing it,, and
the soil may be dust dry, and without a sign of vegetation upon
it,unless it be the ashes of grass or stubble, burned off the day
before. Probably he may be expected to drive a team of bul-
locks instead of the horses he has been used to. Instead of the
clear fields to which he has been accustomed in the old
country, he finds the
ground studded with
tussocks, or stumps
and roots. He can
see very little in the
plan of cultivation
followed here that
accords with his ex-
perience in the old
land, and slovenli-
ness in the work that
would ensure his dis-
AUSTRALIAN STRIPPER OR HARVESTER.
missal from the old farm is looked upon with a lenient eye in this
country. There is no hedging and ditching to be done, and no
turning of the muck-heap, no thatching, seldom any pigs to be
looked after, no thrashing with the flail. A hundred jobs that
he was expected to perform are not thought of here. He finds
that the work on a farm in Australia is almost entirely differ-
ent. The rotation of crops, perfect tillage of the soil, manur-
ing, weeding, drainage, rolling of the crops, the feeding down,
the spring and fall croppings, and many other things which are
regularly provided for there are not practised here, and there-
fore it is not very strange that the new arrival should find him-
self as it were, upon his head, and appear to be awkward in
the eyes of his colonial employer. Perhaps the first job he is


put to is the working of a grubbing machine—the like of which
he never saw before—or may be told to drive a tripple
plough or a stump-jumper, or perhaps to “scarify” in a crop of
seed-wheat, or even to harrow over a piece of stubble-land for
the sake of a self-sown crop. Then in November, or a little be-
fore, he may see haymaking on a totolly different plan to that
of Europe, and shortly after the wheat harvest may commence,
without the aid of hook, sickle, or binding. The reaping ma-
chine, or stripper gathers the crop, and thrashes it in a way that
he never dreamed of. The winnowing machine is the only part
of the work it is likely he may understand. The big stack,
with its careful thatching, the great barn in which he spent the
greater part of the winter at home in thrashing out the grain, is
not visible ; the crop is carried direct from the field to the rail-
way, in many instances, or to the wheat-buyers’ stores. It is
not at all like the farming that the old country has been edu-
cated to, and therefore there is no justification for condemning
the newly-arrived hand as an imposter for calling himself an
agricultural laborer, because he does not understand the colonial
modes of farming.
Harvesting Machines.—The rapidity with which har-
vesting machines have come into use in Australia, prove that
when suitable, our farmers are not slow to see the ad-
vantages of good things. The change which has taken place
in the system of harvesting in the principal wheat-growing
districts is very marked in its character. For a long series of
years the Adelaide stripper has been steadily but surely
gaining ground. The reapers and wire-binders were introduced
suddenly, and owing to the action of Australians who saw
them at the Philadelphia Exhibition, and afterwards string-
binders displaced the wire machines. Then by a system of
sowing only clean seed, it was seen that the land could be
kept comparatively free from wild oats for many years, and in
clean crops both machines did excellent work. Straw was of
little value when grass was abundant, and markets distant and
difficult of access ; while in regard to the effect of the system
upon the fertility of the soil, burning the straw upon the
wheat-fields proved to be better than cutting it off by the
reaper and failing to return it in the shape of manure; so
that, wasteful as it is to burn the stubble, it is better than
taking all that is grown off from the land ; so where the straw
is usually short, no interference seems likely with the
supremacy of the stripper as a harvesting machine; and it has


also been made clear that the reapers and binders are capable
of doing really good work. At first the machines were some-
what complicated, and farmers were afraid to risk the danger
of stoppages through something going wrong; but most of
the machines that are now made inspire more confidence.
There are situations, too, where both kinds of harvesters are
used with advantage. With the aid of a reaper and binder,
harvesting can be commenced a week or a fortnight earlier
than stripping, and stripping can be carried on long after
reaping would be impossible, because of the grain being
shaken out. It is probable, therefore, that the harvest in the
future may begin by reaping, until stripping time arrives.
This will give a quantity of straw for the farm, and when the
crop is ripe enough the stripping-machine may be put in to
finish the work. By this means hurry and bustle will be done
away with, and, at the same time, the farm stock will not be
left without a supply of straw. The stripped wheat can also,
if necessary, be sent to an early market, while that which has
been reaped will the more easily be allowed to wait for the
thresher. Recent dry seasons, and correspondent scarcity of
horse and cattle feed, raised the value of straw in the
estimation of farmers. The losses of stock, too, and the
difficulty of carrying on the ploughing through want of horse-
feed, have brought the importance of the straw-stack forcibly
before the minds of those who keep an eye upon the ways and
means. Markets have also been made available through the
extension of railways, so that we have an explanation of the
tendency to adopt a means of harvesting by which the straw
is saved. When it is returned to the land, in the form of
manure, we are in a fair way of making another advance in
our system of cultivation.
Keep Tools and Implements in Good Order.—Possibly the
man who tries to do work with a dull axe or scythe rather than
spend the time to put it in order has more muscle than brains.
Not less foolish is he who uses a dull hoe; for, besides being
much harder work to use it, a weed that is merely pulled up
and left intact, is much less likely to die than when the roots
are cut into many pieces in being torn up and thrown upon the
surface. Now, with a common flat file we can put the hoe or
spade in good order, and this with the expenditure of a few
minutes’ time each day, by filing the tool to an edge from the
underside. In the use of tools, it is every man’s choice whether
he shall have them sharp or dull ; in using a cultivator drawn


by a horse, the workman is under obligations to have it in such
a condition that it will do the most good with the least expen-
diture of muscle of man and beast. The cultivator with dull
teeth not only draws harder, but is much less efficient in destroy-
ing weeds. It costs but a small sum to have the edges ham-
mered out thin and sharp, and it pays to have it done suffi-
ciently often.
“ Coating” to Keep Off Rust.—For protecting machinery,
tanks, etc., during the time they have to remain out of use,
melt down two parts of mutton kidney fat, one and a-half
parts of beeswax, add equal weight of the two of whiting,
stir all up together and use hot, with an ordinary brush, first
cleaning and drying the metal to which the mixture has to be
applied.
To Make Repairs.—Everyone who farms, and especially those
who are some distance from mechan-
ics’ shops should, if possible, be pro-
vided with the usual materials for
repairing tools, implements, <fec., as
the delay is often many times greater
than the cost of putting them in
order. Provide boxes with compart-
ments, and get a supply of screws
and nails of different sizes, screw-
bolts with nuts, and nuts alone,
rivets, coarse and fine galvanised
iron wire, copper wire and pieces of
copper straps, common and tarred
cord twine, scraps of leather, paint
with paint brushes, varnish, and the
other necessary tools. The great
COMBINED BOILER AND ENGINE.
flexibility of copper wire and copper straps renders them very
useful for making repairs quickly.
Ploughs, ploughing, and implements for general cultivation
are dealt with in Chap, v., pumps and water-lifting gear in Chap,
xxxi. Engines of the useful patterns, and of any desired power,
are easily got in all the colonies, and are in common use for
threshing, pumping and other work. “ Steam on the Farm” is
another of the subjects concerning which details are given in
“The Elements of Australian Agriculture,” and affording tech-
nical information concerning the making and use of steam, &c.


XV.—LIVE STOCK IN AUSTRALIA.
Grazing-Farming.— Agriculture as practised, and as be-
lieved to be the best for the warmer sections of Australia,
differs considerably from that followed in other parts of the
world similarly situated with regard to climate. Here it is
not only found practicable to combine stock-raising, cattle or
sheep, or both, with the cultivation of the soil, but the com-
bination is found desirable. In many parts of the country it
it would be considered folly to attempt the one without
the other. It is only the larger grazier or squatter who
depends upon the native grasses for his herds or flocks;
and cultivation is receiving more attention from graziers
every year, for no branch of agriculture is at the mercy of the
seasons to an equal degree with that of the squatter pure and
simple. The agriculturist who combines cattle or sheep with
■his tillage operations is not only secured in the benefits inci-
dental to live stock, but the manure made by them lessens the
effects of bad seasons by increasing the fertility of his fields,
which should be characteristic of agriculture in warm countries.
The Better Prospect.—lt is source of much hopefulness re-
garding the future of the warmer sections of Australia, that
farming has commenced and is already carried on with a full
knowledge of the relation between highly-cultivated fields and
success. Draining, subsoiling, and manuring are receiving more
attention. Consequently horses, cattle, and sheep are in much
favor amongst the farming classes. The practice most usual
is to use the native grasses largely during summer, to cultivate
for winter feed, and to use the common run of cattle or sheep as
the basis of the herd or flock, resorting to thoroughbred male
animals for improving or keeping up the breed. When feeding
is attended to from the start, and shelter is provided against
the changes of climate felt in warm as well as in colder
climates, the groundwork of success is secured. The making
of manure is a primary end with the grazing-farmer, and he
sells when his stock bring a fair profit. Those who follow this
system may get no hundreds for a single animal, nor do the
animals sold “ cost more than they come to.” There are, and
will, we trust, always be numbers of gentlemen who have the
time, the means, and the taste for breeding fine stock, cattle,
sheep, horses, pigs, &c., and to warrant them in maintaining
the herds and studs needed for the supply of the active demand
always existing; and in case it should cost some of them a
I


few thousands for the gratification of a worthy desire in this
direction, nobody is much hurt.. With the ordinary grazier or
farmer, who practises mixed husbandry as a business rather
than specialties, the condition is quite different.
The Horses in Demand.—ln the case of horses, most far-
mers disposed to breed from good mares find it better for their
interests to produce such stock as find a ready market for the
ordinary purposes required of them in the hands of the
masses : draught-horses, harness-horses, and such as, without
special training or expensive handling, answer their own
purposes, or sell in the city or country for more than it costs
to rear them. A good sound draught or carriage horse is as
saleable as a fat beast, and such an one can be bred with
reasonable certainty by the use of a proper stallion, for-
tunately becoming plentiful in the country, as every farmer
knows. No professional trainer, no track but the road, no
paraphernalia are necessary to develop the powers, and hence
his value. A few months at ordinary farm-work breaks-in
the horse in much better form than when the breaking is more
rapidly done, and at four or five years old he is ready for sale,
and can command a good paying price.
Farmers’ Sheep and Wool.-—Those who have land suitable
for sheep find a similar course of breeding from high class rams
equally suitable, and the manure of their flocks especially valu-
able on the farm. There has been enough done to prove that sheep
can be made to pay in flocks of hundreds as well as thousands,
and that the idea of the country being suitable only for squat-
ting, on the orthodox model of former times, is amongst the
fallacies of the past. Victoria and our own southern districts
offer striking examples of successful changes from the old style
of squatting to a system of grazing-farming. The bulk of the
cattle and sheep raised there are owned by men owning less than
2,000 acres of land. Some of the most successful men carry on
operations on less than 500 acres; and yet for years we were
assured that in the hands of farmers the staple product of export
—wool—-was to disappear or become so worthless as not to pay
for carriage to the European market! Beyond this the carcase
was thoroughly to deteriorate, the chief thoughts of the smaller
settler being supposed to move only in the direction of preserving
and disseminating scab ! Of course no one with any exercised
sense believed such extreme views, and none without an over-
powering or interested motive ever sought to make converts to
to them. Time has gone on, and we read in a recent report of


one of the largest sales of wool ever catalogued in Australia
that “ the wool interest has changed its character. A new set
of producers has come into the field.” The catalogue Consists
of 444 lots, representing 5,274 bales, nearly the whole of it the
produce of farms in the neighborhood of Pentland Hills, Bac-
chus Marsh, the Werribee, Kyneton, Riverina, &c. To this
the Deniliquin Chronicle adds ; “ There has been a considerable
falling off in the quantity of wool from squatting stations, but
this deficiency has been fully compensated by what has been
supplied by the farmers.” Such facts speak for themselves, and
can guide opinion only in one very evident direction ; they are,
however, worthy the special attention of those who appear to
imagine that to enlarge the number of those interested in the
production of wool is a sure method of injuring it as an in-
dustry.
Leave Fancy Stock Alone.—There is one source of danger
concerning which a word is necessary —the danger of being led,
without sufficient means and skill as ballast, into attempts to
breed fancy stock, in order that fancy prices may be secured.
The more plodding but more certain way to produce for an
every-day demand, is safest. The men who breed and rear
what we call fine horses and choice cattle, sheep, pigs, or
poultry are scarce. Of the hundreds who within the thirty
yeas last past have attempted in this country to rear thorough-
bred horses, or any of the pure breeds of cattle, hoping to reach
eminence and fortune by their efforts to “ improve” such stock,
an occasional one has made his mark—the vast uncounted ma-
jority have turned aside, or have “ died and left no sign.” The
true breeder of a strain of horses, cattle, or sheep, like the true
poet, “is born, not made.” It is certainly the fact that the
necessary skill and judgment, added to the necessary taste
and judgment, together with the necessary taste and means,
are rarely possessed by one individual. We can number on
the fingers of one hand the number of this generation claimed,
by well-informed persons, as having actually accomplished very
marked improvements by their own superior ability in the prac-
tice of breeding. These facts are mentioned, not by way of
discouragement, but of caution ; not in order to deter any from
making the effort to become famous as breeders, and least of
all to prevent any one from doing his utmost to improve the
general quality of the stock in his possession, for improvement
is perfectly safe while it aims at an object in constant demand.
Nor is it because of any want of appreciation of fine stock, or


any lack of admiration for the pluck and enterprise displayed
by those who are devoting their means and energies to produce
them On the contrary, we love good horses, useful horses, fine
horses, and thoroughbred cattle of whatever tribe or family ;
and we honor those who believing they are called to improve
them, spend time and substance in the attempt to do so. In a
modest way we know personally how it is. The ideas which
cluster about such an enterprise are rose-colored—promises of
success are flattering ; the chances of failure seem small; but
the prizes are found in practice to be very few in comparison
with the blanks. And the reasons are obvious enough when
the matter is carefully considered. It requires large capital,
favorable location, keen perception, personal devotion, and an
ordinary lifetime to reach the end which every real breeder
aims at when he sets out. Even with those otherwise situated
in these respects favorably, a prolific cause of failure lies in
the fact that few persons can so far divest themselves of preju-
dice in favor of their own as to judge impartially from time
to time of the defects and excellencies of what has grown up
under their hands, and hence are unable to select and cull with
that nerve and skill which are indispensable to success. We
are sure that every breeder has felt the danger that lies in this,
and has acknowledged it to himself if not to others.
The Leading Breeds op Cattle.— Of the many known
breeds of cattle, three only have been generally introduced
amongst the pastoralists of Australia, namely, the Durhams or
Shorthorns, the Herefords and the Devons. Polleys are
receiving more attention than formerly.
Shorthorns. —As they are by far the most largely dis-
seminated of any known breed, not only in Australia, but in
Great Britain, America, and every other country where
agriculture has received attention, a short history of the
shorthorns will not be unacceptable here. The Durhams, as
they were originally termed, and by which name they are
still generally known in the bush districts of Australia, were
originally confined to the counties of Durham and York.
They were large, loose, short-horned cattle, celebrated as
milkers, and originally imported into Holderness, as is sup-
posed from Denmark and the north-east of France. Although
the shorthorns of the present day bear very little resem-
blance to the original Durhams, there can be no question but
that they are the same breed of cattle, with very little
admixture. The breeders on the banks of the River Tees,


favored by rich soil, by practising careful selection, soon
moulded them into a new and almost distinct type, and they
then became celebrated throughout Great Britain as the
Teeswater breed. The brothers Robert and Charles Oollings
adopted the Teeswaters as the basis of their herds, and to
these gentlemen the honor of having founded the present
magnificent variety, denominated shorthorns, is now, by uni-
versal consent, accorded. As the best modern English
racehorses trace back to the blood of the Godolphin and
Arabian, so there are no shorthorns of any note that do not
trace back in direct lines to the blood of Hubback. This bull
was purchased by Mr. Charles Oollings from his brother and
Mr. Waistall, who found him as a calf grazing on a meadow
past which they rode daily, and purchased him from a man in
indigent circumstances, for the sum of £B. Waistall after-
wards acknowledged that from anyone but a reputed judge of
cattle the old man would have taken a much smaller sum.
Hubback, in Mr. Charles Oollings’ herd, became the sire of
Foljambe’s dam, the grandsire of Favorite, and the g. g. grand-
sire of the world-renowned Comet, which sold for the then
unprecedented price of 1000 guineas. Up to this period the
brothers Oollings and Sir Charles Knightly had it pretty much
their own way with the shorthorns; but now two gentlemen
appeared on the scene whose names are indelibly associated
with the shorthorns wherever the name is mentioned. At one
of Mr. 0. Oollings’ sales, Mr. Bates, of Halton Castle, became
the purchaser of a heifer, Young Duchess, by Comet, for 183
guineas ; and at the same sale Mr. Booth, of Oatterich,
obtained a bull calf, Albion, by the same sire, for 60 guineas.
From this date the Oollings’ names gradually began to cease,
and the names of the rival breeders, Booth and Bates, to be
substituted in connection with the shorthorns. For a number
of years the Booth and Bates “ tribes” struggled for superiority
in public estimation. It was generally considersd that the
Booths were superior to the Bates in the forequarters, whilst
the latter, especially the cows, were more massive, and better
developed in the hindquarters. This being the case, it will
be easily imagined that a judicious blending of the two tribes,
under the direction of a master-breeder, would result in the
production of a very superior animal. This was undertaken
by Colonel Townley, celebrated alike as a breeder of horses
and cattle, who, after several experiments, succeeded in pro-
ducing his celebrated family of Butterflies. One of these,


Master Butterfly, -was purchased by Mr. J. G. Ware, of
Victoria, for the sum of 1200 guineas, and it was only on the
understanding that he was to be taken to Australia, that he
could be procured even at that figure. It has been already
stated that Mr. Bates refused to sell any of his best female
cattle, evidently with the hope of preserving a monopoly. He,
however, parted with several of the best representatives of his
Duchess family to an American breeder, and the latter, with
that smartness which is so much a characteristic of our trans-
atlantic cousins, sold their progeny to English breeders, at prices
far exceeding any ever realised by the founder of the famous
Duchess tribe. It is claimed for the shorthorns that they
mature earlier, fatten more kindly, and produce a greater
amount of superior meat, with a less proportionate amount of
bone and offal than any other variety of cattle. As milkers
they stand unrivalled by all except the Ayrshire and Jersey or
Alderney. The prevailing colors are red, red and white, white
and roan. The light roan body and dark roan neck, with red
or brown-tipped ears, is the favorite color with Australian
cattle-owners. The latter is perhaps the prevailing color of
the Booths, whilst the dark red, characteristic of the Duchess
family, is preferred by many in the Bates’ strain.
Herefords.— Next to the shorthorns the Herefords are
generally considered the most valuable of modern breeds of
cattle. Unlike the shorthorns, however, which have some-
times been denominated an “ artificial ” breed, the Herefords
may be considered an aboriginal race, having been bred up to
their present state of perfection quite within their own blood.
Originally the Herefords were brown or red-brown, without
any white, but for nearly a century the white face has been a
never-failing characteristic of the breed. The improved Here-
fords, until late years, were of a light, almost yellowish, red ;
but the fashionable color of the present time is a dark blood-
red, white face and crops, and in most instances white dewlap.
What the Collings and Booths have done for the shorthorns,
Mr. Price has accomplished with the Herefords, and his name
will ever be honorably associated with them. The Hereford of
the present day is a magnificent animal, possessing in a marked
degree the propensity to lay on fat, particularly on the hind
quarters. So much is this the case that to the eye of a
practised judge they appear gross, and lack the beautiful sym-
metrical appearance so much a characteristic of the short-
horns. They are inferior milkers, and it has been observed that


their calves do not withstand the rough usage so well as the
Durhams. It is claimed for the Herefords that they are better
adapted for our coast lanfls than the shorthorns; and it has
been asserted that they mature earlier on our natural pastur-
age, being as a rule fit for the butcher at three years. It is
also claimed for them by their admirers that they travel better
to market than the shorthorns; but this is stoutly denied by
the shorthorn men. It cannot, however, be denied that if we
take the market prices as a guide, they are held in even greater
esteem by the butchers in these colonies than the shorthorns ;
although this is not the case at Smithfield. For purposes of
improving other breeds, the Herefords are in no respect equal
to the shorthorns.
Devons. —Like the Herefords, the Devons have been pre-
served pure from the aboriginal cattle inhabiting North and
South Devon. The breed were formerly known as the “ Middle
Horns.” They are considerably smaller than either of the two
previously described breeds, and were, until recently, compara-
tively little known in Australia. They are now, however, fast
rising into notice. It has been said that the grand secret of
breeding is to suit the breed to the soil and climate, and where
the fattening of cattle is limited solely to natural herbage, the
Devons would appear eminently suited to thrive where larger
and less hardy breeds cannot hold their own. It is believed by
many experienced cattle-owners that the Devons are well
adapted for our coast and mountainous runs. They are better
milkers than the Herefords. We have not yet had sufficient
experience of them in Australia to know whether they will
carry their flesh well to market; but the fact that next to the
Sussex they make the best and most active of workers, war-
rants the belief that this will be the case. In color the Devons
are dark-red without a spot of white. Their- skin is somewhat
thin but not delicately so, and they feel and handle like a glove.
They are more what a breeder would call “ pretty ” than hand-
some, with fine bone; but without that squareness of outline
so justly appreciated in the shorthorns and Herefords. For
many years the improvement of this breed was comparatively
neglected, but for a number of years past much care and
attention have been bestowed upon them in some parts of
England, and the “ Devon Herd Book ” has now a place in the
library of agricultural societies.
Polleys. —These hornless cattle are coming into favor in New


Zealand, and, to a lesser extent in Australia. They are gentle
and thrive well under the conditions that develope high class
shorthorns. The relative merit of the breeds, as beef stock,
may be gathered from the following details of a recent Smith-
field Club show The top weights were—Shorthorns, 23cwt.
Iqr. 71bs. ; Hereford, 23cwt. 201b5.; Sussex, 23cwt. 3qrs.
121bs. ; Highland, 21cwt. 3qr. IGlbs.; polled, 21cwt. 3qrs.
151b5.; Devon, 18cwt. 2qrs. 271bs. ; cross (shorthorn and
polled), 27cwt. It will thus be seen that this shorthorn-polley
cross topped the shorthorns and Herefordsby nearly 4cwt., and
the Devons by nearly Sicwt. To a large number of Austra-
lians, the color of the polled cattle would at first appear highly
objectionable ; but their introduction here is only a question of
time, and when their value comes to be tested by the ordeal
of account sales, the objection as to color will very soon vanish.
No attempt is made in these papers to notice the many breeds
of British cattle beyond those that are widely disseminated in
the United Kingdom, or have been introduced into Australia;
but any paper on the subject of cattle would be incomplete
without reference to those bred more particularly for the dairy.
Crosses. —By this term is not meant the indiscriminate use
of two or more varieties of cattle in the same herd, with the
hope of ultimately establishing a fixed breed midway between
the two. Any attempt in that direction will result, as it
always has done, in disappointment. Between certain breeds,
however, a first cross produces a better animal for the butcher
than even the very best pure varieties. It does not follow
that a cross between two of the largest varieties will result in
the production of the best and heaviest ox. On the contrary,
experience has shown that a cross between the shorthorn and
Hereford, although these are individually the two most valued
breeds, does not equal the cross between the shorthorn and
Devon, and is far inferior as a butcher’s ox to a first cross
with the shorthorn and Highland cattle. But unquestionably
the most valuable cross, both for the butcher and breeder,
is that between a shorthorn bull and the Aberdeen black-
polled cow. A reference to the reports of the Smithfield Club
shows will show that this cross has reigned supreme for many
years, not only as regards weight and the small proportion of
bone and offal; but the flesh, which is beautifully marbled,
is superior to any other known class of cattle, and they are
therefore held in the highest esteem in the London market.
Dairying Breeds. —The Ayrshires, Jerseys, Alderneys, and


their crosses, stand in the front rank for dairying purposes,
as they do in other lands. More will be seen of them when
dairying is discussed.
XVI.—SHEEP AND WOOL.
The Merino. —The origin of this
celebrated family of sheep is in-
volved in obscurity; but at and
from the time when they first
attracted the attention of nations
under their present family name,
they may be considered as indi-
genous to Spain. The Spanish
merinos were divided into two
grand families the Transhunv-
antes, or migratory sheep, which
were driven from the southern
provinces in April or May to the mountains in the north,
some 400 miles, and driven back again in the autumn; and
the Esiantes, or stationary sheep.
The first introduction of merino sheep into Australia took
place in 1797, and afforded an illustration of the hackneyed
saying, “ It’s an ill wind that blows no one good; ” for to the
circumstance of a Colonel Gordon, at the Cape of Good Hope
having shot himself, Australia was indebted for her first
shipment of merino sheep. They had been presented by the
King of Spain to the Dutch Government, and passed into the
possession of Colonel Gordon at the Cape, and at his death
were sold by his widow, and shipped in the war ships Reliance
and Supply for Sydney. They were of the Escurial breed,
and were considered very superior. On their arrival Captain
Macarthur purchased three rams and five ewes, and these
formed the basis of his celebrated Camden flock. In 1805,
Captain Macarthur, when in England, purchased some of the
Kew flock, which had been presented to George 111. by the
Spanish Government. Although inferior to Colonel Gordon’s
these were added to the Camden flock, and from these two
selections the name of Australia has gradually risen to the
first rank in the great wool trade of the world. Mr. Cox,
of Mulgoa, also purchased some of Colonel Gordon’s sheep,
but he does not appear to have been so successful with them


as Captain Macarthur. At a subsequent period, however,
having purchased the flock of Mr. Riley, of Raby, he added
some Rambouillet ewes from the French flock, and removed
them to Mudgee, and from this dates the origin of the now
celebrated Mudgee flocks.
The Australian Merino.—After sheep breeding had been
thoroughly established as the staple industry of Australia
many breeders imbibed the idea that improvements in their
flocks could only be effected by means of importations from
Spain or Germany, and for a considerable number of years
large ■ importations of Saxon-Merino, and Negrettis continued
to arrive annually, although in a few instances the Rambouillet
were preferred, in consequence of their larger carcase and
greater length of staple. It is creditable to the family of
Macarthur that they kept the Camden flock pure and free
from any of these importations. For a number of years so
great was the rage for imported sheep that, less than thirty
years ago, several hundred pounds each were willingly paid in
Sydney and Melbourne for rams from the Steiger and Hesse
Cassel flocks, which many of the same breeders would not now
admit into their flocks at any price. Some thirty or forty
years ago, however, several sheepowners, possessed of both
practical and scientific knowledge of the principles of breeding,
and being confirmed in the belief that the climate of Australia
was more favorable to the growth of fine wool than the more
rigorous European climates, determined on founding and
maintaining a purely Australian type of merinos. With this
object always in view, they made their selections as a basis on
which to work, and confined all future selections of stud sheep
to their own flocks. The sequel has given abundant evidence
of the soundness of this theory, for it is an undoubted fact
that all the best clips in Australia are those in which the
breeders have not gone beyond their own flocks for stud sheep
for many years. The name of Mr. James Shaw will always
be honorably remembered in connection with the establishment
of the pure Australian merino. It does appear most un-
accountable—looking at the subject with our present knowledge
of the laws of nature with respect to sheep breeding—that
this rage for imported sheep should have so long existed. It
was generally, nay universally, conceded that the climate of
Australia was more favorable to the growth of fine wool than
either Spain or Germany. Such being the case, the only
natural sequatur would be that the introduction of foreign


blood in our flocks could only have the effect of disturbing the
process of acclimatisation, and retarding the formation of a
purely Australian family type of merino. are, however,
few, if any, breeders now in the colonies who subscribe to the
doctrine of the necessity for importations of sheep of European
merino blood. The unqualified success of the Learmouths,
Shaws, and Bells of Victoria ; the Fishers and Murrays of
South Australia ; the Coxs and Bayleys of Now South Wales,
and the Gores, Bells, and others of Queensland, in establishing
and maintaining pure Australian merinos, solely by careful
selections within their own flocks—far superior to any in which
an opposite course has been pursued—has decided the question
at once and for ever, and, as a matter of fact, importations of
European merinos have entirely ceased. So far as Queensland
is concerned, no merinos have been imported from Europe,
with two unimportant exceptions, for years. With the cessa-
tion of importations, the family names, Saxon, Negritti,
Rambouillet, etc,,' may now be dropped, and the great family
name of Australian merino adopted. The wool of the Aus-
tralian merino varies in quality with the influence of climate
and pasturage, but it may be divided into two classes, comb-
ing and clothing. Clothing-wool is the class principally
grown ; but of late years it has been found that a large portion
of the country lying on the western slopes of the main range
favors the growth of a staple considerably longer than that
recognised by the manufacturer as clothing, hence many
breeders so situated have adopted, and with great success, the
growth of the longer combing wools. In the far inland and
salt bush districts a medium combing has been found profitable.
The coast lands have been found unsuitable for the merino,
and are gradually being brought under cattle.
The merino is not so much a farmer’s sheep as those larger
breeds hereafter to be described. This is partly owing to the
fact that the coast lands, on which settlement has principally
taken place, are unsuited to the merino. When, however,
under wise and judicious legislation, grazing farms of from
2000 to 5000 acres have been alienated in the interior, the
merino will be the mainstay of the settlers.
Long-wools—The Leicesters.— lt has been stated that the
merino is not a farmer’s sheep, that is, using the term in
contradistinction to the term grazier. The most profitable
sheep for the farmer, who cultivates a portion of his land and.
devotes only a limited portion to the depasturing of stock will


be those that combine the largest carcase and heaviest fleece,
with the property of arriving at early maturity ; the class of
sheep, in fact, that will give the largest and speediest return
for capital invested, and it is to the English varieties, or a
modification of them, that we must look for such an animal.
The merino, as is well known, does not reach maturity until
three or even four years old, whereas many of the English
varieties, or a cross with them, mature sufficiently for the
shambles at two years. The history of the magnificent race of
animals known as the Dishley or New Leicesters, dates from
about 1760, when Mr. Bakewell, of Dishley, succeeded in
shaping them from the large, ungainly animals, now known
in the history of this breed as the “Old Leicester.” Mr. Bake-
well appears to have made the matter of wool a secondary
consideration. Symmetry of shape, aptitude to fatten, and
the maximum of flesh with the minimum of offal, appears to
have been his steady aim. It has frequently been said that
the breeder, like the poet, is born, not made'. That Mr. Bake-
well was a master breeder, the magnificent race of animals
founded by him at Dishley conclusively show. Like all
successful breeders, Mr. Bakewell relied upon the great law
of nature in breeding, “ like begets like,” his practice being
to select and put the best rams to the best ewes, altogether
regardless of family relationship. Of all the classes and breeds
of sheep with which we are acquainted, the Leicester is the
handsomest. Lord Summerville remarks, with truth, in his
illustrations: “To such extreme perfection has the frame of
this animal being carried that one is lost in admiration at the
skill and good fortune of those who worked out such an
alteration. It would seem as if they had chalked out upon a
wall a form perfect in itself, and then had given it existence.”
For a number of years Leicesters have at various times been
imported into Australia, and have been successfully bred in
New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and New Zealand;
but it was not until 1868 that the breed was finally established,
and their value in crossing with the merino thoroughly demon-
strated in Queensland by Mr. F. J. C. Wildash, of Canning
Downs, who in that year purchased two superior imported
Leicester rams.
Lincolns.— Next to the Leicester, the Lincoln is the most
valuable of the long-wooled sheep. Although at one time a
distinct variety, the Lincolns have of late years been so
modified and intermixed with the Leicesters that they may


now be denominated a sub-variety of the latter. The Lincoln of
the present day is a larger sheep than the improved Leicester,
with a heavier fleece of very lustrous wool; so much so that
in some instances samples of Lincoln wool have been mistaken
for those of fine Angora mohair. The Lincoln, however, has
not the fine bone and head, nor the same extreme white and
beautiful silkiness of hair on the face and legs as the Leicester.
For purposes of crossing with the merino, however, it is con-
sidered superior to the Leicester, inasmuch as whilst giving an
equally large carcase, the fleece of the Lincoln-cwm-merino is
heavier and much more lustrous. They are, therefore, held in
great esteem by the Downs breeders.
The Cotswolds may be ranked next in importance to the
Lincolns; but although the largest of any known variety of
sheep, they are not on that account considered the most
suitable for these colonies. It may interest some to know
that the name of this family originated from the circumstance
of their having been housed in cots or sheds in winter, and
from being grazed over wolds or hilly grounds in summer.
The Cotswolds can be traced back as a pure and distinct variety
to an earlier date than any other breed of English sheep ; but
within the last quarter of a century they have been greatly
modified, and lost many of their original characteristics by
repeated infusions of the Leicester blood. The wool is exceed-
ingly coarse and open, and it has been found, in the Southern
colonies, that they do not amalgamate well with the Merino.
The only breeders of Cotswolds in Queensland, so far as we
know, are the Hon. James Taylor, of Toowoomba, and Mr. J.
\V. Haygarth, of Cannon Creek, Logan district. It is a
peculiarity of the three last described varieties that, when
fattened, the ewes are heavier than the wethers, by amounts
varying from lOlbs. to 401bs. It is to be observed, however,
that these remarks apply to the artificially-fed sheep of Smith-
field Market.
The Kentish, or Romney Marsh Sheep next claim attention,
and they possess additional interest to us from the fact that,
by recent experiments made by Mr. Lyell, of Western Port,
Victoria, it has been found that they have the power to resist
fluke and rot better than any other description of sheep, and
on this account they are considered the best class for the coast
lands of Australia, which may be said to be subject to these
diseases all along the south and eastern seaboard. The Romney
Marsh is a large sheep, carrying a heavy fleece of long staple.


but it lacks the deep round chest of the Leicester, and cannot
compare either with the latter or with the Lincoln for sym-
metry. Within the last few years three shipments of
these sheep have arrived in Queensland, two of which,
numbering about twenty, are the property of Messrs. Hodgson
and Ramsay, of Eton Vale, and one of the three ewes and
three rams to the consignment of Mr. John Oribb, of Brisbane.
The four classes above described belong to the long-wooled
varieties. Of the middle-wooled varieties several are found in
considerable numbers in the Southern Australian colonies.
The late Mr. Turner, of Helidon, Mr. H. P. Cardew, and
Mr. D. C. M'Connell, have each imported handsome specimens
of South Downs; and we understand that Mr. J. P. Jost, of
Brisbane, is a breeder of the same sheep on his estate, Jost’s
Vale, near Grandchester.
Sheep for Mutton.-—Of all the long-wooled—or, as the
Americans term them, the mutton-producing varieties—the
Leicester is undoubtedly entitled to first rank. As the Booth
tribe of shorthorn cattle have always been famous for the great
improvement their blood makes in a herd, so there are few
varieties of long-wools of the present day that have not been
indebted to the blood of the Dishley Leicesters for improve-
ment in shape and aptitude to fatten ; in fact, as has been
quaintly remarked, they have almost completely eaten up every
other long-wooled breed. The South Down
is a handsome sheep, with close fleece of com-
paratively fine wool, speckled face, and legs
dark, in some instances almost black. To one
whose eye has long been accustomed to the
Merinos, the South Down would probably be more fancied at
first sight than any other of the English breeds. Unlike the
classes previously described, the South Down has been handed
down to us pure, any attempt at crossing with larger varieties
having resulted in failure. To Mr. Ellman, of Glynde, in
Sussex, the credit of working the greatest improvement in this
breed is due. His mantle having fallen upon Mr. Jonas Webb,
the latter brought them up to as great a state of perfection as
we can conceive it possible for any class to arrive. It was
formerly thought that the South Downs would be well suited
to the higher lands in Australia, and consequently were at one
time extensively used in New England and Monaroo; but they
were superceded by the merino.
Cheviots. —There only remains one other distinct variety to


be noticed as likely to prove a good farmer’s sheep, namely,
the Cheviot. The fact of their inhabiting and thriving well
1 • ■ O O
on the precarious mountain pasturage of Scotland, must stamp
them as a very hardy race. The Cheviot of the present day is
a handsome animal, weighing from 1301bs. to 1501bs. ; it is
capable of enduring great privations, thriving equally well
under the same conditions with the hardy black-faced mountain
sheep. On this account, those who have had practical experi-
ence in their management in Scotland are of opinion that they
would be eminently suited to our broken, hilly country and
coast lands. The wool of the Cheviot is coarser than that of
the South Down; but when crossed with the merino the
progeny has been found little inferior to that of the Leicester,
except that the fleece presents an appearance of wanting yolk.
Crosses.— lt is found that a first cross between the merinos
and several of the English long-wooled varieties produces an
excellent cross-bred wool, and a valuable sheep for the butcher,
one that matures much earlier than the merino. As before
stated, the late Mr. Wildash was the first in Queensland to
demonstrate the value of such a cross some years ago, by
means of two large Leicester rams put to large-framed merino
ewes. Since that time at least twenty other sheep-owners
have embarked in the production of cross-breeds from either
the Leicester or Lincoln. The Leicester crosses are superior
in carcass to those of the Lincoln, whilst the latter excel the
former in length and lustre of wool. Both crosses mature
early, being fit for the butcher at from 16 to 18 months.
When these crosses were confined to a few breeders, very little
demand existed for cross wools ; since, however, large numbers
have embarked in its production in the different Australian
colonies, the cross-bred wool has been adapted by the manufac-
turers to special purposes ; a demand has sprung up for it, and
it now readily sells at from Is. Id. to Is. 3d. per lb. It should,
however, be clearly understood that only the first cross should
be sought for, the sire and dam on both sides being pure blood
of their respective families. Beyond this, results will be dis-
appointing. If ewes of a first or subsequent grade are bred
from, it should be to pure males, so as to breed back to the
pure stock on either side ; and if to Leicester or Lincoln rams,
the fourth or fifth generation will be tolerably pure for general
purposes. It has been said by an acknowledged authority on
sheep, Dr. Randall, of America, that “an attempt to unite the
fleece of the merino and the carcase of a Leicester, for instance,


by crosses between these breeds is an unqualified absurdity.”
No cross-bred males should therefore be used for stud purposes.
Sheep for the Farmers.— Where pasture
is suitable sheep will be found the most profit-
able stock for the farmer who cultivates a
portion of his land, inasmuch as sheep-dung
is a powerful fertiliser and easily applied by
folding the sheep on the land. They have
also an advantage over cattle in that—the
crosses at least—mature earlier, and give an annual return in
wool whilst arriving at maturity.
Classifying Wool.— The illustration shows the different
parts or sections of a Merino fleece. Sections 1 and 2 have
the finest, longest and strongest wools; sections 3 and 12,
short but close; 4, somewhat longer, but a shade lower
than 3 ; 5 and 6, good ; 8, lower still, and called the britch
or breech; 7, good length but slightly lower in quality than 1
and 2 ; 9, shorter, and loses vitality as compared with better
parts; 10, short and generally frowsey ; 11, shorter than 12 ;
13, the cap, dry and harsh ; 14, fribby and of little value;
9, 10, 11, 13 and 14, constitute the skirt.
Combing and Other Wools. —The difference between
combing, clothing, and other wools is in the length of staple.
A combing wool is seldom less thau T 1 inch. A desirable
arrangement or classification may be made as follows : —lst.


Super-combing from fleeces that have a soft, silky appearance,
strong and dense in the staple, a considerable length, and very
bright. 2nd. First combing from fleeces not so silky and dense
in the staple, but strong and bright. 3rd. Second combing,
coarse long wool, handling rather harshly. 4th. First clothing.
5 th. Second clothing. Gth. Dingy: that is, sandy, stained and
cotty fleeces. In shearing it is necessary that the wool be
cut as nearly as possible the same length all over. If the shearer
make a cut which is not quite so near the skin as the others,
he should not be allowed to take it off with a second cut, for
that piece of wool is of no use in the fleece, and if found there
reduces its .value ; but if left on the sheep, could be shorn off
the following year to better advantage. After the fleece is
shorn it should be spread inside down, on a table made of
battens placed an inch apart, that all the small pieces of wool
may fall below, and leave the fleece perfectly free from locks.
It then should be carefully skirted, the stained parts taken
off and kept by themselves; then the hind legs and britch,
which also should be kept separate, and called second
pieces; next the fore legs and neck, and any other wool which
is not of the same quality as the fleece. These should
also be kept by themselves and classed as first pieces. The
pieces may be divided into five classes, viz. : first pieces;
second pieces ; third, stained pieces; fourth, belly pieces;
fifth, locks. After the fleece has been properly skirted, it
should be rolled up, taking care to have the shoulder part on
the outside, as the best wool is on that part.
Australian Cross-bred Wools.—As a rule it may be stated
that in quoting cross-bred wools as having a good position
in the market, those sorts are meant which have a strong
if not a preponderating strain of Merino blood, and it is this
description which is attaining such a degree of popularity in
the European markets, that, notwithstanding the enormously
increased supplies, steadily but rapidly advancing from 23,000
bales offered in London during 1872 to 185,000 in 1889, the
demand is found to increase in at least a corresponding ratio.
The high-class cross-bred Australian wool must have a dis-
tinctive Merino cast, and not a mixture of several crosses.
The origin and support of this remarkable progression may
doubtless be found in that largely growing partiality for
woollen textures which has characterised popular taste in
Europe and America for some years past, and has recently
been manifested in an especial degree, a taste which is min-
J


istered to and expanded by the supply of such wools as those
now under notice, which, with length and strength of staple,
combine in their manufactured state a measure of softness in
handling which is well calculated to meet popular require-
ments, but is unattainable by the coarse long-wools, and those
of English growth, which these are to a large extent dis-
placing. To the same cause may probably be attributed the
fact that those useful and strong Merino wools, from a medium
to a fairly good description, have experienced, as compared
with former years, a relatively keener inquiry than those
of a more distinct merino quality; though, doubtless, the
revival of trade in France, which has a speciality for those
more delicate manufactures whose texture demands a peculiar
lightness and fineness in the raw material, will contribute
much to maintain our fine wools in the favorable position they
have so long held.
XVII.—INDIGENOUS GRASSES AND FODDER
PLANTS.
To the grasses and other forage plants indigenous to the
country, Australia owes no small share of her prosperity and
wealth. Yet the expression is common, and is made usually
in tones of disappointment and sorrow, that so little is known
of those plants further than is acknowledged concerning their
general excellence. There is but too much truth in the
observation, in so far as published information descriptive of
the native pasture plants is concerned. But, amongst the
pastoral classes, there is much general knowledge of a prac-
tical character on the subject; and in New South Wales,
Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia, scientific men have
devoted considerable care and attention to the more learned
aspect of the subject. Were this information available in
book form, it would be of very great value to those who may
desire to investigate and study the subject further, for either
scientific or practical purposes. To the credit of the youngest
colony of the group, Queensland, is due the greatest amount of
credit for investigation in the direction indicated. In that
colony the Board of Inquiry into Diseases of Plants and
Animals have done really effective service. But there is still
much need for attracting more attention to a subject which is
beyond a doubt amongst the most important for the general


welfare. As a contribution to what is known, practically, of
the habits and qualities of the grasses and forage plants, the
description of country in which they do best, and the fate which
is, unfortunately, befalling many of the very best of them,
the following is offered. Limited though investigation has
been as yet, two well-defined points have become evident to
those who have followed up the subject closely. They are—
That Australia has been, and is still, though to a lesser
extent, exceptionally rich in indigenous grasses and pasture
plants.
That changes very much for the worse are creeping over the
grazing prospects of the country, in so far as they are de-
pendent upon the native pastures.
A Decisive Test with Native Pasture.—ln order to apply a
test in a section of country much like Riverina both in the
nature of the soil and the indigenous pasture plants, the
author, some years since, had a very telling experiment worked
out—an experiment, it may be added, which is now common
practice with selectors and others who occupy portions of the
country in question. The land referred to had been made
absolutely bare by the combined effects of over-stocking with
sheep, dry weather, and the presence of immense numbers of
marsupials. The country was open, loamy plains, and had
been as rich in grasses and fodder plants in its palmy days as
were the plains of Riverina. Oattle first, and then sheep had
done immensely well on the country for over 25 years. Then
came exhaustion with alarming quickness. It was developed
all the more rapidly by the droves of kangaroo and wallaby
which infested it from scrubs and mountains with which the
country is bounded at no great distance. The experiment was
carried out upon a selection of 320 acres, which, although a
fine piece of open land, was close to the scrub. That selection
was fenced in with kangaroo netting, although during two
years previously scarcely a blade of grass or any other vegeta-
tion had been seen upon it. While the fencing was going up
jokes were heard regarding the certainty of bandicoots starving
upon the place, and it might have been said that the object of
the fencing was to prevent animals getting upon the selection
and dying there ! Yet on that very land, a few years before,
such grasses as the following—all of which are becoming scarce—
flourished in great plenty, and the poorest sort of cattle and
horses that got upon the run from near-at-hand townships


became “mud fat” in a short time. Amongst those grasses
were—
Valuable Native Grasses. —Authistiria Australis.—This is
of the numerous series known by the common name of kangaroo
grass ; it is one of the best, and in former years was amongst
the most widespread. While it was in plenty on good soil,
such are its drought-resisting capabilities that but, little was
heard of droughts and starvation. But it is not a fast grower,
and it suffered; and its absence is felt severely in sections of
the country where in former years it seemed impossible to
exhaust the land. The seed is not difficult to gather, and the
grass does well under cultivation.
Bromus arenarius, a grass in former years very abundant in
New South Wales, and a rich pasture plant, is an annual,
but specimens could scarcely be got on a Murrumbidgee run
during July, 1888, although this is a winter grower.
’'Elusine cruciata, an open country grass, found on loamy
plains. It is very rich and juicy, the stems becoming sweet
and sugary when the seed has opportunity to mature. Cattle
are very fond of this grass, and sheep hunt it to extermination
during dry weather. Specimens are obtained now with diffi-
culty in the Riverina country.
Chloris barbata, commonly termed blue grass, is naturally
very rich, and suffers greatly from over-stocking.
Andropogon refractus and pertusus, both powerful growers
and rich grasses in good country, and amongst the few which
revive when good seasons come after a time of exhaustion.
Are commonly called barley grasses.
Erianthus fulvus, the “ sugar grass ” of the old shepherds,
owing to the sweetness of the steins. One of the richest fodder
plants in existence.
Helopus annulatus, another rich, strong grass, which re-
covers several times after hard treatment.
Neurachne Mitchelliania, the “ mulga grass ” of stockmen,
and a variety which spreads as better sorts disappear, but
which is itself giving way by close grazing upon the very
richest plains country, where it ought to spread rapidly.
Authistiria avenacea, also a most valuable variety, but,
although a strong grower, and having a close hold upon good
land, it is becoming scarce in our pastures. Like the former,
it seeds freely, and might be cultivated extensively.
Panicum Mitchellii, the “ bread-grass,” of black-fellows, the
Mitchell grass of the west. A grand seeder that does well


when cultivated, and is very fattening for horses and cattle.
Sheep hunt it when young.
Panicum flavidum, “ black soil cow grass,” a strong, valuable
sort, and another of those which recover after exhaustion.
This grass is still spreading on the open plains country, but
must-in time suffer as the better sorts have.
Sporobolus diande and elongatus, both hardy, rich varieties.
Andropogon annulatus, the “ blue grass,” a most valuable
variety, and widespread on rich, land, but getting scarcer each
year on the older pastures.
Andropogon erianthoides, another very rich, sweet grass, both
while young and when at "maturity. Recovers wonderfully in
good weather after hard treatment.
How the Grasses recover Strength.—There were other good
grasses on the land referred to before the time of exhaustion
and excess of marsupials. During some years previously,
prairie grass {Broinus uniolides) has been grown on cultivated
land in the district, and as the case is usually, with this highly
valuable grass, when first introduced during good seasons in
rich country, it appeared in various places on the open country.
But there was no knowledge of any of it having been seen on
the piece of land in question. There was no change in the
weather (which had been very dry) during several months
before the fencing, or several months after. But heavy rain
came about Christmas, and in a few days a coating of green
was seen within the netting-surrounded 320 acres. Not so
outside. Miles around, and all up to where the scrub commenced,
continued as bare as before. Outside the fences the Kangaroos
wore tracks, which during the wet weather became deep ruts
in places, and to a person unaquainted with the herds of
marsupials travelling around in search of an entrance to the
young pasture which had thus opportunity to grow within
their view, the kangaroo-tracks might have been mistaken for
paths worn down by horses or cattle. The kangaroos suffered
severely during the first weeks of wet weather, and this, added
to their weakness from starvation during the drought, made
them so weak that numbers died in the tracks, and some were
caught in the meshes of the wire, and died. Scarcely any got
inside, and they were shot. The grass inside of the fence went
on growing very rapidly when it fairly got a start, and by the
middle of March the 320 acre selection was a sight. It was
comparable to a field of oats; for in addition to Andropogon
halepensis, a good, though rather coarse grass, which had not


been seen in quantity previously in the immediate vicinity,
there was a strong growth of the prairie grass Bromus
{uniolides ). Examination of the paddock gave the most
telling kind of proof of how the grasses on rich land will
recover when they have absolute rest and favorable growing
weather. But, good though the growth was, not a few of the
rich grasses and nearly all the herbs had disappeared, their
place being taken by the strong growers, but still really
valuable sorts mentioned, and by the prairie grass.
Fattening Qualities. —Then, touching the other point men-
tioned as becoming evident by investigation, the great natural
value of the indigenous pastures, we find ample proof of this
quality in the wool of Australia, and in the stamp of the
cattle and horses upon stations and farms where they are
in their prime. Unfortunately it so happens that residents in
towns have opportunity but rarely for judging of the excel-
lence of those cattle in their prime grass-fed condition. Long
distances of travel, with the harassment of the journey, added
to starvation from want of their natural feed, and from poor
supplies of water, tell a serious tale upon grass-fed stock ere
they reach the slaughtering-places of the cities.
Grasses as Indicators of Land for Cultivation.—As the
grasses are seen on our new and uncultivated soil, they tell
unmistakably how it is that sheep, cattle, and horses develop
very great perfection where the good grasses are. And the
grasses tell further whether the land is suitable for culti-
vation purposes. In climates where the seasons are regular,
where spring, summer, autumn, and winter follow with
regularity, annual plants are much more common than they
are with us. The habits of the grasses also differ in different
climates. Where moisture prevails, creeping grasses are more
abundant. All over Australia, with the few exceptional places
met where creeping grasses prevail, the rule is for our in-
digenous pastures to be of upright habit, and the plants, as a
rule, are of individual or isolated growth. Thus, tussocky
grasses, each standing apart by itself, are more prevalent than
the more dense, close-growing and creeping sorts, which go to
form sod and turf-pasture. Where grasses of that kind
abound, and amongst them are Bromus and Anthistria Aus-
tralis, Andropogon falcaius, Etusine cruciatia, Neurachne
Mitchelliana, Cynodon dactylon, and others, the seed is worthy
of collection, and of being extended in cultivation or by
scattering it on bare places during wet weather. The latter


named plant offers as good proof as need be that grasses can
be introduced which improve in the Australian climate.
Grasses indicate the Seasons.—When the peculiarities of our
grasses as indicators of the soil, the seasons, and the climate,
are better understood, there will be fewer complaints regarding
the unsuitability of portions of the country for farming pur-
poses. Large numbers of the grasses speak so plainly in this
respect, that they offer conclusive proof that without irrigation
to develop the vegetation of spring at the time of seed sowing,
it were folly to attempt growing crops where perennial grasses
only are sound. But though thus indicative of irregularity of
seasons, and of a capacity to grow and mature during whole
seasons without a shower of rain, those very grasses, and the
climate in which they grow, have proven unexceptionally
favourable for sheep and the production of the very best
quality of wool. One of the first requirements to the latter is
the presence of potash, in some form, in the feed of the
animals. Many, indeed nearly all the grasses mentioned in
the foregoing list, are rich in sugary matter in the stems, and
especially near to the soil. The seeds are rich in starchy
matter. And to the list may be added Anthistiria membrana-
cea, Avanacea Andropogongryllus, and others, with which much
might be done by selection and cultivation.
Classifying Country by the Grasses, etc. —In a rough, but by
no means ineffective manner, the grasses are classed in the bush
by those who have most to do with them—overseers, stock-
men, shepherds, drovers, carriers, and others. Their classifi-
cation is kangaroo-grass country, oat, blue, or barley-grass
country, salt-bush, and other country. Of the kangaroo-grasses,
Anthistiria Australis is the central or main figure. It is a
variety of great .value, not only for its grazing qualities, but as
indicating the character and quality of the soil in which it may
be growing. On the rich plains of the west this grand grass,
in former years, stood in masses which have been compared to
fields of grain. On poorer soil it is much smaller ; and in
quartzy mountain ranges it becomes wiry and a mere dwarf in
comparison, and has few of the characteristics which make it
a sweet nourishing grass on rich soil. It is disappearing
rapidly, unfortunately, from the older grazing districts, and
may disappear altogether unless more care is taken to conserve
the indigenous pastures. “ Blue-grass ”is a favourite name
with pastoralists, teamsters, and others, and several very ex-
cellent varieties pass under that general title. The term is


applied only to really good country. Andropogon refractus is
one of the best and most hardy of those so-called blue grasses.
While young, it contains a pleasant oily matter and is much
sought after by sheep. When older, they do not hunt it so
closely, and the grass has opportunity to seed. When well
grown this grass indicates rich soil, and when freely in seed it
is evident that a season of from six to twelve months of dry
weather has been experienced. Andropogon erianthoides is
another very valuable sort, and since rain fell this year it has
re-appeared in quantity in the Murray, Murrumbidgee, and
other districts, where in former years it was in great plenty.
A. annulaius is also an excellent grass, and one of the best
when tested by cultivation. It is a national misfortune that
such valuable fodder plants should be gradually disappearing
because of neglect. In the North very rich varieties of An-
dropogon still give the pastures life and vigour, and abound in
plenty, several of which could be propagated extensively by
sowing. It is from the country where those rich grasses
abound that fat stock were sent in numbers during the recent
time of great scarcity. As “ barley grasses,” Andropogon pro-
cerus and A. pertusus are well defined. The latter is hardy
and holds its position well in rich open country, appearing again
and again, after being eaten down. Erianthus fulvus , Pen-
niseium glaucum, and Poa dbortiva are also good varieties
indicative of rich soil, and the stamp of permanent pasture
known as barley-grass country.
How to improve the Pastures.—ln the northern and warmer
western districts, couch-grass (Cynodon dactylon) is spreading,
and especially where land has been under cultivation. Where
grazing is the object in view, the hint might be taken, and
much could be done to extend this variety by jeed, and also by
portions of the grass itself. It is very hardy when it takes
hold, but becomes a nusiance in cultivated land. The “rib
grass ” is another variety which is spreading in land that has
been cultivated, and also in rich pasture land where the stronger
growing native grasses are disappearing. It is a valuable
addition to sheep pasture, and when seen in quantity is indi-
cative of rich land and a favorable season in so far as rain is
concerned. Considering the immense number of imported
grasses that have been tried in the colonies, it is surprising, on
first thoughts, how few of them are seen even on rich land,
where numbers of the very best grasses in the native pastures
are becoming weaker every year. The character of our climate


offers a solution of the difficulty. Strong and valuable as
many of the rye grasses, cock’s foot, timothy, the Kentucky
blue grass, and various of the trifoliums are, they succumb
with but rare exceptions during the long uncertain spells of
dry weather characteristic of portions of Australia. But when
even small areas are cultivated, and especially where water
can be applied, the introduced as well as the native pastures
are helped materially. The richer feed thus secured, soon
shows its effect, not on the stock only, but on the land they
graze as well. All grasses are surface feeders, and soon feel
the effects of any rich material left upon the surface. This,
indeed, is the way in which the grand pastures of the mother
land have gone on increasing in richness. By a modification
of the process, we can do much; that is, by cultivating such
areas as may be possible, and adding to the cultivated land,
as top dressing, any rich material available. In time, the
richness thus given the land is spread, in the droppings of
stock, over the pasture they graze.
Irrigation and the Native Grasses.—Reports from the irri-
gated districts are startling, almost, concerning the effects of
water upon the native pastures. On the margins of lucerne
paddocks, and in places where the overflow of water from
irrigated lands reached pieces of native pasture, the effect is
astonishing. Few had an idea of the growth of whicli the
pasture was capable until the effect of artificial watering was
seen. Unfortunately, it is not in many places in New South
Wales where water has been applied in this way, but were
seed sown where the young growth could be protected from
sheep or other stock for a season, the effect would scarcely fail
to be satisfactory. 'Of the grasses worthy of attention for
sowing are Bromus Australis (oaten grass), Andropogon
annulatus, erianthoides, Gryllus, halepensis, montanus, ner-
vosus, refractis, rottboellioides, Anthistiria Australis (Kan-
garoo grass), avenacea, ciliata and membranacea, Chloris
ventricosa, Danthonia pectinata, Danthonia lappacea, Eleusine
indioa, Festuca Billardierii, Helopus annulatus, Microleena
stipoides, Panicura speotabile (Phillips grass), loevinode, itali-
cum and parviflorum, Pea Brownii, coespitora and Chinenensis,
Cynodon dactylon, Alopecurus Geniculatus, and other grasses;
the native carrot (Daucus brachiatus) and saltbush are also
well worth encouraging, by scattering the seed in likely places
to secure growth. It would be a farther benefit were collect-
ions of seed made for sowing and cultivation. If this is not


done soon there will be cause for bitter regret when, by means
of irrigation, native pastures could be developed.
Amongst those who have exerted themselves'to make the
qualities of the native grasses known, are Baron Von Muller,
Dr. Woolls, Mr. F. M. Bailey, Mr. Gilfoyle, Fred. Turner,
Walter Hill, and others, and were their experiences collected,
they would add materially to what is known of the habits and
growth of several varieties not mentioned in the lists herein
given.
Ensilage or Hay from Native Grasses.—As an additional
recommendation to cut them for either purpose, it is found
that there comes a very superior aftergrowth or aftermath,
when the first cutting is removed. This particularly is the
case with another of the “ Mitchell grasses” (astrebla ely-
moides) for wherever this grass had been cut, say for thatching
or other purposes, there is an immediate spring of fresh growth,
sometimes, indeed, almost rivalling the spring after a fire.
The Kangaroo grasses also give a fine growth after cutting,
provided the grass is cut at the right time; that is, when it
has arrived at maturity, but is not withered. If rain should
fall then all the better, for the second growth equals the first
in quantity and surpasses it in quality. Also occasional cutting
is well-known to cause all grasses to grow a denser sward of
consequently thinner grass stems.
Trifolium Plants.—ln the very general deterioration of the
pastures going on, and the increase of less valuable varieties
of fodder plants for the richer sorts with which the pasture
lands are clothed in the natural state, the increase of trifolium
plants offer a striking exception. Instances of the kind can
be seen during good seasons in the south-western districts,
and possibly in other parts where the naturally rich herbage
has been grazed very nearly to the death by over stocking and
successions of dry seasons. Amongst them are “sheep clover,”
and a valuable grazing plant if it comes in quantity, and is not
exterminated as several valuable predecessors have been. It
is supposed to spring from the sheep droppings; more likely
it is propagated by birds from the drier lands of the north-
west. It is an indigenous plant, and could be increased.
“ Bird’s foot trefoil ” is also appearing in rich pasture land
around the Wagga and other districts, and, like the other,
could be propagated.
Fodder from Trees.—ln timber country, and also in the
thinly-wooded districts bordering upon the great plains, many


of the trees, notably what are known as kurrajong, boree,
mallee, and others, are of value as furnishing fodder in times
of scarcity. During the late drought cases of absolute star-
vation were staved off by cutting down the branches of trees,
upon ( which the animals managed to sustain life for a time.
Beyond a doubt much could be done in the way of increasing
these valuable trees, by allowing the young plants to grow,
and prevent their being eaten off ere they reach a size where
they would be able to withstand the attacks of stock upon
their branches.
Salt Bush.—Hardy as they are, the salt bush are more than
likely to follow the others unless changes are made in our
grazing system. The varieties of this valuable family are
numerous. They are easily propagated, and grow with but
moderate attention. With a spell for a year or so, when the
season for growth is any way favorable, the salt-bush would
extend again without further aid. A triplex vesicarium and
A. halinoides are very hardy and valuable sorts, as they were
in former times and are still, fortunately in some districts,
prolific and wide spread.
Winter and Spring Herbs.—The grazing herbs for which
the older pastures are famous during good growing winter and
spring seasons, appear in numbers during favorable spring
seasons. This may be owing to their greater rapidity of
growth, and their having opportunty to seed, and the seed
being carried about by animals. They are deep-rooters too,
as a rule, and have a good hold in rich soil, and during damp
weather. They do not appear in plenty at other times.
Amongst the more prominent and valuable of them are the
native ca,rrot {Daunts brachiatus). It is rich in oily matter,
and has an excellent effect upon animals suffering before its
appearance from dearth of juicy grazing. The native cress
(i Senebiera didgma) is also much relished, and comes as a
welcome bite in winter and spring..
Diseases of the Grasses, and Results.—There are causes
which lead to the decay and disappearance of the grasses,
aside from the effects' of over-stocking. Fungoid diseases of
various kinds attack them. Ergot is not uncommon, and has
very serious effects during some seasons, especially upon
female cattle and horses. To the effects of this could be traced
many of the losses to travelling stock especially, which are
frequently attributed to the presence of “ poison plants” in
the country through which the stock have been passing.


Amongst grasses of sweet growth, near to watercourses, ergot
is frequently present. Helopus annulaius, Paspalum Scro-
hicidatum (water couch-grass), Sporoholus Indicus, S. diander,
and S. elongatus, are amongst them. Burning, wasteful
though the process is, seems the only remedy for clearing off
such a very dangerous enemy, and it is a good precaution to
keep stock away from old grasses in low-lying situations, or in
dry watercourses, if they cannot be burnt off. The presence of
fungus enemies amongst old grasses is indicative of the pre-
sence of starch and sugar, while they were in a healthy state,
and which tend so materially to give the fattening properties
which many of the grasses have to an extraordinary degree.
With careful grazing in small paddocks, where the grasses are
eaten down evenly, and by the shepherding system which
clears off, by burning, all grass in which disease is detected, or
which the stock or sheep refuse to eat down, the presence of
fungus diseases are not felt so severely.
Malignant Weeds.—A brief reference to the malignant
weeds that are taking the place of so many valuable grasses
must bring this part of our subject to a conclusion. Amongst
them are Bathurst burr, prickly pear, the native acacia ( Cassia
sophera ) cobblers’ pegs ( Erigeron linifolia), purple top (Vita-
denia Australis), and several other pests, that are useless if not
dangerous. Time and money are being expended on the “ eradi-
cation” of some of the pests named, and with very doubtful re-
sults, for something will grow in the land, if it is at all good,
when rain falls; and when the rich grasess which held the first
places have disappeared, weeds and rubbish take their places.
The true means of checking the progress of the intruders is to
so rest and encourage the native pastures by manuring, sowing
seed, irrigation, and other means, so as to keep their natural
enemies, the weeds, in check.
XVIII.—AUSTRALIAN TIMBER TREES.
As indicators of soil, we have seen how the quality of land
is indicated by the grasses growing on it. Trees also have
their favorite soils and locations. Few countries are blessed
with more useful timber trees than Australia. Many of them,
as the cedars, pines, jarrah, sandal wood, and others, are very
valuable, and comparatively well known beyond the colonies;
others are suitable, in the first degree, for ship-building,


house-building, cabinet-making, wheel and coach-making, and
other purposes ; others, again, and by far the greater number,
although valuable for the various uses of bush life, are
scarcely known by those who cut down and burn them as
encumbrances in the way of the cultivator of the soil. The
rule holds good, or very nearly so, throughout the country,
that the softer the wood, as the cedars, beech, &c., the better
the soil in which it grows. The heaviest and best timber of
the gums (provided it is not stunted) is found on the richer
soils. Timber of slow growth is heavier and better than that
of rapid growth. The gums vary between 70 and 80 lbs. per
cubic foot; blood wood about 70. The pines range between'
50 and 60 lbs. per cubic foot. Through the action of Mr
Alexander Kethell, of Sydney, and as a means of encouraging’
the growth of indigenous timber, a nursery and propagating
grounds have been established at Gosford, where, and in the
mountain country beyond, Mr. McOoig, the curator, is doing
good work. A small volume, “ The Timber Trees of 17. S.
Wales,” by Arvid F. Milson, has been published from
Government Printing Office, and affords further information
on the subject.
XIX.—MEDICINAL PEANTS.
In this division, ginger, perhaps, ought to hold the first
place. For general usefulness the value of this root is pro-
verbial. It is a grateful stimulant and carminative that
seldom disagrees with the stomach. As explained in the
chapter dealing with the cultivation of ginger, IX.,it is amongst
the most agreeable preserves known, as it can be grown
wherever the climate is sufficiently warm, and under cover in
cooler localities; it deserves the most extended cultivation.
The Gums. —The Eucalyptus, peculiar to Australia, but
rapidly coming into favor over the semi-tropical world, are rich
in medicinal properties. The trees are readily propagated from
seeds or young plants, and in addition to the blue gum that
has become famous of late years in California,. Algeria, Italy,
and France, the family includes the smooth-leaved gum, red
and white gums, three varieties of iron-bark, and stringy-bark.
All the varieties have astringent properties ; the leaves of all
are rich in a powerfully odoriferous oil, and from the young or
true leaves of the blue and smooth-leaved varieties a powerful


tonic tincture is extracted, which is considered of great value
in cases of fever and prostration, for relieving pain, healing
wounds, &c. For these purposes bushmen usually make a tea
or poultice from the leaves, but extraction by means of pure
spirit is much more effective. Gum leaves are also effective for
keeping off vermin from poultry nests, for hanging at windows
to keep off flies, and upon the heads of horses for the same
purpose. As a means of checking dysentery, it is recom-
mended to—“ Take a few chips of bark of the blue gum tree,
of the size of a man’s finger. Extract the sap of the same by,
means of chewing. The effect is almost instantaneous.” Speak-
ing of the medicinal properties of the leaves of the spotted gum,
a planter records that one of his islanders was severely attacked
with dysentery, so much so that prompt action was necessary.
He thought of the leaves of this tree; he poured a little hot
water on some of them and gave it to the islander to drink, the
consequence being that the disease was speedily checked, and
he soon recovered. But the reason he thought of adopting Jhis
remedy is very important to settlers and others. He had found
that by giving calves, affected with scouring, a piece of the
gum of this tree—say about the size of a nutmeg—they quite
recovered, one dose being quite sufficient.
Opium Poppy.— This plant is cultivated over a large area of
country, but not extensively in any particular place. The true
opium poppy is papaver somniferum, the seed of which is
obtainable from seedsmen. Several varieties of the family are
grown, two of them being natives of Australia. Somniferum,
from which the opium of commerce is obtained, is a native of
the Levant. In this climate it grows from two to three feet
in height; the plant changes considerably in different soils, the
seeds on some soils being black and on others white, while the
color of the flowers vary between pure white and a decided
violet color. It is a heavy seed bearer, when the plants are
left for that purpose; but when the cultivation is neglected,
and weeds are permitted to check their vigor, they degenerate
rapidly, become tough and hairy on the stems, and are then of
no value. Both roots and stems contain a bitter nauseous
juice. The gum from which opium is made is obtained from
the seed head after the flowers fall, and before the seed has
time to ripen. It is found, in practice, that this gum varies
considerably in strength in different localities, although grown
from the same seed. To succeed with the crop, therefore, it is
necessary to select seed from the best plants, and to reserve


them for that purpose. The time for sowing is from June to
the end of August in the warmer districts, but in moist, warm,
localities, September is the better month. Frost does not
affect the poppy seriously. One who has had long experience
with the poppy in the southern districts, says:—“As soon as the
seed heads are formed, which in dry weather is a week or so
after the flower leaves fall, cut the outside skin of the heads
with a sharp knife, and either across directly or slanting across
the heads. Out early in the morning, and during the day the
milky juice of the seed heads flows out. In dry weather it
gathers as a gum upon the plants; in wet weather it trickles
down, and bits of banana leaf have to be laid under the cuts
to catch the juice. Towards evening it becomes a dark gummy-
looking substance. Scrape this together with a knife or any-
thing convenient. Take it home and work it over like dough ;
if moist, work it in the sun until it becomes a tough mass. In
dry weather it can be done in the house. The opium is then
rolled up in dry banana leaf, or corn husks, and is ready for
sale. The method of growing the plant for oil is just as simple :
it is allowed to stand until perfectly ripe. The capsules at this
stage contain an immense quantity of seed, and which is very'
liable to drop out. From this seed the oil is obtained, and it
must be gathered very carefully ; it is better to have a cloth
spread, and, as the plants are pulled, lean them over and shake
the seed out; it is then ready for the mill.”
Cinchona—Quinine. — Although none of the true cinchonas
have been found in Australia, there are several trees, notably
“ the bitter bark ” (apocynaceous), a fine upright tree reaching
forty-five feet in height in the rich scrub of Northern Queens-
land, is believed to contain quinine. Others with similar repu-
tation grow in numbers on the banks of the Logan, Albert, and
other rivers, and go by the name of quinine trees. The Peru-
vian bark of commerce and its active principle quinine, are
obtained from three trees of the natural order Oinchonacese;
they are the red bark or oblongifolia, the yellow or cordifolia,
and the pale or lancifolia. They are all natives of South
America. Of late years the great value of quinine as a
medical agent has induced the cultivation of the tree in India,
where it has done well. It is believed that the mountain scrub
soils of this country would also suit it. The cultivation of the
tree, as followed in the Government plantations in India, is
very similar to that of coffee. Quinine is extracted from the
bark, and the proportion of this drug fixes its value.


Sarsaparilla.—The root of commerce comes from South
America and the West India Islands. The best is from New
Granada. There are several varieties, all belonging to the
Smilax family. The roots only are used ; they are long and
ropey, and tied up in bundles for the purposes of transport.
The plants are more or less thorny, of trailing, vine-like habits ;
they delight in loose, rich soil—such as the mountain scrubs of
Australia ; and from the efforts made to produce sarsapalrilla
here, there is great reason to believe that in time it wi! be
grown in quantity. It is a valuable article of commerce and
medicine, llardenbergia Monophylla or “ Australian sarsapa-
rilla,” is a native of this country. Of late years the supply
of sarsaparilla root has fallen off, as but little care is taken to
propagate it. The Spanish-Americans and Indians who, up to
the present time, have supplied the article, being amongst the
most slovenly of cultivators. Their “ culture ” consists in not
digging up the stump ; in cutting and removing the roots from
only three sides; and, finally, in being able to take two or
three harvests a year. The method in use by Indians is, if
possible, more simple than this. They dig up the plant, root,
stump and all; and, although some of them replant, a part
dies, and the rest give no well-developed root under a year,
which makes only one harvest. In cultivation, the plant is
reproduced from the vine or stem when ripe, the roots are dug
out and exposed to the sun until they are quite dry. They
are then tied up in bundles, weighing from 12 to 20 lbs. each,
for export. The bundles of South America are packed in
bales, weighing from 80 to 100 lbs. or more, and imperfectly
covered with skins. To make the extract, the root is cleaned
with cold water, and sliced, and 1 oz is added to lime-water,
1 pint. Macerate for twelve hours in a covered vessel, with
occasional agitation, and strain. According to Mr. Battley,
lime-water is not so good a solvent for the constituents of
sarsaparilla-root as distilled water ; for 874 grains of the root
lost only 140 grains by maceration in lime-water, whereas the
same quantity of root lost 175 grains in distilled water.
Biiubard. —The valuable plant as known in the kitchen-
garden may either be grown from seed or roots. Rhubarb
must have rich, deep soil, and it should be in the shade at
least during the afternoons. Sow the seed in July or August;
it grows slowly at first, and is fit for planting out in July of
the following year. When plants are obtained, August is a
suitable time for setting them out. The plants should stand


about three feet apart each way. The rhubarb
belongs to the same family, and ought
warm and sheltered localities in this The 'medical
article is supposed to be obtained from several pi.th©' 1
plant; gardeners, however, believe that the qu
entirely upon the suitability of the soil to the plant, the age TST"
the root when dug, and its preparation.
Tumeric. —This plant has been grown in small quan-
tities for several years in the vicinity of Brisbane. Some
very fine roots were shown at a recent exhibition at Been-
leigh, on the southern coast. Several varieties are known;
that found to do the best in the colonies is the Bengal
turmeric, which produces handsome cylindrical roots. All
correspond in a greater or less degree with the characteristics of
ginger. They are used for making curry powder, curry paste,
starch, itc., and for several purposes in medicine.
Liquorice. —Another of the root crops that may be found
valuable in the time to come. The plant is a free grower in
free, rich, sandy loam, such as that considered suitable for
sarsaparilla; like it, the roots only are used. Plants are ob-
tained either by rooting the stems or taking the suckers that
spring from the crowns of the old plants. Plant out as soon
as the soil-heat is sufficiently strong, say in August, Sep-
tember, or October, about three feet each way. The roots
run deep in the ground ; they are used in medicine, for making
the liquorice of commerce, for brewing, &c.
Cinnamon. —The cinnamon is a hardy and handsome shrub.
It grows freely from cuttings or layers in moderately
good soil. The bark is used as spice, for making essences,
cordials, etc. Of the preparation of the spice, Mr. Hookings
says : “ Sticks as straight at possible, three or four feet long,
are cut from the bushes in large numbers, the thickest not
much greater than one’s thumb, the thinnest not so small as
one’s little finger ; these sticks are held by the operator in his
left hand, resting lengthways on his forearm, whilst, with a
sharp knife prepared for the purpose, he cuts the bark down
the entire length of the stick, and then peels it off, endeavoring
to retain the pieces of as great a length and breadth as
possible ; the strips of bark are then thoroughly dried in the
sun, rolled up into thin cylinders, the smaller being placed
within the larger, and packed for exportation. A spurious
camphor is prepared from the roots of this tree, but the
camphor of commerce is the produce of the cinnamonum cam-
K


phora. In order to preserve the cinnamon, black pepper is
sprinkled amongst the bales as they are shipped.
Peppermint and other Mints. —One of the best varieties
of the low-growing shrubs that yield peppermint is a native of
this country ; it abounds about old sheep yards, where cart
loads of it could be gathered at times. It is easily propagated
by setting out the roots in rich loose soil at any time of the
year. The active properties of peppermint depend upon an
essential oil, of which the plant yields by distillation a large
quantity. It is this essential oil which, in one form or other,
is the article used in medicine. Dissolved in spirits of wine,
and stained green with parsley, it makes the essence of pepper-
mint, so extensively sold in stamped bottles. Dissolved in
spirits of wine, without coloring, and mixed with gum, starch,
and sugar, it makes the grateful and refreshing confection
known as peppermint lozenges; and again, when a small
quantity of colorless essence is rubbed down with sugar, mixed
with water, and finally filtered through magnesia, it makes the
peppermint-water, or julep, so frequently used as a vehicle in
mixtures for the drugs combined with it. Formerly all these
medical waters were distilled from the plants or herbs from
which they obtained their names ; but now they are almost all
prepared in the above manner. Peppermint, in any of its
forms, is a warm, aromatic cordial, a carminative and stimu-
lant, and in cases of colic or flatulence is as useful and certain
a remedy as can be employed for the purpose. A few drops
of the essence of peppermint, and the same of the essence or
tincture of ginger, either in water or on a lump of sugar, is
generally found to afford immediate relief in cases of flatulence
and colic.
Spearmint, lavender, marjoram, thyme, rosemary, balm, and
horehound.—These plants all grow freely. They are propagated
by taking pieces from the root, and are used dry and as des-
cribed for peppermint. Horehound is tonic, mildly stimulant,
and, in large doses, laxative. Taken in the form of infusion,
it promotes the secretions of the skin and kidneys. It is a
favorite bush remedy for colds, &c., but is rarely employed by
medical practitioners.
Aloes.— Various subjects of this family are grown in the
colonies for ornament (some of them beautifully variegated) and
curiosity. Further than for mere experiment, as yet no use
has been made of their medicinal properties. They are amongst
the few plants that thrive luxuriantly in poor soil. They are


propagated from suckers at any period of the year, spring being
the best season for propagating. According to Porter, the
aloe perfoliata, and the aloe spicata, are the species from which
the aloes of commerce is obtained.
Peppee-Yielding Plants.— Cayenne.—The capsicum (from
a Greek word, to bite, on account of its biting qualities) is the
generic name of all the peppers from which the condiment
called cayenne is manufactured. They flourish in the tropics
as well as the semi-tropics. In England it is called Guinea
pepper ;in France, Foivre dClnde. It belongs to class 5, order
1 Linnrcus, Pentandria, Monogynia, and to the natural order
of Solanre, or, according to some, Luridte. In the long-podded,
the fruit varies, oblong fruit, divided taper fruit, and of these,
both red and yellow ; the heart-shaped has round hanging pods
of different sizes, some upright and round, and both red and
yellow. The bell pepper has its fruit three-celled. The bonnet
pepper is scarlet and has the top compressed like a bonnet.
The cherry pepper is a small plant; fruit, round, smooth, and
red. The olive pepper has oval fruit and the size of an olive.
The bird pepper has small berries ovate in shape and of the
size of currants. There is also a pepper called hen pepper,
from Antigua. Another called barberry pepper, from its
resemblance to that fruit. A great variety of these beautiful
plants for ornament in shrubberies or gardens, for their bright
green foliage and brilliant berries, may be obtained by plant-
ing the different sorts together and hybridising. The uses to
which these fruits may be applied are as follows: —First, for
making Ohili vinegar. A few, say an ounce, put into a pint of
white wine vinegar, or acetic acid, and strained off after a few
days, makes a delicious simple sauce for cold meats; and
diluted further still, a splendid gargle for ulcerated or sore
throats. The bird pepper, ripe, dried in the sun, pounded and
mixed with salt, kept in stoppered bottles, is known as Cayenne
butter. In the West Indies a few pods of this, or bonnet
pepper, mashed and mixed with a little lime-juice and Madeira
or sherry wine, poured over sliced cucumbers, eschalots, or
onions, cut small, makes what is called “Mandraw,” and is so
efficacious that it would provoke appetite in a surfeited aider-
man. These peppers are also very useful on a farm where
horses, from new corn or too much green food, get colic, and a
mild application in a drench will instantaneously stop the
griping pains. They are also useful as stimulants in poultices.
For pickling, the bell pepper is the best, and should be


gathered before quite ripe, whilst the flesh is soft; slit open
the seeds taken out, then soaked in salt-water two or three
days, and then drained and covered with boiling vinegar;
after being closely stopped two months, boil it in vinegar to
make it green. The Cayenne pepper of commerce is generally
made from the bird pepper, as also pepper pot. The ripe pods
are dried in the sun, and afterwards in an oven in an earthen
pot, with flour between the pods. When dry they are cleaned
from the flour and ground to fine powder. To every ounce
of this a pound of wheat flour is added, and made into
small cakes with leaven. These are baked, and cut into small
pieces, and baked again till as hard as biscuit, and then beaten
into powder and sifted. But the cayenne pepper that has been
manufactured in Queensland, has had no ingredient of any
kind beyond the simple pods of the bird pepper and the bar-
berry pepper before mentioned only, dried in the sun on iron
plates till it could be pulverised with the finger and thumb,
then ground in a coarse mill, afterwards in a finer mill, then
submitted again to the rays of the sun, and finally sifted
through muslin.
Black and White Pepper. —This, as a product is little
known in Australia. We are mostly indebted to Potter for
what is known of the cultivation and preparation of the plant:
“ The berries of the piper nigrum are the black and white
pepper of commerce. This is a perennial plant, with a creeping
or climbing stem of a dark color, which soon becomes woody,
and acquires considerable thickness. The leaves are heart-
shaped and pointed, with a glossy surface, and of a dark green
color. They have very little smell or pungency. The branches
are short and brittle, not projecting above two feet from the
stem, and separating readily at the joints. Clusters of small
white flowers are succeeded by round berries, green when
young, and turning to a bright red as they arrive at maturity.
They grow abundantly upon all the branches, resembling, in
form, clusters of grapes; but the berries grow distinct, and
more in the manner of currants or elderberries.” Few articles
suffer so much from adulteration as pepper. Rice, sago, and
similar ingredients are commonly ground to the same degree
as the pure pepper, and mixed with it to fit the taste of the
buyer, and the price he is prepared to pay for it.
Native Bramble. —lt is said that the tops of the bramble
made into an infusion, the same as tea, say a good handful in
a quart of water, seldom fails in curing bowel complaints.


The plant is called the wild raspberry here, and is well known
to old bushmen, but may not be so well known to new hands.
It grows on the banks of creeks and rivers, on flats, on the
edge of scrubs, and on mountain sides. J. Hogg v M.R.0.,
says: “ Blackberries, in some cases, have proved extremely
useful in dysentry ; to eat the berries is very healthful; tea
made of the sprigs and leaves is beneficial, and a syrup made
of the 'berries is still better. Blackberries have effected a
cure when all other means have failed.”
XX.—THE DAIRYING INTERESTS.
Dairy Oattle. —The Ayrshire, the Jersey, or Alderney,
and the Shorthorns and Devons, are the varieties held in most
esteem as milkers, and there are very excellent dairy herds of
crosses, in which the shorthorn has the lead. But there is a
strong tendency in favor of the pure breeds. The Jersey,
Alderney, and Kerry are more celebrated for the richness than
the quantity of their milk. The Ayrshire is a comparatively
large cow, yields a large supply of very rich milk, even on
indifferent pasture, and fattens well for the butcher. It has
been already stated that the shorthorns are capable milkers ;
but, in order to raise a superior class of dairy cattle from this
breed, it will be necessary to pursue the improvement with
this object almost solely in view. Let none but the very best
cows be bred from, always selecting the bulls from amongst
the calves of the very best milkers, and in this way, in the
course of a few generations, the milking property may become
habitual in the produce.
The Ayrshire is a masterpiece of soience-in-practice in cattle-
breeding. She is the dairy cow of to-day as she was of fifty
years since. Her excellence is recognised in the old world and
the new. She is the product of the old Scottish farming,
and has been improved in the face of immense difficulties which
meet dairying in poor country. But to be the milker she is,
the Ayrshire must be well kept. She is a giant to milk when
the food is given her. She is not the cow for poor grass and
neglect ; of this those who are desirous of seeing this animal
take the place in Australia to which she is entitled, may
rest assured. It is a truth worthy the attention of all who have
the admirable ambition to improve the breed of stock. But
it cannot be done unless there is feed available, in quality and


quantity, to keep up the blood. In the olden time, the native
country of this breed, as well as the remainder of Scotland,
was a poor place for farmers. Burns, in his quaint way, tells
us of the hardships of the Ayrshire farmers of his day. The
climate was cold and raw; the soil was wet, sour, and un-
productive. The dry hillsides were the only exceptions. There
the spring grasses were early, and comparatively rich, and as
the cattle that had been half starved during winter began to
make a little flesh, the natives saw that, if the feed could be
maintained, profitable dairying was within their reach. They
were an observant people, and some of them located on the
hilly pastures came to see that by getting their cows on the
best grass, and when the grass failed, providing for them
barley, turnips, and the few other things they could grow, the
cows gave milk of richer quality and greater quantity; and
that it was better, more convenient, and more profitable to
feed, shelter, and milk the cows, than to bleed them. The
best were gradually selected for the best treatment. The
process occupied some fifty years, while the country was being
drained, limed, and manured. Somewhere about the time
Waterloo was fought, the Ayrshire cow had earned her
reputation. As a first-class milker she holds it still, and she
is as able to hold it in Australia as in the dairies of London,
New York, or elsewhere.
The J erseys and Alderneys are the true Channel Island
breed of dairy stock. They came originally from Normanby,
are gentle, and thrive excellently in this country. For rich-
ness of milk, and as butter-yielders, they are very superior;
but, like the Ayrshires, and indeed, all good milkers, they
must have the feed, or they cannot give the milk. During
late years, and both in Great Britain and in America, many
breeders have tried to improve these cattle. So far, however,
they come back to the old stock, so well defined in the
native Normanbys and their descendants in the Channel
Islands. Any noticeable differences in any of those mentioned
appear to have arisen from local breeding. The colors range
from light fawn to dark brown and decided black, and the
same distinctive marks are common to. us in Australia, ever
since the late Mr. Edward Wilson made his selections of
Alderneys and sent them here. Possibly the most striking
differences, in appearance and color, as between Jerseys and
Guernseys have been brought out by the Americans, who for 40
years have been importing chiefly from Jersey—that being the


largest territory and having most cattle to spare. The Jerseys
are the smallest of the breed ; they look the most lean and angu-
lar, but they give the rich milk common to all the family, when
well fed. The Guernseys are 20 per cent, heavier than the Jer-
seys, of nearly the same anatomical shape, and of similar color,
both being chiefly fawn or light yellow, mingled more or less with
white, squirrel grey, or smoky brown, and occasionally splashed
with streaks of brown. The Guernseys, for their greater weight
yield more milk and butter than the others, and carry more
flesh. The Alderneys proper have or had much more black,
some being nearly all black, with just a steel grey or a few
yellow hairs running through. But, as between the use the
whole breed make of the feed they eat and the rich quality of
their milk, the differences are not marked to any extent. In
the Australian milking cow of the future, for butter-yielding
purposes, the blood of this strain is likely to come out promi-
nently.
The Devons come nearest the Channel Islanders for rich-
ness of milk; but, unlike the famous breeds named, they are
not reliable dairy stock. Very desirable crosses, however, are
got, having the Devon and also the shorthorn strains. But
all through the breeds, feed comes in as the first requirement
for successful dairying, be it for milk only, or for butter, or
cheese. Of the indications of a good milker, of any of the
breeds, the following points are worthy of attention:—
She’s long in her face, she’s fine in her horn,
She’ll quickly get fat, with cake or with corn ;
She’s clean in her jaws and full in her chine,
She’s heavy in flank and wide in her loin.
She’s broad in her ribs and long in her rump ;
A straight and flat back, without ever a hump;
She’s wide in her hips and calm in her eyes,
She’s fine in her shoulders and thin in her thighs.
She’s light in her neck and small in her tail,
She’s wide in her breast and good at the pail,
She’s fine in her bone, and silky of skin,
She’s a grazier’s without and a milker within.
Milk-giving Indications. —What constitutes a perfect
udder in a cow is largely a matter of taste and judgment, as
regards external form. Different breeds of cows exhibit differ-
ent characteristic shapes of both udders and teats. This is
natural, and it was to be expected that udders would vary in


form as much as the cows themselves do. A cow’s udder, when
the animal is sound, has four perfect teats, and in cases she
may also have one to three rudi-
mentary ones. The four teats
each communicate with a gland
in which the milk is secreted
out of the blood. This gland, in
the upper portions, seems to
be very solid, almost like liver,
but it becomes more open in its
structure below, as tubes and
channels for conveying away
the milk are required. Just
above the teat the principal con-
duits converge, and form an
irregular cavity of compara-
tively small size. When we take
the view, which is the true
MILK-GIVING INDICATIONS.
one, that the udder is the laboratory in which milk is made,
the shape is important. Judged by its anatomy, the larger
the gland the more milk should be secreted (which is not
saying that the largest udders always give most milk). We
know certainly that a large udder is more conveniently carried
when it runs out well in front, and extends up behind, than
when it is pot-shaped and fills the whole space between the
thighs, so that in walking it rubs against them and becomes
chafed and sore, or when it is baggy and swings from side to
side. The glandular or secreting substance of the udder occu-
pies the internal portion of the vessel, except a very small part
surrounding the base of each teat. The perfect udder, thus
regarded externally, consists of four quarters, each having one
teat, the forward quarters extending far forward under the
belly, and the rear quarters extending backwards and upwards.
It should be capable of holding much milk. The teats should
be of even size, and large enough to be conveniently grasped
by the hand. When they are evenly and squarely placed, the
form is about right. The general texture of the skin of both
teats and udder should be soft and thin, and the udder covered
with fine silky hair. These general features are, as to form,
indicated in the accompanying sketch. The quarters are
clearly seen ; the most desirable and capacious form of the
fore-udder, and the manner in which a well-formed udder ex-
tends up behind, between, and not interfering with the thighs.


Of course, it requires an enormous flow of fluid to the udder,
and proportionally large vessels to convey the milk away. The
in-flowing fluid comes in arteries, which are so deep-seated as
not to be observable, but the veins, which take it from the
udder, are upon the surface, and may be clearly seen. They
pass forward from the fore-udder, meander more or less over
the abdomen, and enter the abdominal walls by one or several
passages, on each side of the medial line. It is in accordance
with universal observation, that the size, length, and numerous
corrugations of these milk veins bear tolerably definite relation
to the amount of milk which the udder is capable of secreting,
and, of course, the animal must be absorbing sufficient food,
of quality and quantity to supply the material of which milk
is made. In large milkers, milk-veins, apparently coming from
the rear-udder, are often seen upon the upper portion of the
perinaaum, just below the vulva. Both these classes of veins
are indicated in the engraving, and, are important factors in
judging of the ability of a cow to secrete milk.
Milk and Butter.—How to Milk.—The quantity of milk
that a cow gives depends much upon the mode, time, and re-
MILKING IN COMFORT.
gularity of milking. Cows do best that have one regular
milker, and the time of milking should be carefully attended
to, and not to be subject to variations from day to day. The
udder should be cleaned ; in case of any dirt on, it should be


cleansed by washing with a cloth and water. "Wetting the
hands and teats with milk before milking is a very bad prac-
MILKING MACHINE.
tice, both for the comfort of the animal and the cleanliness of
the milk. The milker should have short finger nails, for long
nails will be sure to hurt the teats and cause irritation to the
cow. There are two methods of milking. The one may be
called stripping or catching the teat between the finger and
thumb and stripping down the whole length of the teat. This
plan is not to be recommended. The better way is to grasp
the teats, one in each hand, diagonally
across the bag, and press out the milk,
the second, third, and fourth fingers
doing the main work, while the upper
portion of the hand and first finger
prevent the milk from returning to the
udder. The milk should be drawn
rapidly, and the udder completely
emptied of its contents. In the flush
of the season, or when cows are yield
ing the most milk, from eleven to
twelve cows per [hour will be about the
rate for a competent hand; but a
A HANDY BAIL.
good deal depends upon the freedom or stiffness with which
the cow gives her milk—a feature of much importance when
purchasing or breeding milkers. When a cow has her calf
taken from her, she will often hold up the milk, appa-
rently for the purpose of saving it for her offspring. It re


quires kindness and patience to overcome this very natural
desire in the cow. The operation of milking is pleasant for
the animal, and, if she is given a feed while being milked, her
attention will be so diverted that she yields without remember-
bering her calf. It is important to milk the cow dry from the
first, as retention of milk in the udder injures it and tends to
decrease the yield.
Milking Machines.—We illustrate one of the best. The
idea is to insert tubes into the teats, and get the flow of milk
by natural exhaustion. All attempts of the kind meet such
serious drawbacks that they have not been successful. So
far, next to the calf, the human hands of a friendly milker
form the best milking-machine.
Dairying for Milk or for Butter.—lt matters little which of
the branches we want milk for. There must be quality as
well as quantity, and without the feed we cannot have rich
milk, no matter what breed of cows we have ; the quality of
the milk is in exact proportion to the quality of the feed given.
Let us take the average dairy cow that furnishes milk about
towns, for example. She travels all day over the average
quality of pasture. This at its best is not rich, and that best
is from four to six months of the year, from November to
April—a month earlier or later, as the case may be. During
that time her milk is moderately rich ; it yields the standard
proportion of cream, and butter is easily made from it. Then
comes cold and dry weather, when any little nourishment in
the grass is seized on for the support of the life of the animal,
for nature satisfies her own demand first. The remainder goes
to milk, and a very thin watery compound it soon becomes.
There is no immediate necessity for going into chemical analy-
sis to test the quality. There is a very fair laboratory in the
churn ; when that fails to render butter the cows are under-
fed. There is no doubt of it, and the milk is poor; it has
very little nourishment. Anyone who has a doubt can test it.
It is not advantageous for anyone to keep cows, or a single
cow, unless there is enough feed for it. That being assured,
we can set about dairying from the best available breeds of
cattle. The quality and quantity of milk now supplied in our
towns show that these points in successful dairying—quality
of stock, quality and quantity of feed, and proper appliances
for dairying, including shelter from perishing weather—are
becoming better and better understood.


A Comfortable Cow Stall.—The following design for a cow-
stall has been found to give
satisfaction. The slatted hay-
manger stops two feet above
the floor, and under it is a
feed trough, made by set-
ting a six-inch board on
edge three feet from the wall.
A round log about four
indies in diameter is seen in
front of the cow’s hind feet
when she is standing, and
the space between the log and the trough is filled with bedding.
When the cow lies down she will step .forward upon the
bedding.
THE CREAM SEPARATOR.
The Factory System for Butter-making.—lt is to the credit
of our dairymen that they were amongst the first to entertain
the feasibility of the factory system. For this change New
South Wales is largely indebted to the efforts of Mr. D. L.
Dymock, of Kiama. The system so well advocated by him is
spreading over the districts that are found suitable for butter
dairying business. The system is both co-operative and pro-
prietory. The milk is taken over from the dairymen as
quickly as possible after it is got from the cows, and is paid
for, according to the ruling price of butter ; an ordinarily fair
calculation to all parties being that 251bs. of milk, or 2-1
gallons, should yield lib. of butter. This is very close to a


correct estimate, as worked out by careful analysis of milk
from fairly well-fed cows—milk that will yield its cream by
either the old method of setting in pans or by the more accu-
rate centrifugal cream extractor, now in general the
factories, and also in proprietory dairies.
CREAM SEPARATOR.—INTERIOR OF MACHINE.
Cream Separating Machines.—They are of different pat-
terns, but all get at the
result of separating the
cream from the milk in the
same way. The cream or
butter particles of new-milk
are seen floating in the more
watery mass. They are the
lightest part of the milk,
and rise to the surface of
their own gravity when
milk is set in pans. This
operation is completed,
almost instantly, by the
creaming or separator
machine. In operation, the
milk, when properly
strained, runs in a steady
stream into the top of the
separator, and the heavier
portion —in reality the
skimmed milk—is thrown
to the outside of the ma-
chine, and is discharged in
HAND CREAM SEPARATOR.


a steady stream. The cream meanwhile is gathering in an in-
ner layer,and is separated in a separate stream. Amongst the
advantages of the system, it is more cleanly, everything heavier
than cream is extracted promptly, and very curious substances
are thus seen to be present in milk, whether coming from the
poor condition of the animals, from poverty of feed, from dirty
milking, bad water, exposure to excessive cold or rain, or other
causes, need not be followed at this stage. The evils of con-
tact from flies, dust, ike., that can scarcely be avoided when
milk is set out to get the cream to rise in pans, are also over-
come.
From Cream to Butter.—Chemistry and Practice.—The
whole of the operations, from the time of milking to the pro-
duction of butter, are accomplished in the factories, as a rule,
during the cool of the morning—a change, indeed, from the
time when the whole day, and often the night, had to be
occupied in milking, creaming, churning, &c., by the dairyman
and his family. The process allows us to see that the fatty
matter in milk is not uniform; a part of it consists of the
essential oil of the grasses, and which gives the nutty flavor
to butter and cheese. These exist in small quantity and in a
separate and uncombined condition, and may be separated from
the cream by treatment with ether. The bulk of the cream
consists of minute globules of fat in the form of an emulsion
with albuminous matter and water, and covered with a thin
albuminous envelope. The existence of this envelope is a
reality. As an evidence of the tendency in the secretion of
milk to coat over the globules, microscopic examination of
one large globule with several smaller ones inside, with a
portion of the envelope broken off and looped over on the
side of the globule, explains the matter clearly. The globules
of cream contain yellow and white fat—olein and margarin—
in the same envelope. To get off the envelope and leave
these little specks of mixed unbroken and unaltered is what
we desire in churning. These skins, so to call them, can be
got off in two ways; one is. by wearing them off by concussion,
as is done by factory churns, when the cream is sweet; the other
is to loosen and peel them off, which is done by souring. The
watery part of the envelopes separates from the solid part by
souring, just as it does from the curd or solid of milk, and
the envelope shrinks and cracks and peels off with little
effort, very much as the bark is loosened and peels easily from
the body of a tree by partial decay. By using a dash-churn


with a dasher that will fill three-fourths of the section of the
churn, the cream is subjected to a yielding pressure at each
stroke, and the sacks are peeled off with the least injury to
the globules. By wearing the sacks off as is done when a
dash is used that is so small as not to insure something of
pressure on the cream, and as is done in most of the 8000
patent devices for churning, the skins of the larger globules
wear off first because they meet with the most friction, and
the work is done unevenly. If the churning is continued till
the small globules “come,” the larger ones will be over-
churned, and the butter become greasy. Relatively, there is
often as much difference in the size of the globules in the
milk of different cows as there is between cannon balls, musket
balls, and shot; and hence, when the work is done by wearing
off, it is done very unequally. Just souring enough to effect
coagulation is best. Too much souring produces new products
and injures the butter, and makes the churning more difficult.
But, by the use of the litmus test, this point becomes a very
simple matter.
Butter-making Machinery. —To perform efficiently the
churning and the subsequent process of mechanically removing
the buttermilk, the following rules should be borne in mind:—
1. The cream should be
churned at a temperature
of 58 or 60 degrees if at
all practicable ; though, in
the colonies, butter is often
made in a temperature
above 70 degrees. During
very hot weather it is
always better to lessen the
speed of the churn when
the butter begins to form.
2. If during the churning
the temperature should in-
crease, it must be lowered
either by adding very cold
skimmed milk or water, as
cold as possible. 3. As
soon as the butterisformed,
i.e., when it is in a granu-
lated state, and there is
actual separation of the
HOME MADE BUTTER-WORKER.


butter from the buttermilk, the
churning must be stopped at
once. 4. If the cream has been
churned at 58 degrees, or at
most 62 degrees, that is to say,
if the mass of butter has not a
higher temperature than 62
degrees, it may be put into the
Centrifugal butter-worker with-
out any washing ; this is the
Danish system, and recommen-
ded as the best. 5. Should it be
preferred to wash the butter in-
stead of following the Danish
BUTTER-WORKER.
system,then the buttermilk should be allowed to run out by the
tap or plug placed on the lower part of the churn. Fill the churn
with cold water and let it run from the tap in the same way
as the buttermilk ; fill up again with the same quantity of
water, and so on three or four times until the water runs out
quite clear. It is, of course, essential not to give the churn
more than two or three turns, otherwise the butter will be
formed into a lump, and retain the buttermilk in the mass.
The object in changing the water is not only for the purpose
of washing the butter, but because, when the water is of a
lower temperature it hardens the butter and makes it in a fit
condition for the butter-worker or the centrifugal machine.
The butter thus obtained is compact and dry, free from cavi-
ties, and from those drops of whitish water always present in
the very best butter not mechanically treated in butter-making
machine, and which are a cause that prevents good butter
from keeping.
Various butter-workers are in use. In the factories the
butter is not handled at any stage. The object of all the
machines is to separate buttermilk from the butter, and pres-
sure in some form has been used until recently, when
centrifugal force has been brought in for this purpose also.
The action of this latest of the dairy machines may be briefly
described : The butter, after leaving the churn, is, while still
in a granular state, placed—about 161bs. at a time—in a canvas
bag. This bag is placed in a metal cylinder, not unlike the
cream separator, but perforated with holes, lika a colander,
which, from motion commnuicated by a horizontal spindle, is
made to revolve rapidly—7oo to 800 turns per minute. The


result is that the buttermilk, or any other moisture the butter
may contain, is driven off into the outer case, whence it
passes out by the pipe, the butter being then in immediate
readiness for being worked up into pats of whatever shape
may be required. The whole operation only takes a few
minutes, and directly one lot of butter is dealt with another
may be put in. About l-|cwt. of butter it is claimed can be
dealt with in an hour.
CHEESE-MAKING.
Decided improvements have been made during late years in
cheese-making in this country. Skilled men from Britain
and America, with the best appliances of the cheese factory,
have been introduced. These appliances consist of vats, in
which the milk, curd, &c., is heated by steam to the tem-
perature necessary for carrying on operations in the best way—
cheese-makiug in this respect requiring really scientific treat-
ment. The Bega, Bodalla, Milton, and Moruya districts are,
consequently, famous for their cheese-factories, and the quality
of what they turn out. Good cheese is also made in various
other parts : the variety known as “ Cheddar,” a rich, creamy
cheese, made from whole, unskimmed milk, being in general
favor, both by cheese-makers and those who use cheese.
To Make First-class Cheese. —It may be accepted as settled,
that good, sound, indigenous pasture is the first requisite for
the cheese-maker. He can improve it by dressing with bone
manure, with salt, gypsum, or other fertiliser. And with a
backing of the cultivated grasses, with maize-meal, sweet
potatoes, pumpkins, or oats, either green or in hay, at the rate
of say one acre of feed that will be available all through the
year for each cow milked, and the usual skill in the dairy,
there is no reason why he should not make first-class cheese.
Our best cheese-making season extends from August until
the native grasses are exhausted for the season, say in May or
June. The weather is occasionally too hot, but the average
temperature is not opposed to this business, for the milk, as
it comes from the cow, is easily brought to the best tem-
perature for use, a strong point in its favor. Whole, un-
skimmed milk is the best for the cheese-maker in this country.
He must make rich, spicy cheese. It pays nobody to make
tasteless, leathery, or poor cheese. On an average, a gallon of
milk of good quality should yield 11b. of cheese; if the return
falls much below this, the maker has reason to ask himself
whether the business is paying.
L


The Rennet.—Next to good water for the cows, and good
milk as a consequence, good rennet is important in cheese-
making.. The stomach of the calf—the fourth, or digesting
stomach—gives the best rennet. The
stomachs of lambs and young pigs have
been used, but there are risks in using
them, and they do not give that richly
mild flavor liked in cheese. The calf
should not be less than three days old,
and probably ought to be five or six days
old, so that all the organs may be in
active and vigorous operation. It should
go without eating immediately before
being killed, for twelve to eighteen hours.
A good way is to feed at night, muzzle
the calf or put it where it cannot lick
dirt or get hold of straw, hay, or other
solid substance, and kill it some time
during the next forenoon. The stomach
should be removed as soon after killing
as possible, as decomposition begins very
soon. It should be turned inside out
CURING RENNET.
and carefully cleared of all food substances, but not washed,
and then well salted and stretched on a bow .or forked
stick, and hung in a cool dry place, or salt the ends well,
tie up one end, blow up the rennet like a bladder, close
the other end, and then hang up to dry. When dry, tie your
rennets up in bags—brown paper bags answer well—and keep
in a cool dry place until wanted. For use, take pure, sweet
whey and heat it to boiling, and remove the scum which rises;
then let it stand until it settles, and run off the clear whey,
leaving the sediment at the bottom of the vessel. When this
whey is cold and acid, soak the rennets in it, adding a little
salt, but only just sufficient to preserve them from tainting.
Of this liquid use enough, say five tablespoonsful, or 2J,- ozs.,
for each 20 gallons of milk, which should commence coagu-
lating the curd in fifteen minutes. But the precise quantity
depends upon the strength of the rennet, heat of the weather,
and many other considerations. On an average, it requires
about one good strong rennet to each gallon of whey thus pre-
pared. The mode of scalding the whey, so that it is not
scorched, is of some consequence. • Prepared rennet, put up in
sealed packages, is now in general use, and answers very well.


It is used in the same way as the former, in the liquid form,
and of about the strength, which requires about 5 tablespoons-
ful, or 2| ozs., for coagulating into curd 20 gallons of milkj
equal to 201bs. of cheese.
Color.—When color is used it is in a liquid state, and pre-
pfepared from the best Annatto, Hanson’s prepared coloring
and also the form known as Annattoine are well spoken of. It
is easy to reduce to a liquid state, and is put up in packages,'
accompanied by a recipe for its preparation and use in cheese-
making. One tablespoonful (4 oz.) is generally used for 20
gallons of milk.
Setting, Cutting, and Heating.—The milk—having been
cooled the night previous, and the cream prevented from rising
by frequent stirring—is usually about 65° in the morning.
Into this is run the morning’s milk, which is usually about
the same quantity as the night’s, and the temperature of the
whole is raised to about 84° in hot weather, and 90° in cool
weather, making a mean temperature of 85° for setting in mild
weather. The coloring liquid is first thoroughly incorporated
with the milk, and then sufficient rennet is added to cause
coagulation to begin in about fifteen minutes. A slight agita-
tion is kept up, until the milk begins to roll thick and heavy/
for the purpose of preventing the cream from separating; but
care must be taken not to stir too long, or a smooth, compact
mass of curd will be impossible, and a broken, spongy mass will
appear in its place, from which many of the fine particles will
be washed off in the whey, causing great waste. As soon as
the curd breaks smoothly across the finger, leaving the finger
clean, and clear whey settles in the broken place—say in 35
minutes from time of adding the rennet—the curd is fit to
cut. Then, the cutting should be done as quickly but as
gently as possible, first with the horizontal knife, length-wise
of the vat, then with the perpendicular knife, until the pieces
of curd are about the size of beans. If the milk is very sweet,
the pieces may be left coarser ■ if it shows age, and is working
rapidly, cut finer still, so as to secure even action of the heat
in a shorter space of time, and before the acid gets too much’
developed. Stir the curd gently, and only enough to prevent
packing, while raising the temperature of the whole mask'
gradually and steadily, but more or less rapidly, according to
the state of the milk, to 96°, 98°, or 100°, as experience shall
have determined to be the proper point for the district. Hold
the curd steadily at the desired point of temperature until the


action of the heat is nearly or quite complete, and acid, or just
a taste of sourness begins to show itself slightly. The use of
litmus test-paper is desirable at this stage, as it shows the first
trace of acid. When a curd-mill is in use, draw off all the
whey early, at least as soon as there are any signs of acid ;
raise one end of the vat, draw the curd away from the other
and pile it up along each side of the vat ; leave it to drain and
take on a little more acid, with occasionally cutting it length-
wise and across into convenient pieces to handle, and turning
it so as to air the bottom and inner portions and to give the
outer portions that have cooled somewhat the advantage of
more heat. When the whey that drains from it is unmis-
takably acid, or when an iron heated to a black heat and
applied to the curd will draw it out into fine threads a quarter
or half an inch long, commence to grind the curd as soon as
possible, and apply from -j to 4 lb. finest table salt to the curd
of each ten gallons of milk. It may then be filled into any
desired moulds at once and sent to press, or allowed to stand
and drain for an hour or so, before filling, according to tem-
perature, and what experience may prove to be the best
course.
Curd-Cutters, Grinding-Mill, Salting, &c.—-The work of
cutting can be done with a common table-knife, and still
better with a bent knife ; but to do it well, the curd-cutters
and the improved utensils now in general use are of great
advantage. To lower and raise the temperature of milk and
curd, the vessels are surrounded with cold or warm water, as
the case may be. One of the very best cooling appliances we
have seen for small quantities is of porous earthenware ; into
this the evening’s milk is put, and the vessel is surrounded
with wet cloths, or set in a shallow basin of water. This
reduces the temperature, during warm weather, to 65° in the
course of three hours. If the curds are not ground up, as
some of the very best makers now do, allow the whey to drain
off pretty well while thoroughly stirring and separating the
curd with the hands, and then apply, as evenly as possible,
from to Jib. of fine salt to each ten gallons of milk,
according to the state of the weather and the amount of whey
left to wash away the salt. Air the curd well and put it to
press, having regard to both the temperature of the curd and
the temperature of the atmosphere; 74° is a favorite tem-
perature. If put to press too warm in hot weather, the curd
will ferment in the centre of the cheese and cause it to lose


flavor. In cool weather the temperature must be left high
enough to enable you to make a smooth face to the cheese.
Pressing and Curing.—As pressing, in some form will
probably always be resorted to, it is a matter of a good deal of
importance to get the best and most convenient method. The
gang-press, with its improved iron vat or hoop, is in favor in
the factories. It is compact, economical, and does its work
satisfactorily. A great variety of presses are also in use, the
principle of which is the lever, weighted lightly at first, and
heavier as the pressing goes on. A very good press is made
by fixing a notch of wood to the wall of the room in which the
pressing is done ; the butt of a sapling is put under the notch,
and the sapling is then fixed to rest upon the cap of the
cheese-vat, the end being weighed as may be desired.
Temperature, Acid, ifec.—One of the most difficult things in
cheese-making is to determine the exact point where the heat
and acid should be arrested, and the salt applied to the curd.
Much depends on experience and judgment; some acquire the
skill in a few months, which others never reach it. No fixed
rule can be laid down, as the milk of different cows, and
of different localities, as well as of different years and different
seasons of the year, works differently. Each cheese-maker
must determine for himself or herself the degree of heat and
acid required for the time and place. The importance of
having curing-rooms, in which the temperature can be con-
trolled and kept between 70* and 80°, is beginning to be more
and more recognised, and more pains to secure this end are
taken in building for dairy purposes.
Factory Practice.—ln several of the most successful fac-
tories, the temperature preferred, before adding the rennet, is
about 90°; if below 85° the milk is warmed until the whole be
of the desired heat. This is considered an important point;
for if the milk be too cool when .the rennet is added, the curd
continues tender, and the cheese made from it is apt to bulge
out at the sides, and if it be too hot it may cause a swelling or
“ heaving” in the cheese, or become too spongy ; both are
defects, and operate against cheese in the market. The
rennet is then added to the milk, quantity being regulated by
the quality, as before remarked. When the milk is sufficiently
coagulated, the whey is drawn off and thoroughly squeezed
out. The curd is then cut into squares and gently pressed in
a perforated box made for the purpose ; after this, it is passed
through the curd-mill and is ready for salting. This last


process must be carefully performed, and will need not only
the assistance of weight and measure, but the best salt. The
Dutch use nearly an ounce of salt to a gallon of curd ; but
Australians are more partial to a mild-eating cheese, and
prefer that in which but half an ounce has been used to the
above quantity of curd, or even less.
Points in Cheese-making.—When the salt is added and
thoroughly intermixed, a clean cloth wrung out of warm water
to prevent the curd adhering, is placed inside the cheese vat,
and the almost powdered curd is pressed in by hand as firmly
as such power can do it, putting a round top of curd on,
bringing the ends of the cloth over all, and fastening them
into the edges of the vat with a block. Where small quantities
of special cheese are made, a favorite plan is to set the
new cheese before the fire, and, by frequently turning it for
two hours, gradually warm it with no other pressure than the
cap, and afterwards with a light weight of 20 or 30 lbs. Early
next morning it receives a dry cloth, and at this time, should
the weather be cool, the vat containing the cheese is again
warmed before the fire. Changing again takes place at 10
o’clock, and also at 2, and if everything has gone on well (the
condition is indicated by a uniform yellow color and an elastic
feel to the touch), it should be ready to take from the press
that afternoon. Some makers find that twelve or even twenty-
four hours longer tends to mature the cheese better; and
perhaps, for larger ones, this latter course may be advisable.
In some dairies, before the cheese is finally removed from the
press, it is put under pressure with a cloth wrung out of nearly
boiling water, to give tonghness to the skin. The cheese may
then be removed to the cheese-room, and turned daily for a
fortnight or three weeks, and afterwards at longer intervals,
as they become drier and firmer. There are several means of
securing a soft and rapidly-curing cheese, all of which com-
bined not only make a cheese soon ripe, but it does not keep.
These are—less heat, less acid, less salt, and more rennet.
The secrets of cheese-making are in the proper use and degree
of these several agents, so as to produce a firm, flaky, but not
crumbly, sweet-flavored article, that will improve for at least
a year, and melt in the mouth like butter, leaving a clean
sweet taste on the palate. Such a cheese will not be fit for
market in thirty days, or less. The cheese-maker knows how
to produce a long-keeping or rapidly-curing cheese, as may be
desired, at will. A good deal of judgment may also be exer


cised in the size of cheese made. For instance, a Cheddar, or
whole-milk cheese for family use, weighing about 6 lbs., is
coming into great favor in the Sydney market.
Chemistry of the Operations.—Milk should contain about
12 per cent, of solid matter, made up of sugars, phosphates,
&c., the proportions of which the chemist only can separate.
About 87 per cent, of genuine milk is water. It is becoming
more and more necessary that the precise qualities as well as
the quantity of the milk of each cow should be known to the
owner. The factories also should know the quality of each
man’s milk, and pay for it in proportion. Freshly-drawn milk,
so long as it remains much warmer than the air, may stand
unharmed, provided nothing but the pure air touches it. If a
vessel of cold milk is placed in warm air the effect will be re-
versed. When warm air touches cold milk the air becomes
condensed, and its capacity for holding moisture and odours is
so much diminished that it becomes unable to retain the load
it was carrying, and it quickly deposits its burden on the sur-
face of the milk or cream, to the injury of the latter. If a
pail of warm milk and one of cold milk are placed side by
side in the same room, one may be growing purer and the
other be injured at the same time, so much has the fact of
temperature to do with the absorbing power of milk. The
milk-sugar in the curd decomposes into lactic acid. The lactic
acid in turn acts on undecomposed sugar and forms butyric
acid, alcohol, and various gases. When the milk-sugar is
allowed to decompose before the whey is drawn, the lactic acid
sets free the fine oils and phosphates from the curd, and they
run off in the whey, thus damaging the quality of the cheese,
when, by drawing the whey before the decomposition has
commenced, the oils and phosphates do not get away. A
cheese, to be properly cured, should be exposed to a temper-
ature varying according to its age. For the first 12 or 15
days a temperature of 75 deg. is not likely to injure a well-
made cheese. The after-treatment is to rub the cheese with
butter or such other material as may be chosen. Rub cheese
freely, and turn daily or oftener to prevent drying or cracking.
If wrapping cloth around the cheese is preferred, then rubbing
with butter or cheese is unnecessary. From one to three
months’ time is necessary to cure cheese effectually. The
most suitable place for curing is where there is neither sun
nor draught, but plenty of fresh air.
Points in Dairying. —Milk to Butter. Milk is heavier


than water. A fair weight is 10 lbs. 2 ozs. for a gallon, and
the standard gallon is equal to 10 lbs. of pure water. Once a
week at least the milk from each cow might be weighed, and
the record kept in a book. It does not take long to test in
this way. If the cream could be measured also, the’ record
would be of great value, and at the end of a year the dairy-
man would discover such differences in the yield of his cows as
would enable him to improve his profits the following year by
probably 25 per cent. A good cow should give 8,000 lbs. of
milk per year, and, each 100 lbs. of milk 4 lbs. butter.
Cream churns best at a temperature of 65° to 68° F., and
the butter is formed in 15 minutes. The buttermilk should
be drawn off, cold water substituted; churn slowly four or
five turns, draw off, and repeat three times; last time for
salting use clean strong brine. Leave in churn for an hour if
weather is hot. Then take out with paddle ; work with
butter-worker. Never touch with hands.
Bad Flavors in Butter. —They are acquired simply enough.
Put either cream or milk or butter in a room along with the
substance that has any other flavor, and leave the articles
together for five minutes for a slight dose, or longer for a
strong one. By this simple plan the flavor of leather, kero-
sene, onions, cheese, bacon, soap, turpentine, or any other
substance is readily imparted to milk, cream, or butter. The
recipe has not been patented, nor is the process recommended.
Bad Flavors from Feed.—There is no known remedy for
lucerne, sorrel or other flavor in milk except keeping the
cows from such feed. Scalding to 145 degrees and then sud-
denly cooling will prolong its keeping twelve or more hours,
and will remove many objectionable odours, but will not drive
out the flavor or odour imparted by any of the onion family,
but it will abate them. The flavor arising from lucerne is
due to the richness of the feed in the green state. It is too
rich for milk, and should be given sparingly, or as hay.
Cooling the Best Preserving Agent.—The preservation of
milk by any other method than cooling is open to suspicion of
containing stuff that is risky, to say the least. No harmless
agent suffices for such a purpose. Cooling in a refrigerator
when first drawn will preserve milk in the sweet state, if it be
kept cold, and greatly retards souring under ordinary condi-
tions.
Warmth aids Milk-making.—Experience has shown that,
even in our favored climate, cows supplied with warm feed


and drink give one-third more milk than those allowed to
drink water at its natural winter temperature. The advan-
tages of feeding warm mashes of bran and meal in stimulating
milk production soon become evident. It is also true that the
butter product is increased by a warm shed or stable, food and
drink. It requires a good deal of animal heat to warm up
cold water in a cow, and this must be done whether or not any
more of the feed or heat is left to furnish cream and butter
globules in the milk.
The Pharaoh Oows still around.—Readers of biblical history
remember Pharaoh’s dream, wherein he saw seven lean kine
eat up seven fat ones. The Pharaoh sort of cows are still in
dairy herds. They give the smallest and poorest sort of milk,
and eat more food than they pay tor in the bucket. These
cows swallow up the profit on the others, and thus make loss
where there should be gain. If one cow yields 10,000 lbs. of
milk in a year, and another yields only 5,000, the last is a
Pharaoh cow, and should be put out.
XXI.—SILOING, ENSILAGE, HAY, &c.
The Silo and its Contents.—That green feed, as well as grain,
and other substances could be preserved in pits, or silos, is no
new discovery; but, of late years, and especially since the
introduction of the factory system in dairying, the subject has
received greater attention. The silo, as brought into use in
Europe and America, is an excavation or pit in the ground ;
considerable expense being incurred in making pits of this kind
water-tight. They were built of brick, laid in cement. In
New South Wales, silos of this elaborate sort have been laid
down ; but, when it became evident how suitable is the climate
for preserving feed, with as much moisture as possible in it, the
silos were simplified very much. For instance, excavations
were made in granitic and other porous soils, and in these
places feed has been stored upon the siloing principle, with
results as good as the best. In other places silos have been
made partly in the ground, and partly above the surface.
Barns, sheds, and other erections have been used, and stacks
above ground, of much the same form as haystacks, are in
favor. The object in view, in all cases, is to compress the stuff
sufficiently close to allow mild fermentation to set in, but to
prevent over-heating, and the fermentation and destruction


COMBINED SILO AND BARN.
A, Barn Space; B, Silo Pit; C, Brick Walls and Floor, laid in Cement.
sure to follow. The success of the operation depends very
much upon the two conditions : of expulsion of air from the
mass of forage ensiled, and secondly, upon keeping air out
when the ensilage is covered. Whatever may be put into a
silo, it should be thoroughly well trodden in, and rammed
down at the edges into a compact mass. The same rule
i applies to ensilage made
above ground. This is
greatly facilitated for
silo ensilage by passing
the material through a
chaff-cutter, as the long
stalks of uncut stuff
occupy a greater space
and offer more opportu-
nity for admitting air.
To secure the exclusion
of air, it has been found
useful to cover the mass
ENSILAGE STACK ABOVE GROUND.


with close-fitting boarded lids or shutters, in one or more divi-
sions. Air-tight roofs or covers have also been used with good
effect. Where a silo can be all filled at one time, and where
there is no intention of re-opening it for additions, dead weights
to press down the mass appear to be the most economical. But
where the coverings have to be removed to add more stuff to
make up for shrinkage, the value of mechanical appliances
becomes apparent. To avoid the necessity of refilling, a super-
silo, or false silo, removable at will, has been usefully em-
ployed. By filling to the top of this, sufficient space is allowed
so that the silo itself may still be full after shrinkage, which
should not amount to more than one-fourth of the bulk, if the
material be chopped and well trodden when first put in.
The Crops Available.—Corn, giving as it does, so very
much more feed than any other crop, is ranked first ; then
come wheat, rye, sorghum, lucerne, native grasses, cornstallA,
variegated thistles, &c. ; in fact, anything that affords food
for stock can be preserved in this way. Oats, because of
their qualities in milk-giving material, being the richest feed
of all. Those who put the stuff in whole report that if well
trodden down in filling and weighted on top, it keeps first-rate
if the silo is tight. If the fodder is at all green, the ensilage
will be so juicy as to soak and soften the butts, so that the
stuff comes out more evenly. When put in whole, the en-
silage has to be cut out with a hay-knife or broad axe in strips
a foot wide, when it is easily pitched out and greedily eaten.
A good farmer, who has tried cut ensilage, but of late years
put his corn-fodder in whole, says; “ This last season I put in
about 40 tons uncut in October; it was perfectly green and
very juicy when it went in. I opened it on March 10th,
and came near losing my dinner, because it smelled so. This
odour remained in the silo till all the top layer of ensilage,
which for about three inches was decayed, was removed, and
after that a person on entering the shed would never suspect
we had a silo there. I think the ensilage on top of uncut
stuff is more decayed than when cut, and in addition is a
little decayed around the edges ; for, instead of bulging out as
the cut ensilage will do, the whole ensilage has a tendency to
draw toward the centre in the act of settling, leaving the
outside exposed to the action of the air.
A Simple Contrivance for Moving Ensilage Stuff, Hay, Arc.
—The accompanying sketches represent a simple and useful
contrivance for moving green corn, Arc. It consists of a pole,


10 or 12 feet long, tapering to a point at one end. Near the
large end is a J-inch hole, by means of which a clevis is attached.
CORN-FODDER MOVER.
MOVING A BUNDLE.
A stout rope, 15 to 18 feet
long, 'is fastened by one
end to the whiflltree, and
at the other end is a ring
two inches in diameter.
When in use the pole is
thrust through the shock
or cock to be removed, the
rope is run through the
clevis, and over the top of
the pile, the ring being
slipped over the small end
of the pole. Then a horse
is attached -to the whiffle-
tree and started up. The
draught tightens the rope,
and binds all compactly to-
gether while it is moved.
If the clevis is provided with a small pulley-wheel or loose
sleeve of iron, itwould save friction and wear of the rope.
Ensilage from Native Herbage.—The problem of utilising
the overplus of natural grass in good seasons is one of the
greatest moment. After rain the grass and herbage grows
more rapidly than stock can consume it, and by far the greater
quantity is lost or becomes food for bush fires, or is trampled
into dust. The making of bush hay is expensive, is attended
with many risks, and only in special cases is the finished pro-
duct of any great value. Messrs. N. and P. Lamb, of Meri-
long Station, Liverpool Plains, have carried to a successful
issue some operations on a scale unprecedently large. During
the spring and early summer, there being an immense growth
of grass on the station owing to the wet season, mowing
machines and men were set to work to make ensilage. First,
some large pits (100 ft. by 12ft. by 10) were filled, but these
not proving nearly sufficient to hold the mass of cut stuff
available, a large quantity was piled in stacks on the ground.
In the latter case the grass was consolidated by being trampled
with horses. Altogether about 1500 tons were put up, and
converted into excellent fodder. In appearance, the stuff,
when opened out, seemed rather wet and of a nondescript
color, but it did not smell unpleasantly, and to stock, which


eat it greedily, it
proved very attractive.
It proves that the na-
tive grasses can be
preserved in this way,
as previous experi-
ments had been con-
fined to cultivated
crops. Messrs. Lamb’s
ensilage consists large-
ly of trefoil and nutri-
tious herbage, but be-
MOWER AT WORK.
sides these it contains a quantity of thistles and coarse
grasses. The stock, however, eat the ensilage without making
any selection, showing that the process improves the ranker
grasses without deteriorating the finer ones. The work of
getting and stacking it employed 27 men, three mowing
machines, and an American Acme hay-raker (see Chap. xvii).
Cost of Ensilage.—ln the case stated the cost of making
the ensilage was 4s. per ton, but with the appliances now
available, and the experience gained, they expect to be
able to cut, cart, and stack at a cost of 2s. 6d. per ton.
It is impossible to overrate the importance of an enter-
prise of this kind in a pastoral country. During the
recent drought station-holders had to purchase hundreds of
tons of dry fodder, at prices which must have proved
almost ruinous, in order
to keep their more valu-
able stock alive. But it is
now shown that where
the natural grasses grow
herbage luxuriantly, ensi-
lage can be stacked in
large quantities, and the
general adoption of the
practice will do much to
HORSE HAY-RAKE.
enhance the prosperity of the country.
Ensilage as Eeed.—Although disappointments have occurred
because of the extravagant claims made regarding the supe-
riority of ensilage in comparison with other kinds of feed, the
material still advances in the estimation of those who have
made it carefully. The advantages of the system are beyond
a doubt, for any available fodder stuff can be stored away in


any weather, and at the least cost for making feed ; and that
coarse, woody matter, is made more digestible is reasonable.
The quantities of corn and sorghum ensilage given to cows in
milk, may range between 30 and 60 lbs. daily; but, so far as
known, no minute tests as to what quantity answers best have
yet been made here. We can testify, however, that the ensi-
lage feed had markedly beneficial effects upon milking cows
while grass-feed was scarce.
Chemistry of the Operation.—Any changes made in the
silo are of a chemical character, and require close attention.
Fermentation can be regulated in two ways—by drying or
wilting out less or more of the natural sap of the cut stuff
before it is put in the silo or stack, and by shutting out the
air by means of pressure, got either by tramping in the stuff,
loading it above, or by rope pressure, as in the Johnson stack
apparatus. The more moisture there is in the stuff when put
up the less it is likely to heat, and the temperature can be so
regulated between 120 and 140 deg.—the point of safety in
green ferments. A very effective apparatus is being intro-
duced to aid in regulating the temperature. It is an auger,
with a handle so long that it can be sent six feet into a mass
of stuff. The handle is hollow right down to the boring point,
and into the handle a thermometer can be inserted as required,
and the temperature tested. With this aid, good stuff to'
operate on, and the knowledge that fermentation cannot go
on without air, the chemistry of ensilage-making becomes
simple enough. There is one other point worthy of attention.
Milking stock like a little sourness in their feed; it promotes
the secretion of milk. The stuff full of sap when put in is
most likely to sour a little. To make the sweeter feed, it may
be the better practice to let the stuff lie a little after it is
cut, in order-to get rid of some of the sap. That the fer-
mentation of ensilage between 120 and 140 deg. makes dry
stuff more digestible is a main feature of the change. Then,
in a dry season, it is a great advantage to have the sap in the
feed. Experiments and experiences of the past two years are
confirmatory that, if in the filling, or immediately thereafter,
a heat equal to about 130 deg. can be induced which shall per-
vade the mass in the silo, and then the silo or stack is tightly
closed, the ensilage will remain sweet until it is re-opened.
These results are attained by not too rapid filling, nor too
much tramping, the temperature being watched ; and as soon
as that of one layer or portion reaches, say 130 deg., another


layer of 3ft. or 4ft. in thickness may be added, levelled off,
packed a little around the sides, and left for a day or two to
heat in turn. Pits filled in this way turned out beautifully,
and the cattle, especially milch cows, have had healthful ex-
cellent feed, fragrant and sweet, and, of course, highly re-
lished. Heating of all plants is promoted by cutting, by
which the juices are exposed to the action of ferments, the
germs of which are almost universally distributed in the
atmosphere. The very fine cutting which used to be recom-
mended is probably unnecessary, but neither corn nor grass,
when packed whole, come into a uniform heat, and there is
then the risk of over-heating, mould, &c. This applies equally
to ensilage stacked above ground as to what is stored in pits.
Haymaking.—The value of hay, as feed, need not be under-
rated, in order to see the advantages of ensilage. Haymaking
requires skill, and machinery specially suitable. Then it suffers
from the risks of wet as well as excessively dry weather,
neither of which affect the cutting and storing of ensilage, in
either pits or stacks. Webster defines hay as dry grass, cured
for future use as food for animals. But it is as well to know,
that to preserve the valuable qualities of herbs or grasses, they
must first be wilted in the sun, and then dried in the shade,
and in the operation there is loss of flavor and of valuable
juices. “Make hay when the sun shines” means that the
grass should be stirred and wilted as quickly as possible after
being cut. It does not mean that it should be left bleaching
in the sun and dews two or three days after cutting, until it
has lost nearly all that is good for food, and has become much
as flax should be for the brake. The revolving rake seen in
the illustration, does good work in gathering up stuff either
for hay or ensilage.
Other Feeds available, Cob Meal included.—Bran is an excel-
lent feed ; but, to get all the benefit from it, to enable the
stomach of the cow to
digest it, the bran must
be cooked, or scalded,
at least, otherwise
there is great loss.
Maize-meal, with the
same treatment as
bran, enriches and in-
creases the flow of
milk. About 6 lbs.
REVOLVING HAY-RAKE.


of either, with ensilage or other feed, as much as the
animal can eat, makes ample feed for a cow giving milk
equal to 1 lb. of butter daily. Then meal made by grind-
ing the corn, cob and all, has long been in use and is
known to be economical feed. This has been proved by
those who have used both, and now we have the results of
recent experiments at the Kansas agricultural college, where
a variety of steers, 10 in number and “ two-years-old and past ”
have been fed, five on corn-meal and five on cob-meal, under
exact conditions, each tied in a stall four feet wide. Besides
the grain ration, each steer received 6 to 12 lbs. of fodder, the
latter ration being steadily diminished, while the amount of
meal was gradually increased ; the belief being that the best
results in full feeding are arrived at with the least consumption
of fodder. The experiment was continued through a period of
five months, the aim being to make an increase of flesh. The
first set of animals made a gain in the time of 1025 lbs., con-
suming 12,918 lbs. of cob-meal; the second set gained 1085
lbs. on 12,654 lbs. of corn-meal. The sets consumed almost
the same weights of the two kinds of meal, and the average
gain per steer was nearly the same in both instances, showing
plainly that cob-meal was instrumental in the formation of
flesh to a considerable extent. If we substract the cob 18 per
cent, from the weight fed the first series, we have 10,593 lbs.
of clear corn-meal as their total feed ; this, divided by the
pounds of feed yielding a pound of increase in the second
series, gives 90S lbs. as the meat product of the corn, and 117
lbs. of beef extra as the yield of the 2325 lbs. of ground cob
fed. A very noticeable feature in the experiments was the
entire absence of diarrhoea among the cob-fed steers, and the
fact that their appetites were seldom cloyed, while both
troubles were all too frequent where clear corn-meal was fed.
It has been clearly proved that while finely ground corn and
cobs are valuable and economical, ears but coarsely pulverised
are only imperfectly digested, and therefore wholly the oppo-
site. There are first-class cob-grinding machines now offered,
which grind both cob and corn perfectly.
Warmth and Feeding.—This is a most important point, and
to dairymen in particular. The first call upon food is to
maintain the animal heat, and even in our favored climate
cows exposed to the cold of winter fall off in their milk, in its
quality and quantity, to a far greater extent than dry weather
accounts for. The loss may be even one-third of the milk supply.


The remedy is sheds, or, better still, closer stables and warmth.
Measuring Hay in the Stack.—For calculation purposes it
is usual to allow 1 owt. of hay to the cubic yard. For in-
stance, in an oblong stack: Suppose it to measure 20 feet x
10 feet x 15 feet, the cubic contents is 20 x 10 x 15 = 3000
cubic feet. This divided by 27, the number of cubic feet in a
yard, will give the weight in cwts., 11l 1-9 cwts., or 5 tons 11
cwts.
XXII.—THE HORSE IN AUSTRALIA.
He lives much more in the open air than in Europe or
America. The climate allows of his being put upon grass at
all periods of the year. Consequently he is a much sounder
animal than where he is continuously stable fed. The horses
of Australia are noted for sound limbs and rough, ungroomed
appearance, both due to the freedom allowed to the animals.
Draught Stock.—ln most modern works on the horse, the
heavy draughts are described in the following order, intended
tor epresent their value for farm or other purposes as estimated,
viz. : 1. The Lincoln, or dray horse ; 2, the Suffolk Punch; and
3, the Clydesdale. The old English black cart-horse may be
said to have become extinct, and except as to the part he has
played in the formation of the modern dray horse, this un-
shapely animal is now seldom noticed. Viewing the above
three classes in the light of their present value for farm or
draught purposes, this order must now be reversed, and the
Clydesdale assigned first place. “Stonehenge,” the popular
writer on the horse, more than fifteen years ago remarked that
the Clydesdale was then gaining so fast on the Suffolk in
general estimation, that it was supposed by many experienced
horse-breeders that in a tew years the latter would become as
scarce as the old dray-horse. This prediction may now be
said to have been almost fulfilled, as, for general purposes of
draught, the Clydesdale is the only breed used throughout the
whole of Scotland, and has almost entirely supplanted the
Suffolk in a majority of the English counties. A similar dis-
position prevails in this country.
The Clydesdale, it is said, was originally imported by one
of the Dukes of Hamilton from Holland, and bred to the
strong pack-horses then existing in the Vale of Clyde, from
which place its name is derived, This has been questioned by
M


some writers; but the circumstances of many of the Clydes-
dales owned by the earlier breeders of them having been
named after Dutch towns and places would appear to cor-
roborate the statement. For general usefulness in the collar,
the Clydesdale is admitted to be the best of all modern breeds,
being handsome, compact, and active as the Suffolk, as hardy
as a Timor pony, and now nearly as large as the Lincoln.
Formerly the Clydesdale seldom exceeded 16 hands or 16.2;
but of late years the extreme fancy prices readily given for
large specimens for town drays have induced breeders to look
more to size, although some who are good judges on such
matters do not hesitate to affirm that the additional size has
been gained at the cost of activity and hardiness ; but if spirit,
activity, and endurance may be accepted as evidences of ex-
cellence, the Clydesdale certainly possesses them. His neck
and well-set-on head are extremely neat; his girth at the
heart is good; his shoulder is sufficiently oblique for a first-
class, high-action carriage horse; and his well-proportioned
body is firmly set on short legs, which, although covered with
a profusion of long hair, are beautifully flat and hard. Many
of the Scotch farmers use them in their gigs, and it is no
unusual thing to see them trot to the fairs at the rate of nine
or ten miles an hour. The Clydesdale is decidedly the best
heavy draught-horse for Australian purposes.
Breeding Horses.—The draught horse and the roadster offer
the best prospects. There are two classes of draughts, the
light and heavy. The lighter and more active draught are
more properly omnibus or light cart horses. Given a 1200
pound mare, whether we get a light draught or heavy depends
on two things, the selections of a sire, and the feed. The
light draught or spring cart horse should weigh from 1350 to
1230 lbs., have good action and good color. He should not be
a dun, a light sorrel or light grey, or have a white face or a
glass eye, and must have good clean limbs and fair style. He
must be over four years old and well broken to harness. Even a
heavy draught horse may be the progeny of a grade draught mare
weighing 1400 lbs. and a pure-bred horse weighing from 1800
to 2000 lbs. He must not weigh less than 1500 lbs. in fair
condition.
The hack or roadster is also a paying horse when the breeder
keeps a level head on himself and breeds level-headed horses.
He may not attempt to raise fast horses. But he can produce
good road horses that travel as fast as any Christian ought to


want to go, and to do first-rate farm work, just as much, in
fact, and a little more, than the draught horse, and sell at five
years old for a good price, provided that the breeder is skilled
in working and driving such horses and has a taste for it. To
produce roadsters it is not good to start with a draught or a
plug, or with anything small. The draught may give size but
no speed ; the small mare may give action but no size. Both
qualities are desirable in good hacks. If we have mares well
bred, with style and action, breed to the large standard-bred
trotter and we will not miss the roadster. It is thought by
horse breeders, that the efforts of Messrs. White and Dangar
to introduce the Arab blood into New South Wales, will do
more to restore us the neat hardy hacks for which the colony
was once so justly celebrated, than any other attempt at im-
provement made in this direction for many years. .
The highest-priced of all is the coach horse. Great speed is
not required, but size, good high-stepping action, color, motion,
style, disposition, and, in addition, training. These are rare,
and like rare things, costly. The materials out of which the
coach horse are to be built up are scattered as yet. The coach
horse, whether Australian, French, English or American, is a
cross between the thorough-bred or standard-bred to trot and
some' cross of the draught-horse, possibly Clydesdale on good
stylish farm mares.
We have glanced over the field and indicated the various
classes of horses that seem likely to pay. There is plenty of
room for variety of tastes and skill. But let no one imagine
that he can succeed without good judgment, skill, and feed.
BUYING A HORSE.
It may be said without egotism that Australians know a
good, serviceable horse when they see him, as well as any
people upon earth. And notwithstanding all that is said about
the deterioration of horses, in comparison with twenty years
ago, there are few places where a good, serviceable horse can
be picked up easier than in Australia. It may be that, as a
rule, the horses of the country are not much to look at, but it
would be nonsense to deny that they are good ones to go. It is
equal nonsense to say that good horses, both in look and action,
do not abound in the country —compact, hardy animals, which,
if light, are light all over; and if heavy, then heavy all over.
The head, body, and limbs look as though they belonged to one
animal—and in forming an estimate of the appearance of the


horse, we should pay attention to the relative position of his
body and limbs. The body should give a distinct impression of
being placed on the limbs, not suspended between them; If
the body is placed on the limbs, the horse will have the power
of doing his work within himself, as it is termed, and will not
be easily fatigued ; while the horse whose body is swinging, as
it were, between his limbs, will have a very slack, uncomfort-
able gait, and will be very easily fatigued. He will have a
long, loose, showy action, which would lead the casual observer
to imagine that he was going at a tremendous pace ; but a few
miles of heavy work makes him drag his legs heavily, and, in a
long journey, he gives up with downright exhaustion.
HEADS OF HORSES FOR TEMPER.
The Head Shows Character.—Aye ! very much as a man’s
does. Vice is shown in the eye and mouth ; intelligence in
the eye and in the breadth between the ears and between the
eyes; spirit in the eye and in the nose, in the mobile nostril
and active ear. The size of the eye, the thinness of the skin,
making the face bony ; the large, open, thin-edged nostril ; the
fine ear, and the thin, fine mane and foretop, are indications
of high-breeding, and accompany a high-strung nervous organ-
isation, which, with good limbs and muscular power, ensures
a considerable degree of speed in the animal. The first of the
two shown is high-strung and mettlesome, with an untrust


■worthy eye and a vicious mouth—a powerful animal of great
endurance, but, being wilful, is hard to control. The other is
equally high-bred, with great breadth of forehead, a large, full,
and generous eye, not lacking in spirit. The bony face indi-
cates blood, the ear and the thin-edged nostril show spirit,
while the whole expression of the animal’s face is one of
abounding docility, kindliness, and honesty. Without pre-
vious knowledge of the animal, we candidly confess we should
greatly hesitate in buying a horse with a bad, treacherous-
looking countenance. Many worthy men and many well-dis-
posed horses are unfortunate in this particular. We may not
value a friend the less for it; but it would certainly not induce
us to form an acquaintance with the man so arranged without
cogent reasons for so doing. Then why should we with a
horse? Books tell us what a perfect horse is, but they do not
quite tell us where to find him. As the rogue said, you may
“ look to me” for payment; but we are not aware that looking
to a man and being paid are quite the same thing.
Judging Age.—While all the little black cups or hollows
are still in the teeth of the horse’s lower jaw, the horse is
not over six years of age ; when those in the corner teeth only
are left, the horse is under nine. If the cups are all gone in
the under jaw, but are still all left in the teeth of the upper jaw
the horse is probably not older than ten, but this is not a
certain rule. The shape of the teeth tells much to the ex-
perienced observer. In youth the cutting surface of the tooth
is long from side to side ; in old age, long from front to rear.
When the cutting surfaces of the teeth in the upper and lower
jaws are worn smooth, and so long from front to rear as to
resemble in shape the nail on your little finger, the horse is
probably not less than 15, and perhaps 20 years of age. If a
horse stands with his legs stretched out, front and back, he is
probably badly used up ; neither should he stand with his
feet all drawn together under him. There is a false pride
which prevents most men from making complaint when they
get bit in the purchase of a horse; it has no reasonable
foundation. If you don’t know a horse’s age, and the seller
tells you “ seven this spring,” he may be fully ten most likely.
If the seller says about ten, “go him five better.” If he says,
“ Sound, as far as I know,” make up your mind he knows
he isn’t sound. If he says, “True to pull, but a little high-
strung, and needs careful handling,” well, as likely as not, he
is balky, and would stand killing. If you know little about


the horse, ascertain if the seller is a responsible man, and make
him warrant the horse in whatever respects you desire ; if he
misrepresents in the least, you can make him pay damages for
tying-
Horse Nature.—The disposition of a horse can to some
extent be determined by the expression of the eye, and by the
manner of the holding the head and ear. Take hold of the
halter, face the horse, and give the strap a sudden little jerk ; if
the horse throws his head up, holds his neck stiff and ears
rigid, and his eye assumes a glassy look straight out from
either side, you may look with confidence to have him put his
hind feet through the dash-board, or his fore feet over the
other horse’s neck, three times in four minutes, the first time
you hitch him up. When you harness up a horse, and he
turns his head round flat on his side, and he looks at you with
a meek, lamb-like expression as you take your place in the
seat, if you haven’t a temper that is child-like and bland,” you
will probably put a head on that horse that will make his eye
look differently before you get far on your journey. Balky
or jibbing horses are of two kinds—those which want to
go to much and those which don’t want to go at all. The
first is the nervous, jibbing horse ; the second the sulky
balky horse. A good way to manage the first is to unhitch
at the first • manifestation of the evil spirit, and without
any blustering or whipping, get on his back and run him
about three miles at the top of his speed; nine times in ten a
horse will, after this treatment, when put in the harness
again, pull as steadily as the most sober-minded old horse in
the world. The best way to manage the second kind, in a
worldly-minded point of view, is to trade him off to some one
in want of a good, steady, reliable, old family horse. A
favorite, but not generally successful plan, pursued with horses
of either of these types, is to pound them over the head with
the butt of the whip or with a sapling. This is useless, but
natural. There is nothing in animated nature that can de-
velop bad bile in a man to such an extent as can an animal of this
kind. Once a man got a hired horse and went out for a drive.
The horse balked ; the man lighted a cigar, took out a news-
paper, settled himself back into the cushions, and read two
hours and forty-five minutes by the watch. Then that horse
got ready to go, and the man must have been pretty well pre-
pared for a better world. One who has experienced it says :
“ I owned a balky horse once; and it is my firm conviction


that if the martyr, John Rogers, who met his death with
Christian resignation at the stake, had ever got stopped on a
pleasant Sunday morning at the foot of a hill, on his way to
church, by a balky horse, he would have spoken out like a
piper, and beat the horse over the head with his leather-
bound book.”
Training Horses.—After young horses have once become
entirely bridle-wise, it is a good practice to teach them the
meaning of words. This is not a difficult matter, provided
too many words are not used at any time. The first step is
to adopt some word, at the sound of which they are to under-
stand that they must stop. Words that are easy to speak,
and which can be made emphatic, should be chosen, such as
“ho,” “ whoa,” &c., and every time the word is used the horse
to which it is spoken should be made to obey it fully. Care-
lessness in regard to this matter will do more to undo what
has been taught than anything else. When a horse fully
understands the meaning of the word used when we wish him
to stop and stand still, the greater part of the work is accom-
plished. To make the work more effective, it is a good plan
to get into the vehicle to which a horse is hitched, and,
having stopped after a short drive, one should get out and
leave him for a short distance. Should the horse then start,
the one in the vehicle can draw the lines suddenly, and thus
prevent his getting away. There will be no trouble in teaching
a horse with an ordinary amount of common horse-sense to
stand without being hitched, if a little judgment and patience
are used in attempting it.
XXIII.—THE PIG: TO RAISE AND USE HIM.
The pig is a popular institution in the colonies. We find
him everywhere—on the station and the farm, in town (where
municipal laws are not enforced), and in the country. Yet
Australia does not export pork to any extent, and well-fed and
cured ham and bacon are by no means common. This is the
more singular because maize—the great pork-producer of
America—grows in the fullest luxuriance over a large extent
of country, and other food—sugar cane, sweet and common
potatoes, pumpkins, <kc., <fec.—abound. Perhaps the feeling
that it is of no use making more pig-meat than we can con-
sume is due to the cheapness and abundance of beef and


mutton; and that, as higher prices rule for the latter, pigs
will be more looked after. Be that as it may, there are few
more useful or more satisfactory things about a house than a
good pig in the stye. The animal agrees well with the climate.
He enjoys robust health and a lively appetite. He puts on
flesh as rapidly as in any other part of the world. When well
fed, the smaller breeds—the improved Berkshire, Royal Albert,
and small China—reach 100 lbs. dead weight when eight
months old ; the bigger breeds—the Chinese, Polanders, and
the various crosses springing from them—reach 200, 300, or
400 lbs. in two years, according to the feed given them. The
smaller size, those ranging from 80 lbs. to 150 lbs., dead
weight, are the animals most in demand by butchers, and the
most suitable for home use. The larger, for curing in whole-
sale. For general usefulness, the varieties of pigs may be
classed as above, and the crosses between them in the same
proportion, always providing that the food given keeps pace
in quality and quantity with the improvement. No breed has
been invented yet that thrives without feed, though the better
sorts make the best out of what they eat. The poor lots make
bone, muscle, and trouble amongst neighbors. When stinted
of their food, the best sorts become miserable. It is a good
rule in pig keeping that keeps up the breed by keeping the
troughs well supplied.
The Berkshire.—This breed has been known for centuries in
the district from which the name arises. The family from
which the existing breed sprang was of a sandy or buff color,
about equally spotted with black, was of large size, a slow
feeder, and did not fully mature till two and a half to three
years old. But it was ever highly esteemed for the greater
proportion of lean and fat in its meat, and for the superior
weight of its hams and shoulders ; thus rendering the whole
carcass peculiarly well fitted for smoking, for which purpose it
is said to excell all other English breeds. The Berkshire of
the present day improves most other breeds, but no other
breed that we know of improves them. The pure Berkshire
has face short, fine and well dished, broad between the eyes.
Ears erect, but sometimes inclining forward with advancing
age ; small, thin, soft and showing veins. Jowl full. Neck
short and thick. Shoulder short from neck to middling, deep
from back down. Back broad and straight, or a very little
arched. Ribs long, well sprung, giving rotundity of body;
short ribs of good length, giving breadth and levelness of loin.


Hips, good length from point of hip to rump. Hams thick,
round and deep, holding their thickness well back and down to
the hocks. Tail fine and small, set on high up. Legs short
and fine, but straight and very strong, with hoofs erect, legs
set wide apart. Size medium. Length medium ; 180 lbs. is a
fair average live weight at 18 months; extremes are to be
avoided. Bone fine and compact. Offal very light. Hair
fine and soft; no bristles. Skin pliable. Color black, with
white on feet, face, tip of tail, and an occasional splash of
white on the arm, while a small spot of white on some other
part of the body does not argue an impurity of blood, yet it is
to be discouraged to the end that uniformity of color may be
attained by breeders ; white upon one ear, or a bronze or
copper spot on some part of the body, argues no impurity, but
rather a reappearance of original colors. Markings of white,
other than those named above, are suspicious, and a pig so
marked should be rejected.
The Royal Albert.—This breed is one of the most desirable
for farmers’ use, when they can be housed and cared for. The
characteristics of the breed are ; Head short, broad between
the eyes. Nose decidedly bent up. Ears thin, projecting
forward and lap at the point. Neck short and thick. Jowl
large. Body lengthy and deep. Broad on back. Hams full
and deep. Legs short and well set under for bearing the
weight. Coating thinnish white, straight, and if a little wavy
not objectionable. Small tail, and no bristles.
The Small China.—A somewhat delicate, but in other res-
pects, thrifty breed. Matures in eight months, and then
weighs about 120 lbs. Is a perfect model of a small fat pig.
Color bluish-black, head extra short, ears small and erect,
body roundish, legs short, hams small and roundish. Cures
best in sides, but is rather fat for ordinary taste. They
are believed to be an offshoot of the Norfolk pig with
some of the Tunky breeds, and very soon run into varieties
unless carefully bred.
The Large China.—This is classed as a good pig for general
purposes, which can be relied upon for the production of a
progeny of like qualities and character. The leading charac-
teristics are ; Short legs ; broad, straight back; deep sides,
flanking well down on the leg; very broad, full square hams
and shoulders; drooping ears; short head, wide between the
eyes; of spotted or dark color; are hardy, vigorous, and pro-
lific, and, when fat, are perfect models of fat pigs all over.


The foregoing embrace the leading characteristics of the pig as
we find him, when properly understood. But when neglected
he quickly runs into varieties, and becomes a long-snouted,
large-headed, and big-boned mongrel. A good pig, of what-
ever kind, has a short head, short tapering snout, and full
cheeks. The back is broad, with the ribs springing out well
from the spine, the chest broad, the body the same. The neck
is thick, the rump full and round, with the roundness descend-
ing to the hams; the hams full and finely tapered. The
bristles should not be strong or coarse.
Pig Feeding.—Accepting maize as the basis of profitable
pig-keeping, we find that it takes seven bushels of maize to
make 100 lbs. of pork, the pig cutting up to SO orßs percent,
of its live weight. But, at the same time, a pig may be kept
for months without its gaining a single pound in weight.
Where has the food gone to ? Is it in keeping up simply the
life of the animal, and the waste of always craving for more
food? To test this, take a young pig eating 75 lbs. of corn
monthly, or in any other given time, but getting no fatter
after eating the 75 lbs.; add 25 lbs., and it gains 20 lbs. Thus
for 75 lbs. we gain nothing; for 100 lbs. we gain 20 lbs. of
pork. Give 125 lbs., and we gain, say 40 lbs. or 150 lbs.,
and we gain 60 lbs. If by any superior feeding qualities a
pig could be made to eat 200 lbs. monthly, we should make the
gain in weight one-half of this. The great aim, therefore, in
the selection of a pig should be to obtain a breed which will
eat a large amount of food, and make flesh in proportion.
That is what a thrifty pig does. This sort of pig must be
kept comfortable. It is beyond a doubt that heat is equivalent
to so much meat; the absurdity—for it is nothing less—of
expecting pigs to be thrifty where they are cold, wet, and
exist in slushy places, will be manifest enough. Pigs should
be comfortably kept, well littered, and kept clean. This last
part of the sentence will sound oddly in the ears of those
who think it is really a part of the natural economy of the
pig to be dirty. But it is worth while to consider the functions
which the skin performs, and, if this be considered, we rest
assured that cleanliness in a pig will be worth securing; and,
if secured, those who think that pigs like dirt will be sur-
prised to find how they revel in being washed. A visit to
one of the most creditable piggeries in the country, at Oallen
Park, near Sydney, demonstrates the excellent results that
follow careful attention to this animal.


The Breeding Sow. —With a run of grass, a bit of swamp,
with roots, &c., and a bit of pasture, with a comfortable shed
for a sleeping-place, a breeding sow will have strong, active
pigs. She may require feeding if there is not sufficient roots
or grass. Indeed, it is always well to feed a little extra—it
gives her greater strength ; but she should never be fed so
much as to become fat. A fat sow is a poor breeder, and
makes a poor mother. The instinct to eat the placenta should
not be interfered with, as it supplies just the kind of food
which nature requires to replenish the system, and checks a
tendency to feverishness. A great many young pigs are in-
jured by being compelled to take milk from feverish udders,
and the milk itself in turn inflaming their little stomachs and
making them sick. Such pigs show the bad effects of their
food by rough coats, and a general delicate and sickly appear-
ance. More care and less food than is generally bestowed on
the breeding sow will cause less abortion and better success.
Good Pork, and How to Cure it.—To do up a pig promptly,
a shatp knife is the principal requisite, with a blade about
eight inches long, not more than an inch wide, and with a
rounded point. Have it very sharp. If his pigship is about
100 lbs.—a good handy size, by the way, for home use—one
used to the work would
bale him into a corner of
the stye, grip him by a leg
and an ear, tumble him
with his head towards
the right-hand side, and
with his feet towards the
operator, who then places
his left leg across the pig,
and inserts the knife at
the centre of the neck,
and as low as the fore-leg.
Or, by whipping a line
round a hind leg, the pig
can then be raised by a
sapling laid over a rail, up-
FOR HANGING-UP OR SOUSING A PIG.
on a triangle (as shown in engraving), or other convenient
arrangement. There is no noise from a pig raised in this way.
And when the knife does its work, the animal is in the very best
position for bleeding effectively. Touch the heart with the
knife (easily known by a film coming over the eye of the pig).


The animal feels no pain after that. He bleeds freely, and
dies in peace. The sticking is a main feature, for, unless well
done, the animal does not bleed freely; and, unless well bled,
does not keep well. The mistake in this matter often arises
from inserting the knife too high up in the neck, instead of
the breast, where the heart is. As soon as the animal is dead,
souce him with hot (not scalding ) water. The usual practice
is to put him into a tub or trough, deep enough to cover the
pig; but the job can be done as well by putting him in before
applying the water. Tuck the head and feet under the body,
then pour on the warm water, and commence scraping off the
hair at once. The hair comes in flakes from a young, good-
conditioned pig, but sharp knives and an approach to shaving
have to be employed to get the back bristles from old and
coarse stagers. By the time it is off, the feet, ears, and snout
will be soaked, and the hair can be scooped off with the hands
or the knife. Take off the hoofs, clean the head at once, and
keep actively at the other parts, pouring on water where the
hair sticks, until it is all off. Then lift him on a board; douce
him with cold water, and shave off any bristles that remain.
Cutting up a Pig.—The body should be allowed to cool
thoroughly. When pork is
tainted, after salting, it is
almost invariably for want
of thorough gradual cooling
before cutting up the carcass,
A good way to cut up a pig
is to saw or chop down the
back, and make two sides.
CUTTING-UP A PIG.
The shoulder is then cut as at 1, the ham nicely rounded at 2,
leaving the small rump-piece with the tail. The belly(3)is cut oft,
and the loin (4 and 5) is cut into two or more pieces, as may be
desired. The rib-bones should all be taken out and used fresh.
The shoulder should be also freed from the ribs, and, with the
hams and belly-pieces, salted and smoked by themselves. The
belly is often cut up into long, narrow pieces, weighing 5 lb. to
6 lb., and, after being carefully salted and smoked, is readily
saleable as breakfast bacon in the stores.
Curing for Ham and Bacon.—Cut out the ribs, using a
sharp heavy knife for the purpose, and passing it close into the
bone, the rule being to cut out the bones, and nothing more.
In warm localities, where the meat is wanted for home use, it
is safest to cut out the bones of the hams also; follow them


out closely as in the former case, leaving only the small bones
at the points of the hams and shoulders. In cooler localities
the bones may be left in, in which case a sharp saw should be
used to trim those on the surface quite flat. Leave neither
holes nor protuberances, and the appearance of the ham will
be improved very much. Use purified saltpetre—about one
ounce to 50 lbs. of meat. This is quite enough if the meat is
sound. Pound it fine; run a steel or skewer close alongside
of the bones, pushing down the saltpetre with it, paying par-
ticular attention to all places where joints occur. Then rub
in salt, as much as the meat will take, say 10 lbs. to 100 lbs. of
meat; but double the quantity of salt should be handy.
Surround the meat with salt, pack it on a table or board to
drip ; rub it again 10 or 12 hours afterwards. Rub it well,
and again the next evening, and the next, changing the pieces
from top to bottom of the heap each time, placing boards
between the pieces, when it is desired to flatten them out
nicely. It may then stand for 12 or 14 days. More rubbing
will be all the better for it. If salted* meat only is wanted,
it is then cured, and may bo hung up for use.
Smoking.—After the meat has been in salt about 14 days,
wash it quite free from salt, and hang it up until just dry, no
more; then smoke it with tea-tree, wattle, stringy bark, or
other hardwood. Those named are the best.- Do not allow
flame or the heat of the smouldering fire to reach the meat.
To darken the color, a little sweet oil may be rubbed on ;
smoking for 10 or 12 hours, either at once or at different times
during a week, is sufficient for ordinary tastes. The smoking
is all the better if done in a close place; a draught of air is
likely to make the meat dry and crisp. To get rid of salt on
the surface, and also to improve the color of the hams or
sides, they are dipped in water of 180 deg., having |lb. soda
in, say ten gallons of water. Let it drip, then hang up till
dry, and smoke.
Pickling.—A Popular American Method.—Rub the hams
and shoulders with salt, and let them lie 36 hours. Then
cover with brine for six weeks longer, remove them from the
brine, insert a strong string in the large end, and hang them
up in the smoke-house hock-end downward. By this means
tenderness and flavor are given to a portion of the ham often
thrown away. Smoke with green chips, and, when they are
sufficiently smoked and dried, wrap them each in a large sheet
of brown paper, and put in a loose bag of strong calico. Tie


up the mouth of the bag carefully, leaving out the string by
which it was hung up, and return to the hook in the smoke-
house, or any other safe convenient place. Hams thus treated
will keep for years. So says a large pork-raiser of Indiana,
whose hams command the highest price in the markets.
Curing with Sugar.—The sides of hams are neatly rounded
and trimmed, well sprinkled with salt, and allowed to lie
twenty-four hours to let the blood run out. Then use the
following for curing : —l} lb. coarse sugar, 1J lb. fine salt, 6
oz. saltpetre pounded fine, 1 lb. common salt. This is enough
for cwt. of meat. Lay one of the flitches on a table or floor,
where the brine can run off, and rub a quarter of the mixture
well into it; lay the second flitch on the top, and proceed in
the same way; lastly the hams, taking care in every ease to
lay the inside up, and have plenty of the mixture sprinkled
over. It should lie thus for a month, turning it every other
day, putting the top flitch to the bottom, and adding a little
fresh salt if much brine has run off. It should then be hung
in the smoke of a wood fire for about ten days, not too near
the fire.
Diseases of Pigs.—They usually appear in the form of
fevers, and although they but seldom assume a wide-spread
character, it is well to know the symptoms ; these are—loss
of appetite, vomiting, constipation, uneasiness, trembling,
anxious and staring look, hot mouth, frothing, great prostra-
tion of the vital powers, loss of power of the hinder quarters,
appearance of boils, purplish tint or discoloration of the skin,
grinding of the teeth, signs of -abdominal pain, distressed
breathing, cough, diarrhoea, total inactivity, or a state of
stupor. When sickness appears, separate the patient, and
give him tartar emetic and ipecuanha ; mix, and give small
pigs a scruple, and larger ones half a drachm; throw it dry
upon the root of the tongue. Follow this up by purgatives of
Epsom salts, one, two, or three ounces, according to size and
age of the animal; administer in broth or swill. Exercise,
fresh air, occasional doses of salt and charcoal with their food,
and sluicing the animal over with cold water, are measures to
be recommended. (See Chap, xxvii., Diseases of Animals.)


XXIV.—THE POULTRY YARD.
Fowls.— Am I Likely to Succeed with Fowls I—Best1 —Best get a
few and try. Better commence with a small number, even
when the intention is to go into poultry as a business. The
prospect favors those who succeed with a few.
The Kinds to Keep, and Where to Keep Them.—The
latter is the more important question of the two. Fowls,
to do well, must have room ; must have the run of grass
and weeds, with their belongings of insects. These living
things mean that fairly good soil answers best. They must
also have gravel and lime in some form, dry places to shake
themselves in, and moist places to scrape in. The place
being available, it becomes necessary to fence it in in the
best manner; for unless the whole property is to be given up
to fowls, in-doors and out, they must be fenced in, or
dissatisfaction, annoyance, and misery will follow in their
trail. Seven feet is not too high for the fence of the space in
which they are to be confined ; palings or wire-netting should
surround the enclosure, as well as the gates. To make
a hen satisfied that she must stay within an enclosure,
leave no room for any doubt upon her mind as to whether
she can get out. Be the enclosure ever so high or ever
so tight she will attempt to get out of it ; but she must
not succeed, or there will be trouble in that neighbour-
hood. Fowls are persevering in proportion to their early
success. Contentment on their part is the result of feeling
that they cannot do the other thing. Then they become
satisfied with their lot, lay many eggs, or wax fat, as the
owner may desire. In their fenced-in enclosure should be
the roosting and laying places. This is necessary, for poultry
in this country have many enemies, including dogs, guanos,
hawks, ifec.
Roosts.—Much depends upon how fowls roost. The roosting
and laying places of fowls should be sufficiently close to pro-
tect the inmates from rain and wind. A shingle roof is the
best ; the sides may either be iron, boards, slabs, or other
material that make a close wall. It is a mistake to suppose
that an open shed only can be well ventilated. Anyone who
tries will find that better ventilation is secured by means of
doors, windows, or shutters. ■ A fowl-house, 10 ft. by 8 ft. is suf-
ficiently large for 30 fowls. Place roosting-sticks, at least
three inches thick, across the building about 20 inches apart,


each one being elevated about 12 inches above that in front
of it. This gives more space for roosting, and allows the
queens and kings of the yard to have the highest roosting
places at night, but no roost should be higher than 31 feet.
Another good plan is to have the roosting-sticks set upon a
frame ; in any case they should be so arranged that any time
they can be removed, cleaned, and replaced with the least
trouble. Nest-boxes (kerosene cases make good ones) are placed
in the quiet, shady, out-of-the-way places. They should be
always half-filled with dry sand or soil, and each contain a nest-
egg. Drinking-vessels being provided in the yard, and always
supplied with water, we are ready for the inmates. The
reason for recommending low roosts is that laying-hens are
often ruined by jumping or falling from high places.
Eggs for Setting.—They should be fresh ; when over eight
days old, in the summer season, the progeny will be weak to
a certainty. To carry eggs a long distance, coat them with
butter, beeswax, or, best of all, varnish. Wash this coating
off with warm water before setting the eggs. They carry
better by road or on horseback than by steamer. The shaking
of a vessel at sep generally proves destructive to the repro-
ductive properties of, eggs. In any case they ought to be
well packed for travelling, sawdust or bran being the best
substances to surround them with, and prevent jarring. In
setting hens, nests made of dry sand (soil answers well), with a
sprinkling of gum-leaves. They should be in places where
the sitters cannot be molested, not where other hens may be
tempted to come and lay beside them. The hen should be
roused from her nest every day, and induced to feed freely and
dust herself. These are the best precautions against vermin.
When the weather is very dry, it is a good plan to sprinkle
both eggs and nest with warm water every day when the hen
leaves it. The nearer the nest is to the ground the better
will be the prospects of the hen keeping herself free from
vermin.
Time for Hatching.—During the cooler months, from March
to September, are best; but, with the precautions mentioned,
other seasons will do, though there is always the serious risks
of vermin during hot weather. With the aid of incubators,
chickens can be raised at any time. Hen-eggs, of all breeds,
take 21 days to hatch out; ducks, 28 days, with the exception
of the Muscovy, which often takes 35 days; goose, 30 to


35 days ; Guinea and pea fowls, from 28 to 30 days; turkeys,
28 days.
How to Select for Breeding.—Select the fowls from which
the next year’s stock of chickens are to be bred and place them
where they will bo separated from others. Even if not pure
bred a careful selection of half a dozen hens which are in good
health and good layers, and a vigorous male will give eggs
more sure of hatching and more hardy and vigorous chickens
than can be got from twice as many eggs taken from a larger
stock without selection. In selecting fowls to breed from it is
better that the hen should be over a year old, rather than
younger, and the male bird is better at two or three years than
at one. If breeding fancy fowls and striving for true feather-
ing and a high scale of points, never use birds of one year old
if older ones can be had. If there exists any imperfection of
plumage or other points which should cause a bird to be re-
jected as a breeder, it will usually be seen distinctly in the
second year, while in the bird of less than a year it might not
be noticed.
Chickens.—Fowls take 21 days to hatch out, and the third
day after the hatching is completed the hen should be taken
from her nest and confined in a sheltered coop for a few days
at least, the chickens only being allowed their liberty. Bran,
pollard, bread-crumbs, or Indian meal, scalded or simply wet
in water, and clean water to drink, should be given them, and
for the rest they will supply themselves. If, however, you
have other fowls, give the chickens whatever else you give the
fowls, and always feed them three times a day. Place the
coop so that water cannot settle under it. Sprinkle the coop
with sulphur, ashes, lime; move it frequently to prevent its
becoming infested with lice. By following these few simple
directions you will not only have the pleasure of seeing your
chickens live, but thrive, so that their growth will be almost
perceptible from day to day.
Eggs are made.—That hens cannot lay unless they are
properly fed needs no demonstration. Maize tends to produce
an undue proportion of fat; and a very fat hen cannot lay.
Hence it is best to feed with a variety of food, both animal and
vegetable. Given a well-crossed flock of young fowls, for old
fowls get worse and worse as layers, there need be no trouble
about getting eggs. People complain that their fowls will not
lay. There can be but three reasons: the fowls are old, in-
bred, or not well fed. Laying fowls must have lime, and pro-
N


bably it exists in no form better adapted to their needs than
in that of broken-up bones or pulverised oyster shells.
Breeds.—lt has been said that a mixed breed is the best for
the many who keep fowls for their own use or for sale as
poultry. For the masses, including the thousands of farmers
who can raise a few hundred fowls annually at little cost, the
question of crossing breeds judiciously, to produce any desired
quality in fowls, is of importance. Some desire to breed for
the egg-producing quality in their fowls, others keep a special
eye to size, while the great desideratum is a combination of
these good points with another very essential one—that of
early maturity. Many experiments bearing on this point have
been, made public. We remember the enthusiasm of some
recent writer over a cross which he was pleased to designate as
“ the farmers’ breed,” combining, as he believed, a grand com-
bination of almost all desired points. This cross was obtained
by mating a grey Dorking cock with dark Brahma hens; and
we agree with him that the progeny of such a “ pen” is truly
gratifying. Other very valuable crosses can be had, however,
by judicious mating, it being always desirable, in putting a
light and heavy breed together, to take the male bird from the
lighter breed. For this purpose the Spanish is excellent. The
opposite plan seldom, if ever, answers so well. The range for
experiment is so wide, and the peculiar fancies of different
breeders vary so largely, that it would be unwise to attempt
even a brief synopsis of the number of valuable crosses to be
produced from popular breeds. The birds resulting from the
cross alluded to are good layers, large in body, and mature
early. To produce as good fowls every year it is necessary to
breed or buy a few pure Brahmas, Spanish, or Dorkings con-
stantly, in order to make the same cross annually. But for
propagating pure bloods, only well-marked fowls should be
used, while the birds not well marked will do as well for
crossing. There is one very great point gained in this way,
viz., the fowls are very hardy and free from tendency to
disease. They are seldom affected by cholera, croup, or other
common complaints. As to early laying and egg-laying capacity,
there is the simple general rule for guidance that the smaller
breeds are the earliest layers. The larger sorts take longer.
Thus bantams lay at 5 months’ old; Hamburgs, 8 months ;
Cochins, 10 months; and so on.
Feed and Laying.—Experiments in England were instituted
to determine the daily amount of food consumed by various


Dorkings
. 138 grains & laid 110 eggs per year.
Games
. 92 do.
100
do.
Buff Cochins ..
. 117 do.
115
do.
Langshans
. 123 do.
125
do.
Dominiques
. 92 do.
110
do.
Leghorns
. 107 do.
120
do.
Hamburgs
. 92 do.
139
do.
Spanish
. 110 do.
140
do.
Guineas
75
do.
breeds of fowls. The results were that the Buff Cochins ate
much more than any of the other breeds; and to show the
increase of weight in proportion to food consumed, it may be
stated that each gained daily as follows for twenty days—
It will be noticed that the Spanish and Hamburgs gave the
largest number of eggs, and the Brown Leghorns next, but the
Dorkings and Langshans made the largest daily gain in
growth, while the Cochins, though consuming enormously of
food, did not show its effects either in eggs or the first twenty
days’ growth. Taking the three highest for weight at six
months, the following was the result; —Dead weight—Dork-
ings weighed 10 pounds one ounce and 385 grains; Buff
Cochins weighed 9 pounds 13 ounces and 240 grains; Lang-
shans weighed 10 pounds 5 ounces and 437 grains. The
greatest gain was made by the Langshans, but for the food
allowed the Dorkings are entitled to the honor.
Diseases of Bowls,—When they have plenty of space to
roam in—if only for a few hours each day—and they are not
molested with dogs or by intruding upon neighbours’ fowls,
they have more certain prospects of continuing in health in this
climate. They require very little doctoring. When much of
that sort of thing becomes necessary, it is evident that there
is something wrong in the breed or the location. By far the
greater proportion of diseases arise either from exposure, or
overcrowding, or neglect in preserving cleanliness—often all
combined. The first symptoms of nearly all fowl diseases are
moping and diarrhoea. At this stage much evil may be warded
off. Whenever a fowl hangs its wings, and looks drooping,
let it be seen at once whether it appears purged, and, if so,
give immediately, in a tablespoonful of warm water, a table-
spoonful of spirit saturated with camphor. Repeat this
next morning, and in most cases the disease will be checked,
care being, of course, taken to give the invalid warmth and
shelter. Oil, as a medicine, is not effective in this climate.
Gapes is a fatal disease, and is epidemic. The disease consists


—at least, so far as actual symptoms extend—in a number of
small worms which infest the windpipe, and cause the patient
to gasp for breath, If taken early, it may be sufficient to
give, for two or three days, a morsel of camphor the size of a
grain of wheat, and to put camphor in the drinking water, or
a little turpentine or sulphuric acid may be given daily in
meal, taking care, of course, that the deficiencies in diet and
shelter be amended. In fully-developed cases, the worms
must be removed by introducing a feather or a loop of horse-
hair, saturated with kerosene, into the throat, and turning
Vound during withdrawal, the operation to be repeated several
times, till all the worms are extracted. Loss of feathers is
supposed to be caused by want of green food or having no
dust-bath, but it is often a symptom of depraved, morbid
appetite, not easily cured. Roup is caused by wet, or cold
winds. It begins with a common cold, and terminates in an
offensive discharge from the nostrils and eyes, often hanging
in froth about those organs. It is highly contageous, the
disease being, as we believe, communicated by the sickly
fowl’s beak contaminating the drinking-water; therefore let
all fowls affected by it be at once put by themselves. Keep
them warm, and add pepper or other spice to the feed, with
green-stuff unlimited, wash the head with tepid water, and
give daily one grain sulphate of copper. lioup runs its
course rapidly, and in a week the bird will be either almost
well or so nearly dead that it had better be killed. It is the
worst disease of poultry, and to be dreaded accordingly.
Apoplexy; This disease is very prevalent at times, and as it
carries off its victims suddenly, and generally during the
night, it causes great alarm amongst poultry-owners. Old and
young fall victims; no particular breed are exempted while
others suffer. There are but few symptoms, but occasionally
the first stages of the disease are noticed in a staggering gait
in the birds affected for one or more days before death; or
the head is slightly twisted back upon the neck, or to one
side. Moving about being difficult, the bird is soon afterwards
found in a sitting posture, or half turned on its back. If
now disturbed, its gait is staggering, and it seems inyolun-
tarily impelled to go to one side; superadded to this, attacks
of convulsion occur at intervals, in one of which the poor
bird expires. Cause : The appearances after death are either
effusion of blood on the brain, or otherwise a turgid and con-
gested state of its blood-vessels. Here, it is usually sup


posed that this disease is the effect of a system of high feeding,
and as matter of fact the birds in best condition usually suffer
first. "Various remedies have been suggested, such as bleeding
by cutting the comb, giving salts and other purgatives,
drenching with cold water, reducing the supply of food, ifec.
In practice it is best to reduce the feed and change the whole
stock when this complaint becomes serious.
Yermin.—They are the most serious drawback to poultry-
keeping in warm climates. During dry summer weather the
little pests peculiar to fowls attack human beings, and become
a fearful scourge. To keep them in check, sitting and broody
hens should be rubbed on the head and under the wings with
sulphur ointment, isolated from the others, sprinkled with
water, and dusted with flour of sulphur and lime daily. The
fowls should also have shady, damp places in which to roll and
clean themselves. The vermin, be it well understood, cannot
travel or live in damp places. Hot lime-water is a most
effectual remedy for clearing them off.
Ducks.— Four breeds of ducks are common in the colonies
—the Rouen, Aylesbury, East Indian, and Native. The latter
is a small, very dark-plumaged bird, easily domesticated, and
the flesh and eggs being extra fine, it makes a desirable cross.
All the varieties are healthy, and can be kept wherever poultry
are. They require green feed in abundance, but do very well
with only a small supply of water : just enough to admit their
cleaning themselves, and allowing of a puddle afterwards.
Hens make the best mothers for ducks ; they protect the
young from hawks and other enemies, and do not expose them
to wet (the effects of which are generally cramp and death) to
the same extent as mother-ducks. Ducks are fit for the table
much earlier than fowls.
Geese.— All the varieties are common—the common white,
the Toulouse, the China, and improved Irish. They are healthy,
and a desirable addition to the poultry-yard wherever there is
plenty of soft, green feed and a liberal supply of water. They
are really grazing birds. Persons who breed generally assign
one gander to four or five females. In mild seasons the goose
lays early; she sits with' exemplary patience, but ought,
during incubation, to be well supplied with food and water
placed in a convenient and undisturbed situation, to which she
may have free access. The gander is very attentive to his
favorite, sits by her, and is vigilant and daring in her defence.
The goslins, or gulls as they are termed in some parts, require


the same treatment as ducklings ; it is advisable to pen the
mother for a few days upon a dry grass plot or green sward,
supplying her with water and grain, of which the young will
partake; green food, as chopped cabbage or beet-leaves, crushed
maize, and the like, may be given. One thing is imperative :
let not the young be starved upon poor grass, for poor pas-
turage occasions disease and mortality ; a few handsful of corn,
given morning and afternoon, turn to good account in the
long run.
The Turkey. —This bird is found difficult to raise while
young, but is perfectly healthy in after-life. Full-grown birds
bring splendid prices, and are much in demand. The mothers are
excellent sitters. The young suffer from exposure, and attacks
of hen-lice or other vermin are fatal to them. Dry, sandy
situations answer best for turkeys, and when extra care is
taken with them at the early stages they do very well. It is
also desirable to keep only young male birds, say those between
two and three years old.
Guinea Fowls, Pigeons.— All the varieties are healthy, and do
well with the care found to fit them best in other countries.
Feeding.—Attempts to provide special food for fowls leads to
no end of tribulation, and nothing else. They will eat any good
food when healthy, and are scarcely worth troubling with when
unhealthy Maize, whole or cracked, is too fattening, if given
alone; but wheat answers better, and bran, pollard, bread,
rice, meat, anything and everything that man uses, is readily
eaten by fowls; but while the former can educate himself into
using all sorts of messes and mixtures, into suffering from
dyspepsia, indigestion, and gout, fowls suffer from all such
attempts [at civilising them, and wherever anything of the
kind is persevered in, they become discontented, diseased, and
die.
Does it pay I —lt is often asked if there is any profit in
poultry-keeping. In keeping flocks of from 40 to 50 fowls,
which lay no more than that number of eggs during the winter
only, there certainly is no profit. But a flock of from HO to
30 well-cared-for hens, laying summer and winter, more than
pay their way. Nor is there any doubt that large numbers of
fowls may be kept with proportionate profit, when they are
attended to, have plenty of space to run in, and there are
proper divisions for separating the young and the old, those
that are laying and those that are growing. It is from the


want of these appliances that attempts to keep large flocks of
fowls often result in failure.
About Incubators.—They answer well when properly attended
to. But they require a lot of attention—more than they get,
as a rule, hence failures follow. Better commence by setting
hens, then, when more chickens than hens bring out readily are
required, or say, more than 200 chickens are necessary for
the season, then get an incubator. Hen life will be better
understood by that time, and that, to secure chickens from
eggs, the temperature of incubators must be attended to during
every hour eggs are being hatched in them.
XXV.—THE HOME GARDEN.
FRUITS, VEGETABLES, FLOWERS.
In this department, it is not intended to do more than indi-
cate the necessary requirements for the successful cultivation
of fruits, vegetables, flowers, &c., for use in the house.
Orcharding or fruit-farming, market-gardening, and floricul-
ture are very special occupations, the outlines of which, as
followed in Australia, we may trace, but which require
special treatment. This must be got with actual practice on
the land. What we may be able to do here is to outline the
peculiarities of our soils and climate, concerning which
Chapters 11. and 111. treat rather fully, and the requirements
for budding, grafting, and other means of propagation suitable
for our climate and circumstances, the varieties found most
suitable, and other conditions that lead towards success. The
varied climate and extensive territory of Australia furnish
localities for the successful growth of nearly all the desirable
fruits of the world ; and, through the enterprise of colonists,
the varieties already proved cover a very extensive range of
country, so that the cultivator who is desiring information as
to harder kinds for profit, and the market for his productions,
can be very generally directed aright; the pioneering in a
great many instances has been accomplished.
In the elevated districts, immediately west of the great
Dividing Ranges, the apple, pear, plum, peach, nectarine,
cherry, apricot, &c., etc., the fruits of the temperate zone are
thoroughly at home. In the coastal districts, the orange,
lemon, lime, dateplum, loquat, mango, olive lichti, &c., find a
congenial climate, and flourish abundantly; while in both


sections of the country the grape thrives almost equally well.
Some of the apples, pears, &c., thrive also on the coastal lands,
as do peaches of the Chinese races ; and the orange succeeds
in favorable situations further inland, as well almost as in the
coast country.
The cultivator who resolves to either wholly or in part pro-
secute fruit-growing as a business will spare no trouble in
order to obtain a suitable piece of land for his orchard ; fertile
soil, good exposure, sufficient under-drainage, and an acces-
sible market, are absolutely necessary in order to ensure
success.
Land for a Garden.—lf it is for home use only, then the
nearer it is to the house the better; when the garden surrounds
the house it is all the better. But if we require a larger area,
and there is a choice, then the best soil for the majority of
fruits is a good sound loam, such as would yield good conse-
cutive crops of grain. A lighter soil, while perhaps working
more freely, does not give such stamina to the trees as to
ensure long life, nor is the fruit so long keeping. These re-
marks are especially true of the apple tribe ; but for the
orange family, the experience gained at Parramatta, the great
orange-producing district of Australia, indicates a loose
friable soil and absence of clay as being suitable. Under-
drainage is an absolute necessity, and where it does not exist
naturally (which is rarely the case) it must be provided by
the careful, forecasting orchardist, as described in the chapter
on draining. The exposure of land intended for fruit is
worthy of consideration, experience pointing to the eastern
and north-eastern slopes as being especially favorable. Access-
ibility to market speaks for itself, and needs no comment.
Setting-out Trees.—ln planting, the ground should be laid
out so that, as nearly as may be, the same varieties should be
together, and those which ripen at the same time, as besides
other advantages this arrangement saves considerable time in
gathering the fruit. The trees should also be planted at re-
gular distances, so that the land may be fully occupied. The
best mode is that called quincunx, although some prefer to
plant in squares. The preparation of the ground is of prime
importance. It should be ploughed and subsoiled, if possible,
some time before the planting season, allowing sun, air, and
rain to exert their beneficial influences upon the newly-moved
earth ; then plough and subsoil again, this time more deeply
than before, getting down at the last subsoiling as nearly two


feet as possible. Harrowing, cross-ploughing, &c., will com-
plete the general preparation. In forming new places, it is
not always convenient to prepare all the land in this manner,
in which case strips of two or three yards in width should be
thus treated—these strips to be in the line of the future rows
of trees. If the ground is poor, manure should be incor-
porated in the ploughing, the best being well-decomposed farm-
yard manure, with potash added, unless analysis prove the
soil to have enough of that essential for fruit culture. A
light dressing of ashes and bone-dust is also very good. The
laud being worked well and clean, and the places marked for
the trees, the work of transplanting commences. If practic-
able, perform this early in the season; with deciduous trees,
as soon as they are at rest, from May to August, according to
location ; and with evergreens—as the orange family —either
shortly before or soon after the season of frost, say in August,
the best time being when in autumn the external temperature
has moderated, but the ground is still warm. In carrying
trees from the nursery or the package in which they were
received, be very careful not to let the roots dry. Open the
holes sufficiently wide to spread all the roots out to their full
extent, trimming with a clean cut the broken ends, and dis-
tributing the roots evenly round; then partly fill the hole
with fine mould, keeping the roots and rootlets separate from
each other. Before completely filling the hole, pour in water
slowly around the roots, settle the earth among them, and
when well drained away gently fill in the remainder of the
earth, press the soil closely around the roots, but on no account
tramp around the trees as if ramming a post, especially after
watering. If your tree has several tiers of roots, spread out
the lower ones, cover them with earth, then upon this earth
spread the next tier, and so on until all are covered ; then
proceed to water, &c., as before, being careful not to plant
the tree deeper than it stood in the nursery. In selecting
trees, choose what nurserymen call maidens, i.e., one year
from the bud or graft. These are generally small trees of one
straight rod only. Cut or prune deciduous trees down to
about two feet from the ground, so that they may branch out
at that height, and thus shade the trunk from the direct rays
of the sun. During the succeeding season keep the surface of
the earth in the neighbourhood of the traes in loose friable
condition, which will obviate the evil effects of a dry spell in
spring—to which we are often subject—and maintain a steady


healthy growth. Take out all suckers and superfluous shoots
as they start, which will not only prevent much useless work
and unnecessary wounds in winter, but also benefit the por-
tions left. A little judicious thumb-pruning, i.e., pinching the
top of too luxuriant shoots, is also very beneficial.
Pruning Young Trees.—The general tendency should be to
keep the trees low ; high pruning should only be practised for
direct reasons, as the extra time required to gather fruit from
high-pruned trees in a large orchard is very considerable, and
when fruit falls it is sure to be injured. In low-pruned trees
gathering fruit is very much facilitated and cheaper; the
trees are less exposed to winds, and- as a rule are more
shapely. The time to prune apple trees has never been defi-
nitely settled. While small branches may be cut when the
saw is sharp, large branches should be cut when the sap is
most active and the healing process most rapid. When large
branches are cut at other times, gum shellac should be used to
prevent decay. Pruning, to be properly done, requires the best
foresight and skill of the orchardist. In all phases its imme-
diate and future effects upon the trees should be well consi-
dered, that no permanent injury may be done. It is a good
practice, with a view to thinning the fruit, to prune when the
tree is in flower, with a well-trained and practised eye and
hand. In the succeeding winter, thin off any crowded or mis-
placed shoots which may have escaped the summer regulation,
and shorten the branches that remain, removing one-third, or
in some cases even one-half, of the season’s growth of branch.
The best shape for warm climates is generally considered to be
a short trunk surmounted by a pear-shaped tree ; the branches,
three or five in number, radiating from the main stem for a
short distance, and thereafter growing more upright. Some
good cultivators prefer the pyramidal shape, having one central
main stem, the branches springing out in tiers from this stem,
longest near the ground, and shortening gradually towards the
top of the tree, so as to resemble a pine tree, claiming that
this form preserves the trunk from the sun, distributes the
fruit regularly over the tree, and defies the destructive ten-
dencies of heavy storms. Each succeeding season will bring
the same operations of summer-pinching and winter-pruning
into play, until fruit-bearing so taxes the energies of the tree
as to reduce vigor of growth and rapid extension, thus greatly
moderating the need of pruning. But the practical fruit-
grower finds by experience that our long seasons and short


winter rest necessitate a more vigorous surgery than the
moderate pruner would advise in colder latitudes.
Pruning for Fruit.—Leaf and Fruit Buds.—Young fruit-
growers are often at a loss to distinguish between these two
kinds of buds. They consequently make mistakes in pruning
by cutting away fruit-buds when they should retain them, or
vice versa. A young tree, for instance, to which it is desired
to impart more vigor would only be checked by cutting away
leaf-shoots and leaving fruit spurs. Fruit buds of apples,
pears, cherries, ifec., are generally distinguished by their rounded
and obtuse form ; while leaf buds are slenderer and more acute.
The fruit spurs of these trees are nothing more than stunted
shoots, originally produced from leaf buds, but which, making
but little growth, become fruit-bearers. In the pear, and some
other trees, they are never less than two years’ old, and they
often continue to bear for many years. Whatever tends to a
free circulation of the sap, and consequently to a rapid growth,
causes the formation of leaf buds rather than fruit buds. On
the contrary, whatever tends to retard the motion and increase
the accumulation of sap in any part, induces the production of
fruit instead of leaf buds. Thus, in the examples just given,
as soon as small stunted shoots are formed, they become fur-
nished with fruit-producing buds. The vigorous one-year shoot
of the cherry is mostly supplied with leaf buds; but the short
spurs on the second year’s wood, which are but shortened
branches, are covered with fruit buds, with only a leaf bud in
the centre. This also explains the chief reason that young and
vigorous trees of the apple kind, the wood and bark of which
are comparatively soft and yielding, and through the large and
unobstructed vessels of which the sap flows without restraint,
do not bear so freely as those whose older and more rigid parts
impede the circulation. A young tree kept in a very thrifty
condition may not produce fruit buds for many years; while,
if checked in its growth by imperfect culture, it bears at a
much earlier age. The varieties of fruit available for planting
are very numerous—perhaps too numerous. There is no diffi-
culty in getting lists of sorts suitable to different districts from
the many excellent catalogues issued by the nurserymen. The
following are the leading characteristics, as observed in this
country:—
Apples. —This is a hardy fruit over vast areas of Australia,
accommodating itself, in some of its many varieties, to very
different soils and climates. The slopes of the Main Ranges,


and the New England country, exhibit orchards of fruit very
hard to surpass for productiveness, appearance, and quality ;
while in the coast country, several sorts do well ; especially is
this the case with many of the apples introduced from America.
The tree delights in a good, free soil, somewhat calcareous,
lime and ashes, in conjunction with good farm-yard manure,
being specially valuable as fertilisers. Fruit-growers within
reach of a gas-works find that a load of gas lime and a bag of
salt (any refuse salt is proportionately as good as the best)
well mixed, and then composted with three or four loads of
good swamp muck or good loam, prove very valuable surface
dressing, to be afterwards lightly forked in. The above-
mentioned substances are all valuable for the prevention of
“ blights ” and the dry bitter rot, &c., which otherwise are apt
to attack the fruit in some localities. As the apple, when
worked, i.e., grafted or budded upon the ordinary crab or free
stock, is subject to attacks from its hereditary insect enemy the
“ American ” blight (Aphis langifera), the provident planter
will either procure his trees upon blight-proof stocks, or if not
to be obtained already worked, will get a sufficient number of
these stocks fpr planting, and bud or graft them in the proper
season. This will ensure the roots being free from the vermin,
and should the trees become affected it will only be above
ground, where all can be seen and promptly dealt with, as
described in the chapter on blights, pests, <tc. Where space
is limited, such as in small gardens, and where a variety of
fruit is desired, precluding the possibility of growing large
standard trees, minature trees may be grown upon the Pom-
mier de Paradis (the French Paradise stock), or other dwarfing
stocks, which has the effect of dwarfing the tree, and bringing
it into the compass of a large bush.
Pears. —ln former years this was a hardy and prolific fruit,
but, of late it has fallen into bad odour in our coast country.
Compared with the peach or apple it is slow to fruit, and
hence, by hasty people, is condemned. Some kinds which are
good in other climates have proved unsuitable here. Some of
the old standard varieties, too, are suffering from disease.
The pear offers inducement for the development of new, Aus-
tralian varieties. It is generally budded or grafted upon its
own seedlings, or rather should be so grown ; for some nursery-
men, from the scarcity of seedlings, use suckers, which is an
objectionable practice. Suckers are very apt to produce crops
of suckers, much to the annoyance of cultivators, and often to


the detriment of the tree. Many of the best varieties of this
valuable fruit thrive well when worked upon the quince, and
in some the fruit is improved in size, flavor, and appearance
thereby ; but the soil must have good cultivation, and be kept
in fine tilth, to suit the fibrous roots of the stock. The thorn
(whitethorn) is also used for some varieties, especially upon
clayey soils, unsuitable to either the pear or quince stock.
Trees on the quince are smaller, and come earlier into bearing
than those on the pear root, and are thus, like apples on the
Paradise stock, very suitable for small gardens where large
trees cannot be grown; they are also more easily and safely
removed, if that is rendered necessary by change of residence
or from any other cause. In the case of those varieties of
pear which will not grow directly upon the quince stock, we
have recourse to double grafting ; that is, we bud or graft the
quince stock with some pear which thrives well upon it, such
as Prince Albert, Beurre d’Amanlis, Beurre Hardy, &c., and
the following season bud this with the variety which we wish
to grow. There is a tree in the writer’s garden which is now
bearing fruit, and which was propagated in this manner. A
root of Anger’s Quince was grafted with pear Prince Albert;
this was budded with Huy she’s Prince of Wales, which
latter is now a fine dwarf tree, although it utterly refuses to
grow direct upon the quince. Mr. Thos. Rivers, who has
done so much to popularise double grafting, recommends that
the associated pears should be of similar race and habit, in
order to ensure the best results.
The Quince. — This grand preserving fruit is hardy all over
the country. It delights in moist, rich soils of a friable charac-
ter, thriving well on the banks of streams, and when properly
cared for, it gives a very handsome return of useful fruit. The
surface of the soil should be kept loose, and the multitude of
shoots and suckers which are so apt to crowd the tree, should
be kept in check.
Plums. —ln the colder portions of the country, the plum in
all its choice varieties, thrives and produces abundantly. In
the Parramatta, Lane Cove, and other coastal districts, plums
also do well, and those sorts especially that have been originated
locally.
The Peach. —This quick-growing, early-fruiting tree, suc-
ceeds admirably in some of its many varieties throughout the
whole country. The Chinese races suit the coastal regions of
the north best, being remarkably fruitful and better flavored


than in the colder districts; while in the cooler districts, to
the west of the Dividing Ranges, the Persian strain— i.e., the
European varieties—grow well and bear abundantly. Nursery-
men and skilful amateurs are gradually originating quite a
new strain of peaches from the old Flat China, the stones of
which have a great tendency to “ sport,” that is, to change into
new kinds ; and the prizes in these seedlings are above the
usual average in proportion to the blanks. We are also get-
ting a second race from the descendants of the Flat China
seedlings which are of high promise. Some sports also of the
common double-blossomed China are of very good quality, and
prolong the season of the early fruit. In addition to these,
several of the best European and American peaches are on
trial, some of which are fruiting. Wood, ashes, lime, and bone-
dust, are excellent manures for the peach, especially composted
with swamp-muck,leaf mould, &c. All the varieties draw heavily
on potash, and suffer in health, unless it is supplied. The
tree should be shortened-in rather severely at the winter
pruning, from one-third to one-half of the season’s growth
being cut off; and when it begins to show signs of age, or
before, cut out one of the main branches, leaving twelve or
eighteen inches of a stump for young growth to spring from.
Gradually thin out these young shoots until only three or four
leaders remain. By repeating this operation upon the remain-
ing main branches, one every season, together with the annual
pruning, the tree attains to a much greater age than usual ;
and the fruit, when judiciously thinned, is of the highest ex-
cellence.
Nectarine. —This fruit is not so generally successful in the
coast regions as the peach is, but is abundantly so in the more
elevated and cooler southern districts. In the warmer districts
the later varieties, like those of the peach, are subject to the
attacks of an active little fly, which punctures the fruit and
deposits its eggs therein; these in due time develop into small
white maggots which destroy the fruit. All punctured and
fallen fruit should be gathered daily, and given to the pigs, as
if left on the ground the grub would pass, into the earth,
undergo its transformation, and come forth as the fully devel-
oped fly, to carry on its work of destruction.
Almond. —Yery fine almonds are grown in the western dis-
tricts, about Parkes especially, and wherever the peach and
nectarine thrive, the almond is subject to the same general
conditions. The following are the different varieties, of which


the first three are best:—Brandis’ Jordan, Nonpariel, Soft-
shell, Jordan, Sweet Hardshell, Bitter Hardshell.
Apricot. —Like the preceding, the apricot is better adapted
to the high and cooler lands rather than the lower coast
country. It does not grow quite so rampantly as the peach,
and does best in a firm, compact soil. As a rule, the trees must
be large to be successful fruit-bearers.
Cherry. —This delicious fruit thrives in the colder portions
of the country. Although the tree grows well and may flower,
as usual, the fruit fails to set in the warmer districts. When
budded on the Mahaleb stock the tree is dwarfed, and bears
most abundantly ; all the Duke race takes especially to this
stock, which is generally free from the vice of suckering.
Strawberries. —Many varieties are grown, and where the
soil is open, loose, and sufficiently rich to keep the plants
vigorous all through the growing season, very fair returns are
got
Mulberries. —This fruit is prolific here, and we have many
good varieties which are, strange to say, mostly European.
Some are valuable only for their foliage, which is fed to silk-
worms. The tree is a free-grower, and its roots run far and
wide, monopolising the soil to a considerable distance. It is
not so generally esteemed as the previously named fruits; but
as some of the varieties ripen earlier than other fruits, a tree
or two is useful near the homestead.
Raspberries. —This fruit succeeds well in all parts of the
country wherever tried. Plant in rows five or six feet apart,
about three 'or four feet apart in the row. There are several
different families of this useful fruit on trial, both European
and American.
Blackberries. —These grow well and produce abundantly in
the colder districts. We have the three following American
varieties, which give heavy crops in the coastal country ;
Lawton—very large, strong grower, late; not sweet until
deeply colored. Kattatinny—very fine, sweeter than the fore-
going. Wilson’s Early—also fine ; very early
The Banana.— This useful and delicious fruit thrives well
along the northern seaboard. It delights in a rich moist soil;
lime, salt, and decomposed farm-yard manure being specially
suitable. The banana is planted at various distances, twelve
feet apart being a good average. One grower near Brisbane
plants at a distance of nine feet only between the rows, and
twelve feet apart in the row; and after a few bearing seasons


he takes out every alternate row, leaving the rows eighteen
feet apart. Those varieties which produce many suckers
should have the superabundant ones constantly removed, or
the ground will speedily be filled with poor plants bearing
inferior fruit.
The Orange Tribe.— The orange takes as naturally to the
Parramatta, Paterson, and other districts, as though indi-
genous to the soil. It pays handsomely for careful culture.
A prime essential of the soil, both surface and subsoil, is
friability. It must also be fertile, and have good under-
drainage, either natural or artificial. The finest trees which
the writer ever saw were grown in a sheltered position, in
rich scrub soil composed of leaf-mould and alluvial deposit.
Neither rain nor drought appeared able to make it compact
and adhesive; it was always free. In the Parramatta district
enormous crops of aranges are grown on open sandy soil,
manured on the surface with guano or other rich ammonia
compost. Selecting a sheltered locality, or making such by
planting belts of useful timber trees, the ground should be
thoroughly worked, if possible, a whole season before planting,
cultivating, ploughing, subsoiling, allowing no weed to mature
its seed, and thoroughly aerating every particle of soil. As
the tree grows, thin out superfluous and intercrossing branches,
and stop any grossly luxuriant growth that would destroy
the balance of the tree. All this is best done by the vigilant
cultivator while the wood is so young that it can be taken off
by the thumb-nail. Many sorts—as Maltese, Oval, Manda-
rins, ike., will show fruit the first or second year ; take them
off as soon as flowers show, and let the tree be of good size and
at least five years old before permitting it to mature fruit,
otherwise the tree will be permanently injured. In the matter
of the best stocks upon which to work the orange, our best
growers are not unanimous. The fell disease which decimated
the whole of the orangeries of Spain and the Azores never
appears to have attacked the Seville (bitter) orange, nor the
the sorts worked npon it, and it had the sanction of Mr. Pye,
the veteran grower of New South Wales. It has also been
tried in Queensland successfully, and, reasoning from analogy,
it should be a much better stock, forming a more lasting union
than the common lemon or citron, sometimes used for the
purpose. Many growers prefer to raise their plants from
seeds, and very excellent trees formed in this way now exist,
and do remarkably well.


The Lemon.— This fruit is much more difficult to suit with
soil than the orange. It suffers badly, should the roots reach
clay. On sandy loam, in which shells abound, are grown some
of the finest lemon trees in the country.
The Citron, True Bengal Citron (spherical fruit, smooth
skin), Blood Shaddock, and Marmalade Lemon all do well, and
are about the best in their respective classes.
The Mango.— This is a very interesting, delicious, and valu-
able fruit, which thrives and produces fruit well on the Rich-
mond and northwards. In India, its native country, mango
topes are abundant, and the juicy fruit of the best varieties is
a prominent feature of the dessert.
Guava.— A well-known hardy, and prolific fruit-bearing
shrub or tree, which is readily propagated from seed or layers.
Does best in good soil.
Loquat. —This fine tree and useful fruit is well-known, but
does not commonly receive the attention which it deserves. It
is generally raised from seed, and the resulting trees often
produce fruit of very different qualities. One tree in the
writer’s garden produces a large fruit, rather acid until it com-
mences to shrivel, when its acid appears to change to sweetness
and a very valuable fruit. Others give a small round fruit
of great sweetness. Yery fine sorts have been originated in
the Lane Cove district, and there is ample scope in this one
fruit for the efforts of some persevering, intelligent cultivator,
to raise new varieties, and propagate desirable sorts by
grafting.
The Fig. —ln the drier country about Forbes, Parkes, and
other places, the fig ripens in great perfection. It flourishes
in a great variety of soils and situations, and is easily propa-
gated from cuttings. There are many varieties cultivated in
Europe, the majority of which have been imported here, and
offer inducement for preserving the fruit, which is always in
demand.
Pine Apple,— This valuable fruit has long formed a con-
siderable item in exports from Queensland, and it does well in
the northern districts of New South Wales. It is generally
planted in rows from six to eight feet apart, and at varying
distances in the row. Eight feet between the rows, and from
two or three feet in the row, has proved a convenient and suc-
cessful plan; the middle of the rows being utilised while the
plantation is young by growing vegetables. Good strong
suckers are best for forming a plantation, although, when these
0


are scarce, as in the case of new desirable sorts, crowns from
the fruit are also sometimes used. The pine likes a sweet free
soil, sufficiently rich, keeping the plough—or, better, a good
cultivator (such as Perry’s)—always going, preventing weeds
and aerating the soil. As crops are removed, manure is added
to keep up the fertility of the soil. A superabundance of
suckers may be kept down by removal, or by destroying the
heart of the sucker with a chisel-shaped instrument.
Cape Gooseberry (Physalts edulis). —This rich fruit is so
commonly found growing wild in the scrubs that but little
attention has been paid hitherto to its cultivation. But its
value for desert—in pies and tarts, and as making one of our
finest preserves—should ensure for it more consideration. From
the few attempts made at its cultivation, it appears to need a
selection of seed from the best berries on the most productive
short-jointed plants, the plant to be trained on a trellis (like
the tomato), and the points of too rapidly growing branches to
be pinched out. In this way the writer has grown them to
the size of moderate Orleans plums.
Passion Fruit. —The real value of this as a common well-
known fruit is becoming better understood of late. It is now
in great demand, and is easily propagated from seed or cut-
tings. The following are the varieties best known and the most
suitable fruit :—Passiflora Edulis —Common passion fruit.
Passiflora Quadranyularis —Granadilla. Passiflora Decaisnea-
na—Smaller variety of the granadilla, stronger grower, flowers
superior.
GRAPES AND WINE.
This is a department of much importance in Australia,
calling for special attention. The grape, in some of its
varieties, does well all over the country, and very excellent
wine is made in a few places. But the latter part of the
business requires more skill than the ordinary grape-grower
can give it. Consequently quantities of poor stuff are made,
and the business has not the standing it should occupy in a
country so well fitted for its development. Both the proper
manuring of the grape, in order to induce the secretion of the
finer flavorings, and skilled wine-making, require the attention
they so well deserve. There is abundance of land and oppor-
tunity available for the purpose.
Varieties and Cultivation.—We have representatives of
many families of the grape in this country. The ordinary


European and Asiatic varieties belong to Fids vinifera.
Besides this we have members of the Isabella family (V. la-
brusca), the Scuppernong (V. rotundifolia), the Clinton (V.
cordifolia), and the Lenoir (V. aistivalis), all more or less
unaffected by oidium (mildew), which has been so destructive of
late years to the vinifera. The Scuppernong and its seedlings
are said to be proof against the attacks of the 'phylloxera vas-
tatrix, and, so far as known, the American varieties have
not suffered from attacks of that or other similar pest. For
ordinary fruiting purposes the European and all the American
tribes, except the Scuppernong family, appear to succeed best
when trained upon high trellises, giving plenty of room, say
seven or eight feet between the rows, and from eight to twelve
feet from plant to plant in the row, training not too near the
ground. The best and simplest form of training for the less
vigorous growers appears to be two main horizontal arms,
right and left of the main stem, at about twenty inches from
the ground, with spurs at ten inches apart on these arras, and
then trained either to wire supports, or to fruit upon the
support of a single stake or upon their own stems. The vine
is especially benefitted by thorough under-drainage, and in
poor land by the addition of any well-decomposed manure,
with lime, rubbish, old mortar, &c.; also by keeping the top
soil loose and free from weeds, which can be easily effected by
a good scarifier.
For Wine-making.—-In one or other of the colonies all, or
very nearly all, the famous vines of Europe and America are
grown, those affording rich saccharine or alcoholic juice, and
also the finer varieties that give boquet in other countries.
The material to work with is here. The climate is undoubtedy
favorable, but investigations made by the author concerning the
soils, and also with vines, prove that there are defects that can
be overcome only by skill in treatment in the field and by
manuring specially, and then by skill in the cellar. The most
serious defect of the soils, as a rule, is potash, in the absence of
which grape-juice may be very strong and rich in sugar matter,
and develope an enormous proportion of alcohol in the
wine. But the finer ethers are not developed in equal
proportion, and rough or heady alcoholic wines result as a
consequence. These are features that can be rectified, and it
is with that hope that they are mentioned in this plain way.
In other respects, the better systems of wine-growing and


■wine-making found effective in the wine-producing countries
appear equally effective here.
BUDDING, GRAFTING, PROPAGATING.
Budding. —Budding is the favorite method in this country
for propagating stone-fruits, such as the peach, apricot, &c., and
such flowering plants as roses. The season for budding extends
from November to March, commencing with the early China
peaches in the coast districts, and ending with the later cling-
stones in the cooler districts. The process most in favor is
shield or T budding, particulars of which can be got in standard
works on fruit culture. The main requirement for success is
practice. Ring-budding is followed on lemon, orange, and
other trees that have soft and brittle bark that will not lift up
conveniently for the insertion of a bud. Experiments have
been carried out by the author upon walnut, loquat, mango,
guava, and several of the eucalyptus tribeby this process. The
ring with the bud must be of the same depth as that cut in the
stock, but it may be taken from a smaller or larger plant, and
be made to fit by cutting from or adding a bit of bark to fill
up any deficiency arising from size. The advantages of bud-
ding are, the convenience with which twigs containing many
buds of desirable sorts of fruit can be sent long distances, and
propagated upon seedling or other stocks. It can be observed
in three or four days whether buds have taken; when they
fail, others can be inserted on another part of the stock.
Should the buds all fail (not at all likely when the work is
carefully done), the stock is still good for the next season. An
expert man with a boy to tie on the buds will place from COO
to 1000 buds per day.
Grafting.— This operation, like budding, requires practice;
the season extends through the spring months, commencing with
the orange tribe in July, but the season varies occasionally as
much as a month in very dry or very wet weather. The right time
is just when the buds swell and are ready to break ; the sap of
the tree is then becoming active, and is in the best condition
to make new growth. Taking advantage of this condition of
things, slips of bearing wood are taken from a plant of a fixed
and desirable kind of fruit, and grafted upon another, gener-
ally a seedling of the same species. The advantages of this
kind of propagation are that it ensures the extension of a
desirable fruit, and a quicker supply than if we wait for seed


lings to come to maturity. For the orange, seedlings of the
bitter varieties make the best stocks.
Propagating by Layers. —This favorite method is at once
one of the simplest and most successful for propagating plants.
When the operation can be carried out in the bush-house it
seldom fails.
Plants prom Cuttings. —The grape vine, currant, figs,
gooseberries, mulberries, &c., etc., are easily propagated in this
climate, in the open air, from cuttings. Select at pruning
time (say in June) straight, well-matured shoots of one season’s
growth, cut them* in lengths from 6 to 12 inches, or more,
leaving three or more buds upon each. Cuttings may either
be set out in rows or bundles for further propagation, or singly
in the places where they are to stand. Set them in carefully,
so as not to injure the bark or buds, and cover all but the
uppermost bud. The tomato, cucumbers, passion fruit, and
many others, can be propagated from cuttings. With the aid
of the bush-house, shade, shelter and moisture, there is an
increase, every season, of the number of plants which we find
suitable for increasing from cuttings. Scarce plants are propa-
gated by inserting cuttings having but one bud each, in fine,
rich soil ; cover each bud or cutting with about an inch of
soil, and tend the young plants carefully until they are fairly
rooted.
Plants from Seed. —New sorts of grapes, mulberries,
apples, pears, and other small-seed fruits, are grown from seeds
sown and tended as recommended for single buds. New varie-
ties of potatoes are also grown from seed.
Grafting-Clay and Grafting-Wax.—Olay for grafting is pre-
pared by mixing one-third cow droppings, free from straw, and
two-thirds clay, or clayey-loam, with a little hair, like that
used in plaster, to prevent its cracking. Beat and temper it
for two or three days, until it is thoroughly incorporated.
When used, it should be of such a consistency as to be easily
put on and shaped as may be desired. Grafting-wax of excel-
lent quality is made by melting together three parts of bees-
wax, three parts of rosin, and two parts tallow. While yet
warm it may be worked with the aid of a little water, like
shoemaker’s wax, by the hand. The common grafting-wax of
the French gardeners is of two kinds. The first is melted and
laid on with a brush in a fluid state, and is made of half-a-
pound of pitch, half-a-pound of bees-wax, and a pound of cow-
droppings, boiled together. The second, which is spread while


warm on strips of coarse cotton, or strong paper, and wrapped
directly about the graft, answering at once to tie and protect
it, is composed of equal parts of bees-wax, turpentine, and
rosin. Another grafting wax is made of tallow, bees-wax and
rosin in equal parts, or as many prefer, with a little more
tallow to render it pliable. Grafting wax is a much neater
and more perfect protection than grafting clay; but the trifling
cost of the latter, where a great deal of work is to be done,
accounts for its greater use by nurserymen and gardeners
generally.
THE KITCHEN GARDEN. ’
It there is choice of soil, then a decidedly sandy loam is the
best for a kitchen garden. It is easiest to work, and we can-
not get vegetables without manure. The beginning of the
year is the best season for laying a foundation for a plentiful
supply of kitchen vegetables. The seed-sowing time for the
bulk of these—the cabbage, turnip, pea, and onion tribes—
extends through February, March, April, and May, and can
be carried on still longer where the soil has been made very
rich, and an occasional soaking with water can be adminis-
tered. In preparing land for vegetables, two things are essen-
tial : that it be rich in plant food, and closely fenced. The
reason for the former will be obvious. The climate we have
to deal with is changeable, and occasionally dry. Yegetables,
to be first-class—and we trust the reader aims at nothing short
of the best—must go on growing continuously. A check to
their growth, from poverty, drought, or disease, invariably
affects the quality. Fencing, again, is necessary to keep oflT
the domestic and the wild pests that never fail to harrass an
exposed garden. Soil may be made rich by artificial means,
by trenching, draining, manuring. Sandy loam soils are best
for vegetables; they are quick, and when kept rich with
manure, bring crops quickly to maturity, even should the
weather continue dry for a month at a spell.
Seed for the Cold-Weather Crops—cabbage, lettuce, cauli-
flower, brocoli, sprouts, carrots, turnips, onions, leeks, parsley,
herbs, ike., are sown from February to August, if possible after
rain, and in such quantities as may be required. As stated,
richness of soil and the use of water enable the grower to
extend the cultivation of these crops, it may be over the entire
year.
The Warm-Weather Crops—beans, cucumbers, melons, mar


rows,' tomatoes, capsicums, &c., are sown from July right
through the warm weather, their success, as in the case of the
other classes, depending upon the richness of the soil.
Radishes, beets, shallots, mustard and cress, rhubarb, celery,
asparagus, are more general crops, that are worked at any
time of the year the weather and convenience will allow.
In no department of agriculture does the experience of the
Old World come more to our aid than in the kitchen garden.
The same system of shallow-sowing in clean, well-raked ground,
applies admirably here ; as does transplanting into rich, clean
ground, frequent hoeing, care in staking and tying up climbers,
&c. Some of our very best vegetable gardeners are men who
were trained in the old land. Depth of soil and drainage are
essential requisites in the garden. In this fast-growing climate
plants root deep when they have the opportunity. The quick-
growers are also heavy feeders, and will stand as much manure
as can be conveniently given them ; they reach it dug in deep
as well as near the surface; but the deeply-placed manure
should be in the ground before the crop is put in. The most
striking exceptions to this system of cultivation are potatoes
and carrots ; but they also are all the better of liberal man-
uring when the manure is well rotted.
Mulching is a decided aid to our kitchen garden. Almost
anything that is not too solid, that is light and of a vegetable
nature, answers for this purpose. Straw, old hay, dried cow
manure, leaf-mould, leaves, small branches, scrub soil; all these
things, and many others, aid us in having fine vegetables
during the summer season, and do no harm in winter. Scatter
the mulch an inch or two in depth around the crops. It keeps
in the moisture, keeps the surface from packing, and keeps the
land clean and cool. Watering without mulching is very like
labor in vain; but the effects of water upon mulch are deci-
dedly beneficial.
Watering.—lf it can be given in sufficient quantity to soak
the ground, then the benefit is decided ; but sprinkling, with-
out thoroughly wetting the soil, may do more harm than good.
Early Cucumbers and Melons.—“ I have found for a small
patch it is preferable to take extra pains with the plants.
They return an extra crop. Therefore, when I have my soil
nicely dug over, the positions for the plants are marked out,
and rich compost with sand forked in each place for the space
of three feet; wood-yard scrapings are capital for the purpose
as well. Old-time folks would next raise a mound about a
foot high ; but I long ago detected the fallacy of this, and so,


on the contrary principle, I scrape out a shallow basin, and plant
the seed in the centre. Put in plenty of seed to avoid the
nuisance of replanting several days later in the season, and
then, if the seeds all germinate, thin out to two strong plants.
To aid them in starting, a glass-covered box is placed over
each seed spot. As soon as they have made a few rough leaves
the covlr can be removed, and it is an advantage to apply a
mulch of short grass or rotten chips to the surface of each
basin, and give them a good soaking of water. The mulch
over the surface prevents baking, and preserves a nice moist
bed. After the vines have grown, say two feet, pinch off the
tips, to induce side shoots, as well as to promote fruitfulness ;
but I am at all times exceedingly careful not to bruise either the
shoots or foliage, as this frequently causes disease in the plant.
Once a week give a little diluted manure-water, and increased
vigor will be the result.”
The Shade or Bush-Frame.—This is one of the handiest
and most effective contrivances in our Australian practice.
What we require is protection from drying winds and heavy
rains, and this we get by making up a seed-bed in the ordinary
way, such as that recommended for tobacco, for instance.
Then to furnish shade and shelter, stakes are fitted at the
corners, and a cover of bushes, calico, or old sacking, is made
to fit over the bed in such a manner as allows of its being fitted
close to the soil, say six inches above it, or it can be fixed two
feet above it. This gives shade, and admits unlimited air. It
is a real climate-improver, and with its aid we can raise vege-
tables, flowers, or other seedlings, as required, and an occa-
sional spring of lettuce, mustard and cress, or other salad,
during, hot, dry weather. With it, from four to six weeks can
be gained in growing early vegetables. Lettuce, raddishes,
early cabbage, tomatoes, celery, egg-plants, mustard, &c., may
be sown in the frame by the first of February, and amply
repay the little extra trouble it will be to care for them. To
grow good lettuce the soil must be fine and rich. They can
be cut as soon as they are large enough to use, and others will
soon grow and form loose heads. For a succession, sow every
two weeks from the Ist of March.
Anybody can grow tomatoes and early cabbage. In lieu of
a frame they may be sown from February onwards in boxes in
a sheltered place, and they are early for setting out, and will
keep on growing just as if nothing had happened. Cabbages
require very rich soil and plenty of lime ; cultivate often, keep


the weeds down, fight the cabbage-worm, and you will have
plenty of good heads. Winter cahbage may be sown in a seed-
bed as early as the middle of February, and transplanted to
the ground where they are to grow a month later. The soil
for tomatoes need not be very rich, or they will run greatly to
vines.
The soil for turnips and radishes must be deep, finely pul-
verized, and rich from manuring in previous years. It is
useless to attempt to grow radishes in poor soil; they will be
tough and stringy ; radishes should be watered often while
growing, else they will be soft and spongy. The early scarlet,
olive-shaped radish, is one of the best for early use; it is sweet
and crisp, and ready for the table in six weeks from planting.
A small bed of mustard sown in the frame, or in the open
ground, will furnish excellent salad material. Peppers for
family use should be grown in every garden. They may be
started in the frame or in boxes, and transplanted to the open
ground as soon as the weather Will permit, The long Cayenne
pepper is good for soups, stews, and for poultry, while the
sweet Spanish and green mountain are the best for pickling
green.
Egg-plant must remain in the frame until settled warm
weather comes, then transplanted into very rich, finely pul-
verized soil, two and one-half feet apart.
Manure the Garden Liberally.—From six to eight loads of
well-rotted manure per half acre is none too much. Every
farmer might well devote at least that amount of land to
vegetables and small fruits. We get a large share of our
living from the half acre we call “ our garden.”
THE FLOWER GARDEN.
The choice of flowering shrubs and plants, in this country,
is absolutely limitless. They can be had of every hue and
every size, from the bushy gardenia to the magnificent poin-
ciana—shrubs, climbers, trees, according to the taste of the
grower, and the space available. The taste for flowers is grow-
ing amongst us; it is becoming an exception to see a house
without flowers. This admirable taste means health, content-
ment, love of home.
Roses of all kinds do well, and the list is very extensive ;
but it is to annuals we have to look for the continuous
succession of bloom that keeps up the freshness and interest
of the flower garden. The hosts of half-hardy, and what are


elsewhere considered tender annuals, which come to perfection
here are almost countless; the only difficulties in connection
with them are in the sowing and rearing of the young plants.
The spring months—August, September, October, November—
answer for raising plants. The weather is frequently dry
about that time, and seeds and young plants require coaxing
just a little. The bush frame offers the simplest means of
affording protection sufficient for most early seeds, though
when other more perfect appliances are available they will of
course be employed. In many cases the seeds are sown on a
layer of prepared soil in the open ground; but the better plan
is to sow them in pots or seed-pans, or boxes—the latter being
preferable, as they are more shallow than pots, and afford a
larger surface in proportion to their breadth. The pots should
be quite dry and clean when used ; and to ensure thorough
drainage, which, essential for all plants, is doubly so for tiny
seedlings, they must be filled at least one-third their depth with
broken brick or bits of charcoal, the largest fragments being
placed at the bottom and the smallest at the top. A compost
of light sandy soil, enriched by a considerable mixture of fine
leaf-mould, easily rubbed to powder, may be used. Fill the
pots lightly with the soil to the brim, when they should be
gently struck to settle the mass about half an inch from the
brim. If it should settle below that point, a little more soil
may be added. When a sufficient number of pots are filled,
the surface of each should bo gently levelled by pressure with
a circular piece of wood, having a clean, smooth surface,
which, from rendering the smaller seeds more evident to the
eye, will facilitate their equal distribution. The rules observ-
able in sowing in the open ground apply equally in pots. The
seeds should be uniformly and thinly scattered over the flat-
tened surface, and be then covered by a slight layer of pulver-
ized soil, which for most seeds need not be thicker than a half-
crown piece, after which the surface may again be slightly
pressed, then gently watered with a very fine rose watering
pot, and it is ready to be placed where wanted. In the case
of very small seeds, such as those of calceolaria, lobelia, cam-
panula, &c., the covering may be a sheet of blotting paper,
kept moist till they begin to grow, as seeds so minute are liable
to be carried down into the soil, unless very carefully watered,
it is even advisable to moisten the flattened surface of the soil
in the pot before sowing the seeds instead of afterwards.
Place boxes or pots containing the seeds in the frame if possi


ble. In any case, keep them shaded, which prevents the rays
of the sun drying and baking the soil and doing much mis-
chief to seeds of slow growth. , Flat seeds, such as zinnia,
stocks, cobea, didicus, also melons and cucumbers, are best put
in edgeways into the soil, being sometimes liable to rot when
sown flat. As the seedlings of slender-growing kinds appear
above ground, care must be taken that they are not washed
away and smothered when water is applied. Choose damp
weather and the evening for setting out the seedling plants
where they are required.
Classifying Plants.—Annuals are plants which grow, bloom,
and die the first year from seed. Some of the very hardy
kinds, however, may come up again in the autumn, remain all
winter in the ground, and blossom, seed, and die the next year,
Examples are phlox drummondi, mignonette, sweet alyssum.
marigolds, etc. Biennials bloom the second year from seed, and
then die; though many of them, if sown early in the spring,
bloom the first year, but in such cases they manifest a tendency
to live through the second year. This class is not so strictly
defined as the annuals or the perennials, many so-called bien-
nials frequently living longer than the year in which they
flower and ripen seed. Perennials comprise a large and im-
portant class, rarely flowering before the second year, and
continuing to grow and blossom for some years under favorable
conditions. While all plants not included in the two former
rightfully belong to perennials, the term is generally applied in
catalogues to hardy, herbaceous plants with perennial roots,
like such border flowers as pinks, sweet williams, &c.
Wonders of Plant Life.—“ Not less wonderful than its
universal prevalence is the fecundity of plant-life.” The number
of germs or seeds which many varieties of plants produce is
astonishingly largo. A single capsule of the white poppy has
been known to contain eight thousand seeds. A single plant
of tobacco has been found to yield the most incredible number
of three hundred and sixty thousand seeds ; while a single
stalk of spleenwort—a genus of ferns—has been computed to
produce at least a million of seeds.
Propagating.—lf there is a choice of plants, take up those
which have short, stocky, woody, tough growth, rather than'
such as are soft and luxuriant. Cut back part of the shoots,
and remove the leaves from the remainder of the plant, so that
the necessary multilation of the root may be equalised by fewer
leaves. Over-potting is a common error, which the skilled


gardener carefully avoids. Getting all the roots possible, with'
some soil adhering, select a pot into which the entire mass can
be just squeezed, press the soil firmly into the pot, water well,
and place for a few days in the bush-house, or a shady spot,
where a moist atmosphere can be secured about the plants.
Sprinkling overhead frequently is a great help.
Preserving Powers.—lt is not always easy to secure a rosebud
just when it may be wanted. But try gathering the buds
when nearly ready to open, and seal up the ends of the stalks
with sealing-wax, wrap each bud in tissue paper, and put in a
tight tin box. When a bud is wanted to open, cut of the
sealing-wax, and immerse the stalk in water, to which a little
saltpetre has been added, and the bud opens out prettily.
Gardening and Health.—The German, Flemish, and Dutch
women, who help husband or father in his fields, are a hand-
some, strong, hardy, stalwart race; and ladies, who, at times,
find a few turns on a verandah almost too much for them,
might be all the better for a graduated scale of garden work.
Beginning with a quarter of an hour a day, it might be found,
at the close of a month, that they could easily do their two
hours, and that they eat and slept as they had not done before,
while they forgot that such evils as hysteria and nerves ever
had any existence.
The Bush-House.— This is becoming, and deservedly so, a
special feature,of the Australian garden. It may be a very
simple affair, or it can be made as elaborate and fanciful as
taste and outlay allow of. The principle is the same, and that
is to get shade, and shelter, without shutting out the air. To
effect this, any framework can be set up, of any desired form
or size. The roof should be as high as convenient, say eight
feet at least. Then the sides and roof are covered with bush
material, laid as evenly and neatly as possible. The brush-
wood of young tee-tree answers admirably ; laths are also
used ; also Chinese matting, and close-mesh wire netting. All
that is required is to divert the direct rays of the sun, and to
break the force of heavy rain. In very exposed places, it is
also desirable to make the sides from which drying winds come
as close as convenient. In a house, or shelter arranged in this
way, the growth is immense. Where water can be spared, the
place becomes delightful. It is evergreen, literally, and in
addition to the plants, ferns, etc., that do so well when thus
protected, seeds can be raised for the flower garden, and where
there is space, for the vegetable garden as well. Nurserymen


and gardeners are taking more advantage of the opportunities
the bush-house offers for raising seedlings of all kinds. It may
well become a feature of every garden, whether for private or
business purposes; for, with a little taste, and at no great
outlay, the bush house may be ornamental as well as useful.
XXVI.—INSECT AND OTHER PESTS.
In an introductory to a useful little work by Professor Kirk,
of New Zealand, issued recently from the Government Printing
Office, Sydney, the author reported concerning insect pests in
New South Wales—“ I have gone very carefully through the
proof-sheets of the pamphlet on “ Pruit Blights and Diseases
of Fruit Trees,” by Professor Kirk, of New Zealand, and have
confidence that its publication and issue in New South Wales
would prove beneficial to the fruit-producing interests. The
condition of affairs here, however, differs so materially on cer-
tain points from the condition of affairs in New Zealand that
the few comments I have to add on the subject may prove
useful. Yery considerable attention has been given to the
insect pests best known in New South Wales, from their num-
bers, or destructive habits, and I am very glad to add that the
instances are comparatively rare as yet where the destruction
is so severe as described by Professor Kirk. But the warnings
and precautions submitted by him are all the more deserving
of attention on that very account. The more serious enemies
here are of the aphis and scale kinds. Stone fruits suffer from
the former, oranges, lemons, apples, pears, from the latter.
This has been going on for years, and very serious damage has
been done in the older fruit-growing districts ; but—and espe-
cially during the last three or four years—such precautionary
measures have been employed as leave no doubt that when due
attention is given to this most important matter there is no
single enemy of the whole host that cannot be kept in check,
or possibly eliminated. Take the woolly aphis, misnamed
“ American blight,” for instance.* This pest in former years
did immense mischief. It was as bad here as Professor Kirk
describes it; but it is now kept in check by using clay paint
# Tlu3 pest, and also Codlin moth, scale pests, wheat rust, scale insects,
&c., are described and illustrated in the agricultural class-book of the
Sydney Technical College, “ Elements of Australian Agriculture,” which
may be useful for further study of this subject.


made up of lime, sulphur, and clay, or by using soft-soap
washes. Scale insects, too, are checked, and the trees kept
clean, by spraying with alkaline washes, of which potash is the
basis. Spraying machines are coming into use, and are found
of decided advantage by throwing the mixture rapidly and
effectively upon the plants at the time and in the place desired.
Treatment with oils has not proved so effective here as it
would appear to be in New Zealand. This may be in conse-
quence of difference of climate and the greater rapidity of
evaporation here. In not a few cases trees have been killed
by the use of oil, closing up, as it does, the pores of the plant.
All washes and mixtures made up either for poisoning or suf-
focating insects, scales, etc., have to be used here with greater
SPRAYING-MACHINE AT WORK.
precautions, and much more diluted, than would appear to be
necessary in New Zealand. The afternoon, towards evening,
or very early morning, and if at all possible, while the air is in
a moist or humid state, is the time to do effective work against
insect pests without injury to the trees.’ The effect is not
nearly so good during dry weather, because of the greater
tenacity with which parasites cling to plants. There is also
the much greater risk of injuring the trees at such times.
Alkali washes, either in the form of concentrated lye (80 per
cent, potash), caustic soda (90 per cent, alkali), or soft-soap,
have proven most effective. If oil is used it would be well to
saponify it by adding either potash or soda, both of which are
beneficial to fruit-trees and destructive to insect life. Analyses
made in this department show that the important spraying
mixtures are made up largely of the alkalis mentioned, and
they are proving most effective. Kerosene or petroleum, beaten
into soapsuds or milk, also does effective service. The clay


paint now in very general use is made up of 3 lb. flowers of
sulphur beaten into two gallons of water; about 5 lb. freshly-
burnt limestone is next added to the water. This causes
violent boiling, and a desirable chemical change. The whole
is then thoroughly beaten up, and two gallons more water
added, with as much clay as makes a thick paint or batter.
It is laid on quickly and easily with an old paint-brush—laid
on so thick as to cover the scales or insects completely. They
are scorched and suffocated by this treatment. As the mixture
dries it holds them as in a matrix, and when the whole mass
peels off the wood is left clean, while all the ingredients are
manurial to the tree. Like other things, this paint may have
to be used several times. It is becoming customary to so coat
the trees as far up as possible every winter—the right time to
tackle insect pests.
Investigations made here leave no doubt that the encroach-
ments of parasites, vegetable and insect, are due very largely
to starvation of plants. Draining, proper manures—potash
especially —and cultivation are proving most effective pre-
cautionary measures ; but the other precautions recommended
by Professor Kirk are very necessary, such as supervision of
plants and fruit brought into this country, and also of orchards
and gardens, so as to put cultivators on their guard when
enemies appear, or disease symptoms show themselves. As
means to the same end, the issue of information concerning
the appearance, habits, and means for checking these only too
active enemies are of undoubted service.
Oidium: its Nature and Treatment.—As Queensland was
the first to suffer from that fearful pest of the vine-grower,
oidium, so was she the first to understand its nature, and
check or destroy it. The agents used are sulphur, lime, ashes,
salt, etc., now common all over the country wherever careful
vineyarding is carried on. Sulphur, however, in the form of
flowers or dust of sulphur, is the main reliance for keeping
oidium in check. The disease is watched systematically and
beaten in detail. The first buds of the earliest vines in the
early districts begin to’ swell in August, and a blast of flour
of sulphur and fine lime-dust is blown over them from the
sulphur-bellows early in the morning or in the evening when
the dew fastens the sulphur to the plants. This treatment is
repeated whenever the vines show any symptoms of disease,
and in some cases as a precautionary measure, when no disease
can be seen. The dust thus applied destroys the fungus


growth, but does not harm the vine. Oidium is very easily
observed. The leaves as soon as touched, become rusty ; they
dry up and wither rapidly unless the disease is checked. On
looking closely into the affected leaves, a downy substance is
found—a much rougher and distinct down than that natural
to the under side of the vine leaf. This is very likely to be
oidium. It is a fungus growth, and as it spreads over the
fruit, leaves, and stem, it saps the life from them. It spreads
most in hot, damp weather; and at such times, a mixture of
sulphur, wood ashes and lime—about 10 lbs. of the latter to
20 lbs. sulphur, and 40 lbs. of sifted ashes—is found effective.
This is blown over the vines liberally every week, or oftner if
necessary. In addition to this, washes of salt and lime, etc.,
around the stems of the plant while they are at rest in winter
are found useful. Draining, trenching, liberal manuring, and
such a system of cultivation as keeps the vines growing freely
from the start, all aid in keeping them healthy.
“Phylloxera,” Enemies of GrapeVines.—The accive ravages
of one or more kinds of plant-lice, of the aphis kind, upon the
roots and stems of grape vines, in a few locations in Victoria
and Mew South Wales, aroused much alarm and dread that
the terrible phylloxera pest of America and Europe was
amongst us. The insects found here are very minute. Close
observation with good observing instruments is necessary to
see them on the roots. But the effects of their presence are
more easily observed above ground. The vines and other
plants attacked assume a sickly appearance. Examination is
very necessary when these symptoms are apparent, and if the
roots are seen to be injured, and the finer rootlets seem to be
rotting away, and if, on closer examination, little yellowish,
whitish, or redish mite-like things are seen clustered upon the
the roots, the better course is to at once dig the plants out
and burn them. The loss of a few vines is not such a very
serious matter as the risks incurred by leaving them in the
ground, and the annoyance of fearing that there is a phyl-
loxera in the vineyard. It may be that the root-destroyers
seen here are the same as those of Europe; but they show
differences both in appearance and their powers of injuring
plants. The Australian insects do not seem so strong as the
specimens sent from Europe. The probosis, or sucking-tube,
is shorter than that of the European insect. Then insects,
doing much the same sort of injury, have been found on the
roots of oaks, mulberry, fig, and other trees, and also on


garden beans. The author has a large collection of these
destructive mites, collected in various parts of the country,
Geelong and Camden included. The whole subject is worthy
of very careful attention, with the object of more narrowly
identifying these insects, and for seeing how far they can be
checked by manuring, and especially with potash fertilisers.
Potash has been found to be scarce in every soil examined
where root-destroying insects were present. But, as pre-
cautionary measures, the sensible course is to root out and
burn all infested plants, and then manure the land freely
before replanting. So far the American vines of the Isabella
type have not been attacked, and as vine-grafting is a simple
and an effective operation, and the Isabella makes a very
excellent and strong-growing stock, it is a good practice to
plant cuttings of that sort for grafting purposes.
Gum Disease in Orange Trees.—Cases of this dangerous
complaint have occurred here. It is reported as fearfully des-
tructive in Europe and America. When the disease attacks
the roots the death of the tree follows rapidly—sometimes in
less than a year. The sudden changing of the leaves to a
sickly yellow color is the first visible symptom of the disease,
then the exudation of a gummy fluid from near the base of the
trunk, decay of bark in that region and of the roots below soon
follow, and extend upwards until the tree is girdled. In
some cases gum exudes from various cracks in the trunk, or
even on the branches, and in others the decay progresses with-
out emission of gum. Attendant or premonitory symptoms are
excessive and rather late blooming, the flowers being small and
mostly unfruitful, and arrested and unnatural development of
the foliage, which becomes yellow and drops. It appears that
means of preventing or checking the ravages of the malady
found to be effective are : —l. To bud at least 3ft. above the
ground on resistant stocks. In Florida it is claimed that sweet
seedlings are especially liable to the attacks of foot-root, while
bitter stocks are practically resistant. 2. To plant on dry or
porous soil. 3. To irrigate sparingly. 4. To use the knife
freely whenever the malady appears, and burn or destroy all
diseased wood.
Flies.—Two-winged flies are very numerous some seasons,
and precautions have to be employed, such as fly-nets for the
face to keep them from the eyes. The whole tribe are the out-
come of dirt accumulations, and decaying vegetable and animal
matters. Early in 1890 hordes of flies of the order ortala-
p


dians, or wing-shakers, from their jerky, shifty habits of
flight, attacked grapes and other soft fruits, in the south-
western districts. They were quickly driven off or destroyed
by using the spray machine upon them, with alkaline, Paris
green, or benzoine solutions. When all the refuse about the
place is mixed in the compost heap, and when rotted down,
and used up as manure, flies have all the less material to breed
in.
XXVII.—DISEASES OF ANIMALS.
To Keep Disease in Check.—When judged by the European
standard, it is very possible that we may appear remiss in
what has been done to keep ailments of animals as well as
plants in check. But when the conditions of life, climate,
and other conditions, are looked into, it may be seen that
there are reasons, in many cases most cogent reasons, for
seeming shortcomings in this respect. In the case of animals,
the climate of Australia is such that the isolation which is
possible and usual in other lands, by completely separating
the stock of one man from those around him, is scarcely
possible here. So that, as in the case of pleuro for instance,
a different course of treatment has to be followed, and with
results, taking all the conditions into consideration, as satis-
factory as have been arrived at in other countries. There
really is a good deal in colonial experience in such matters,
and they act wisely who, in the treatment of ailments, take
into consideration the condition of climate and facilities
available, for what should be done.
The Animal Pulse.—lrregularities of the system, which
ever form they may develope, always affect the blood circula-
tion system, or the pulse, as we term it; and some information
regarding the health of an animal may be got by feeling the
pulse. In the horse, a good and strong but quiet pulse beats
40 times a minute; the cow from 50 to 55; sheep and pigs 70
to 80 while in ordinary health. The pulse may be felt wher-
ever a large artery crosses a bone. In the horse it is generally
felt on the cord which crosses over the bone of the lower jaw
in front of its curbed position, or in the bony ridge above the
eye ; and in cattle, over the middle of the first rib. In sheep,
it is, perhaps, easier to place the hand on the left side, where
the beating of the heart may be felt. A rapid, hard and full


pulse in stock points to inflammation and fever, a rapid, small
and weak pulse also to fever, but fever accompanied by a poor
and weak state. A very low pulse in stock may be found to
indicate brain disease, while a jumping and irregular pulse
shows something wrong with the heart.
The Digestive System.—The cow, and ruminating animals
generally, are said to have four stomachs. It may be more
correct to say that the stomach has four divisions, the object
being to more perfectly digest the great mass of bulky food
which animals of this kind take into the system without
chewing. Hence it is that the cow is an entirely different
animal from a horse, mentally and physically. They cannot be
compared ; they live, move, feed and digest in different ways.
The cow has a large paunch for the reception of bulky food,
and she requires hours of quiet rest to make the best use of it.
The horse has the smallest stomach known to comparative
anatomy ; this stomach holds about twelve quarts. The human
stomach has, in ordinary cases, a capacity of three quarts.
Some men may hold a keg of beer, but the normal capacity is
three quarts; that is one-fourth the size of the stomach of the
horse, and he is six or seven times as bulky as the average
human being. This indicates that he should be fed frequently
and regularly a small amount of concentrated food. The horse
in his long association with man has learned many bad habits,
one of these is hurried eating. When kept a long time from
his food, or disturbed at his meals, he readily learns to eat
fast. Like his hurried, nervous master, he does not sufficiently
masticate, and fails to mix the saliva with his food. In this
way, the health of both suffer. His salivary glands are natur-
ally very active, and, as in man, the primary act of digestion
takes place in the mouth. The saliva contains a dissolvent
similar to the “ diastase ” formed by the sprouting of grain in
the process of brewing, and possibly in complete mastication
some assimilation takes place in the mouth. A horse that eats
eagerly and bolts his food without chewing should be checked.
Dry meal, bran, or pollard mixed with the corn, or other grain,
will induce slower eating.
Physicing.—lt may he perfectly correct that the less physic
either men or other animals absorb, all the better for them.
But physic is necessary in several diseases. In all cases,
if possible, the horse should be prepared by bran mashes,
given for two or three nights, so as to make the bowels rather
loose than otherwise, and thus allow the dose to act without


undue forcing of the impacted feces backwards. If physic is
given without this softening process, the stomach and bowels
pour out a large secretion of fluid, which is forced back upon
the rectum, and met by a solid obstacle, which it takes a long
time to overcome, and during that interval the irritating purge
is acting upon the lining membrane, and often produces ex-
cessive inflammation. Purging physic should generally be
given in the middle of the day, after which the horse should
remain in the stable, and have water as often as he will drink
it, with bran mashes. By the next morning he will be ready
to be walked out for an hour, which will set the bowels to act,
if they have not already begun. It is usual to tie up the tail
with a tape or string, so as to keep it clean. The horse should
be warmly clothed, and if the physic does not act during an
hour’s walk, he may be gently trotted for a short distance, and
then taken home ; and if still obstinate, he may be exercised
again in the afternoon. As soon as the physic operates pretty
freely, the horse is to be taken into his stable, and not stirred
out again for forty-eight hours after it has “ set,” or, in common
language, stopped acting. When the purging has ceased, the
mashes may be continued for twenty-four hours, with a little
grain added to them, and a moderate quantity of hay. The
water, during the whole time, should be in small quantities, and
the clothing should be rather warmer than usual, taking great
care to avoid draughts of cold air. Every horse requires at
least three days’ rest for a dose of physic, in order to avoid
risks. The ingredients of which the physic is composed, as
well as the dose, will vary according to circumstances ; as the
nature of the ailment, the animal’s constitution, size, age,
breed, temperature, <fcc., being taken into consideration. If
no veterinary surgeon is available, then some of the standard
works should be consulted. Mares near foaling should not be
subjected to physic.
Wounds. —“ Solutions of continuity,” as these accidents are
designated in the dignified nomenclatnre of human surgery,
are easily treated in the animal, because his skin heals very
readily, though not so speedily or in the same manner as
that of man. In man, a clean cut, if properly treated, heals
quickly, and in a few days large surfaces of many inches
in extent will often be firmly coated by a kind of glue thrown
out from the wound, which afterwards become organized. In
the animal, however, no such glue is thrown out. The oozing
is always of a watery nature, so that parts to be joined must


always be maintained by stitches, and even they are only of
use in preventing extreme displacement. The mode by which
nature heals the wounds of domestic animals is by granu-
lation, in which small red bladders are thrown out by both
surfaces, which, after they are in contact for some hours or
days, coalesce and form a band of union; but if they are
allowed to rub against each other this union cannot take
place, and the growth is confined to the angle of the wound
only. Hence the use and necessity of a bandage, which keeps
the two surfaces in contact, and hastens the cure; thus, as a
rule, effecting in ten days what would often require ten weeks if
left alone. When the granulations rise above the level of the
surrounding skin (constituting what is commonly termed proud
flesh), a piece of bluestone may be rubbed over them daily, and
if the whole sore is too red, and the granulations large and
smooth, a little Friar’s balsam may be brushed over it; or,
what is better, a solution of nitrate of silver, say three to
eight grains in an ounce of distilled or rain-water.
Outs and Tears.—ln slight cuts or tears, therefore, it is
better to leave the wound to the healing powers of nature; but
always applying some lotion, as kerosene, Potties’ Oil, Farmer’s
Friend, &c., to keep off flies, which irritate and may poison the
wound. In cases where a large flap is torn, as in the leg, for
instance, a stitch or two should always be inserted, over which
a bandage can be fixed, or the animal tied so that it cannot
interfere with the stitches. Without the last precaution,
stitches or bandages are of no use, since the animal will try
hard to remove them, and will tear out stitches which may be
inserted, however carefully they may be tied. The first thing
to be done is to wash the parts, if dirty, and then with a curved,
flat needle and thick waxed cord, or tape, to put in several
stitches, from half an inch to an inch apart, with about a
quarter or half an inch hold in the skin, according to the ex-
tent of the wound; but only fixing it so as to keep it nearly
in position, for an exact adaptation is of no use whatever.
The Surgical Stitch.—For this sort of surgical stitching,
take the needle and a double thread and insert in the outside
of the skin, on one side of the wound, and bring it out on the
inside ; then pass it from the inside toward the outside of the-
opposite part of the corresponding flap on the other side, and tie
the ends with the double thread so as to close the wound. The
edges of the wound should be drawn together, gently, but
firmly. The stitching being done, cover the wound all over


•with a bandage. After four or five days the stitching may be
cut and removed, because no longer serviceable, while it may
irritate the skin ; and from this time the whole dependence
must be placed upon the bandage in keeping the parts together.
In some parts —as, for instance, the flank—a bandage can
scarcely be applied ; but even then it is wonderful how nature
fills up a gap. We have seen a flap torn down by a stake or
spike, which hung down from the flank for five or six inches,
but at the end of a month scarce any scar could be seen. We
need never despair as long as the skin only is the seat of the
accident. But when the abdominal muscles are also torn the
bowels are apt to protrude, and the parts, if left to themselves,
will never regain their original condition. Here a circular
stitch must be practised, so as to pucker the parts like the
mouth of an old-fashioned purse, and if the walls are thick
enough the plan may be practised with success; but in the
thin tendinous expansions covering the middle of the belly
there is great difficulty in carrying out this plan of rectifying
the injury.
Pleuro.—-With the manner in which cattle may be said to
mix from one end of Australia to the other, periodical out-
breaks of this disease must continue to occur in the various
districts amongst cattle that have not been previously affected
so long as it maintains a footing on the Australian continent;
so that no measures short of stamping it out, or rendering the
cattle impervious to its attacks, can be effectual. To stamp it
out, or even to confine it to districts, by any means provided by
“ Diseases in Cattle Acts ” seems a most difficult matter. But
to render cattle invulnerable to the disease is not only possible,
but, in the belief of very experienced men, amongst them the
painstaking chief inspectors of stock of New South Wales and
Queensland, is practicable. In inoculation, properly performed,
we have this means within the reach of stockowners. It was
somewhat unfortunate that a few veterinary surgeons in Eng-
land, who were considered to rank high in the profession,
should have, at one time, expressed doubts as to the efficacy
of inoculation, and thus have been the means of establishing
and keeping alive a certain amount of uncertainty on the sub-
ject ; but it is noticeable now, with no surprise, that inocula-
tion is more generally resorted to, and with the very best
results, in Europe. Mr. Priestman, a veterinary surgeon,
practising it on a large scale in the dairy cattle sheds in
London, reported that he found that out of 965 cows inocu


lated, 74 became diseased, and only five of those died. This is
the more remarkable when it is remembered that for upwards
of a quarter of a century the mortality from pleuro-pneumo-
nia in these dairy sheds had been very great. The circum-
stance of 74 having become diseased can readily be accounted
for by the fact, that in nearly every instance the disease had
entered the shed before he was called in. But, we have not to
travel beyond our own colonies for strong corroborative testi-
mony of the effectiveness of inoculation. A few years ago, the
New South Wales Government collected the opinions and
experiences of stockowners in all parts of the colony on the
subject. A large majority reported most favorably of the
results of inoculation. In a great number of instances, where
doubts or disbelief in its efficacy was expressed, it was shown
by the replies that they had either not given it a trial, or had
only done so after the disease had established itself in the
herds. In this latter case, inoculation, to have been effective,
would have had to work a cure, instead of mere prevention,
and that inoculation cures pleuro is not claimed for the
operation.
Inoculation for Pleuro.—Chief Inspector Bruce, New South
Wales, has collected a vast stock of information upon the
subject, and published it in the form of a small work, giving
minute details of the symptoms of the disease, of the best
methods for inoculating, and the virus employed. He says ;
—“ Where the disease has broken out in a herd, the cattle
should be disturbed as little as possible, and if they are to be
inoculated, they should be quietly mustered, and yarded in small
mobs. The safest and most efficacious mode of inoculating is to
use what may be termed an enlarged needle, from five to six
inches in length, with the point ground narrow and fine, and
to draw a soft thread of twine or of worsted, of two thick-
nesses, well saturated with virus, twice through the upper or
outer side of the tail, and about one and a-half inch from the
tip ; and having done so, without drawing the stitch tight, to
cut off the thread, leaving about two inches out of the incision
at each end, like a seton, twice inserted and left untied. The
double insertion renders the effect of the inoculation more
certain—a material matter, since it is so difficult to discover
whether or not the virus has taken effect, while experience
proves that this mode does not increase the risk of evil effect
from the operation. The tail should be closely clipped with
sheep-shears around the proper spot; and in operating, the


needle should be carefully inserted just deep enough to reach
the blood and no further. It will be obvious that the tail of
the animal is the proper seat for the inoculation, not only from
being the portion of the body with which it can most easily
dispense in case of any evil effects following the operation, but
chiefly because it is the most remote from the more vital organs
of the animal. The operation should, like spaying, be steadily
and carefully performed, and not bustled or hurried over, as
cutting and branding generally are. To economise virus, only
about three or four inches of the thread should be saturated at a
time, and it should be so for every animal. A spaying needle
may be used when a setoning one cannot be obtained;
but the larger it is the better, both on account of its being
held more firmly in the hand, and from its making a larger
opening, whereby a healthy discharge is more likely to occur.
Making a slight incision in the tail, and placing a drop of virus
in the wound, or using a grooved inoculating knife, is a more
expeditious mode than the needle and saturated thread ; but
it is not nearly so certain, as the blood from the wound is apt
to carry off the virus before it has done its work, nor is it safe,
for as clean wounds in cattle are apt to close, the comparatively
clean wounds thus made in inoculating with the knife some-
times do so, and the discharge stopping, dangerous conse-
quences ensue. This the thread, by acting as a seton, in
a great measure prevents.
The Virus.—The virus is to be taken from a lung of a young
beast in the second stage of the disease ; and the animal selected
should be slaughtered and bled as if killed for meat, every care
being taken that the lungs are as free as possible from blood,
since blood in the virus renders it unsafe and comparatively
useless. Between the more firmly and earlier hepatized portion
of the lung, and that which has only reached the inflamed or
congested stage of the disease, will be found a soft, jelly-like
part, which has quite recently become hepatized, and is plainly
charged with quantities of lymph. It will be known also by
the comparatively bright light color and fleshy appearance of
the brown portion of the marbling. This is the portion to be
used, and the lynfph, when extracted, should have but a very
slight tinge of blood. The part thus selected is then to be
placed in' an earthenware vessel, and to be cut up in small
pieces, when the greater part of the virus will flow from the
lung, and can be poured off. The pieces of lung may then be
put into a cloth of open texture, and the virus still remaining


pressed out. The whole virus thus obtained should be filtered
through a piece of fine muslin into test tubes, or a clean bottle,
which is to be made quite air-tight and to be kept in a cool
place, the virus being taken out in small quantities as required.
If, after being allowed to stand, it coagulates, it will again be-
come liquid by shaking. The virus should be perfectly inodor-
ous ; if it becomes fcetid it is dangerous ; for we know that
medical students in dissecting bodies, such as those in which
death has resulted from erysipelas, do so with impunity—
although their hands may be unsound. But after putridity has
begun, the conditions are changed, and inoculation from such
bodies upon the slightest scratch would be most dangerous, if
not certain death. The lymph or matter taken from the in-
oculated wound of an animal which has been operated upon
not later than the twentieth day after the date of the inocula-
tion, has been found to be as effective and fully as active as the
virus taken from the diseased lung; but the quantity of lymph
procurable in this way is comparatively small, and only suffi-
cient to operate on a few head, even where some thousands
have been inoculated. Virus from the newly hepatized portion
of the lung of an animal in the third stage of the disease has
also been used with success, but it should only be used when
virus cannot be procured from one in the second stage ; for it
is doubtful if it be equally efficacious, even when the lung is
apparently of the right description, and selected free from the
least portion of the earlier hepatized part; from the experience
gained it would seem that excessive swellings and mal-inocula-
tion were much more frequent where the virus used had been
taken from an animal in the third than in the second stage.
Some, again, have inoculated with the serous fluid found in the
cavity of the chest in cases of hydrothorax—the wet form of
the disease. As, however, hydrothorax is more properly a
sequence than a stage of pleuro-pneumonia, and as it may
arise from other causes, this fluid contains little or none of the
proper virus, and must be comparatively useless for the purpose
of inoculation. There is certainly in the dry form of the
disease a small quantity, and only a small quantity, of virus to
be obtained near the lung; but unless the inoculator has had
considerable experience in selecting virus, it would be safer to
use only what can be procured from the lung in the state
already described.
Preservation of Virus.—As virus, when in the least exposed
to the air, becomes putrid and useless in less than twenty-four


hours in hot weather, and in two or three days when carefully
corked and kept in a cool place, many attempts have been
made to preserve it, but with indifferent success. It is pos-
sible, however, by using glass tubes, to preserve virus in the
same manner as vaccine lymph is saved, by filling the glass
tubes and hermetically sealing them ; but this mode has to be
fo lowed out with extra care and skill, and with special appli-
ances. Stock-owners wishing to inoculate cattle before the
disease has shown itself among them can generally obtain a
supply of virus on its coming within a day’s ride of the station.
If there is difficulty in the matter, then the safe course is to
apply to the Ohief Inspector of Stock for advice concerning
virus. A practicable mode of keeping the virus sound for a
time is to fill the bottle (which should be perfectly clean) in
which the virus is to be put with the fumes of sulphur, which
have a decidedly purifying effect, and then to pour the virus
into the bottle, carefully corking and sealing it before the
whole of the fumes of sulphur are expelled. By adopting this
plan, and keeping the bottle in a cool place, virus can be pre-
served for several days longer than it would otherwise be,
which is a great advantage in inoculating a herd. Another,
and perhaps a better mode, is to pour some oil on the top of
the virus, which excludes the air, and keeps the virus fresh
till required again, when the oil can be poured off. Some of
the advocates for the preservation of virus also modify or
weaken it; indeed, it is believed they cannot accomplish their
so-called preservation without doing this. But it will be seen
that this modification or weakening of the virus is objection-
able, when it is considered that the chief object to be aimed at
in the operation of inoculation is the certainty of its taking
effect; for if it fails in only a few cattle the disease is kept
alive in the herd, and the effects of the inoculation are to a
great extent lost. Since it is almost impossible to say from
the appearance of the cattle after inoculation whether or not it
has taken a proper effect, it is much better rather to over-do
than under-do the operation, and make the matter a certainty,
even at the expense of a few losses from excessive swellings.
The losses from inoculation, where unmodified lung-virus is
used, seldom, when properly performed, exceed 2 per cent. ;
they are generally less.
Inoculating a Dairy Herd.—Commence by mustering into
the yards ; then draught out all animals that have been inocu-
lated, and all that appear weakly or seedy, and separate them


from those that are to be inoculated ; then pass the latter into
a strong, tight lane, sufficiently high and strong to hold a
struggling bullock, and sufficiently narrow to prevent- a cow
turning round. When the lane is full, close up the ends, and
commence inoculating by pulling the tail of each beast through
the slabs. Insert the point of the needle at the end of the
tail where the hair commences to grow. The matter should be
inserted just under the skin. The bones of the tail should not
on any account he touched by the injector, needle, thread, or
vaccine matter. Most of the cases of mortification, loss of tail,
&c., arise from neglect of this precaution. As each animal is
inoculated, cut off the hair at the end of the tail, that it may
be known, and turn out the inoculated beasts by themselves,
so that they cannot mix with others. They should be looked
after carefully for a fortnight after being operated on, and any
that show symptoms of sickness or swollen tail* should be
yarded at once. To treat them, use a liquid injector, washed
perfectly clean, and charge it with either of the following
solutions :—Weak carbolic acid, water of chloride of lime, weak
tannic acid, as extracted from iron-bark, with water, or bi-
sulphite of lime. Inject either of these into the swollen parts,
and if the tail is very bad slit it in two from the swelling
downwards; but this latter operation is seldom necessary
where the inoculation has been carefully done. The spring
season, just at the approaah of warm weather, is the best time
for inoculating.
Blackleg.—This disease, as colonists know it, is identical in
many essential particulars with the “ black-quarter,” “ blood-
striking,” and “ quarter-ill,” known to owners of cattle in
Europe. In general cases young stock are the first affected ;
and the change from warm summer to chilly autumn weather
often brings the disease. Its career is as rapid in the warmer
as it is in colder climates; a beast may seem well in the
evening, may pass through all the stages of the disease during
a single night, and be found dying in the morning. The symp-
toms are loss of power of one or both thighs, with rapid decay
of the flesh. On examining a deceased beast, masses of clotted
blood and matter are found mixed with flesh and muscle in a
state of disintegration. High-feeding, using maize-meal, bran
cooked, lucerne and oaten chaff, ike., have been followed, where
symptoms of the disease were around, and with good effect,
as preventive means. Bleeding has been recommended in
cases of attack, and the administration of nibs of garlic as a


preventive. Inoculation is also recommended. But removal
to higher anjl drier pasture, and the providing of shelter, at
least for the young stock, are the more satisfactory precau-
tionary measures that have come under the notice of colonists.
Cancer.—This disease is dangerous to other animals and to
human beings. The statement that veterinary practice has no
cure for it seems absolutely correct. In the case of the eye
only being affected, that member can be extracted, but it is
very doubtful whether this stays the disease. It is simply
cruel to apply caustic remedies with the “ hope that they will
burn out the cancer.” Tonic condiments may be given, such
as salt, iron in some form, as means of relief. It has also been
found effective to shift diseased animals to salt-bush country,
but there is danger in every movement made with animals so
affected, and but the most doubtful prospects of curing them.
Worms.—Salt is a most efficacious agent to keep worms in
check. Let horses, sheep, and pigs have plenty of salt. Iron
filings, sulphur, and salt, as a mixture, are good, about a table-
spoonful at a time. This mixture is sold as condition powder.
The presence of worms in the horse is marked at first by an
increased appetite, but the animal, notwithstanding the quan-
tity of food which he consumes, falls off in condition; the
skin is dry and hide-bound, the coat is rough, and is not shed at
the ordinary time ; there is an annoying itching, which causes
the horse to rub his upper lip against the manger or on the
wall; sometimes there is considerable itching about the
rectum, which is indicated by the f horse rubbing his tail or
rump against anything within reach. The symptoms before
mentioned are such as would lead one to suspect the existence
of worms, but it is only when these appear among the dung
voided by the horse that we can speak with certainty on the
nature of the evil. At a later period, and especially when the
worms have developed in great numbers, the symptoms are
very much aggravated, and the horse becomes emaciated, and
suffers occasionally from colicky pains ; the flank is tucked up;
he walks with difficulty, and fatal terminations sometimes
ensue. As to medical treatment—a does of aloes, six drachms ;
powdered ginger, two drachms; treacle, sufficient to make a
pill, may be given, and has often the effect of expelling the
worms without having recourse to other treatment. If this
fails, divide six ounces of iron filings into twelve parts, and
make into as many balls with sufficient linseed meal and
treacle, and give one every morning until finished; then give


a dose of aloes, as mentioned, which will of
any worms which remain in the horse’s j
Colic.—Gripping of the bowels, or colic, is a dangerous con>_
plaint. It is generally caused by unwholesome
remedies, hot wet cloths and a draught containing loz. tincture*
opium and 2oz. spirit nitrous ether are effective. (See article,
“ Pepper-yielding Plants,” page 155).
Red Water.—This is a disease connected with calving; it
may commence during the period of pregnancy, and in the
alteration of the blood then going on. Gradually the red
blood globules are broken up, and the coloring matter passes
in the urine. Hence the term red water, which very well
expresses the disease. Unless treated promptly, the animal
suffers great pain, becomes constipated, ceases to ruminate;
the water becomes black in very bad stages, and the patient
may die. Many cases of the kind are reported lately. The
safest treatment is, first to give a purgative, made up of lib.
Epsom salts, lib. common salt, oz. ginger. If the animal
will take this in a warm mash, so much the better; if not,
administer as a draught, and give mashes afterwards. Keep
the bowels open by giving small doses spirits turpentine,
with 3to 6 drachms laudanum. As a preventive, cows prior
to calving should have purgatives, and the bowels kept open.
Gold water, impregnated with decaying matter, bad feed and
constipation are primary causes of the disease. In very ob-
stinate cases injections of warm water and salt, or soap and
warm water, are given. Where many cases occur, professional
help should be called in, and the drinking water examined by
analysis.
Milk Fever.—The animal is usually attacked with milk
fever within 36 hours after dropping her calf, and unless re-
lieved will probably be dead in 48 hours more. The heaviest
milkers, and cows in high condition are more subject to it than
those in poor flesh. The cause is pressure of blood on the
brain, consequent on the increased amount in the circulation
forced to seek new channels by the expulsion of the calf. The
symptoms are a sudden and entire ceasing of the flow of milk,
the eyes become blood-shot, the cow loses all interest in her
calf and all care for it, lies down and can be aroused with
difficulty, loses power of motion, and death ensues. Sometimes
these symptoms are varied by violent mania, the cow being
crazy, running against walls or other obstacles, and injuring
herself. Prevention can usually be secured by keeping the


animal in a low condition. The bowels should be kept open
by the use of bran, turnips, &c., and, if necessary, mild
cathartics. For several weeks before calving the feed should be
reduced, if the cow is in full flesh. Where the danger is con-
sidered great, bleeding may be resorted to soon after the calf
is dropped. After the attack the only remedy which has been
found tolerably sure is bleeding, when it can be done, but in
advanced stages the blood is thick and dark and will not flow.
In bleeding, cord the neck of the animal tightly well down
towards the shoulder, when the vein will fill above the cord
and show distinctly. Over this a lancet should be held and
given a sharp blow with a stick to make the opening into the
vein. The bleeding should be copious, and the blood caught
in some vessel so as to be sure how much is taken, as a little
blood makes a great show if left on the ground. Two-thirds
of a common pailful, six or eight quarts, should be taken ; if
bled till the animal staggers, it will do no harm. The head
should be showered with cold water, or wet bags applied to it.
Move the bowels by physic —a drachm of calomel or a dose of
Epsom salts.
“ Springers.”—This term is generally applied to the first
stages of pregnancy in the cow. And it is useful to know
the condition of an animal before distention of the abdomen
shows itself. The practical ear may be able to detect the fact
of pregnancy in the domesticated animals at a very early
period, and in the cow as early as the sixth or eighth week.
The beating of the foetal, or calf-heart, may be heard twice as
frequent as that of the mother. The region best adapted for
listening is on the right flank, commencing at the upper por-
tion, at a point midway between the hip-bone and the last
rib, and at an equal distance below the processes of the back-
bone, shifting the ear downwards and backwards. It the
operator closes the other ear with his finger, it assists the con-
centration of sounds at the desired point. Of course, it is
important that the animal should be perfectly at rest, and that
there should be no disturbing noises. The acquirement of
accuracy, and the ready detection of the fcetal sounds, can
only be attained by practice ; but once heard, the sounds can
hardly be mistaken, especially if care is taken by the listener
not to confound the pulsations of his own arteries with those
for which he is seeking.
Bloating or Hoven.—This complaint is not so common in
the colonies as where animals have the run of rank green


clover, &,c., the rapid fermentation of and generation of gasses
in the paunch which cause hoven, and may kill the animal
unless attended to. A ready remedy is to put a round stick,
two inches in diameter, in the mouth like a bit, and tie it fast
by the ends to the horns to hold it. This assists in the escape
of the gas from the paunch. Instant relief is afforded by
puncturing at a point midway between the hip-bone and the
last rib, and equally distant from the back, so that the loin and
kidneys are avoided. The exact point is where the swelling is
most prominent. A penknife is a useful instrument, but a
trochar and canula are better. When a knife is used, a quill
should be put into the orifice, and kept from stoppage by a
wire. When the gas has all escaped, the quill is removed, and
the wound heals very quickly. After the trouble is over, dry
feed, bran, Ac., should be given, with pepper or other relieving
medicines (see article on pepper plants, page 155.)
Worms in Sheep.—Amongst the various specifics recom-
mended for the cure of worm disease, that of nitre and sulphur
has been brought under favorable notice by the Chief Inspector
of Sheep for New South Wales. The proportions are, 1 part of
nitre and sof sulphur to 10 parts of water. Dose : 1 ounce
of the mixture to be repeated every eight or ten days if
required.
Swainsonia, Indigo Plant, Poison Pea, &c.—The losses in
sheep from eating the plant variously known by the above
names have been very considerable, although botanists have on
various occasions expressed doubts as to this [plant containing
poisonous properties. But the evidence to the contrary is too
strong to admit of doubt. These plants are dangerous, and
sheep that once acquire a taste for them refuse other herbage
single out from the flock, keep nibbling at the indigo, &c., and
gradually pine away and die. The following well authenticated
incident communicated by a large sheep-owner is valuable, not
only as determining the fact of the plant being poisonous, but
as tending to show the nature of the poison it contains :—A
lamb that had become, in bush parlance, an “ Indigo.eater,”
and had separated itself from the flock, was placed in a small
paddock near the homestead. Here it obstinately refused to
eat grass. After a few days the owner collected a small
quantity of Indigo plants, and this it greedily ate out of his
hand, and afterwards followed him round the paddock and
tried all it could to get more of the stuff. It has been observed
that the plant is most destructive when in blossom. The plant


above referred to is a low, branching shrub, with purplish, pea
like blossoms, and considerable quantities of it were seen
recently in the New England country, and westwards, and
south towards Wagga and Riverina. It should be rooted out
wherever possible.
Physicing a Pig.—To dose a pig, which is sure to choke if
we attempt to make it drink while squealing, halter the animal
as if for execution, and tie the rope end to a stake. He will
pull back until the rope is tightly strained. When he has
ceased his uproar and begins to reflect, approach him, and
between the back part of his jaws insert an old shoe from which
the toe-leather has been cut. This he will at once begin to
suck and chew. Through it pour the medicine and he will
swallow any quantity that is given.
Worms in Pigs.—Oystic worms in pigs are more common
than is generally supposed. These animals, not being very
particular as to what they eat or drink, gather the ova of these
parasites from various sources. When swallowed by an unfor-
tunate animal, the ova speedily crack their covering, the
embryo escapes, works its way into the blood-vessels, and is
carried into the particular organ most suitable for its develop-
ment. One variety, the ccenurus cerebralis, may reach the
brain, causing the familiar gid or sturdy of sheep. A smaller
variety is prone to settle in the kidneys, and in ten or twelve
weeks reach maturity, when they vary in size from a pin’s
head to a large marble. They do not undergo further develop-
ment in the kidneys; but, when dogs or pigs get them, they
will, in three months, be infested with the worms. . A careful
search should be made in all the carcases for evidences of para-
sites. Smaller cystic worms are sometimes found in the flesh,
rendering it dangerous for human food. The affected kidneys
will, of course, be buried beyond the reach of animals. If
nothing is found amiss excepting in the kidneys, the carcases
may be used, especial care, however, being used in salting, and
more particularly in thoroughly cooking the pork.
Ticks.—These nasty little bugs may get into the skin of
human beings, at the teats of cows, into dogs and other
animals. They kill both dogs and cats, and they are annoying
and dangerous in any case, when they burrow in the skin.
Where annoyance is observed in an animal, or felt by a person,
search for and pull out or cut away the tick at once. Part of
it will most likely remain in the skin, and that should be
rubbed with kerosene or spirits, or, better still, with a weak


solution of ammonia. In the densely-timbered and warmer
parts of the country ticks are very poisonous, and a well-
known resident in the Cardwell district, Queensland, states
that, having twelve years’ experience with these destructive
and often fatal parasites, he has found calomel to be very
successful in curing the effects of their bite. His treatment
has principally been directed to dogs, but on one occasion he
successfully treated a foal, which became so paralysed that it
had to be carried and placed in slings. He gave it 24 grains of
calomel as a first dose, but did not weigh the succeeding doses.
The foal recovered, and grew up. After a dog had lost the
use of its hind-quarters calomel has always, in his experience,
effected a cure. When he finds a tick or ticks in a dog, before
paralysis sets in, he pulls the parasite out, and gives several
large doses of calomel. Many of his neighbors who have tried
this treatment have been equally successful.
XXVIII.—PREPARING BREAD AND MEAT.
GOOD BREAD, AND HOW TO MAKE IT.
Good bread is the rule in Australia, bad bread the exception.
This is the case in the bush, as well as the towns, and is
attributable, in the first place, to the excellent quality of the
wheat and flour; and, in the next,
to the skill in bread-making that
pervades the community. It is
an accomplishment of which Aus-
tralians may well feel proud.
Good breadmeans good digestion,
contentment, health ; for all of
which the country is somewhat
famous—a fame due, in a greater
degree to the quality of the
bread than might be supposed.
The first requisite for good bread
is good flour—not necessarily
the whitest or finest flour, but
sweet, dry, wholesome flour, made
from sound grain, without mix-
ture of any kind. Whatever the
price, this is the cheapest flour
FOR HOME-MADE FLOUR.
that can be bought. Even in prison establishments it has
Q


been proved by actual tests, extending over months and years,
that the best flour is the cheapest in the end. Where wheat
can be got conveniently, very good flour is made by grinding
it in domestic mills. Flour can be tested for its “ strength,”
O >
or bread-making qualities, in the manner described at p. 51,
“ Elements of Australian Agriculture.”
Yeast.—This is another important ingredient in bread-
making. A simple and thoroughly good way of making it is
to put 1 oz. of hops into 2 quarts of water ; boil until the
water is reduced by one-third ; strain this, and add to the
water 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar ; when the mixture is cool add
2 tablespoonfuls of flour, and bottle it. This gives about 3
pints of yeast, and what is wanted first for use should be put
into a bottle that contained yeast before. If no such bottle is
handy, a few drops of vinegar or a bit of dough will cause it to
ferment. It is ready for use as soon as fermentation sets in,
or, in moderately warm weather, about twenty-four hours
after the fresh yeast is made. It keeps for weeks when corked
tight and put away in a cool place. One pint of this yeast is
sufficient for 121bs. of bread.
Making the Bread.—To make, say 121bs. of bread, use
water slightly warm in cool weather, and cold water in warm
weather. Put 2 quarts water, or skimmed milk if it can be
got from a butter factory, and 1 pint yeast and sufficient salt into
a dish. Add flour sufficient to make a thin batter; beat it up
until thoroughly mixed ; do not spare the beating at this stage.
This is the sponge, and when it is tough and elastic, and fine
with beating and working, tuck it in nicely with flour from
the sides of the dish, and cover it over with a cloth, and leave
it in a warm or cool place (according to the weather). A good
sponge will spring or rise three or four inches cluring the
night; in cool weather it takes longer. Turn the sponge out
upon a table, into the flour necessary to make bread—say
Gibs, flour if we are making 121bs. of bread. It may be home-
made flour, or bran, or coarser flour may be added at this
stage if we want coarser bread. Mix it in until the dough is
just stiff enough not to stick ; work it well; don’t spare elbow-
grease—that is one of the secrets of bread-making. Form the
well-worked dough into any desired shape or size for loaves—
pans are the best for baking—and let them stand until it rises
an inch or so ; then put into the oven and bake.
Bush-Yeast.—A bit of dough the size of the fist, put away
in a cool place, in flour, will keep for three or four days, and


make good bread. To use it, mix up the dough in about 3
pints warm water; mix them thoroughly; then add a table-
spoonful of sugar, with salt and flour, and mix up the sponge
as in the former case, and make it into bread in the same way.
This can be repeated in warm weather until the bread begins
to have a sourish taste; and this again can be corrected by
adding a little baking-soda, until compelled again co make yeast.
The Oven.—ln the bush this is an important part of success-
ful home-life. “Is marriage a failure”? has a serious look in the
face of a bad'oven. The so-called “ camp-oven” is simply a
flat-bottomed iron pot, with a lid less or more hollowed to hold
fire or ashes. The dough, when ready for baking, is put into
this pot, which is set into a mass of hot ashes, covered over, or
a fire is kindled around it, bottom, sides, and top. It is a
hasty process, entailing close watchfulness, and risks of burnt
fingers and clothes, and swear-words at times, when the man
is called on to come and help over a difficulty. It is alto-
gether a barbarous arrangement, and should be beneath the
notice of a man who can use his hands. An oven is easily
made. An iron nail or oil can makes a good one. Set it
lengthways upon stones or bricks, sufficiently high to get fire
under it. Then cover it round with a sheet of iron, or any-
thing that will stand fire, leaving about an inch of clear space
between the iron drum or oven and the cover. Over the
latter put a layer of clay, working it well to make it stick and
reduce cracking; the thicker the clay the longer it will hold
heat; the more it is worked the less it cracks. Leave an out-
let for smoke at the top or back of the oven. Fit a lid of wood
or iron to the mouth of it. Put in a shelf to form a sole.
Use irobbark or dry gum-bark for the fire, and there you have
an oven, not much to look at, perhaps, but it is all there for
baking—anything from a biscuit to a roast—fit for a man that
is able and willing to work for the best food in the land, lie
deserves it. But he who allows his wife to destroy temper
and fingers over an iron pot deserves the burnt offerings that
are often found in these barbarisms. Colonial ovens, on the
above correct principle, that is with a confined space for fire
or hot hair round the sides and top, are made of iron, and sold
in the towns. Ovens are also made of brick and stone, or by
scooping out a white-ant nest, and are heated by kindling a
fire inside until sufficient heat is gained ; then put in the
article to be baked, and close up the front tight, to keep in the
heat until the cooking is completed. On a pinch, bread can be


baked in the red-hot ashes ; ashes from bark are the best; or
by heating stones, as is done in the South Sea Islands, putting
the bread or article amongst them, and covering up the whole,
until the baking is completed.
Baking Powder.—A good article is made by mixing 3 oz.
tartaric acid, 5 oz. bi-carbonate of soda, and \ lb. of arrowroot.
These proportions can be carried out to any extent. Dry each
of the articles separately in the sun or oven, and when per-
fectly dry mix them thoroughly, and put the mixture in a
bottle, corked tight to keep off the air. Two teaspoonsful of
the powder makes 2 lb. of bread, or nearly as much biscuit.
Mix the powder with the flour and salt, then add cold water
or milk to make dough. Do the mixing and kneading quickly,
and bake in a quick oven.
Self-Raising Flour.—There are several processes for making
“ self-raising flour,” among which the following are fairly good :
100 lbs. well-dried flour, 10J oz. tartaric acid, 12 oz. bi-car-
bonate of soda, 8 oz. lump sugar, 1J lbs. salt. The ingredients
must be perfectly dry, and reduced to fine powder before
mixing.
“ Machine Milk ” for Bread-Making.—Those who are near
enough to a cream-separating machine might try the effect of
using the skimmed or “machine milk” instead of water, or as
part of the water, for bread-making. It is extra excellent.
MAIZE FOR BREAD, PUDDINGS, ETC.
In maize we have an every-day instance of the prejudices
that regulate what we eat and drink. In speaking to a dozen
persons upon the healthfulness of maize as food, eleven would
readily admit that, in one form or other, it is pleasant; easily
digested, and strengthening as a consequence; but it is doubtful
whether one of the twelve uses the article—not because of its
scarcity, for maize is amongst the things seen everywhere, but
from little difficulties in the way of preparing it for food.
Difficulties also arise from not finding freshly-prepared maize-
meal or flour in the stores, and thus it does not find its way to
the table to anything like the extent merit and real value
should secure for it. There being no necessity whatever to say
a word for the healthfulness of maize, we will devote the space
at our disposal to showing a few of the favorite methods of
using the article.
Green Corn.—When the grain of maize is just full upon
the cob, and while, upon pressure with the thumb, the sweet


juice (milk it is termed in America) can be squeezed from it,
pull off the ears, strip the wrappers from them, and boil the
cobs with meat, or merely in water. When cooked, the grain
comes off freely. The cobs can be sent to table in various
neat ways that will readily suggest themselves. , The grain
tastes like green peas, and may be either eaten from the cob
without further preparation, or after being pared off with a
knife, and served up as peas. There is a peculiar flavor in
this green corn, not unlike cooked oysters, to enjoy which is
an acquired taste; but, once acquired, few things are more
appreciated or more nourishing than green corn. In America
vast quantities of the grain are put up in cans in the same
way as preserved meat and fruit, and it comes into use while
the corn is out of season. In Australia we have had fresh
green corn on the table during seven months of the year. The
white varieties are most in favor for cooking; but all are
good.
Maize-Meal.—To make the best meal or flour the maize
must be dried in an oven until quite crisp, then, if there is no
grinding-mill handy, a hand-mill (sold by the ironmongers at
from £2 to £4) answers very well. These hand-mills make
excellent meal; they grind a bushel in an hour, and last for
years. Grind the corn coarsely at first—the work is too hard
when the meal is ground fine at one operation; then screw up
the mill as fine as may be desired, and grind what will be
necessary for not longer than a week. It should always be
fresh,
Porridge.—There are few things better than maize-meal por-
ridge for persons of weak digestion. It is also good food for
strong men. Boil the water, and pour.in the meal gradually
through the fingers of one hand while stirring with the other.
It requires at least half-an-hour’s boiling, and is all the better
of being boiled still longer. Eat with milk, molasses or butter.
When cold it forms into a stiff mass that is excellent when
fried.
Puddings.—They require four or five hours’ cooking. The
meal makes up well with suet, eggs, milk, molasses, currants,
spices, or other pudding fixings. Stir the ingredients into as
much meal as may be desired, making the whole into a stiff
batter. Let it stand a bit, and prepare a pudding-cloth by
first dipping in boiling water; then dredge flour over it, and
put in the pudding, tying it so that water will not get in
and make the pudding heavy. Leave plenty of room for


swelling—maize-meal swells more than flour. Put the bag
into boiling water, and do not let it get off the boil until
cooked.
Baked Puddings,—A quart of meal, half pint of milk, 11b.
molasses, and eggs and other fixings to fit, make excellent
puddings. Scald the milk and mix it with the molasses and
meal, stirring the whole thoroughly together. Add eggs and
any desired spice, with salt, &c. Pour the whole into a well-
buttered pudding-dish. Bake it well, and use while hot. It
is good.
Various other puddings, boiled and baked, and known by
various names, are made by modifying the foregoing, and
using more or less molasses, eggs, essence or juice of lemon—
one of the best seasonings for maize-meal puddings, &c. They
must all be well cooked, and special care taken that water
does not get into the cloth while boiling. To turn them out
nicely, dip the cloth in cold water as soon as taken out of the
pot.
Cakes, buns, &c., &c., are also made by following the same
general rules.
Bread.—To make bread from maize meal, it must be worked
up in the first place with boiling water, and then the meal and
water must be allowed to incorporate or “ leaven.” Put the
meal into a dish, add the salt, then stir in the water boiling
hot, until there is a stiff, well mixed batter. Let this stand
covered with a cloth until it is blood-warm, then mix yeast
with the dough (a little more than is allowed for wheat-bread) ;
knead the whole thoroughly ; don’t spare the elbows; make
into any desired sized loaves, and set them in baking-pans in a
warm place for an hour, or until the loaves are risen. Bake in
a moderately warm, but not hot, oven. If the dough should
get sour, mix a little soda in warm water and mix it
with the dough; mould the loaves again, and bake. Maize
requires longer baking than wheaten bread; and to prevent
a hard crust forming, each loaf should be wrapped up in
a damp towel until required for use. The foregoing is a
most wholesome bread. A finer bread is made by mixing one-
half or less wheat-flour with the meal, and using warm instead
of hot water in making the dough. The other process described
answers for the remainder of the work. A richer bread is
made by using milk instead of water : the skimmed milk from
cream-separating machines answers excellently for this or any


other bread. Germans, who make excellent maize-bread, put
a few carraway seeds, with the yeast, into the dough.
GOOD MEAT AND HOW TO CURE IT.
Australians are not much afflicted with bad meat; though,
in the towns, it is tough enough, and calls for the skill of the
cook to make it tender. The climate does not encourage back-
slidings on the part of butchers. But still it is as well to know
the indications of the genuine article. Sound meat has a
marbled appearance, from the ramifications of the little veins
which surround the fat-cells ; its fat, especially the inside fat,
is hard and suety, and is never wet, whilst that of diseased
meat is soft and watery. The touch or feel of healthy meat is
firm and elastic, and it hardly moistens the fingers ; that of
doubtful meat is soft and wet ; it is often so soft that the
liquid matter of the blood runs from it, in which case it is
technically styled “ wet.” Good meat has but little odor, and
this is not disagreeable. Good meat will bear cooking without
shrinking, and without losing much in weight; but bad meat
shrivels up, and it often boils to pieces. So much for fresh
meat, which is best preserved in that state by hanging clear
from the touch of all but the hook, in an airy shady place, and
so protected that flies cannot get at it. To still further preserve
meat, it must be taken in hand as soon as the flesh is firm and
the meat is cold. In warm weather even this cannot be done ;
we must then kill at night, and cut up and salt first thing in
the morning, before the sun is abroad, if possible.
Common Salting.—Cut the meat in pieces of from 6 lbs. to
10 lbs., heavier or lighter, as may be desired ; use common
coarse salt only, if for immediate family use; if for keeping,
pound 1 oz. of saltpetre for each 50 lbs. of meat; about 10 lbs.
of salt is necessary for that quantity of meat; mix the salt and
saltpetre together, and place it handy to the bench or table on
which the meat is to be salted. When neither are available, as
in camp, a piece of canvas or a bag is often made to do duty
instead. Rub into each piece of meat as much salt as it will
carry, and stack on a board to allow it to drip off the brine for
one day, or longer if the meat is wanted dry. Rub again next
day, letting it have all the salt it will take ; then pack it
tightly in a cask, spreading a layer of salt all round the meat as
the packing goes on. Press it down tight, and head up the
cask ; if it is for every day use, keep the meat covered with
salt or brine.


Dry Meat, for Carrying.—May be either rubbed daily with
dry salt until it is quite dry ; or, after salting for eight or ten
days, wash it clean with water, and smoke the meat until it is
quite dry. In cool weather, one or two days’ salting answers,
then smoke till dry.
Sweet Salting.—This makes good meat for carrying. Take
the tenderest pieces of the round or other part without bone.
To, say 15 lbs. meat, allow 1 oz. saltpetre; bruise it fine; soak
three or four chillies in a cup ofwatcr ; squeeze out the chillies
and add the saltpetre to the water, and rub the meat with it.
Or pepper or other spice may be used instead of chillies. As
soon as the moisture runs off rub in a mixture of one-third
sugar, two-thirds coarse salt, say in all 3 lbs. to 15 lbs. of meat;
but don’t spare the sugar and salt, if the meat will take it in ;
rub the meat daily for a fortnight. In the regular and
thorough rubbing in of salt is the secret. It can then be
washed and smoked as described, or left in the sw.eet pickle.
When the beef is to be cooked, put it into a pan with say a
quart of water; cover the meat with suet shredded rather
large; an onion or two minced small improves it very much ;
cover the whole with a flour crust, and let it bake in a moder-
ate heated oven for about three hours. The liquor and suet
remaining in the pan can all be made use of for frying and for
sauces.
A Handy Meat-Safe.—A contrivance seen amongst the
men on the railway-lines for preserving their meat from flies
that might come into more general use were it known : To a
circular piece of wood, about 24 inches diameter, three galvan-
ised-iron hooks were screwed, then a piece of netting was
tacked round the circular top, and fell about three feet under
it, and was tied at the bottom. A bit of cane, in the form of
a hoop, was stitched into the calico about half-way down. This
“ safe ” was suspended by a line thrown over the branch of a
tree 50 or more feet above ground. It hung up there in fresh
air, and above the reach of flies.
To Sweeten Meat, Casks, &c. —Lime-water, douced on freely,
is the most cleanly and healthy.
KILLING AND CUTTING-UP BEEF.
Spearing.—As carried on at the slaughtering places, the
killing of cattle in Australia is both humane and scientific.
The animals are driven into a yard, and, ere they have time to
be alarmed, an iron-shod spear is shot into the vital part of


the spinal column at the back of the head, one after another,
till all are down. This is done by a man who is poised above
the animals. The carcasses are at once subjected to the further
purposes of butchering.
Shooting.—Where better appliances are not available, the
animal is shot, usually in the head.
Killing Quiet Cattle.—A rope being passed over the horns
or head of the animal, it is drawn tight to a ring in the floor
of the slaughter-pen, or to other strong fixture that may be
available. A sack or something else is thrown over the eyes,
and a broad, sharp chisel, held in the hand by means of a rope
or withe, as a blacksmith holds a swedge, is driven into the
vertebra: just behind the skull, and a sudden blow with a
maul drives it between the bones and into the spinal cord.
This blow instantly paralyses the victim. The throat is then
cut clear across, to divide both the vein and artery, and the
animal bleeds very quickly.
Taking off the Hide, and Cutting Up.—After it has bled
the beef is turned upon its back, and the skin is ripped from
the throat over the brisket down to the thighs, and then up
the thighs to the hock-joints ; it is also ripped up the forelegs
to the knee. These joints are then severed and separated,
taking care not to cut the sinew at the back of the hock, by
which the carcase is to be hung up. The skin is stripped
down as far on the sides as need be. The carcase is. then
opened, the brisket is sawn through, and a stick put in to hold
it apart. The internals are then taken out, received in a large
tub, and set aside. The carcase is then hoisted up, the skin
CUTTING UP A BEEF.
wholly stripped off, and the head cut off. The skin is laid on
one side for the present. The carcase is then drenched with a
few pails of cold water, and is divided down the backbone
with a saw, and possilby an axe; unless the axe is very sharp a


cleaver is the best thing to use. The sides are then left to cool
and set. This is a point which is often neglected, and the
meat consequently may not keep, and is tough and hard.
When the meat is firm and quite cooled it is cut up, being
first divided as on the line from ato a, figure 1. The fore-
quarter is laid on a strong bench, and is divided across on the
line hto h. The upper parts may be cut for roasts, and the
shoulder into steaks, or with the brisket into salting pieces.
The flanks and belly are suitable for salting, and the loins for
roasts and steaks. The three-cornered pieces ip the rump make
steaks, the thigh is called the round, and makes steaks and a
very fine salting piece, and the knuckles are fine for soup
pieces. When thus divided the meat is saleable, and what is
not sold can be salted down for corned beef. For domestic
use the larger pieces can be divided again, and the most of the
pieces corned and barrelled. If dried beef is desired it is taken
from the lower part of the leg of the beef, which is a wedge-
shaped piece, and is lightly salted, with some sugar and spice
added, and then smoked.
CUTTING up A SHEEP.
A sheep is killed by laying it on a bench, with the head
projecting over the edge, and cutting the throat quite through.
When it has bled, it is hung up, and the skin removed. As
soon as the belly is clear, the carcase is opened and the offal
taken out at once. If this is not done quickly, the meat will
have what is called a “ woolly taste,” from the absorption of
the gases from the intestines. The carcase is divided into
quarters by cutting or sawing down the back, and by dividing
the halves on the line atoa,as in figure. If the saddle is cut
out, it is taken before the carcase is divided into halves down
the back, this piece being the two loins marked 2, and not
separated. This is the choice roast of the mutton. Other-
wise, the leg is cut off as marked by the dotted lines (3), the
neck is cut off at 1, and the shoulder at 4 ; at 5, G, are the
flanks used for stewing. The neck is regarded the best piece


of the mutton for soup. A mutton ham (3 in the illus-
tration), trimmed nicely, salted and smoked, is good enough
for anybody, and they ought to be plentiful in Australia.
Dressing Mutton for Export.—The increasing export trade
in chilled mutton, makes it important that the various
ENGLISH METHOD
a , Shoulder; b, Neck; c, Breast; d t Loin ;e, Leg.
methods of dressing in favor in different countries should be
understood. The American and Scotch methods of killing
and cutting up mutton are almost identical. In Scotland the
jigot, or leg, is cut with a part of the loin for roasting, or it is
cut without any addition for boiling or roasting. In America
it is used for the same purpose. The loin is a roasting piece in
both countries. The fore-quarter is divided through the
shoulder-blade into two pieces. The back ribs are divided into
two, and are used for different purposes. The neck is for
boiling, and makes good soup. The back ribs, consisting of
both ribs and shoulder, make an excellent roast. The ribs are
cut up into chops, while the breast and shoulder make a good
SCOTTISH METHOD,
a, Jigot; b, Loin; c, Backrib; d, Breast.
roasting piece. The breast alone boils well, or may be corned.
The English mode of cutting up a carcase of mutton is by
many preferable to the Scotch or American. The leg is cut


short like a ham, and the shoulder-blade—the scapular region
of the anatomist—is removed entire. This piece makes an
excellent roast; of the neck-piece, the fore part is fitted for
boiling and soup, and the hind part for roasting and chops.
The breast is left bare on removing the shoulder, and the ribs,
called spare-ribs, are roasted, broiled, or corned along with the
brisket. The back end of the breast makes a good roast ; but
for this purpose the loin is the favourite cut; when removed
double, forming the chine or saddle, it may grace the table of
a public dinner. The leg is roasted or broiled, but when cut
long, taking in the hock-bone, it resembles a haunch of venison,
and is roasted accordingly.
HIDES, LEATHER, AND SKINS.
Taking Off the Hide.—There is some skill necessary to take
the hide neatly from a beast. Let us suppose the animal dead,
and placed on its back; the operator, by thrusting his knife
point foremost and edge up, makes a slit the entire length of
the carcass, from the throat, over the centre of the breast in
the line of the navel to the vent. Let him now stand by its side,
with his face looking the way the head lies, and taking the fore
foot in his left hand, run the point of his knife in the line of
the cleft of the foot and cap of the knee, up the front of the
leg, and into the central slit on its breast. For the hind leg,
having reversed its position, let the slit be made in the line of
the heel, over the centre of the cap of the hock, down the back
of the ham into the central slit. Then using the hand to
separate the skin, and the knife as little as possible, strip the
hide off towards the back. In this way the hide, when spread
out, will have a square form without long projections, and con-
sequent deep indentions of its outline. So far we have seen
nothing of the cuts and slashes of which tanners complain, nor is
there any necessity for making them, as a competent man proves
by taking the hide off without once cutting into it. But
tanners are themselves to blame in some degree, when they
don’t make an inspection when buying, or allow more for a
fair hide than one that is cut and slashed. Then there are the
effects of branding, for every mark of the iron on the living
beast leaves a mark on his hide.
Salting Hides.—To preserve the hide, three or four shovel
fuls of coarse salt are thrown over it at once, and rubbed in
with a broom. It is then laid out full stretch, flesh side
uppermost, and over the top of others similarly arranged, if


there are several of them. If the hides are to be sent away
for sale, fold them up, salt and all, by first turning the outside
edges into the centre, then either rolling up the hide and tying
it, or folding it three or four times until it is a tidy-sized
bundle. In all cases leave the hair-side out.
Green Hide.—To get green hide for whips and the many
other purposes to which green hide is put, mix two ounces of
alum with sufficient wood-ashes to cover the flesh side all over.
Let this remain on the hide for a fortnight, then rub it until
perfectly dry, and it is ready for use. By this method the
hide does not become soggy in wet weather.
Tanning.—This work cannot be recommended for home use';
it is laborious, expensive, and occupies much time. But in
emergencies it can be done. Have a trough ready, large
enough to hold a hide when spread out; into this put a mixture
of lime and water of about the consistency of thick cream.
After soaking the hides, one over the other, in water, until
they are pliable, lay them in the soak ; draw them out every
day, and put them back until the hair can be scraped off,
generally in 12 or 14 days. Then scrape off all loose flesh,
and trim the hides. To tan them use terra-japonica, common
salt, and alum, in the proportion of six pounds of the former,
four of salt, and one of alum, for every 28 lbs. of hide. Dissolve
the mixture by boiling. Put the hides in as large a vessel as
possible, cover them with water, to which one quart of the
tanning composition has been added for every 28 lbs. of hide.
Add the same amount of composition each night and morning
for three days ; then add the remainder ; shift the hides about
two or three times daily while tanning; the tanning liquid
may be again used by adding half the quantity of new liquor.
When it is desired to give the leather a dark appearance, put
in one pound of sumac to the foregoing quantities. In using
this composition, kip-skins require about twenty days, light
horse-hides for harness, thirty days ; calf-skins require from
six to ten days.
Sheep Skins for Home Use.—Make strong soap-suds with
warm water ; when it is cold, wash the skins in it, carefully
squeezing them between the hands to get the dirt out of the
Wool ; then wash the soap out with clean cold water. Dissolve
alum and salt, each half a pound, with a little hot water,
which put in a tub of cold water sufficient to cover the skins,
and let them soak in it over night, or say for twelve hours;
then hang them over a pail to drain. When they are well


drained, spread or stretch carefully over a board to dry. When
a little damp, have one ounce each of saltpetre and alum pul-
verised, and sprinkle the flesh side of each skin, rubbing in
well; then lay the flesh sides together and hang in the shade
for two or three days, turning the under skin uppermost every
day until perfectly dry. Then scrape the flesh side with a
blunt knife to remove any remaining scraps of flesh; trim off
projecting points, and rub the flesh side with pumice or rotten-
stone and with the hands ; they will be very white and
beautiful.
Kangaroo, Wallaby, ’Possum, and smaller Skins.—These are
cured singly. Tack each skin—using galvanised tasks—to a
board, wall, or fence, spreading it out fully, flesh-side out.
Dissolve alum—about two ounces for a large wallaby skin—in
a pint of warm water, and with a sponge or flannel rag dipped
in this solution moisten the surface all over ; repeat this every
now and then for three or four days. When the skin is quite
dry, take out the tacks, and rolling it up loosely the long way,
flesh-side out, draw it quickly backwards and forwards through
a large smooth ring, or anything of a similar kind, until it-is
quite soft; then roll it the contrary way of the skin and repeat
the operation. A very good and simple process in use in the
interior is to sprinkle the flesh-side, after scraping it well, with
equal parts of pulverised' salt and alum ; then fold the flesh
sides together and roll the skin compactly, in which state it
should remain ten or twelve days. Then it is opened, and
sprinkled with bran or sawdust to absord the moisture, and
rolled up again for twenty-four hours ; the process is completed
by thorough rubbing and manipulation, as above, on which the
pliability depends. Skins, when taken off, should be freed
from grease or flesh by thorough scraping, when they may be
dried and left to wait the leisure of the owner. Previous to
tanning they must be soaked well and wrung dry. Another
way ; Tack the skin upon a board with the flesh side out, and
then scrape with a blunt knife ; next rub it over hard with
pulverised chalk until it will absorb no more. Then take the
skin from the board, and cover it with pulverised alum;
double half-way over with flesh-side in contact; then roll
tight together and keep dry for three days, after which unfold
it and stretch it again on a board or door, and dry in the air,
and it will be ready for use.
Indian Soft Skins.—Trappers wash their skins with soap
and soda to free them from grease, then rinse them in clean


water to cleanse them from the suds, then rub as dry as possi-
ble ; after which they are put into a mixture of two ounces of
salt to a quart of water containing one ounce of sulphuric acid
added to three quarts of milk or bran-water, and stirred briskly
for forty or fifty minutes; from this into a strong solution of
soda, and stirred till they will no longer foam; they are then
hung up to dry.
Furriers’ Method.—They rub the skins freely with rancid
butter, then tread them thoroughly in a tub or vat, after which
a large quantity of sawdust is mixed with them, and the pro-
cess of treading continued until the grease is absorbed, when
they are finished off by beating, working and rubbing with
chalk or potters’ clay, whipping and brushing.
Odor in Skins.—This is removed by soaking them in a
potash bath ; it can be made by first soaking fresh ashes from
mangrove or oak timber, or crude potash with water; pour off
the water and soak the skins in it.
Dyeing Skins.—Dyes that color woollens will, as a rule,
color sheepskins or furs. Do not apply too hot, or the texture
of the skin may be injured. To color a skin buff, five parts
whiting to two parts yellow ochre; mix them with water to a
paste, make into cakes and dry. When a dressed skin is quite
dry, rub one of the balls on the surface ; rub the powder in ;
take a piece of sand-paper and raise a nap on the leather by
going over with it. To color black, use clear logwood; after
it is dry use copperas-water to blacken it. Be careful not to
use too much copperas. To color dark brown, 5 lbs. oak bark,
4 lbs. fustic, 14 ounces of logwood. Use alum-water to make
it strike in. To color orange, for a 5 lb. skin, muriate of tin
3 ounces, ox gall 4 ounces; boil and dip one hour; then add
fustic, 2| lbs. ; boil ten minutes and dip one-half hour, and add
again, madder one tea-cup, and dip again one-half hour.
Cochineal in place of madder makes a brighter color; add in
small quantities about two ounces.
XXIX.—FRUIT PRESERVING.
Canning.—Very superior preserved fruits by the canning or
tinning process are now turned out from Australian factories.
They are as a rule of excellent quality, and are put up in such
a handy, neat, and attractive form, as to displace the poorer
sorts of jams and jellies, and also dried fruits. The stores are


well supplied with them. For cooking purposes, for making
into the hundred and one things that the experienced house-
keeper knows how to prepare from fruits, and also for the
bushman, who appreciates things he can use without much
preparation, the tinned goods have many features to recom-
mend them. In the first place they are easily prepared. They
are not boiled or cooked into a mass with sugar as jams and
jellies are, and retaining, as the canned articles do, the flavor
of the fruit, they are much more refreshing in locations—say
on goldfields and on stations in the interior—where there are
no fruits. The discovery that fruits could be preserved in this
way is not new ; but the extensive application of tin for the
purpose is comparatively new. Glass was used at first, glass
jars and glass bottles, and they are used still. For home use,
and where glass jars can be tilled over and over again, and
where they can be kept well covered and away from the light,
they answer very well ; but for trade purposes, where the
articles have to be moved from place to place, and exposed for
purposes of sale, then the cans are decidedly the best. The
process as followed in the factories is as near perfection as
operations of the kind seem capable of reaching. Immense
quantities of fruit are put up rapidly with the least expendi-
ture of labor; but expensive appliances in the form of machi-
nery are necessary. For house-preserving purposes a more
simple system has to be employed, although the results are
similar. The object in view in all cases, whether tins or bottles
are used, should be the same, and that is to cook no more than
is necessary to destroy the vegetable vitality, and to shut out
the air effectually from the fruit. Sound fruit only should be
used ; no other can be made to keep.
Home-made Preserves.—ln order to follow the process as
adapted for home-preserving we will suppose that peaches are
the fruit in hand. We have a vessel of any desired size for
water upon a brisk fire. We put about a gallon of water in
the vessel, and \ lb. of caustic soda, in order to make a weak
lye, and the vessel is kept boiling. A second vessel, with a
steamer or perforated tin cover, is kept boiling with pure water,
and there is a third vessel with cold water only. Peaches that
are just ripe, but are not soft, answer best for canning. Put
them in a dipper or collander, and plunge them into the vessel
with the lye. The skins loosen almost immediately, and all
animal or other life about the fruit is destroyed. As soon as
the skins are loosened put the dipper, fruit and all, into the


cold water; the skins can then be slipped off quite easily.
Let the peaches drain until dry, then put them into the
steamer over the pure water, and steam them for say fifteen
minutes. They will be .sufficiently cooked to allow of the
peach-stones being pushed out without mutilating the fruit.
There are machines for this purpose, but for small quantities a
peg may be fixed into the table, and the fruit being pressed
upon this peg the stones are easily and quickly pushed out at
the stem end.
The syrup for canned or bottled fruits may be made in the
proportion of lb. sugar to each 1 lb. of fruit, less or more
as may be desired. Much less will do equally well in so far
as preserving goes, and where it is desired to retain the flavor
of the fruit the less sugar to answer that purpose the better.
Have the syrup boiling, and as they are stoned drop the
peaches into it, and simmer them for about five minutes ; then
fill the cans from one-half to two-thirds with fruit, and fill to
the top with syrup —scalding hot, mind that. Wipe the top
of the tin clean and put on the lid. Press it down tight, and
pour wax or cement into the groove. As it cools the wax or
cement shrinks, and the groove has to be again filled to the
surface, and all made tight as recommended. Another method
is to halve the peaches and take out the stones, and another to
preserve them with the stones. The latter gives the most
decided peach flavor. In all cases the skins are taken off as
described. Where it is desired to have the finest possible
color, or to retain the pure white of peaches just skinned, a
thin piece of white calico is put under them in the steaming
vessel, and fresh syrup is prepared for each boiling. By long
boiling the syrup becomes darkened in color. Softer fruit, as
tomatoes, mulberries, &c., must be handled as little as pos-
sible. In the case of the latter the fruit can be cooked suffi-
ciently by boiling it in the syrup in the can, by keeping it in
water boiling for say fifteen minutes. Where there is a suspi-
cion of animalculie about the fruit, or it is desired to peel off
the skins, the scalding-lye bath is the necessary process—the
missing link towards absolute preserving. Solder is the
material used for sealing in the factories, and the tins, when
sealed, are dipped in cold water, which condenses the steam-
vapor inside of the tins, and so secures a vacuum ; but this is
not practicable in home practice, nor is it desirable to use lead,
which has many risks; it is the only really objectionable
feature in tinned goods. The wax or cement used in home
R


practice is made of resin, beeswax, and gum shellac, in the
proportion of 1 lb. resin, 2 oz. beeswax, 4 oz. gum-shellac.
The ingredients are melted in an iron pot, and are then ready
for use. The molten cement is poured hot into the groove
between the lid and the body of the tin, the channel being
filled one-half at first, and then filled level as the fruit cools.
By this means, should any air-holes occur in the first filling,
the latter closes all up tight, and when the cans are opened it
is only necessary to chip the wax with a fork, and as soon as
the junction of the lid is reached it can be prized up, and the
wax comes away with it in a flake. All tinned fruits should be
used as soon as possible after the can is opened, otherwise the
fruit looses flavor. In the case of bottled fruits, the bottles
or jars are set in water, which is boiled around them, and the
scalding fruit is put in, and they are closed up tight.
Drying Fruits, <tc.—This business is carried on successfully
in South Australia, where very superior raisins, grapes, <kc.,
are made, and, in the drier districts of New South Wales, as
about Forbes, Parkes, and other places, where excellent fruits
are grown, drying might answer, in a business sense. The
climate of the coastal districts is too uncertain, and the fruit
goes bad with the slightest damp. It would not be safe in any
part to calculate on much drying being done without the aid
of drying machines. They are of various forms, fiom a small
oven-like apparatus, to elaborate drying-houses. The active
principle of all is alike, however, hot air being the agent
employed, and when the fruit is of good quality to commence
with, the application of hot air in one or more drying cham-
bers is found effectual in evaporating the watery moisture, and
leaving, the rich flavor and sugar in the fruit. In opera-
ting with fruit-drying machines, the sun temperature of 110
deg. is found sufficient for the work. Occasionally a higher
degree of heat is employed to finish the drying; but, more
commonly, the work is done with lower heat; and when the
air is dried before it is heated, a still lower temperature is
found to be sufficient. In drying fruit by either process, in
the open air or by hot air, it should be perfectly ripe before it
is pulled, and every care is necessary to prevent mashing or
bruising the fruit while handling. This is especially the case
■with figs. In the earlier stages of curing, and while spread
out to dry, the fruit should not press or lie upon each other.
After it commences to wilt, the fruit is not injured by closer
contact. In the case of figs or raisins that have hard or rough


skins, the practice in drying-houses is to place the fruit in
sieves and dip it for a minute or so in scalding water. This
softens the skins, and brings the sugar to the surface in granu-
lated particles, giving that richness in appearance and flavour
which is a high recommendation to dried fruit. Sulphur
fumes are used for bleaching or “ ripening ” the color of dried
fruits. When well done, the fumes leave a rich straw color
on the fruit, and the sulphur does no harm.
Candied Fruits.—There are unusual facilities in Australia
for preserving peel, &c., by the candying process, that is curing the
fruit with sugar; and in many farms and garden homes we
now find fruits, such as orange, lemon, citron, peach, ginger,
pears, quince, pineapple, bananas, &c., done up in this way
in very creditable style. The first requirement, next to the
fruit itself for candying operations, the sugar, is made here of
the very best quality for preserving purposes, and the cost
price is sufficiently low to encourage the preserving of fruit by
its aid. The operation is much the same, whether carried out
on a small or a large scale. Preserving syrup is made by boil-
ing the very finest cane sugar. The fruit is either cut in halves,
if it is of the orange, lemon, or citron kind, and put into strong
brine (salt and water) for a day or more. The pulp is then
scooped out and the peel is boiled in clean water till it is tender
enough to part easily between the teeth. It is then laid out on
a sieve, or other contrivance, to drain and dry, and meantime a
fruit-syrup is being prepared. This is made of the best white
sugar, and the first syrup is quite thin—that being the neces-
sary condition so that it may be absorbed by the fruit. The
peel is changed into a second, third, up to a sixth syrup, each
thicker with sugar than the former. The last syrup is as
thick with sugar as it can be. A week for this process of
soaking in sugar is not too much. The peel is then boiled for
an hour or so. To be accurate with this operation, when
carried out on a large scale, the syrup is boiled up to 38° by
the saccharometer, which means that it is as thick as treacle.
The peel is then taken out and drained and dried again. Just
before the drying is complete, crystallised sugar may be dusted
over the fruit, which gives it a bright crystalline appearance.
But the more perfect way to finish it off, whether the fruit be
peel, or pears, ginger, quince, pineapple, &c., is to make a
finishing syrup. This is as thick with sugar as possible, and
the fruit is laid into it gently, and then put upon a fire and
just brought to the boil. The small proportion of water pre


sent evaporates quickly, and the syrup crystallises upon the
fruit in drying again, in the most natural and elegant form.
When quite dry, the candying is complete, and the result is at
once delightful and very attractive.
The only difference between peel, ginger (for candying),
pears, pineapple, bananas, Sic., is that less soaking in salt and
water is necessary, to get away any earthy flavor. Sweet
fruits are soaked in syrup only, and get less cooking when the
fruit is naturally tender.
Natural Flavors, and Essences of Fruits and Vegetables.—
The grateful acid of rhubarb arises from the malic acid and pot-
ash which it contains; the grateful flavor of the lemon,.orange,
and other species of the genus citrus, is caused by the abun-
dance of sugar and citric acid in their juice; that of the cherry,
plum, apple and pear, from the malic acid in their pulp ; that
of strawberries, blackberries, gooseberries and currants—black,
red, and white—from a mixture of malic and citric acids ; that
of the grape from a mixture of sugar, malic and tartaric acids
and several very fine ethers ; that of the mango from citric acid
and a fugitive essential oil; that of the tamarind from a
mixture of citric, malic, and tartaric acids ; the flavor of as-
paragus, from aspartic acid, found also in the root of the marsh-
mallow ; and that of the cucumber from a peculiar ingredient,
fungic acid, which is the cause of the cucumber, mushroom, die.,
being offensive to some stomachs. Spinach has a direct
beneficial effect upon the kidneys. The common dandelion,
used as greens, is excellent for the same reason. Asparagus
“ purges the blood.” Celery acts admirably upon the nervous
system, and is by many believed to cure rheumatism and
neuralgia. Tomatoes act upon the liver. Beets and turnips
are excellent appetisers. Lettuce and cucumbers are cooling
in their effects upon the system. Onions, garlic, leeks, shives,
and shalots, have virtues of a marked character, stimulating the
circulatory system, and the consequent increase of the saliva
and the gastric juice, promoting digestion. Red onions are an
excellent diuretic, and the white onions eaten raw, to some
persons, have the effect of relieving insomnia or sleeplessness.
They are tonic and nutritious. A soup made from onions
is regarded by the French and other good judges as excellent,
and restorative in debility of the digestive organs. Indeed
the latter is the characteristic of vegetable food generally, and
especially of fresh vegetables and fruits.


Drying Digs.—The British Consul at Smyrna supplies
information on the method of drying figs in Asia Minor, with
remarks on the mode of their cultivation. When the figs
become thoroughly ripe they fall off. They are gathered up
every morning and placed on ground prepared for the purpose,
as used for drying grapes. After remaining there for ten or
twelve days, the figs are placed in sacks, and conveyed by
railway,to Smyrna; they are allowed to remain some days
exposed to the air in open spaces. Great care is taken that no
water or dew falls upon them ; as, whenever touched, a black
spot is visible, and the fig gradually decays. The figs grow to
great perfection in the districts of Aidin only. All attempts
to cultivate them elsewhere have failed; that is to say, the
skin of the fruit becomes thick—does not contain the delicate
flavour and sweetness of figs grown at Aidin. The Pasha of
Egypt planted some thousands of trees in other, and more
humid parts of the country, but owing to the dew, the crops
were injured and could not be packed, although the fruit was
good before the figs fell. The soil in which they grow is rich
and dry, and they ' are easily propagated by cuttings. In
order to induce fruiting, when the fruit is at a certain size, a
long string of male fig is passed over each tree to fructify it.
Without this the fruit is almost useless
Pickled and Dried Tomatoes.—One peck of green tomatoes
sliced ; six large onions also sliced ; strew a teacupful of salt
over them; let them remain over night; drain off in the
morning ; then take two quarts of water and one of vinegar;
boil them in it fifteen or twenty minutes ; after boiling put in
a sieve to drain ; then take 4 quarts of vinegar, 21bs. of brown
sugar, white mustard seed, 2 tablespoonfuls of ground
allspice, same of cloves, cinnamon, ginger and mustard, and 1
teaspoonful of cayenne pepper ; put all in a vessel and cook 15
minutes slowly. The result is a very excellent condiment.
To dry tomatoes, in a form in favor amongst the Italians,
they are trained on the lower bars of trellis similar to that to
which vines are attached. The tomatoes are allowed to
remain on the branches until they are quite ripe; they are
then picked and pressed in bags made of coarse cloth, which
allows the pulp to pass through, but which retains the seed
and skin. The pulp is then thinly spread out on cloth, boards,
or in shallow dishes, and exposed to the sun to dry. When
it has become quite dry it is broken up fine, or ground, and
put into boxes or bags and sent to market. It is used for


making soups. It is soaked for a few hours in warm water,
and then cooked in the ordinary manner. Tomatoes do not
can well. The acid juice which they contain unites with the
solder of the tin cans and forms a disagreeable compound.
Preserving Green Corn. —Cut the corn off the cob and put
it in a jar, with a handful of salt to a pint of corn. When
the jar is full, put a weight on it. When wanted for use,
move a little of the top, and wash and soak over night. Corn
is also canned like fruit, in very large quantities.
Packing Fruit.—To be successful with fruit as an export,
or even when it is sent for sale some hundreds of miles, very
much can be done to ensure its good quality by selecting
suitable fruit in the first instance, and then by packing it care-
fully. As-a rule, it is found that fruit,' oranges included, that
is grown on loamy soil, keeps better than what is grown on
sandy soil. One reason is that the latter ripens more rapidly,
and, in the case of oranges, the pores of the skin are more
open, and accessible to air, and decay, as a consequence.
These are points worthy of attention from those purposing
taking up this business. Only sound fruit should be put up
for export; the slightest bruise on packing fruits, like apples
for instance, becomes a blemish, and may result in decay and
injury to others, ere a lengthy journey is made. It is neces-
sary to put the fruit in wrappers of some sort. Paper is most
convenient for the purpose, and various “specially-prepared
wrapping papers ” for fruit have been offered. The basis of
most of the preservative material upon these papers is borax,
which, for such purpose, does no harm, if it should prove of
little benefit.
XXX.—SEED FARMING: SEED IMPROVEMENT.
This branch—one of
the most enticing for
those who have the ne-
cessary skill, time, and
facilities for operating—
offers peculiar induce-
ments in Australia. Very
little has been done in
SCIENCE OF THE PERFECT SEED.
that direction so far. There is an immense field open, and
practically unoccupied. In preceding chapters we have seen


how cultivators in different branches of grain-growing suffer
because of the poor, mixed, or unsuitable character of the seed
of maize, wheat, &0., they use. It is quite safe to say that
these leading crops suffer seriously from causes arising in defec-
tive seed—maize because of the delicacy and unsuitability of
the varieties grown, some of which seem worked out; and wheat
from the same causes, and also from the manner in which seed-
wheat has got mixed in all parts of the country, and especially
since reaping machinery came into use. Close examination of
our wheat-fields makes it evident that even in the case of
careful cultivators there are frequently two or three varieties
of this grain growing as one crop. Sometimes a dozen sorts
may be seen growing in one field or paddock. The evils of
this mixture of seed are numerous. Millers complain of it,
and the difficulty of making from unripe or mixed grain the
first-class flour naturally expected from Australian wheat ;
and there is the greater evil of the crop ripening at different
times. The dangers from rust attacks are increased in this
way, because even a single seed-head of a delicate variety may
introduce the rust in the epidemic form, and so destroy the
whole crop.* One remedy for this danger is in sowing more
hardy, carefully-selected varieties of grain, as suitable as pos-
sible for the location, and that will ripene venly. This is in reality
what wheat-growers aim at; but from the causes mentioned
their difficulty in getting pure seed has been increasing instead
of decreasing. The remedy for this is selection of seed in the
field.
Improvement of Seed by Hybridizing, by Cultivation, and by
Selection. —The latter is the more certain course for improving
wheat-seed. Maize is improved in all the directions stated.
But wheat (and the same is probably true of many others of
the Graminacece) is really'self-impregnated, and the most care-
ful attention is necessary to do it artificially. One fact is that
the ovary— i.e., the young seed—is enclosed in a double sheath
(the chaff of the ripe seed), which is tightly closed except for a
moment when the expanded anther is protruded; and the
other fact is, that in favorable seasons all the grains in one
ear are fertilised and matured by that ear. The following
experiment, first carried out by Dr. Paley, is most interesting
and conclusive, as showing how wheat is fertilised: —Gather
* Bust disease in wheat is described and illustrated in “ The Elements
of Australian Agriculture,” 3s.


half-a-dozen green wheat-ears which are just beginning to
flower, and keep them for an hour or two in a warm room in a
glass of water. The anthers in succession may be seen, under
very close observation, in the very act of being protruded
through the tips of the glumes, which open just a little to let
the thread-like filament hang out, and then immediately close
up tightly. To actually see this gaping of the glumes we
must keep a very close and minute observation. Then cut off
from the ear one of the green seed-cases which appears next
about to flower. Remove the ovary with its three stamens
and feathery double pistil, and lay these organs on a piece of
glass. Breathe on them gently, and the anthers may be seen
to burst with a kind of spasmodic motion, scattering the pollen
partly on the pistil, to which, as a magnifying glass will
show, it adheres in minute globules, partly on the glass. But
when the spurting takes place only within the glumes, the
pollen must be confined to the cavity which contains the
pistil and its numerous stigmas, unless, which is possible, some
few grains escape when the empty anther is protruded. Imme-
diately after the bursting of the anthers the filament becomes
restless and begins to move. Contrary to the usual nature of
this organ in plants, it is elastic, and it may increase to the
length of about half an inch, carrying with it, as it creeps on
glass, the now empty and useless anthers. Of course very
close observation is necessary to carry out operations of this
kind successfully. It seems very suitable work for the com-
bined efforts of teachers and students in the agricultural schools
and colleges of Australia. It is no mere figure of speech to
say that in every field of well-grown grain, of maize, wheat,
barley, &c., there are ears so much superior to the ethers, as
to induce selection and propagation with the hope of securing
more prolific, hardier, or earlier sorts—true Australian sorts,
in fact, of wheat, maize, and other grains.
Crossing Wheat with Rye.—We see, then, that wheat is a
self-fertilising plant, and that new and improved varieties of
seed are to be got only by the exercise of special care. The
flower is practically shut out from the ordinary naturally cross-
ing, and the only way in which an artificial cross can be
obtained is to open the case protecting the flower and make a
purely artificial crossing. In this way all the crossed varieties
of wheat have been produced, and there are most interesting
records of how the process was carried on. In a series of ex-
periments recorded in the Century Magazine , it is stated that


the first step was to make an artificial crossing between wheat
and rye. For the female plant a head of Armstrong’s beardless
wheat was selected, and the flowers were carefully opened, and
the stamens cut out with a pair of scissors while still green.
Shortly after, when the pistils were in the best condition,
pollen from a head of common rye was dusted over them, and
the casing carefully closed again upon the wheat pistils, and
fastened by means of a paper ring. This was repeated three
times on each of the flowers where the stamens had been re-
moved. This was in the summer of 1883, and from one head
of wheat ten good seeds were obtained. These were planted on
the 29th of the following September, and in due time nine new
plants appeared, grew, and lived through the winter of 1883-4.
In the summer of 1884 eight of these plants produced good
seeds, and one plant produced a few apparently sterile and
worthless seeds. The experiment here divides into two sections.
The good seeds from the eight plants were planted in Septem-
ber, 1884, and produced many strong and healthy plants that
survived the winter, and bore next summer the greatest variety
of wheat, some beardless, some fully bearded, some of one type,
and some of another, but all more closely allied to wheat than
to rye. The result of this experiment is interesting. The
various kinds being divided and again cultivated to see if the
new types will be permanent. This portion of the experiment
needs no further discussion, as the other branch, with the
plants springing from the apparently sterile or worthless seeds,
is of more interest. One of the original nine plants produced
fourteen heads, giving seventeen shrivelled and narrow grains.
The plant exhibited some of the features of rye, and this led
to the hope that the seeds might germinate. The seventeen
seeds were planted 29th September, 1884, and fifteen plants
grew up and safely passed the winter, two of the others having
been accidently destroyed. These fifteen plants in July, 1885,
presented a most curious appearance, and bore heads of wheat
closely resembling rye. The average height of all the plants
was 3ft. sin., the tallest of all being 4ft. high. The best plant
had thirteen heads, the poorest only two. There were 107
heads in all, or an average of seven and two-fifths heads to a
plant. All the heads produced more or less seeds, and fifteen
seeds selected, one from each plant, appeared to be in every
respect good and perfect seed. Of these, five were larger than
the largest wheat, and three were larger than rye, and closely
resembled rye in shape. As a whole, the seeds appeared to be


wheat, and yet had somewhat the shape of rye. No experi-
ments were made to test the flouring qualities or taste of these
seeds. That must come later when more seed can be obtained.
The point of interest lies in the fact that good seeds, that re-
remble wheat, were obtained from plants that had all the
distinctive features of rye plants. An examination of these
fifteen plants showed the following points : —lst, size and
strength of stem and bluish color; 2nd, furry appearance of
stem just below the heads ; 3rd, heads large! and narrower
than wheat, had more spikelets, being an average of twenty-six
spikelets to each head; 4th, glumes marked more like rye than
wheat, and bearded. In one head there were sixty-seven glumes,
thirty-four on one side and thirty-three on the other. These
features of color, bloom, shape, and character of heads seem to
indicate that the plants followed their rye or male parent. The
seed, on the other hand, is more like wheat than rye, and
plainly not rye. The object of this experiment was to see if a
hybrid plant can be produced that will give seeds as good as
wheat and yet be as a plant like rye; that is, a plant that will
grow where wheat may be delicate, or in fields that have
become “sick ”of wheat—a grain, in short, as hardy as rye and
ripening its seed earlier than wheat.
Potatoes, Fruits, Ac.—The skill of nurserymen and others
in New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland has given us
several very desirable sorts of peaches, plums, Ac., but very
little has been done for the potato. The improvement here
comes through the true seed of the potato. At first the roots
got by sowing seed are very small. Several seasons of selection,
and the very best cultivation that can be given, are absorbed
in enlarging the tubers before we can be certain of having
secured something better and more suitable than we had
before. But new varieties, real Australian varieties of po-
tatoes, ought to be got in that way, for, in general, the potato
seeds freely here. Having secured even a single potato of an
improved kind, the rate of increase from that stage is rapid, as
evidence the propagation of the Early Rose variety, when a
single tuber, five ounces in weight, was increased to 450 lbs.
in a single season. The operator in that case was Peter Hen-
derson, a man of great skill. As a first step, he cut the tuber
into two pieces, so that each surface presented the greatest
number of eyes ; then he placed them on a shelf, keeping them
quite dry until the cut part had healed over ; then they were
placed in soil on the bench of the greenhouse, where the tern


perature averaged about 75° Fahr. ; this is the temperature
for most effective propagation of seeds, cuttings, buds, &c.
The shoots soon began to appear, and when they reached three
or four inches in length, they were cut off at about a quarter
of an inch from the surface of the potato, so as not to injure
the dormant eyes that were yet to start. These slips were
planted in the propagating-house, and shaded and watered in
the usual way until they rooted. They were next potted into
small pots in ordinary soil, and started to grow in a tem-
perature of about 75° Fahr. As the season got on, the two
halves of the original potato produced great numbers of new
shoots, which in turn were submitted to the same process as
the first lot. As the first shoots grew to lengths of five or six
inches, the tops were cut off and used again as cuttings, so that
by the end of two months the five-ounce potato had already
produced 150 plants, each one equal to a “ set” as ordinarily
made by cutting up a potato. The crop realised weighed exactly
450 lbs. Now, we will suppose that a desirable sort of potato,
and one that is likely to be in great demand, has been got from
seed. The discoverer may have only 1 lb. weight of this tuber,
and knows that it would not pay to dispose of it for its weight
in silver ; so he begins by cutting the potato in such a way as to
have all the eyes exposed upon the upper surface. He will
have ready a sufficient number of frames, with most probably
a fool of dung buried beneath four or six inches of light, rich
soil. A frame ten feet long by four feet wide holds 1000
plants or slips as they come off the divided seed-potatoes.
These are shaded and watered until rooted, and then planted
out, in proper weather, in the open ground, after which they
are treated as though grown from sets. If further increase is
wanted, more cuttings are taken off these plants when they
have produced enough tops. Whilst the first cuttings were
being rooted in the frames, the divided tubers would be pro-
ducing more shoots, which would be ready to take the place of
the first lot as soon as they were planted out. There is nothing
new in all this ; it is very much the process that was fol-
lowed in Australia when the Early Rose was introduced; but
it is not every cultivator who has the opportunity of seeing
these operations carried out, interesting and instructive though
they are. In growing ordinary potatoes it is easier and cheaper,
as well as quicker and more profitable, to buy a bag or two of
the improved potatoes for seed, even though, as the case was
with Early Rose, they cost Is. per lb., but not so when the


variety is a new one, and each potato is worth half a guinea or
more possibly. In such a case it is useful to know how to make
an increase of 1000 to 2000 lbs. in one season from a single
pound of potatoes, and this is the way in which it can be done.
It is very desirable work for agricultural schools and experi-
mental stations. It is a very much needed work, and it
should pay.
Seed-Farming Generally.—Only the more prominent grains
and the potato have been mentioned, we are so very badly in
want of hardy and improved varieties of each of them. There
are honors and profit for those who develop good and reliable
sorts of one or all. Then onions, turnips, cabbage, cauli-
flower, lettuce, &c., offer inducements for seed-growers in
Australia ; for in the wide range of climate there are surely
places suitable for the seed of cold-weather as well as the hot-
weather crops. In fruit-growing, too, there is immense scope
for improvement. As stated, very desirable Australian sorts
of oranges, peaches, nectarines, and plums have been got in
this way, and are in general cultivation ; but apples, pears,
lemons, &c., are not improving as they might. Several of the
best old sorts are failing badly. The field for developing
Australian sorts of these fruits has scarcely been touched.
And then there are flowers, both annuals and perennials,
bulbs, &c., offering most attractive inducements to those who
are operating upon either a large or a small scale. With them
hybridization, that most alluring pursuit of the observing and
enquiring mind, is brought to bear with telling effect.
Perfect Seed only should be Used.—There is another impor-
tant feature in lessons of this kind. The operator comes to
see that only perfect seed should be used. Our illustration
shows the appearance of maize, wheat, and barley, when just
about to burst forth into growth. Ais the oily matter inside
of the skin or shell, B is starchy matter, C the eye of the seed
from which the shoots come; but all parts are necessary for
the full development of the young plant. If the seed is pinched
or starved from any cause it cannot be so vigorous as the full,
plump seed, which every man who sows should do his best to
secure, as a necessary step towards making a full crop of grain.
(See “Trouble with Seeds,” in Calendar for Feb., Chap.
XXXIII.)


XXXI.—WATER IN DRY PLACES, IRRIGATION, &c.
BORED DEEP WELL,
WITH PUMP.
The time was when Australia, or a
very large portion of it, was considered
to be a waterless waste. "We are so apt
to judge from what is immediately under
the eye ! But as the country becomes
settled, it is found that the localities are
few where the fall of rain is not suffi-
cient, when it is stored ; and to that end
dams are built of soil, with a clay core
or puddle wall; or the dam may be
faced with wood or stones, thrown across
gullies, or depressions.
Water from Below.—The experience
gained on Peak Downs—a notoriously
dry region in the early days—may be
useful. After many efforts in well-
boring and sinking, it became evident
that there was abundance of water at
30 or 40 feet from the surface. Further
experience proved that throughout a very
large proportion of the country it can be
obtained at this depth. It seems that
strong bodies of water exist in the allu-
vial drift. A usual surface sign is a tee-
tree gully, especially where the “old-man”
tree grows, situated high up the water
sheds. It is strange that on the banks
of main creeks, and in flats, the sinking
has been of greater depth, and the
supply of water proportionately small,
but up in the gullies numbers of wells
have been successfully sunk, and water
got, above the levels of adjacent valleys.
The sinking in such places is through
a varying depth of black soil, then a sort
of reddish clay, whitish clay, and honey-
comb rock, that powders on exposure.
Sometimes hard rock is met. If the
latter is honeycombed, water is often
found in a few feet, but if it becomes
solid, it is found cheaper to sink else


■where. The selection of the right spot is becoming quite a
science with station managers, and it is seldom that a mistake
is now made.
WATER BORING GEAR.
Lifting Water.—Wells having been sunk, by boring mostly,
and for which contracts at from 15s. to £2 per foot are taken,
the necessity remains for getting up the water, and for this
purpose several expedients have been adopted. Pumps of all
kinds, suitable for all circumstances, are available to raise
water in great quantity from the smaller bores. But from
wells, what may be called the common mode, with two buckets
worked by a whim and emptied at the top by a man, was first
adopted. As an improvement on this, self-acting buckets were
introduced, and are still used at some of the wells. These
require guides from top to bottom of the well, so that the large
square iron buckets as they rise may duly empty themselves
at the top. In consequence of the number of shallow wells
now in use a system has been introduced of raising water with
a horse that always walks the same way. This plan saves the
expense of the whim, and is much easier on the horse,
excepting only that he walks a greater distance for a given
quantity of water. Above the well, at a sufficient distance, is
fixed a roller for the rope to go over, with two side rollers to
keep it within bounds. A long pole works on a pivot in the
centre, with a wheel at the extreme end, and just inside the
wheel are the shafts. The rope is attached to such a point on
this axle that it will raise and let down the bucket exactly to
to the necessary distance. As the horse walks round when he
is close to the well the bucket is in the water ; when he is at
the opposite side of the circle the bucket is at the top. Two
buckets could be rigged with a more complicated arrangement;
but it has been proved that at a depth of anything under 45


or 50 feet one bucket supplies sufficient water for all ordinary
purposes.
Tube Wells. —Tube wells have
been driven with success in various
parts of the country, and are found
to answer admirably where a limited
supply of water is sufficient. Once
sunk and in contact with a water-
giving stratum or a spring, pumping
has to be resorted to. The pointed
tube goes with comparative ease
through sand, loam, gravel or clay ;
but when rook is met the tube may
be withdrawn—it will bend if forced
too much. A likely place for water
being selected, the tubes, lengths of
ordinary iron-piping, are arranged
for driving. Into one of the lengths
is screwed a piece of solid iron,
pointed, about eight inches long, and
the shoulder next the pipe made
of a greater diameter than the pipe.
This is for driving into the ground,
and the diameter being greater
than the pipe, it clears the way.
TUBE, OR DRIVEN WELL.
Just above where this solid point is screwed, holes are
drilled in the pipe for the water to enter, for sixteen or
eighteen inches in length. The number of these holes must of
course be in proportion to the size of the pump, so as to admit
as much water as the pump is capable of throwing. Less holes
would be sufficient for a small pump, suitable either for domes-
tic purposes or for a small paddock. A No. 6 Douglas pump
is as large as can be reasonably worked by manual labor, but
the larger the pump the better, as it takes less time to fill the
troughs. The piping with points, all arranged for driving,
with any number of holes considered necessary, can now be got
from various houses in the ironmongery and implement trade;
and also the monkeys and other gearing found suitable for
driving the pipes. In order to protect the top of the pipe as
well as the driving block from injury by the blows in driving,
a cap which screws on to the ends of all the pipes is fitted and
offers a level to the monkey or block. Oare being exercised in


seeing that the blows are fairly struck, and that the tube is
always perpendicular.
Trying for Water. —When the pipe gets down to a depth
where water may be expected, it is well to let a plummet down
into it, to ascertain if there is water. If so, it may be well to
screw on the pump and try if it is merely soakage water, or
whether it comes from a spring. One who has had experience,
says; With the first pump 1 put down I found at 20 feet that
there were eight feet or nine feet of water, and I tried the
pump on it. I afterwards drove to a depth of 26 feet, and the
water rose 20 feet in the tube ; notwithstanding, however,
there being so much water in the tube, it came up at first only
slowly, and there was great pressure on the handle of the pump.
It required several hours’ pumping before the water became
clear and came with a free flow. But the success of the pump
may be judged from the fact that two troughs containing each
594 gallons, were filled in an hour and a quarter, the pump
throwing out the water as fully at the end as in the beginning,
showing that the springs were fully equal to the pipe of which
the bore is 2 inch. There is not much difficulty in lifting the
pumps when that is necessary. Get a piece of quartering for
a lever, say fifteen feet long; put a bullock-chain round the
pipe, with the hook to run on the chain ; roll the other end
round the lever. When the end of the lever is lifted, the chain
tightens on the tube so thoroughly that it does not slip, and
the tube draws with a strong lift of the lever. When the end
of the lever is lowered after the first lift of the pipe, the chain
round the pipe slips down, and when the lever is again lifted it
tightens round the pipe, so that it takes the pipe up gradually,
without any re-adjusting or re-fixing of the chain.
Helpful in Driving Pipes or Stakes.—The usual method of
driving stakes, &c., is to strike them on the upper end with a
sledge or other heavy article; but in the case of long poles or
the pipes of a tube-well this mode is impracticable. But the
driving, if in sandy or soft ground, may be done quickly, and
without a high step or platform, by using the device shown in
the illustration. This consists of a block of tough wood one foot
in length, four or five inches square at the top, made tapering
as shown, with the part next the pole slightly hollowed out.
Take a common trace-chain, wind closely about the pipe or
pole, and hook it in position. With maul, axe, or sledge,
strike upon the block. Each blow serves only to tighten the
grip of the chain. To keep the chain from falling to the


ground when unfastened from the pole it
should pass through a hole bored through
the block, as shown at b, one end of
chain being fixed on staple, e.
Risks from Bad Water.—Most of them
arise from surface water, contaminated by
filth of some sort. The tube-well, when
a suitable location can be got, is likely to
reach and supply water free from such
dangers, and wells of that kind can now
be put down for very little money ; a
No. G pump and a few lengths of piping,
with the skill and labor of driving covers
the whole fit out.
Dams, Tanks.—They are more suitable
for paddocks and stock-watering than for
domestic use. There are excellent works
available, costing a few shillings, that give
specific and reliable information concern-
ing dam-making, tank-forming, the capa-
city of tanks, &c. ; and special appliances in the form of
earth-scoops and other contrivances are used for excavations
of that kind.
Irrigation.—This is one of the coming features of Australian
agriculture. In the chapters on cultivation and crops, and the
native grasses, we have instances of the beneficial effects of
the application of. water by artificial means. The subject is
also dealt with somewhat fully in “ The Elements of Austra-
lian Agriculture.” The experience gained here shows that
there is considerable differences in the quantities of water
required by different crops. Wheat, for instance, has matured
35 bushels of excellent grain with a rainfall of 2 inches during
the growing season, and 5 inches of irrigation water. An inch
of water is about equal to 100 tons on an acre of land. Maize
requires 14 inches or more, and turnips, potatoes, sorghum,
eta, quite as much. A heavy crop of sugar-cane takes 30
inches, while oats do with 10 inches, and barley and rye with
less. For gardening purposes 10 inches would do, and insure
full crops in most districts suitable for orcharding and gar-
dening. Chinese gardeners, by their slow and laborous and
wasteful method of watering, do not use 10 inches of water.
There is a very excellent system of sewerage irrigation in
operation at the Botany Farm, and pipes have been laid for
s


sub (that is, under the surface) irrigation at the Ho ok wood
Farm.
Plants as Indicators of Water.—lt has been suggested that
good service could be done by noting the rock and soil for-
mation of localities where water has been got in large quantity
under the surface. The plants found in such places might also
aid in leading to systematic identification of water-bearing
locations; and also the formation of the country, whether in
gullies, or plains, hill-sides, the elevation, &c. Were infor-
mation of that kind sent to the Agricultural Department, its
arrangement and classification could scarcely fail to be useful.
XXXII.—MEDICAL HELP IN EMERGENCIES.
To the timid mind there is something dreadful in the idea of
meeting an accident, or being taken sick) in places beyond the
reach of medical aid, and the feeling is perfectly natural.
Visitations of the kind are amongst the distressing features of
life in the bush, when those concerned have not the skill or
the courage necessary to help themselves, or to help another in
a case of emergency. But, fortunately, colonists are seldom so
placed. The amount, of downright medical skill afloat in the
bush might seem surprising. We often come across serious
cases of bone-breaking, wounds, and other casualties, and
fevers, that have been alleviated with a degree of skill, both in
the treatment of the case and in the appliances brought into
use, that is encouraging. It is seldom that one comes to a
station, a plantation, a large work in progress, or other place
where bodies of men are collected, without hearing of one or
more who can treat an accident or ordinary ailment, in case of
emergency. It is an admirable peculiarity of bush life, and
one that will be still more extensively cultivated as the medical
school becomes a more general colonial institution.
The following notes, always keeping in mind the remedies
likely to be available in the bush, have been put together with
the view of aiding those in a pinch while beyond medical aid.
It is in every case the desirable and safest course to call
in a medical man, if one can be reached; but, in the meantime,
it is simply the duty of those around the sufferer to help—to
do whatever can be done.
Flesh Wounds.—These are of various kinds—punctured, a
tear, a bruise, a shot, &c. The first, in a warm climate, is a


dangerous wound. It may lead to lock-jaw and other serious
consequences. The first care is to extract any substance that
is left in the wound, and if this can be done without exhausting
the patient, it should never be omitted, although the pain may
be severe. If this cannot be accomplished, wash the wound
and apply poultices to encourage the injured part to suppurate
or throw out the foreign substance. In other cases the parts of
the wound should be brought together as naturally as possible,
and either held in place by means of a stitch or two brought
through the skin with an ordinary needle and thread, or by
strips of adhesive plaster or bandages. Nature is very kind in
such cases, and if the patient is kept clean and quiet, and the
bowels are kept regular, the cure may prove rapid. Where
the wound is on the face, or other part where a mark tends to
disfigure, the bandages should be covered with oiled silk or
cotton, to exclude the air. At times a poultice of gum-leaves
(boiled if possible) is tied around the wound. To relieve pain,
an effective plan is to burn sugar in a pan, and hold the wounded
part in the smoke that arises.
The Head.—Broken Bones.—The colonial “ buster,” or a fall
from horseback, very often results in a broken head, or in dis-
location of an arm or leg, or both. Falling timber gives very
bad wounds, and the sufferer has to be treated with every con-
sideration and care. In such cases, no time should be lost in
securing the best medical aid available. But at once lay out
the patient where he will be easy and quiet; cut the hair from
the wounded part; wash it clean, and bring the parts together
with a plaster or with bandages. Stitches are not desirable in
wounds of the head, as anything irritating is liable to bring on
erysipelas. When the scalp has been injured by severe'bruises,
warm-water dressings will in general be found the best appli-
cation, unless there be considerable heat and inflammation,
when if procurable, a lotion of sugar of lead, in the proportion of
2 drachms of the sugar of lead to a pint of water and 2 ounces
of vinegar, is to be applied slightly warmed, on pieces of lint
or linen. Owing to the number of pieces of bone composing
the skull, a simple fracture seldom extends far, as it is usually
confined to one bone; in such cases the fracture may be a mere
crack, as in a pane of glass, and perfect quietude with the
necessary precautionary measures in keeping down inflamma-
tion may be sufficient.
Shoulder.—Dislocation is a common occurrence. The author
once had rough, but as it proved, effective experience of how


an accident of this kind can be met. He was thrown, and had
just strength enough to crawl to the road side; the injured
limb hung powerless, and was very painful. Shortly afterwards
two gentlemen came along, and seeing how the case stood, one
of them held his arms firmly over a fence, while the other,
taking him by the injured shoulder, pressed it backwards until
the bones came into their places with an audible crack. The
arm had to be carried in a sling for some weeks, but it came
right without further treatment. The following is a commend-
able course in cases of dislocation :—The patient being seated
in a high-backed chair, or against a tree, an assistant, standing
on the uninjured side, places his left hand under and across the
arm-pit, while with his right hand spread on the top of the
shoulder, he grasps and keeps firmly in its place the shoulder-
blade. The operator then grasps the bent arm above the
elbow, and steadily pulls the limb till he disengages the head
of the bone, when, either moving it a little inwards or out-
wards, according as the dislocation has been in an outward or
inward direction, and at the same time slightly relaxing his ex-
tension, the bone will glide with a crack into its place. Much
in this operation depends on the firmness with, which the
assistant keeps the shoulder-blade in its place, for if that is not
done the operator will, of necessity, pull both arm and shoulder,
and be no nearer the end for which he manipulates. As soon
as the arm is reduced, a sling must be made with a handker-
chief, and the folded arm carried in it for not less than a fort-
night, to allow the muscles and tendons to recover their tone.
If the reduction has been attended with much pain, and there
is any swelling or tenderness of the joint, it will be well to
foment the shoulder with warm bran poultices.
Ribs Broken, without a Wound.—The symptoms are pain on
taking a deep breath, or on pressure where the injury has taken
place. If there be spitting of blood, keep the patient quiet,
give no stimulants. If there be a bruise, apply hot wet cloths,
or a large hot poultice ; then a bandage of flannel, say 6 inches
wide round the chest (of course over the injured part) ; draw
this tight, and sew it on with large stitches, not placed oppo-
site each other, but more like what is called the “ herring-bone
stitch tighten it from day to day as required. If the acci-
dent happen away from the house, tie a handkerchief firmly
over the clothes till medical help can be got.
Ribs Broken, with a Wound.—lf it be merely a scratch.


after applying warm cloths, as afomentation, use a bit of lint and
plaster, and bandage as before; but if the wound be at all
deep, even if you do not think it has gone through into the
chest, put on some folds of wet rag and a bandage. Let the
person lie on the had side, and keep him as quiet as you can
till the doctor comes. Do not forget this rule—in all cases of
a wound to the chest the person must lie on the wounded
side.
Hand, Foot, or Ankle.—These bones are solid, and are
mostly wounded by such accidents as break or crush the bone,
such as by a falling tree, timber, machinery, etc., and are
always serious. Cover the whole limb in several folds of rag
or handkerchiefs, dipped in cold water. If you cannot find
water wrap it up in a handful of damp leaves or grass. If
there be much bleeding dip it into water if possible.. Hold
the hand on the top of the head.
Cap of the Knee.—This fracture is commonly caused by
falling on the knee. The bone is split across, and has left a
gap as found at the elbow when the bone is broken. Keep
the leg straight. When the patient is obliged to move, pass a
strong bandage round the neck and under the foot; draw it
so tight that it will support the weight of the leg.
Leg below the Knee.—Get splints, strips of stiff bark, or
anything which will reach from the knee to a little past the
foot; take a pillow-slip, a shirt, or strips of calico, roll each
end round a piece of the splint, and fasten it on; lay anything
soft lengthways in this, place the leg comfortably upon this
pillow, bring up the splints (rolling the calico round them) till
it allows them to come just half-way up the knee-joint and
half-way up the foot; pass two or three pieces of tape or
string under, bring up the sides of the pillow against the leg
and tie them; keep the foot pointing directly upwards.
General Remarks.—The object is not to cure broken bones,
but to put the broken ends in their proper places, and keep them
there. A door, a flour-sack cut open, a sheet of bark, or a
a blanket fastened at the four corners to two saplings makes
a hammock, on which the injured person should be placed. In
case of injury to the arm or hand you need a splint; but
whatever you use let it be long enough to reach from the elbow
to a little beyond the ends of the fingers. Cover this with a
pad or anything soft, then not only the arm, but the hand will
rest comfortably. The hand must not hang lower than the elbow.
In cases where the patient is insensible lay him gently in a dry,


quiet place, and in the most natural position possible. Keep the
mouth and hose clean, keep off flies or insects, and keep up
the heat of the body with warm clothes, tins of hot water,
stones, or anything handy. Stimulants should be used with
the greatest caution, as they invariably tend to excite and
bring on inflammation.
Burns and Scalds. —Doctors differ very much regarding
the best agents for counteracting the effects of burns or scalds;
but all are agreed upon the necessity of keeping the air from
the injured parts. Cloth, cotton if possible (but anything in
an emergency), white of an egg, flour, oil, and starch, are
useful agents for covering the injured parts. When a person
is discovered on fire he or she should be brought to the ground
as speedily as possible, with the double object of smothering
the fire and covering the injured parts. A coat, a blanket, a
sack, anything that will keep away the air and smother the
fire should be wrapped around the sufferer. Do not attempt
to tear off the clothes; smother out the fire ; that is the best
thing that can be done. Do not take off anything that adheres
to the flesh. Cover all sores with flour, molasses, or soap, or
starch, or oil, and put poultices of bread or bran over any
burnt pieces of cloth that may cling to the wound ; they will
come off freely in five or six days, when a new skin has
formed. Do not puncture or peel off any of the skin; it is
the best possible covering. In cases of prostration or great
shock to the system stimulants should be given, such as
brandy, and warm-water bottles, bricks, stones, or anything
that will keep up the heat should be applied to the feet, under
the arms, etc. Molasses or treacle is amongst the best agents
for keeping the air from a burn or scald. Where the wound
is not dangerously large, extract of gum-leaves, pain-killer, or
spirits make painful, but effective dressings.
A Colonial “ Pain Paint.”—Relief from the pain of a bruise,
burn or other surface wound has been got by coating over the
sore with white of egg, with oil and other substances, that shut
out the atmospheric air from the sore. But a friend pins his
faith on glue, and when it is of good clean quality, and quite
clean—for it is dangerous to allow any doubtful substance
near a sore—the glue paint is worthy a trial. He says ;—“ A
few weeks since as I was driving in an open vehicle, my horse
took fright and the bit broke, so I was entirely at the mercy
of circumstances. I was thrown from the waggon, my face
severely cut and scratched and my body badly bruised. I


walked home so as to keep my blood in vigorous circulation,
and not allow the fall and bruises to stiffen me. On arrival I
had the glue pot put on, and after washing the wounds, carefully
covered them with old linen on which the glue had been spread.
All pain ceased from the moment of the application, and in an
hour from the time of the accident I was at work again. The
wounds healed without any scar, and were not disturbed in any
way. As fast as they got well and the linen peeled up I cut
it off with scissors. For many years I have tested the virtue of
glue in slight abrasions, but this test of its value as a healing
application gives me more confidence than ever in its soothing
powers.”
Accidental Poisoning.—Some one has said that there is
poison in everything, and, in fact, we do find ourselves sur-
rounded with, and daily using, articles that in unskilful, care-
less, or thoughtless hands are dangerous to human life.
Poisonous Plants.—No better general rule can be laid down
for the detection of poisonous plants than (hat nature has made
them nauseous to the palate of both man and beast. There are
exceptions to this rule, as for instance the “ poison plant ” of
Northern Queensland, the “native currant,” and a few others
that are rather pleasant than otherwise to the palate ; but the
poisonous qualities of these things operate by preventing
digestion, and they are removed with comparative ease from
the human stomach by the aid of warm water, mustard, salt
and water, or other emetic. The real poison plants have gener-
ally a milky, bitter juice, disagreeable to both taste and smell,
and without exception it is very painful should a drop get into
a sore or the eye.
But Poisons.—Amongst the absolute poisons in common use
for various purposes are strychnine, arsenic, and phosphorous,
used for destroying native dogs and other animals, and often
seen lying about shelves and tables, and occasionally pulled
from the pockets of persons who use them as though they were
as innocent as confectionery. In the household we find matches
(everyone of them dangerous), laudanum in various forms
acids, and other poisons with which families become quite
familiar—generally because the thought that they are capable
of inflicting the most terrible torture, seldom occurs. Of late
sulphuric acid has come into use as an agent for curing diph-
theria, and the testimony of many highly intelligent persons
goes to prove that three or four drops of the acid in water (as
much, we should say, as is safe) may be useful in that disease.


But this acid is exceedingly dangerous, as anyone can see who
rubs a drop of it upon his hands—it eats away the flesh at a
fearful rate, and destroys life rapidly. Carbolic acid is another
dangerous compound that has come into use for destroying
vermin, as a purifier, and for other purposes.
Prompt action is everything in cases of accidental poisoning.
Seconds, not hours, are at our disposal to apply a remedy, and
in places where medical aid is not at once obtainable, and
where no other guide is handy, the following may prove useful
in case of emergency ;
Laudanum—Opium, paregoric, soothing syrup, syrup of pop-
pies, etc., etc.—Symptoms : Giddiness, stupor, the pupil of the
eye very small, lips blue, skin cold, heavy, slow breathing.
Treatment: Empty the stomach as quickly as possible by
vomiting ; hot water, mustard and water, salt, or soap, or
tickle the throat with anything that is handiest. Then for an
adult, if it can be got, give fifteen grains of sulphate of zinc in
a little water; to a young person half the quantity ; to an
infant a teaspoonful of ipecacuanha wine. After vomiting
give plenty of very strong coffee, put a mustard plaster round
the calf of each leg, and if cold and sinking give spirits and
water. Get medical help. Keep the patient roused till the
effect has passed off by beating the soles of the feet, walking,
or dashing cold water on the face. Remember that if the
patient goes to sleep at this stage it is the sleep of death.
Strychnine—Dog and rat poison, etc., nux vomica.—Symp-
toms : Twitching of the muscles, convulsions, lockjaw, or the
body is bent backwards. Treatment: Try to empty the
stomach by an emetic, then give linseed-tea or barley-water,
and to an adult thirty drops of laudanum occasionally to
relieve the spasms. Hurry for a medical man.
Acids—Oxalic, sulphuric (vitriol), nitric (aqua fortis),
muriatic (spirit of salt), carbolic acid.-—Symptoms : Horrible
burning sour pain from the mouth downwards. The skin of
the lips, mouth, and throat is dissolved; purging of blood,
great thirst. Treatment: Water or milk in quantity, car-
bonate of soda, magnesia, whiting, chalk, or lime-water; or
knock a piece of plaster off the wall, pound it small, and give
it in milk or water. While one person attends to this let
another cut some common soap into small bits, and give a tea-
spoonful with water, or a tablespoonful of soft soap.
Arsenic—Paris green, green colorings, ague drops, rat and
dog poison, etc.—Symptoms : Pain and burning heat of


stomach, dryness of throat, cramps, purging, and vomiting.
Treatment: Give large quantities of milk and raw eggs, lime-
water, or flour and water ; then castor-oil.
Antimony—Butter of antimony, tartar emetic, etc.—Symp-
toms : Severe vomiting, cramps, faintness, purging. Treat-
ment : Plenty of strong common tea, or infusion of wattle or
iron-bark. For butter of antimony use the treatment given
for acids, and support the strength.
Mercury—Calomel, corrosive sublimate, red precipitate, ver-
milion, etc.—Symptoms : Metallic taste in mouth, burning
pain in throat, stomach, and bowels, vomiting, very painful
purging and cramps. Treatment: Give the white of an egg
in water; repeat this twice more, with five minutes between
each time; give large quantities of milk or flour and water,
then linseed tea.
Nitre, or Saltpetre.—Symptoms : Similar to arsenic. Treat-
ment : Give plenty of flour and water, then linseed or sweet
oil.
Phosphorus—Lucifer matches, dog and rat poisons, etc.—
Symptoms; Great excitement of the whole system; other
effects like arsenic. Treatment: Give large quantities of
warm water, with magnesia, chalk, or whiting, or flour stirred
in it; encourage vomiting, but give no oil or fat of any
description.
Alkali—Potash, soda, ammonia, sal volatile, disinfecting
fluids of concentrated solutions of salt, soda, or potash, wash-
ing mixtures, etc.—Symptoms : Heat, pain in stomach,
vomiting and purging. Treatment : Vinegar and water,
oranges, lemons, sour beer, or sour fruit; afterwards olive,
linseed, or any wholesome oil.
Lead—Tinned goods may contain lead from the solder (see
Chap. XXIX.) —Acetate or sugar of lead, red lead, white lead.
—Symptoms: Metallic taste in the mouth, pain in the stomach,
painful vomiting, often bloody, hiccup. Treatment : Two
ounces of Epsom salts in a pint of water, and give a wine-
glassful every ten minutes till it operates freely. Taken in
small quantities, either by drinking water out of a lead cistern
or one newly repaired with white lead, or by working amongst
it, lead produces colic, loss of power in the limbs, especially
wrist-drop, and a blue line along the gums. Get medical aid.
Copper—Blue copperas, mineral green, verdigris, food or
confectionary cooked in foul copper vessels, pickles made green
by copper.—Symptoms : Coppery taste in mouth, tongue dry


and parched, very painful or bloody motions, colic, etc.
Treatment: Large quantities of milk and white of eggs, after-
wards sugar in any form or strong tea.
Bad Fish.-—Symptoms : Pain in stomach, headache, flushed
face, feeling of choking, scarlet eruption of skin. Treatment:
Empty the stomach by any emetic (as in poisoning by laud-
anum), then give a full dose of castor-oil, with some warm
spice. A mustard-plaster to pit of stomach if needful.
Poisonous Plants, or seeds, berries, false mushrooms, etc.,
often picked up by chrildren.—Treatment; Empty the stomach
by any emetic at hand—warm water, mustard, salt, or soap,
warm camomile-tea, etc. If there be no purging give a dose
of castor-oil or olive-oil. If the patient be faint or sinking
give stimulants, and apply mustard poultices to the feet and
spine.
The druggists sell labels with skull and cross-bones—an
admirable caution for placing upon bottles, jars, etc., in which
dangerous articles have to be kept in places accessible to chil-
dren and persons unable to read less striking labels.
Sunstroke. —When the temperature rises over 100°, and the
weather is moist, care is necessary to prevent the exhausting
effects of so great a heat. Temperance in living is of the first
importance in this respect—not temperance in eating and
drinking only, but in the clothing worn, in government of the
temper, <fcc. Amongst men doing duty in hot climates,
it is well known that the man who has become heated
over night, either by drinking, quarrelling, or other cause,
runs more than ordinary risk of sunstsoke, and the treatment
in such cases depending upon the free application of water
upon the patient, efforts are made to have a supply handy
when cases of sunstroke are anticipated. As means of pre-
vention, it is advisable to wear head-coverings that, while
light, give shade and air to the head and neck. For these
purposes the colonial shell-hat, and calico or other pugaree
attachments, are unexceptionably good. Loose clothing
should be worn, and of the lightest possible color. The symp-
toms of an attack are sharp pains in the head and giddi-
ness, and unless the patient is of very strong nerve, and can
get under shade at once, he falls to the ground insensible—the


victim of over-heated blood. To cool the temperature of the
body, by applying water all over, and by exposing as much of
the body to the coolest possible current of air, are means of
the first consideration. Bleeding is often effective, and the
application of mustard poultice to the back of the neck, rub-
bing the spine with spirits, ammonia, or turpentine, are all
aids towards recovering the patient. Sometimes a man ex-
posed to the direct rays of the sun is struck down without any
warning; and sometimes the high temperature of the atmos-
phere under cover, or at night, especially if the air be fouled by
defective ventilation, will induce all the phenomena of sun-
stroke. Whatever checks perspiration, whatever induces
nerve-weariness, or embarrasses the normal working of the
organic system, powerfully predisposes to heat apoplexy.
Temperance in all things, sobriety, and that cleanliness which
is allied to godliness, are, after all, the main things to be ob-
served by residents in hot climates.
Snakes and Snake Bites —Australian snakes, with few
exceptions, are timid, and get out of the way. But at the
season of the year when snakes are pairing (during January
and February) they are less timid and more dangerous than
usual. In the event of being bitten, the following may be of
value :—ln former times everything in the shape of a snake
was considered poisonous ; but of late years colonists know
that many of the more common snakes, notably the carpet
species, are not poisonous. The death adder is the really
dangerous reptile of the snake tribe, because it is sluggish, at
all times, and retains its position until touched, when it bites
instantly. None of the snakes are known to attack ; they
bite only when disturbed in logs or elsewhere, or when trodden
upon by men or animals. They are easily disabled, and
seldom escape when attacked with a whip, stick, or other
weapon. They seldom move about at night, and lie in a semi-
dormant state during the winter months, in logs, hollow trees,
amongst stones, heaps of bark, ifec. It is in all cases advisable
to have a stick handy, and to look cautiously about when
working near places that give cover to snakes. In the event
of a bite, the flesh around the wound, to the size of a sixpence,
should be cut away to the depth of about an eight of an inch,
or scarified at once to cause a free flow of blood, and warm
water applied to induce bleeding. Dr. Bancroft, of Brisbane,
finds the immediate application of leeches to the wound to be
effective, and leeches are plentiful enough in scrubs, swamps,


Ac. A bandage or piece of cord should, if practicable, be tied
tightly between the wound and the heart, and the blood and
poison sucked out with vigor. If the patient cannot do this
himself, there is no great risk to another person doing so, as
snake poison is dangerous only when it comes in contact with
a wound. Drowsiness is the first symptom of snake poison;
and as soon as it appears every effort should be employed to
keep the patient awake by moving him about, rubbing, Ac. ;
medical aid should be called in as rapidly as possible. Stimu-
lants are valuable in all cases. If bleeding the wound has
been neglected, then much depends on giving large doses of
stimulants, the best of which are whisky, brandy, rum, weak
ammonia. Ac. Numbers of lives have been saved by the
injection of weak ammonia into the principal vein of the arm
by means of the subcutaneous syringe, which can now be had
in the colonies at reasonable prices. The operation requires
care, and a knowledge of the blood system. Amongst other
remedies recommended in cases of snake bite—and it is well
to become acquainted with them, for it is not always conve-
nient to employ the best-known remedies. Take one table-
spoonful of gunpowder and salt and the yellow of an egg, and
mix so as to make a plaster, place on a cloth and apply to the
wound, letting it extend an inch on all sides of the wound.
As the poison is drawn the plaster will lose its sticking
qualities, and fall off. Apply a new plaster until it sticks,
which is evidence that the poison is all out. This will cure a
snake bite on either man or beast. From the shortness of the
poison-fangsinAustraliansnakes, whichseldom exceed one-sixth
of an inch, it is not necessary to cut out the flesh to any great
depth, still less to chop off fingers or blast the wound with
gunpowder.
Apparent Death from Drowning. —The following instruc-
tions for restoring persons apparently drowned, are issued by the
Royal National Life-boat Institution. Send immediately for
medical aid, blankets and dry clothing, but proceed to treat the
patient instantly, on the spot, in the open air, with the face
downward whether on shore or afloat; exposing the face, neck,
and chest to the air, except in severe weather, and removing
all tight clothing from the neck and chest, especially the braces.
The points to be aimed at are—first and immediately, the
restoration of breathing; and secondly, after breathing is
restored, the promotion of warmth and circulation. The


efforts to restore breathing must be commenced immediately
and energetically, and perserved in for one or two hours, or
until a medical man has pronounced that life is extinct.
Efforts to promote warmth and circulation, beyond removing
the wet clothes and drying the skin must not be made until
the first appearance of natural breathing. For if circulation
of the blood is induced before breathing has recommenced, the
restoration to life will be endangered.
To Imitate the Movement of Breathing.—Standing at the
patient’s head, grasp the arms just above the elbows, and draw
the arms gently and steadily upwards above the head and keep
them stretched upwards for two seconds. (By this means air
is drawn into the lungs.) Then turn down the patient’s arms
and press them gently and firmly against the sides of the chest.
(By this means air is pressed out of the lungs.) Repeat the
measures alternately and perseveringly about fifteen times in a
minute, until a spontaneous effort to respire is perceived, imme-
diately upon which cease to imitate the movements of breathing
and proceed to induce circulation and warmth.
Treatment after Natural Breathing has been Restored.—
Commence rubbing the limbs upwards, with firm, grasping
pressure and energy, using handkerchiefs, flannels, &c. (by this
measure the blood is propelled along the veins towards the
heart.) The friction must be continued under the blanket or
over the dry clothing. Promote the warmth of the body by the
application of hot flannels, bottles of hot water, heated stones,
bricks, &c., to the pit of the stomach, the armpits, between the
thighs, and the soles of the feet. If the patient has been
carried to a house after respiration has been restored, be careful
to let the air play freely about the room. On the restoration
of life a teaspoonful of warm water should be given ; and then
if the power of swallowing has returned, small quantities of
wine, brandy-and-water, or coffee, should be administered. The
patient should be kept in bed, and a disposition to sleep
encouraged.
Appearances which Generally Accompany Death.—Breath-
ing and the heart’s action cease entirely ; the eyelids are
generally half closed, the pupils are dilated, the jaws clenched,
the fingers semi-contracted, the tongue approaches to the under
edges of the lips, and these as well as the nostrils are covered
with a frothy raucous. Coldness and pallor of surface
increase.
Exposure and Starvation. —The time during which a human


being can exist without food depends upon his mode of life,
his temperament, and his bodily condition. Well authenticated
cases have come to notice of persons being in the bush without
food for ten or twelve days, and when rescued showing no
very marked signs of exhaustion. But in these cases the
mind had been affected before the person had disappeared,
and the body did not crave that regular solid nutriment
demanded by a healthy organization. In such cases it is
almost certain also that the sufferers had obtained water, with
the aid of which human nature holds out much longer than
when deprived of both food and water. In ordinary cases
the bodily powers are exhausted in four days ; delirium sets in-
and completes the destruction of the body. With water, a
cool, collected man has held out for seven days and nights,
and still retained his faculties. Children have been known to
live five days without food, and it is rather singular that they
have adopted shifts to sustain life which their elders would
be likely to overlook—but of that in another part of the subject.
On reaching a person exhausted by hunger great caution is
necessary. Milk is the best of all nourishments in such cases;
next to it is bread and water reduced to the consistency of
milk. Whatever is given must be in small quantities—the
eagerness of the starving person to have nourishment must
be restrained. Stimulants are worse than dangerous, and
should on no account be given to a person exhausted by hunger.
Put warm clothing around the sufferer, lay him in bed, if
possible, but not so near a fire as to get direct heat, and
so gently nurse the nearly exhausted spark of life into fresh
vigor.
Water in Fever Cases —The word fever has a terrible
significance to the mother in the bush who finds her
child hot, dry, and peevish ; and to the bushman who finds
his mate laid low or unable to proceed. Fevers are as
numerous as the fanciful and very often meaningless names
given to diseases of this kind; and all brought on by some
irregularity of the system—the result of exposure, unwhole-
some food or air—in many cases the result of cold. The
symptoms are quick pulse, furred tongue, languor, inability
to make exertion, shivering, thirst, loss of appetite. Cold,
wet cloths bring relief when the patient is hot, hot applications
when he is cold. Gentle purgatives are good in all cases,
carbonate of soda and tartaric acid, in the form of effervescing
drinks, being amongst the best. Moisten the Ups and tongue


frequently. A fever patient requires but little food, and
that little should be easy of digestion, as the powers of the
stomach are at a standstill for the time being. When the
head is affected, the hair should be cut or shaved off, and
cold cloths applied. Jaring sounds, or anything that will
excite the imagination should be kept away from the patient.
Above all, careful nursing, fresh air, courage, quiet, and clean-
liness are powerful influences in pulling a person through a
fever. Water has a soothing effect upon the fever-prostrated
patient, old or young. It gives relief immediately the heat
of the body becomes exhausting. It is this heat, we should
bear in mind, that injures the patient ; water—coldj tepid, or
warm—according to the state of the patient, can be applied
ivhen there is no sense of chilliness present; when the heat of
the surface is steadily above what is natural , and when there is
no general or profuse perspiration. These rules are so plain
that it is difficult to see how any one could be at a loss
in knowing how to proceed, at least safely, in the application
of water in fever, until more skilled professional help can be
got.
Quinine. —This agent is in high repute for malarious fever,
chills, &c. Four grains are usually given in a cup of hot
coffee the first thing in the morning, or a glassful of wine
later in the day. Even if it fail, which it rarely does, no
harm can result from its use, and it is essential that it should
be continued for at least 14 days after quitting a malarious
locality.
Precautions. —Do not get “scared” for a fever. Never
allow any clothes of a patient to be washed in the house, but
always outside; do not pour boiling water on to them and
stand over the steam. Fever is not a solitary disease like
rheumatism or dropsy, affecting only one person; but when
it once fixes itself, it is impossible to tell how many it may
attack before it quits the locality ; therefore, never go near it
from mere curiosity; but if it be your duty to go, do your
duty without fear, and leave the rest to God.
Prickly Heat.—This is an acute skin disease of warm
weather. The symptoms are small reddish pimples and specks
upon the back, breast, arms, and other parts of the body
covered by clothing ; these pimples cause a sharp, itching,
stinging sensation. They are caused by slight disorganisation
of the system, the result either of great or moist heat, the use
of food that does not agree with the system, or contact with


foul air. Bathing in tepid or cold water, a slight dose of
medicine, and change of diet are the safest means of cure. It
is not advisable to check the rash suddenly, or worse com
plaints may arise. To relieve the stinging, a little bran should
be soaked, and the parts washed in the water.
Gum Leaves and Banana Leaves, for Wounds, Sore Eyes,
Etc.—The leaves of the gums generally, and of the plantain
or banana form useful applications, thus: —As a dressing for
blistered surfaces, for which purpose they are admirably
adapted in hot climates. After the removal of a blister, gum
leaves, or a piece of plantain leaf smeared with oil, should be
applied to the denuded surface, and kept in its place by means
of a bandage. The first sensation it occasions is peculiarly
cooling and soothing, and the blistered surface generally heals
satisfactorily. For the first two days the upper smooth
surface is placed next to the skin, and subsequently the under
side, until the healing process is complete. It should be
changed twice daily, or oftner if required. As a substitute
for India-rubber or gutta-percha tissue in the water dressing
of wounds and ulcers, banana leaf is decidedly good ; the
younger the leaf, the better is it suited for this purpose. Two
points require attention—l, the pieqc used should be suffi-
ciently large to cover or envelop the whole part; and 2, it
should be carefully kept in its place by bandages, etc. If
properly applied, evaporation of any subjacent fluid is effect-
ually prevented. As a shade for the eyes, in ophthalmia and
other diseases of the eye, no manufactured shade is superior
to banana leaf. The older and greener leaves answer best for
this purpose.
Charcoal.—This is a substance we can get wherever there
is a fire, and it is of charcoal we are told that it is an article
of great importance in a sanatory and medical as well as in an
economical point of view. It possesses no mean power as a
deodorizer, and in close sick rooms the smell of the air is
deprived of much of its unpleasantness by hanging about the
apartment thin muslin bags loosely filled with roughly-
powdered charcoal. The charcoal requires to be renewed
occasionally. For purifying water, an effectual plan is to boil
it with a good-sized piece of freshly-prepared charcoal.


XXXIII.—SEASONABLE REMINDERS FOR FIELD
AND GARDEN OPERATIONS, &c.
Making Calculations for Work.—As we have seen in
Chapters I. and V. to X., the seasons and seasonable work in
the field and garden in Australia, vast though the country is,
are matters of degree only. Thus, in the following Calendar
of Operations the work laid out is seasonable as a rule for the
warmer sections of the country, from Sydney northwards away
into Queensland, and westwards towards the mountains ; but
even in the strip of country mentioned modifications of the
sersons occur, and must be allowed for. As much as the
difference of a fortnight for planting such a well-understood
crop as maize may be found in places not 50 miles apart. As
we come southwards or westerly the seasons for planting,
harvesting, etc., are more decidedly affected, and allowances of
a month or more have to be made for change in the season,
being earlier or later, according to location, position with
respect to the mountains, elevation, rainfall, etc. It is in
adjusting such matters that local knowledge comes in with
such telling effect in Australian agricultural operations. With
this understanding, and by making allowances for differences
in crops found suitable for the different districts, such as
warm-weather or semi-tropical products doing best as we pro-
ceed northwards and colder-season crops' as we go south, or
get into the more hilly or mountainous country westward,
the calendar arrangement of seasonable work is most likely to
be found useful.
JANUARY.
Weather.—The seasonable weather of January is warm and
dry; it is the finishing harvest month for wheat in the
southern districts, and the commencement of the corn harvest
northwards. January in Australia is compared to July-August
in Britain, the temperature, in the heat of the day, ranging
between 80° and 100°. When rains fall this month, they
bring muggy heat (see Chap. XXXII.), and develops immense
growth in the native grasses and warm-weather crops.
In the field.—lt should be decided at once whether land that
was under grain is to go to grass or be prepared for other
crops. If the latter, or it is new land for cropping, then the
sooner it is broken up the better (see chapters on cultivation,
rotation, &c.). If green feed is required for the colder season,
maize, oats barley or rye can be sown ; also swede turnips.
T


Further north maize may be planted for the late crop of grain.
The summer-grown potatoes should be dug as soon as the tops
wither, otherwise they may heat and rot in the ground. Sweet
potatoes are just ripening, and as they come near the surface
a few may be got for use by rousing them out of the ground
with a sharpened stick, without injurying their fellows. Sow
sorghum, millet, &c., for winter feed. Tobacco is coming to
maturity and should be cut as it ripens.
In the Garden.—The season for budding fruit-trees should
now be fairly on (see Chap. XXV.) Ginger is ripe for preserving.
Grapes have to be attended to carefully, and picked as they
ripen for market or for wine-making. In the event of rain,
grapes swell rapidly, and there may be heavy losses unless the
picking is very close. Towards the end of the month, prepara-
tions )are generally made for the full cold-season crops of
vegetables. The selection of seed available for sowing during
the season, commencing in January, is immense, and includes
beets—blood-red, silver, and spinach; the two latter produce
rapidly a very wholesome green vegetable similar to spinach,
but larger leaves. Brocoli—white mammoth, Chappell’s cream,
especially adapted for the mountains and cold districts, being
hardier and more certain to produce flower-heads than the
cauliflower. Cabbage—early, large York, St. John’s Day,
sugarloaf, oxheart, medium early, East Ham, Enfield, or London
market, drumhead, flat Dutch, red drumhead, curled savoy.
Carrot —early short horn, intermediates. Cauliflower—early
London, large Asiatic, Veitch’s autumn giant. Chervil—
curled. Cress—triple curled, American. Endive—green curled.
Eschallots, garlic. Kohl rabi—green or purple top. Leek—
London flag. Lettuce—drumhead, Neapolitan. Mustard—
white. Onion—brown Spanish. Parsley—triple curled. Parsnip
—hollow crown. Peas—marrowfat, Yorkshire hero, Veitch’s
perfection, Yorkshire gem, Champion of England, Dr. M'Lcan.
Radish—long scarlet, red or white turnip, French breakfast,
black Spanish. Spinach—round, New Zealand, brach. Turnip—
white stone, white Nepaul, early snowball, orange jelly, white
globe, garden swede. When the season is warm and favor-
able a small sowing for autumn supply may still be made of
cucumber, rock and water melon, preserving melon, pumpkin,
tomato, and vegetable marrow, or cuttings may be planted, by
using the ends of the shoots. The first trenches of celery
should be got ready ; but where plants have perished, the white
solid variety may be sown, and, when watered freely, plants


advance rapidly. Where water can be applied, and the drills
shaded till the plants are fairly started, carrots, long red and
intermediate, may be sown in quantity. In the cooler districts,
turnips, early white stone, orange jelly, red American stone,
and Laing’s garden swede may be sown. Peas of the wrinkled
or marrowfat varieties may be got in. Where the soil is rich
and moist, French beans can be planted in any quantity
required during January and February. Manure as liberally
as can be done, in order to secure full returns. Those desirous
of knowing where the vegetables come from that are seen in
times of scarcity or during dry spells soon see the effect which
heavy manuring with the right stuff has in improving the
seasons. To develope pineapples to their fullest extent, and
the smooth leaf pine and autumn croppers especially, manure
should be given them now, and liquid manure freely. It is a
mistake to suppose that the pines do best on poor land;
bananas also are all the better of manure, superphosphate
having a marked effect on them.
The Vineyard.—Grapes ripen during January and Feb-
ruary, and preparations for wine-making should be all ready.
The business demands skill of no ordinary kind, and such
acquaintance with chemical manipulations as enables the wine-
makers to control fermentations, acetification, etc. This
includes acquaintance with the natural acids and alkalis of
vegetable life, which have so much to do with the qualities of
wines. Those entering upon this business may well give all
the attention they possibly can to the cultivation of grapes for
wine and the fertilisers that aid them in securing the desired
quality, and also to the scientific aspect of wine-making (see
Chap. XXV.).
In the Flower Garden.—Attend to staking and tying up
chrysanthemums ; treat them liberally to waterings in dry
weather, to keep the growth from getting hard and woody, or
small flowers will be the rule. Vallota purpurea is an ever-
green bulbous plant from South Africa, which about this time
unfolds its rich, brilliant, scarlet flowers. The earliest varie-
ties of fuschias cease flowering during January, and those
coming into flower should be treated liberally to liquid manure.
When verbenas look shabby cut off the tops well in, and top-
dress the plants with well-rotted manure; water copiously.
They will then throw a fine bloom next month. Out back the
earliest-flowering petunias that are shabby, give some fertiliser
to the plants, and more vigorous growths will be produced for


flowering. Stake the flowering Japanese and other lilies, to
prevent the winds from breaking them. Balsams, when grown
very quick, usually produce poor single flowers, however good
the strain of seed may be. These early flowers should be
picked ofi until the plants gain strength and have outgrown
the succulent stage, and when they do show good flowers give
them liberal supplies of liquid manure, as they are eager
feeders. Double-flowering dahlias promise well where water
is liberally supplied. Keep the weak growths thinned out
and firmly tied to stakes, or winds will break the succulent
shoots ; but for decoration the single-flowering varieties are
recommended, they produce such a profusion of flowers of
every hue of color, are dwarf and compact in habit, conse-
quently stand the winds and dry weather better than the
double-flowering sorts. Annuals can be sown to any extent.
The plants are raised more satisfactorily by sowing in pans or
pots, and transplanting in showery weather to the open beds.
In the meantime the beds should be well turned over and
manured. Sow seeds of abronia, ageratum, alyssum, snap-
dragon, columbine, daisy, calliopsis, canterbury bells, candy-
tuft, carnation, crysanthemum, clarkia, cowslip, cornflower,
dahlia, delphinium, dianthus, foxglove, forget-me-not, gail-
lardia, geranium, heliotrope, hollyhock, Indian pink, larkspur,
lavender, linaria, linum, lobelia, marigold, mignonette, pansy,
penstemon, perilla, petunia, phlox, pink, picotee, polyanthus,
French poppy, pyrethrum (golden feather), scabiosa, stocks,
sweet william, verbena, violets, wallflower, zinnia. The fol-
lowing are suitable for green house and bush-house culture in
pots :—Auricula, begonia, calceolaria, cineraria, cyclamen,
gloxinia, mimulus, musk, pansy, primula.
In the Bush-House.—Plants grown in baskets will require
plenty of water. At times, when the soil in pots becomes very
dry, it is good practice to set them for a few minutes in water ■
but be careful when watering or syringing begonias that the
water does not go over the leaves, or they will lose their beau-
tiful metallic lustre. All soft-wooded plants require abundance
of water at the root if the drainage is good. Shake out and
re-pot fancy and regal pelargoniums that were out during last
month. Use the syringe and water freely to all established
plants.
FEBRUARY,
In the Field.—The ordinary work is much the same as that


of January, the weather if anything being hotter this month
as we get northwards. In the cane fields, chipping out weeds
is the principal work ; corn is helped on towards maturity and
heavy crops by cultivation. Cape and skinless barley and
oats can be sown; also lucerne and the clovers toward the
end of the month, and rye with tares or vetches, which gives a
better crop for cutting, as the rye stands up well. Plant the
full crop of winter potatoes, also pumpkins wherever land is
available in the warm districts, and prepare land for wheat
and barley, which can be sown next month.
In the Garden.—See to the bandages around budded plants,
and continue budding later sorts. This is a good time for
re-forming and improving banana and pineapple plantations,
by thinning out the old stocks and manuring ; also for setting
out new plants, that they may catch hold of the ground ere
cold weather comes on. Seedling orange, citron, and lemon
plants are considered the more suitable as a rule in the north,
but it is always desirable to work by budding and grafting,
and so test some of the very best sorts. Strawberry plants
can be set out wherever the soil is sufficiently moist. Give
rosellas liquid manure to bring on this grand fruit. Where
rain has not been sufficient, all available stuff, as leaves, litter,
corn husks, etc., should be spread around the plants, as a
mulch to keep the sun off and the soil moist; water may be
necessary in some cases ; when given, it does most good when
put in deep and near the roots, covering up with dry soil.
This is the time to arrange for collections of bulbs for plant-
ing, from hyacinths to lilies ; the choice is very great.
Bees.—They take to swarming about this time, during
seasons when honey is plentiful. When drones are scarce, or
additional stocks may not be required, the better way is to
return them to the hive they came from, giving more room till
they settle down to work again. By sprinkling the bees with
syrup, in which a few drops of camphor spirit is mixed, they take
quite kindly each stock to the other with which they are
“ boxed ” or mixed.
The Trouble With Seeds.—Before doing much in the way
of seed-sowing, it may be advantageous to read up Chapters
VI. and XXX., dealing with the ordinary cultivation crops
and seed-farming. When purchased seeds fail, the seedsman
is blamed. If seeds do not produce a crop true to kind, the
fault is probably that of the seedsman, or rather of the seed-
grower ; but when seeds fail outright, the fault is generally


that of the man who sows them. Entire failure with seeds
is usually due to one of two causes ; too deep covering or
to improper covering. When the seedling plant appears
above the surface of the soil, the growth made in doing this is
entirely from the contents of the seed. The stem of the
minute embryo, the rudimentary plant peeps forth from the
shell of the seed, and a portion pushes downwards, while the
other pushes upwards towards the surface of the soil. The
material for this growth is provided beforehand in the seed
itself, and the growth takes place before the plant has formed
any roots by which it can take up nutriment from the soil. It
is evident, if the seed be so far below the surface that the
material provided for the growth of the young plant upwards
maybe exhausted before that reaches the surface, and it may die.
Hence, covering too deep is a frequent source of failure,
If the seeds are but slightly covered with very loose, dry soil,
the embryo plant, after its starts, may perish from excessive
dryness. Hence, compacting the soil by the use of a roller,
by patting the surface with the back of a spade, or by the old
method, rough, but effective, when the soil is dry, of “ treading
in the seed,” by passing over the rows with the feet—either of
these is likely to ensure success with seed which otherwise might
fail. These are most important points to be heeded at sowing
time. The proper keeping of seeds has much to do with their
germination. While there are many seeds of perennials
that should be sown as soon as ripe, it is different with
annuals and biennials. Cultivation has caused the cabbage,
cauliflower, lettuce, carrot, parsnip, and most other garden
vegetables, to produce heads or roots many times larger, and
much more succulent, than in their wild state. The seeds of
these, when self-sown, or when sown as soon as ripe, produce
degenerate plants, which in turn run to seed, instead of yielding
full grown plants. In the experiments of Professor Buckman
and M. Yilmorin, on the improvement of the carrot, radish, &c.,
from the degenerate forms known as weeds, it was found that
keeping the seeds dry during the winter, and sowing them in
spring, proved an important agency in restoring these plants
to their useful condition. Rest, suspended growth for a time,
has an important influence in keeping such plants in the
artificial condition produced by cultivation. The manner in
which seeds are kept has much to do with their value at sowing
time. We should keep in mind the fact that seeds are not a
collection of mere fragments of vegetable matter, like so much saw


dust. They really contain living plants—living, but in a state
of suspended animation; they are dormant. It would be more
accurate to say that each seed is a case containing a living
plant, together with food enough to nourish it during its early
growth. In the seeds already cited, the embryo plant in the
cucumber fills the whole shell of the seed, its two seed-leaves
being very large and thick, on account of the plant-food which
is stored in them. In the beet the embryo plant has thin seed-
leaves, and it is placed on the outside of a mass of food provided
for its early growth. When we sow seeds of any kind we know
that we must have, in order to secure the full, healthy growth,
a certain amount of heat, and must supply moisture and air.
These agents soon start the embyro plant into activity. The
seed germinates, or in popular language, “ comes up.” In
keeping seeds for use, as seeds, we wish the embryo to remain
perfectly dormant, hence we must preserve them from those
influences that promote vegetation. Moisture and a high
temperature must be especially avoided. On the other hand,
too great dryness and a too low temperature may injure, if not
destroy, the embryo plant within the seed, for though dormant
it is not dead. Entire exclusion of air is not desirable. Seeds
kept in closely-stoppered bottles often fail. The ordinary
method of keeping them in paper bags for small quantities, and
in sacks of coarse fabric for large lots, is found to be the best, as
it secures dryness and does not entirely exclude the air. An
inner closet or room, which is not heated, will be better than
a warm dwelling-room or kitchen, even in the case of maize-
seed, hardy though it is. The number of years that seeds
retain their germinating power varies greatly. Parsnip seed
does not usually grow after the first year, while seeds of
cucumber, and others of that family, may continue good for
ten years and more. With the exception of parsnip, other
ordinary vegetable seeds, if well kept, may be good at the end
of two or three years.
Watering Plants.—Much disappointment arises from mis-
taken ideas concerning the watering of plants, and the way in
which water is applied. In this place we will see to pot plants
mainly, and to those in the bush-house and conservatory;
though the general principle with which wo have to deal in
using water by artificial means may apply to field crops almost
equally with pot plants. In the .early days of irrigation, in
California, large areas of young wheat were destroyed by over-
watering. The fact is, that the capacity of all plants to take


up water is dependent very largely upon the extent of their
roots; so that, in watering, say a bush-house, we may be
starving some and drowning others, while we continue to serve
all alike, by using the sprinkling pot or hose upon them. Thus,
a young begonia may be gorged with water, while its full
grown sister along side is starving; or it may be that a plant
has not been shifted and that its ball has become over-crowded
with roots, and after being repotted all the water may pass
through the new soil while the interior of the hardened ball is
left dry. In this way, shade-tree plants are often seen starving
for want of water. Asa rule, the larger the leaf surface of
plants or the quicker they grow, the more water is required.
On the other hand plants with less area of leaf, or that grow
more slowly, do not require such large supplies. The quantity
of water required by plants also depends to a great extent on
the situation in which they are growing; thus, in the moist
atmosphere of a conservatory, evaporation from the leaves is
much less than in an airy bush-house ; less water requires to be
pumped up from the soil, which retains its moisture longer,
and it is, therefore, not necessary to give water so often j but
in such a situation as the latter, most plants that are in full
growth and have not been recently shifted, require to be
watered twice a day in dry weather ; and in many cases, the
watering is most effectively done, at least once a day, by
placing the pots in water. These facts should be borne in mind
when potting, larger space being allowed for water in the case
of plants of rapid growth, and of those that have to bear much
exposure to light and air than would be necessary under oppo-
site conditions. Again, much depends upon the way in which
a plant is potted ; where the drainage is good, and the roots
have ramified throughout the soil, too much water can hardly
be given to a vigorous grower in dry weather; for not only does
the plant itself require a large supply, but evaporation from
the outside of the pot causes a constant drain in that direction
also. Then there are certain plants—soft-wooded succulents—
which ought to be kept dry while in a dormant state, while
ethers require to have the soil in a constant state of saturation;
among these are the ferns that naturally belong to moist, mossy
situations ; and most of the orchids, when in baskets or pots,
require to have their roots kept constantly moist while in a
state of growth, though able to endure almost complete dryness
when dormant. Various of our indigenous plants, as rock
lilies, staghorns, &c., although able to endure an almost abso


lute condition of drought, yet to bring them to perfection in
pots a regular supply of water must be given when they are in
a state of growth ; for though they do not lose much moisture
by evaporation or breathing, a large supply is needed to fill the
tissues of the growing shoots or leaves. Mistakes in watering
plants may be made during the resting as well as the growing
period. To know whether a plant requires to be moist or dry
during its period of rest, its natural habitat has to be studied.
Nearly all tropical and most of our Australian native plants
rest during seasons of drought, and start into growth with the
advent of rain; the contrary being the case with plants of
temperate and cold regions, where the soil contains the greatest
amount of moisture during the winter or resting season. So
that not only is it necessary to study the nature of plants but
also the climatic conditions of the regions of which they are
native. Sufficiency of water is a necessity during the resting
period of plants from countries where the soil is moist during
the winter season, whether grown in pots or in the open
ground, the scarcity of moisture at the root during the winter
invariably affecting and lessening the amount and quality of
the future crop ; and we see how it is that such crops as
potatoes, turnips, &c., require moisture all through their season
of growth, The structure of a plant cannot be taken in all
cases as a guide to the amount of water it requires during the
period of rest. In bulbs, for instance, the majority remain
dormant during the season of drought, but there aresome such
as Crinum, Eucharis and others that require the soil to be kept
moist throughout the year. Therefore a beginner must study
the conditions under which plants exist in a state of nature, or
learn at the dear school of experience. When we do water,
it should be done effectively. It is a bad plan to give sprink-
lings in driblets, or give a little water, thinking it sufficient for
the time, and again a little more, of which none may reach the
lower roots, so that the plant under-ground may be starving
while the surface of the soil is sufficiently moist. When water
is given it should be in sufficient quantity to moisten the whole
of the soil, and this should be the case both as regards plants
in pots and in the open ground. The temperature of the water
is also very important, it should never be lower than that of
the air for the time being, and may frequently be higher with
advantage. In fact hot-water (up to 140°) is given with good
effect to kill parasites.


MARCH.
The Weather.—The cooler season commences this month.
March in Australia is comparable with September in Britain.
As a rule it is a delightful time, though, as a rule also, too
dry for the work of the farmer when he has grain to sow,
unless early ploughing has got his land in more favorable con-
dition for sowing winter crops.
In the Field.—When the season is favorable March is not
too soon for getting in wheat in the colder districts ; but
whether the latter end of the month or April be chosen, thin-
sowing, and to sow as early as possible, are very desirable
means towards securing full, healthy crops. It is not neces-
sary to add a word concerning the advisability of sowing some
rust-proof wheat, by way of test or trial. Very particular
attention should be paid to the selection of seed (see Chap.
XXX., “Seed-Growing”). It is wrong to say that any kind of
shrivelled grain will do for sowing. The plumpest and
cleanest of the selected variety should be sown. The “ germ ”
is probably as large in shrivelled wheat as in the more plump ;
but the young plant is fed during the first stage of its life by
the meal or flour that is stored expressly for its maintenance
in each seed until it has developed roots. The first shoot is
the radicle which finds water with which to change the flour
into plant food, and from this are developed roots and the first
tiny leaves. If the supply of nourishment is not sufficient the
plant cannot be as fine as if it were plentiful, and the “crown,”
from which the “stools” or wheat-stems proceed, cannot be so
well developed, so that one or two weak stems may be pro-
duced in place of a dozen strong ones. Where oats for grain
are to be grown, the end of March is not too early for sowing ;
for hay, later sowing, even up to August, yields well. Barley
and buckwheat can be sown. For malting-barley land rich in
lime, though too poor for wheat, may give very fair returns.
All the grasses, also clover, lucerne, and alfalfa, a variety of
the latter doing very well on poorer soil, may be got in. In
all cases the land for cultivated grasses should be in first-class
condition, by cultivation and in quality of soil. In the cooler
districts it is too late for potato-planting, as frost may take
them ; further north the crop can be got in still. Keep the
hoe going about the growing potatoes, otherwise weeds will
soon tell a tale upon them. Sow for mangels, which for dairy
stock ranks amongst the best feed known. Eye, tares, swede


and white-top turnips, chicory, beet, field-cabbage, and carrots
are all in order for sowing in the cooler districts.
In the Garden.—The main work is getting a full supply of
vegetables for winter use, for sowing and working which see
“ Reminders” for January and February.
In the Bush-House.—Fuschias that were turned out to
ripen their growths can now be pruned to shape, and as soon
as they show signs of new growth turn them out of the old
soil, and re-pot in good, light, rich compost. Water carefully
until established. Give all fine-foliage plants abundance of
water. From climbers that may be growing too freely cut out
superfluous growths, so as not to interfere with light and air,
which are so essential at this season for plants. A few
hyacinth bulbs, either grown in pots or hyacinth glasses, have
a pleasing effect in winter. Use the syringe freely to ferns,
and do not let insects get a chance to multiply.
Home-made Soap and Candles. —The cold weather season
is the time for using up the spare tallow and fat, and making
supplies of soap and candles. Though, when that time does
not suit, another may answer. It is becoming quite an object
of ambition now-a-days with bush housekeepers to make their
own soap and candles. They like to have them of the best,
too, and a most commendable ambition it is, for we not only
convert an almost waste commodity, in many houses, into
needful articles of every-day use, but we make the articles
abundant and the supply reliable ; and, by going to the trouble
of making our own soap and candles, we avoid the far greater
trouble of complaining that those articles are used too rapidly,
or running out of them altogether—not uncommon contin-
gencies, as many bush-folks can testify. To make good, hard,
white soap, we must have clean tallow or fat, pure lime, and
washing-soda in the lump. If a yellowish tinge is considered
desirable, then common resin is used. The following pro-
portions may be doubled to any extent for making larger
quantities; though the experience of makers differs a good
deal about the relative proportions of tallow, lime, soda, and
water used ; but this will be found to depend a good deal
upon the heat of the fire, hardness or softness of the water, all
of which differ in nearly every case, and can only be settled
by experience:—
1.—7 lbs. washing-soda and 7 lbs. lime, to be boiled in five
gallons of water for half an hour; when cold, pour off the
clean water or lye ; add 6 lbs. fat and \ lb. resin, and boil


about four hours; test the soap by pouring a little upon an
earthenware vessel; as soon as it acquires the right feel of
soap, pour the whole mass into a tight box of a good shape for
cutting the mass into bars when it cools. Out it with a thin
wire, or string will do.
2. —To about 10 quarts water add 6 lbs. of quick-lime (shell
lime is best) and 6 lbs. common washing-soda. Put all to-
gether and boil for an hour; then let it stand all night to
clear. Draw off the water or lye, and add to it 1 lb. common
resin and about 7 lbs. tallow or fat. Boil this for half an hour ;
then let it stand till cool, and cut it into bars.
3. —3 lbs. washing-soda, 3 lbs. slaked lime, and 8 quarts
water. This should boil about twenty minutes ; let it settle,
strain very clear, and add about 3 lbs. of fat and 4 oz. of resin ;
let it boil very slowly for about three hours. Makes from 20
to 24 lbs. soap.
4. —Slake about Gibs of shell-lime in 4 gallons of water;
have 5 lbs. of washing-soda dissolved in about 1 gallon of
water; mix the two and let it stand for thirty hours; dip off
the water, free from lime, and add to it (the water) 4| lbs. of
clean grease; let it boil up, and add 2 oz. of resin ; and boil
the whole till it thickens, which usually takes three or four
hours, but which can be proved by taking out a little to cool;
have ready a box or tub, the sides and bottom of which should
be wet, to prevent the soap from sticking. When all is ready,
pour in the soap, and when it is cold cut into bars. The bars
require to be cut large, as it shrinks very much in drying.
Oare should be taken not to let clothes or boots touch the lime-
water, for it will burn them.
Soft-Soap.—The difference between hard and soft soap is
that soda is the alkali used for the former, and potash for
making soft soap. It is safest to purchase the potash, as it is
not plentiful in our native timbers; but fresh ashes from man-
grove and oak may do ; swamp oak is amongst the best for the
purpose. Any sort of tallow or fat will answer if reasonably
clean. When the potash is to be got from wood-ashes, make
a hole at the bottom of a tub or barrel; plug up the hole, and
nearly fill the barrel with wood-ashes; pour in as much water
as the ashes will hold, and let it stand for three days ; run off
the liquor, now called lye, and pour in more water, until three
degrees of lye are taken from the ashes. Put the first lye into a
pot with as much tallow as it can saponify or make soapy, and
boil about three hours; then add the second lye, and boil


about two hours more ; draw off the water as it separates from
the soap, and add the third lye and boil for an hour or so,
making three boilings of about six hours in all. Allow it
to settle, and as it cools, draw off all water that remains under
the soap, which is then ready for use.
Another Soft Soap.—To make about 241bs. of soap wants
as much wood ashes as will fill a flour barrel, or a box, or
anything of about the same size. To get good ashes, burn as
many leaves and small branches of mangrove, oak, box, or
ferns as possible. Bore a few holes in the bottom of the
barrel or box, and then put in some straw, hay, or dry ferns
and four or five handfuls of lime. Then put in the ashes over
the lime and ram firm ; scoop out a hollow in the ashes and
fill it with warm water, and as it soaks through pour in more
water, say about five or six gallons in all. As the water (or
lye rather, for from it potash is made) runs through, catch it
in a pot or other vessel. Three gallons of this liquid and
three pounds of tallow or clean grease should make from 24 to
30 lbs. of soap. It is boiled in an iron pot until it curdles into
the desired soapy mass.
Carbolic Acid Soap. —Out common soap into fine shavings
and melt it over a gentle heat, with as little water as possible.
Then add the acid—an ounce will be enough for 1 lb. of soap ;
boil gently until the mass thickens; then pour it into any
desired mould. The hardness of the soap depends upon evapo-
rating as much of the water as possible. This soap is really
good for cleansing purposes generally ; there are few better
things for tender feet. It is used also for poultry, calves,
pigs, dogs, and other animals, the acid being utterly de-
structive to insect life.
Candles.—They can be made from any tallow, but the
cleaner and firmer it is the better the candles. Equal portions
of beef and mutton tallow answers very well. When bees-wax is
added, in the proportion of about 3 oz.to a pound of tallow, we
have an improved candle. Small quantities of camphor, or
alum, also improve the article. Candle-moulds to make half
a dozen at a time are sold by the tinmen. They are rounded
to a point at one end ; through this end twisted candle wick
is passed, and fastened in the centre of the other end to a pin
or skewer. The wicks should first be dipped in alum or lime
water, and dried before they are put into the moulds, to
prevent their burning too rapidly. When the wicks are all in


position, pour in the melted tallow. When cool, dip the
mould into hot water, and the candles will slip out. They are
improved by keeping.
APRIL.
Weather.—Cool days, chilly nights, like October in Britain.
In the Field.—Sow for wheat as soon as possible, or when
the season is backward for growing, shake up the land with
plough or grubber to kill weeds and sweeten the soil for the
seed-bed. Sow for oats, barley, rye, vetches, swede turnips.
Where sorghum or other seeds are to be saved, gather or
protect the seed-heads from birds. Cut and cure tobacco
plants as they ripen. (See Chapter VIII).
In the Garden.—Transplanting of fruit trees commences,
many experienced growers preferring to get in oranges,
lemons, olives, loquats, mangoes, etc., now, that they may
make some roots before the growth of the season is checked.
Sow for mustard and cress. Peas are a desirable winter crop,
and M‘Lean's little gem is a very desirable sort for the warm
districts. Continue planting out cabbage, cauliflower, lettuce,
etc., whenever weather is favorable ; it is of little use putting
in feeble or weakly plants; see that they are firm and some-
what hardened before lifting them from the seed bed, and, if
possible, soak the ground about the plants when they are in
position. To force squash and pumpkin plants to mature
their fruit before cold weather stops their growth, pinch off
the ends of the running shoots. Sow for turnips, carrots,
salading, etc., as may be required, and keep the seed-beds
re-sown for cabbage and cauliflower plants. Plant broad
beans, and keep the surface soil loose and clean, making the
garden rich on every possible opportunity.
Dairy Stock.—Cold weather tells upon the milkers, and
shelter in sheds or stables, with warm feed, help them very
much to keep up the flow of milk. (See Chap. XX.)
Bees. —Unless in very favorable localities, bees make but
very little honey from this time till September. See that the
hives are clean, snug and warm for winter. Bees suffer badly,
and fall prey to moths and ants when they are in drafty,
uncomfortable boxes, instead of snug bar-frame hives.
Doing up the Places for Summer Again.—Paint for Rough
Work.—Few things pay better than a coat of paint, and the
winter season is the time to do it. Be the object a slab wall,
or any rough outside place, it is not only preserved, but the


surroundings are much improved by a coat of paint. Amongst
other compositions found useful for this purpose, the following
are favorites:—
1. —Unslacked lime 20 lbs., slake it with water, covering
during the process to keep in the steam ; strain the liquid
through a fine sieve or strainer, and add to it 5 lbs. or more
salt, previously dissolved in water; rice, 3 lbs., boiled to a
thin paste and stirred in boiling hot; Spanish whiting, \ lb. ;
clean glue, 1 lb., which has been previously dissolved in water,
soaking it well, and then hanging it over a slow fire in a small
vessel immersed in a larger one filled with water; next add
hot water to the mixture, enough to make a nice thick paint,
stir it well, and let it stand a few days covered from dust;
then put it on hot if possible. This will last on wood, stone,
or brick for years.
2. —“ Machine,” or Skimmed milk, 2 quarts ; fresh slacked
lime, 6£ ozs.; linseed oil, 4 ozs.; common whiting, 3 lbs. Put
the lime into a stoneware vessel; pour upon it sufficient milk
to make it like thick cream ; add the oil a little at a time; mix
thoroughly; add remainder of milk, then the whiting made
fine ; keep the whole well stirred while using.
3. —Cement Wash (Cement, or Water-lime, as some call it)
—Mix the cement with water, and apply three or four coats.
Any color may be added. This will last for years, and by
renewing once in two or three years a building may continue
looking well at small expense.
4. —Use common stone lime; slack or reduce it to powder
in a tub, by pouring on sufficient water. During the process
cover the tub with a bag to keep in the steam ; then pass the
powder through a fine sieve, and to every 6 quarts add a quart
of salt and a gallon of water; then boil and skim clear; to
every 5 gallons of the liquid add pulverised alum 1 pound,
pulverised blue-stone pound, and add, very slowly, about 6
lbs. of fresh burnt wood-ashes from mangrove or oak-wood, if
possible, and any coloring matter desired. Apply the paint
with a brush. It looks well and is very durable; will stop
small leaks in roofs, prevent moss from growing thereon, make
it incombustible, and render bricks impervious to water.
5. —A good base for rough paint is Spanish White, or as it
is more commonly called, whiting, mixed in pure raw linseed
oil; stir until it Is thoroughly mixed; then reduce with oil to
the consistency of paint, and add a little turpentine or other
drier, sufficient to dry it. Apply with an ordinary brush. It


must be thoroughly beaten up together, so as to work out all
the lumps of the whiting. Another : For weatherworn weather
boarding take about one-half common whiting, one-half white
lead, and a small portion of red lead or chrome yellow to
overcome the blackness of the wood, or add umber for a drab
color. Flaxseed oil may be used ; a little turpentine or kero-
sene makes the paint flow more freely from the brush. Small
portions of Venetian red and lamp black do for darker colors.
MAY.
Weather.—Wintry, like November in Britain. In the
northern districts, May, June, July, August, are delightful.
Southwards and west, the cold is often very bitter.
In the Field.—Where sowing of wheat has still to be done,
the work should be pushed on without any delay. In the
coastal districts, and indeed all over the country whether rust
has occurred or not during previous seasons, steeping of the
seed (see Chap. VI.) as a safeguard against rust should not be
neglected. Oats and barley, malting barley included, can be
sown. Rye may be sown ; also vetches, one of the best crops
for dairy stock. Sorghum, another of the good winter feeds,
is now ripe, and when chopped or passed through the chaff-
cutter, proves a grand help during cold weather. Those who
have silos, and can put away some tons of chaffed maize and
sorghum, with grass, etc., should have a valuable addition to
the usual winter feed. Where mangolds have been grown,
some judgment is necessary now in dealing with them, whether
they should be dug and housed, or added to the silo stuff, or
left in the ground; and sweet potatoes, it may be added, can
be treated under much the same rules. In parts where the
winter season is mild, and frost is not sufficiently severe to
freeze the roots, they can be left in the ground, and used as
required. In other cases, it is best to lift and pit them, as is
done with potatoes. Pumpkins, in every case, should be got
under cover as soon as the stems are dry. They are sure to
be injured it left exposed when ripe. Potatoes also should be
dug and pitted as soon as ready for digging. It is bad practice
leaving them in the ground. Peas and beans, of all the varie-
ties for field crops, can be planted, and in their case we
would advise the use of potash manure, or lime, where the soil
requires it. These crops have suffered badly during several
seasons, dying and damping off, and failing to give crops. It
will be found that potash, with lime, is a most effective means
to check losses of that kind. Sow onions for a field crop. To


get on the onion-seed beds for spring planting, they should be
watered freely. Field beans can be planted. Sow for sugar
beets, field cabbage, Altringharn and white Belgian carrot,
chicory, linseed (see Chap. XII.), mangold-wurtzel, field-
peas, tares, the various varieties of white and Swede turnips.
All grasses, clovers, <fcc., for permanent pastures can now be
largely sown; the principal kinds are white Dutch, red, and
perennial red clover, trefoil, lucerne, cocksfoot, perennial rye
grass, couch grass, prairie grass, rib grass, timothy, fescues,
(fee.
In the Fruit-Garden.—The planting and the pruning season
is now on, and insect enemies can be attended to with some
prospect of success. At the commencement of another planting
season it would be well to take advantage of the experience of
previous years. That many young trees fail, and others live
only a languishing life during a few seasons, are well-known
facts ; that the great growth of wood during favorable growing
seasons, want of attention to pruning, which tells severely
upon trees during the dry weather of our spring seasons, deve-
loping, as this check to growth does, many insect enemies, are
primary causes of trouble to fruit-trees we have not a doubt.
It is well to suggest that no more trees should be set out
during very dry seasons than can be supplied freely with
water where necessary ; for as the buds begin to swell, and they
are then stinted of moisture, the sap-vessels become shrivelled
up, and never again regain the vigor necessary for a healthy
tree. The orange tribe are amongst the first ready for setting
out. See that the soil in which they are put is rich, spread
the roots well out, and do not set in the trees deeper than they
stood in the nursery row. Stone-fruits can be left until the
leaf is down, then transplant. Where trees have been doing
only poorly try the effects of compost manure, superphosphate,
bone-dust, or gunano dressing. Chip the manure just under
the surface, to feed the fine roots. Beyond a doubt no small
number of fruit-trees aro being literally starved to death for
want of the substances of which they exhaust the soil (see
Chaps. XIII and XXY.). Plant out strawberries ; make
cuttings of currants, goose, and raspberries, or obtain plants
of same for setting out. Loquats should be flowering freely.
Let them have liquid manure, and where guavas are failing
to yield good fruit it is good practice to cut them back, manure
freely, and introduce a new and more vigorous growth. Indeed,
close pruning of fruit-trees generally is one of the safe ways
U


towards success. In the colder districts grape-vines are shed-
ding their leaves, and pruning will soon be necessary. In setting
out fresh vines it is very desirable to select sorts found suitable
for each district, and such as have proven healthy and free from
disease. Where the so-called phylloxera has appeared, root
out and destroy the plants and manure the land. That is the
best treatment for that complaint yet discovered in Australian
practice.
Insect Pests.—ln addition to the information given in Chap.
XXYI. concerning insect and other pests, the “ Elements of
Australian Agriculture” deals more .fully with the codlin
moth, wheat, rust, &c. Systematic war has to be made upon
these annoyances, and this, in so far as insects are concerned,
is most effectively done during the cold-weather season. Insects
are in the dormant state then, and when trees are pruned they
can be cleared off and the trees cleaned ; then use the clay-
paint and washes freely, to clear out aphis, scales, etc.
Setting Out Trees and
Shrubs.—No small vexation
is caused by setting out trees
during the planting season
now commencingjust as they
are received from the nursery-
men. The object of the illus-
tration is to show how this
trouble arises. As a rule the
purchasers of plants want
them as large as possible, so
.that, taking a two-years-old
peach for instance, we see a
plant that looks somewhat
like the first seen in the
sketch. It is a very nicely-
grown young tree; but if the
nurseryman had his way he
would prune or cut back the
main stem and branches till
it looked like the second
sketch. The average buyer
of trees, however, would not
appreciate the cutting back,
although it is a really neces-
sary operation, in order to
TREATMENT OF YOUNG TREES.


balance or make up for the loss of roots, as seen in the half-
circle at the roots of sketch 1. This cutting or mutilation of
the roots outside of the half-circle has been caused by lifting
or shifting the tree. It cannot be avoided very well; but one
can make up for the loss by pruning back the stem and
branches and trimming the broken roots with a sharp knife,
and so prevent the exhaustion of sap which occurs when a
young tree has more branches and leaves than it can support
from the roots.
In the Vegetable Garden.—Where the soil is either coarse,
raw, or backward (see Chapters 11., XIII., and XXV.) a
dressing of lime seldom fails to impart vigor to growth. Sow
peas, both early and late sorts ; keep up the supply of cabbage,
cauliflower, lettuce, and similar plants, by small sowings
weekly or fortnightly. Sow garden onions for spring planting.
Plant out potato and tree onions. Tomatoes may be set out in
the warm districts, and where fruit is ripe the time is favor-
able for preserving. (See Chap. XXIX). Asparagus, horse-
radish, and rhubarb beds should be dressed liberally; make
the soil as 'rich as possible. Continue to plant out from the
seed-beds any of the vegetable seedlings that have obtained a
sufficient size, and for successional crops make sowings of
globe artichoke, giant asparagus, broad Windsor, long pod or
green Windsor beans ; borecole and Brussels sprouts, white
mammoth and Chappel’s cream brocoli; large York, oxheart,
Winnigstadt, Enfield market, east ham, king, drumhead, flat
Dutch, schweinfert, and red drumhead cabbage ; short-horn
and intermediate carrot, early London, large Asiatic, and
autumn giant cauliflowers; white, solid, and turnip-rooted
celery ; chervil, triple-curled, American; land and water cress,
endive, eschallots, garlic, kohlrabi (turnip-rooted cabbage),
London flag leek, drumhead and cos lettuce, mustard, brown
Spanish onion, parsley, turnips, Laxton’s supreme, blue peter,
rising sun, champion of England, blue scimitar, and blue
imperial peas ; long scarlet, red turnip and other varieties of
radish ; salsify, sea kale, prickly spinach ; white stone, white
nepaul, orange jelly, red American, and garden Swede turnip.
Plant roots of sage, thyme, sweet majoram and mint. Plant
rhubarb roots, potato and tree onions, asparagus, Jerusalem
artichokes.
In the Flower Garden.—Where new places are being formed,
■or walks have to be made, see that they have good stone
ballast put below the gravel; give a slight rise to the centre of


the walk to throw the water off, and drain if necessary. (See
Chap. IV). A well-made walk lasts an indefinite time, but
one badly made is always needing repair, is painful to walk
on, and is most expensive in the long run. If anemones,
ranunculuses, and hyacinths have been started in pots, transfer
them to beds at once when weather favorable. The soil should
be well prepared with leaf-mould and well-rotted cow manure.
Ifa number of cineraria plants have been raised, and more
than is wanted for pot culture, after they are nicely estab-
lished in Sin. pots, plant them out of doors in sheltered situa-
tions in well-prepared beds, dug quite 2ft. deep, with plenty
of manure worked in, for in favorable situations no plants
look more charming; in fact, as spring bedding becomes more
appreciated in Australia, this plant takes the lead. Let us
picture a bed, say with a hundred plants in it, and all bearing
flowers of different shades of color—the effect is charming to
a degree. The pruning, manuring, and digging of flower
beds and shrubberies can be proceeded with, but be careful
not to prune winter or spring flowering shrubs that bloom on
the old growths, or a serious loss of flowers will be the
result. The operations should be deferred till after they have
done flowering. As the digging is proceeding, all herbaceous
plants should be divided, and the youngest and healthiest
portions planted again. If there are any old and unsightly
plants of geraniums and pelargoniums, replace with young
plants to flower in spring and early summer. Plant out
general collections of spring-flowering annuals, of which there
should be plenty if former directions have been attended to.
When planting out pansies and violets see that the soil they
are to grow in has been liberally dressed with manure, other-
wise the flowers will be small. Give liberal top-dressings from
time to time. Put in cuttings of ligneous or woody plants ;
select well-ripened wood, and cut them with a sharp knife into
six-inch lengths. The base of the cutting should be taken clean
off just below a bud or joint, and then insert four inches in
the ground, which must be well firmed round the cuttings.
Water if the weather proves dry. Dahlias that have done
flowering should have their stems cut down, and the tubers
lifted and dried in the sun for a few days, then store in a
cool, dry place. ■ See that they are all legibly named, so that
when planting next season no bad contrast of colors aie placed
near each other, otherwise the effect of color will be spoiled.
The autumn flowering dahlia imperialis should be firmly tied


to stakes with strong twine, as the growths are so brittle that
they break with little wind. As chrysanthemums cease
flowering cut down their stems, and name each variety for
reference later on. The growing season being over with them,
save seeds of amaranths, cockscomb, balsam, zinnias, gaillar-
dias, and French and African marigolds, and as the old plants
show signs of decay dig them up. Sow more seed of pansies,
rocket, candytuft, Virginian stock, German stocks, and double
carnation striped poppies. The latter should be sown in small
pots or boxes and grown till ready for transplanting, which
can be done without disturbing their roots, as they are
impatient in this particular. Grass, during favorable seasons,
grows at such a rate that the scythe and lawn-mower will be
busily employed. After mowing top-dress; give the lawns a
good rolling. This operation makes the roots of the grass
compact, and a finer turf will be the result. Keep the edges
trim and all dead leaves cleaned up. A smart kept
place compensates to a great extent the want of flowers during
the winter season.
In the Bush-House.—As pelargoniums fill their pots with
roots transfer them to larger pots kept moderately dry at the
root, and as the plants make sturdier growths pincli back any
exuberant shoots to give the plants an even appearance.
Foliaged plants and ferns of all descriptions that have filled
their pots with roots, and have good drainage, must have
liberal supplies of water given them during dry spells (see
“ Watering Plants,” in February reminders) ; pick of decaying
leaves, and keep everything clean and trim.
Bees.—The hives should be inspected during the warmer
part of fine days. If moth grubs are present they must be
cleared out, or the bees are sure to suffer. Feed, in the form
of honey or syrup, may occasionally be given to weak stocks,
so as to have them strong for the honey-making season, which
commences in August or September, according to location.
Dairy Stock.—The winter season is hardest upon them,
and attention to warmth and feeding is very necessary, even
in the mildest districts.
JUNE-JULY.
Weather.—Continuation of winter. Cool, cold, or bracing,
according to location.
In the Field.—Wheat may be backward if season is dry, and
rolling or the use of the back-tooth harrow does good, and


helps on the crop ; or the growth may be rank in a dropping
season, in which case it is good practice to turn sheep upon it
and eat down the crop, and to encourage a tougher growth
from the crown. This practice is becoming common, and
nowhere more than in the districts where rust was so destruc-
tive in years past. It is quite safe to put on large flocks of
sheep wherever the crop is disposed to be rank and the land is
not too wet. Even the packing given by the feet of sheep
does more good than harm to wheat. Sow for lucerne and
alfalfa, also white and red clover, the latter in the cooler dis-
tricts only. Prairie and rye grasses may also be sown. Sweet
potatoes, yams, arrowroot, and ginger are ripe, and should be
lifted at once. Where abundance of clear, fresh water is
available, and full yields of arrowroot can be grown, the crop
has many recommendations for farmers in the warm districts
(see Chap. VIII.). The trashing of sugar-cane, or stripping
of! the dead leaves, which aids in bringing the cane forward to
ripeness, has to be seen to, in order to be ready for the
crushing. Onions are a garden crop in the warmer parts of
the country. The treatment found to answer in the cooler
sections answers well in the warmer parts also ; but enrich
the soil for them. Prepare land for the spring crop of
potatoes, and sow seed for tobacco plants (see Chap. VIII.).
Sorghum, where the land has been well manured, will give
cuttings of green feed during the winter months. It can be
sown any time from August to February, and for winter feed,
or as a heat-giver, is one of the most reliable of fodder crops.
Garden and Bush-House.—The reminders for May apply,
as a rule, in all departments.
Land Improvement.—Now is the season for improving land
by draining, subsoiling, trenching, manuring, etc., and the
Chapters IV., V., XIII., and XXV. dealing with these sub-
jects, may be gone over again carefully, and possibly with
advantage. Trenching is expensive work, and where the soil
is clayey it becomes lost labor after a few years. Draining in
many situations is proving the least expensive in the end.
Seeing to Rabbits and Hares.—The approach of spring,
with dry weather as a general thing, may induce rabbits,
hares, etc., to invade the garden or the crops when there is
scarcity of green-stuff outside. Hares are mischievous when
they take to eating the bark of young trees; but they can be
checked at that by coating the stems of the plants with a
thick paint made up as largely as possible with the droppings


which mark the trails along which they usually run. Clay
added to these droppings, and all well beaten-up, make an
effective preventive. Lime should not be used in this case, as
it affects the other material. Rabbits are nuisances, no doubt);
but they have their uses. A few fat bunnies sent tcT'the
kitchen at times may be welcome, and they can be trapped
with that object, or in order to get the skins, in the manner
seen in the illustration. The apparatus is an empty barrel set
down in the ground, and a long box or a hollow log set as a
“ run ” over the barrel. Rabbits take naturally to logs like
that. A “ tilt-board ” is fixed in the bottom of the box, as
shown. This board should be so hinged that the short end
will strike the top before it reaches the perpendicular. Put a
small weight on "the short end to over-balance the longer end,
and so as to return the board to its place after the rabbit has
passed into the barrel.
AUGUST—SEPTEMBER.
Weather.—The true spring season of the warmer parts of
Australia commences in August. Nights still cold; frost
common ; but days becoming sensibly warmer.
In the Field.—Sow rye, and where other crops have missed,
or there is land available, sow for a quick crop of buckwheat.
The seed should be got in at once, but with the seed add ashes,
or some other dressing with potash ; buckwheat cannot thrive
without it. Plant for hops during August. The time is
favorable for root crops (see Chap. VII.), for mangold, swede,
carrot, chicory, and other root culture for feeding purposes.
Now is a good time for sowing ; also for the pasture crops,
including lucerne, clover, cocksfoot, cow grass, and the peren-
nials generally. The autumn sowings do very well, but their
prospects are all the better where the seed was drilled in, and
the hoe can be passed through the ground. The show of weeds


and coarse grasses during rainy seasons is excessive amongst
drilled crops, and they must be shaken up and destroyed, or
they will choke the grain. Potato planting is general this
month, the cold districts delaying till towards the end of
August, when risks from frost are over. Field beans do fairly
well, and where good strong land is available, planting of this
crop may be carried on, but there is no time to lose. Seed for
a full summer crop of onions may be sown still, but it will be
better if plants are available for setting out. Towards the
end of the month, and in the warmer districts, haricot and
French beans may be got in ; also maize for green stuff, and
planter’s friend and sorghum; also seed for pumpkins, but
September is preferable, if there is any risk from frost. Sow
hemp for fibre, and linseed for fibre and oil. (See Chap. XI.
and XII.) Set out the full crop of tobacco plants, and sow
again in prepared beds in order to keep up the supply of
plants. (See Chap. VIII.) For green crop, sow Cape barley,
oats, buckwheat, rye. For root crop, Swede turnip, mangel
wurzel, long red Altringham, and white Belgian carrot'. For
permanent pasture, <fec., sow largely of lucerne, perennial rye-
grass, cocksfoot, prairie-grass, white Dutch, and perennial red
clover.
In the Fruit Garden.—Grafting of peaches can be com-
menced as soon as the buds show signs of life. . Apricots, plums,
cherries, apples, pears, etc., follow the peach for grafting.
(See Chapter XXV.) It was during August, 1884, that the
miserable little aphis-bug appeared that destroyed the first
peaches that set, and then went to the other trees, doing
serious damage all through the season. These little pests first
appear in masses at the base of the buds generally, but they
spread all over the limbs, unless checked ; they are very black
and shiny, and when rubbed off by hand give off a sickening
odor, and are greasy to the touch. They can be brushed off
in masses with an old hair brush. Kerosene beaten up in soap-
suds kills them, and does not injure the fruit. (See Chapter
XVI., “Elements of Australian Agriculture.”) The lime,
sulphur and clay-paint is very effective. But active vigilance
is also necessary. The stuff should be rubbed in with a small,
stiff-pointed paint-brush. Young trees that were budded in
autumn should be headed back to allow the scion-roots to
make all the growth possible. Seeds of all the warm-weather
fruits can be sown where seedlings are wanted for stocks or
other purposes. Sow them for orange, lemon, loquat, date


plum, chestnut, filbert, pomegranates, Cape gooseberries,
passion-fruit, granadilla, &c. Plant out young trees without
delay, as the season of growth may come on suddenly. Goose-
berries, blackberries, raspberries, mulberries, apples, pears,
oranges, figs, vines, etc., are all amongst the fruits with which
the Australian garden can be stocked during June, July, and
August. But there is no time to lose now. Of course,
pruning should be finished in the very late districts. We
would again urge the absolute necessity of manuring the fruit-
garden. The requirements are potash, nitrogenous manures,
and phosphates ; sulphate of ammonia does good service;
bone-dust is. good; superphosphate is better. Liberal appli-
cations of guano are desirable, but not too much, and all the
well-rotted stable, stockyard, and other manure that can be
got. To make up a compost-heap (see Chapter XIII.) that can
be used as required, save all the vegetable refuse, leaves, and
stuff for manure, rot it down with ashes, and secure the potash.
It is much wanted in our gardens to induce healthy growth.
Strawberries should be starting into active growth, and the
planting out of this very desirable fruit finished without delay.
In the Vegetable Garden.—For the time we are likely to
have no insect pests ; but they will come again, as they do in
other countries, and they have to be met and destroyed as
sharply as possible, or they may get the best of us after all.
Burn up all rubbish as a means to that end, or destroy the
insect larvse in it by making up a lively compost-heap. Manure
heavily, and so encourage the most vigorous growth. It
is of little use attempting to garden without ample manure.
Set out during showery weather plants of cabbage, cauliflower,
lettuce, celery; plant out roots of sage, thyme, sweet mar
joram, mint, and other culinary herbs, and rhubarb-roots in
well-manured ground. Plant for main crop the desirable
varieties of patatoes, amongst which Early Rose and Man-
hattan have done well. In order to secure early supplies
of plants, raise in pots plunged in hot-beds, or under small
frames in the open ground, seeds of cucumber, rock and water
melon, pumpkin, squash, vegetable-marrow, and tomatoes.
Make sowings for successional crops, seed of broad, Windsor,
and long-pod beans, in warm localities free from frost early
pale dun, Canadian wonder, and long-podded negro dwarf
beans ; also blood-red, silver, and spinach beet, the two latter
recommended for dry districts, giving an excellent supply
of leaves, which are a good substitute for spinach. In cold


districts make a sowing of Chappell’s cream and mammoth
broooli ; also East Ham, drum head, winningstadt, and ox-
heart cabbages ; for warmer districts sow St. John’s Day,
sugar-loaf, early and large York cabbage ; short-horn and inter-
mediate carrot, early London cauliflower, white, solid, and
turnip-rooted celery, triple-curled and land cress, London flag
leek, drum-head and tennis-ball lettuce, mustard, brown Spanish
onion, triple-curled parsley, hollow-crown parsnip. In cold
districts continue to sow Essex rival, Laxton’s fill-basket,
Beck’s prize-taker, blue peter, or Bedman’s imperial peas ; and
in warmer situations sowing may be commenced of Yorkshire
hero, Veitch’s perfection, Dr. M'Lean, champion of England,
M‘Lean’s little gem, Yorkshire gem peas; red turnip, French
breakfast, and long scarlet radish ; round spinach, white stone,
white nepaul, orange jelly, and red American stone turnip.
In the Flower Garden.—The planting of trees and shrubs
should be finished, and also herbaceous plants and spring
flowering annuals. If hybrid perpetual roses are still unpruned,
finish the operation at once, as there is little fear now of frost
or harsh winds nipping the young growths. When stirring
the soil fork in manure about the roots, then heavily top-dress
with some half-rotted stuff. Roses being such keen feeders,
manure, when liberally applied, is well repaid in the production
of larger and finer flowers. If the weather continues open the
plants in carpet bedding should have the annual overhaul and
re-arrangement of the beds, and as the effect of this stylo of
gardening is dependent on the arrangement and harmony of
color of the plants employed, forethought can be usefully
employed in securing the most desired results. We have found
it in practice a good plan to draw the designs on paper, then
color the plan with the colors of the plants it is proposed to
use, when the effect can be seen at a glance. This incurs a
little extra trouble, but it saves a great amount of eyesore
during the following season. Pansies that are flowering should
be top-dressed. A little soot sprinkled over the top-dressing
has a deterrent effect on snails. These plants require liberal
treatment to produce good and continuous flowers; also top-
dress ranunculuses and anemones. Cyclamens should be dis-
playing their charming flowers; see that the soil they are
planted in is well drained, or if we get continuous rains they
may prematurely die off. Cinerarias that were planted out for
a spring display of flowers should be looked after, for snails are
exceedingly fond of their leaves and soon disfigure them, and


this has a marked effect on their ultimate flowering. Sprinkle
soot occasionally over the ground, which not only fertilises
but deters many insects from coming in contact with the
plants. Bulbs and tubers of the following varieties may still be
planted out: Amaryllis, brodiseas, coburghias, crinums, gladio-
lus, liliums, pancratiums, chlidanthus, and vallotas. Sow seed
of annuals for summer flowering, such as dianthus, mignonette,
French and African marigolds, bartonia, phlox, double and
single sunflowers, double-flowering pyrethrums, chrysanthe-
mum, coronarium and its varieties, lobelias, asters, convolvu-
lus minor, gaillardias double and single flowering varieties,
lupines, larkspur, petunias double and single varieties, browal-
lias", rhodanthe, mirabilis, tropceolums, variegated maize, &c.
Keep the grass regularly cut with the scythe or lawn-mower,
for if it is allowed to grow too long before cutting, it presents
a patchy and unsightly appearance.
In the Bush-House.—After repotting where necessary, re-ar-
range and give the plants more room to develop their foliage in.
Thoroughly wash the shelving, &c., for very often there lie
dormant many insects injurious to plants, and which are only
waiting for fine weather to become lively again and multiply.
As hyacinths, cinerarias, and epiphyllums come into flower,
transfer them to the coolest part in the glass-house or drawing-
room for the better protection of their flowers against rains.
If exposed they become disfigured. Before those charming
spring plants, azaleas and rhododendrons, come into flower see
that their foliage is thoroughly freed from insects (thrips are
particularly partial to these plants); use Home Garden Fer-
tiliser or insecticide to exterminate them.
Hatching Chickens in Hot Weather.—Read up Chapter
XXIY. now, on poultry farming, raising chickens, eke. At
this season of the year many find that the old hens want to sit,
and so they are gratified, and batches of thirteen eggs are given.
At the end of the time they hatch out only from five to nine
chickens, and the owner wonders why. The reason, in the
majority of cases, is simply that the chickens are injured in the
egg by dryness and exposure to dry air, and to attacks of hen-
lice upon the mother. Hence they do not come to maturity.
The egg shell is porous, and evaporation can take place through
it at a quite sufficiently rapid rate to kill the chick. Always
set hens on the ground as the warm season approaches. If
possible, let the hen choose her own place, then loosen the
surface with a pick for several inches in depth, add a bucket


fulorso of sand, or mould, (fee., to forma nice snug hollow, and
then pour into it a bucket of water, then make a nest by
spreading an inch or two of sawdust, old cow manure, or some-
thing that will act as a mulch and check evaporation (tobacco
and gum-leaves and stems are excellent), and place the eggs.
Once every week, should the weather continue dry, sprinkle
over the eggs a dipper full of blood-warm water. The ground
under the nest having been rendered porous by the digging,
absorbs the water and causes a nice moisture under the hen,
which is just the condition required for successful incubation.
Hen-lice do not like moisture ; the chicks inside of eggs do.
The day before the chicks come, that is the 19th or 20th, day
after setting, if the weather is very dry, the eggs may be
placed in warm water, up to 105° of temperature, for a minute
or so.
OCTOBER—NOVEMBER—DECEMBER.
"Weather.—Heat increases until the full force of summer is
felt in December. Precautions are necessary against exposure
to the full force of the sun at this time, and during January
and February, especially on the part of new arrivals in the
country. (See Chap. XXXII.)
In the Field.—The harvest season for wheat commences
(see Chap. XIV.), and the work of sowing, transplanting,
and cultivation of summer crops, foreshadowed in the August
“Reminders,” goes on steadily. During moist seasons, the
growth of warm-weather or semi-tropical crops is very rapid,
and skill and steady work are necessary to keep weeds in
check. Frosts occasionally come in August-September, and
may injure sugar cane seriously. The very first work when
frost has got into the cane, is to push on the crushing,
which, if done before fermentation sets in, may save very
nearly all the sugar in the crop when frost caught it. Cane
planting will be time enough during November, but plants
can be selected from the cane tops as the cutting goes on.
"When these plants are laid out in mats or beds, in which the
plants are set up close together in a sloping direction, and
one half is covered with earth, the bud-growth germination
induced helps the plants when they are set out. Plant arrow-
root bulbs (see Chap. VIII.) in rows about 3ft. apart, the
plants being about Ift. apart, and in much the same manner
as potatoes, answers very well. Arrowroot requires good
strong land to yield full crops, for although this crop, and


sugar cane, like oil and fibre crops, take but little from the
soil, they all require manure in order to induce strong growth
of the plants. Set out sweet potato vines, for which thinner
and more sandy soil answers well. The plants should be
about Gin. in length, having four to six eyes, one of which
should be left above ground ; they are got from vines sent up
by the potatoes left in the ground from last crop, or they
may be raised from potatoes set in a warm frame. Yams
may also be planted, the West Indian being amongst the best,
though some of the South Sea Island varieties are very good.
Okra (Hibiscus esculentes) is another plant that deserves
attention in the more tropical districts, yielding as it does a
good summer vegetable. Get in the full crop of corn, giving
manure whenever anything good enough can be got. Cotton
may be planted, and cotton roots left in the ground will now
begin to send out fresh growth ; if any of the growth of last
season is left upon the roots, it should be cut away.
In the Garden.—All fruit trees, grape vines, &c., require
attention. Keep the soil around them loose and free from
weeds, that the crops may get the benefit of what is in the
soil 'and the rain that falls. Keep insects in check, and pinch
out, or cut away badly-placed shoots as they appear. Do not
let trees overbear by setting too much fruit. Beans, both
dwarfs and climbers, of which many varieties are available,
can be planted as desired; from this time all through the
summer they form the main source of the warm-weather
vegetable supply. Any of the cold-weather crops still in the
ground, as cabbage, turnips, <fec., should have extra room, that
they mature without bruising against each other. Shade, got
by putting up dry bushes amongst growing cabbage, etc., helps
them very much. Beets may be sown, endive, &c., also celery.
Set out the rosella plants as soon as they are hardy enough,
and induce growth in those that have sprung from seed in the
open ground. This fruit is worthy of the very best attention.
Fruiting trees and vines now bursting out freely require
attention to prevent attacks of scale, oidium, and other parasite
pests of the cultivator. Do not allow the peaches to set too
much fruit, which is a common cause of injury to this grand
crop. Bananas can be planted out, also pineapple plants, in
all cases making the soil as rich as possible. Where tea,
coffee, cocoa, cinnamon, allspice, or other plants of the tropical
kind are to be tried, now is the time to get them in. (See
Chap. YIII.)


Budding.—The season for budding commences during
November, with the earliest peaches. They are fit for the
operation as soon as the buds are matured after the crop
is oft'.
In the Bush-House.—There is comfort and enjoyment in
the bush-house at this season. Fuchias can be grown to per-
fection, and much hardier than when coddled in the more
pretentious glass-house. Pelargoniums, caladiums, and coleus
find a home in the bush-house, and if it is necessary to save the
stock of Chinese primulas for another season, as the flowers
wither, the plants may be placed aside, to prevent the entry of
worms. Old begonias that are getting unsightly might be
headed back, and the cuttings put in sandy soil for future
stock. Maiden-hair, staghorn, and elkhorn ferns do remark-
ably well when they get water freely. Gloxinias should now
commence to make a show. These plants delight in a fair
amount of shade, and to keep them robust plenty ventilation
must be given. Ferns likewise require shade and moisture,
and soaking or syringing may be indulged in three or four
times during each fine day. With increasing heat crotons,
dracienas, climbing plants, delicate palms and ferns may be
attacked by thrips, scale, or mealy bug insects. These must
at once be destroyed by fumigating and washing (see Ohsp.
XXVI.). Encourage the growth of achimenes, gesnerias, tydias,
and other favorite and hardy classes of exotic hulbs. Orchids,
when in flower, may be removed to the cool green-house, in
which they retain their flowers a longer period. Gold and
silver gymnogrammas that have been in pots for a long time
may be root-bound. • In such cases, and with all other plants
similarly situated, water should be freely given, so that the
mass of soil and roots should be thoroughly saturated. Attend
to the training of climbing plants, repot such as may require
it, and keep every part of the house as clean as possible.
Bees.—Honey-gathering commences in September in most
parts of the country, and swarms are thrown off shortly after.
See that the hives are in order for increasing the stocks and
for storing honey. Australian bee-keeping is dealt with some-
what fully in the “Elements of Australian Agriculture.”
The Area Under Cultivation.—lt is important to know
precisely what area we have under crop, whether it be roods
or acres. This can be managed only by measuring, and the
following contrivance may be useful for that purpose :—lt is
simply an old wheel, or a similar arrangement of spokes around


a centre-piece, having ten or twelve pieces so placed as to
have just one foot between the outer ends. A short axle is
passed through the hub, and is fastened to pieces which form
the handles, and which latter are then supported by light legs
for keeping the machine in an upright position. One spoke is
painted different from the others, or may have a tag tied to it
for ease in counting. It will be seen that by each revolution
of this wheel each spoke marks one foot, one turn marks ten
or twelve feet (or four yards), according to the number of
spokes, and so forms an easy and rapid method of getting the
dimensions of any desired land area sufficiently close for cal-
culation purposes, though for absolute accuracy a capable
surveyor does the work in the best manner.
Then What is an Acre 1—
Five yards wide by 968 yards
long contains one acre; 10
yards wide by 484 yards long
contains one acre; 20 yards
wide by 242 yards long con-
tains one acre ; 40 yards wide
by 121 yards long contains one
acre; 80 yards wide by 601-
yards long contains one acre ;
70 yards wide by 69 1-9 yards
long contains one acre; 110
feet wide by 369 feet long con-
tains one acre ; 220 feet wide by 198 feet long contains one
acre; 440 feet wide by 99 feet long contains one acre ; 60 feet
wide by 726 feet long contains one acre; 120 feet wide by
563 feet long contains one acre; 240 feet wide by 18U feet
long contains one acre.
The Pig as a “Farm-Hand.”—Unless it be in the Bega
district, the pig is not yet recognised as the helper he can be
made on the farm. There are rare chances for his operations
in this country. He harvests corn in A 1 style, and in a
manner that as a rule pays as well as shelling it and sending
the corn to market. As a means for fertilising the land and
exterminating weeds the pig comes very near perfection
Herding swine upon pasture land, or land that needs breaking
up, is not very much practiced; yet it is one of the best
methods for raising pigs for stores. They can be confined
within a moveable fence, and they utilise the grass and coarse
feed quite as well as sheep, and perform a work in stirring the


soil that sheep cannot do. The nose of the pig is made for
rooting, and we follow nature’s hint in giving him a chance on
the soil. A moveable yard, large enough to keep two or three
pigs, can be made of strong hurdles or of stout inch boards,
about 14 feet long and 6 inches wide. Split stuff will do,
though it is heavier to move. For the corners use stout posts.
Nail the boards or palings to the posts about 6 inches apart,
making four lengths or panels 4 feet high. Fasten the corners
with stout hooks and staples, and we have a pen or yard 14
feet square, which is easily moved by two men. If we place
two 50-pound pigs into this yard they will consume nearly all
the weeds and other vegetation in it in three or four days, and
thoroughly disturb the soil several inches in depth. That great
agricultural enemy, sorrel, soon disappears before them ; so
does nut-grass, that terrible pest of the coast farmers. Corn
or other feed can be given when necessary. When they have
done their work satisfactorily the pen can be moved onward
and onward through the season. The advantages of this method
are that it fertilises the land for grass or crops, destroys weeds
and insects, and mixes and fertilises the surface of the soil
about as well as it can be done. Even ferns and small brush
are effectively destroyed. Worms and caterpillars are avail-
able food for the pig, and it is not the least of the benefits that
the small stones, if they are in the soil, are brought to the
surface, where they can be seen and removed. The keeping of
pigs gives a grand opportunity for concentration of produce.
In times of extraordinary plenty, when it would not pay to
send maize or wheat to market, it is found advantageous to
turn the grain into pork or bacon. Many of the farm products
which otherwise might not pay may be utilised by the adop-
tion of the pig among the live-stock of the Australian agri-
culturist.
THE CONDITION AND PROSPECTS OF OUR AGRICULTURE.
In an address, given in the School of Arts, Sydney, and
reported in the Sydney Morning Herald, the author thus com-
mented upon the condition, and what was desirable for the
improvement of our agriculture. The matter is very much
condensed, and it seems a fitting summary of the every-day
lessons of this volume. Mr. Mackay commenced by stating
that the time was favorable for reviewing the situation from


an agricultural standpoint, and to see what the prospects were.
The agricultural classes of the Technical Education Depart-
ment he explained were about to re commence, when the
subjects to be taken up would, in addition to the regular
course of agricultural teaching, include the chemistry of
agriculture in its relation to soil, water, crops, dairying, feed
stuffs, &c. There was the very general agreement in the com-
munity that agriculture should be the basis of our progress,
and although many mistakes had been made, he was very hope-
ful that they were about to approach an era of marked change
in agricultural pursuits, the features of which would be a better
understanding of the nature, capabilities, and improvement of
the soils now in use, and abandonment of the wastefully
expensive process of changing from place to place, as portions of
land became impoverished by cultivation or by grazing—for by
both processes the lands of New South Wales were being
exhausted.'at a ratewhichsomefeltandmanysuspected,butwhich
had become very manifest by the systematic agricultural
analyses he had carried out as part of his duties as Instructor
in Agriculture. Grazing he considered a true branch of agricul-
ture quite as much as gardening or farming. The production
of meat had never been long separated from the growing of
feed in any part of the world but the effects became evident;
and, judging by the poorer and poorer quality of the stock
coming to our markets, to their higher values, and the lament-
able falling off in numbers, it was becoming more and more
evident that the supply of meat would ere long become part of
the business of those who aided the native pastures by growing
some feed.
Cultivation had been a favorite pursuit of colonists since
the first days of colonial settlement. But the commencement
was very defective, and unfortunately the process had gone on
in too many cases, though there were marked exceptions in
the various branches of agriculture of the colony. The wasteful
process was to quit a piece of land as soon as it had failed to
return paying crops. The successful men were those who did
not allow either their land or their stock to run down in
condition. The real facts of the case are, that of more
than 100 soils examined and analysed, practically and chemi-
cally, not half-a-dozen of them were soils that would return
many paying crops of wheat, unless much the same care was
bestowed upon the cultivation as in the old land. The most
serious mistake of all was the supposition that we had such


immense quantities of “ practically inexhaustible land.” They
might take his word for it, there was not much land of that
quality in any part of the world, and we were in much the
same condition as other people—we had many advantages and
some drawbacks. It was best for us that we should under-
stand the real situation. When men cropped land or grazed it
upon the principle of non-exhaustion, the time when nine-
tenths would reach the stage of sterility for grass or crops could
be estimated very closely. But the branches of cultivation, in-
cluding sugar and maize farming, orange-growing, ctre., in which
skilful treatment has been brought to bear, had made as such
substantial progress as gave confidence in the capacity of the
country, when the soil was treated carefully.
Wool production had made immense advances. In the
selection of sheep and classifying of wool really scientific skill
is exercised. But how strange that while money and great
talent had been devoted to the animals, so very, very little had
been done for the soil, upon which all were depending. The
facts are that no systematic attention had been given to the
soil, or to its sources, of what it is made, or its immediate require-
ments for grass and cultivation. Hence pastures failed, crops
failed, and fruits became prey to diseases—not so much for
want of rain, as w T as very generally supposed, but from the
exhaustion of, in most cases, one or more ingredients of the
soil. It was to see into this matter that the Board of
Technical Education had commenced a systematic analysis of
the soils, and to investigate how operations of this kind could
be carried out, in the most simple and inexpensive manner
known. The results show, a satisfactory state of things, as a
whole, and that the soils are right enough for grass or crops
when treated carefully, as he had every confidence they would
be more generally in the time to come.


BY ANGUS MACKAY.
INTRODUCTION TO AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE.—CIass-book
of the Education Department of N.S. Wales. Science combined
with Australian practice. Is.
ELEMENTS OF AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE.—Steps leading
to further acquaintance with the theory and practice of agriculture.
Contains a thoroughly practical treatise upon Bee-keeping in Aus-
tralia. 3s. 6d.
THE AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURIST.—“One of the most useful
and practical works ever issued.”— Leader. The contents include
Australian farming and gardening in all branches, cattle, sheep,
horse, pig, and poultry-keeping ; dairying, ensilage-making, seed-
farming, &c., &o. Special chapters on the “Indigenous Grasses
and Fodder Plants,” and for “ Medical Help in Cases of Emer-
gency,” how to treat wounds, snake-bite, drowning cases, &c., &c.
A calendar of field and garden work for the whole year completes
a most useful work for suburban and country residents. Second
edition. 10s. 6d.
THE SUGAR-CANE IN AUSTRALIA.—The standard work upon
cane-growing and sugar-making. The contents include details for
field-work of all kinds, the cultivation of sorghum, Planter’s
Friend, beets, &c., for sugar-making, &c. Second edition. 10s. fid.
GRAZING, FARM, & GARDEN SOILS OF NEW S. WALES.—
“The most complete and exhaustive series of scientific investiga-
tions yet made into the soils of Australia.” —Northern Star. The
practical chemical analyses made of a large number of Australian
soils explain what is necessary to secure crops and maintain the
fertility. Is. fid.
THE HONEY-BEE IN AUSTRALIA.—Contains brief accounts of
the native Australian bee, the black or English bee, Ligurian or
Italian bees ; modern bee-keeping and honey-making, how to make
and use bar-frame hives, &c. 2s.


James MARTIN & Compy.,
IMPORTERS AND MANUFACTURERS OF ALL KINDS OF
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS & MACHINERY, 81 YORK ST., SYDNEY.
The Latest and most
.reliable Implements
for the Gardener,
Fruit-Grower, Farmer,
Squatter and Stock
. Breeder. -
Hornsby’s Improved
Single Ploughs.
Double and. Treble-
Furrow Ploughs.
The Genuine “D”
Plough Shares.
Avery's American Cast, Chilled,
and Steel Walking Rotate Dig-
ging and Hillside Ploughs, Sulky,
Gang Riding Ploughs, Horse
Hoes, Cultivators, Seed Sowers,
Seed Drills, Corn Planters, Zig-
zag Harrows t Disc Harrows, Pul-
verisers.
Hornsby Gold Medal String Binder,
Mowers and Reapers, Steel Strippers, Winnowers, Steam
Threshers, Straw Elevators, Portable Steam Engines,
Johnson Ensilage Stack (the simplest and cheapest above-
ground method), Com Crushers, Chaff Cutters, Com-
shellers, Horse Gears, Steam Engines, Dairies and Butter
Factories erected and fitted with
the latest improvements in
Chums, Butter-workers, Milk
Coolers, &c.
Write to us for Prices , etc.
Post them Free.
JAMES MARTIN & COMPY..
81 YORK ST., SYDNEY.
Improved Danish Cream Separator.
Martin’s Reliable Wind
Mills, improved Pumps
and Water-lifters, for
Irrigation, Garden, Or-
chard, and for general
purposes. ‘


BOOKSELER, STATIONER, AND MUSIC SELLER,
5 & 6 Market Buildings, George St., Sydney.
Elements of Australian Agriculture, leading to various depart-
: ments of Agricultural Science, illustrated by numerous Engravings.
By Angus Mackay. 3a. 6d.; post 4s.
A Book about Bees: their History, Habits, and Instincts,
■ together with the First Principles of Modern, Bee-Keeping. By
Rev. F. G. Jenyns. Splendidly illustrated. 4s. 6d.; post ss.
Consult Me.for all you Want, to Know. 2s. 6d.; post 3s.
Enquire Within upon Everything. 2s. 6d.; post 35.; .
;New Guide for the Hotel, • Bar, Restaurant, Butler and Chef,
i: ': , being I a Handbook for . the, Management of Hotel and American
t . Bars, and the Manufacture of the principal new and Fashionable
' . Drinks. .By Gorden Bleu, 7s. 6d.; post Bs.
The. Soul of Things; or, Psychometric Researches and Dis-
, coveries. . : Wm.,Denton. ~. 3 vols. 555.; post 565. 6d.
Acoustics, .Light and Heat, with 200 Illustrations. By
. . Wm. Lees, M.A. 4s. 6d. ; post ss. . • .
The Manufacture of Aerated Beverages, Cordials, etc. By
Stevenson and HowelL 2s. 6d.; post 2s. 9d.
•Electricity and Health, for the Cure of Acutfe and ■ Chronic
Diseases. Illustrated. By G. Cohen. 2s. and 3s. 6d.;' post 2s. 3d.
and 3s. 9d. , '
Elementary Lessons in Electricity and Magnetism.’ } Illustrated.
By S. P. Thompson, B.A. 4s. 6.; post ss. .> . i ..
An Elementary Treatise on Heat, illustrated.' By Balfour
Stewart. 7s. 6d.; post Bs. < .
Rust, Smut, Mildew and Mould: an Introduction to the Study
of Microscopic Fungi, illustrated. By W. C. Cooke. 65.; post
6s. 6d. ■ ■ -■
Everybodys’ Pocket Cyclopaedia; or, Things worth Knowing,
» Things Difficult to Remember, and Tables of Reference;- 6d.;
post7d.
Egesoh’s Weather System of Sun-Spot Causality, being original
Researches in Solar and Terrestrial Meterology, illustrated. By
■ Charles Egeson. 2s. 6d.; post 3s. .
The Engine-Driver’s Guide:, the Management, Care,- and
Working of Steam Boilers, Engines and Pumps, and Guide to
Examination for Factory, Mining, and Hoisting Engine Driver’s Cer-
tificate of Competency, etc.; illustrated with numerous engravings,
and over 300 Examination Questions: 1 By A. C. Newman. , '4s, 6d.;
post ss.
Every Man’s Own’Lawyer.' 7a; 6d,; post Bs. 6d.
Cassell’s Miniature Cyclopaedia. Compiled by W. L. Clowes.
Illustrated. 4s. 6d.; post ss. ;


Pocket Encyclopedia ; a Compendium of General Knowledge
for Ready Reference, illustrated. Sampson, Low & Co. 4s. 6d.;
post ss.
The Multum in Parvo Atlas of the World, illustrated. W. &
A. K. Johnston. 3s. 6d.; post 4s.
Papers on Health. Professor Kirk. In 10 vols. ; sold in
separate volumes, 2s. 6d. each ; post 2s. 9d.
Treatise on the Manufacture of Coal Gas. A. Richards.
Illustrated. 305.; post 325.
Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical and Analytical, as applied
to the Arts and Manufactures by eminent Chemists. Edited by
C. W. Vincent. Illustrated. £5 ss. 2 vols.
Perspective Explained and Illustrated. George S. Clarke.
4s. 6d.; post ss.
Handbook of Magisterial Inquiries in New South Wales, being
a Practical Guide for Justices of the Peace in holding Inquiries in
lieu of Inquests, with an Appendix containing Acts relating to
Inquiries, Directions for taking Depositions of persons dangerously
ill, etc. R. H. Alatthews, J. P., Coroner. 7s. 6d.; post Bs.
An Australian Orator: Speeches, Political, Social, Literary,
and Theological, delivered in the Parliament of New South Wales
and on the Public Platform. David Buchanan, Barrister-at-law.
. 25.; post 2s. Gd.
Graphic Statics : the Elements of Graphic Statics. Professor
Karl Von Ott; translated from the German by G. S. Clarke.
6s. ; post 6s. 6d.
Machinist’s Calculator : the Machinist’s and Steam Engineer’s
Practical Calculator, a compilation of Useful Rules and Problems,
etc. D. B. Dixon. 10s. 6d.; post 11s. 6d.
Tramways : their Construction and Working, illustrated.
D. Kinnear Clark. 2 vols.; 425.
Elementary Carpentry and Joinery for Amateur Artisans and
Mechanics, with 257 Illustrations, Diagrams, etc. Is.; post Is. 3d.
A Treatise on Mines, Surveying—new edition revised. Ren-
nett A. Brough. 9s. 6d ; post 10s.
Sanitary Science as applied to the Healthy Construction of
Houses, R. Scott Burn. Is. Gd.; post Is. 9d.
Elements of Magnetism and Electricity. John Angell. Is.
6d.; post Is. 9d.
Works ly I. TODHUNTER, So. D., F.R.S.
Natural Philosophy for Beginners. In two parts. Part I.—
The Properties of Solid and Fluid Bodies. With numerous
Examples. 3s. 6d. Part ll.—Sound, Light, and Heat. 3s. 6d.; post
3s, 9d.
Euclid for Colleges and Schools. New Edition. 3s. 6d.; post
3s. 9d.
Key to Exercises in Euclid. 6s. Gd.j post 7s.


Mensuration for Beginners. With numerous Examples.
New Edition. 2s. Gd.; post 2s. 9d.
Key to the Mensuration for Beginners. By Rev. Fr. Law-
rence McCarthy, Professor of Mathematics in St. Peter’s College,
Agra. 7s. 6d.; post Bs.
Algebra for Beginners. With numerous Examples. New
Edition. Cloth. 2s. Gd.; post 2s. 9d.
Key to the Algebra for Beginners. New Edition. 6s. 6d.; post
7s.
Trigonometry for Beginners. With numerous Examples.
New Edition. 2s. 6d.; post 2s. 9d.
Key to the Trigonometry for Beginners. Bs. 6d.; post 9s.
Mechanics for Beginners. With numerous Examples. New
Edition. 4s. Gd.; post 4s. lOd.
Key to the Mechanics for Beginners. Gs. 6d.; post 7s.
Algebra for the use of Colleges and Schools. With numerous
Examples. New Edition. 7s. Gd. post Bs.
Key to the Algebra for the use of Colleges and Schools. New
Edition. 10s. Cd.; post 11s.
A Treatise on the Theory of Equations. New Edition. 7s.
6d.; post Bs.
Plane Trigonometry for Colleges and,Schools. With num-
erous Examples. New Ss.'j post ss. 6d.
Key to the Plane Trigonometry for Colleges and Schools.
10s. 6d.; post 11s.
A Treatise on Spherical Trigonometry for the use of Colleges
and Schools. With numerous Examples. New Edition. 4s. 6d.;
post ss.
A Treatise on Conic Sections. With numerous Examples.
New Edition. 7s. Gd. post Ss.
A Key to Conic Sections. Edited by 0. W. Bourne, M.A.,
Head Master of the College, Inverness. 10s. Gd.; post 11s.
A Treatise on the Differential Calculus. With numerous
Examples. New Edition. 10s. Gd.; post 11s.
A Key to Differential Calculus. By H. St. J. Hunter, M.A.
10s. Gd.; post lls.
A Treatise on the Integral Calculus. With numerous Exam-
ples. New Edition. 1 Os. Gd.; post lls.
A Key to Integral Calculus. By H. St. J. Hunter. In the
Press.
Examples of Analytical Geometry in Three Dimensions. New
Edition. 7s. Gd.; post Bs.
A Treatise on Analytical Statics. With numerous Examples.
Fifth Edition. Edited by J. D. Everett, M.A., F.R.S. 10s. Gd.;
post lls.
An Elementary Treatise on Laplace’s, Lame’s, and Bessel’s
Functions. 10s. Gd.; post lls.


A History of the Mathematical Theory of Probability, from
the time of Pascal to that of Laplace. 18s.; post 19s.
The Conflict of Studies, and other Essays on Subjects connec-
ted with Education. 10s. 6d.; post 11s.
William Whewell, D.D., Master of Trinity College, Cambridge.
An Account of his Writings with Selections from his Literary and
Scientific Correspondence. In two volumes. 255.; post 275.
Colenso’s, J.W., Arithmetic. New edition, 4s. 6d.; post 4s. 9d.
Key, 55.; post ss. 3d.
Smith, Hamblin, Arithmetic, New edition, 3s. 6d.j post 3s. lOd.
Key, 95.; post 9s. fid.
Smith*,Barnard, Arithmetic. New edition, 4s. 6d.; post 4s. lOd.
Key, Ss. fid.; post 9s.
Elsee, Rev. C., Arithmetic. New edition, 3s. 6d.; post 4s.
Lock, J. 8., Arithmetic. 4s. 6d.; post 4s. lOd.
Thompson, Jas., Arithmetic. New edition, 3s. 6d.; post 4s.
Cornwell & Fitch, Arithmetic. New edition, 4s. 6d.; post ss.
Key, 7s. fid.; post Bs.
Collins Bros. & Co. (Ist Book) Arithmetic. New edition, 4d.;
postSd. Key, fid.; post 7d.
Smith’s, William, Principia Latina, Part 1,2, 3, 4 and 5.
3s. fid.; post 3s. lOd.
Magnetism and Electricity, illustrated. F. Guthrie. 3s. Gd.;
post 4s.
Practical Plane and Solid Geometry, illustrated. By Arged.
Is. fid.; post Is. 9d.
The'Singing-Olass Book. J. Stimpson. Is.; post Is. 3d.
Mensuration and Land Surveying. Is.; post Is. 3d.
Elements of Algebra for Middle-Class Schools and Training.
25.; post 2s. fid.
Elements and Practice of Algebra for the use of Schools and
Colleges. James Landon. 2s. fid.; post 3s.
Mathematical and Nautical Tables for the use ot Students,
Mathematicians, Seamen, &c. By Evers. 3s. fid,; post 4s.
Tables of Logarithms and other Tables required in Mathe-
matics. Is. fid.; post Is. 9d.
A Handbook of Domestic Cookery, adapted to the Require-
ments of every Household, with 80 Colored Illustrations showing
the latest mode of sending Dishes to Table, and copious Index
Mrs. Heine. 2s. fid.; post 3s.
A Class-Book of Geography, with 18 Colored Maps. C. B.
Clarke. 3s. fid. ; post 4s.
J. W. R. Clarke, Bookseller and Music Seller,
5 & G Market Buildings, George St., Sydney.
