

"
\
■
■
;
The Case for
Universal Service
Price: ONE PENNY,
ISSUED under the Authority the UNIVERSAL
SERVICE LEAGUE, University ,
Elizabeth Street,
William Brooks & oo. f Ltd,, Sydney


What Mr. Lloyd George
says:
It is the elementary duty of every citizen to place the whole
■of his strength and resources at the disposal of his native land in
its hour of need. No State can-exist except on the basis of a
recognition—a full recognition—of that duty on the part of every
man and every woman in the land. . . ■. . Pray do not
talk about it as if it were won and saved
our liberties in this land.on more than one. occasion by compulsory
service. , France saved the liberty she had won in the great Revolu-
tion from the fangs of tyrannical military empires purely by com-
pulsory service. The great Republic of the West. worrits independ-
ence and saved its national existence by compulsory service. And
two of the greatest countries of Europe to-day, France and Italy,
are defending their national existence and liberties by means of
com pulsory service.
—At 3lamheMer f ISth 191 5,
What Mr. Fisher says:
54 We are with the Empire to . the last man and the last
shilling. 35 ' -f


UNIVERSAL SERVICE LEAGUE
Case fop liniver ; Service
THE ISSUES IN GENERAL.
In the present struggle the British Empire, the Australian
Commonwealth, and the ideals of both are threatened* In each
respect our-duty is clear.
Britain has claims on us, ' We are bound by filial piety to
the parent State.from which we are, sprung; by loyal gratitude
to the world-wide power that has sheltered us under its covering
wings so long; by instinctive sympathy to the kindred com-
munity whose institutions, speech and sentiments we share.
Australia has claims on us, as the home of our. adoption or
our birth; which bestows on all her children a larger profusion
of physical bounties . than any other land on earth, and .in
which the government of the people by the people for the
people has been established and developed as in no other
civilised state.
Therefore, free constitutional democracy has claims on us—
democracy, which Britain and Australia ■ in. their' own ways
represent, and which the autocratic militarism . of Berlin is
seeking to overthrow, ■ And not only are Commonweath and
Empire defending the political principles of liberty and self-
government., They ,are fighting for right, truth, and. humanity,
against force, fraud, and savagery.
FOR AUSTRALIA IN PARTICULAR. -
The question has been heard, “What have the people of
Australia to lose, if it should pass from . the British to the
German Empire Why,, almost everything.
To begin at the lowest consideration, they would not be
nearly so well off materially. In Germany the policy is so


restrictive of the worker that he earns a smaller proportion
of the fruits of his labour than he gets in most great countries,
above all in Australia. The ■ Commonwealth statistician com«
pares the rates of wages paid, and the number of hours worked,
in 18 different trades, in Australia and Germany. “The number
of hours per week Tor all Australian trades is 48; in Germany it
averages 54. As for wages, there are only two of the 18 trades
in which the Australian rate is not more than twice that of the
German, while in one or two it is three times as great. . . ♦
The significance (of these figures) is enhanced by a considera-
tion . of the cost of living. . . * A shilling goes nearly a fifth
further in Australia than it does in Germany. . . . The Australian
working man, as a comparison of the family budget shows, is
enabled to spend, and does spend* 56 per cent, more on the
material goods of life than does his German counterpart.”*
This comparatively high standard of physical comfort is
important in itself, but it is more important for what it implies.
The “status” of the worker is higher in Australia, and it is a
status which commands much more opportunity. The educa-
tional system is so devised that his children are helped in
finding- the walk in life for which they are most fitted, and there
is no artificial bar of caste against their engaging in any pursuit.
The workers themselves, if they like and are united, can control
the Government of the Commonwealth and of each separate
State; while in Germany, even the Reichstag, which by no means
represents the sentiments of the masses, is powerless against
the Kaiser, and the ministers and bureaucrats he appoints. Here
the workers become ministers themselves; but who ever heard
of any but Junkers or their adherents rising to office in Berlin?
Let there be no mistake about it. It is. not- merely the com-
parative comfort of their existence that. Australians ' have to
defend. ■ It is the democratic faith, which has' so penetrated
to our very blood and bones that we could not live without it.
The goal of human development in the political sphere is the
society where all men and women are free, the humblest as. well
as the greatest, because all obey the laws they , themselves , have
made, and no other power on earth, save the laws prescribed
by nature and the laws revealed to their consciences. 'This
ideal we are striving to realise; the liberty to continue these
efforts is an inestimable treasure.
The Germans are fighting for Germany, despite the hard
conditions of their life, their grievous burdens, their political
subjugation. If - Australians did not fight for Australia, with
its store of bounties, its wealth of opportunity, its popular
rights, that would show that democracy, where most favoured
by nature,' was unfit to inspire champions in its cause.
* Australia and the War*—A, T. Strong.


HOW GERMANY WOULD TREAT US.
The German; political system' is a, negation o£ everything
that is distinctive of our own, of every development of our
political institutions which is implied in '‘Self-Government.”
But let no one suppose that under German supremacy, we should
even enjoy the fragment of political rights which exists in
Prussia. What concerns the Australian is not the position' of
the Germain in Berlin, 'but that of the Pole in Germanised
Poland and, the Frenchman in Germanised Alsace; for "the
prevalence of the German idea in the world,” the "civilising
task to which the decrees of Providence” have called the German
nation, demand the suppression of every feature of an alien
nationality under German rule. Parliamentary institutions and
the control of Governments by the people must disappear
before a purely military regime of German officials,, with the
methods of the Prussian drill-sergeant. A recent peace pro-
gramme' laid before the German Chancellor assumes, "as a
matter of course,” :that "the population of an annexed territory
will:-notbe able to obtain a political influence upon the des-
tinies of the German Empire.”, No means for the free expres-
sion of political opinion, whether through the press or through
associations, would be tolerated; every attempt at organisation
for political action would be treason. Moreover, in order to
divorce us from the English-speaking world and yoke us to
the German system every effort would be made, as similar
efforts have already been made in Alsace-Lorraine and Poland,
to suppress our mother-tongue and force on us the German
language. For the speech of a people is one of the chief instru-
ments and symbols of its .nationality; and all nationality, save
Ms. own, the German is bent on destroying. So that German
would become the official language, the language of justice,
the language in which alone our children would be allowed to
receive their education. The colonisation-of Australia with Ger-
mans would follow the lines made familiar by the history of
Poland, viz., the expropriation of the present owners of
property ;and their replacement by -Germans;' and that
in fact is' the suggestion contained in, ■ the peace pro-
gramme . already referred to:—"All the sources of eco-
nomic power in these territories, including properties large
and small, will pass into German hands.” But there are
other means than the confiscation of property, which Germany
can use for colonisation purposes. Her educational policy
would, to a large extent, involve the transfer of education to
German teachers; the Civil Service, the Railways, and the Post
Office, would be substantially manned by Germans. This would
be practically necessary for political and military reasons.
Every German ■; so employed would be available as a soldier
when needed, and would at all times be the eyes of the Govern-
ment to detect every indication of disaffection in his neighbour-
hood, and its ears, to.- catch every incautious word*


German trade demands free markets, and the notion that
Australia, as a German province, should raise a protective tariff
against the dominant- country, would be unthinkable. / What-
ever Australia owes to her system of protection, whether eco-
nomic independence, or employment for large numbers of her
inhabitants, or her unique position among the nations of the
world in wages and conditions of employment, must yield to
the imperious necessities of German trade. The machinery of
Arbitration Courts and Wages Boards to which the Australian
working classes have come to look for the maintenance and
Improvement jof these conditions, could not stand the economic
strain to which it would be subjected, even if the Germans
should think for a moment of retaining it. Trade Unions would
be reduced, to helplessness; their political influence would, of
course, have gone with the institutions on which it had been
dependent. In fact, the Trade Unions in Australia have been
so closely linked up with the political institutions of the country
and identified with its political life, that it is hardly conceivable
that in the first instance, at any rate, they could be tolerated
by a Government which would see in every effective organisa-
tion a challenge and a menace to its own system of supremacy.
In proportion as the features of a nationality are
strongly marked, as institutions are deeply rooted in the life
and thought of a.people, the German task of suppression would
be undertaken with the . greater ruthlessness. German writers,
and the German Government itself, have made us well acquainted
with their contempt for “humanitarianism” and “sentimentality,”
The course of. the war in Belgium and northern France has
shocked the world less by the brutality and,ferocity with which
it has been waged by the soldiery than by the moral obliquity
of a system which, in cold blood, has let ioosr the worst pas-
sions upon people, and whioh treats the lives of
the aged and of children, and the honour of women as a means
of subduing the territory invaded. Even in the, time of peace,
the same code of "Frightfulness” is only modified to keep in
awe a country that Prussia has annexed; as is seen in the
notorious case at Sabern, where a young lieutenant was vir-
tually applauded for stabbing an unoffending lame cobbler. ' In
Australia, where men's minds are saturated from childhood
with the ideas of liberty, democracy, and equality, how many
would be slaughtered by the aristocratic junkers for uncon-
scious insolence; how many more for, daring to stand on their
rights?
“A MERE SCARE,”
this,” we are told, “is the bogey of the scare-monger,
Is it? What else will happen if Germany wins the decisive
victory? Part of the semi-official programme is to seize a
•number of the British colonies. There can be no doubt that


Australia would be one; , for the German press has long been
carping at the scanty - population of this continent compared
with its wealth and size. If Britain were worsted, she . could
no longer protect us with her fleet; for most probably Germany
would demand a great - reduction of its strength; and, in any
case, a defeated England could not keep pace with the ship-
building of a triumphant Germany. But without the British
fleet, what is there to prevent a descent on our shores? Then
we should have to face either such an invasion as has devas-
tated Belgium and Poland, and filled those countries with
outrage and carnage, or a craven submission, which would
expose us to all the oppression of Alsace.
Occasionally one hears the selfish argument that Australia
has no interest in this war. It has;, and that a greater interest
than Britain itself. For the Briish Isles, with their 45,000,000
inhabitants, could not by any possibility be wholly German-
ised; but the vast spaces of Australia, with its 4,900,000 inhabi-
tants, could soon be overflooded and submerged by a stream
of encroaching Teutons.
Even if the war ended in a draw, the result would be
disastrous to our political aspirations; for, that a country may
develop on free democratic lines, it must be secure.' If it has
at any moment to expect attack from without, it must accept
the constraint of a so-called “strong” government. England
has been able to foster freedom owing to its insular position,
and Australia has done the same owing to its remoteness. But
nowadays neither insularity nor distance is a sufficient protec-
tion; and an unhumbled Germany would be a continual menace
that would force us to give the government extraordinary
powers, and that would check all social progress.
The immunity we are enjoying through the efficiency , of the
superb navy of our Empire suggests to many a belief that we
cannot be beaten outright in this war.. Our real concern, how-
ever, is not merely avoidance of defeat, but the crowning victory
which will deliver us permanently from the peril, of slavery;
and this can only be won on land.
To preserve Australia from the risk of invasion, annexa-
tion, or' at the least, reaction, Britain and her Allies must
thoroughly defeat the German Alliance,
WHERE WE STAND. HOPES DISAPPOINTED.
This is no easy task. It is, indeed, infinitely harder than
,we at first supposed. The illusions with which we flattered
ourselves have, one by one, disappeared.
We were told that. Germany would soon be reduced, from
.sheer lack of the necessaries of life. But she came successfully
through the most critical months, has increased her crop-bear-


lug area, and has had a fair harvest—not to speak of the
plies that come to her from Roumania, which has now no other
outlet
We were told that she would lack petrol and material for
.munitions. For. petrol her science provided a tolerably good
substitute, and now she has the oil-belt about ..Lemberg'; while
of most other material she has abundance, since in addition
to her own resources she holds the black country of Belgium
and France. Possibly there may be deficiency in copper; but
even as to that the information is not decisive.
We were told that she could not avoid a financial break-
down; but on this statement her last huge war-loan is the
best - comment. She is practically self-supporting at home;
she is relieved from anxiety about foreign exchange; for any
necessary purchases abroad she has‘a considerable gold store,
and can: always get some credit from German-American well-
wishers, and from speculators who look to recouping them-
selves, if she wins, from the indemnities she ; will exact.
We were told in regard to Britain's sea-borne trade, that
our warships would soon clear the seas of the German cruisers.
They have done sot but the submarines have been causing far
more mischief to our shipping than many Emdens would have
done; and though the percentage of victims is comparatively
small, and the wastage of the assailants comparatively large,
the losses are no light matter to a trading country, ‘and one
like Britain that gets the bulk of. its supplies from abroad. ,
We were told of our military operations that a great
campaign in- April or May was to smash the Germans in the
West, and that by the end of June peace would be in sight.
Then the term was extended till September. Mow there is a
further postponement, and we have learned not to specify a
date.
We were told , that Russia, like a great steam-roller, would
crush all resistance as far south as Vienna, and. as far west as
Berlin. Now, she has lost almost all her conquests, is driven
from her Polish provinces, and is battling to save the route
to her capital.
We were told that the Dardanelles ■would be forced by
Easter. Then the forecast was changed to two months after
the disembarkation of the land forces. Then. six weeks were
added. The six weeks are long ago expired, and the result
seems more doubtful than ever.
We were told that presently new allies would be, on our
side, that in the first half of 1815, Italy, Bulgaria, Roumania,
..Greece, would be -all giving us their- aid. That is true only of
Italy. In regard to the Balkan States, how different is the real
from the promised situation, and how it increases our anxiety


lor the allies in that. theatre of the war! It is quite possible
that German influence may be supreme from Hamburg to Con-
stantinople; and. the route by the Suez Canal* as well as Egypt
and India* will be in serious jeopardy.
Even after - the cheering news from Flanders and ■ Russia*
that has come to us in the last days of September* there can
be no question that the situation is most serious and critical*
But, with the resources of the Allies in wealth and material*
fin the number, physique and spirit of their men* there is no
cause to be downhearted, if they make. full use of these advan-
tages, And there is no cause for us to be downhearted, if we
set ourselves to understand the reasons for Germany's long
continued successes and for our own frequent disappointments*
and seek to make good our previous defects by taking lessons
from, our friends, and if necessary, from our foes.
ORGANISATION THE GREAT NEED.
One of Germany's advantages' it is too late to make our
own; viz., the long preparation that has been proceeding for
at least a quarter of a century. Another we arc on the way of
appropriating, viz., the set, unanimous, concentrated national
will which was present among the Germans from the first, but
which till the gravity of the issues and the urgency of the
danger were realised, was somewhat lacking, in the British
Empire. But the third, the careful, intelligent and effective
organisation, in which this national will finds expression, has
still to be acquired in our community, and it .. is this that the
Universal Service League is striving to secure.
It is useless to have superior resources in wealth and man-
hood, unless they are utilised with thrift, insight and method*
A traveller is better off with a well furnished portmanteau
than with a litter of packing-cases. Germany has understood
how to make the most of her means and her men. There is no
shirking or delay, no waste or overlapping, no caprice or hap-
hazard; all her arts and crafts, all her produce and manufac-
tures, all the aptitudes and acquirements of her population are
put under requisition, and in such a way that each shall be used
to the greatest effect.
THE ORGANISATION OF WOMEN IN GERMANY
This is true of all spheres, but it may perhaps be best
illustrated by the way in which the State has made use of the
help of women,, as that in Germany was a matter of special
difficulty.


“The outbreak o£ war found German women unorganised,
unaccustomed to public duties, devoid of political education
or aspirations. . . . The German Government undertook to
instruct (them) in their new duties, not as individuals, but as
MEMBERS OF THE ORGANISED STATE, for war. Instruc-
tion began in the kitchen: preserving of fruits, the scientific pre-
paration of food so as to secure the greatest nutritive value, &c.,
was taught in 150 cities of the Empire. .... Women responded
with enthusiasm to the appeal, and it would be no exaggera-
tion to say that the present relative abundance of food in Ger-
many is in great measure due to their efforts. . . . To-day,
German women are bearing their full share .in the war, not
merely as mothers, sisters, wives of the men fighting, but rather
as an ORGANISED BODY POLITIC, which has specific duties
and responsibilities.” And the writer (a “Neutral/’ in an article
in the London Times, June 26th), goes on to show how many
tasks and duties have been assigned to women, in husbandry,
the preparation of chemicals, munitions, optical instruments,
in packing, &c., &c. ,
This is a conspicuous example, but' it is the same -all around.
Germany aims at getting the best out of every man and woman,
out of every commodity and acquirement, out of every asset,
■actual or potential. Obviously, sh? can mike her smaller
resources go a very long way. Bernhard! in his forecast does
not shrink from the prospect of a seven years’ war, and believes
that Germany could hold on for that time and come out top
at the last ' In view of such facts and utterances, we must
follow suit, and prepare for most severe and protracted de-
mands, and set our affairs in the wisest possible order.
ORGANISATION IN AUSTRALIA. THE WAR CENSUS.
The War Census, which the Commonwealth Government
has recently been taking, may be considered a preliminary
step to the systematic regulation and distribution, that are
required, of our duties, burdens and privileges; and as it there-
fore seems probable that these matters will presently receive
attention, the League, while insisting on them as urgent and
essential, does not think it necessary t| dwell on them ".at great
length. It assumes that the Wealth Census, is intended to show
what our stock in hand really is, that the Government may
know how far our means will carry us, and how, if required,
they may equitably be .made available for the common good.
It assumes that the Personal Census is intended to show the
numbers and qualifications of our male population, so that
those who are indispensable in the life and. work: of the com-
munity may not be withdrawn from it, and that fit citizens may
be provided in sufficient numbers for the employments that are
vital to the country.


SUGGESTED ADDITION TO THE PERSONAL SERVICE
CARD.
The League would only point out that the Personal Census
should be extended in two respects. (1) It should include
men above 60, for there are many such, who, though no longer
capable of severe bodily exertion, might release those who are,
in occupations of a sedentary character. (2) (which is much
more important) It should include women: (a) because the
experience of Europe shows that they can successfully engage
in many industries and pursuits, which may need to be extended,
or in which male labour may be lacking; and .(b) because their
co-operation and increased efficiency in thrift, domestic and
public, and in their own maintenance, is of pressing importance.
In short, the League holds that the Government should
find out what help in money or in work every man and woman,
every lad and lass can best give, towards winning the victory
in this war: and then enable and command them to give it.
COMPULSORY MILITARY SERVICE.
If the State, for the. purposes of this war, has the right to
demand from all the help they can best render, that implies
that it has the right to demand from them help in the ranks,
if thatinadvisable., To urge that this theoretical right be
embodied, in an actual law to be in force while the present
struggle continues is the central though not the exclusive
object of the Universal Service League. What other basis can
there be for complete and efficient national organisation?
THE PRINCIPLE ASSERTED IN THE LAW AS IT
STANDS,
The League would point out that'as regards the defence of
Australia the obligation on every male citizen is twice asserted in
the Commonwealth Defence Act. By section 125, ail male inhabi-
tants have to undergo a course of military training that extends
to 14 years, from the age of 12 to the age of 26. By section
60, all men between 18 to 60 are liable to be called out during
war-time in the following successive classes:—
I. Unmarried men and widowers without children
between 18 and 35.
11. Unmarried men and widowers without children
between 35 and' 45.
111. Married men and widowers with children between
18 and 35,


IV, Married men and widowers with children between
35 and 45,
V. All men without distinction between 45 and 60,
It is true that the Act confines this compulsory service
to territory under the authority of the Commonwealth, la
so far, it .would need to be amended to give the Government
the necessary powers. But the amendment would be quite in
accordance with the spirit of the Act, which seeks to. ensure
the defence of Australia. For Australia is defended best ,at the
great centres of the war. Every check given to Germany or
her allies staves off the danger of invasion or annexation;
every advantage they gain increases the chance of both. It
is the unspeakable privilege of Australia still to be able to
defend herself beyond her own frontiers, and thus, hitherto,
to escape the horrors that have blasted Poland, Belgium, and
Northern France, Her sons who are fighting in Flanders or at
Gallipoli are none the less fighting in • her defence,
though they ■ are thousands of miles away. This is altogether
a defensive war on our part, without the slightest taint of
aggression;:' and that it is. waged under the most favourable
possible conditions, such as are almost without precedent in
defensive warfare, does not make it less desirable that these
conditions should continue. “Compulsory service ■ for the de-
fence of Australia within the Commonwealth” is already the'
law; “Compulsory Service for the defence of Australia beyond
•the Commonwealth”, follows very easily. As it is, Australians
can be. called out to serve at Port Darwin or in Papua; what
change of principle is there in calling them out to serve at the
Dardanelles, when in both cases the'purpose is to keep Aus-
tralia safe?
BENEFITS.' OF, COMPULSORY SERVICE.
The advantages of the change would be many.
NUMBERS GO UP,
(1) Of ■ these the least is the increase in numbers, though
this is important enough. And a very great increase could be
effected without an exhaustive drain even on Class 1., which
has been variously estimated at a little below or a little above
i 500,000. It ..should be., noted ■ that when the League advocates
Universal Service, it does not for a moment mean that the
whole male population should 'be requisitioned at once, but
'that 'such draughts. as are expedient : should be made on the
successive classes according to. a well-considered system.


SAVING OF MONEY; FAMILIES SPARED.
(2) By a general, though it need not be a rigid, observance
of the arrangement in classes, one crying evil, both domestic
ml S 0 0 ’ will be avoided, viz., the large proportion of
~ t 3^ eS cmldrem who join the forces. It speaks
f °‘ the P ubll 9 spmt of these men that they have volun-
wp-lfh’ Wrt 6 S T e t J“ e ’ 5 18 / sacrifice, which the Common-
wealth, for the sake of itself and their dependents, should accept
omy a.ter grave consideration. For the claims of wife and
*fflV OHeS ar | , most sacred that can be laid on a man’s
t f . Ch s’ and the loss of the husband and father is the loss
: *l an!y . result ln the most poignant and lasting
misery, while the maintenance of the bereaved families becomes
an extra charge on the public revenues.
INDUSTRIES SAFEGUARDED.
(3) Since all the available manhood even of Class I would
not immediately be required, it would be possible to' make a
selection that would be wholly to the advantage of the country’s
i TL rtam occupations, especially in war time, are more
essential than others; some are already depleted of those who
for P l aCti f them l in some it: is harder to find substitutes
ior the absentees; and so on, and so on. The proper author!-
ties would decide what men could best be spared*
YOUTH LEFT TO RIPEN*
(4) Also, with the large field for choice, the very young
men might meanwhile be left over till they had com/more
Stre . ngth - Th f re is a ***** consensus
that 18 is too early an age for such tax on the nerves as modern
warfare imposes, and it is unlikely that a mere lad will ha™
the staying power of a mature man. It would be satisfactory to
s s s.; he high - !pw,ed m >°” ■&»
UNDERHAND CONSCRIPTION.
(S) It _ would abolish that worst form of conscription, pri-
yate and irresponsible conscription, with its accompaniments
of misconstruction, insult and inward misgivings. At present
we hear of employees being badgered into enlisting by their
employers of friends being persecuted by their friends. No
individual has a ngat to lay down the law to another; but it is
<^' ve ™ n t- - There is an authenticated case of
a man who offered . himself twice and was rejected, being
plagued with anonymous post-cards, denouncing him as a pol-


trobn. We all know men who cannot make up their, minds
whether it is their duty to join or not, and who would be glad
to have the matter decided for them by the properly constituted
authorities. Under the Compulsory Service system, all would
have the right to go about their ordinary work with a clear
conscience and a light heart till the' country called them to
the fight; and the unfit, the rejected, those whose turn had not
yet come, would be free from the reproach of shirking, whether
made by themselves or others.
RECRUITS COULD BE PROPERLY HANDLED
AND PREPARED.
(6) .Meanwhile, those who were called, would present them-
selves-in successive relays. There would be a constant, regu«
lar, calculable supply; for whose equipment, maintenance and
training, provision could be made in'- advance. There would be
less chance of imperfect arrangements than when the numbers
fluctuate as they at present do. There would be time, for ade-
quate instruction, and we should no longer hear stories of men
being rushed in a, hurry to the front with an insufficient course
of drill, rifle and bayonet practice. These evils are hard to
avoid at present, and they are very serious. The will to, fight
must be seconded by the power to fight. t The importance of
systematic and continuous preliminary training cannot be over-
rated, as all military authorities agree. “Numbers are not
enough,” .says Lord Roberts; and to show that “they can be of
no use, and may be a-positive danger,” he took place
in 1870: “140,000 levies, more or less ill-trained, confronted
35,000 disciplined Germans. What was the result? In three
weeks 60,000 were dead, wounded or prisoners; and the re-
mainder, demoralised and panic-stricken, were flying beyond
the frontier.”
SUMMARY -OF RESULTS.
It is therefore maintained that without properly authorised
regulation the community cannot be organised to the best effect,
for the supply,, either, of, the sinews of war provided by the
civilian population at the back, or of the expeditionary force
composed of the citizen soldiers at the front.
Generally speaking, under the Voluntary System reservoirs
of service remain untapped; there is a, lack of work here, and
a lack of workers there; there is ..a dislocation of industry and
a misuse of means; things are not done that need to be done,
and there are numbers who wish to help but don't know what
to' do.
More particularly, the Voluntary System in its military
aspect has failed to produce quite satisfactory results. None


can wish or dare to deny that our men have come forward
nobly, and done wonders. But we need more and more; and
under the Voluntary System we can’t be sure of having them
m the required numbers at the required time. Under it men
go from a sense of duty, who tear themselves from the fami-
lies that have the first claims on them, and that the State
(taay have Under it men leave occupations in which
bheir work is of the highest importance to the community.
Lads go, who would be of far greater use if they delayed till
they were a little older. Bullying, contumely, and -undue influ-
ence drive others to the colours, who have good reasons for
staying behind; many are at a loss before an apparent collision'
of duties; many undeservedly exposed to the reproaches
of others and their own hearts. And with the sudden fluctua-
tions in the number ,of enlistments, and the hot haste in which
they have sometimes to be employed, it is often difficult to
treat them as they should be treated in camp, and to give them
that training which would make them of most use, and would
best conduce to their safety.
What can be urged for this .slipshod method or against
the more practical one- that the League recommends?
OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE GENERAL SCHEME OF
UNIVERSAL SERVICE,
VIOLATION OF LIBERTY,
1 (1) It is said that so thorough-going an organisation of
the community would- mean ,an interference with individual
liberty, and that individual liberty is one of the most precious
treasures of life. Both statements are perfectly true, but it
has to be remembered that this sacrifice would only be* till the
war is over; that it would be. only a suspension not a surrender
of full personal independence; further, that it would be the
mandate not'of a single despot or a despotic caste, but of the
general will, which would have the right and power to reverse
it as .soon as expedient; and above, all, that this temporary
common acceptance of control would be for the purpose of
securing personal liberty in the long run, and of securing it as
soon as possible. To attain that it is worth while to give up
some of our privileges for a season, and to welcome the allotted
task even if it should be uncongenial. W r e must cultivate- the
spirit of the statesman who said, “I am willing to sweep the
streets, if the Government, tells me to do so.” But really there
is no more loss of liberty for the citizens under such regula-
tions in war-time, than there is in the obedience of a football
team to their captain. It is only while the game lasts, and they
have, chosen their captain themselves.


PROPERTY AND WAGES IN DANGER*
(2) But it is objected more particularly that universal
organisation would violate'the of ownership and remune-
ration; and oddly enough this objection is urged, from opposite
points of view, both by .the employers and the employees* The
former fear general confiscation, the nationalisation of wealth;
the latter, the compulsion to work at any trade which may be
assigned to them, at inadequate wages, while the employers
dray/ enormous profits.
Neither of these forebodings need be realised; and in point
o£ fact they are both falsified in France, where-a condition of
things now prevails like what the League contemplates, but
in an intenser degree.
The League would point out again, in regard to both objec-
tions that the proposals it advocates are only for the emer-
gency, and are to be considered no more permanent than the-
arrangements for feeding the population of a city in a state
of siege.
In regard to the first, it disclaims, of course, IT that be
necessary, any designs on private property; though it holds,
that as labour would be asked, for the sake of a full regulation
of industries, to suspend during the war some of the rights it
has secured, it is only fair that wealth should give an equiva-
lent in contributions to the finances. Surely the Commonwealth
Government, which is the creation of Labour, can be trusted
to see that this is done in the degree that may be advisable.
And the League also holds that-in times of stress it occasionally
happens that the possessions of the whole community have
provisonally to be pooled, to provide means for meeting the
common danger; just as groups of individuals, when need com-
mands, e.g., if they are marooned or shipwrecked, have to
throw all their belongings in the common stock. But this is
no infringement of private property. All personal rights revive
when the emergency is passed. At any rate, the principle is
so far from being an innovation that it is already the law of
the land. Section 67 of the Commonwealth Defence Act de-
clares:—“The owner of any vehicle, horse, boat, or any goods
required for naval or military purposes, can be compelled to
hand*- them over to the' Commonwealth for such purposes.**
That expression, “any goods,” includes much more than the
League expects to be necessary. The League is not afraid
that the Commonwealth will use its- power to take more of
any man’s capital, profits or earnings from him than , the exig-
encies demand;- and the resulting disturbance of credit and
diminution of employment must be faced as a smaller evil than
would otherwise ensue. The League is prepared to trust the
Australian Government to act with what it believes to be pru-
dence and honour. After all, that Government is responsible
t© the people for everything that it does.


As to the second objection, the League maintains that the
very idea of right national organisation forbids the exploita-
tion of the worker to put huge profits in the pockets of the
individual or company he is working for, especially if these
profits are due to the operation of the war. In Australia there
is not very much fear of this. In other belligerent countries,
where Labour control is less pervasive, such excessive profits
have been restricted or taxed. It would certainly be the same
here. If citizens were transferred to occupations other than
their usual ones, because additional service was urgently needed,
it would be m the interest of- their own democratic State, not ot.
any private persons or particular class. The Income Tax for
war purposes, with its demands rising in bold curves as the
incomes taxed increase, may be taken as an indication of the
policy that would be pursued, It is the most daring experiment
hi this direction that has yet been made m any country, and
shows no inclination to favour the capitalist unduly. Nor if
the crisis demands, can the experiment stop here. More may
be needed. If, to defend the Empire and Australia, a call has
to be made on Capital, as well as Income, then by all means
let it be made. But this so-called conscription of wealth
should be on all fours with the so-called conscription of men.
That is; more men should not be sent to the iront than .he
wants of the situation require; and more property, whether m
the wav of capital or income, should not be taken from tne
owner than the wants of the situation require. The .position
of the League is: Let Government requisition all that is neces-
sary in the way of men, work and wealth, to the last man,
stroke, and " shilling; if ttart : :must, be; but don’t let it take more
than is necessary under any of these heads.
UNIVERSAL SERVICE, UNIVERSAL CHAOS.
(S) It is said by some: “We are muddling along, but we
ARE muddling along. Good work is being done, and any
attempt at national organisation by;the authorities would only
obstruct it,-'add meddling., to* the muddling, and make confusion
worse confounded. The way in which, officialdom manages the
departments already in its charge, does not tempt us to enlarge
its-sphere.” This is a very natural .rejoinder; out overlooks
the fact that national organisation implies the utilising of, the.
fit men in the fit place, of the best brain-power of the com-
munity in the work for which the best brains are best trained,
lust as the movement is not confined to any class or calling,
creed-or party, so for ■ the . organisation would be available the
best qualified workers, professional men, tradesmen, business
men etc., each able and willing to help with his own know-
ledge Ms-own abilities, his own.stock of insight and exper-
ience.' That would be the part for him to play. That there are
such men In plenty, among the nearly five millions of Aus-


tfalia, who can doubt? The names of many rise at once to
one’s lips. And the choice would be all the wider, as the 'whole
nation, and not merely one section, political, sectarian or indus-
trial, could be drawn upon. At present we are not using them
as they might be used. But if commissions of the most capable
appointed under Government to organise the national
activities for the war, each commission with its special scope
but co-ordinated with all the rest; in the first place we should
get the most'good out of the most capable, in the second place
they would enable us to get the most good out of ourselves—
the community at large. ■ At present it cannot be- denied that
many things are overdone and many things not done, that
there is leakage and double banking, surplus and defect; that
much potential energy lies idle, and that much effort runs to
waste. This can only be remedied by a systematic scheme of
universal service, and such a scheme can only be established
by the Government.
OBJECTIONS TO COMPULSORY MILITARY SERVICE
ON PRINCIPLE,
A MENACE TO DEMOCRACY.
(1) The cry is raised that it is undemocratic.
How then comes it that the most complete example of
it is to be found in France, than which there is. no..more demo-
cratic' .country in the-world?- In the French Republic, the sys-
tem is even more consequently carried out than in the Kaiser’s
Germany. And democracy, not only in France,, but in Europe
and in the ~ world, has , been. saved by it But lor the French
Universal Service Army, the war would now probably be over,
and the absolutism of Berlin would prevail without a check.
The truth is that the' term “conscription,” which means
nothing more than ENROLMENT, suffers from evil associa-
tions* It used to mean tyrannical enlistment from above, with-
out the will of the people; which reached its climax when
Napoleon compelled subject states, under the specious name of
Allies, to contribute quota of their youth •to his armies, no
matter how bitterly opposed to his policy they might be. That
has nothing in common with the kind of conscription proposed
by the League. The latter, if it comes, will come as a decree of
the popular will. Our movement'is an appeal to a complete
democracy to legislate compulsion, for itself, just as an indi-
vidual adopts a resolution for his own efficiency and self-dis-
mocratic, what shall we say of the laws compelling parents to
give adequate attention to their children, or householders to
; observe the regulations for public health, or a thousand and


one other interferences with the liberty of the individual, when
such liberty might injure his fellows? Much less can the
supreme end of the State, national security, be left; to the
sporadic and uneconomical efforts of voluntary aid. Surely
nothing could be more democratic than the well-organised and
equitable distribution of the burdens of the State, among all
its citizens, on the principle of capacity for service; and this
will involve military service for such as on impartial examina-
tion of the case, are seen to be the most suitable for it.
The mere statement of this principle disposes of the sus-
picion that any one class would be especially affected. The
general classification of our manhood has been laid down in
the Defence Act, and the selection would be determined by con-
siderations of the public good,—-the degree of their physical
fitness, of their domestic responsibilities, and of the ■ urgency
for the State of their civilian work. Here again, France shows
THAT it can be done and HOW it ought to be done. Neither
wealth nor social position nor educational advantages exempt
any Frenchman from the military duty that may. be assigned
to him. .
THE INFECTION OF MILITARISM.
(2) It is further objected' that Compulsory Military Service
in this war would foster the growth of Militarism. But so,
that is the case .already, for Compulsory Military Service is
decreed twice over in the Statute Book; and it makes no differ-
ence in this respect that such service for the defence of Australia
would be rendered in one place rather than another; the com-
pulsion for home defence is just the same. Were the proposal
to make service compulsory in wars of - aggression, or even in
wars where the safety of Australia was not involved, the objec-
tion would be valid. But nobody suggests that . Military ser-
vice for the defence of Australia is at present obligatory.; the
only change advocated by the League is that it should be obli-
gatory not merely within, but beyond the Commonwealth, lor
the period of the War. There' is no ■ new stimulus to ; militarism
in this. On the contrary, it .aims at withstanding militarism as
represented by the Prussian system. If Germany can be beaten
thoroughly enough, the citadel of militarism will be stormed,
and we may hope for a general decrease,' if not discontinuance
of armaments. If Germany triumphs, we may dread the intro-
duction of the worst militarism among ourselves, the militarism,
that compels the French of Alsace and the Poles of Prussian
Poland to fight in the German ranks. Even, if. without triumph-
ing, she escapes an utter overthrow, she will be so grave a
menace to. our lives and liberties that we shall be forced to adopt
a stringent' and permanent form of conscription. The temper
and spirit of Germany are such that unless .she is brought to
her knees once for all, we shall have to shoulder a greater


burden of armaments and preparations for war than now we
think credible.
, evil of militarism lies not in the service, but in the
spirit, and the service 'has to be used to oppose the spirit.
“What is war?”* says Uncle Toby, of the struggle against the
aggressions 'of Louis ■ XIV; “What is it, when fought, as ours
has' been, upon principles of liberty and upon principles of
honour,-—what is it, but the getting together of quiet and harm-
less people, with their swords in their hands, to keep the ambit-
ious and'turbulent within bounds?” ' That, at least, describes
our part in this war; that describes the soul of a citizen defen-
sive army. And so long as we remain quiet- and harmless..peo-
pie who fight only on principles of liberty and honour, there
is little fear that compulsory service will infect us with mili-
tarism. In the first place, the enforcement of the requirement
would only be for the present crisis, and the crisis passed, we
would drop back into our accustomed- ways, just like the United
States after the interim of conscription which Abraham Lin-
coln introduced to bring the Civil War to a conclusion. In the
second place, compulsory service, even if, permanent, does ,not
in a free., and self-governing-State produce the temper of mili-
tarism; as we see from the example of France, which has never
been more pacific than in .recent years, with her democratic
and largely socialistic ■ national forces. v
THE INFECTION OF PRUSSIANISM.
(3) Equally idle is the fear that the obligation on every
man to' defend Ms country would ..-“Prussianise”' us,'that, is,
would introduce among us the servile materialism and uniform-
ity that, spreads from its hotbed at Potsdam. But did compul-
sory .service Prussianise the United States, or has it Prussian-
ised France? Where can we find a more individualistic demo-
cracy than, the one, or a more idealistic democracy than the
other? Has it Prussianised Switzerland, which keeps its ancient
liberties intact? Has it Prussianised Belgium, which it is enab-
ling to wage its noble and heroic struggle against Prussianism
in every form? Britain is the only civilised community where
the principle of compulsory military service has not been
adopted, for' a time at least, during the- last century, and this
is entirely due to her insular position which used to give- suffic-
ient security.
The same objection, that it would '“Prussianise us,” was
raised in England against compulsory education. There is
only one way to. be “Prussianised,” and that is to be beaten
and enslaved by the Germans. Universal military service is
the one sure way to avoid this.
* Tristram ■ Shandy, VL| xxxii
20 C


u OM ONE PAIR OF VOLUNTARY LEGS DO' MARCH
THREE CONSCRIPTS,”
(4) Then there is the military argument that volunteers
make so much the better soldiers, that compulsion may be dis-
pensed with.; The phrase runs that one ©£ them is worth three
pressed men. “If that is so,” said an English officer, who had
some experience of the enemy's prowess in Northern France,
and knew better, “God. help ■ us, if we ever meet any German
volunteers!” It is obvious that the armies of Germany, though
levied under a. system that almost totally disregards the popular
voice, have achieved wonders. And this is' not surprising when
we read what was done by the soldiers and sailors in former
days who were snatched : away by the iniquitous press-gang.
But even if~ the conscript forces of Germany had fallen
short, instead of being as they are a model of efficiency, still
it would prove nothing. For with them the compulsory ser-
vice is imposed from'above, In : republican France, as it would
be with us, it is demanded from below. In that sense it is
collectively voluntary. The nation wills that the nation should
serve; and the particular citizen, in accepting the general will
which Tie himself has helped to form, is not subjected to a
merely external constraint. Indeed, the man who ■ goes to . the
front in obedience to the mandate of the State has a motive no
less worthy than the .man who goes in obedience to his own
decision. This was the view of Lord Roberts, who understood
war and soldiers so well: he writes: “To true manhood, to the
truly noble and free-born spirit T must' is even higher than
T will/ Self-effacement in the moral world is the very basis of
all true self-assertion, and in-the political world it is the basis
of all true citizenship.” Our gallant “conscript” allies of France-
are showing that Just now.
YOU CAN'T MAKE THE HORSE DRINK.
.(5) A -strange development of the argument for the voluntary,
and against the compulsory system, is the statement that the
latter is illogical, because the State can compel no one “to love
or to hate,” and therefore to fight. The , premises are--true.
Government cannot control the emotions; but it can-control the
conduct. It can't make - a father love his* children, but it can
make him treat them humanely; it can't make a bystander hate
an assailant of the police, but it can punish him if he refuses
help required “in the King's name,” ,
The author of this argument goes on to meet the rejoinder
that the : Defence Act compels a man to fight in the case of
invasion, by saying that if that took place ail would instinc-
tively fly- to arms. What'then, we ask, Is the good of the clause?
But the defence of one’s country is NOT instinctive; it is much


!T™ i !T t 1 ive , th^ n , p ? ternal ! ? ve - If the latter needs to be sup-
P ted b J ieglslat |on, so m a far greater degree does the
former. And even when instincts are present, legislation can
give them direction and efficacy. ’ 6 q can
OBJECTIONS TO THE PRESENT ADVOCACY OF
COMPULSORY MILITARY SERVICE.
(6) Some, who are not altogether opposed to the principle,
f-rgue that the time has not yet come in Australia.
FOLLOW ENGLAND.
ia) They say, “Let us wait till it is adopted in England”
Lat, since the momentousness of the war has been brought
J° the heart of England far more closely than to ours,
vun the raids by air and sea, the losses of ships and men,
Jinpand has already contributed a far larger percentage of
Oianteers; not to speak of the enormous financial and naval
S b l arlng ‘ , Then England has to DECIDE on the
PRINCIPLE of compulsory service, while we have adopted it
J on f a S°> an< i have only to consider the APPLICATION. And
lastly, we are not in the habit of waiting for the example of Eng-
land in legislation that is to extend the powers of the State.
Oiu universal military training is only one among many in-
stances, in which Australia lias gone her own way, without
waiting for British precedent, to organise the community for
the common good, Australia led the way in enacting the
use of the ballot—-which is still called abroad the “Australian.
i t ‘ ie i franchise, the old-age pension, the • in-
dustrial legislation. V/hy not lead the way:.in this?
“YOU HAVE WAKED ME TOO SOON."
t .(b) “Let us wait till the need, is more urgent." The answer
is, ;cnat to meet the urgent need there must be preparation
beb,mes. The war found the British Empire and all its con-
stituent members unprepared, and it was only the comparative
of France that gave us the chance of collecting
our powers in some degree. Now, we don’t know when or
how long or how great the further demands on us. may be.
There should be no delay in making the arrangements, espec-
ially as they will claim the most thorough and mature delibera-
tmm . If the. system, has to be adopted.' at the last moment as a
last resort, it will be much less . efficient than it could other-
wise be made.


KNOW YOUR OWN PLACE,
(c) They say., “Let us wait for the action of the Common-
wealth Government.” Of course we have to wait for that, as
it is only the Commonwealth Government that can decide.
But the Commonwealth Government can only give expression
to the people's will, and it is partly to elicit, partly to influence
the people's will that the League has inaugurated this move-
ment. The authorities cannot proceed with confidence unless
■they know what the community wishes, and it is the right of
any individual or association of individuals to try "to give these
wishes a particular direction,, so long as the means used are
fair ■ argument and persuasion. It is altogether undemocratic
to decry such legitimate proceedings.
(7) But there are critics who, while admitting this as true
In ordinary circumstances, contend that in the present position
the action of the League is mischievous.
SOWERS OF DISCORD.
(a) They say: “It disunites the public, and thus prevents the
whole-hearted concentration on the one supreme issue.” But as
the League considers that the course it recommends is the best
one to secure victory, and the only one to secure victory without
needless waste of time, wealth, and lives; and as this course,
on account of its comparative novelty, cannot be adopted with-
out initial difference of opinion, it has no option ■■ but raise
the discussion. “Doctors differ and patients,-die”; but iff the-
patient is dying, the doctor who thinks he can cure him, must
not be silent merely to avoid discussion. Discussion, however,
need not lead to dissension. The League will endeavour to
state its case strongly and uncompromisingly, but fairly and
reasonably; it gives its opponents credit for their good faith
and public spirit, .and asks its opponents to do the same by it;
and as all have the same ends' in view—the defence of the
Empire and Australia, the safety of democracy, and the triumph
of right—it may be hoped that no important breach will be made
in their ranks.
RECRUITING- HAMPERED.
But (b) it is feared that the intervention of the
may interfere with recruiting. The League therefore takes
the opportunity of declaring that till Universal Service is
enforced, it regards voluntary recruiting as of the most urgent
necessity. An ample and constant supply of fit men to be
trained is the grand want. % The League holds that the
machinery it recommends will best secure that supply: but till
the better machinery is set up, urges the most strenuous em-


ployment of such as exists, and desires To give all the aid it
can to the working of the present system. The temporary
falling off in recruiting is due not to the activity of the League
but to the natural swing of the pendulum after recruiting had
been especially vigorous.
THE MEMBERS READY.
(8) It remains to answer a criticism which' has been level-
led at the members of the League, from a misunderstanding of
their attitude. “Why,” it is asked, “do these people insist that
others should be made to enlist, instead of enlisting them-
selves? 5 "
Women members of the League and those over SO years
of age, are, of course, debarred from military service. They
can be of use only in other walks,- and, according to the general
programme'of the manifesto, are asking that suitable tasks ; be
imposed on them. ' The great majority of the members, however,
are men within the military age, and they are in the most
genuine sense volunteering, that is, they' are voluntarily pro-
posing that Government should call them out, each in the class
to which he 'belongs. Why did the Parliament define those
classes if the order were not meant to be' observed?
THE LEGAL QUIBBLE,
(9) A note may be added on the legal question which has
been raised, as to whether the Commonwealth Government has
the power to pass a-law compelling citizens of the Common-
wealth to serve as soldiers outside the territorial limits of Aus-
tralia. Such power probably exists under the Constitution as it
stands at present. But even if it does not, it is quite absurd
to suppose that a legal technicality of this kind would be allowed
to hamper the Federal Government in requiring Federal service
abroad for Imperial purposes, if it desired to do so. All that
would be necessary 'would be .a cable to The Imperial Govern-
ment, asking for the passage of a short bill through the Imperial
Parliament, conferring on the Australian Parliament the power
to pass such legislation. The whole thing could be done in a
few hours. The , power of the Imperial Parliament to do this
cannot, of course,, be questioned. The willingness: to . do- ; it,
if requested by the Government of the Common wealth, is
equally beyond question. • '
.CONCLUSION,
This then is-the case of the League in the bare" outline that
the space permits. Surely even in outline it deserves the earnest


consideration of all our citizens whose hearts throb to the call
of Right, of Freedom, of Patriotism, of mere enlightened Self-
interest It is indeed a solemn and terrible crisis, and every day
we are more loudly warned to have our loins girt,- and our
swords sharp, and ali things ready. If we are to shun the fate
of those great civilisations in the past that were swept away
by brute violence, we must bestir ourselves at once; for never
had. any 'State so intelligent and well-equipped, so resolute and
forceful, -so remorseless and unscrupulous a foe as'“the blonde
Teuton beast J? —such is the description given of the German by a
famous leader of German thought. To defeat the attack, or
even hold it in' check, we must put our backs and brains and
wills, into- the struggle as we have not hitherto done. Many of
our countrymen and countrywomen have no doubt given us a
magnificent lead; for this holiest of causes they have offered
up health and happiness, career and life, friends and home.
Most of us are-.hardly interrupting our ordinary business and
pleasure, are far indeed from making anything like an equival-
ent contribution, and are letting the burden fall almost solely
on our nobler fellow-citizens. This is unjust. It is also futile.
All the sacrifices that individuals have made, all the human
.and material treasure that has been consumed “in hot digestion
of this cormorant war” will have been lavished with no other
result than to feed, the monster, unless the example of the van-
guard is followed by the community at large. Only a great
united national effort will win'-a draught; of healing from the
blood and tears that have been shed; only that can give us
hopes for a peace that will not be more baleful than the war
itself. But how can there be such a national effort except by
Universal Service alike at the front and at the back; and how
can there be Universal Service without the direction, the man-
agement, and. the requirement of those whom we have chosen
to govern us?
Australian men and women, this way leads to safety for
hearth and home, Empire and Commonwealth, our ideals and,
convictions. It is simple, swift and sure; all others are diffi-
cult, devious, and most precarious.
The means that Heaven yields must be embraced,
And not neglected; else, if Heaven would,
And we will not, Heaven*s offer we refuse ,
The proffered means of succour and redress .


EXTRACT FROM THE LETTER OF A, SOLDIER AT
GALLIPOT#!.
Quoted in “The Round Table/' September, 1915.
“If there is any possible influence which could be exerted
to show the nation at last what it is really fighting for, there
might be more hope of a near end, and at least something would
be done* If the nation could only realise that it is not fighting
so much against ‘German militarism, or for Belgium, for
anything else, but just against itself, against all that which has
kept us where we are, instead of the living Empire we ought
to be, there would be more hope. Unless we first cast the
beam out of our own eye it is no use shrieking at the size ©f
the mote in the eye c>f another nation, and until we do it all
our straggles and the heavy price of manhood we are paying
will really be as vain as they sometimes appear* Our light at
present is a peculiarly thick darkness, and great because so
few seem to know that it is darkness and has been darkness
even when we thought it light,"
’The comment of the writer in “The Round Table" follows:—•
“In. substance the criticism of our conduct of the war
amounts to this, that as a nation we have not yet ‘risen to the
full level of our duty in this supreme crisis of the world, that
we have spent much time in abusing the sins of Germany, while
we have dealt lightly with our own; that we have criticised our
own Government unmercifully, and have changed it, but that
we have not yet' begun to make the sacrifices and incur the dis-
cipline that are necessary if we are to support our own brothers
and our Allies at the front to the utmost of our-power. That
individuals, and an immense multitude of them, have sacrificed
their all, but that as a community, we have not pulled ourselves
together,' nor abandoned absolutely the shibboleths of peace,
nor accomplished fully the three . things which really matter
in war; the organisation and disciplining of the whole population
for the purpose of the war, the absolute suspension of every
hindrance, however dear to capital or labour, which impedes
the work of national supply, the husbanding;; of. the/ resources
of the nation by a rigid enforcement of public and private
economy. That people are still left to serve only if they choose
and when they choose, that industrial service is rendered by
many employers only if they are handsomely paid for it, that
trade union regulations restrictive of output are still enforced,
that strikes occur, and that, throughout, money is squandered
lavishly as' if nobody could be expected to do his duty without
being paid for it, and paid extravagantly at that. In conse-
quence that, while one section of the nation is enduring hard-
ships and making sacrifices greater than any in English history
lor the sake of their fellows, the rest are still living at their
ease, seeking pleasure and enjoyment as usual, and wasting


resources which are vital if we are to make certain of victory
for our cause. . . . . We are now fighting the war with only
half our national strength. One half of the nation, and that
the smaller half, are submitting themselves to discipline and to
separation from relatives and friends, are suffering untold hard-
ship, pain, and, in great numbers, are giving up their lives for
their friends, while the other half are making no equivalent
contribution to the common cause. That is broadly true and,
inasmuch as it is true, it must be changed. We owe it to our-
selves, to our brothers at the front, and to our Allies to put
our whole national strength into this war. . . .
“This war, in one of its aspects, is a spiritual conflict
between liberty and tyranny, between the principle of right and
justice as the foundation of international relations, and the
principle that might is right, in which truth is on our side;
in another it .is a contest between the idea that the primary
duty of the citizen is to give loyal and unselfish, service to the
community of which he is a part and the idea that the primary
right of the individual is freedom to ignore his duty to the com-
munity if he chooses, in which truth is with the , Germans. How
discipline and "active service of the State is to be combined
with democracy it is not the purpose of this article to suggest.
It is manifest that we have hardly begun to solve the problem
of creating either the spirit or the machinery necessary to the
full working of the principle of self-government. To destroy
the power of a king and transfer it to an electorate is obtfcbusly
only the first step, and the machinery created : to enable an
autocrat to control his subjects is obviously not that which
will best enable a community to govern itself. But these are-
questions which must be reserved .till after the war.
“Meanwhile we can begin to cast the beam out of our own
eye by building up the foundation on which, all healthy demo-
cracy must rest—--a strong sense of our responsibility as citizens
and of our duty to*serve the : community of which we are a
part. The chief difficulty in the way is not organisation or
even our enemy, but our reluctance to put pressure on our-
selves. Once we have made up our minds to do that,, the
battle is half won. For in grappling thus manfully with our-
selves there will be born that spirit of unity and high courage
which, once alive, will not only carry us to..victory in this war,
but which will be the sure foundation of a better world when
peace is come once more.”


“WILL YOU JOIN THE LEAGUE?”
The foregoing pages contain an official expression,
of the objects of the UNIVERSAL SERVICE
LEAGUE. If' yon are convinced that the objects
are right ones and best calculated to help the
NATION at this time, show your support by
intimating to the joint Hon. Secretaries your desire
to become a member of the LEAGUE. The
League welcomes the membership of every man
and ■ woman.
Membership subscription, 1 /-.
„ ' (J- D. FITZGERALD
Horn Secs J -
IT. R. BAVIN
Universal Service League f
University Chambers,
78 : Elizabeth Street


UNIVERSAL SERVICE LEAGUE.
New South Wales Branch
PRESIDENT:
Professor T. W. Edgeworth David, C.M.G Hon. D'.Sc.
(Oxp : h,)> F.R-S,
EXECUTIVE .COMMITTEE.
Hon. W. A.- Holman,’ Hon. C. G. Wade, Hon, ■ J,C
. Watson, Hon. Frank Bryant, M.L.C., Hon. John
Garland, M.L.G., Hon. F. E. Winchcombe, M.L.C..
Mr. Meredith Atkinson, Miss Ruth Beale, Miss
Board, Dr. Mary Booth, Mr. F. S. Boyce, Mr.. H.
Y. Braddon, Mr. T. F. Furse, Mr. W. W. Hill,
Mr, C. Lloyd Jones, Mr, George Lewis, Mrs, R,
R.' S, MacKinnon, Miss Gladys Marks,- Mr. E. ■M.
Mitchell, Professor J. B, Peden, Dr. Cecil Purser,
Mr. F, T. Turner. ■
HON, TREASURERS:
Mr. | Russell' French, Mr. ;G, Mason Allard.
HON, SECRETARIES:
Hon, J. D, Fitzgerald, M.L.C., Mr. T. R. Bavin.
HON. AUDITOR:
Mr. T. A. Strudwigk.
The objects of . the Universal Service League are:—■
1. To advocate the adoption for the period of the present
war of the principle of universal compulsory service at
home or abroad, in the battlefield or elsewhere; and to
support the Government in providing at the earliest pos-
sible moment such organisation as is necessary to secure
the wise and just application of this principle.
2. To secure the passage of legislation for the above pur-
poses; and to assure the Federal Government that such
legislation will command the loyal support of the people
of the Commonwealth.
3* To adopt any other measures calculated-to-promote the
object of the League.
All correspondence should be addressed:—
THE HON, SECRETARIES,
Universal Service League,
University Chambers,:
Elizabeth Street, Sydney,


BIBLIOGRAPHY.
‘THE ROUND, TABLE.”
(September.)
National 'Duty in War.
“NINETEENTH CENTURY.”
(January.)
The Volunteer Spirit.—Bp G. G. Coulton,
An Individualist’s Plea for Obligatory Service. —Bp G. A . B,
Dewar,
(February,)
The Middle Ways A Reply to Colonel Maude's Article in January
issue,—Bp Colonel T . Cretan.
Right : and Wrong Methods of Recruiting.™Bp D, C . Lathbury .
(April.)
Compulsory Service in England : A Retrospect—-Bp H. B, Simpson .
(June.)
The Coming of Conscription.-— Bp G. A . B. Dewar .
(September.)
How America Became a Nation in Arms.— Bp Ellis Barker ;
“ENGLISH REVIEWS
(February.)
Conscription.—Bp Austin Harrison .
(June*)
National Service and Government—Bp Austin Harrison.
“EMPIRE REVIEW; 9
(July.)
The Need for National Service,™ Bp Viscount Milner,
War and Democracy.— -Bp H, D. Gregory,
“FORTNIGHTLY REVIEW,**
(May, July, and August.)
Recruiting and Organisation foe War. —Bp Sir Leo Chiozza Money ,


“SATURDAY REVIEW"
(Weekly*)
Correspondence, January to March inclusive, May 29lh s and subsequent
“nifcbers.
“SPECTATORS
(January- 16th.)
Mr. Lincoln and Compulsion.
(May Bth.)
Arraying the Nation.
BOOKS.
A Nation in Arms Earl Roberts? V.C., K*G, (Murray, 1907)*
. (Speeches and Addresses.)
Stray Notes on Military Training and Khaki Warfare.-— FM* Sir
Charles H, Brownlow, C,C.B.
'War and the World's Life.— -Col F. N . Maude , CM. (Smith, Elder,
1907).
The Nation and the Empire.— Viscount Milner (Constable & Co.,
1913).
The Army in 1906. — H. O. Arnold Forster (Murray, 1906}*
Ordeal by Battle.— F. S, Oliver , 1915.
L r " 3 1
