

THE
OLD THEOLOGY AND THE NEW.
A Sunday Evening Lecture
BY
CHARLES STRONG, D. D.
Minister of the Australian Church, Melbourne.
[PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.]
PRICE SIXPENCE.
(Proceeds in aid of the Publishing Fund.)
Melbourn:
HAASE & STEVENSON, PRINTERS, 14 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCLXXXVIII.




THE
OLD THEOLOGY AND THE NEW.
H Sun&a? Evening lecture
BY
CHARLES STRONG, D. D.
Minister of the Australian Church, Melbourne.
[published by request.]
PRICE SIXPENCE.
[Proceeds in aid of the Publishing Fund.)
ffteltaurae:
Haase & Stevenson, Printers, 14 Flinders Lane West,
mdccclxxxviii.




THE OLD THEOLOGY AND THE NEW.
A SUNDAY EVENING LECTURE BY CHARLES STRONG, D.D.
“ When I teas a child, I spake as a child, I felt as a child, I thought
as a child: now that I am become a man . I have put away childish
things .” “ For now ive see in a mirror darkly." — St Paul
The subject of this evening’s short lecture, my friends,
may be entitled “The Old Theology and the New.
We sometimes hear sneers at the new theology. It is
called bad names. “ Old Lights” shake their heads over
it, and pass by on the other side. Students of divinity
are warned against it, and the shepherds bid their sub-
missive flocks shut the fold doors against it, as against
a biting wind from a sea of icebergs. It is a vain
philosophy and wisdom of men, a rationalistic Rachel
who steals the gods of her father and brothers, a denier
of the most sacred beliefs, a blasphemer of holy names,
and books, and places.
We sometimes hear also denunciation of the old
theology. It is declared to be a system of lies, the con-
centrated essence of an ignorant and barbarous age, a
Nazareth out of which no good thing can come, but only
priests, and bigots, and enemies of human progress.
Between the opposing battle-hosts of the old and the
new stand some who endeavour to perform the feat of
facing two ways at the same time —a feat possible only


to those fearfully and wonderfully formed double-headed
gods of ancient mythology. Like the angel in the
Apocalypse, they have one foot on the earth and the
other on the sea. To-day they would be "liberal,” to-
morrow “conservative.” There they would surrender
all, but here they would put up a barricade, or dig a
wide, deep trench over which there is no bridge. They
are willing that the first and second chapters of Genesis
should be given up to the new theology, but jealously
guard the first and second chapters of Luke. They are
loud in their scorn of bigotry, and in their approval of
a broad, liberal clergyman—none of your stuck-up,
narrow-faced pietists or old-world dogmatists—but when
broad, liberal principles demand to be carried out, and
acted on at|a sacrifice of some snugly-esconced prejudice,
some comfort, some respectability, or some money, then,
like the invited guests in the parable, “they all with one
consent begin to make excuse.” Good, earnest souls
many of these middlemen; some of them also, perhaps,
but timeservers and dilettanti.
There is an old theology and there is a new. About
this fact there can be no doubt. People’s ideas about
the earth (geology) have changed, so also have their
ideas about the stars (astronomy), about animals
(zoology), about language (philology), and about other
things of which the time would fail to tell. On such
subjects there has been a perfect revolution, though it
has come so gradually that we scarce realize what a
revolution it is. It is not, then, to be wondered at that
a similar change should have come over ideas about


God, and the relation of the human to the Divine, which
form the subject-matter of theology.
The difficulty, and at the same time the important
matter, is to get at the root of the difference between
the old and the new religious conceptions of God and
Man. If you want to distinguish between a human
being and a mere animal, you will not be content to say
that the one has so many convolutions of the brain more
than the other, or that the one walks on two legs and
the other on four. But this is the sort of method which
some adopt in distinguishing between old and new
theology. “What is a broad and liberal theologian?”
you ask. Perhaps it is replied, "Oh, one who doesn’t
send everybody to hell, one who doesn’t preach ‘ the
blood,’ or one who can shake hands with Jews, Turks,
infidels, and sit at meat with ecclesiastical and theological
publicans and sinners.” “And what,” you ask, “is
one of the old school?” “Oh, one who believes in
eternal punishment, accepts everything in the creeds,
and believes in this and that absurdity.” Answers of
this kind do not go to the root of the matter. They
provide you with no rational principle by which you
may distinguish between the new and the old. You
cannot thus arrive at an understanding of the real
difference between them any more than you could at the
real difference between the mind of an Oriental and that
of an American, by saying that the one wore sandals, and
the other shoes.
Let us try to-night to point out some of the dis-
tinctive marks by which the old and the new theology


are distinguished from each other. The subject is one
which necessarily can only be dealt with in outline, in a
brief discourse, but if the distinction is clearly discerned,
even in outline, thoughtful people, (and it is to them we
address ourselves), can fill in the details for themselves 1
In the first place, let us try to understand the lines on
which the Old Theology proceeds.
The God of the old theology is a Being outside of the
universe. His relation to the world is that of a watch-
maker to a watch, to use the well-known illustration.
He sets the watch of creation agoing, and may, at any
time, interpose and check the spring, or shift the hands.
For many centuries He did so, and the chief knowledge
which men have of Him may be said to have been
gained from His interference with the ordinary course of
things, by wonderful apparitions, strange voices, dreams,
storms, utterances of His special servants, and other extra-
ordinary, inexplicable phenomena. The relation, further-
more, of this Being outside of the universe to Man is
that, firstly, of a Maker, and secondly, of a Ruler. He
is the Almighty Creator who makes one vessel to honour,
another to dishonour, and to whom no man durst say,
“What makest Thou?” for He does according to His
will “in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth.” He is just, so far as infallibly punishing
those who disobey His commands, and rewarding those
who keep them. His laws He has taught, partly
through what is called “Nature,” the natural instincts of
the human heart, and partly through what is called
‘‘revelation,” that is to say, through visions, apparitions,


possession, and non-natural communications between
heaven and earth, granted to favoured individuals and a
favoured nation. The God of the old theology is a
“covenant” or contract God, first, of the chosen Hebrew
nation, and then of all who believe in Jesus as the
Messiah, and accept the faith and discipline of the true
Church. That which, by His nature, He must first seek
is His own glory and the honour of His law; and this
honour and glory can only be secured by strict obedience
to the very letter, by adequate punishment of every
offender against one jot or tittle, or by an equivalent of
substitutionary suffering, should the law be broken.
Being an infinite Ruler, some theologians have added
the minutest transgression, the loss of one’s temper, or
the stealing of a pin, must deserve an infinite punishment,
or an infinite substitute to bear, in a short time, what it
would otherwise exhaust eternity to bear. But God is
merciful. He might, as Maker and Ruler, consign the
world to eternal torment, with perfect justice. Nay, the
smoke of this torment of damned men, and women, and
babes, would be as incense to His “glorious justice.”
But God does not leave Man to perish. He, “out of
His mere good pleasure,” yet in love, mysteriously and
unaccountably “elects some to everlasting life,” and
sending forth out of His bosom the Son of His love,
provides an infinite Substitute to bear with the might of
Godhead, in a few brief hours, the unutterable anguish
of eternity. Here the old theology has a rift in the
cloud through which struggle the beauty and power of
the Divine Being as Love. That bright beam may yet


fill the leaden sky with light. God’s elect are “adopted”
as sons, and finally are transported into bliss unending.
So much for the idea of the Divine Being according to
the old theology. He is outside the world as Maker and
as Ruler, and the title of ‘ Righteous, though Merciful
Judge,’ is that which best befits Him in His relation to
Man.
From what has been said it is pretty plain in what re-
lation Man stands to God. Created perfect at first, he
falls. The old family idea (so familiar in ancient times,
when the father of the tribe, or house, was regarded as
the all-important personage), is logically carried out.
With the father of the human race the whole race falls.
All men, accordingly, even the newborn babe, are in-
evitably “children of wrath.” The natural attitude,
therefore, of every soul to God is that of a criminal at
the bar, or rather that of the convict locked up in the
condemned cell, and only waiting to be cast into tor-
ments “with the devil and his angels.”
Starting from such conceptions of God and Man, the
great end of religion is necessarily conceived of as de-
liverance from the avenging justice of God through the
divinely appointed means. To save one’s soul, meaning
by this to get out of prison and reach paradise, becomes
the absorbing aim of the pious. Religion is not so
much in itself an end, as an instrument. It is not so
much a “spirit of life,” as a way of escape from an
awful fate. The covenant, contract-idea runs through
all.
As to the means of deliverance, these, it is said, are


made known in the Bible, or in the Church. The Bible
is an infallible book, not merely inspired, but infallible.
It has been supernaturally written, and supernaturally
preserved, in order to show how Man is to escape the
wrath of God and be saved from hell, his natural heri-
tage. Or, as others say, the Church, the priesthood, is
the supernaturally instituted guardian of the truth
listen to her, observe her God-appointed rites, and sub-
missively follow her guidance from hell to heaven.
These are the sort of bare bones of the old theology.
I do not think I am misrepresenting it. Perhaps, in-
deed, the colouring might, with perfect truthfulness, be
deepened, and I could read you passages from, for in-
stance, Augustine, Calvin, or the Larger Catechism, which
would make you either shudder or laugh. At the same
time I would beg you to remember with what warm flesh
and blood these bare bones were often covered. Through
what may appear to us crude mythology, and a hard, dry
system, the Idea of Divine goodness and love managed to
struggle into men’s souls, and truth was not without its
witness. Through the bars of ruthless logic God’s light
shines, and the very strength of the old theology lies in
the truth and love which are embedded in it, and with
which it is thought to be inseparably associated.' 1 God
cares for man, and God is seeking and saving “the lost,”
and God’s love has manifested itself in a selfsacrificing
human life of suffering and shame these are thoughts
which touch men’s hearts, and make them beat, even
* The general reader may find a book entitled 11 Many Voices
(Kegan, Paul, Trench & Co.) a help to the recognition of this.


through double plies of Calvinism, Lutheranism, Cathol-
icism, or Anglicanism. If even in Greek, Roman, and
Egyptian religions, with all their strange mythologies and
rites, we gladly recognise the rays of a Divine light, and
hope, and trust, streaming into many a heart, shall we
not recognise the sunlight also glittering through the
casement of the old Christian theology ?
11. But let us turn now, in the second place, to the
New Theology.
i. In the first place the New Theology does not start
from the idea of God as a mighty Maker and Ruler, out-
side of the world and Man, but from the idea of Him as
an immanent Spirit, infinitely transcending Man’sthought
indeed, yet really present in, and related to the universe,
with Man as His “Shekinah,” His chief temple, His
child. He is the Soul of souls, so to speak. The world
is His robe. The mind of Man is a spark of His divine
nature. He is a Being whose existence cannot be
proved, because He is the ground of all existence, and in
Him we live and move, and have our being. Indeed,
He may be said to be the only Reality, and the world to
be but a phantom. All history is the revelation of
Him. He dwells in no one place, for all space is
full of Him. His “Word” is confined within no one
book, for it is a Word wide as every utterance of
truth and goodness, and every whisper of wisdom in
the soul. He needs no special wonders to reveal
Him, but only the thoughtful mind and the pure heart
to see Him. He is man’s Father in reality, not
merely by “adoption.” To know Him is life. To love


and serve Him is to fulfil our highest nature, and to be
men alike in thought and feeling. He is the Parent of
our reason, and of our love. He lives in Man, and Man
lives in Him. Humanity and God are not, indeed, iden-
tical, but they are one.
Such an idea of God is not new, but it has been
quickened and enlarged by our modern studies, by
deeper thought, more enlightened views of the Bible, and
the free publication of the ideas of spiritually-minded
persons inside, and outside of the churches. And it is
this idea, in one form or another, working in the minds
of modern philosophers and poets —such as Spinoza,
Hegel, Goethe, Carlyle, Tennyson, Browning, Emerson,
Shelley—which has been gradually supplanting the
old idea of the covenant or contract-God —the great
Mechanician, the national God of the Old Testament, the
God of one book, one Church, one age, one creed the
God who too often has been degraded to the level of
what Matthew Arnold calls a great “non-natural man,”
the God of subtle scholastics, the whole truth regarding
whose nature was once supposed to be bottled up in a
few dogmas affirmed by the votes of a majority of
ecclesiastics assembled in early Councils. The old
theology is too small to contain such an Universal God.
Its logic cannot compass Him ; its forms, and sacred
books, and literature of one small branch of the human
family, cannot express Him. One Mount Sinai is not
enough for Him. One family of prophets, however noble,
cannot utter all His wisdom. That He should be
sought in the story merely of past wonders wrought in


a remote age, and, from the nature of the case, often
quite unverifiable—in the slaughter of rude Semitic
tribes, the peopling of Palestine, or the Hebrew poem
of the Creation and the Fall, becomes impossible as the
spirit of Man expands and claims kinship with Him.
2. Another feature of the new theology is its idea of
Law. The analogy which the old theologians went upon
when they spoke of God’s law, and of God as lawgiver,
was that of human courts of justice, or the tribunal of
an Eastern potentate. That which the words suggest
in the new, is the orderly course of nature, seed time and
harvest, the sower and the reaper. It does not seek for
God in unaccountable wonders, such as the burning
bush, nor in specially prepared thunderstorms, arrested
suns, or angels of pestilence hanging over a city whose
king is untrue to the “covenant,” but rather in the
steady working of great laws whether in the physical,
mental, or moral world. It does not most certainly dis-
card the idea of Judgment. On the contrary, it affirms
Judgment as one of the great facts of history. “The
world’s history is the world’s judgment.” But it does
not take the ancient family or tribal law of the East, or of
the West, as the reflection of eternal right, the criminal
or county-court as the model of the Divine, or the ven-
geance of an offended man, as the type of God’s justice.
It does not deny original sin, or vicarious suffering. On
the contrary, it affirms the doctrine of the solidarity of
the human race, and maintains that literally, and as a
matter of fact, the world is one, and men members one
of another. It affirms that no man sins to himself alone,


or suffers to himself alone. But it cannot accept the
childish, and not very moral idea of a God who makes
a contract with his creature knowing it will be broken,
and on the old principle of tribal law holds every one of
that creature’s children responsible and liable for what
their father does, or who literally pours out His wrath on
an innocent Substitute.
3. Once more, the new theology is moulded by the
idea of Development. The world according to it was
created by a Divine Being, but creation was a process,
and the world did not spring up full-blown. Through un-
told ages, perhaps from formless vapour, things which
now appear as earth and sky were step by step evolved
into this marvellous, rational Cosmos, in whose order and
beauty the mind of man revels as in its native air. The
new theology carries the idea of development into every-
thing. According to it the Idea of God is slowly de-
veloped, and it is folly to look for the highest form of
belief in a primitive and comparatively barbarous age.
Mythology-stages have to be passed through by human
minds, even by the most earnest, on their way to the
knowledge of the Father. All doctrines and dogmas
have grown, and their rise and progress can be clearly
traced. The creeds are but the condensed history of the
growth of human thought in its search and progress to-
wards God. The Bible itself is such a history. It con-
tains the literature of a people pre-eminently disting-
uished by their zeal for God, and the story of the gradual
unveiling of God in the minds and hearts of that people,
until the vision of Him in Jesus, and the Christian


Spirit, burst in dawnlike splendour on the world. The
Church is, or may be, a Divine institution, but it has
grown as a tree grows, as the British Constitution has
grown. No supernaturally revealed model of it was
handed down originally. It grew out of the “upper
chamber” in Jerusalem, assimilating and transmuting
the soil and atmosphere of Judaism and Paganism in
which it sprung up. Its ministers are “anointed” and
“ordained” of God, according as they are men full of
the Holy Spirit of God, and inspired with the enthusiasm
of Jesus to open the eyes of the blind, unstop the deaf
ears, set at liberty them that are bound, and preach
good tidings to the poor.
4. Lastly, brethren, the new theology puts Love in the
centre of its system—love of the true and good, love of
God and love of Man. The old theology speaks of love,
but not as “creation’s final law.” The justice of an in-
exorable Ruler and Judge, rather, is its starting point.
It speaks of faith, but this faith is merely “ as the con-
dition to interest sinners in Christ.” Faith is the hand
which takes the gift of a purchased pardon, and an un-
deserved heaven of eternal felicity. The new theology
makes faith, or filial trust, the spiritual germ of a new
Divine life, the first breath of God’s springtime in the
soul waking out of the winter of selfishness and sense,
the promise of the summer and harvest of a Christ-like
character, whose ripest fruit is love—free, trustful,
hopeful, unselfish love. Unite yourself, cries the old
theology, with the Fulfiller of the broken law, and so
be just with God, the Judge and King. Unite your


self by spiritual trust with love as the fulfilling of
God’s truest law and your own truest nature, and
so be reconciled, be one with Him whose name is
Love, apart from whom is neither peace nor life for Man.
God loves you, cries the old, and gave His Son to save
you from eternal torments of body and soul, which else
He had inflicted on you, and which, on all not mysteri-
ously favoured like you, the elect, he is going by and by
to inflict. God favours none, cries the new. He cares
for all. He created the world out of His love, and
through the baffling, tangled web of human life He—
the Spirit of wisdom and beauty, of thought and order—
is working out something better for Man than Man can
yet understand. Trust Him, wait patiently for Him,
and never despair. He has created no one to be
ultimately damned, otherwise He were not God, and
otherwise all Christ-like souls would weep and pine,
though doomed to live in Paradise. “He prayeth best
who loveth best.” “He that loveth another hath ful-
filled the law.” “He that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in
God.” “ Now abideth faith, hope, love, but the greatest
of these is love.” To the old theology, whose founda-
tion is in the letter, and in a supposed infallible book
written long ages ago, love is a grace which comes
after “salvation.” To the new, to love as Jesus loved
the poor, the sinful, the bad, is itself salvation, and to
be not by “adoption” merely, but of necessity a child of
the Father who “maketh His sun to shine on the evil
and the good, and who sendeth rain on the just and on
the unjust.” The old is ever seeking for a text, and


turns to the book for a prescription. The new seeks to
interpret duty in the light of the Spirit of religion,
troubling itself little about Hebrew roots and Greek
particles, and the babblings of an ecclesiastical
“science, falsely so-called,” which “some professing,”
it maintains, “have erred concerning the faith.”
Such, brethren, are some of the chief points of
distinction between the old theology and the new.
There are bridges between them, no doubt. Spiritual-
mindedness and love have subsisted even under the
shadow of a theology which is neither spiritual nor
loving. But the distinction is very real, for it is that
between a religion grounded in the very nature of Man,
inseparable from the progress of Man as a rational and
spiritual being —a religion of Spirit embracing all men
and all things, filling the universe with the warm sun-
shine of eternal hope and love, and unfailing trust that
God is good, and that through all history He is working
to a rational and glorious end—and a religion grounded
on texts of Scripture whose very dates and writers’
names have been lost in the mists of time, on facts
which often cannot be verified, and on often childish
conceptions of the workings of the Eternal, which the
very knowledge vouchsafed by God to those of later
times, has rendered antiquated and impossible. It is
the distinction between a religion which says, God can
do as he likes, and one which says, The law of righteous-
ness and love which is revealed in Jesus, is also the law
of God’s own nature, and he who hath seen the Son of
Man hath seen the Father. It is the distinction


between a religion which says, Jesus suffered vicariously
that I might not suffer, and one which says, Jesus
suffered vicariously as love and truth always must, and
in suffering revealed the highest law of human life.
From all this you will see that while there are, happily,
meeting points between old and new, the difference
between them is one of spirit. The new theology is really a
new spirit—new in so far as it is the child of the modern
idea of law and development—old in so far as it is the
child of the most spiritual thinkers of all time, and the
child of the free, trustful, spiritual Jesus, whose bitterest
opponent was the religion of legalism, nationalism, and
the written word.
I do not know how further to make clear to you in
general outline, without going into detail, the distinction
and difference between the old and new theology, except
it be by asking you to read calmly a few chapters of
Calvin’s Institutes, the Westminster Assembly’s Larger
Catechism, Doddridge’s Rise and Progress, and Flavel’s
Almost Christian (favourite books in their day), one or two
books of Milton, Bunyan, and any orthodox volume of
sermons of 50 years ago; and then to read Tennyson’s “In
Memoriam,” Kingsley’s, or Martineau’s Sermons, Pro-
fessor Momerie’s Works, Whittier’s Poems, Walter
Smith’s Among the Broken Gods, Scotch Sermons for 1880,
or Dr. Service’s Sermons; Beecher’s Sermons on Evolution,
Fiske’s volume on the Idea of God, or Principal Caird’s
Spinoza. Or read a few pages of Scott’s or Henry’s
famous commentaries (once household words), and then
such modern books as Godet’s Biblical Studies , Kuenen


and Pfleiderer’s Hibbert Lectures, Dean Stanley’s
Writings or Haweis’ 11 Story of the Four.” These are
typical books.* Reading and understanding such, you
will understand that the difference between new and
old is not superficial merely, but real, not one of a detail
here and there, but of the whole spirit. You will
understand what the revolution and evolution are which
are going on within and without the Church,! and you
will be the better able to judge which is most of God,
and which is most in harmony with the mind of
Christ—the Old or the New. You and I, as I
understand it, have given our vote for the new theology.
Let us try to show that the new is not in theory only,
but in practice, that the new theology demands a more
spiritual mind, a deeper and a wider love, a fuller,
richer, social morality, and that what we aim at is to
make “a new heavens and a new earth” —a “new man
serving God, “not in the oldness of the letter,” but in
newness of spirit, and making spirit and love, not letter
and law, the centre of our sphere. Let us try to show
that the new theology does not mean licence or indiffer-
ence, but the liberty of the Spirit of Truth, the liberty of
that Love which is servant of all. And let not the new
theology separate us in charity from our brethren, who
still honestly cling to the crumbling fabric of the old.
* I mention such popular books because they are within the reach of
all. For a really scientific study of the question a wider and deeper
reading of History, Theology, and Criticism, would be necessary.
f Those who are interested in the study of Theology, will find much
information in a book entitled “ Contemporary Evolution of Religious
Thought" (Williams and Norgate) by Count Goblet d’Aviella.








