





Cbe Hfearsben Cross.
On Christmas Day, 1814, was held the first Christian
service in New Zealand, when the Rev. Samuel
Marsden preached to the Maoris at Oihi, in the Bay of
Islands. The spot is now marked by a tall stone cross,
which was unveiled on March 12, 1907, by His Excel-
lency the Governor, Cord Plunket, in the presence of
a large number of Maoris and Europeans.
At 3 p.m. the Governor was met on landing by the
Bishop of the Diocese (the Right Rev. M. R. Neligan,
D.D.) and the Yen. Philip Walsh, Archdeacon of
Waimate, and escorted to the site of the Cross, when
the following order was observed:—
Hymn :
‘When Shepherds Watched their Flocks by Night.”
Speech
By Hare Te Heihei, on behalf of the Maori people.
Address by Archdeacon Walsh.
Hymn :
“All People that on Earth do Dwell.”


Prayers by the Bishop
LET US PRAY.
Loed, have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Loed, have mercy upon us.
OUR Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy Name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses,
As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.
THE DEDICATION COLLECT.
OLORD Jesus Cheist. Eternal Word, Who for us men and for
our salvation came down from heaven, and wast content to be
found in fashion as a man. Who by Thy Cross and Passion hast
redeemed the world ; We bless Thy holy Name, and worship Thee,
revealed unto man in the mystery of the Holy Incarnation ; Accept,
we beseech Thee, our work in erecting this Cross at the place where
the message of Thy Love was first delivered in this land ; Grant
that we and all those who see this the sign of Thy humiliation and
of our redemption may be the more moved to pray unto Thee for
daily forgiveness of sin ; increasingly to put our whole trust and
confidence in Thee ; and constantly to praise and glorify Thee Who
with the Father and the Holy Ghost liveth and relgneth one God,
world without end. Amen.
THE MEMORIAL COLLECT.
(Adapted from the Collect in the Barum Breviary for 8. Hugh,
Bishop Lincoln, 1186 — 1200.)
OGOD, who did’st singularly adorn Thy servant Samuel Marsden
with noble acts and shining signs of grace ; Grant that his
holy pattern may enkindle us, and his brave and virtuous deeds
enlighten us; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
THE COLLECT FOR OUR COUNTRY.
OLORD, our Saviour, Who hast warned us that Thou wilt require
much of those to whom much is given ; Grant that we whose
lot Thou hast cast in so goodly a heritage may strive together the
more abundantly by prayer, by almsgiving, and by every other
appointed means, to extend to others what we so richly enjoy , and,
as we have entered into the labours of other men, so to laboui that
in their turn other men may enter into ours_, to the fulfilling ot
Thy holy will and our own everlasting salvation. Amen.
THE ACT OF UNVEILING.
Speech by the Governor.
Speech
By Mr. J. B. Clarke, on behalf of the Mission families.
Speech by the Bishop.


Hymn :
“O God, Our Help in Ages Past.”
The; Blessing.
“God Save: the: King.”
The hymn, “When Shepherds,” etc., recalls Mr. Marsden’s text,
“ Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy,” and the Old Hundredth
was sung at the memorable service.
Zb e Coming of flDarsbcm
The Rev. Samuel Marsden was appointed chaplain
to the penal settlement of New South Wales in 1794.
He took the greatest interest in the Maoris, many of
whom used to ship as sailors on vessels visiting New
Zealand waters, and generally found their way to Port
Jackson (now Sydney), at that time the principal port
in Australasia. They found in him a trusted friend
and adviser, and were always made welcome at his
house in Parramatta.
While on a visit to England in 1808, Mr. Marsden
urged the Church Missionary Society to undertake a
mission to New Zealand, and they resolved to send out
three earnest, intelligent men, who were to proclaim
the truths of Christianity and at the same time to
teach the useful arts of civilization. Only two were
available at the moment —Messrs. John King and
William Hall—both laymen; and with these Mr.
Marsden embarked for Port Jackson in the Ann, a
convict ship. Mr. Thos. Kendall, a schoolmaster,
followed four years later. He was afterwards ad-
mitted to Holy Orders.
On board the ship, Mr. Marsden found a young
Maori chief named Ruatara, who had embarked on a
voyage of adventure, and had already spent several
years away from his native land. ’He had made his


way to London in the hope of seeing the King—
George lll.—and all the wonders of the great city.
His captain, however, not only declined to help him
to gratify his curiosity, but actually refused to pay
him his wages; and, disappointed, defrauded and
destitute, he fell sick nigh unto death. The utmost
the captain would do was to transfer him to the Ann,
as she was about to sail for Port Jackson, whence he
might hope to go on to his home.
When Mr. Marsden found him, he was sitting
wrapped in his blanket, coughing and spitting blood.
His kindness rescued him from the brink of the grave,
and attracted a grateful friend and a willing disciple.
They talked over Mr. Marsden’s plans for establishing
a Mission, and Ruatara assured him of a welcome and
protection if ever he should find means to carry them
out.
Ruatara, after various attempts, eventually reached
New Zealand : but it was not for some time that Mr.
Marsden was able to follow him. On his arrival at
Port Jackson everything seemed favourable for an
early start, but the news of the massacre of the Boyd
at Whangaroa made it advisable to wait for some
years, and it was not until 1814 that the Governor of
New South Wales would consent to his undertaking
what was considered a most hazardous adventure, and
even then he was obliged to purchase a vessel —the
Active, a brig of no tons —on his own responsibility.
In her he sent Messrs. Kendall and Hall on a recon-
noitring expedition. They were most kindly received
by the Maoris, and Ruatara, with Hongi Korokoro,
and some other chiefs, accompanied them back to
Parramatta.
On November 19, in the same year, Mr. Marsden
set out on his long-deferred journey. There were in
all thirty-five souls on board the brig—Mr. Marsden,
the three missionaries, with their wives and children,


the crew of the vessel, two sawyers, and a blacksmith,
-several Maoris and Tahitians—with a varied assort-
ment of live stock.
The Active reached the Bay of Islands on December
22, and anchored off Rangihoua, a strong pa where
Ruatara had his home. The next two days were
occupied in preparations for landing and getting ready
a place for holding public worship.
£bc jftret Christmas
The first Sunday was Christmas Day, and the first
sight that greeted Mr. Marsden’s eyes as he went on
deck in the morning was the British flag flying over
the pa. On going ashore he found that Ruatara had
rigged up a church in a sort of rude imitation of what
he had seen at Parramatta. About half an acre was
enclosed with a fence, and in the centre a piece of a
canoe was fixed end up in the ground, with a little
desk in front, to represent a pulpit. Some old canoes
turned upside down, and covered with native mats,
were arranged as seats for the Europeans, the Maoris
being satisfied with a seat on the ground. Here, amid
these strange surroundings, was held the first Chris-
tian service in New Zealand.
Mr. Marsden’s own account of the wonderful scene
is as follows :—“When we landed we found Korokoro,
Ruatara, and Hongi, dressed in regimentals given them
by Governor Macquarie, with their men drawn up
ready to march into the enclosure to attend Divine
service. We entered, and were placed on the seats on
each side of the pulpit. Korokoro marched his men
in, and placed them on my right hand behind the
Europeans; Ruatara placed his on the left. The in-
habitants of the town, with the women and children,
and a number of other chiefs, formed a circle round
the whole. A very solemn silence prevailed. T rose


and began the service by singing the Old Hundredth
Psalm, and I felt my very soul melt within me when
I viewed my congregation, and considered the state
they were in. After reading the service I preached
from S. Luke ii. 10, ‘Behold, I bring you glad tidings
of great joy. - The natives told Ruatara that they could
not understand what I meant. He told them not to
mind now, for that they would understand it by-and'
bye, and that he would explain my meaning as far as he
could. When the service was over we returned on
board, much gratified, and with the strongest persua-
sion that the time was at hand when the glory of the
Lord would be revealed to these poor benighted
heathen, and that the labours of those who remained
on the island would be crowned and blessed with
success.”
The whole scene comes up irresistibly to anyone who
visits the place and is acquainted with its history.
There is no difficulty in identifying the spot. The “half
acre of ground” is the only level space in the neigh-
bourhood—a little shingle flat above the beach where
the party must have landed. To the left is the pa—
the “town” as they sometimes called it—with its
ditches and terraces still clear and distinct, though the
houses and palisading have, with its thousand inhabit-
ants, long since disappeared, while to the right is the
sloping ground afterwards occupied by the dwellings
and cultivations of the missionaries, the levelled sites
of the buildings being still plainly traceable. Local
tradition states that the spot occupied by the pulpit
was sheltered by a spreading pohutukawa tree, but
this beautiful landmark was unfortunately destroyed
by fire many years ago.
Mr. Marsden was not only the founder of the
Church of New Zealand: he was also the founder of
the nation. Before that memorable Christmas Day
the Europeans living in these islands were but a float-


ing population of beach-combers and pakeha-Maoris—
mostly runaway sailors from the whaleships and
escaped convicts and ticket-of-leave men from the
penal settlements. By establishing the little station at
Oihi, he took the first step in the real colonisation of
New Zealand; and it was largely due to the influence
of the missionaries, whom he supervised for over
twenty years, that the peaceful occupation of the
country was effected. He paid in all seven visits to
New Zealand. On the last occasion, in 1837, shortly
before his death, he had to be carried in a litter from
station to station.
flDovement for tbc lErcctton
of tbc Cro66.
It seemed only right that an event of such deep and
far-reaching importance as that first service should be
marked by some visible memorial. The idea origin-
ated with the late Rev. Dr. Kinder, sometime Warden
of S. John’s College, Auckland. But it was not until
some years after his death, when his widow offered a
sum of £lOO towards the erection of a Cross, that the
project began to take definite shape. Mrs. Kinder
requested the Yen. Archdeacon Walsh to take the
matter in hand, and, in response to an appeal made by
him to the Church-people of New Zealand, a sufficient
sum was received to enable him to erect a handsome
and substantial stone cross, which is placed, as near
as the conditions of the ground will permit, on the
actual spot occupied by Ruatara’s historic pulpit.
£be flDarsben Cross.
The Cross is of the Celtic pattern. The head, shaft
and die are of Melbourne bluestone, and the base and
sub-base of Auckland volcanic stone. It is 20 feet


8 inches in height, and its total weight is over 23 tons.
A smooth slab let into the front face of the die bears
the following inscription in Roman capitals:—
ON CHRISTMAS DAY, 1814,
THE FIRST CHRISTIAN SERVICE IN N.Z.
WAS HELD ON THIS SPOT
BY THE REV. SAMUEL MARSDEN.
On the base is the date of erection,
1907.
The Cross was designed by Archdeacon Walsh, and
the work carried out by Mr. J. Bouskill, monumental
mason, of Auckland, under the supervision of Messrs.
Goldsbro’ and Wade, architects. The cost, including
contingent expenses, amounted to about £220.


%ist of Subscribers*
Abbott, S. L.
A.B.C.
Allen, Thos.
Anon
Armstrong, M. H.
Ashwell, Mrs.
Atkin, Miss
Auckland, Bishop of
Beck, Rev. A. J.
Bedggood, Mrs. Jas.
Bindon, .7. W.
Bishoprick, Chas.
Boler, Norman
Boler, Rev. R. G.
Boyes, Rev. N. D.
Brett, Henry
Buckland, Rev. A. S.
Busby, William
Butler, Miss A.
Butler, Miss W. J.
Campbell, Mrs.
Campbell. Sir J. Imgan
Campbell, Mrs. Hugh
Campbell, Mrs. J. P.
Carpenter, J. H. M.
Chatterton, Rev. F. W.
Clarke, Balance Memorial
Fund
Clarke, E. de C.
Clarke, Miss H. E.
Clarke, Hopkins
Clarke, H. Tacy
Clarke, Mrs. Marsden
Clarke. Wm.
Clayton, Capt. M. T.
Glendon, Geo.
Cochrane, W. S.
Cock If.
Cole,’ Archdeacon
Collins, H.
Contes, Mrs. G.
Cubitt, Rev. L. L.
Davies, H.
Davis, Rev. J- King
Davis, Mrs. W.
Devenish, Miss
Devenish, Mrs.
Drummond, P.
Duncan, Russell
Du Rieu, Rev. W. M.
Dyer, R. C.
Eccles, Rev. Canon
B.R.
Evershed, Rev. T.
Parqubar, Capt. W.
Florance, R. Stone, S.M.
Flowerday, W. B.
Ford, Ernest
Foster, F.
Fowler, Rev. A.
Friend
Gilflllan, H.
Goffe, Mrs. W. E.
Govett, C. W.
Gower, Joseph
Hawkes, G. W.
Hawkins, Rev. H. A.
Hesketh, S.
Higgins, Mrs.
Higglnson, Miss J.
Higginson, Airs.
Hocken, Dr.
Holt, Percy
Hope, M.
Hunt, R. R.
K.B.A.
Kemp, Mrs. Jas.
Kenderdine, Mrs.
Kinder, Harry
Kinder, Miss F.
Kinderj Miss Nessie
Kinder, Mrs.
King, Miss Marie
King, W. J.
Kirkbride, Rev. M.
Kirkpatrick, Mrs.
Lindesay, Thos.
Ludbrook, H. S.
Ludbrook, W. W.
Mac Murray, Rev. Canon
Mair, Capt. Gilbert
Major, Rev. H. D. A.
Manoko
Maori Church Meeting,
11


Maoris, Kaikohe
Sissons, Mrs.
„ Kerikeri
Shaw, S. W.
„ Ohaeawai
Skinner, W. H.
„ Oromahoe
Smith, Mrs. S. Percy
„ Paihia
Smith, S. Percy
„ Te Kao
Speight, W. J.
„ Ti Mangonui
Spencer, W. C. C.
,, Waimate
Stewart, Mervyn
„ Wainui
Strothers, A. A. B. P.
Marsden, Bishop
%ist Of Subscribers— Continued.
Marsden, Bishop
Marsden, Rev. E. McL.
Tayler, Miss
Marshall, Rev. Jas. Thurburn, Miss A. M.
Mason, Rev. H. Trimnell, Dr.
Matthews, R. H., collected by Tutere
McWilliam, Rev. J. T.
Mitchelson, Hon. B. Waiapu, Bishop of
M.M.G. Walsh, Archdeacon
Moody, Harold Ward, Percy
Morrison, Mr. Wellington, Bishop of
Wells, Thos.
Okato Weston, Henry
Wheeler, W. .T.
Pickmere. Mrs. Williams, Hon. H.
Plunket, His Excellency Lord Williams, J. N.
Price, Mrs. Williams, K. S.
Williams, Miss A. M.
Reed Vernon H Williams, Norman
bSJ. uK"' wl'ISs' t's Hetb9tt
tr.n rU &s M M wlllriVcLLon
Kyan, .miss m. Wilson, C. J.
Wilson, Rev. H. H.
Sefton, Fred. Wilson. Rev. W. H.
Sefton, Mrs. W.
Seth-Smith, His Honor Judge Yates, B.
The Brett Printing Company, Auckland.




y ...
