

jHHBBP ;VI I {ajfr? I _"V\r I
M I , , j if It I b
- m I lHb ' a \v / [
\ \ IBS ui i **
i !/\w' -i, f , -ftr^-5
\ / /—r? a. J — * > «) -
|
B",r,i—; > . J
. , _ > i , ,
4FKV AMD
f V I ‘i \ \ Jf & . \ I 4
j f-
Bps Hunt
/ r/




(Hfte diftronicfeA iJaer^/faneL


/ ..'I.
T-**
v, *"- s -! :


i \ -
! . V; - - jJj • . i ,
T H E
CHRONICLES OF FAERYLAND
Fantastic Yales for Old and Young
FERGUS HUME
ILLUSTRATED BY M. DUNLOP
* I /
'■ r J
LONDON
GRIFFITH FARRAN & CO.
NEWBERY HOUSE, 39 CHARING CROSS ROAD


The Rights of Translation and of Reproduction are reserved.


those earnest students of faery eore
JOAN AND JACK BURNETT
THESE STORIES
DEDICATED
THEIR FRIEND
FERGUS HUME


Jk
1
•
'
•
•
»


<J\ of @fafe£.
O’er weary earth the twilight falls,
The sunset fades from western skies ;
Dark shadows dance upon the walls,
As from the hearth red flames arise.
This hour is full of strange surprise,
Of mystic stories sweet and grand ;
And children hear with shining eyes
These Chronicles of Faeryland.
So, children, gather round my knee,
And list to tales of old romance ;
With stories of the land and sea
I’ll make your eyes with pleasure dance.
And if the fays are kind, perchance
You’ll see in dreams the elfish band,
Whene’er you hear with wond’ring glance
These Chronicles of Faeryland.
The rugged caves where giants dwell ;
The dragons guarding gems and gold ;
Fair ladies who by magic spell
Are held enchained in castles old ;
The handsome princes, brave and bold,
Who cross the moat by drawbridge spanned
Such tales and more will now unfold
These Chronicles of Faeryland.
Envoi.
Then, children, leave your books and toys,
And come to this enchanted strand ;
I tell for happy girls and boys
These Chronicles of Faeryland.




%
CO NT E N T S.
♦
PAGE
»
H
25
47
• •
6 3
95
109
! 39
157
1 S3
• •
B
KING OBERON’S LIBRARY, .
The Red Elf,
Shadowland,
The Water-Witch, .
Moon Fancies,
The Rose-Princess, .
Sorrow-Singing,
The Golden Goblin,
THE ENCHANTED FOREST,


*


King Oberon's Library
was after dinner, 1 think, as 1 was seated m
my arm-chair before the fire, t.red out wit t
hard work, and therefore half asleep. All day
loner it had been snowing hard, and even now
at seven o’clock in the evening, it was still
coming down in great white flakes, making t c
earth look like a beautiful birthday cake. There
in the room, except the red glimmer of the fire that filtered
and flared on the wide hearth, roaring up the great ch.m
as if it was grumbling to itself at having to go ou
COld No 0 w Tam very fond of the firelight in a dark room at such
an hour, for it casts strange shadows, which put -ange fancies
i„.„ ,„ y head, and ! * * ,h»i
which pleases them very nmci. rallin£r
to are very wise, and believe in these strange fancies, ca
them faery tales, as indeed they are. Grown-up people do n
believe in faery tales, which is a great pity, because there are
many .ood and beautiful stories told of the faer.es which
make people who really understand them better vv.su •
But all children understand them because acu


that Faeryland exists, and, therefore, the strange fancies called
faery tales must necessarily be true.
Well, as I said before, I was seated half-asleep in my arm-
chair in the dark, watching the fire burning merrily on the
hearth, and sending out great shafts of red light to explore dark
corners, where goblins are fond of lurking. On the roof and
on the wall danced the firelight shadows in the most amusing
manner; but they are foolish folk these same shadows, belong-
ing to the strange Kingdom of Shadowland, which lies near
the realm of Faery ; yet not mingling with it in any way, for
in Faeryland, as wise children know, there are no shadows
at all.
I grew tired watching the shadow-dance, so, letting my chin
sink on my breast, I stared into the red hollows and burning
caverns made by the flames among the logs of wood. There
I saw all kinds of curious things,—turreted castles, which held
enchanted princesses, broad red plains, across which journeyed
brave knights in armour, to deliver those same princesses, and
huge rocky caverns wherein dwelt cruel magicians, who try to
stop the brave knights from reaching the enchanted castles. I
saw all these things in the fire, and you can see them also, if
you look steadily into the flames at night-time, because then
everything is under the spell of faery power. But you must
believe very hard indeed, as you look, for the faeries will not
let their country be seen by children who doubt that the
beautiful land exists.
There were some twigs on the logs still bearing a few
withered leaves, but, being out of reach of the fire, they were
not burnt up ; nevertheless the flames made them quiver with


king OBERON'S library.
, heir ho. breath, just as it the, were .dll beiag **» '>V
mol breeze of tbe lores!. . , i
Now, while I was looking at the shaking of tie witterec
leaves a cricket began to chirp, and, whether it was t c magu,
of the’ darkness, or the influence of the faeries, I do not know,
but I understood every word of the song the cricket sang. Oh
really a famous singer, that merry cricket, and the song it
sang went something after this fashion.
the crickets song.
You can only hear my voice ;
But vou cannot see me.
Oh, would not your heart rejoice,
If you could but be me !
Thro’ the sultry summer hours
My shrill voice was ringing ;
Now, when cold has killed the flowers
By the fire I’m singing.
You don’t understand my song,
Tho’ so bright and airy ;
For to mortals you belong,
You arc not a faery.
Living now the earth upon,
Oft my life’s imperilled ;
But at court of Oberon,
I’m the faeries’ herald.
If you caught me you would say,
“ in the fire stick it ;
In the house it shall not stay,
Noisy, noisy cricket.”
Therefore by the Faery King,
I to hide am bidden,
And you only hear me sing
When I’m closely hidden


b irst of all, it sounded as if only one cricket was singing,
then a second seemed to join in, afterwards a third and fourth,
until the whole forest appeared to be full of crickets.
Forest?—yes!—l was now in an old, old forest, for, as I
listened to the cricket’s song, the twigs on the logs became
fresh and green, then seemed to grow larger and larger, until
they hid the red light of the fire, and branched out with great
leafy boughs into the room. I looked up in surprise, and saw
the green branches, high above my head, waving in the soft
wind, and I could hear the singing of unseen birds sound
through the chirping of the crickets. Under my feet, instead of
a carpet, there was now fresh green turf covered with daisies,
and my arm-chair was a chair no longer, but the mossy trunk
of a fallen tree. The red light glimmered behind the leaves, as
though the fire was still there, but I knew in some strange way
that it was not the fire, but the crimson glare of the sunset. A
great wave of phantasy seemed to roll through the forest, and I
started to my feet, as the crickets finished singing, with a
curious sense of wonderful knowledge and vague longings.
“ Dear me ! ” I said to myself; “ this must be Faeryland.”
Yes, it is Faeryland, piped a shrill voice, which seemed to
come from the ground. “ This is the Forest of Enchantment.”
I looked down without astonishment, for in Faeryland no
one is astonished at the strange things which take place, and
saw an old, old little man, with a long white beard, sitting astride
the stem of a flower, which kept swaying up and down like a
rocking-horse. He was dressed in bright green, with the
inverted purple cup of a Canterbury bell on his head, and if he
had not spoken I would not have known he was there, so much


did his clothes and cap resemble the surrounding gitxn grass
and coloured flowers. n ,
« Goblin ? ” I asked quickly ; for, you see, he looked so old and
ugly that I thought he must be one of the undergroun aeries.
• I’m not a goblin,” he replied in an angry, shrill voice like
the wind whistling through a keyhole. “It is very rude of you
to call me a goblin-a nasty thing who lives under the cart , ant
only cares for gold and silver. I’m a faery-a very celebrated
taer - Butyou wear a beard.” I said doubtfully; “ faeries don’t
wear beards. . . . i
“Not all faeries,” he answered, with dignity, jumping o\\
from his swaying flower stem ; “ but 1 do, because
librarian of King Oberon. ,
“ Dear me ! I did not know he had a library. Do let
it | »
“ You see it now,” said the librarian, waving his hand ;
“look at all the books.” . ,
I looked round, but saw nothing except a circle of trees,
whose great boughs, meeting overhead, made a kind of lea >
roof, through which could be seen the faint, rosy flush of the
sunset sky. The ground, as I said before, was covered with
daisy-sprinkled turf and there was a still pool of shining water
in the centre, upon the bosom of which floated large white hhes
“ I must say I don't see anything except leaves, I said, alter
a pause.
“ Well —those are the books.”
“ Oh, are they! Well, 1 know books have leaves, but I
didn’t know leaves were books.”


The faery looked puzzled.
“ You must have some faery blood in you,” he said at
length, “or you would never have found your way into this
forest; but you don’t seem to have enough of the elfin nature
to see all the wonders of Faeryland.”
“Oh, do let me see the wonders of Faeryland!” I asked
eagerly; “ now that lam here, I want to see everything.”
“No doubt you do,” retorted the faery, with a provoking
smile ; “ but I don’t know if the King will let you —however, I’ll
ask him when he wakes.”
“Is he asleep?” I said in astonishment; “why, it’s
day-time.”
“ It’s day-time with you, not with us,” answered the
librarian; “ the night is the day of the faeries—and see, there’s
the sun rising.”
Looking up through the fretwork of boughs and leaves, I
saw the great silver shield of the moon trembling in the dark
blue sky, from whence all the sunset colours had died away.
“ But that’s the moon,” I cried, laughing.
“ The moon is our sun, stupid,” he said tartly. “ I think
the King will be awake now, so I’ll ask him if you can see the
books.”
He vanished, —I don’t know how ; for, though I did not
take my eyes off him, he seemed to fade away, and in his place
I saw the green leaves and slender stem of a flower, with the
Canterbury bell nodding on the top.
The only thing I could do was to wait, so I sat down again
on the fallen tree, and amused myself with looking round to see
what kind of creatures lived in Faeryland.


The night was very still, —no sound of cricket or bird, not
even the whisper of the wind, or the splash of water, —all was
silent, and the moon, looking down through the leaves, flooded
the glade with a cold, pale light, turning the still waters of the
pool to a silver mirror, upon which slept the great white lilies.
Suddenly, a bat, whirring through the glade, disappeared in
the soft dusk of the trees, then I heard the distant “ Tu whit,
tu whoo ” of an owl, which seemed to break the spell of the
night, and awaken the sleeping faeries ; for all at once, on every
side, I heard a confused murmur, the glow-worms lighted their
glimmering lamps on the soft mossy banks, and brilliant fire-
flies flashed like sparkling stars through the perfumed air.
Then a nightingale began to sing ; I could not see the bird,
but only heard the lovely music gushing from amid the dim
gloom of the leaves, filling the whole forest with exquisite
strains. I understood the nightingale’s song just as well as I
did that of the cricket, but what it sang was much more
beautiful.
THE NIGHTINGALE’S SONG.
The Day has furled
Her banners red,
And all the world
Lies cold and dead ;
All light and gladness fled.
Asleep ! —asleep,
In slumber deep,
Are maid and boy;
And grief and joy,
And pleasures—pains
Are bound —fast bound in slumber’s chains.


Ah, slumbers keep
The maid who sighs,
The boy who cries,
The bee that flies,
In charmed sleep.
See how the moon shines in the sky
Her light so pale,
O'er hill and dale ;
O’er dale and hill,
So calm and still,
In splendour flinging;
And Mother Earth,
At her bright birth,
Hears me the night-bird singing.
Tis I !
Who in the darkness cry ;
The nightingale who sings, who sings on high.
I call the elves
To show themselves ;
They creep from tree, from grass, from flower ;
In forest-bower
At midnight hour,
They dance—they dance,
All night so bright—so light;
While I the woods with song entrance.
Singing—Singing,
My voice is ringing
Thro’ the still leaves,
Till all the dark night heaves
With pain—with pain
Again—oh, sing again ;
Bring joy—bring tears,
Till o’er the lawn
The red, red dawn
Appears—appears—appears.


While the nightingale was thus singing in such a capricious
manner, paying no attention to metre or rhyme, the whole glade
changed, but I was so entranced with the bird music, that I did
not notice the transformation until I found myself m a splendid
hall with a lofty ceiling, seated on a couch of green velvet. The
trees around were now tall slender pillars of white marble, and
between them hung long curtains of emerald velvet. The pool
was still in the centre, with its broad white water-lilies asleep
on its breast, but it was now encircled by a nm of white marble,
and reflected, not the blue sky, but an azure ceiling, upon which
fantastic patterns in gold reminded me somewhat of the intricate
traceries of the trees. High up in the oval ceiling, in place of
the moon, there hung a large opaque globe, from whence
a soft, cool light radiated through the apartment.
As I was looking at all these beautiful things, I heard a
soft laugh, and, on turning round, saw a man of my own
height, dressed in robes of pale green, with a sweeping white
beard, a purple cap on his head, and a long slender staff in his
hands.
“ You don’t know me ?” he said in a musical voice. M)
name is Phancie, and I am the librarian of the King.”
“ Were you the faery ?” I asked, looking at him.
“I am always a faery,” he replied, ‘‘You saw me
as I generally appear to mortals ; but, as the King has given )on
permission to learn some of the secrets of Faeryland, I now
appear to you in my real form.”
“So this is the King’s library?” I said, looking round;
“but how did I come here? —or rather, how did the glade
change to the library ?


.. . 1 h f, g ' ade has not chan S ed at all,” said Phancie quietly;
it is still around you, but your eyes have been unsealed, and
you now see beneath the surface.”
“ I i d " n ’ t understand,” I observed, feeling perplexed,
t is difficult,” assented Phancie gravely, “but I can show
you what I mean by an illustration. When you see a grub it
only looks to your eyes an ugly brown thing ; but my eyes can
•see below the outside skin, to where a beautiful butterfly is lyin-
with folded wings of red and gold. The glade you saw was. so
, SP ! ak> f" ° f the libra T- Now, your sight has been
made keen by the command of the King. You see this splendid
loom it is sti the glade, and still the room; only it depends
upon your sight being lightened or darkened.”
It doesn t look a bit like the glade.”
‘‘You don’t think so, of course"” said Phancie kindly ; “ but
1 will explain. The white pillars are the trunks of the trees ■
the green curtains between are the green leaves ; the ceiling
and th, ,I y f T 6 gl ° be tHat giVCS liglU is the moon
fth t S ° ° i'• - retW ° rk ° n tHe Ce,hng is the leaves and boughs
° th( ' trees shining against the clear sky.”
And the books ? ” I asked quickly.
“ Here are the books.” he replied, drawing one of the green
curtains a little on one side, and there I saw rows of volumes in
brown covers, which reminded me somewhat of the tint of the
withered leaves.
"You can stay here as long as you like,” said Phancie
dropping the curtain, “ and read all the books.”
.. , “° n ! Can ’. t Sta , y long enough fo «- that." I said regretfully
I would be missed from my house.”


“ No, you would not,” he replied. “ Time in Faeryland is
different from time on earth —five minutes with you means five
years with us —so if you stay here thirty years, you will only
have been away from earth half an hour.”
“ But I’m afraid ”
“Still unconvinced!” interrupted Phancie, a little sadly,
leading me forward to the pool of water. “You mortals never
believe anything but what you see with your own eyes —look ! ’
He waved his white wand, and the still surface of the water
quivered as if a breeze had rippled across it ; then it became
still again, and I saw my own room, and myself seated asleep
in the arm-chair in front of a dull red fire. I closed my eyes
for a moment, and when I looked again the vision had
vanished.
“ How is it my body is there and I am here ? ” I asked,
turning to Phancie.
“What you saw is your earthly body,” he said quietly, “ but
the form you now wear is your real body—like the butterfly and
the grub of which I told you. Now, you can look at the books.
You will not remember all you read, because there are some
thoughts you may not carry back to earth ; but the King will
let you remember seven stories which you can tell to the children
of your world. They will believe them, but you —ah ! you will
say they are dreams.”
“ Oh no, I won’t,” I said eagerly, “because it would not be
true. This is not a dream.”
“ No, it is not a dream,” he said sadly ; “but you will think
it to be so.”
“ Never! ”


AIA ’ G OBERON'S LIBRAE Y.
I? H y '? y ° U W ' !L Mortals "ever believe.”
a £ ain t0 reply, SiThTd lanisLcl-^'l ’ "'“p" 1 lo ° ked
Of snow in the sunshine and I i jdtd awa ha wreath
Ok, it was "a r n, “*•
wonderful books in he I the most
before, except the faery tiles ' I n °" e ° f wWch 1 had seen
six books of Spenser’s Fn •oi ' CCeSS 1 found the lost
Chaucer’s Canterbury Pik - , 0 "’ the ,ast ta,es told by
some forgotten plays ° f ColeHdge ’ S
which had been Lfon e!r th JT’t ° ther «**»»
to complete, I learned ..ft’ ' the authors had failed
earthly works in Faervlm d IT 1 finished ‘heir
written during thel fives w " J’ 0 " 6 ° f the books they had
they had not written. ' 6 ‘ ' b '' ary ’ but on! y those
° f T ' haVe men '
but when you grow up vou •>, <L ' no Ito understand them,
the faery books, ofcoursl but Vd i?’ alI ~ not
mention have written. ‘ ° therS wlllch the men I
'* J ZZt nTmTcZ faery ta,es --/^-
others, which were all marked “ and many
Ido not know how Wr I ?T °f Hyland.
was no day or night, but only the' soft because there
shining through the room. I read m & the m °on-lamp
and they were full 0 f the most h r ° f the b °° ks ’
•*“» «•*> I- .0 hear h„, . "n «
remember seven, and these ~2“™


I hope you will like them very much, for they are all true
stories in which the faeries took part, and there is more wisdom
in them than you would think.
The faeries understand them, and so do I, because I have
faery blood in my veins ; but many grown-up people who read
them will laugh, and say they are only amusing fables. The
wise children, however, who read carefully and slowly will find
out the secrets they contain, and these secrets are the mcst
beautiful things in the world.
So now I have told you how I was permitted to enter
Faeryland, I will relate the stories I remember which I read
in the faery palace, and the clever child who finds out the real
meanings of these stories will perhaps some day receive an
invitation from King Oberon to go to Faeryland and see all the
wonders of his beautiful library.


«


(URe Gff.
HOW THE RED ELF RAN AWAY FROM FAERYLAND.
AERYLAND lies between the Kingdom of the
Shadows and the Country of the Giants. If
you want to reach it you must sail across the
Sea of Darkness, which rolls everlastingly round
these three strange places, and separates them
from our world. Then you journey first through
the Giants’ Country, the inhabitants of which are very like
ourselves, only larger and fiercer, with very little spiritual
nature in their enormous bodies; afterwards you pass into
Faeryland, where the elves are bright, graceful creatures,
who possess forms like ours, and not a little of our nature.
Beyond lies the strange Kingdom of Shadows, where dwell
things which have very little in common with our earth ; they
are the shadows of the past and the future, of what has been,
and what yet shall be. Mortals have strayed by chance into
the Giants’ Country, and in old stories we are told they have


lived in Faeryland, but no living man or woman has ever seen
the Kingdom of Shadows, nor will they ever see it during
Now, the Faeries, being afraid of the Shadows, never enter
t leir kingdom, but they also never enter the Country of the
lants, because they despise them very much as being lower
an themselves, much the same as we look down upon the
uncivilised savages of Africa, Oberon, who. as you know, is
tic King of Faery, made a law that no elf should ever go into
t ie Giants’ Country, being afraid lest the faeries should learn
things there which would bring evil on his own land. So when
the faer.es want to visit our earth, they do not cross the Giants'
Country, but come in another way which is known only to them-
selves. Having thus explained how these three countries lie, I
W1 nOW tell 5 011 of " a naughty elf who, disobeying the King’s
command, lost himself in the Giants' Country, and of the difficult)-
he had in getting back to Faeryland.
The elf’s name was Gillydrop, a beautiful little creature all
c ressed m clothes of a pale green tint, which is the favourite
colour of the faeries, as every one knows who has seen them
dance m the moonlight. Now Gillydrop was full of curiosity
which is a very bad thing, as it leads people into a great deal of
trouble, and although he had never bothered his head about the
lants Country before, as soon as he heard the proclamation of
Oberon he immediately determined to see for himself what the
giants were like. Do you not think this was a very naughty
mg for him to do? it certainly was, but he was punished for
h.s disobedience, as all naughty people are sooner or later.
He spoke to two or three faeries in order to get them to


join him, but they would not disobey the King’s command, and
advised him to give up his foolish idea.
“ The King is very wise,” they said, “ and no doubt he has a
good reason for not letting us visit the Giants’ Country, so you
ought to do as he tells you.”
“I don’t care,” replied naughty Gillydrop; “I’m sure
there is something in the Giants’ Country the King does not
want us to know, and I am determined to find out what
• • >}
it is.
So, in spite of all warnings, he spread his beautiful wings,
which were spotted silver and blue, like a white-clouded sky,
and flew away through the woods. It was night-time, for, of
course, that is the faeries’ day, but the way to Giants’ Country
was so long that by the time he reached the end of the forest,
and came to the boundary of Faeryland, the red dawn was
breaking, so he crept into the bosom of a rose, and, after getting
a honey supper from a friendly bumble-bee, curled himself up to
sleep.
All through the long day, while the sun was high in the
blue sky, he slept, lulled by the swaying of the flower, which
rocked like a cradle, and soothed by the whisper of the wind
and the buzzing of the bees as they hummed round his rose-
house.
At last the weary, hot day came to an end, the silver moon
arose in the dark blue sky, the wind sighing through the forest
made the delicate leaves tremble with its cool breath, and the
elf awoke. He left the kind rose, which had sheltered him in
her golden heart from the heat of the day, and flew towards the
rippling stream which lies on the confines of Faeryland. Away


in the distance, he could hear the murmuring laughter of the
faeries, as they danced to the sound of elfin music, but he was
too anxious to get into the Giants’ Country to trouble himself
about his old friends.
Just as he was about to cross the boundary, the leaves of the
Faery forest sighed out the word “ Beware!” but, not heeding
the warning, he flew across the stream, and found himself at last
in the terrible country where dwelt the foolish giants and the
evil ogres. As he alighted upon an enormous daisy, which was
as large as a mushroom, a voice rang out from Faeryland, full
and clear, like the sound of a beautiful bell :
“ Never more come back you need,
Till you’ve done some kindly deed.”
And so when Gillydrop looked back, he saw no green
banks, no tall trees, no beautiful flowers, but only a wide grey
ocean sleeping in sullen stillness under the cold light of the
moon.
Fie was now flying over a dreary waste plain, with great
circles of upright stones standing here and there, and a bitter
cold wind blowing shrilly across the flat country towards the
sullen grey sea. Flad he not been able to fly, he would never
have crossed the plain, because the grass stood up like mighty
spears, and the furze bushes were like great trees. On every
side he saw immense mountains, blue in the distance, lifting
their snowy summits to the clouds, with great trees at their foot
looking like enormous hills of leaves. There were no birds
flying in the cold air, and no animals crawling on the bleak
earth ; everything seemed dead and silent, except the wind,


which moaned through the mighty trees like the roaring of
oceans.
There are no towns in Giantland, because the giants are
not very fond of one another, and prefer to live by themselves
in lonely castles among the mountains. Gillydrop knew this,
but, although he looked on every side, he could see no sign
of any castle, until at last he suddenly came on one which was
quite in ruins, and so tumbled down that no one could possibly
dwell in it. He flew on, feeling rather afraid, and came to
another castle, also in ruins, with a huge white skeleton lying at
the foot of a high tower, which was no doubt the skeleton of
the giant who had lived there.
Then he found a third, a fourth, a fifth castle, all deserted
and in ruins. It seemed as though all the giants were dead,
and Gillydrop, in despair at the sight of such desolation, was
about to fly back to Faeryland, when he suddenly thought of
the voice which had said :
“ Never more come back you need,
Till you’ve done some kindly deed.”
Poor Gillydrop was now in a dreadful plight, and, folding
his weary wings, he dropped to the ground, where he sat in the
hollow of a buttercup, which was like a large golden basin, and
wept bitterly. He could never return to Faeryland until he
had done some kindly deed, but, as there was no one to
whom he could do a good deed, he did not see how he could
perform any, so cried dreadfully at the thought of living for
evermore in the desolate Giants’ Country. So you see what
his disobedience had brought him to, for, instead of dancing


merrily with his friends in the f orest of Faeryland, he was
seated, a poor, lonely little elf, in a dreary, dreary land, with
no one to comfort him.
While he was thus weeping, he heard a sound like distant
thunder; but, as there were no clouds in the sky, he knew it
could not be thunder.
It must be a giant roaring,’ said Gillydrop, drying his eyes
with a cobweb. “ I'll go and ask him where all his friends
have gone.”
So he flew away in the direction from whence came the
sound, and speedily arrived at a great grey castle, with many
towers, and battlements, perched on the top of a very high hill.
At its foot rolled the Sea of Darkness, and round the tall towers
the white mists were wreathed like floating clouds. There was
a wide road winding up the steep sides of the rock to the castle
door, which was as high as a church; but Gillydrop, having
wings, did not use the road, so flew right into the castle through
an open window.
1 he giant, whose name was Dunderhead, sat at one end of
a large hall, cutting slices of bread from an enormous loaf which
lay on the table in front of him. He looked thin,—very, very
thin,—as though he had not had a good dinner for a long time ;
and lie thumped the table with the handle of his knife as he
sang this song, taking a large bit of bread between every verse :
THE GIANTS SO SC.
Oh, if my Ufa grow* hander.
Ml »ri«h tljat I were dead I
'('here 1 * nothing in ihc larder
Kx/ccpt cli.it* cntit of bread


With hunger I am starving,
And it would give me joy
If just now I was carving
A little girl or boy.
I’ve drunk up all the coffee,
I’ve eaten all the lamb,
I’ve swallowed all the toffee
And finished all the jam.
I want to get some plum-cake—
I only wish I could ;
For if I can’t get some cake
I’ll die for want of food.
Here Dunderhead stopped singing with a roar of pain, for
while cutting himself some more bread, the knife slipped and
gashed his hand in a most terrible manner. A great spout of
blood gushed out like a torrent and settled into a dark red pool
on the table, while the giant, roaring with anger, wrapped up
his wounded hand in his handkerchief, which was as large as a
tablecloth.
“What are you crying about, giant?” asked Gillydrop, who
had perched himself on the table, where he sat, looking like a
green beetle.
“ I’ve cut my finger,” said the giant in a sulky tone;
“ you’d cry, too, if you cut your finger. Don’t call me a giant
my name is Mr. Dunderhead. What is your name ?
“Gillydrop. I’m a faery.”
“ I thought you were a beetle,” said Dunderhead crossly.
“ What do you want here ? ”
“ I’ve come to see the giants, Mr. Dunderhead,” replied
Gillydrop.


“\ou wont see any, then,” said Dunderhead, making a
face. I hey re all dead except me. I m the last of the giants.
You see, we ate up every boy and girl that lived near us, and all
the sheep, and all the cattle, until there was nothing left to eat;
and as none of us could cross the Sea of Darkness, every one
died except me, and I won’t live long—this loaf is all I’ve o-ot
to eat.”
“ Perhaps il I do a kindly deed to Dunderhead by getting
him a meal, I’ll be able to go back to Faeryland,” thought
Gillydrop, as he listened to the giant’s story.
“Well, what are you thinking about?” growled Dunder-
head, cutting himself another slice of bread.
“ I was thinking how I could get you some food,” replied
Gillydrop.
What! }ou ? roared the giant; “a little thing like you
get me food! Ha, ha, ha!” and he thumped the table with
his great fist.
Now, as he did this, everything on the table jumped up
with the shock, and so did Gillydrop, w r ho had no time to
spread his wings and prevent himself falling; so when he fell
he came down splash into the pool of blood. He gave a cry of
terror when he fell in, and after crawling out with some difficulty,
he found his beautiful green clothes were all red, just as if he
had been dipped in red ink.
The rude giant laughed heartily at the poor elfs plight, but
to Gillydrop it was no laughing matter, for there is nothing the
faeries dislike so much as the colour red.
Oh dear, dear, dear! ’ sighed Gillydrop, while the tears
ran down his face; “now I’ll never go back to Faeryland.”


“Why not?” asked Dunderhead, who was still eating.
“ Because my clothes are red,” replied the elf ruefully ; “ no
one who wears red clothes is allowed to live in Faeryland.
Cannot I clean my clothes ?”
“ No,” answered the giant, taking a bit out of the loaf.
“You are dyed red with my blood, and the only way to get
your clothes green again is to wash them in my tears.”
“ Oh, let me do it at once ! ” cried Gillydrop, jumping up and
down with delight. “Do cry, Mr. Giant, please do.”
“ I can’t cry when I’m told to,” growled Dunderhead; “but
if you go to earth and bring me two nice fat children for supper,
I’ll weep tears of joy, and then you can wash in my tears and
become a green beetle again.”
“ But how am I to bring the children here ? ” asked Gilly-
drop, who never thought of the poor children being eaten, but
only how he could get his emerald suit once more.
“ That’s your business,” growled Dunderhead crossly, for
you see he had eaten all the loaf, and was still hungry. “I’m
going to sleep, so if you want to clean your clothes, bring me
the children, and you can wash in the tears of joy I shed.”
So saying, the giant leaned back in his chair and fell fast
asleep, snoring so loudly that the whole room shook.
Poor Gillydrop, in his red clothes, spread his red wings, and,
alighting on the beach of the Sea of Darkness, he wondered
how he was to cross it, for he knew he was too feeble to fly all
the way.
“ Oh, I wish I hadn’t been naughty! ” he said to himself.
‘ I’ll never see my dear Faeryland again.”
And he cried red tears, which is a most wonderful thing,


even for a faery to do. It was no use crying, however, for
crying helps no one; so he looked about for a boat to carry him
across the Sea of Darkness, but no boat could he see.
Gillydrop was almost in despair, when suddenly the sun
arose in the east, and a broad shaft of yellow light shot across
the Sea of Darkness like a golden bridge.
On seeing this, the Red Elf clapped his hands with glee, for,
being a faery, he could easily run along a sunbeam; so, without
waiting a moment, he jumped on to the broad golden path, and
ran rapidly across the Sea of Darkness, which heaved in black
billows below.
HOW THE ELF BROUGHT THE GIANTS SUPPER.
As the sun grew stronger, the beam shot farther and farther
across the Sea of Darkness, until it quite bridged it over, and
you may be sure Gillydrop ran as hard as ever he could, so as
to reach earth quickly. It was lucky he did make haste, for,
just as he alighted on a green lawn near a village, the sun hid
himself behind a cloud, and of course the beam vanished.
Having thus arrived, Gillydrop began to look about for two
naughty children to take to the Giants’ Country for Dunder-
heads supper. He was very tired, both with his journey across
the Sea of Darkness, and with being up all day, which was just
the same to him as staying up all night would be to us. As
he was anxious to get back to Faeryland, there was no time to
be lost, so, instead of going to sleep, he searched all through
the village for two naughty children.


Now, in one of the pretty cottages there lived a poor widow,
who had two children called Teddy and Tilly, of whom she
was very fond, as they were all she had in the world to love.
I am sorry to say, however, that Teddy and Tilly were not
worthy of their mother’s love, for they were very naughty
indeed, and never so happy as when engaged in some mischief.
Dame Alice, for that was the name of the poor widow, tried
very hard to improve them, but it was really a waste of time,
for the harder she tried the worse they became. They tore their
nice clean clothes, worried the cat, destroyed the flowers, ate
up everything they could lay their hands on, and altogether
were a great trouble to their poor mother, who often wondered
why her children were so much worse than any one else’s.
Dame Alice, however, had still some hope that they would
improve, for, having a few friends among the faeries, she had
learned that some day both Teddy and Tilly would receive a
severe lesson, which would make them the best and most
obedient children in the world.
There was a wood, not far from the village, which was
said to be enchanted, and Teddy and Tilly were told never to
enter it, but this command only made them the more anxious
to disobey, and they constantly wandered about the wood, never
thinking of the faeries, nor of anything else, except their own
pleasure. On the day Gillydrop arrived, they had been in the
wood all day, gathering nuts and chasing the squirrels. Now,
as it was sundown, they were coming home to their supper,
quarrelling dreadfully all the way, which was very naughty of
them after spending a pleasant day.
Gillydrop heard them calling each other names, so he


peeped out from behind the leaf of a tree, where he was hidden,
and, seeing their cross faces, he immediately guessed that they
were two children who would do capitally for Dunderhead’s
supper, so at once made up his mind how to act.
It was now night, and, as the faeries say, night is caused
by the overflowing of the Sea of Darkness, which rises and
rises when the sun goes down, until it rolls all over the earth,
and any one abroad during the night is in danger of being lost
in its black waves. At dawn, however, the sea subsides, and
vanishes altogether when the sun appears ; but when he sets
in the west, it rises once more and spreads over the earth.
Gillydrop had brought with him a withered leaf from the
Giants’ Country, which, being enchanted, would expand into
a boat, and sail across the Sea of Darkness to the Giants’
Country, for, having come from there, it was bound to return
to the tree upon which it had grown.
The Red Elf took this leaf out of his pocket, and immedi-
ately it spread out into a great brown carpet, which he placed
under a tree in the darkest part, and then went away to entice
the children on to it.
Teddy and Tilly came through the wood, quarrelling in a
noisy manner, and calling each other ugly names ; not a bit
afraid of the dark, although they certainly ought to have
been.
“You’re eating all the nuts,” bellowed Teddy.
“Well, I gathered them,” shrieked Tilly.
“No, you didn’t; I got most,” whimpered her brother
crossly.
“Oh, you story! You didn’t,” retorted Tilly.


And then they called each other more ngly names, and
fought and scratched until the whole wood resounded with
their noise, and the birds trembled in their nests with fear.
Suddenly, in front of them, they saw a small red ball,
glowing like a scarlet coal, and it kept dancing up and down
like a restless will-o’-the-wisp.
“Oh, Teddy,” cried Tilly, “look at that pretty ball!”
“ It’s mine ! ” roared greedy Teddy, rushing forward. “I’ll
have it.”
“You shan't!” cried Tilly, running after him. “I’ll get
it.”
But the red ball —which was none other than Gillydrop—
rolled and rolled in front of the children through the dark wood,
and led them deeper and deeper into the forest, until it bounded
right on to a brown carpet lying under a great tree, where it
lay glowing like a red-hot coal. Teddy and Tilly jumped on
to the brown carpet with a scream of delight, thinking they
would now seize the ball, when suddenly the sides of the brown
leaf curled up, and it lengthened out into a long boat. The
darkness under it grew thicker and thicker, the foliage of the
tree above vanished, and the two naughty children found them-
selves in a boat, rolling and tossing on the black waves, with
a gloomy, starless sky above them. Away at the end of the
boat sat Gillydrop, who had now unrolled himself, and was
guiding the magic skiff across the Sea of Darkness towards
the Country of the Giants.
“ Oh, I want to go home! ” cried Tilly, now very frightened.
“ And so do I ! ” roared Teddy, sitting close to her.
As they said this, they both heard a mocking ripple of


laughter, and saw the Red Elf dancing with glee at the end
of the boat.
“ You’ll never go home again,” he cried mockingly,
“because you have been naughty, and must be punished.”
“ I ’ll never be naughty again,” sobbed Tilly.
“No more will I,” echoed Teddy ; and they both wept
bitterly.
“ It’s too late now,” said Gillydrop, shaking his head.
“ Naughty children always get punished.”
He might have said the same thing about himself; but then
he was a faery, and felt ashamed to tell two human beings that
he had been as naughty as themselves.
Teddy and Tilly cried dreadfully as they thought of their
poor mother waiting for them at home, and of the nice supper
of bread and milk which she had prepared for them ; but their
tears were all of no avail, for the magic boat sailed on and
on, though how it moved without sails or oars they could not
tell.
At last they saw a faint silver light away in the distance,
and a cool breeze blew steadily against them. The light grew
larger and larger until it spread everywhere, and they saw the
shores of the Giants’ Country, with Dunderhead’s great castle
hovering above them. The boat ran right up on to the beach,
and then, suddenly turning into a leaf, contracted to a small
size and flew away to another beech, but this time the beech
was a tree.
The Red Elf vanished as soon as the leaf, and Teddy and
Tilly, finding themselves alone in this dreary land, began to
cry loudly. It would have been better for them if they had


held their tongues, for Dunderhead, hearing two children crying,
knew at once that the elf had brought them for his supper,
and came down to seize them before they could get away.
“ Ah ! this is the supper my friend the elf has brought me,”
he roared, picking up the children. “ I’m so pleased! Now
I’ll boil them.”
You may be sure that Teddy and Tilly were in a dreadful
fright on hearing this, as they did not want to be boiled; but,
in spite of all their cries, Dunderhead took them up to the
great hall of his castle, and set them down on the table.
They were so fat and juicy that the Giant cried tears of
joy at the prospect of having a good supper, and as his tears
gushed out in a great torrent, Gillydrop, who had been waiting
for this, plunged into the torrent to get his clothes cleaned
again. Much to his dismay, however, the more he washed in
the hot tears, the redder grew his clothes, until he was just the
colour of the scarlet bean blossom.
“You told me a story,” said Gillydrop to the giant when he
saw how red he was getting.
“ I know I did,” said Dunderhead, drying his eyes, for he
had now wept enough, and was growing hungry; “but if I
hadn’t told you a story, I wouldn’t have got any supper. You’ll
never be green again, so don’t trouble your head. I’m going
to get some wood to cook these nice fat children.”
On hearing this, Teddy and Tilly roared like bulls, and
Gillydrop roared too, for he was afraid he would never be able
to go back to Faeryland in his red clothes ; but the giant only
laughed at them, and went out to light a fire under his big
kettle.


Gillydrop was naturally very cross with the giant for
having deceived him, and determined to punish him for having
done so. Bringing the two children to Dunderhead for his
supper could not be the kindly deed he had to do, or else he
would have turned green again ; so Gillydrop made up his
mind to take Teddy and Tilly back to earth, and thus leave
Dunderhead without his supper. While he was thus making
up his mind, seated at one end of the table, the two children,
seated at the other end, were crying bitterly at the plight in
which they now found themselves, for it certainly is not a nice
thing to be boiled for an ogre s supper.
“ Poor mother ! ” wailed Tilly, weeping; “she’ll missus so
much.”
“I don’t know if she will,” replied 1 eddy dolefully;
“we’ve always been so naughty, I daresay she’ll be glad we’ve
gone.”
“Oh no, she won’t,” said 1 illy, nodding her head , she
loves us too much for that; but if we could get back I’d be so
good.”
“And so would I,” cried Teddy ; and then they both wept
again, while Gillydrop, seeing their tears, wept also out of
sheer sympathy.
“ Perhaps the giant will only eat one of us, said Tilly
after a pause ; “so while one of us is boiling, the other must
run away and go back to comfort mother.
“Who will be boiled?” asked Teddy sadly. “Will you,
Tilly?”
“ I don’t like being boiled,” answered Tilly, with a shudder
“ Pm sure it isn’t nice.


“ Well, I don t like being boiled either,” observed Teddy.
“ Suppose we draw lots who is to run away.”
“ Yes, that would be fair,” said Tilly, drying her eyes ;
“and the one who wins must go back to cheer mother.”
Gillydrop was quite sorry now that he had brought them
for Dunderheads supper, when he heard how they regretted
their mother ; so he made up his mind to save them.
“You shall neither of you be boiled,” he said, walking up
to them across the table, which was like a large plain. “ I will
take you back to your mother.”
“ But how ?” asked Teddy and Tilly, both together, “We
cannot go back across the sea alone.”
“Oh yes, you can,” replied the Red Elf. “I brought
you here, and can send you back ; that is, if I only had a
leaf.”
“ Here is one,” cried Tilly eagerly, pulling a faded leaf out
of her pocket. “ I picked it up in the wood to-day, it had such
pretty red and yellow colours.”
“ Oh, that will do for a boat,” said Gillydrop joyfully.
“ But it’s so small,” objected Teddy.
I’ll make it large enough,” said the elf. “You’ll see.’
“ But how can we go on without sails or oars ? ” said Tilly
timidly.
“You don’t need any,” rejoined Gillydrop, laughing; “you
know every tree has power to draw back its own leaves. The
boat we came in was a leaf, and, as soon as it was launched on
the air, it went straight back to the tree in the Country of the
Giants upon which it had grown ; and as this leaf comes from a
tree on earth, it will go straight back to its tree.”


“ Then we can get home,” cried Tilly, clapping her hands,
“ for the tree isn’t far from mother’s cottage.
« Mind, you are never to be naughty again,” said Gillydrop
solemnly.
‘ Oh, no, no ! ” cried both children.
‘ And be very, very good to your mother.
‘ Yes, yes ! We’ll be very good.”
“ Then go down to the beach by the path,” said Gillydrop,
spreading his wings. “ I’ll fly down and get the boat ready , be
quick, or the giant will return.”
Then he flew away through the open window, and Teddy
scrambled down the steep path, followed by 1 illy, both of them
in a great fright lest the giant should catch sight of them and
pop them into his big kettle. When they reached the beach,
they found Gillydrop had launched the leaf, which had now
been transformed into a beautiful red and yellow coloured
boat.
“Good-bye,” said Gillydrop, as soon as they were com-
fortably seated in the boat. “ I’m sorry I brought you here,
but it will do you no harm, as it will teach you to be good.
Mind you don’t quarrel in the boat—if you do, the leaf will
vanish, and you’ll sink for ever in the black waves.
“ Oh, we’ll be very, very good,” promised both the children
eagerly, and then Gillydrop gave the boat a push, so that it
moved rapidly away from the land, leaving him seated on the
beach, a lonely little red figure.
Teddy and Tilly were rather afraid at finding themselves
alone in the darkness, but they kissed one another, and fell
asleep, while the leaf-boat sailed rapidly over the Sea of Dark-


ness towards its parent tree. When the children awoke, they
found themselves lying on the ground under the tree, and there
above them was their red and yellow boat, hanging, a red and
yellow leaf, on a high bough.
“Now we’il go home,” cried Tilly, jumping up; “now
we’ll go home to mother.”
“And be very good,” said Teddy, also rising.
“Yes; very, very good,” replied Tilly. And then, taking
one another’s hands, they ran home to their cottage through the
dark forest.
Dame Alice, who thought they had lost themselves in the
wood, was very glad to see them, and, after she had kissed them,
gave them a good supper of bread and milk, which they enjoyed
very much, for you see they were very hungry with the long
journey.
They told Dame Alice all their adventures, and she was very
glad they had gone to the Giants’ Country, for she guessed, like
the wise mother she was, that this was the lesson the faeries
had foretold.
Ever afterwards, Teddy and Tilly were good children ; there
never were two such good children, because they thought, if
they were not good, they would be taken back to the Giants’
Country and boiled for an ogre’s supper. But after a time they
liked to do good actions because they found it pleasant, and
Dame Alice was so pleased with their behaviour that she made
a rhyme about them, which soon passed into a proverb :
“The magic power of a faery
Cures a child when quite contrary.”


HOW THE RED ELF RETURNED TO FAERYLAND.
When Gillydrop saw the magic boat disappear into the
darkness of the sea, he thought that, now he had done one
kindly deed, his clothes would change from red to green, and
he would be able to return to his dear Faeryland. But nothing
of the sort occurred, and the poor elf began to cry again,
thinking he was lost for ever, but this time his tears were
not red, which was a good sign, although he did not know it.
Very soon he heard Dunderhead roaring for the loss of his
supper, so, drying his eyes, he flew back again to the hall of the
castle, to see what the giant was doing. He found a great fire
was lighted, over which was suspended a great kettle filled with
water, which was now boiling hot. Dunderhead was searching
everywhere for the children, and when he saw Gillydrop he
shook his great fist at him.
“ Where’s my supper, you red rag ? ” he roared fiercely.
“Your supper has gone back to earth,” replied Gillydrop
angrily, for no one likes to be called a red rag. “You told me
a story, so I thought I’d punish you.”
“Oh, did you?” bellowed Dunderhead, in a rage. “Then
I’ll punish you also for spoiling my supper.” And before
Gillydrop could fly away, he caught him in his great hand and
popped him into the boiling water.
Oh, it was terribly hot, and Gillydrop thought it was all
over with him ; but, being a Faery, he could not be killed, as
the foolish giant might have known. He sank down, down,


right to the bottom of the great kettle, and then arose once
more to the top. As soon as he found his head above water,
he sprang out of the kettle and flew away high above the head
of Dunderhead, who could only shake his fist at him.
To his delight and surprise, Gillydrop found his clothes had
all changed from red to green, and instead of being dressed in
crimson, his suit was now of a beautiful emerald colour. He
was so delighted that he flew down on to the floor of the hall,
and began to dance and sing, while the giant joined in as he
tried to catch him ; so that they had quite a duet.
Gillydrop. Now I’m gay instead of sad,
For I’m good instead of bad :
Dreadful lessons I have had.
Giant. I will catch and beat you !
Gillydrop. Tho’ a naughty elf I’ve been,
Now my clothes are nice and clean :
1 dance once more a faery green.
Giant. I will catch and eat you !'
But you see he could not do that, because Gillydrop was too
quick for him, and flew round the hall, laughing at Dunderhead,
who roared with anger. Then the elf flew out on to the terrace
which overlooked the Sea of Darkness, followed by the giant.
Gillydrop flew down on to the beach to escape the ogre, and
Dunderhead tried to follow ; but, as he could not fly, he fell
right into the Sea of Darkness. Dear me! what a terrible
splash he made! The waves arose as high as the castle walls,
but then they settled down again over Dunderhead, who was
suffocated in the black billows. He was the very last of the
giants, and now his bones lie white and gleaming in the depths
O 7


of the Sea of Darkness, where nobody will ever find them—nor
do I think any one would trouble to look for them.
As for Gillydrop, now that Dunderhead was dead, he flew
away across the dreary plain towards Faeryland, and soon
arrived at the borders of the sullen grey sea which still rolled
under the pale light of the moon. Gillydrop was not a bit
afraid now, because his clothes were green once more, and he
had performed one kindly deed; so he sat down on the sea-
shore and sang this song :
“When from Faeryland I fled,
All my nice clothes turned to red ;
Now in emerald suit I stand—
Take me back to Faeryland.”
And as he sang the grey ocean faded away, and in its place he
saw the green trees of the faery forest, waving their branches
in the silver moonlight. Only a bright sparkling stream now
flowed between Gillydrop and Faeryland ; so, spreading his
silver and blue wings, he flew across the water, singing gaily :
“ Thanks, dear Oberon. At last
All my naughtiness is past;
Home I come without a stain,
And will never roam again.”
So at last Gillydrop got back to Faeryland after all his
trials, and ever afterwards was one of the most contented elves
ever known. You may be sure he never wanted to see the
Country of the Giants again, and whatever King Oberon said
he did willingly, because he knew it must be right.
He was quite a hero among the faeries, and had the honour
of telling all his adventures to King Oberon himself, which he
did so nicely that the King gave him a title, and ever afterwards
he was called “Sir Gillydrop the Fearless.”


'
3ftc^o(x>faa©L
was Christmas Eve, and the snow, falling
heavily over a great city, was trying to hide with
, its beautiful white robe all the black, ugly
houses and the narrow, muddy streets.
The gas lamps stood up proudly, each on
U • 1 its tall post, and cast their yellow light
'■ * : *r- c-'
on the crowds of people hurrying along
with their arms filled with many lovely presents for good children
“ They are poor things,” said the gas lamps scornfully. “If
we did not shed our light upon them, they would be lost in the
streets.”
“ Ah, but the people you despise made you,” cried the church
bells, which were calling the people to prayer. “ They made you
—they made you, and gave you your beautiful yellow crowns.”
But the street lamps said nothing, because they could not
deny what the church bells said, and instead of acknowledging
that they owed all their beauty to the people they despised,
remained obstinately silent.
Near one of these lamp-posts, at the end of a street, stood
a ragged boy, who shivered dreadfully in his old clothes, and


stamped about to keep himself warm. Ihe boy s name was Tom,
and he was a crossing-sweeper, as could be seen by his well-
worn broom. He was very cold and very hungry, for he had
not earned a copper all day, and the gaily-dressed army of
people swept selfishly past him, thinking only of their Christmas
dinners and warm homes.
The snowflakes fell from the leaden-coloured sky like great
white angels, to tell the earth that Christ would be born again
on that night, but Tom did not have any such ideas, as he
was quite ignorant of
angels, and even of
the birth of the
child-Christ. He only
looked upon the snow
as a cold and cruel
thing, which made him
shiver with pain, and
was a great trouble to
brush away from his
crossing.
And overhead the
mellow bells clashed out their glad tidings in the bitterly chill
air, while below, in the warm, well - lighted churches, the
organ rolled out its hymns of praise, and the worshippers
said to one another, “ Christ is born again.”
But poor Tom !
Ah, how cold and hungry he was, standing in the bright
glare of the lamp, with his rags drawn closely round him for
protection against the falling snow. The throng of people grew


thinner and thinner, the gaily-decorated shops put up their
shutters, the lights died out in the painted windows of the
churches, the bells were silent, and only poor Tom remained in
the deserted, lonely streets, with the falling snowflakes changing
him to a white statue.
He was thinking about going to his garret, when a gentleman,
wrapped in furs, passed along quickly, and just as he came near
1 om, dropped his purse, but, not perceiv-
ing his loss, walked on rapidly through the
driving snow. Tom’s first idea was to pick
the purse up and restore it to its owner,
whom Tom knew very well by sight, for he was a poet, who
daily passed by Tom’s crossing. Then Tom paused for a
moment as he thought of all the beautiful things the money in
that purse would buy; while he hesitated, the poet disappeared
in the darkness of the night, so Tom was left alone with the
purse at his feet.
There it lay, a black object on the pure white snow, and as
Tom picked it up, he felt that it was filled with money. Oh,
how many things of use to him could that money buy—bread
and meat and a cup of warm coffee—which would do him good.
Tom slipped it into his pocket, and thought he would buy
something to eat; but just at that moment he seemed to hear
a whisper in the air,—
“ Thou shalt not steal.”
With a start of terror Tom looked around, thinkino- a
policeman had spoken, and would take him off to prison for
stealing the purse, but no policeman was in sight. He saw
nothing but the whirling flakes and his ragged shadow cast


blackly on the white snow by the light of the lamp. It could
not have been the shadow speaking, as Tom thought, for he
knew that shadows never speak ; but, ah ! he did not know
the many wonderful things there are in this wonderful world
of ours.
Whoever had made the remark touched Tom’s heart, for
he remembered how his poor mother had blessed him when she
died, and told him to be an honest boy. It certainly would not
be honest to steal money out of the purse, but Torn was so
cold and hungry that he half thought he would do so. He
took out the purse again and looked at its .contents —four
shining sovereigns and some silver. Then he put it back in
his pocket, and trudged home with his broom under his arm.
Home !—ah, what a dreary, cheerless home it was !—nothing
but a garret on the top of an old house —a bare garret, with no
table or chairs, but only the sacks upon which Tom slept at
night.
He closed the door, and then lighted a little bit of candle
he had picked up in the streets with one of the matches from
a box given him by a ragged match-seller.
Tom placed the candle on the floor, and, kneeling down,
opened the purse to look at the money once more. Oh, how
tempted he was to take one of those shillings and buy some
food and wood —it would be a merry Christmas for him then !
Other people were enjoying their Christmas, and why should
he not do the same? The great poet who had dropped the
purse had plenty of money, and would never miss this small
sum; so Tom, desperate with hunger, took a shilling, and,
hiding the purse under his bed, was about to blow out the


candle before creeping down-stairs to buy some food, when he
heard a soft voice whisper,—
“ Don’t go, Tom.”
He turned round, and there was the shadow cast by the
reflection of the candle-light on the wall. It was a very black
shadow, much blacker than Tom had ever seen before, and as
he looked it grew
blacker and blacker
on the wall, then
seemed to grow
out of it until it
left the wall alto-
gether, and stood
by itself in the
centre of the floor,
a waving, black
shadow of a ragged
boy. Curiously
enough, however,
Tom could not see
its face, but only
the outline of its
whole figure, yet it stood there shaking with every flicker ot
the candle, and Tom could feel that its eyes were looking right
into him.
“ Don’t go, Tom,” said the shadow, in a voice so like his
own that he started. “If you go, you will be lost for ever.
“Lost?” said Tom, with a laugh; “why, I couldn’t lose
myself. I know every street in the city.”


“ I don’t mean really lost,” replied the shadow ; “but it will
be your first step on the downv/ard path.”
“Who are you ?” asked Tom, rather afraid of the shadow,
but keeping a bold front.
“ I am your shadow,” it replied, sighing. “ I follow you
wherever you go, but only appear when there is light about
you. If you had not lighted that candle I would not have
appeared, nor could I have spoken.”
“Was it you who spoke at the lamp-post?” said Tom
doubtfully.
“ Yes, it was I,” answered the shadow. “I wanted to save
you then, as I do now, from committing a crime. Sit down,
Tom, and let us talk.”
Tom sat down, and the shadow sat down also. Then
for the first time he caught a passing glimpse of its face,
just like his own, only the eyes were sad—oh, so sad and
mournful!
“ Thou shalt not steal,” said the shadow solemnly.
“ I don’t want to steal,” replied Tom sulkily; “but I’m cold
and hungry. This shilling would buy me fire and food. I
don’t call that stealing.”
O
“Yes, but it is stealing,” answered the shadow, wringing its
hands; “and you know it is. If you steal you will be put in
prison, and then I shall have to go also. Think of that, Tom,
think of that.”
Tom did not say a word, but sat on the floor looking at the
bright shilling in his hand which could procure him so many
comforts. The shadow saw how eager he was to take the
shilling, and, with a sigh, began to talk again.


rhink of your mother, I om,” it said softly. “She was
the wife of a gentleman—your father; but he lost all his
money, and when he died she could get no one to help her.
Do you remember how she died herself in this very place,
and how she implored you with her last breath to be an honest
boy ? ”
“ Ves, I remember,” said Tom huskily; “but she did not
know how cold and hungry I would be.”
“ es she did—she did,” urged the shadow. “ She also
had felt cold and hunger, but she never complained. She never
stole, and now she has her reward, because she is a bright
an^el.”
o
“I don’t know what an angel is,” said Tom crossly; “but
if she’s all right, why doesn’t she help me ?”
She does help you, Tom,” said the shadow; “and it was
because she saw you were tempted to steal to-night that she
asked me to help you. She cannot speak as I do, because she
is not a shadow.”
“Well, help me if you’re able,” said Tom defiantly; “but I
don t believe you can.”
1 he candle on the floor had burnt very low, and as Tom
said the last words his shadow bent nearer and nearer, until he
again saw those mournful eyes, which sent a shiver through his
whole body. It stretched out its arms, and Tom felt them
close round him like soft, clinging mist; the candle flared up
for a moment, and then went out, leaving Tom in darkness
altogether. But he did not feel a bit afraid, for the soft arms
of the shadow were round him, and he felt that it was carrying
him through the air.


They journeyed for miles and miles, but Tom knew not
which direction they were taking until a soft light seemed to
spread all around, and Tom felt that he was in the midst of a
large crowd, although he saw no one near him. Then he
felt his bare feet touch some soft, cloudy ground, that felt
like a sponge ; the shadowy arms unclasped themselves, and
he heard a voice, soft as the whispering of winds in summer,
sigh,—
“This is the Kingdom of Shadows.”
Then Tom’s eyes became accustomed to the subdued
twilight, and he saw on every side a number of shadows
hurrying hither and thither. He seemed to be in the centre of
a wide plain, over which hung a pale white mist, through which
glimmered the soft light. The shadows were all gliding
about this plain; some thin, some fat, some tall, others short ;
they all appeared to have business to do, and each appeared
to be intent only on his own concerns. Tom’s own shadow
kept close to him, and whispered constantly in his ear of strange
doings.
o
“These are the shadows of the past and of the future,” it
sighed; “all the shadows of human beings and their doings are
here; see, there is a funeral.”
And a funeral it was which came gliding over the smooth,
white plain ; the great black hearse, the dark horses with
nodding plumes, and then a long train of mourners; all this
came out of the mist at one end, glided slowly over the
plain, and vanished in the veil of mist at the other. Then a
bridal procession appeared ; afterwards a great army, clashing
cymbals and blowing trumpets from whence no sound of music


proceeded ; then the coronation triumph of a king, and later on
a confused multitude of men, women, and children, all hurrying
onward with eager rapidity. But they all came out of the mist
and went into the mist, only appearing on the white plain for a
few minutes, like the shadows of a magic lantern.
“The stage of the world,” whispered Tom’s shadow.
“ Birth, death, and marriage, triumphs and festivities, joys
and sorrows, all pass from mist to mist, and none know whence
they come or whither they go.”
“ But what has this got to do with me ?” asked Tom, who
was feeling rather bewildered.
“ You are a man,” said his shadow reproachfully, “and must
take an interest in all that men do; but come, and I will show
you what will happen if you steal the purse.”
They glided over the plain towards the distant curtain of mist,
but how they travelled over the immense distance so rapidly
Tom did not know, for in a moment it seemed to him that he
had come many miles, and found himself suddenly before a
grey, misty veil, with his own shadow beside him, and many
other shadows around.
As he stood there, a whisper like the murmur of the sea on
a pebbly beach sounded in his ears, and he seemed to guess,
rather than hear, what the shadows said.
“ Now he will see —now he will see—he must choose the
good or the bad. Which will he choose ?—which will he
choose ? ”
Then the grey veil stirred, as if shaken by a gentle wind,
and, blowing aside, disclosed what seemed to Tom to be a great
sheet of ice of dazzling whiteness set up on end. As he looked,


however, shadows began to appear on the milky surface which
acted a kind of play and then vanished, and in the play he was
always the central figure.
First he saw himself pick up the purse in the snowy street;
then hide it in his bed. He saw his ragged shadow glide
down-stairs from the garret to buy food ; the shopman looking
at him, then at the shilling ; then a policeman arresting him and
finding the purse hidden in the bed. Afterwards he saw
himself in prison ; then released, and prowling about the streets.
Years seemed to pass as he looked, and his shadow became
taller and stouter, but always wearing a ragged dress. After
many years he seemed to see his shadow breaking into a house
—meet the owner of the house, and kill him. Afterwards the
shadow of himself stood in the dock ; then crouched in prison ;
and, last of all, he appeared standing under a black gallows
with a rope round his neck. At length all the shadows vanished,
and the surface of the ice mirror again became stainless, whilst
a voice whispered in his ear, ‘‘All this will happen if you steal
the purse.”
Then the shadows again came on to the mirror and acted
another play ; but this time it was much more pleasant.
Tom saw his shadow representative take the purse back to
the poet who had lost it. Then he saw himself in a school,
learning all kinds of wonderful things ; and the years rolled by,
as they had done in the other play, unfolding the shadows of a
beautiful life. He saw himself become a great and famous poet,
who wrote beautiful books to make people wise and good.
Then he saw himself in church, with a woman’s shadow by his
side, and he knew, in some mysterious way, that it was the


rL,*' •
\ '
%
«
£
Wk
.


.


daughter of the poet who had lost the purse. And as the
happy years rolled on he saw himself rich and honourable, and
the end of all was a magnificent funeral, taking his body to be
buried in the great church wherein many famous men were laid.
Then the shadows vanished, and the mirror became pure again,
while over it the grey mists fell like a soft veil, and once more
the voice of his shadow said, —
“All this will happen if you remain honest.”
Then the crowd of shadows around Tom looked at him
with their mournful eyes, and a whispering question ran through
the fantastic throng,—
“ Which will he choose ?—which will he choose ?’
“ I will choose the honest life,” cried Tom loudly. “ Yes, I
will give back the purse to the poet.”
At this the shadows around seemed to rejoice, and he could
see beautiful faces smiling at him from amid the crowd. The
shadow multitude broke in a wild dance of joy, keeping time
to some aerial music which Tom could not hear; and his own
shadow, with happiness shining out of its mournful eyes, threw
its arms round him once more. A dark veil seemed to fall
over him, and the great white plain, the glimmering mists, and
ihe restless shadows, vanished together.
When Tom opened his eyes again, he found himself lying
on the floor of his garret, cold and hungry still, but with his
heart filled with a great joy, for the shilling was still clutched
in his hand, and he knew he had not stolen the money. He
took the purse from under the sacks, replaced the shilling,
and then went out, in the bright sunshine of the Christmas
morning, to give back the lost purse to its owner.


Overhead the bells rang out merrily, as if they were rejoic
ing at 1 om’s victory over himself, and a
beautiful lady, who was on her way to
church, gave Tom some money to get food.
He went and bought a loaf and a cup of
coffee, then, thankful for his good fortune, he trudged off to
the poet’s house.
The great poet received him very kindly, and, after thanking
1 om for returning his purse, asked him why he had done so
instead of keeping it ? Whereupon Tom told the poet all about
the shadow, which interested the poet very much. He also
had been to Shadowland and seen strange things, which he told
to the world in w'onderful verse.
I his boy is a genius,” he said to his wife, “and I must
help him.”
d hen it all happened as the
Tom was put to school by the
magic mirror had foretold, for
kind poet, and became a very
clever man. He also wrote poems, which the world received
with joy; and when he became a famous man, the kind poet
gave him his own daughter in marriage, and the bells which
had rang the birth of the child-Christ when Tom was a poor
boy, now rang out joyously in honour of his marriage.
He has conquered, they clashed out in the warm, balmy
air; “he is the victor, and now he will be happy.”
And he was happy, very very happy, and felt deeply
thankful to the shadow who had shown him the way to be
happy. His own shadow never left him, but it never spoke to
him again, though when lom felt tempted to do wrong, he
heard a whisper advising him to do right. Some people said


that this was the voice of conscience, but Tom knew it was the
voice of his dear shadow, who still watched over him.
And one day he took his wife to the garret where he had
lived when a poor boy, and told her how he had been to
Shadowland, and learned that to be honest and noble was the
only true way to happiness. His wife laughed, and said Tom
had been dreaming; but Tom shook his head, and said that it
was no dream, but a great truth.
Now, who do you think was right—Tom or his wife ?


«-
«


(Ufie ©yafer-©yifcft.
FIRE AND WATER.
NCE upon a time, long long years ago, there was a
shepherd called Duldy, who dwelt in the forests
which clothed the base of the great mountain
of Kel. This mountain was in the centre of an
immense plain, watered by many rivers, and
dotted over with many cities, for the kingdom
of Metella was a very rich place indeed, so rich that the inhabit-
ants looked upon gold in the same way as we look upon tin or
iron, as quite a common thing. Ihe plain was very fertile by
reason of the great rivers which Bowed through it like silver
threads, and all these rivers took their i ise in the mountain of
Kel, a mighty snow-clad peak which shot up, white and shining,
to the blue sky from amidst the bright green of its encircling
forests.
There were old stories handed down from father to son, which
said that the mountain was once a volcano, "which, breathing
nothing but fire, sent great streams of red-hot lava down


to the fertile plain, to wither and blight all the beautiful
gardens and rich corn-fields. But the fires in the breast of the
mountain had long since died out, and for many centuries the
black, rugged summit had been covered with snow, while count-
less streams, caused by the melting of the glaciers, fell down its
rocky sides, and, flowing through the cool, green pine forests,
spread themselves over the thirsty plain, so that it bloomed
like a beautiful garden.
Duldy lived in these scented pine forests, and was supposed
to be the son of an old
couple called Dull and
Day, from whence by
joining both names he
got his own Duldy ; but
he was really a lost
child whom old Father
Dull had found, seven-
teen years before, on
the banks of the Foam,
one of the bright spark-
ling streams which
flowed from the snowy
heights above. Dull
took the child home to his wife Day, who was overcome with
joy, for she ardently desired to have a little boy of her own,
but never had the happiness to become a mother. This good
couple took great care of Duldy, and he grew up to be a hand-
some youth, with golden hair, like the tint of ripe corn, and blue
eyes, the colour of the sky. Any one who saw Duldy would


have said he was a prince, so noble and handsome did he look,
but, alas ! he was only a poor shepherd lad, for, in spite of all
inquiries, Dull and Day never found out who were his parents.
Now, at eighteen years of age, Duldy was the bravest youth
in the forest, for, while protecting his flock of sheep, as they
browsed on the thin grass of the high lands, he had killed many
wolves who would have carried off the lambs. All the forest
maidens were in love with Duldy, for he looked noble and grand
in his simple suit of green cloth; and, moreover, it was well known
that Dull and Day would certainly leave their flock of sheep to
their adopted son, so Duldy would one day be a rich man that
is, rich in the eyes of the simple country people around. But
the handsome shepherd never troubled his head about the
maidens who sighed so ardently at his feet, for the fact is, he
had one day seen the beautiful Princess Elsa when she was
hunting in the forest, and had fallen deeply in love with
her.
She was really charming, the Princess Elsa, tall and stately,
with dark hair and dark eyes ; it was no wonder that Duld)
loved her, but how hopeless was that love! She was the
daughter of King Arago, who ruled over the kingdom of Metella,
and he was a poor unknown shepherd lad. Still all these things
happened in the days of the fairies, and when fairies take a fancy
to any mortal, that mortal can gain anything, however lowly he
may be, from the hand of a princess to the throne of a kingdom.
But did a fairy love Duldy ? Ah, that is a difficult question
to answer! He was not quite sure, and yet he was almost
certain that he was loved by the Water-witch Foamina.
She was the fairy of the stream called Foam, whose sparkling


waters fell from a great height in a white veil down to a deep pool
surrounded by delicate green ferns. From this pool the stream
gushed out between two great stones, and babbled down the side
of the mountain, glided round great moss-covered rocks rippled
under the enarled roots of ancient trees, and swirled into sombre
o
pools beneath the cool shadow of its grass-fringed banks. After
leaving the forest, it flowed broad and placid between rich
fields of yellow corn, through old-fashioned villages, under the
slender bridges which leaped from bank to bank, and at last
mingled with the mighty river encircling the island upon
which stood the city of Aurea, the capital of King Arago,
wherein dwelt the beautiful Princess Elsa.
Dull and Day had both told Duldy how he had been found
on the banks of
the stream lying
on a white bed of
soft foam, and he
was very fond of
sitting by the
brook, listening to
its babbling talk,
and thinking that
it might tell him something about his unknown parents. One
day, while he was thus sitting dreaming about the lovely princess,
and wondering if he would ever see her again, he heard a light
laugh, and thought he saw an arch face peering out at him
from behind the falling foam of the waterfall. As he looked
steadily, the face vanished, but he caught a glimpse of two
white arms playing with the sparkling water, and again saw


the smiling face. Then the stream seemed to stop babbling
and fretting among its stones, and form itself into words, which
grew louder and clearer as he listened. It was not the murmur
of the waterfall, nor the sighing of the wind, nor the babbling of
the stream, but a voice, much more beautiful than all three, which
sounded from behind the veil of foam, and sang this song .
“ I am the daughter
Of earth and water,
Born of the sun and the snow so white.
I fall in foam
From my mountain home,
Downward flash in a torrent bright.
My streamlet rushes
And sparkling gushes,
Cold as ice from the virgin snow ;
And see these swirls,
My foamy curls,
Ringlets white in the pool below.
Now see me dancing,
Chattering, glancing ;
Over and under the grey stones grim
I slide, I creep,
I bound, I leap,
On and on thro’ the forest dim ;
Then, broadly flowing,
Where corn is growing,
Yellow fields ’neath the azure sky,
Thro’ cities old
My waters cold
By turret and tower go gliding by.
I hear the laughing
Of revellers quaffing
Wine, red wine, in the splendid night ;
At morning grey
I pass away,
Golden now in the gold dawn’s light.


With ceaseless motion
I flow to ocean,
Encircle first the King’s chief town.
From dark to light,
From dawn till night,
Ocean calls, and I hurry down.”
A burst of gay laughter ended the song, a great veil of white
spray was flung over Duldy as he sat on the bank, and the
stream resumed its inarticulate babbling. Duldy went home
dreaming of the lovely face he had seen, but, feeling something
cold clasping his wrist, he looked down and saw for a moment
that it was encircled by a wreath of foam. The white bubbles
vanished, but he still felt the cold clasp, and knew, though he
could not see it, that the water bracelet was still on his wrist.
As he stood perplexed at this wonder, the murmur of the water-
fall sounding like soft thunder through the green woods shaped
itself once more into words :
“Tis I whom thou hearest.
I stole thee, my dearest.
I loved thee and kissed when thou wast a child.
I love thee for ever,
No Fate can us sever :
The foam-ring will bind thee to me undefiled.”
And that is how Duldy knew he was loved by the Water-witch.
He came again to the side of the stream and heard Foamina
sing the same song, and when he was going home, he once more
heard her voice murmuring through the woods. This time he
felt rather angry, because he did not want to be bound to the
water-faery, as he was in love with the Princess Elsa. How-
ever, being a very polite youth, he said nothing, but went home
laughing.


Next time he heard her singing, he could not help telling
her the truth, and cried out, —
“ I do not love you, but the Princess Elsa.”
Instantly the still waters of the pool foamed furiously and
arose up like a great fountain, in the centre of which he saw
the water-faery looking angrily at him. Terrified at the sight,
he hastened away, and did not go to the stream again, but on his
wrist he still felt the clasp of the foam-ring, which nothing, not
even hot water, could wash away.
Shortly afterwards, a rumour crept through the kingdom that
the Princess Elsa had fallen into a deep sleep, out of which no
one could rouse her, and the King made a proclamation that
whosoever should succeed in waking her would receive her
hand in marriage, and be king after him.
When Duldy heard this, he was anxious to go to the city and
try to wake the beautiful Princess, but Dull and Day tried to
make him give up the idea.
“ You don’t know how to wake her,” said Dull; “it must be
a magic sleep into which the Princess has fallen.”
“ And no one can wake a princess out of a magic sleep
except a faery,” observed Day sagaciously.
“At any rate I’ll try,” replied Duldy resolutely, “I have
heard that a princess who slept for a hundred years was
awakened by a kiss—perhaps if I kiss the Princess Elsa, she
also will awake.”
“ I don’t think so,” said Dull, shaking his head.
“And the King would never let a poor shepherd kiss the
Princess, I’m certain,” said Day wisely.
“ Perhaps I’m not a poor shepherd,” cried Duldy cheerfully.


“ I may be the son of a king for all you know ; but I’ll go to the
city and try to waken the Princess with a kiss : the King would
not mind a kiss if I wakened her.”
Dull and Day shook their heads, for they were simple people,
who did not know anything about courts, and were afraid Duldy,
whom they loved fondly, would get into trouble.
However, Duldy was determined to try, for one does not
get a chance of becoming a king every day, so, packing up a
few things in a bundle, and, taking his trusty oaken staff, he set
out in the cool of the evening to walk through the forest on his
way to the city of Aurea.
It was a beautiful summer’s night, with a gentle wind blow-
ing, and the silver moon shining down on the snowy peak of the
mountain, cast strange shadows in the old forest. Duldy did not
mind the dark, —for it was rather dark, —but marched bravely
on, singing aloud to keep up his spirits. Very soon he found
himself walking beside a brawling stream that sometimes ran
directly across his path, and as it was deep and turbulent, he
was unable to cross it, but had to walk alonor the bank to see if
O
he could find a shallow place. He never came to any, how-
ever, for the stream still appeared deep and dangerous, and
wound in and out and round about in the most serpent-like
manner, babbling all the time to itself in a laughing way, as if
it was delighted at keeping Duldy from pursuing his journey.
Duldy grew very angry, and tried to leap across, but when
he was preparing for a spring, the stream broadened out into a
wide river, and seeing that, however far he jumped, he would never
land on the opposite bank, he wisely abandoned the attempt.
Then it suddenly struck him that the stream must be


Foamina, who did not want him to leave the forest, so he
determined to find out if it was really her, for he could not believe
that it was only a common stream. In order to invoke her to
appear, he stood still, and, lifting up his voice, sang these
words :
“ Tis I whom thou hearest;
If thou art my dearest,
And loved me and kissed me when I was a child,
I'll leave thee for ever,
Return to thee never,
If thou wilt appear not, in woman shape mild.”
No sooner had he sung these words than a great jet of
foam spouted up from the stream, scattering him all over with
cool spray, and in the centre he saw the form of the water-
faery glimmering ghostly under the thin white veil. She tossed
*
her arms aloft, sending a shower of water-drops to sparkle in
the moon, shining like jewels, and sang in answer :
“ River king’s daughter,
Here thou hast brought her,
From the cool water;
She smiles on thee, dear.
Throw but a kiss to me,
It will be bliss to me,
If you do this to me,
A maid I’ll appear.”
On hearing this, Duldy kissed his hand towards the tall
white column of foam, whereupon it vanished, and in its place
stood a slender, beautiful woman in an azure robe girdled
with white water-lilies, the same flowers also being entwined
in her golden hair, which fell in great waves down to the
ground.


W A
iff v#*’ V
.
-»■
On seeing this beautiful faery with the profusion of golden
tresses, Duldy could only stare, whereupon
T \ she came forward with a smile and took his
\ 1 1 TT 1. 1 1„ 1 J 1
\ l Her touch was bitterly cold, and he
shivered in the chilly atmosphere which she
seemed to spread around her.
“Are you Foamina?” asked Duldy
cautiously.
“Yes, I am the Spirit of the River,”
she replied, nodding her golden head. “Why do you wish to
see me ? ”
“ Because I want to leave the forest,” said Duldy quickly.
“ I know you do,” cried Foamina, with a laugh which sounded
like the ripple of water ; “ but you’ll never do so ; I’ll foam round
you like a brook, and you’ll never be able to jump across.”
“ But why will you do so ?” asked the shepherd.
“ Because I love you —I love you !” she murmured, bending
towards him ; “and I won’t let you go to the Princess.”
“ But I want to waken the Princess with a kiss.”
“I know you do,” said Foamina again; “but you’ll never
kiss her —even if you did it w T ould be no good. I plunged her
into that magic sleep by my enchantments, and she’ll never
awaken until you promise to marry me.”
“ Oh, Pll never do that! ” exclaimed Duldy.
“Very well; then she’ll sleep on for ever,” said the Water-
witch, laughing cruelly, while the air round her grew bitterly
cold, and the yellow locks of her hair and the blue folds of her
robe seemed to undulate over her lovely form like waves
of water.


I hen, as you won t let me leave the forest, I suppose I
must stay here,” said Duldy in despair.
“ \ es, unless you promise to marry me,” replied Foamina
tenderly.
In that case I 11 remain here for ever,” cried Duldy angrily ;
“and as it’s so cold, I’ll light a fire.”
?\o, don t do that, said the Water-witch, shivering ; “ I
don t like fire, —a cruel, hot thing which burns me up.”
“I don t care,” retorted Duldy, beginning to collect sticks
lor his fire; I m not going to perish with cold for your sake,
especially when I don’t love you.”
“11l put your fire out,” cried F'oamina in a rage.
Oh no, you wont, replied Duldy coolly; “ I won’t let you.
Besides, I can talk to you much more comfortably when I’m
warm.”
Foamina stood sulkily on one side as Duldy lighted his fire ;
for, in spite of her threat, she was so afraid of the flames that
she dared not approach them. Very soon the shepherd had a
large fire blazing away merrily, and the red glare lighted up the
sombre branches of the trees and the beautiful face of Foamina,
who retired to some little distance when the fire beean to burn
o ’
singing a strange, sweet song :
“ Fire red,
Thee I dread ;
Water blue,
I love you ;
Fire—water
Maketh hotter;
Water—fire
Makes expire.”


■ 'M ll,
... .. T \ Vftt
* * s 9 *
Now, while she was singing, and Duldy was warming him
self at the bright flames, a small brown
lizard came creeping out of a bunch of
ferns and ran across the open space between
Foamina and the shepherd.
As soon as the witch saw it, she flung
herself on to it with a wild cry, and dissolved
into a wide pool of seething foam, apparently
trying to drown the lizard. But Duldy, who
was kind to all animals, put his hand into
the foam and picked up the lizard, which was
nearly dead amid the angry water. He put it on the ground
near the fire, but the white foam rolled forward right to the
edge of the flames, so the poor lizard had no choice but to be
drowned or burned, and Duldy put out his hand once more to
save it from the cruel witch. To his dismay, however, the
lizard, finding itself hard pressed by the foaming waves of the
pool, ran into the fire and hid itself among the burning embers ;
upon which the water retreated with an angry cry, and spouted
up into a snow-white column, out of which stepped Foamina in
a fearful rage.
“Why did you not let me kill him?” she cried, throw-
ing some cold spray over Duldy. “ I wanted to drown
h # jj
im.
“The poor lizard was not hurting you,” replied Duldy,
laughing.
“ It was not a lizard ! ” shrieked Foamina, stamping her foot.
“It was my great enemy Salamander, and you saved him,
stupid.”


I don’t think so,” said Duldy, pointing to the fire. “Sala-
mander ran in there, so he must be burned to a cinder by this
time.”
“ No, he isn’t! ” cried the Water-witch, coming nearer ; “ that
is where he lives! but I’ll put the fire out —I’ll put the fire out
and drown him ! ”
She dissolved once more into a wave of foam, and, rolling
forward, filing a great sheet of water over the fire. Duldy
expected to see the fire go black out, but instead of that it shot
up into a tall column of red flame, and he hastily arose, afraid of
being burned by the fierce heat. The wave of foam recoiled
with an angry hiss, and, changing into a turbulent brook, flowed
away through the forest with fretful murmurings, leaving not a
trace behind on the smooth green lawn.
“I’m glad she’s gone,” said Duldy, with a sigh of relief.
“ Now, perhaps, I’ll be able to go on to the Princess.”
“You shall,” said a clear voice behind him; “and I shall
help you.”
Duldy turned, and saw the tall column of flame still glowino-
fiercely red. Afterwards it changed to a beautiful rose colour, and
out of it there stepped a handsome youth of his own height and
age, dressed in a short red tunic, with golden sandals, and a flash-
ing band ol jewels bound round his head. His face was as bright
as the sun, and under his skin Duldy could see a rosy flushing,
as though fire was burning inside him, while under his feet
were the dull red embers and flickering flames.
“I am Salamander,” said the youth, with a smile. “You
saved me as a lizard from my greatest enemy, the Fairy of
Water, and now I am going to reward you.”


“ By waking- the Princess ?” asked Duldy eagerly.
“No; you must do that,” said Salamander, laughing, “but
it will take something- more than a kiss to wake her. Listen.
Foamina is in love with you, and when you said you loved the
Princess Elsa, she revenged herself by plunging her into a magic
sleep. She did this by sending to King Arago a golden foun-
tain, and when it was set up in the palace, the water which
spouted out of it sent the Princess Elsa to sleep by spreading
the odour of poppies through the rooms. This odour affects no
one but the Princess, so, in order to release her from the spell,
you must make a fire of pine cones and sprinkle on the flames
some of this powder, then you will see what happens.”
“ Oh, thank you ! ” cried Duldy, taking a small gold box
from Salamander. “And will Ibe King? ”
“ If you wake the Princess, you certainly will be King after
Arago dies,” said Salamander; “but you have a stronger claim
to the throne than by marrying the Princess. Do what I tell
you, and you’ll find out the secret of your birth.”
“ I’ll go at once,” said Duly joyfully, picking up his bundle
and stick.
“One word,” observed Salamander, as Duldy turned to go.
“On your way to A urea, do not let any water of stream, river,
pool, or brook touch you, or Foamina will get you into her
power again.”
“ I’m afraid I am in her power now,” said Duldy mourn-
fully. “ I’ve got the foam-ring on my wrist ; cannot you take
it off?”
“I cannot,” said Salmander, shaking his head; “but the
Princess will be able to do that. Foamina will be very angry


when you marry the King’s daughter, and will try to do you
mischief. It she does, call on me, and 111 help you.'’
He stepped into the rosy - coloured column again, which
immediately changed to a fiery red, and sank lower and lower
until it vanished in the ground, when Duldy saw to his surprise
that his hie had also vanished, the grass being as smooth and
green as if no fire had been lighted at all.
Delighted at having things made so smooth for him, Duldy
went on thiough the forest on his way to Aurea, but, remember-
ing Salamander’s command, he was careful to let no water touch
him. Many streams lay across his path, but he either jumped
over them or clambered over by the trunks of trees, and
when he got down to the plain he crossed all the rivers by
the bridges. Looking back, he saw r the great white peak of the
mountain flashing like a jewel in the blue sky, and the green
forests encircling its base like emerald waves, but he espied
nothing of Foamina, so trudged merrily along on his way to
release the Princess Elsa from her enchantment.
the fountain of jewels.
After travelling for some days, Duldy at last arrived, footsore
and weary, at the gate of Aurea. It was the entrance to a long
stone bridge which crossed the river, encircling the city, and at
the farther end was another gate which opened into the principal
street. Duldy entered under the wonderfully carved archway,
and looked open-mouthed at the smart soldiers on guard, whose


red uniforms were all bedizened with gold lace, and who wore
helmets of the same metal. To be sure, the good people of
Aurea did not think much of gold, as they had such quantities
of it, but Duldy, having been brought up very simply in his
forest home, was quite amazed at the glare and glitter around him.
All the houses were built of white marble, with latticed
windows of yellow gold, and in the centre of the principal
square, which was at the end of the great street, a tall slender
column of marble wreathed round with bands of gold soared
aloft in the clear air. The floor of the square was also of white
marble, with four fountains, one at each corner, which threw up
jets of sparkling water in shining profusion. Indeed, there
seemed to be a great deal of water about this marvellous city ; it
ran down the sides of every street, it rushed out of the mouths
of lions’ heads of white marble fastened to the walls, and in the
centre of some of the squares were great still pools, encircled by
marble rims, flashing like mirrors in the sunlight. Flowers!
flowers everywhere!—wreathed round the houses, growing by
the fountains, and all the people who passed by Duldy wore
chaplets on their heads. White pigeons were flashing through
the still air, and the whole city was perfumed with the scent of
myriad blossoms. Oh, really it was a wonderful city, and
Duldy, looking shabby and dusty in his simple dress, seemed
rather out of place among all this magnificence. His face and
form, however, were so noble that an old white-haired man who
was passing turned back to speak to him.
“ Fair youth,” he said in a thin, piping voice, “why do you
look so tired and dusty ? have you not yet tasted of the
hospitality of our city ? ”


“No,” replied Duldy quietly; “I have been too much
astonished at the beauties of this place to ask yet for hospitality.
I have come to cure the Princess.”
The old man shook his head sadly.
“ Ah, many have come to cure the Princess, but none have
yet succeeded ; for not doing so they lost their heads ; so do not
try, my son, or maybe you will fail, and your comely golden
head will be cut off.”
“Oh, Pm not afraid,” said Duldy, laughing. “ I know all
about this magic sleep, and will certainly succeed in awakening
her, although the others have failed. But tell me, why does
the King promise his throne to the person who cures Princess
Elsa ; has he no son ? ”
“None,” answered the old man, whose name was Onaro.
“ The Princess Elsa is his only child. You are a stranger here,
I take it, so perhaps do not know how the King Arago came
to the throne,”
“ No, I do not.”
“Then I will tell you,” said Onaro; “it will show you how
merit sometimes succeeds. The last King had the misfortune
to be loved by the Water-witch Foamina, who dwells on the
summit of the great mountain of Kel. He refused her love,
and in revenge she drowned his queen and only son when
sailing in a boat. The King was so overcome with grief
at the loss of his wife and child that he died, and as there
was no one of the blood royal to succeed him, the citizens
elected the prime minister, Arago, to be king, and their choice
was very wise ; but as he is not of royal blood, none of the
neighbouring princes will marry his daughter, so King Arago


has promised her hand and his throne to the lucky youth who
awakens her from this long sleep.”
“ But are you sure the young prince was drowned ? ’ asked
Duldy, who remembered how he had been found on the banks
of the river Foam.
“ Some say he was, others that he was not,” said Onaro,
shaking his head. “ I do not know ; but it is fabled that the
enchantress Foamina carried him off with her to her mountain
home, but I know not if this be true.”
“ How long ago was the Prince lost ?” asked the shepherd
breathlessly.
“Just seventeen years ago,” replied Onaro; “and he was a
year old then, so if he had lived he would now be eighteen
years of age.”
“My age,” thought Duldy, with great exultation. “ Perhaps,
after all, I am the Prince stolen by Foamina;” but he was too
wise to say this aloud, lest the King should hear of it, and hang
him for high treason.
“ As you look tired, you had better come to my house,” said
Onaro in a kind voice.
“ No, thank you,” replied Duldy, “ I’m in too great a hurry ;
but please tell me how to reach the palace of the King.”
“ Go straight on, and you will find it at the end of the
street,” said Onaro ; “ but if you are wise you will not go.”
He spoke these last words to the empty air, for Duldy, as
soon as he heard where the palace was to be found, darted up
the street like a swallow, so Onaro turned away sighing,
thinking that Duldy would soon lose his head, like the rest who
had come to cure the Princess.


But Duldy had no idea of losing his head, for it was a very
wise head, and useful to him, seeing he could never get another ;
besides, feeling sure that Salamander would not deceive him,
he determined to follow out his instructions about the fire of
pine cones and the magic powder.
He soon reached the palace, which was built of dazzling
0
white marble on an elevation at the end of a square, and was
approached by a splendid staircase with statues of beautiful
women on either side. Duldy looked at the glittering building,
with its great towers and pinnacles of gold, its innumerable
slender pillars, its golden lattices, and the great dome swelling
against the blue sky like an enormous white soap bubble. All
this matchless building blazed in the hot sunshine with such
splendour that his foot faltered as he placed it on the lowest
step, and thought what a poor unknown lad he was to dare such
a quest. But the remembrance of the Princess, and the half
belief he had in his own royal birth, gave him courage, and he
raced lightly up the steps, never halting until he stood at the top,
looking down on the wonderful city of white marble and gold
spread out before him.
Then he turned and went into a large hall, through the mighty
doors, which were of sandalwood, all curiously diapered with gold.
“ What do you want ? ” asked a soldier who was on guard
at the door.
“To see the King and cure the Princess,” said Duldy boldly.
The soldier burst out laughing, and, calling to his comrade,
whispered in his ear, whereupon they both looked pityingly at
Duldy.
“You’ll never succeed,” they said.


“ I’ll try, anyhow,” replied Duldy, taking off his cap to a
gorgeously-dressed officer who approached. The soldiers
told the officer what Duldy wanted, the officer told the groom
of the chambers, the groom of the chambers told the prime
minister, and the prime minister told the King; whereupon
Duldy was ordered before the monarch, who sat upon his throne
in the great Hall of Audience.
A splendid hall it was, all of white marble, with a roof of
fretted gold, and rich curtains of pale blue velvet hanging
between the slender pillars. The throne of solid gold flashed
like a jewel, and Duldy*s feet sank in the soft velvet carpets as
he stood before the King, a royal-looking man with a crown of
silver, for in Aurea silver was thought to be much more precious
than gold. But Duldy did not look upon the King, as his atten-
tion was fixed upon a great golden fountain in the centre of the
hall, out of which spouted the most beautiful coloured water,
which first ascended and fell into the topmost basin like
liquid silver, then fell from the first to the second basin a sheet
of gold, from the second to the third a beautiful crimson tint, from
the third to the fourth a bright blue, and from the fourth to the
lowest and last a pale green colour. All these different coloured
waters glittered like gems in the sunlight which came through
the wide windows of the hall, so that the fountain was called
the Fountain of Jewels, and Duldy guessed it to be the one
which Foamina had sent to the King.
Meanwhile Arago was rather angry at Duldy staring at the
fountain instead of himself, for no king likes to be neglected, so
he called out to him in a loud voice,—
“Well, my lad, what do you want ?”


“ To cure the Princess, sire,” said Duldy, quickly turning to
the throne.
“ You know the penalty if you fail ? ” said Arago, looking at
him steadily.
“Yes, I lose my head
“Are you not afraid ?
“No, not a bit; but if I succeed, of course I marry the
Princess Elsa, and succeed your Majesty on the throne of
Metella,” said Duldy frankly.
“We have passed our royal word that such will be the case,”
replied the King, smiling. “Now, begin at once and awaken
the Princess.”
“ First of all, I must have the Princess brought into this
hall,” declared the shepherd.
“Impossible!” said Arago, frowning; “my daughter is
asleep on a couch in her bedroom.”
“ Then she must be brought here, couch and all,” said
Duldy boldly, determined to have his own way ; “ I can only
break the spell here.”
“ How so ? ” asked the King.
“ Because the Princess Elsa’s sleep is caused by that
fountain,” said Duldy.
“What! the Fountain of Jewels ! ” cried the King. “ I hat s
nonsense; it was sent to me by the Queen of Paeryland, and
she would not send me anything hurtful.
“ I daresay she would not,” said Duldy, with emphasis;
“but she did not send that fountain. It came from Foamina.”
“From Foamina!” cried every one, with a start of terror,
for the water-faery was much dreaded in Aurea.


“This is very serious,” said the King gravely. “Young
man, you must prove the truth of what you say, and if such is
the case, I shall have the fountain removed.”
“ Then bring in the Princess,” said Duldy, and, kneeling
down, he opened his bundle, which was full of pine cones he had
picked up in the forest. “ I must have your Majesty’s per-
mission to light a fire with these on the marble floor.”
“ Very well,” said Arago, nodding his head ; “ only take care
you don’t spoil the pavement.”
Duldy laughed, and while some of the courtiers went out
to bring in the Princess, he removed a portion of the carpet,
then piling up the pine cones in a little heap, he set them on
fire. While he was doing this, the waters of the fountain kept
changing to all sorts of colours, and at last every tint faded
into a bright yellow, which looked like liquid gold, and breathed
a strong perfume, nearly sending Duldy to sleep. How-
ever, he pinched himself to keep awake, and attended to
his fire, which was now glowing reddiot, while the King and
the courtiers all looked on with great curiosity, being much
astonished at the change of the Fountain of Jewels.
The Princess was brought in, sleeping on her couch of
purple, with a cloth of gold coverlet thrown over her, and she
looked truly beautiful, with her black hair falling in disorder
over the couch, and her rose-tinted cheek supported by one
hand, while the other was pressed on her faintly beating heart.
Duldy fell more in love with her than ever, but, suppressing all
outward signs of his passion, he ordered her couch to be placed
midway between the fire and the throne.
The pine cones were now a small heap of red-hot embers,


so Duldy took out the golden box given to him by Salamander,
and began to sing, while he sprinkled some of the powder from
the box upon the fire, —
“ O my lovely Princess sleeping.
By the spells of evil chained,
At thy side Pm vigil keeping,
Longing, hoping, smiling, weeping,
While the day hath slowly waned.
In thy sleep are visions gleaming,
Faery visions from above,
Yet tho’ lovely be thy dreaming,
All these visions are but seeming,
Wake once more to life and love.
Lovely Princess, I have found thee
Sleeping like a night-closed flower,
Of my heart I queen have crowned thee,
So tho’ evil spells have bound thee,
Laugh to scorn all magic power.”
Duldy now emptied all the powder on the fire, and a thick
violet mist arose, which, trailing along the floor like a sinuous
serpent, writhed across to the fountain and commenced to coil
around it. Coil after coil it curled around, till it reached the
topmost basin, so that the whole fountain could not be seen,
but only the slender jet of water which shot out of the violet
mist like the yellow horn of a trumpet lily. Duldy, waving
his arms towards the fountain, began to sing again,— ■
“ I have found her —long I’ve sought her,
To my heart this maid I take.
Cease thy spells, O river-daughter,
Vanish, fountain —vanish, water,
Let my Princess fair awake.”


At this the yellow jet shot up as high as the fretted ceiling
of the hall, and then sank down till it vanished in the violet
mist, which began to whirl round and round, growing smaller
and smaller, sinking at every whirl till it vanished altogether,
and with it the fountain, leaving nothing but the bare white
gleaming marble floor. But the Princess still slept on, although
Duldy could see a faint flutter of her eyelids, which showed she
was awaking, so, bending forward, he kissed her red lips three
times, and sang once more, —
“Now the end of all things this is,
Thou art free from magic snare.
Life for thee hath many blisses,
Words of love and endless kisses.
Ope thine eyes, O maiden fair.”
At this the beautiful Princess opened her eyes, and looked
long and steadily at Duldy, then, rising to her feet, she smiled,
and flung her white arms round his neck.
“It is the face of my dreams,” she sighed. “Oh, my love,
I have waited for thee long years! ”
So the spell was broken, for the Princess had awakened, to
the delight of King Arago, who descended from his throne and
joined her hand to that of Duldy.
“ I will keep my word,” he said gaily. “ You have released
not only the Princess, but all of us, from the power of Foamina,
so you will be married at once, and to-night 1 11 give a great
ball in honour of you both.”
Oh, how everybody cheered, and the courtiers ran hither
and thither, telling the good news to one another. The city was
in a great state of excitement, and all the poor people were


given plenty of food to eat. Duldy led his Princess to her
room, and then retired in order to dress himself in his
wedding clothes, while the people cheered in the city, the joy
bells rang out, and even Poamina in her mountain solitude
heard the cry, “ Long live Prince Duldy ! ”
THE SECRET OF DULUv’s BIRTH.
You may be sure Foamina was very angry when she heard the
rejoicings in the city of Aurea, for by her magic power she
knew that in spite of all her enchantments Duldy was going to
marry the Princess. She was sitting on a couch of snow high
up on the mountain of Kel, and the moon was shining down
on her as she looked far across the plain to the illuminated
city, where Duldy was being married to Elsa. As she thought
of this, Foamina arose quickly, stamping her foot with rage,
so that a great mass of snow came thundering down the side
of the mountain and crashed through the green trees.
“I won’t let him be happy!” cried Foamina in a rage;
“he still has the foam bracelet on his wrist, so I ’ll part
him from his Princess yet, in spite of Salamander and his
threats.”
So she flung herself off the snow bed and poured down the
valley in a torrent of angry foam. First she went to the faery
of one stream, and then to the faery of another—making them
promise that they would roar like torrents down the mountain,
through the plain, and make the great river round the rock


upon which Aurea was built rise higher and higher till it flooded
the whole city. They all promised gladly, for they were very
much afraid of offending Foamina, who was a very malignant
faery, and could do them all harm.
Then the Water-witch flowed away through the plain to
the great river, and, rising up in the principal fountain of the
city, she spoke to all the streams and fountains of the city, in
order to make them pour out as much water as they could to
drown the city, and this they promised to do, so Foamina was
now quite satisfied she would be revenged upon Duldy and
Salamander for destroying the Fountain of Jewels and awaking
the Princess Elsa.
At the palace all was festivity and rejoicing, and the King
was giving a great ball in honour of the marriage; for Duldy
and the Princess were now married, and sat on two golden
thrones, looking wonderfully handsome and happy. Below
them on the marble floor all the lords and ladies were dancing
the most graceful dances in the world, and the musicians placed
up in a high gallery sang and played the most delightful music,
while tables covered with nice tarts and cakes and other
beautiful things ran down on each side of the hall.
But notwithstanding that Duldy had married the Princess,
and was going to be king when Arago died, he felt quite
unhappy, as the foam bracelet still clasped his wrist.
“ What is the matter, Prince ? ’ asked Elsa, putting her
beautiful white arms round his neck ; “you look so sad.”
“Pm afraid of Foamina,” said Duldy, showing Elsa his
wrist. “Look at the foam bracelet chaining my wrist; I cannot
get it off. Look, you can see it quite plainly.”


And indeed they could, a slender ring of white foam which
clasped his wrist so tightly that Duldy felt as though it were the
hand of the enchantress grasping him, to drag him away from
his lovely bride to the depths of her cold pool.
“ Is it cold ? ” asked Elsa.
“Yes, very cold,” replied Duldy disconsolately. “ I wish I
could take it off.”
“I think I can do that,” said the Princess, laughing. “If
it’s cold, it will soon melt away under my warm kisses ; ” and so
saying, she bent down and kissed his wrist three times with her
red lips. Much to Duldy’s surprise, at the first kiss the foam
bracelet seemed to grow loose, at the second it fell off his wrist
and lay on the floor like a white ring, and at the third it vanished
with a loud noise.
Duldy was overjoyed that he was now free from the power of
the enchantress, and led the Princess out on to the balcony
which overlooked the river. It was a beautiful night, and Duldy
saw the great white peak of Kel shining against the dark blue
sky, and the heaving waters of the river at his feet. Just as he
kissed the lips of his Princess, a confused noise sounded from
the city below. The river, lashing itself into angry waves,
began to rise, and as Duldy and the Princess, full of dismay,
retreated to the hall, a crowd of people rushed in and stopped
the dancing.
“ Sire! sire ! ” they called out to the King, “ the river is rising
round the city, and all the fountains are spouting foam ! We
are lost! we are lost! ”
Everything was in confusion, people rushing here and there
shrieking and crying, while the lights of the city died out, and


the cruel, dark waters kept on rising, until every one thought
the whole city would sink beneath the flood.
Duldy knew it was the work of Foamina, and his mind was
quite satisfied on that point when a great white wave of foam
rolled into the hall over the balcony. On this the Water-witch
was riding, singing loudly,—
“ Give me my lover,
King’s daughter, king’s daughter,
Or I will cover
Your city with water.”
The Princess shrieked and hid her face on Duldy’s shoulder,
while Arago and all the people around looked at the witch in
dismay. Suddenly Duldy recollected how Salamander had
promised to help him, so he called out, —
“ Salamander,
O, withstand her !
She has brought her
Cruel water.
Drive from land her,
Salamander ! ”
The witch laughed loudly, and the wave rolled on, amid the
lamentations sounding from the city below, when suddenly, in
the place where the Fountain of Jewels had been, a tall flame
shot up, and out of it flashed Salamander, glowing like a beauti-
ful crimson star.
“ Foamina, beware ! ” he cried, shaking a torch which he held
in his hand ; “or I will burn up your springs, scorch your forests,
and crush you for ever.”
“ No, you won’t,” said Foamina, flinging her white arms aloft.
“ This shepherd is mine—mine ! and you can do nothing.”


Can t I ? ” cried Salamander, waving his torch. “ Behold! ”
There was a great roar, like the report of a thousand cannons,
and every one looked through the open window with a cry of
alarm.
Far away, from the snowy peak of Kel shot a tall column of
red flame, with a black cloud above it spreading over the mid-
night sky, and vividly bright streams of burning lava began to
run down the white snow like veins of Are.
“ Oh, my springs, my springs ! ” shrieked Foamina wildly ;
“ they will all be burned up, and I’ll die—l can’t put that fire out.”
“ No, you cannot,” said Salamander sternly ; “nor will I till
you give up all claim to Duldy.”
“Ido ! Ido ! shrieked the Water-witch, listening - with terror
O
to the roar of the fire mountain.
“ And tell Duldy who he really is ?” said Salamander relent-
lessly.
“ Aes ! yes ! ” cried Foamina, who was now getting thinner and
thinner as the hot lava scorched her springs in the distant
mountain. “ Only stop that cruel, cruel fire ! ”
“ Who am I ? asked Duldy. “ Quick! tell me, and
Salamander will stop the fire.”
“You are the son of the old King,” cried Foamina wildly.
“ I drowned your mother and carried you off. I surrender all
claim to you now, only stop the fire—stop the fire ! ”
“ You will never do cruel things again ?” said Salamander.
“Never!—never!” said the Water-witch, who was now
writhing on the floor.
“ Then make the waters leave the city,” cried Duldy.
The Water-witch flew to the window and muttered some


words, whereupon the river sank down to its usual level, all the
fountains stopped pouring out jets of foam, and in a short time
the city was as dry and clean as if no waters had been there
at all.
“Now go!” cried Salamander, and stretched out his torch
towards the mountain. Immediately the column of fire sank
back again, the smoke vanished and nothing could be seen but
the snow-white peak, the dark blue sky, and the serene moon.
As soon as Foamina saw this, she gave a cry of joy, and, flinging
herself in a foaming torrent from the window, vanished in the
river, and was never seen again.
Then Salamander turned to Duldy and Arago, who stood
near, delighted with the defeat of the Water-witch.
“You heard what Foamina said,” he observed to Duldy;
“ you are the son of the old king, and ought to reign now.”
“ And so he shall,” cried Arago, taking off his beautiful silver
crown and placing it on Duldy’s head. “ I will give up the
throne to Duldy and my daughter, and become prime minister
once more. Hail, King Duldy !”
“ No, he must not be called Duldy,” said Salamander, smiling,
“ but by his fathers name. So, Hail, King Sama ! ”
Then all present, including Arago, kneeled down before
Duldy, who ascended the throne with his silver crown, and his
beautiful Queen Elsa by his side.
“Be happy,” cried Salamander; “you have a kind heart,
and that always brings happiness.”
Whereupon he vanished, and was never more seen again, nor
did he allow the mountain of Kel to breathe fire any more. So
King Sama and Queen Elsa ruled over the land of Metella, and


were very, very happy, and were guided by the advice of Arago,
who once more became prime minister.
Duldy brought Dull and Day from the forest, and gave them
a beautiful palace to live in, but they
did not like the city life, and went
back again to their cottage, where
they died after many years.
So Duldy became king after all,
but while his people hailed him as
King Sama, his beautiful wife called him nothing but Duldy,
the shepherd lad who had released her from the enchantment
of the Water-witch.




I ** O.
Moon iJande^.
HERE was once a girl called Lurina,
who dwelt with her parents in a
cottage on the edge of a great
forest, which was said to be en-
chanted. She was an only child,
and her parents, whose names
were Panus and Cora, were very
fond of her, although she certainly
gave them a great deal of trouble. Not that she was naughty
in any way, for no one could have been better or more obedient;
but she was generally very dull and sleepy all the day, and only
woke up at night-time, when she liked to wander outside in the
moonlight, instead of going to bed. This habit led her parents
to think she had faery blood in her veins, and, although Panus
was a dull, stupid man, he nevertheless remembered how very
peculiar his old grandmother had been in her actions.
Another curious thing was that Lurina had been born just
at full moon, which is the time when all the faeries hold their
great monthly festival, and Cora remembered hearing them
singing a birth-song about little Lurina, who lay by her side.
So there was no doubt but that the faery blood which flowed


in the veins of the old grandmother had missed a generation,
and once more came out in Lurina. Panus and Cora therefore
let her do just as she liked, which was the best thing they could
do, as they had been told by a Wise Woman who lived near them.
Lurina was a most beautiful girl, with golden hair, a delicate
white skin, and dark, dark eyes,
which had a somewhat mourn-
,/ ful look in their depths.
9// .... , . ,
When she arrived at the age
of eighteen, a young wood-
man called Berl
fell in love with
her, and, after
some hesitation,
Lurinapromised
to become his
wife, provided
he let her do
exactly as she
pleased, and did
not stop her
night wander-
c>
mgs.
“ You can go
into the forest
whenever you like,’’ said Berl, kissing her; “but why do
you not come when the sun is bright, instead of the feeble
moonlight ? ”
“ I don’t like the sun," said Lurina, pouting, “ it makes


<£A ' -: 1 JuSStW& 5 V SB
everything so hot and disagreeable ; but the moonlight is so
soft and beautiful that I love it. Besides, you don’t know what
strange fancies come to me when the moon is shining.”
“What kind of fancies ?” asked Berl, who was a somewhat
dull youth.
“ Oh, all sorts of beautiful things,” replied Lurina dreamily;
“ lovely little men and women dressed in green, who dance
lightly on the emerald turf, and strange, sweet songs which
sound like rushing water and the whispering of leaves. I dream
about them when I’m in the wood, but nowhere else.”
Berl was now convinced that Lurina had faery blood in her
veins, and attended the festivals of the faeries, which she called
moon fancies ; but, being a very cautious man, he said nothing
to Lurina; nevertheless, before he got married he consulted
the Wise Woman.
She was really a very wonderful old woman, with snow-white
hair and a form nearly bent double with age.
She listened to Bed’s story about Lurina’s
moon fancies, and then spoke in a harsh,
determined voice.
“ Your future wife has dealings with the
faeries,” she said, looking at Berl from under
her bushy white eyebrows ; “ but what she
sees at night in the forest are real truths, and not fancies as
she thinks. My advice to you is not to marry her, lest evil
befall you.”
But Berl was too much in love with the beautiful Lurina to
take this advice, so he said nothing, but asked Panus and Cora
to let him marry their daughter at once, which they were very


pleased to do. for he was quite a rich man among the woodmen
and, moreover, very good-natured. .
The wedding-day arrived at last, and Lunna was marnc
to Berl by the village pastor. Those who thought she had
faery blood in her veins said she would never be able to enter
the church ; but, much to their surprise, nothing unusual occurre
at the ceremony, so they began to think Lurina was only a
dull, stupid girl after all. This was a mistake, however, as you
will soon hear.
Berl and Lurina took up their abode in a pretty cottage
under the shade of a great oak, and lived very happily for a
longtime. Lurina was still dreamy
and quiet all the day, but as Berl
was generally at work in the wood,
he did not notice it much. At
night - time, however, she still
wandered into the forest, especi-
ally when the moon was very
bright, and this habit began to annoy Berl very much, but as
he "had given his word not to interfere with Lurina, he said
nothing.
One night, however, when the moon was full, and the who e
of the forest was bathed in the pale, cold light, he woke up, and,
missing his wife from his side, knew that she had gone into
the forest to indulge in her moon fancies. Berl sprang out of
bed, and just caught a glimpse of her shadow disappearing
among the trunks of the trees; so he rapidly slipped on his
clothes and hurried after her, being determined to find out why
she was so fond of these midnight wanderings.


“She’s going to a meeting of the faeries,” thought Berl, as
he ran across the lawn. “ I hope the little people won’t be
angry if they see me ; but my wife will protect me.”
For you must know that the faeries never like their revels
gazed upon by mortal eye, and if they catch any one looking
they pinch him black and blue ; so Berl had good reason to be
afraid of venturing into the enchanted wood at night.
He followed his wife cautiously, always keeping her in
sight, but taking care she should not see him, when suddenly
she crossed an open glade and vanished. Berl ran after her,
but could find no trace of Lurina at all, and was quite dis-
consolate, when all at once he espied her sitting at the foot of
a great beech tree, leaning against the trunk, with her beautiful
face looking pale and white in the moonshine. Having watched
her for a long time, he ventured to approach and call her by
name, but, to his astonishment, she did not answer nor express
surprise at seeing him, but simply stared across the glade with
vague, unseeing eyes.
Emboldened by her silence, Berl ran up and fell on his
knees with a little laugh, thinking she would scold him for
having dared to follow her. He was perplexed, however, to
see that she still did not seem to notice him, and when at last
he took one of her hands, it was as cold as ice. Starting up in
alarm, he looked closely at her, and found that she did not
breathe —placed his hand on her heart, and discovered that it
did not beat.
“Why, she’s dead!” he cried in alarm. “Lurina, it is I,
your husband, Berl.”
Still Lurina did not answer. So, convinced she was dead,


Berl threw her body over his shoulder and hurried home.
When he got inside, he did everything he could to revive her,
but it was no use ; the beautiful Lurina was dead, and Berl sat
all night beside her body, weeping bitterly.
At the first red flush of dawn, he went from house to house,
telling Lurina’s parents and all the neighbours that his wife had
died the preceding night in the forest. Every one came to
Berl’s house to see if it was true, and offer advice, which ones
neighbours are very fond of doing. Among those who came
was the Wise Woman, who surveyed the beautiful Lurina for
some time in silence, then laughed loudly.
“ Why do you laugh ? ” asked Berl, angry with her for
doing so.
“ I laugh at your folly,” said the Wise Woman, looking
oddly at him. “ Lurina is no more dead than I am.”
“ But her heart is not beating, and she does not breathe,”
said Panus quickly.
“Nevertheless, she is not dead,” replied the Wise Woman
quietly. “Have you ever seen her like this before?” she
added, turning to Cora.
“ No, never,” answered Cora, who was weeping bitterly.
“ Ah ! that is because you never followed her to the forest
as Berl did,” said the Wise Woman thoughtfully. “ I told you,
Berl, that your wife had faery blood in her veins, and you should
have taken my advice about the marriage.”
“ Well, it’s too late now to blame me,” said Berl roughly,
for he did not like to be reproached. “What am Itodo ?”
“ I will tell you,” observed the Wise Woman. “ Come to
my cottage at once.”


*
So Berl left the body of his beautiful Lurina with her parents,
and walked with the Wise Woman to her cottage, which was
just on the verge of the wood, but protected from the entry of
the faeries by a rusty horse-shoe fastened on the door.
When Berl entered, the Wise Woman drew a circle on the
ground with her magic staff, whereupon a ring of pale flickering
fire appeared ; then she pulled seven hairs out
of the tail of her black cat, and threw them into
the midst of the circle, where they began to
twist about in a most surprising manner.
While they were doing this, the Wise Woman
waved her staff seven times in the air, mut-
tering strange words, and a white smoke
arose from the centre of the fire circle where the hairs were
jumping about. This white smoke went up like a white cloud,
then suddenly vanished,
and Berl saw a little
man, all dressed in red,
sitting in the centre of
the circle.
“ Well, what do you
want ? ” he said gra-
ciously to the Wise
Woman, whose bright
eyes sparkled when she saw him
“Why did Lurina die?” asked the Wise Woman. “-Tell
me, Pop.”
“She’s not dead at all,” answered Pop quickly ; “she is a
faery, and went into the woods to attend the festival. As she


* e
iji i/iijitf in irwiT-i-Ttiiir-r
{>;} A\ , W'1- *5 : |A
' I ; . M
| '- . AWA%@ a* ■ ■ r>’v; •.>•■
T ' ifK,i
r '- . ,t f '~
could not join the revels of Oberon in her human boay, which
would be too big, she left it behind, leaning against the trunk of
a beech tree, and her faery body went to dance with the faeries.
Of course, when Berl took her body away, she could not find it
when she
returned, and
she never will
find it till it’s
brought back to
the same place.”
“ What is to
be done, then ? ”
asked the Wise
Woman.
“ Berl must
take Lurina’s
body back again
from where he
brought it,” said
Pop ; “ but be-
fore Lurina’s
faery body can
come back to it,
Berl will have to get permission for it to do so from Oberon
Now let me go, I’ve told you all I know.
The Wise Woman waved her staff again, the white smoke
came down on the little red man like an extinguisher, then
everything vanished, and Berl found himself standing outside
the door of the cottage, with the Wise Woman smiling at him.


“You heard what Pop said,” she observed kindly; “you
will have to go to the court of King Oberon, and ask him to let
your wife come back.”
“ But will he do so ? ” asked Berl doubtfully.
“Ah, that I do not know,” said the Wise Woman ; “but as
the faeries may treat you badly for looking at their festival, take
this sprig of the rowan tree, and it will protect you. Don’t forget
to take Larina’s body back to the beech tree.”
Berl took the sprig of rowan with its red berries that she
handed to him, and walked away to his own cottage. He did
not tell any one what the Wise Woman had said, but managed to
put off all their questions by pretending to be too grieved to
speak. So one after another the neighbours departed, until only
Panus and Cora were left, and they, too, after kissing the pale
lips of Lurina, went away, leaving Berl alone.
Berl waited impatiently for night to come, and as soon as the
moon was glowing like glittering silver in the starry sky, he
took Lurina up in his arms, and, carrying her into the forest,
placed her in the same position as he had found her, leaning
against the trunk of the beech tree.
When he had done this, he looked round perplexed, for he
did not know how to find the faery court, but, taking out the
rowan twig, he looked at it earnestly, wondering if it would by
some magic means show him the way. But the rowan twig made
no sign, and Berl put up the hand in which he held it to take
off his cap and fasten it in it, when the twig happened to strike
his ear, and immediately the silent forest became full of sounds.
He heard the most delightful music, then a burst of gay
laughter,and,following the direction from whence they proceeded,


I ' 1
he came upon a wide open glade, with a smooth green sward
upon which the moon was shining. Still, though he looked very
hard, he could not see a faery ; then, suddenly remembering ow
the rowan twig had bewitched his ears, he took it out o us at,
and pressed the red berries against his eyes. To his delight, he
now saw that all the sward was covered with thousands of htt e
men and women all dressed in pale green, and at the end was a
throne of great white lilies, upon which sat the King an Queen
of Faeryland. All round the glade were a circle of glow-worms,
whose pale lights illuminated the festival, and the bright moon-
light pouring down through the boughs of the trees made every-
thing as bright as day.
As soon as the faeries discovered that Berl could really see
them at their revels, they shrieked with rage, and hundreds of the
little green creatures swarmed up on his body to pinch urn
black and blue. Berl was in a great fright at first, til he
suddenly remembered what the Wise Woman had said about
the rowan sprig, so immediately called out—
“ Magic branch of rowan tree,
Work the charm and set me free.’


At once there was a dead silence, and all the faeries fell to
the ground like withered leaves in autumn. Some of them
o
ran to the throne of lilies, and spoke to the King, upon which
Oberon stepped down, and, followed by a long train, walked up
to Berl and commanded him to sit down. Berl did so, and
then Oberon struck the ground with his wand, whereupon a
great red rose sprang up, in which he took his seat with
Queen Titania, while the other faeries gathered round and
prepared to listen.
“Now, mortal,” said Oberon in a dignified manner, “how
is it that with an earthly eye you have beheld the unseen revels
of the faeries ? ”
“It was by this rowan twig, your Majesty,” said Berl, showing
Oberon the sprig ; “ the Wise Woman gave it to me as a protec-
tion, in case the faeries should be angry.”
“We are only angry with evil-disposed people,” said Oberon
gently; “ and if you come here with a pure heart, no one will
harm you. What do you want with us ?”
“ I want my wife Lurina,” said Berl boldly.
There was a cry of astonishment at this. Suddenly a
faery flew forward on emerald wings, and, as she stood before
Oberon, Berl saw that it was Lurina.
“Yes, your Majesty,” said the faery Lurina, “ I am his wife,
but he lost me through his curiosity, as your Majesty knows.
I was exiled from Faeryland many years ago, and condemned to
dwell in a human body. I lived in Lurina’s body, but was
allowed by the Queen to join in the faery revels at night. I told
my husband not to follow me, but he did so, and found my
human body lying as if dead under the beech tree, because


loC MOON FANCIES.
I had left it to attend the festival. When I went back, I
could not find it, so had to stay in the forest all day as a
faery.”
« Is this true ?” asked Oberon, turning to Titama.
.< Perfectly true,” answered Titania. “It was I who punished
Lurina by exiling her from Faeryland, but now I think she is
punished enough, and, as she has lost her human body through
no fault of her own, she is pardoned.
On hearing these words, the faery Lurina dropped on her
knees and kissed the Queen’s hand, then flew off to be congratu-
lated on her good luck by her faery friends. But Berl was not
at all pleased to think he had lost his wife for ever, and spoke
to the King.
“ But what am I to do, your Majesty ?” he said, with tears
in his eyes. “I love Lurina very much, and don t want to
lose her.”
“ There is only one thing to be done,” said Oberon. Have
you brought back the human body of Lurina ? ”
“ Yes, your Majesty ; it’s under the beech tree,” replied Berl
eagerly. A ,
“Then I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” said the King. As the
Queen has pardoned Lurina, of course she can’t go back, as no
faery likes to live in your world ; but the faery Mala has been
very naughty of late, so I will condemn her to inhabit your
wife’s body, and stay in exile until she is good enough to come
back to court.”
“ But that won’t be Lurina,” said Berl.
“She will wear Lurina’s body,” replied Oberon, laughing,
“ and no one but yourself will be the wiser. Leave the forest at


once, and to-morrow morning you will see your wife come to the
cottage door. Strike up, music ! ”
Whereupon the faery music began to play loudly—the blue
bells rang merry chimes, the grasshoppers creaked gaily, and
the wind commenced to sigh among the forest leaves.
Berl dare not disobey the King’s command, and, after seeing
Oberon return to the throne of white lilies, and all the faeries
commence their dance again, he arose to his feet. As he did
so, he accidentally dropped the rowan twig, which was snatched
up by a faery at once, and then the whole of the faery revel
vanished. Berl could see nothing of the dancing, nor hear
anything of the music, but only beheld the smooth green lawn,
the myriad trees around, and the round orb of the moon.
There was nothing left to do but to return home, which he
did at once, and you may be sure he got very little sleep that
night. At early dawn he was standing at his cottage door,
looking towards the,wood, when he beheld Lurina tripping gaily
towards him, singing merrily. When she saw Berl, she flung
herself into his arms.
“ Dear Berl, here 1 am at last! ” she cried, kissing him.
“ But you are the faery Mala,” said Berl, looking at her in
perplexity.
“ Who is the faery Mala?” asked Lurina, who had forgotten
all about her faery existence now she was in a human body. “ I
never heard of her. I went into the forest and fell asleep, I
suppose. When I awoke I came straight back to you.”
Berl was a wise man, and said no more, but kissed his newly-
recovered wife heartily, then called all the neighbours to con-
gratulate him, which they did loudly.


When they told Lurina she had been dead, she declared it
was nonsense, as it was only a sleep, and soon every one believed
it except Berl and the Wise Woman, to whom Berl told all
about his reception by Oberon.
Lurina became bright and gay all day, and never more
wandered into the forest to indulge in moon fancies, so Berl
thought the faery Mala must have been exiled altogether from
Faeryland.
She was very good indeed, so good that Berl was quite
afraid lest she should be called back to Faeryland, but as yet that
has not happened.


(Ufie S^oxse-(pnncex^.
THE QUEEN WHO DID NOT BELIEVE IN FAERIES.
NCE upon a time there was a King and Queen
who reigned over a most beautiful country.
They were very rich and very happy, and lived
in a most gorgeous palace, the grand gardens
of which sloped down to the blue sea, on
which sailed many richly-laden ships, carrying
merchandise to the capital city of the kingdom
The palace was built of silver and ivory, and adorned with
pale blue velvet hangings, upon which were painted the most
exquisite pictures in the world. It stood on a high green hill,
and far below lay the immense city of Buss, with its wide
streets, many towers, and glittering fountains. As the King
and Queen looked down from their beautiful castle on to the
mighty city and great green plains which surrounded it, they
ought to have been happy, but, curious to say, they were not.
They had everything in the world to make them happy except
109


one thing, and that one thing they longed for ardently, the more
so because they did not see any chance of obtaining it.
“ Ah, if I only had a child ! ” sighed the Queen.
“ Yes ; a little boy,” said the King.
“Or a little girl,” retorted the Queen. “Don’t you know
any faeries, my dear, who would gratify our one desire ?”
“No,” replied the King, shaking his head sadly. “My
great-grandfather was the last person who ever saw a faery; no
one has ever seen one since.”
“ I don’t believe they exist,” said the Queen angrily.
“Oh yes, they do,” observed her husband. “ This palace is
said to have been built by faery hands.”
“ I don’t believe they exist,” declared the Queen again. “If
they did, they would surely help me by giving me a little girl or
boy. What’s the good of faeries if they don’t help you ? ”
“ I wish they would help me,” sighed his Majesty; “all my
subjects are getting so unruly that I don’t know but what there
will be a revolution, and they’ll put some one else on the
throne.”
“ Who else could they find ? ” asked the Queen curiously.
“ Oh, I’m not certain of that,” replied the King. “ You see,
my grandfather, who was the first of our dynasty, ascended the
throne by the help of the faeries, and the king who was deposed
vanished, but they say some of his descendants live there; ” and
he pointed downward to the city.
“And there they will stay,” said the Queen angrily. “I
don’t believe a word of it. Faeries indeed ! they don’t exist.”
“ But they do,” persisted the King.
“ Pooh ! ” replied her Majesty. “ Pooh ! ”


Now, when the Queen said “ Pooh ! ” her husband knew it
was no use talking any more, so he retired to his cabinet to look
over some petitions from starving people, while the Queen went
down with the ladies-in-waiting to walk in the garden.
It was really a delightful garden, filled with the most
wonderful flowers. There were great beds of scented carna-
tions, glowing with bright colours, red and white foxgloves, in
whose deep bells the faeries were said to hide, masses of snowy
white lilies, and a great mixture of marigolds, hollyhocks, sweet-
williams, daisies, buttercups, and dahlias, which made the whole
ground look like a brightly-coloured carpet. And as for the
roses —oh, what a quantity of charming roses there were grow-
ing there! Red roses, varying in colour from a deep scarlet
to a pale pink; white roses looking like snowflakes ; yellow
roses that glittered like gold, and faintly-tinted tea-roses that
perfumed the still air with their sweet odours. Oh, it was
really a famous garden, and bloomed all the year round, for the
kingdom was situated in the region of perpetual summer, where
snow never fell and frost never came.
The Queen, whose name was Flora, wandered disconsolately
about the garden, quite discontented with the beautiful flowers,
because she could not obtain the wish of her heart. The ladies-
in-waiting began to pluck flowers in order to adorn the royal
dinner-table, and Queen Flora walked on alone towards a great
white rose tree that was covered with blossoms. As she stood
looking at it, she suddenly heard a tiny laugh, and a great
white rose unfolded its petals, showing a golden heart, and also
a dainty little faery dressed in delicate green leaves, with a
crown of little white rosebuds, and a wand made of a blade of


'nsJ~ _
•-n* If
•?* .;,. /ypP., ■■
,rrass. When the Queen saw her, she was much astonished,
because she did not believe in faeries, but, now she really saw
one, she had to believe her own eyes.
“ I am called Rosina,” said the faery in a sweet, low voice,
“and I heard you say you did not believe faeries existed ; now
you see they do, be-
cause I am a faery.”
“ Yes, you must be
a faery,” replied the
Queen, clasping her
hands, “because no
human being could be
so small.”
“ Oh, I can be any
size I please, 1 ’ said the
Faery Rosina, with a
laugh, and, stepping
down from the rose,
she alighted on the
ground, and instantly
grew as tall as the
o
Queen herself.
“Oh, you are a real, real faery!” cried Flora in delight
“ But why do the faeries not appear now ? ”
“ Because the land is so badly governed,” said Rosina in a
severe tone. “ Yourself and the King only think of luxury, and
never of assisting the poor people; but lam going to cure you
both of such neglect.”
“ But how ? ” asked the Queen, trembling.


“ By giving you your wish,” said the faery, plucking a white
rosebud off the tree. “ Lay this bud beside your bed to-night,
and at the dawn of day it will change into a beautiful little baby
Princess, which is what you want.”
“Oh yes, yes ! ” cried the Queen ; “ I do want a Princess.”
“Every night at sundown,” said the faery slowly, “the
Princess will once more change into a flower, and become a
human being again at sunrise.”
“ But will she change like this all her life ? ” asked the
Queen, in great dismay, for she did not like to have such a
curious baby.
“ She will be a Princess by day and a rosebud by night,” said
Rosina, smiling, “ until she marries the great-grandson of the
King whom your husband’s grandfather deposed from the
throne.”
“And where is this Prince to be found?” demanded the
Queen breathlessly. “ I’ll marry my Princess to him at once.”
“You can’t do that,” said the faery, shaking her head.
“ The exiled Prince does not know who he is, and the Princess
herself will have to tell him he is of the royal blood. When she
does that, and you marry them to one another, the spell will be
removed, and she will be a Princess both by day and by night.”
“ I don’t see how she’s ever going to find this lost Prince!”
said the Queen angrily. “ I shall certainly not let my child run
about the world looking for him.”
“Fate is stronger than you are,” replied the faery, “and
you will see what you will see.” So saying, she suddenly dis-
appeared, and, as the white rose slowly curled up its petals, the
Queen knew the Faery Rosina was inside.


The ladies-in-waiting, who had seen the Queen talking to a
strange lady, dared not approach before, but now they saw their
royal mistress was alone, they ventured to come near, and one
of them offered to take the white rosebud which the Queen
held.
“Ohno ! cried Flora, hastily drawing back her hand ; “ I
am going to keep this rosebud. It is my ”
She was going to say Princess, but, thinking it wiser to keep
her own counsel, she held her tongue, and, on returning to the
palace, told no one but the King about the faery’s promise.
The King laughed at her, and said he did not believe her story—
that she must be dreaming ; but the Queen persisted in her tale,
that the rosebud would become a Princess, and placed it on a
velvet cushion by the side of her bed.
Next morning, at the first break of day, she sprang up out of
bed and hurried to look at the cushion, but there lay the rosebud
a rosebud still, and not a Princess, as she thought it would be.
Queen Flora was very much disappointed, particularly as
the King laughed at her folly for be-
lieving she had seen a faery, when
suddenly a shaft of golden sunlight
shone through the window right on
to the cushion, and in an instant,
instead of the flower there appeared a beautiful naked baby, who
laughed and crowed gaily.
The Queen was nearly mad with joy, and took the baby up
in her arms to show the King, who was equally delighted.
“ You see there are faeries after all,” he said to the Queen.
“ I always thought so,” replied the Queen.


“ Oh, my clear ! ” said the King, who was quite shocked at
such a story.
“ Pooh! ” answered Queen Flora, tossing the baby up in
her arms, and this ended the conversation.
THE ROSE-PRINCESS IS LOST.
Of course there was great joy when it came to be known that
Queen Flora was the mother of a lovely Princess, and all the
bells in the city were set ringing, while the poor people, for
once, had as much food as they could eat. Ihe ladies of the
Queen admired the beautiful baby very much indeed, and there
was no doubt the little Princess was really a charming child.
By the advice of the King, however, Queen Flora told nobody
about the transformation which took place at sundown, and
always put the Princess to bed herself every night. Then, as
the sunlight died out of the western skies, the pretty baby would
change into a delicate white rosebud, and rested on a velvet
cushion beside the Queen’s bed every night. At the first
golden ray of the sun the bud changed to a beautiful Princess
once more, and no one ever knew that she was only a flower
transformed for the day into a human being.
As the years rolled on, the Rose-Princess grew into a tall,
slender girl, with golden hair, blue eyes, and the most beautiful
complexion, white and pink, flushed like a delicate rose. When
she walked she swayed like a graceful lily, and always dressed


in a green gown with a girdle of white roses, which were her
favourite flowers.
She also wore a silver circlet on her golden hair, upon
which were fastened diamond roses and leaves made out of
bright green emeralds, which made her look so
beautiful that all who beheld her fell in love
on the spot. Many princes heard of her beauty
and wanted to marry her, but she did not care
for any of her suitors, which pleased Queen
Flora very much, for she was anxious her
Princess should marry the great-grandson of
the exiled King, and cease to change into a rosebud
The King made a proclamation that if the descendant of
the old dynasty came to the palace, he would marry his
daughter and be heir to the throne ; but no one ever came
forward to claim the hand of the Princess, which showed that
the Faery Rosina spoke truly when she said the exiled Prince
knew nothing about his royal blood.
The Princess was christened Rose by the Queen, because
she really was the offspring of the white rose tree, but her
complexion was so delicate, and her love for roses so great, that
every one called her the Rose-Princess instead of the Princess
Rose.
Now, on the seventeenth birthday of the Rose-Princess,
there was a mighty revolution in the city of Buss, and a great
multitude of men and women marched to the palace in order to
dethrone the King. He was not a bad King as kings go, but,
not knowing how to govern, he did nothing but amuse himself
with balls and fetes, letting his courtiers govern as they pleased.


As the courtiers were all very greedy, and wanted money, they
put such heavy taxes on the people, that at last the Kings
subjects could stand it no longer, and while a ball was taking
place in the great hall of the pala
Princess’s birthday, the doors wen
rushed in. The ball was
being given in the day-
time, so that the Rose-
Princess could attend, be-
cause, of course, she could
not dance when changed
into a flower. The music s'i^^
was sounding most beauti-
fully, the King and Queen
sat on their thrones with
golden crowns, and the
Rose-Princess was dancing
gaily, when the noisy
crowd of ragged men and
women rushed into the
beautiful palace.
Oh, it was really a
terrible scene! All the
palace, in honour of the Rose-
were burst open, and the mob
gaily dressed lords and ladies were seized by the dirty hands of
the people, and stripped of their beautiful jewels. The great
mirrors were all smashed, the lovely blue hangings torn down
and trampled on by the mob, the gorgeous gardens were all
destroyed, and these rioters, breaking into the King’s wine-
cellars, began to drink the fine wine of which he was so proud.


All the women of the city collected a lot of velvet couches
gorgeous dresses, and rich curtains into a heap in the garden
and, setting fire to it, danced about in a ring, singing loudly—
High to low
Down must go ;
Low to high
Now must fly.
All the lords and ladies dead,
Let us eat their costly bread,
While beneath our feet we tread
Every proud and haughty head.”
You may be sure the King and Queen did not wait to face
these terrible people, but, disguising themselves in mean
garments, fled from the palace, leaving all their beautiful
things to be destroyed by the mob, who chose a President,
and proclaimed a Republic, then began to kill all the lords and
ladies they could find. The whole nation seemed to go mad,
and there was no law or order anywhere, but every one did
exactly as they pleased, so that the entire kingdom was brought
to the verge of ruin.
And the Rose-Princess?—ah, poor lady! she also fled in
dismay from the terrible people, and sought refuge in her own
room. It was still early in the afternoon, so she could not
change into a rose, and thus escape the fury of the mob ; and,
as her parents had deserted her, she stood trembling in her
beautiful chamber, thinking she would be found and torn to pieces.
Besides, being ignorant of her nightly transformation, she was
afraid to go to bed, lest she should be killed while asleep.
As she stood weeping and wringing her hands in despair,
she suddenly saw a tall handsome lady standing before her,


looking at her kindly. This was the Faery Rosina, who had
come to save the Rose-Princess from the people, as it was not
her fault that they had rebelled against the King.
“Do not weep, Rose-Princess,” she said in a kind tone ;
“ though things seem to be going wrong just now, they will all
come right.”
“But my dear parents!” cried the Rose-Princess, weep-
ing.
“They have left the palace,” said the faery in a severe
tone, “ and will now endure hardship, to punish them for the
way in which they have neglected their office; but when they
have learnt a lesson, they will come back again.”
“ But what will become of me ? ” cried the Rose-Princess,
as the noise of the mob came nearer and nearer.
“ You will be quite safe,” replied the faery; “and the people
who are now crying out to kill you, will soon be cheering you
on your wedding-day, when you are married.”
“ Married to whom ?” asked the trembling Princess.
“ Ah, that you must find out!” answered the Faery Rosina,
as the crowd commenced to batter at the door of the room.
“ But now I must save you from the people, or they will cer-
tainly kill you.”
As she said this, she touched the Princess, who immediately
changed into a white rosebud, and lay on the dark green carpet
like a snowflake. Then the Faery Rosina vanished, and the
door was burst open, as the mob rushed in.
Of course they now saw nothing, and never for a moment
dreamt that the white rose lying on the carpet was their
beautiful Princess, so they commenced to pull down all the


costly things in the room, and would have trampled the rosebud
under their feet, only a young student picked it up.
He was a handsome fellow of twenty, this young student,
with a slender figure and a dark, splendid-looking face. His
name was Ardram, and he was one of the leaders of the revolt,
although he did not wish the people to destroy everything as
they were doing. Ardram was a very learned youth, and the
son of a poor sick woman, of whom he was very fond. He had
seen all the misery of the poor people who were in want of
bread, and the sinful luxury of the court, so thought it but right
that a change should be made. Therefore he led the people to
the palace, to ask justice of the King, but they had become too
strong for him, and he was already regretting that he had not
let them stay where they were. However, it was too late now
for regrets, but he determined not to take any part in the follies
of the mob, so walked home to his own little room in the city,
with the white rosebud in his button-hole.
All night long he saw the flames rising from burning dwell-
ings, and heard the shrieks of people being killed, so he felt
very sad to think that he was the original cause of it all,
though he certainly had no intention of letting such things be
done. Then he determined on the morrow to talk to the
people, and try and persuade them to stop their plundering and
cruelty, but, in the meantime, went to bed and slept for an hour
in an uneasy manner.
He forgot all about the white rosebud, which had fallen on
the floor, as he flung himself, dressed as he was, on his bed, but
when he awoke in the morning, he was much surprised to find
seated beside him a beautiful woman, who was weeping bitterly.


“ Who are you ?” asked Ardram, springing to his feet; “ and
how did you come here ?”
“I am the Rose-Princess,” she replied sadly; “but I do
not know how I came here. You will let me stay, will you not ?
I am so afraid of those terrible people who broke into the palace.”
“ Oh, I won’t let them harm you, Princess,” said Ardram,
who had fallen in love with her beautiful face ; “ but you must
not leave this room, or else I cannot protect you.”
“I’ll stay here,” said the Rose-Princess obediently; “but
will you please give me something to eat ? I feel rather
hungry.”
So Ardram brought out some bread and wine, off which the
Princess made a hearty meal, talking to her host all the time
she was eating.
“ I saw you in the palace yesterday,” she said, looking
straight at Ardram.
“Yes,” replied the student, blushing; “I was with the
people. We only wanted justice, and I did not think they would
go on like they did. The people were too strong for me, so I
left them.”
“ And will you put my father on the throne again ?” asked
the Rose-Princess eagerly.
“ Pm afraid that will be impossible, Princess,” said Ardram
quietly, “ unless he promises to govern better. You see, many
years ago, a king was deposed for governing badly, and your
grandfather was put on the throne—now they’ll offer the crown
to some one else.”
“Perhaps they’ll offer it to you?” suggested the Rose-
Princess.


“ I don’t think so,” said Ardram, laughing, as he arose to
his feet; “ but if I did become king, I would take care that all
my subjects were well off. Now 111 go out, Princess, and you
stay here.”
“ Very well,” answered the Rose-Princess ; “ and do look for
my parents.”
“ I will—though I daresay they’ve left the city,” said Ardram,
and he went away more in love with the Princess than ever.
Meanwhile the Rose-Princess was left alone, and thought
how noble and brave Ardram was.
“ If he was only the Prince I was to marry!” she sighed;
“ but then the faery said everything would come right, so,
perhaps, he is to be my husband after all.”
She waited all through the long day for the return of
Ardram, but he did not return till sundown, and just as his hand
was on the door, the Princess changed into a white rosebud, so,
when he entered, he found the room empty.
“ Princess, Princess, where are you ? ” he called out in alarm ;
but of course no Princess answered him, and Ardram asked
every one in the house if they had seen a beautiful lady go out,
but no one had done so.
“ I’ll go and see my mother,” said Ardram in perplexity, for
his mother was a very wise woman, although at present she
was lying on a bed of sickness. As soon as Ardram made up
his mind to ask his mother’s advice, he put on his cap to go,
when he spied the white rosebud on the floor.
“ Hullo ! ” he cried, picking it up ; “ this is the rose I found in
the palace yesterday —my mother is fond of flowers, so I’ll take
it to her ; ” and he went away.


The streets were quite full of people, all in a great state
of excitement, for the King, Queen, and Princess had
vanished, and, as all the ministers were beheaded, there was
no one to rule, so the whole kingdom was in a dreadful
state.
Ardram reached his mother’s house, and found her in bed,
very ill, but when she saw him she was much delighted.
“How are things going ? ” she asked, after he had
kissed her.
“ Very badly,” replied Ardram ;“ no one is able to rule, and
I’m afraid we will have a
civil war.”
“ Oh no, we won’t,”
said his mother quickly.
“ If the people won’t have
their present King, per-
haps the exiled Prince of
the old royal family will
be found.”
“ I’m afraid not,” re-
plied her son, smiling;
“ but if he is, I hope he’ll
rule wisely.”
“ I hope so too,” said his mother pointedly. “ Who gave
you that beautiful rose, Ardram ? ”
“ I picked it up in the palace, mother,” he answered, and,
taking it out of his button-hole, he gave it to her to smell.
Then he told her all about the beautiful Princess, and his
mother was very much astonished that the poor lady had left


the safe shelter of his room, and perhaps been torn to pieces
by the angry people in the street.
At last Ardram went away, leaving the rosebud with his
mother, who laid it on her pillow and went to sleep. Next
morning, when the beams of the sun were shining into her
chamber, she awoke, and found the Rose-Princess sleeping
beside her.
“Are you not the Rose-Princess?” she asked, for ot
course she recognised the King’s daughter at once by her
crown.
“ Yes,” answered the Rose-Princess quickly; “but how did
I get here ? The last thing I remember before I went to sleep,
was standing in Ardram’s room.”
“ You must have walked here in your sleep, then,” said the
sick woman, looking at her, “ because he has been searching for
you everywhere.”
“Oh, Pm so sorry!” said the Rose-Princess, rising. “1
would not like him to think Pd run away, because I am so fond
of him.”
“ Are you fond enough of him to marry him?” asked the
mother sadly.
“Yes, I am,” answered the Princess, blushing; “but Pm
afraid he would not marry me. Besides, you know, I am to
marry the exiled Prince of the old royal family, as soon as he is
found.”
“He is found,” said the sick woman quietly. “ Ardram is
my son, and the great-grandson of the King who was driven
from the throne, so, if you marry him, he will be able to regain
his throne again.”


“And my father and mother?” asked the Princess in a
faltering voice.
o
“ I’m afraid they’re not fit to reign, if all I have heard is
true,” said the mother in a melancholy tone; “and if you and
my son, Prince Ardram, ascend the throne, I hope you will
govern more wisely. Now, to prove the truth of what I say,
pull out that wooden box from under my bed.”
The Rose-Princess did as she was told, and, on lifting up
the lid, saw a most beautiful crown, all over diamonds, and
rubies, and great blue sapphires, sparkling like the stars.
“ That is the old royal crown,” said the sick woman, as the
Princess put it on her head, “and Ardram will be crowned
with it.”
“ But if your son is the Prince, why did you not send him to
the palace to marry me?” asked the Rose-Princess, who looked
truly royal, as she stood in the room with the great crown on
her golden head.
“ Because I wanted him to see the misery of the people,
before ruling over them,” said the mother quickly. “ Now he
knows what poor people endure, he will be a wise king, and
govern well. Now, I will sleep until my son comes back, then
we will see about getting you married.”
So she turned her face away, in order to sleep, and the
Princess put away the royal crown, and began to sing to the
sick woman in a low, sweet voice. This is what she sang :
“ Roses red, in the red, red dawn,
Open your hearts to the sun, I pray ;
The dew lies heavy upon the lawn,
Westward rises the golden day.


Roses, droop in the hot noon-tide,
Scatter your petals of red and white,
Far in the depths of your green leaves hide,
Till to the eastward the sun takes flight.
Roses white, at the shut of day,
Close your blossoms thro > sunless hours ;
The moon rides high in the sky so grey.
Night brings sleep to the weary flowers,”
Then she also fell asleep, and, as night came on, she was
once more changed into the white rosebud, and lay on the
pillow beside the grey head of Ardram’s mother. When the
doctor, a gruff old man called Mux, came in, the sick woman
awoke, and asked at once for the Princess.
“ What princess ? ” asked Mux gruffly. “ There’s no princess
here. So much the better, as I’d cut her head off if I saw her.”
“ But she was here when I went to sleep,” said Ardram's
mother angrily.
“ Well, she isn’t here now,” retorted the doctor. “ I expect
she’s left you to look for the King and Queen. But never mind
about her —how do you feel yourself?”
But the sick woman was much agitated over the loss of the
Rose-Princess, and when her son entered, she told him how the
Princess had been with her all day, and again vanished ; where-
upon Ardram rushed out into the streets, to see if he could find
the poor Rose-Princess again.
When Mux was taking his leave, Ardram’s mother said she
had no money to pay him.
“ Never mind,” said the doctor gruffly, for he was really
very kind-hearted; “ I’ll take this rose as payment;” and he
picked up the white rose off the pillow.


“ Its very kind of you, doctor,” said the sick woman grate-
fully. “ Take the rose by all means—my son gave it to me. But,
doctor, do try and find the Princess ; il you do, I will reward you
better than you think.”
“ Stuff! said the gruff Mux ; and he went away home with
the white rosebud fastened in his coat.
THE ROSE-PRINCESS FULFILS HER DESTINY.
Gruff Dr. Mux took the white rosebud home with him,
little thinking it was the lost Princess, which was perhaps just
as well, seeing that he was such an enemy to the royal family.
At least every one thought he was, but everybody was wrong
to think so, as, in spite of the names he called them, he was
really a great upholder of the throne, and in his humble house
the exiled King and Queen had been hidden all the time of
the revolution. No one thought of looking for them in the
house of such a red republican as Dr. Mux, so they were as
safe there as though they were guarded by stone walls and
faithful soldiers.
When Dr. Mux arrived home, he went straight to bed, but
arose very early in the morning, before the sun was up, and
called the King and Queen.
“Sire and madam,” he said, bowing before them, “as I
came through the streets, I noticed that the people were talking
about re-establishing the throne.”
O


“ Oh, then we will go back to our palace, said the Queen
J } "And make an example of all traitors,” observed the King
« Nothing of the sort, sire and madam,” said the doctor,
bowing again. “ From what I heard, I think the people want to
put your daughter on the throne.”
“ Nonsense ! ” said the King.
“ Pooh ! ” said the Queen.
« You think so ? ” observed the doctor severely. “ Listen.
They did listen, and heard a roar in the distance coming
nearer and nearer, then a great mass of people came sweeping
up the street, crying out. “Long live Queen Rose!” “ Let
us see our new Queen ! ” “ Where is the Rose-Princess ?
“ Ah, where indeed ? ” cried the Queen, weeping. “ 1 have
not seen our beautiful daughter since the mob attacked the
palace.”
“ She would easily be recognised,” said the doctor.
“ I’m not so sure of that,” replied the King, looking at the
Queen. “ You know our Princess is enchanted by the faeries.
“ Faeries ? ” echoed the doctor ; “ I never saw one.
“ But I did,” said the Queen.
“ Excuse me, my dear madam —dyspepsia, returned the
doctor gravely, for you see he did not know how the Princess
changed to a rosebud every night.
The Queen was very angry, but dared not say anything,
lest the doctor should deliver her up to the mob, who were
now surging in the wide street, listening to a man who was
speaking.


THE ROSE-PRINCESS. I2g
"That is Ar cl ram the student,” said the doctor. “ I saw
his sick mother last night—she gave me this rosebud.”
Ah, sighed the Queen, as she took the rosebud from the
doctor, how like my poor lost daughter! ”
I do not see the resemblance, sire and madam,” said the
doctoi ; “but listen to Ardram ;” and he went out of the room,
leaving the King and Queen to hearken to the man who had
taken their throne from them. He was talking in a loud tone
to the mob, and telling them they ought to elect the Rose-
I rincess for their Queen, as she would know how to govern
better than her parents. The sun was just rising, and the
golden beams were shining on his face, so that he looked truly
noble.
“A seditious traitor!” cried the King.
“ Cut his head off! ” said the Queen.
But they had not the power to do so, and, amid cries of
“Long live Queen Rose!” Ardram leaped from his standing-
place, and all the mob swept down the street to look for the
lost Princess.
The King and Queen turned from the window in great
anger, when they saw to their surprise that the Rose-Princess
was standing in the room.
My child, my child ! ” said the King, kissing her.
“ It was your rosebud, then ? ” said the Queen, folding the
beautiful girl in her arms.
“What rosebud?” asked the Rose-Princess in surprise;
“ and how did I come here ? ”
“ The doctor brought you,” said the King.
“Did he carry me through the streets?” asked the


Princess, very much astonished. “ I wonder I was not
recognised.”
“No one could recognise you as you were then, said the
Queen, and nodded wisely, but she did not tell the Princess
that she had been a rosebud when she was carried by the
doctor.
“ I’ve had such a lot of adventures, said the Rose-Princess ,
“ but I don’t know how I came from one place to the other.
First, I was in the palace, then in Ardram’s room, then by
his sick mother’s bedside, and now here. It must be the
c • »
faeries.
“ It is the faeries,” observed the Queen, kissing her daughter
again. “ You’ll know all about it when you marry the exiled
Prince, and break the spell.”
“Oh, I can break whatever spell there is when I marry
Ardram,” said the Rose Princess; “he is the exiled Prince.”
“Nonsense!” said the King, frowning.
“ Pooh ! ” said the Queen in an angry tone.
“ Oh, but he is,” cried the Rose-Princess gaily.
I saw his
crown, for his mother showed it to me.
“ Then, if he is the real Prince,” said the King, “you had
better marry him, and break the enchantment.
“What enchantment?” asked the Rose-Princess.
“ You will find it all out,” began the Queen, “ when ”
“ When you marry Prince Ardram,” finished the King.
All day the three royal people sat in the humble room of the
doctor, and talked about their troubles. Rose-1 rincess told her
parents all about the misery of the people, and how they ought
to govern, but the King and Queen only laughed, which showed


that the severe lesson of exile was lost on them. Gruff Dr.
Mux was very much astonished to see the Rose-Princess, and
told her how she had been proclaimed Queen by Ardram.
“Then 111 marry him,” said the Rose Princess promptly,
“for I love him very much. Where is he ?”
“Coming up the street,” said the doctor. Then all four
went to the window, and saw that the crowd of people were
coming back, looking very disappointed because they had not
found the Princess.
Ardram mounted on a great stone in front of the church
door, for the cathedral of the city was just opposite the doctor’s
house. When the Rose-Princess saw him, she ran out of the
room, down the stairs, and across to where the student was
standing.
“Ardram, Ardram, I am here!” she cried, and climbed
up beside him.
The people recognised their beautiful Princess at once, and
cried out, —
“ Long live Queen Rose ! ”
“And King Ardram,” said the Princess loudly; “if you
make me Queen, you must make him King, and we will both
rule wisely.”
“ She never thinks of us,” said her father.
“ Ungrateful child!” cried the Queen.
But no one heard them, for the mob began to roar, “ Long
live King Ardram and Queen Rose! ” and the red light of the
setting sun shone on the handsome couple as they stood on
the stone. Ardram was beside himself with joy, not at being
made King, but because the beautiful Rose-Princess had her


white arms round his neck, and was saying how much she
loved him.
Suddenly the red light in the sky vanished and the sun set,
leaving Ardram standing alone on the stone with a white rose
in his hand.
“Where is the Oueen ?” roared the mob.
“ I don’t know,” cried Ardram, looking at the white rosebud
in a bewildered manner; “ she is gone.”
“He wants to be King alone,” cried the people, “and has
made the Queen disappear by magic.”
“ No, no,” said Ardram. “ I love her too much for that.”
“Kill him! kill him! he’s a magician!” yelled the people,
and they all pressed forward to tear Ardram off the stone, but,
seeing his danger, he jumped down and ran into the church,
closing the great doors after him. There he was safe, for the
mob dared not to break into the church, but all night roared
round it like a stormy sea round a little boat.
The King and Queen left the window, and told the gruff
doctor all about the enchantment of the Rose-Princess, which
he was now inclined to believe, as he had seen her disappear
so suddenly before his eyes. He recommended the Queen to
call on the Faery Rosina, which she did, and in a moment the
faery, a tall, beautiful woman, in a robe of shining green, was
standing before them. Then the doctor did believe in faeries,
because he now really saw one for the first time, and was much
astonished.
“Well, are you sorry you lost your throne?” asked the
faery severely.
“ Very,” said the King and Queen together.


“If you go back, will you rule wisely?” she said, looking
at them.
“We will rule just as we ruled before,” they replied.
“ Then you are not fit to go back,” said Rosina sadly. “ I
see I have not cured you after all.”
‘ Nonsense ! ” said the King.
“ Pooh ! ” said the Queen, and they both thought the faery
was very rude.
“ I’ll settle everything to-morrow morning,” said the faery,
quite angry at their folly. “ I can do nothing till the Rose-
Princess becomes a woman again—she will of course marry
the Prince Ardram to break the spell.”
“Is he really the Prince?” asked the King and Queen
together.
“Yes, he is,” retorted the faery shortly, and then vanished,
leaving them quite disconsolate, as they thought they would
never get back their throne.
Meanwhile Ardram walked up and down the dark church
all night, listening to the roaring of the crowd outside, and
wondering how the Princess kept vanishing and appearing so
strangely. He was more in love with her than ever, and at
last went fast asleep on the altar steps, dreaming about his
lovely bride, who said he would rule as King with her. The
rosebud lay on the steps beside him, but Ardram never
thought for a moment that his charming Princess was so near
him.
Next morning he awoke in the early grey dawn, before the
sun was up, and found himself surrounded by the King, the
Queen, Dr. Mux, his mother, now looking strong and well,


and a beautiful tall woman, in a green robe, with a wand made
of white roses.
“ I am the Faery Rosina,” she said to him in a low, sweet
voice, “ and I am come to put things to rights, Prince
Ardram.”
“ Why do you call me ‘ Prince ’ Ardram ? ” asked the student,
looking puzzled.
“ The Rose-Princess will tell you,” said the faery, smiling.
“ But where is she ? ” asked Ardram, looking around.
“ There,” said the faery, pointing with her wand to the white
rosebud, which lay on the floor where Ardram had flung it the
previous night.
“ Impossible ! ” he said in astonishment.
“Not at all,” cried the King, coming forward; “nothing is
impossible to a royal princess. That rosebud is my daughter.”
“ Given to the King and Queen by me,” said Rosina
sweetly. “ They did not know how to rule, and as I knew this
revolution would take place, I wanted to provide an heir to the
throne.”
“ But the white rose cannot reign,” said Ardram, rather
bewildered.
“ Not now, but wait till the sun rises,” cried the fairy. “ Ah,
here is the first yellow beam ! Now look.”
Every one looked at the white rosebud lying on the floor,
and then a yellow beam which struck through a painted
window, creeping nearer and nearer till it shone on the white
bud. In an instant that vanished, and in its place stood the
Rose-Princess, looking tall and beautiful. On seeing Ardram,
she bounded towards him and put her arms round her neck.


Good morning’, my Prince,” she said sweetly.
“ But 1 am no prince,” cried Ardram, clasping her to his
breast.
Yes, you are,’ said the Rose-Princess merrily ; “ you are the
great-grandson of the King who was deposed.”
“ Is this true, mother?” asked Ardram.
“ Perfectly true,” she replied, producing the crown. “ Here
is the royal crown; you are the real King, but I did not dare to
tell you till the Faery Rosina gave me permission.”
“And I waited till now because I wanted you to marry the
Princess Rose, said the faery, as Ardram placed the crown on
his head. The Princess is enchanted, and turns into a rose
every night, so in order to break the spell she must marry
you.”
“ When ?” asked both lovers together.
Now, said the faery, and, touching Ardram’s dress, it
changed into beautiful royal robes all of gold, and at the same
moment the Rose-Princess appeared dressed in wedding
garments, with her crown of silver and diamonds on her
head. The organ rolled out a bridal march, and the priests
came forth in a long procession. In a few minutes the
Princess Rose was married to Ardram, and then her silver
crown rolled off.
“You must not wear silver any more,” said the faery,
“ because the spell is now broken, and you will never change to
a rosebud again.”
So saying, she touched the Rose-Princess’s head with her
wand, and immediately there appeared a beautiful golden crown,
as gorgeous as that worn by Ardram.


“ Now you are King and Queen,” said Rosina graciously,
“so you will go to the palace and govern wisely.”
“ Oh yes, we will,” cried the new King and Queen joyfully
and then they kissed one another as they stood in their royal
crowns and splendid garments before the great altar.
“But what is to become of us?” said the old King and
Oueen.
/S/
“You are not fit to govern,” said the faery severely, “and
only care for pleasure, so you will go away to the other end of
the kingdom, to a city of your own, where the people are as
fond of pleasure as you are, and there you will be happy.”
“ Nonsense!” said the King.
“ Pooh ! ” replied the Queen.
Nevertheless, both of them were secretly very delighted, as
they would now be able to enjoy themselves as they pleased.
Then the faery ordered the doors of the cathedral to be thrown
wide open, the organ played a triumphal march, and the new
King and Queen walked slowly down the church, looking the
handsomest couple in the world. The gruff doctor and the
old mother followed, but the deposed King and Queen had
vanished with the Faery Rosina, who transported them to
their own city, where they ruled and enjoyed themselves for
many years.
Then all the people in the city saw the new King and
Queen standing before them with their royal crowns, and the
bells rang, the streets were made clear again, and as the young
couple moved through the crowd, which strewed flowers before
them, the people cried, —
“ Long live King Ardram and Queen Rose!”


And the Rose-Princess never changed into a flower again,
but became a true, loving wife to the King, who ruled well and
wisely, for he had seen the hardships of his subjects when he
was a poor student. They reigned long and happily, and had
many children, but in all their prosperity the Queen never
forgot how she had been an enchanted Rose- Princess.




3or r o <x> - i ftg ♦
HERE was once a poor woman who
lived in a little village many, many
years ago, when the world was much
younger than it is now, and when the
destinies of mortals were often con-
trolled by the faeries. This woman,
whose name was Eldina, had lost her
husband, who had fallen in a great
battle while fighting the enemies of his king, and a month
after she heard of his death, Eldina became the mother of a
beautiful little son, which event was a great comfort to her.
The truth was that, seeing she was so miserable and lonely
since the death of her husband, the kind faeries had given her
this little baby to cheer her heart, and when it was born they
took it under their own special protection. It was necessary to
inform Eldina of this, so one bright summer’s night a number
of faeries flew into the room where the child was lying and stood
in a circle round the cradle.
Eldina was engaged in some household work, but having
faery blood in her veins, she had a very delicate sense of hearing,
139


and immediately knew by the rustle of the faeries’ wings that
they had arrived. She made herself neat and clean to do
honour to her illustrious visitors, and went into the room to hear
what they had to say about the child.
The cradle was quite covered with the most lovely flowers,
which the enchantments of the faeries had caused to bloom on
the brick floor of the
cottage, and in the centre
of the exquisite blossoms
slept the smiling baby,
on whose face shone a
bright moonbeam.
“ Eldina/’ said the
Faery Titania, who is
Queen of the Faeries, “we have come to bestow our gifts
upon your child, whom we have taken under our special pro-
tection is there any gift you would like him to possess ? ”
Yes, your Majesty,” cried Eldina eagerly; “the gift of
happiness.”
All the faeries looked grave at this request, and a sigh
sounded through the room, while Titania gazed sadly on the
child.
“ We cannot g' ve happiness,” she said sorrowfully. “ Every
mortal can only find happiness in his own actions, but we will
do the best we can—l will give the child the gift of song, which
is the greatest of all gifts.”
So saying, she touched the child's lips with her wand, and
retired, while the Faery Laurina stepped forward with a wreath
of laurel leaves.


“ 1 give this child the gift of fame,” she said, placing the
laurel wreath on the baby’s head; “ his songs will make him
famous throughout the world.”
“ From me he receives the gift of beauty,” cried another
faery, whose name was Venusina.
From me the gift of wisdom,” said the Faery Mirvenetta.
“ From me the gift of a kind heart,” observed a smiling fay,
who had kind blue eyes.
Then all the other faeries bestowed their gifts in turn —
wealth, honour, grandeur, cleverness, strength. Everything
that human beings most desire was given to this lucky baby, on
whom the name of Lanis was now bestowed by the universal
voice of all the faeries present.
“ All these are beautiful gifts,” said Eldina, weeping, although
she half smiled through her tears, “ but they do not bring
happiness.”
They bring happiness if wisely used,” cried Titania.
Then give him the power to use them wisely,” pleaded the
poor mother.
“We cannot —we cannot,’ sighed the faeries; “the power
rests with himself.”
“ Will he never find happiness ?” cried Eldina in despair.
“ Yes, when he arrives at the Kingdom of Shadows, and
enters it through the golden gate.”
“ But how will he find the golden gate ? ”
“By being a good man. If he misuses his gifts and becomes
wicked, he will go through the iron gate into the Kingdom of
F*
ire.
Then the beams of the moon grew brighter, until the whole


chamber glowed with silver light, and the faeries commenced to
dance gracefully round the cradle, singing this song, while the
baby Lanis slept peacefully, with the crown of green laurel leaves
on his head :
“Great blessings on thy head will fall,
In this thy natal hour;
But ah ! the greatest gift of all,
We have not in our power.
We give thee wealth, we give thee fame,
We give thee hate of wrong,
The splendour of an honoured name,
The mighty power of song.
Ihese gifts are idle as the wind,
Tho’ by them thou art blest,
Unless thro 1 seeking thou canst find
The gift we deem the best”
Then all the faeries melted away in the thin moonshine, the
bloom,ng flowers vanished through the floor, the laurel wreath
d,sappeared from the baby’s head, and Eldina almost thought
that she had been dreaming
&"
She had not been dreaming, however, as she soon found out,
for, as the years rolled by, and Lanis grew up into a tall, handsome
boy, he became the wonder of the countryside, owing to his
beautiful voice and his marvellous songs. Eldina had found a
go den lyre left by the faeries when Lanis grew old enough to
p ay it, and with this in his hand he was accustomed to wander
a tout the country singing his lovely melodies. All the country
fo k used to make Lanis sing to them at their merrymakings, but
w ten he lifted up his voice, the dancers would cease to dance, the


talkers to chatter, and they would sit with awestruck faces
listening to the wonderful stories he told them.
. li was a curious thing that, in spite of what the faeries had
said about not giving him the gift of happiness, the lad’s songs
were of the most joyous description, and made the hearts of all
rejoice. Fddina was- delighted at this, as she thought Lanis
would now be happy, in spite of the prophecy of the faeries,
when at one merrymaking she heard an old man say,—
Ah, he sings fine, no doubt; but he’ll sing better when his
heart is broken.”
“ What do you mean ?” she asked in great dread.
Joy-singing is beautiful, ’ replied the old man, “but sorrow-
singing is better, your lad knows nothing of the bitterness of
life, and sings like a delighted child. Wait till he breaks his
heart, and he will be a famous singer indeed.”
But will he be happy ?” she asked quickly, as the old man
turned to eo.
No . genius is the gift of heaven, but it always brings
sorrow to its possessor; the laurel wreath is a sign of honour,
but the leaves are bitter.”
Eldina looked steadily into the eyes of the old man, and saw
that he was a faery who had come to warn her of approaching
sorrow. She strove to detain him and learn more, but the faery
had vanished, and her hands only grasped the rags of a scare-
crow which stood in the fields.
That night she died, and Lanis, who was deeply attached to
her, wept bitterly as they buried her under the cool green turf.
Before she died, Eldina called him to her bedside, and told him
all about the faeries, bidding him wander through the world and


seek the one gift which they could not bestow. Lanis wept, and
although he could not understand what she meant, still a vague
idea of her real meaning came to him as he sat by her grave
under the silent stars and sang a farewell. There was a note
in his voice which had not been there before, and the simple
people in the village awoke at midnight to hear his sad voice
float through the still air of the summer’s night.
“It is sorrow-singing,” they said to one another. “ Lanis
will never be happy again.”
And they were right, for Lanis now started to wander through
the world and find out how cruel and hard it can be to those
who have sensitive souls and childlike faith. He was full of
belief in human goodness and kindness of heart, for he had
received nothing else but kindness in his country home ; but now
his mother was dead, the spell was broken, and he set forth to
find the gift of happiness.
Many months he wandered, singing his songs, sometimes sad,
sometimes joyful, but in all there sounded the weary note of
longing for what he was seeking.
“Where can I find happiness?” he asked an old beggar
who lay by the wayside.
“ In the Kingdom of Shadows,” replied the old man, without
raising his eyes.
So Lanis pursued his weary way over mountains, plains,
and seas, always asking his one question, and always receiving
the same answer.
Once he came to a great city, and sang in the streets so
beautifully of the green country and silver moonlight, that all
the tired citizens crowded around to hear. A man who was


among the crowd came up to him as he ceased his song and
touched him on the sleeve.
“ Come with me,” he said eagerly, “ and I will make you
rich.”
I don’t want to be rich,” replied Lanis.
“ That is a foolish thing to say,” said the man, who had a
crafty face; “ gold is the finest thing in the world.”
So oily was his speech that he persuaded Lanis to come with
him, and took him to a great hall to sing, where he stood at the
door himself, making the people pay broad gold pieces to hear
this wonderful poet who sang about such noble things. Lanis
felt a longing for wealth in his heart, and sang about the
power of gold to make or mar life, of the good it could do, of
the evil that arose through its misuse; and all the people
in the hall, mostly fat, wealthy merchants, chuckled with
delight.
“Ah ! this is a sensible fellow,” they said to each other; “he
sings about sensible things.”
“ I think his song about the beautiful green woods was finer,”
sighed a poor boy who listened outside, but then’ no one took
any notice of such a silly observation.
When Lanis had done singing, he came out of the hall, and
found the man who had tempted him with wealth sitting before
a table heaped high with gold.
“ Is all that mine ? ” asked Lanis in a breathless tone.
“All that yours!” echoed the man in an indignant
voice ; “ no, indeed—ids my money—here is your share,” and
he pushed two pieces of gold towards Lanis out of the great
heap.


“ But I earned it,” said Lanis indignantly ; “ I earned it
with my voice.”
“And did I do nothing ?” cried the man angrily. “ Do you
think I can give my time and services to you for nothing ? I
should think not. If I hadn’t put you into this hall to sing,
and charged for people to hear you, why, you would have been
singing for nothing in the streets, instead of getting two gold
pieces.
‘ But you have a hundred gold pieces.’
‘ Of course —that’s my share.”
‘ I did half the work, and I ought to have half the money.”
“ Not at all,” replied the man, putting the gold in his pocket;
“if you wanted half you should have said so before you
sang.”
“ But I trusted you,” cried Lanis.
“ More fool you,” retorted the man carelessly; “but I saw
you were a fool when you sang.”
“ You are doing a wicked thing.”
“ It’s only business,” shrieked the man ; “you ought to be
pleased at my giving a beggarly poet like you anything, instead
of trying to steal the money I’ve worked for so hard.”
Then the man ran about the city telling all the people that
he had done a great kindness to Lanis, and been shamefully
treated for doing so. All the citizens, who quite agreed with
the man’s way of doing business, fell upon Lanis, and, driving
him out of the city, shut their gates against him
In this way, therefore, did Lanis gain his first experience of
the world’s unkindness when there is any question between right
and might. Picking up his lyre, he walked on, leaving the city


wherein he had been so cruelly deceived far behind him, and
as he went he sang sadly:
In the school of life
Is the lesson taught,
That with harshest strife
Is our knowledge bought.
We are bought and sold
In our joy and grief;
I have lost my gold,
I have lost belief.
Ah, by cruel Fate
We are onward led ;
I have learned to hate,
And my faith is dead.’
Lanis certainly should not have sung so bitterly when such
a beautiful world bloomed around him ; after all, being deceived
by one man does not mean that every one else is as cruel , but
then Lanis was very sensitive, and the unjust way in which he
had been treated made him very sad, so that all his songs
now spoke but of the sorrows of life and the sadness of
despair.
As he wandered on for many months m this dismal mood,
he met with many adventures, but, alas ! nothing which could
give him back his former childlike belief in human kindness,
and he was very anxious to get to the Kingdom of Shadows
and find once more his lost happiness.
Once he came to a great city which was the capital of a very
rich kingdom, and here found the citizens in astate ol great dismay,
for their King, whom every one loved, had gone out of his mind.
No one could cure him of his madness, so it had been proclaimed


that whomsoever should do so would become the husband of
the lovely Princess Iris, who was the King’s daughter. Lanis
saw the Princess, and she was so beautiful that he at once fell
deeply in love with her, and, forgetting all his former experience
ot ingratitude, he thought that if he cured her father, she would
grow to love him, and he would thus discover his happiness
without looking any more for the
Kingdom of Shadows.
With this idea he went to the royal
palace of the King, and there told the
Lord High Chamberlain that he would
cure the mad monarch by the power
of song. 1 he Lord High Chamberlain
did not believe much in what Lanis
said, still he was anxious that every
means should be tried to
cure the King, so let
7
Lanis go into the dark
room where he was
sitting.
The King was a
noble-looking old man,
who looked very sad and
sorrowful, but Lanis saw
at once that he was not really mad, but sad and despondent,
owing to the treachery and unkindness he had found upon
every hand. His dearest friends had betrayed him, his subjects
were rebellious, and the poor King so despaired of ever making
his people wise and noble that he had thus fallen into this


deeply sorrowful state which the Lord High Chamberlain
mistook for madness.
Lanis ordered the curtains of the great window to be drawn
aside, and, when the bright sunlight streamed in through the
painted glass, he sat down in the centre of all the gorgeous
colours, and, taking his lyre, began to sing of noble deeds in
order to rouse the despairing King from his lethargy:
“The world is fair
With beauty rare,
Then why despair,
Oh monarch great ?
He is not wise
Who never tries
Sublime to rise
O’er adverse Fate.
The summer flowers
Re-bloom in bowers,
Tho’ winter’s hours
May kill with frost.
Beneath the sun
As quick years run ;
All thou hast done
Is never lost.”
The King lifted up his head as he heard these comforting
words, and looked at the noble face of the minstrel, for the
silvery song bade him not despair, although no good appeared
to come of all his work; and Lanis, seeing a ray of hope beam
in the King’s eyes, went on singing joyfully:
“ Put on thy crown,
And boldly frown
Thy sadness down,
Tho’ keen the smart.


Thy burden take
Of office great,
And rule the State
With dauntless heart.
A coward he
Who thus would flte
Despairingly,
In time of need.
Tho’ evils lurk
In darkness murk,
Resume thy work—
Thou wilt succeed.”
Then the King, whose face now was shining with hope and
strong resolve, put on his royal crown, took his golden sceptre
in his hand, and went forth to
take his seat upon the throne to
do justice to his subjects.
“ Thou art a wise youth,”
said he to Lanis, “ and thy words
are noble. It is foolish to desert
one’s post when there is work to
be done, and 1 wall not forget
thy rebuke. Now, thou wilt
stay with me and marry my
daughter.”
Lanis was only too glad to
do so, for he now loved the
Princess with all his might, but, seeing her leave the great feast
which the King had given in honour of his recovery, he followed
her secretly, and found her weeping.
“Why do you weep, beautiful Princess ?” he asked.


“Because I have to marry you/’ said Iris sadly, “and I
love another.”
Lanis felt a pang at his heart as she said this, and on turning
round saw a handsome young man holding the beautiful
Princess in his arms.
“ Do you love one another ? ” asked Lanis, with tears in
his eyes.
“ Yes ; it would be death for us to part,” they both replied.
Then Lanis saw that once more he had failed to find
happiness, but still it was in his power to bestow it upon others,
so he took the Princess and her lover to the old King, and
obtained his consent to their marriage. The lovers thanked
him heartily, and after Lanis saw them married, he once more
started away to wander through the world. The King offered
him gold and jewels to stay, but Lanis refused.
“Gold and jewels are good things,” he said sadly; “but
happiness is better, therefore I go to find it.”
“And where will you find it ?” asked the King.
“In the Kingdom of Shadows,” answered Lanis, and he
departed, singing his sorrow-song :
“Ah me, what treasure
To taste the pleasure
Of love’s caress.
Oh, idle lover,
Wilt thou discover
Heart’s happiness.
Nay ! folly this is ;
I gain no kisses
From sweet Princess.
Of him she’s fonder,
So forth I wander
In sad distress.”


It would take a long time to tell how many adventures
Lanis met with in his wanderings through the world. The
years rolled by, and he travelled onward, never pausing, always
hoping to find happiness, but, alas! no one could tell him where
to look for the Kingdom of Shadows, and he seemed farther
off his object than when he set forth. He freed many princesses
from the durance of cruel magicians, but though they all thanked
him for his kindness, they loved some one else, and he found
no one in the world who cared at all about him. He was
honoured far and wide for his gift of song, and did much good
in all lands, but no one loved him for himself, and although he
was the cause of happiness to others, he never felt happiness in
his own heart.
At last, after many years of weary travel, when he had grown
a white-haired old man, with bent form and sad heart, he found
himself on the shore of a great sea, beyond which he knew lay
the most wonderful countries. A boat was rocking on the
waves near the shore, so Lanis determined to sail over this
mysterious ocean, and thought that perhaps far away in the
darkness he might find the Kingdom of Shadows, for which he
had sought so long and ardently. He knew that if he once
sailed over this ocean, he would never be able to return to earth
again, so he sang a last farewell to the beautiful world wherein
he had done so much good, and then stepped into the boat.
It was a fairy boat, and moved rapidly onward over the waves
without sails or oars. The mists gathered thickly round him
and hid the green shore from his view, so sitting in the boat he
saw nothing but the grey sky above, the grey mists around, and
beneath him the cruel black waters. He was not afraid, how-


ever, for he knew he had done no harm, and, seizing his harp,
sang his last sorrow-song :
“ Grey mist around me,
Grey sky above me ;
Sorrow hath crowned me—
No one will love me.
Brave spirit, quail not;
All will be bright yet.
At thy fate rail not;
God will make right yet.
Still do thy duty,
Tho’ all deceive thee,
Splendour and beauty
Now will receive thee.”
As he sang the last words, the strings of his lyre snapped
with a loud crash, and, leaping out of his nerveless hands, it
fell into the grey waves of the sea. Lanis did not grieve,
for he now knew he was done with his sorrow - singing for
evermore, and as the boat sailed onward he saw a red glow
to the left.
“That is the gate of iron,” he whispered to himself, “it
leads to the Kingdom of Fire. Ah ! I would never find any
happiness there.”
The waves were foaming angrily round the little boat, and
the red glare from the open portals of the iron gate looked like
an angry sunset, but still Lanis felt no fear. After a time the
red glare died away, and now on every side of him was a soft
golden light, while the waves beneath the boat were of a delicate
blue, and the sky above of the same soft tint. Lanis looked
around, and saw a soft green shore, to which his boat drifted


gently, and he sprang out on to the yellow sand of the beach.
As he did so, his travel-worn clothes fell off him, and he found
himself arrayed in a long white robe.
A tall man, also in a white robe, approached, and, smiling
gently on Lanis, gave him a golden harp.
‘ Is this my old harp ?” asked Lanis, taking it.
‘ No ; it is better than the old harp.”
‘ Is it for sorrow-singing ? ”
‘ Nay ; it is for songs of joy.”
‘ And is this Faeryland ?”
‘ Nay ; it is a nobler place than Faeryland.”
‘ Is it The Kingdom of Shadows ? ”
O
“ So we called it on earth, but now we know it as the King-
dom of Eternal Light.”
Lanis looked at the tall man as he said this, and saw it was
the old king he had helped—now no longer old and frail, but in
the prime of life.
“You are the King!” he cried gladly.
“Yes, I was the King. You pointed out my duty to me,
and I did it; otherwise I never would have reached here.”
“ And the Princess ? ”
“Is quite happy,” replied the King. “ She rules my realm
with her husband, and both are wise.”
“ Have you found happiness?” asked Lanis.
“Yes!—and so will you, when you strike your harp,”
answered the Kin g.
Lanis struck the golden strings of his harp, and immediately
all his weariness and sorrow passed away, and he felt glad and
joyful. At the sound of the music, he changed from an old


man into a noble-looking youth—the same Lanis who had sung
to the King.
“ Ah, I have indeed found happiness, ’ he cried ; “ but still,
I feel I want something more.”
“ I know what you want,” said the King. “ Look !
And Lanis, looking up, saw his mother, with a calm expres-
sion of joy upon her face, coming towards him, with outstretched
arms. All the white-robed spirits around struck their golden
harps and sang the most beautiful songs that were ever heard*
while mother and son embraced, and far off the palace of the
great King shone like a bright star.
Lanis also struck his harp, and, with the earthly monarch and
his mother, went singing onward through the lovely fields,
to kneel before the King, who had thus drawn him onward,
through sorrow and sadness, to find his happiness at length in
the land which we mortals call the Kingdom of Shadows but
which wise men know as the Kingdom of Eternal Light.




(Ufie (Svo'BPii^.
RING MAGIC.
ELCH was a handsome young man who lived in
a litde village which was near a great black
forest, and he thought himself the most miser-
able being in the world. It was very curious
that he should do so, for he was young, good-
looking, and healthy, but he did not value any
of these gifts, because he was in love with Filina, the prettiest
girl in the whole country, and her father wanted her to marry a
very rich man called Hocky, for whom she did not in the least
care.
Now Filina was also in love with Kelch, and hated the idea
of marrying ugly old Hocky, but, as he was rich and Kelch poor,
her father would not let her wed as she wished. Kelch had a
little cottage near the wood, which had been left to him by his
mother, and earned his livelihood by cutting firewood, which, to
be sure, was not a very aristocratic occupation. Still, in those
days people did not care much for rank, and pretty Filina loved
157


Kelch tenderly in spite of his humble calling. She nearly wept
her eyes out when her father said she was to become the bride of
Hocky. He was an avaricious old dwarf who only cared for
gold, and wanted to marry Filina, not for her beauty, but because
he knew she would some day be left money when her father
■
■*i\ ' V\ .
died. When Kelch heard of the proposed marriage, he went to
Filina’s father and told of his love, but the cruel parent laughed
at his request.
“You marry my daughter! ”he said mockingly. “ What an
idea!—you can give her no money.”


“ but I can give her love,” said Kelch sturdily, “ and that is
much better than money.”
" I don t think so,’ retorted Filina’s father. “Any one can
make love, but few can make money, so go back to your wood-
cutting, and don t come to me with such silly requests.”
Is there no chance for me ? ’ cried Kelch in despair.
“ Yes—one,” answered the old man mockingly. “ Become as
rich as Hocky, and you shall marry my daughter.”
Poor Kelch went away with tears in his eyes, because old
Hocky was known to be very wealthy, and how could an un-
known youth hope to become rich when he had no one to help
him ? It was no good feeling sad, however, for sorrow would
not help him to win Filina, so Kelch determined to go to the
castle of the Wicked Baron who lived in the centre of the forest,
and ask him to make him a present of some gold.
The Wicked Baron was a famous miser, and his castle was
said to be full of gold, so, in spite of his bad character, Kelch
thought he would not refuse to give him a little out of his plenty.
So early one morning, after saying good-bye to Filina, he went
into the forest to search for the Wicked Baron’s castle, and ask
its owner to give him some gold.
Kelch wandered deeper and deeper into the forest, which
became wilder and more savage as he advanced, but still he did
not come across the looked-for castle. Night was coming on,
and the wood was full of sombre shadows, while behind the
trees flushed the fierce red light of the setting sun. It was a
faery forest, and all the ground was covered with soft grass,
and strange flowers which only bloomed at night-time ; while
overhead the nightingales sang most deliciously in the trees,


and at intervals the wise owls hooted in the most unexpected
manner.
As it was now quite dark, Kelch thought he would sleep under
a great oak tree until the morning, and then once more set out
upon his travels ; so he ate some food he had brought with him,
drank from a stream which sparkled by, and after saying his
prayers, —for he was a good lad, —rested his head upon his knap-
sack and went fast asleep.
In the middle of the night, however, he woke suddenly under
the influence of enchantment, for the whole of the forest was
flooded with the silver moonlight, and on every side the faeries
were holding their revels. Having drank of the waters of the
brook, Kelch had come under the charm of faery power, and, to
his surprise, was able to understand the talk of two elves who
sat chattering to one another on the broad white cup of a lily.
“Who is this youth lying asleep ?” asked the first elt, never
thinking for a moment Kelch was awake, and only kept his e) es
closed in order to hear what they had to say.
“ He is called Kelch,” said the other elf, “and loves Filina,
who is to marry old Hocky. He is now searching for the castle
of the Wicked Baron, to ask for gold.”
“ He’ll never find it,” observed the first faery, “ unless he asks
the Owl who lives in the oak tree under which he sleeps.”
“ Then I will ask the Owl,” cried Kelch, sitting up, whereupon
both faeries flew away in great alarm, much to his iegret, as he
wanted to make inquiries about the Owl.
He looked up at the tree, but could see nothing save the
branches interlaced against the clear sky, and now and then a
gleam of moonlight on the rough bark of the trunk. As Kelch


iad often heard that song was the only way to invoke faeries,
he thought he would try the same means with the owl. So,'
springing to his feet, he began to sing, making up the words as
he went alonfr :
o
“Fairy Owl,
Clever fowl,
Please tell me
Where to see
The castle old,
Where Baron bold
Hoards up his gold
The words were not very good, but they told exactly what
ie wanted to know, and the Owl put her head out of a hole in
the tree with a wild hoot, her eyes glowing red like burnino-
coals. &
Go away, boy, ’ croaked the Owl angrily, “and do not dis-
turb me in my grief. The Baron is dead, and lam in mourning
for him.” 5
The Baron dead ! cried Kelch in dismay. “Oh dear ! then
I wont be able to get any gold. I don’t know, though—he can’t
have taken his gold with him, so it must be there still. Owl!
Owl!—where’s the castle ?”
The Owl hooted crossly, and then replied :
“Follow the brook
To open ground
Then upward look
And all around.
Jump water cold,
Then you will see
The castle old
Frown o’er the lea.”


The Owl drew back her head into the hole, and Kelch, taking
her advice, followed the windings of the brook through the
forest. There never was such a winding brook ; first it twisted
one way, then another, curled round trees, hid under rocks,
fell down precipices in sheets of foam, and even flowed up a
gentle incline. At last it began to grow straighter, and finally
led Kelch into a wide open glade girdled with trees, but flowed
directly in front of him, so that, in order to reach the glade, he
would have to cross it.
“ I don’t see any castle,” said Kelch to himself; “but then
the Owl said, ‘Jump water cold,’ so if I cross this brook, which
evidently renders the castle invisible, I will see it.”
As soon as he made up his mind to do this, he jumped
over, and, on landing safely on the opposite bank, saw before
him a great castle, with many towers all overgrown with
ivy. So Kelch was right, the brook rendered the castle
invisible, and unless he had jumped across it he would have
seen nothing.
Kelch saw no lights in the castle, but, being a brave lad, he
did not mind that, so marched boldly forward, climbed up a
broken-down flight of steps leading to the front door, and, finding
it open, entered. It was all dark inside, but Kelch had a bit
of candle in his pocket, and, having lighted it, he set out to
explore the castle, which was evidently quite deserted.
He wandered through room after room, all of which were
quite empty, and inhabited by nothing but spiders, there not
even being a rat. The moonlight streamed into the lonely
halls through the painted glass of the windows, and filled them
with strange shadows, but Kelch, knowing that he had done no


one harm, was not afraid, and began singing to keep up his
spirits :
“Thro’ lonely halls,
Wander, wander ;
The moonlight falls
Yonder, yonder;
Tho’ dark appals,
Ponder, ponder.
Sad thoughts arise,
Weary, weary ;
The night-wind sighs,
Dreary, dreary ;
1 hear strange cries,
Eerie, eerie.”
And indeed he did hear strange cries, sometimes like the
roaring of wild beasts, then shrill sounds like the piping of winds
upon sandy beaches, sometimes a cry of pain, and at time as
burst of wild laughter. In order to protect himself, he drew his
hunting-knife from his girdle, and went in the direction from
whence the noises proceeded. When he did this, he found
himself descending the stairs, and thought he must now be
going to the cellars where the Wicked Baron kept his gold.
The noises grew louder and louder as he descended, and at last
all dwindled down to one harsh voice, which was singing
this song :
The Goblin Golden
Here you will find
From ages olden
I’ve ruled mankind.
Another victim
I now will bind ;
When I have tricked him
He’ll sorrow find.”


Kelch had by this time come to the end of a long dark
passage, and was stopped by an iron door, under which gleamed
a line of bright yellow light. He knocked, then suddenly with
a loud crash the door flew open, and he saw before him a
circular room illuminated with the bright yellow light. In the
centre was a great pile of gold coins, on the top of which was
seated a funny little man.
Such a queer figure he was, with a great fat body like a bag
of money tied round the top with a golden cord, so that it made
a ruffle for his neck, and above this was
an enormous head with two fierce yellow
eyes, a great beak of a nose, and a wide
mouth, which when open showed long
golden teeth. He had short little legs,
with long peaked shoes of gold, and in
his hands held a golden sceptre, while on
top of his great head of yellow hair was
a huge crown of heavy gold set with
flashing diamonds. He had a yellow skin
and yellow clothes, —in fact, he was
yellow all over, and he sat cross - legged on the top of the
heap of gold, grinning and nodding at Kelch till the diamonds
in his crown glittered like great stars. '
“ I am the Golden Goblin,” he cried in a harsh voice, when
he saw the lad, “and I know what you come for, so take as
much gold as you like and go.”
“ Hut where is the Wicked Baron ?” asked Kelch.
“ He has gone to my kingdom below,” said the Goblin,
grinning ; “ he was my servant, and had as much gold as he


wanted, on condition he came with me when he died, so he did
die last year, and I’ve got him safe in my kingdom.”
Kelch’s hair arose on end at this, so wicked did the Goblin
look, but as he had done no harm, he was not afraid.
“ Can I take some gold ?” he asked ; “ I want some in order
to marry Filina.”
“ You can take as much gold as you like,” replied the
Goblin graciously, “on condition that you put this ring on
Filina’s finger as a present from me.”
Oh, I don t mind that,” said Kelch, taking the gold ring
held out to him by the Goblin. “ Thank you kindly.; it will do
for a wedding ring.”
“ Exactly,” cried the Goblin, nodding his ugly head; “it will
do for a wedding ring. Now, fill your pockets with this gold,
and it wall do for Filina’s dowry.”
“ Eut then this gold belongs to the Baron.”
“ N° > lt doesn’t; he’s dead, and it belongs to whomsoever I
choose to give it, roared the little man, kicking several pieces
across the floor. “ All the gold in the world is mine—take as
much as you like, and don’t say I’m not kind.”
You may be sure Kelch did not require a second invitation,
and filled all his pockets with money, so that he bulged out all
over in the most grotesque manner. While he did so, the
Golden Goblin jumped off the heap and danced about the room,
singing the queerest songs Kelch had ever heard. When his
pockets were quite full, he thanked the Goblin and said
good-bye.
“ Good-bye, cried the Goblin, as Kelch went to the door
“till I see you again.”


“ You’ll never see me again,” returned Kelch, rather
annoyed.
“ Oh yes, I will,” grinned the yellow man, jumping up again
on the golden heap. “Don’t forget to marry Filina with my ring.”
“ No, I won’t forget,” said Kelch ; and then the Goblin
burst out laughing, while all the gold upon which he was seated
commenced to whirl round, until Kelch could not see the little
man, but only a gleaming column of gold, which was at first as
high as the roof, then sank lower and lower until it disappeared
through the floor. 1 hen the yellow light commenced to fade,
so Kelch, seeing there was no time to be lost, left the chamber
and hurried up-stairs as hard as ever he could.
Feeling very delighted that he had attained his object, he
left the castle of the Wicked Baron and jumped across the
brook. When he did so, the magic castle disappeared, and
Kelch, with the gold in his pockets and the ring upon his finger,
followed the windings of the brook until he arrived back at the
oak tree.
“ Oh, you’ve got back ! ” cried the Owl, putting out her head.
“Yes; and I’ve got the gold, thank you,” said Kelch
cheerfully.
“ Much good may it do you,” hooted the Owl, and withdrew
her head again.
o
Kelch thought the Owl was very rude, but as she had done
him a great service, he said nothing, but walked through the
° o
forest, and on arriving at the outskirts went straight home just
as the red dawn was breaking in the east.
O
During the day he went to Filina’s father and gave him all
the gold he had obtained from the castle of the Wicked Baron


upon which the old man was so delighted that he at once gave
his consent to the marriage, much to the disgust of Hocky, who
was very envious of Kelch’s good fortune.
In the evening Filinas father gave a dance on the village
green in honour of his daughter’s marriage, and while the
merrymaking was going on, Kelch took the opportunity to slip
the Goblin’s ring on Filina’s finger. No sooner had he done
so, than, to the dismay of every one, the poor girl vanished out
of their sight, and Kelch was in despair.
Filina s father was very angry at the disappearance of his
daughter, and his rage was further increased by Hocky, who
said that Kelch must have promised to give Filina to the
Goblin in exchange for the gold. All the villagers believed this
malicious story, and drove Kelch from his home with sticks and
stones. So the poor lad found himself at last seated once more
under the oak tree, having lost Filina, his gold, his home, and
his good name.
THE REALM OF GOLD.
It was now night-time once more, and the wood was again full
of merry faeries, but Kelch was too much taken up with his own
sorrows to notice them, although the pranks they played would
have amused the saddest person in the world. However, when
things are at their worst they generally begin to mend, as Kelch
soon found out, for, while he was lamenting his evil fortune, the


Owl put her head out of the hole in the oak tree and hooted
loudly, “ Tu-whit! tu-whoo ! ” Kelch looked up, and, knowing-
owls to be wise birds, fond of word-twistings, made instant
reply.
True wit I have not owing to my sorrow, and I go not to
woo because Filina has been taken from me.”
“Very neat indeed,” replied Mrs. Owl politely. “ I see you
have the real court air.”
“ must be natural, then,” said Kelch, with a sigh, “ because
I’ve never been to court.”
“ Never mind,” observed the Owl, nodding her head sagely;
“ perhaps you will go some day. But why do you sit under my
tree and cry ? ”
“Because I’m so miserable,” said Kelch, and thereupon he
told the Owl all his troubles in connection with Filina. The
Owl listened attentively with her head on one side, and, when
he came to the end of his story, wiped her eyes with a dry leaf,
for she was a very tender-hearted bird, and felt very sorry for
Kelch.
“ Ah, that Goblin, I know him well! ” she said, when she had
recovered from her emotion ; “ he has carried off my friend the
Wicked Baron, who was no more wicked than you, except that
he was too fond of gold. Ah, that was his ruin ! for if it had
not been for his love of money, the Golden Goblin would never
have carried him off.”
“ Why did he carry him off? ” asked Kelch,
“ Because once a year the Golden Goblin has to make the
offering of a human being to the King of Fire, for if he did not,
the King of Fire would invade the Realm of Gold, and destroy


the kingdom of the Golden Goblin. He offered the Baron as
the last victim, and the next will be Filina.”
bilina! cried Kelch in a tone of despair. “Oh no, it
can’t be true.”
It is true quite true, replied the Owl in a dignified manner.
I he ring he gave you is a magic ring, and as soon as it was
placed on Filina’s finger, she vanished from the earth.”
“ She did—she did ! but where is she now ?”
Down below in the Realm of Gold. I o-morrow she will
be given up as the bride of the King of Fire.”
“ Cannot I save her ? ”
“ I don t know,” said the Owl reflectively. “If your heart
is strong, and you don t feel afraid, perhaps you may.”
“ Oh, I’m not afraid ! ” cried Kelch quickly. “Do help me
to save her, dear Mrs. Owl—please do! ”
“ I 11 help you to save Filina and punish wicked old Hocky
on one condition,” said the Owl slowly ; “and that is that you
never cut down my oak tree yourself, or let any one else cut it
down.”
“ Oh, I’ll promise that,” answered Kelch earnestly. “ Your
oak tree will always be safe.”
“ Then you keep your promise and I’ll keep mine,” cried the
Owl. “ Now, first you must get to the Realm of Gold.”
But how ? ”
Don t be impatient, and I’ll tell you. The way to the
Realm of Gold is down the trunk of this oak tree, so if you
climb up to my nest, I’ll show you how to crawl down.”
“But I’m too big,” said Kelch, looking at his sturdy
figure.


“ Oh, that will be all right; climb up to my nest, and as you
climb you’ll grow smaller.’’
Kelch lost no time in obeying Mrs. Owl, and started to
climb up the great trunk of the oak tree. As he did so, he
found himself shrinking every minute, and when he arrived at
the nest he was only two feet high, and able to enter the hole
without bowing his head.
The Owl received him very graciously, and showed him her
home, which was beautifully furnished with dry grass, and
curtains of green moss.
“ These are my books,” said Mrs. Owl, showing him some
dried leaves ; “ for I read a great deal—it improves my mind.
The Faery Minervetta gave me these beautiful volumes.”
“ They look like dried leaves,” observed Kelch.
“To you; yes, because you are a mortal, but I am a faery
owl, and can read faery books. However, there’s no time to be
lost, or Filina will become the bride of the King of Fire, and
then I cannot help you. Now, take this phial of water.”
“What good will it do ?” asked Kelch, putting the phial in
his pocket.
“ A great deal of good,” replied the Owl severely ; “ all the
subjects of the Golden Goblin are mortals who are discontented
with their lot, and want gold to buy all sorts of bad things ; that
phial contains the water of contentment, and if you sprinkle it
over the men and women you find in the Realm of Gold, they
will grow satisfied with their station in life, and not want any
gold; therefore the Goblin will lose all his subjects. When he
sees that, he’ll soon make terms with you, and then you can
demand back Filina.”


“I understand,” said Kelch ; “but how do the men and
women get to the Realm of Gold if they are mortal ? ”
“T- hey go in their dreams,” replied the Owl. “ When they
are awake during the day they live on earth, but at night in
their sleep they go down to the Realm of Gold to be the slaves
of the Golden Goblin ; and, indeed, many of them are his slaves
in the day as w*ell as in the night. Now' go away at once, or
you’ll be late.”
Kelch thanked the kind Owl, and, going through a little
door at the back of the nest, commenced to clamber down the
inside of the oak tree trunk, while the Owl resumed her studies.
“ I’ve saved my tree,” said the Owl to herself sagaciously;
“no one will cut it down now. Ah, there's no doubt I’m really
a very wise owl! ”
And indeed she was ; for she had gained by kindness what
she never would have gained by force, which shows that it is
best to be gentle in all things if we want to be successful.
Meanwhile, Kelch, being completely in the dark, did not
know his way, and in spite of all his care suddenly slipped and
fell right down the centre of the tree trunk. However, as he
was in Faeryland, he felt no fear, for, indeed, he was falling
quite gently, as the air was so heavy, and he was so small and
light. Down, down he fell through the darkness, till at last he
came bump upon a cushion of moss which was at the foot of the
tree. Here there was a faint glimmer of light, and he saw
above him the mighty roots of the oak stretching out in all
directions like the rafters of a huge hall. His eyes soon became
accustomed to the glimmering twilight in which he now found
himself, and he looked around to see where he would go next.


I hrough the misty blue light he espied a small hole which
seemed to lead downward in a gentle slope, but it was so dark
that he felt rather afraid to enter into it. Suddenly he saw that
the misty blue light was caused by the radiance of some
decayed wood which lay about, so, catching up a piece, he
advanced boldly into the hole, and soon discovered that it gave
him sufficient light to see a short distance before him.
Kelch was now in a narrow tunnel, the sides, floor, and roof
of which were nothing but rough rock, but as he advanced these
commenced to glisten with jewels, until they reflected the light
of his decayed wood torch so brightly, that he walked in the
centre of a brilliant blaze. At last the passage ended suddenly
at a deep hole, up which rushed a current of warm air. There
seemed no way of getting down, but Kelch, remembering his
experience in the oak tree, never hesitated for a moment, but
flung himself boldly into the hole. The warm air bore him up,
and he fell gently for a long time, seeing the sides of the hole
rushing past him one blaze of light, like a splendid jewel. The
air grew hotter and hotter as he fell, until at length he tumbled
right into the centre of a heap of gold dust, which made him
sneeze dreadfully. All around him was a soft golden light, such
as he had seen in the treasure vault of the Wicked Baron ; so,
throwing away his useless torch, he jumped to his feet and
looked about him.
He was now in the middle of a large plain, and could see
neither the sides nor the roof of what he thought must be a
cavern, as it was below the earth, but only a soft gold mist
floating above him, and surrounding him on all sides, while-the
ground was covered with fine glittering gold dust, in which lay


great rocks and stones of pure yellow gold, gleaming dully in
the subdued yellow twilight.
It was truly a wonderful place, and what was more wonder-
ful was, that Kelch now found he had grown again to his natural
size, so, very satisfied with everything, he marched along over
the plain to look for the Golden Goblin.
hor a long time the plain was quite lonely, and then he saw
one or two people in the distance; shortly afterwards, some
more, until at length he found himself among a great crowd of
shadows. Kelch knew they were dream-shadows, although
they looked like flesh and blood men and women, and he moved
through the dense mass quite unnoticed, so intent were they on
their occupations. These consisted in picking up nuggets of
gold from the ground and putting them in their pockets; but
Kelch noticed that all their pockets had the bottoms cut off, so
that when the nuggets were put in, they simply fell through to
the ground once more. Some of the shadows wore chains of
gold, of which they seemed very proud, and not one person paid
any attention to another, but each bent eagerly down gathering
up the gold, and putting it into their bottomless pockets. There
were old white-headed men, palsied elderly women, men in the
prime of life, and beautiful maidens ; but all their faces wore
the same eager expression, as they clutched the shining gold.
Kelch could not help pitying them as they worked at their
fruitless tasks, but he knew they did it of their own free will, so
that the work which appeared a pain to him was a pleasure to
them.
Suddenly he recollected the phial given to him by the Owl,
and, as he did not see anything of the Goblin, pulled it out of


his pocket and began to sprinkle the water of contentment on
the avaricious shadows.
Every time a drop fell on one of them, that shadow vanished,
and Kelch knew that it had returned to its sleeping body on
earth, quite contented with its station in life, and would look no
more for gold.
Hundreds of shadows vanished as he sprinkled. them with
the water of contentment, when all at once a quiver passed
through the crowd, and before Kelch had time to wink, the
Golden Goblin, with his eyes blazing with rage, stood before
him, looking uglier than ever.
“ Ho! ho!” cried the Goblin furiously; “it is you who are
trying to rob me of my subjects—but I’ll give you to the King
of Fire. Seize him at once ! ”
A crowd of grotesque goblins, all very like their master,
rushed forward and tried to seize Kelch, but he sprinkled them
with the magic water, which burnt like fire, and they all tumbled
back in a confused mass. The Golden Goblin stamped with
rage, but was afraid to come near Kelch, lest he also should be
sprinkled with the water of contentment.
“What do you want?” he shouted, as Kelch paused for a
moment. “ I told you we would meet again—but what do you
want ? ”
“You know well enough,” retorted Kelch coolly. “ I want
Filina —you stole my Filina from me.”
“She’s mine now,” said the Goblin in a grumbling tone,
“and I’m going to give her as a bride to the King of Fire;
besides, I paid you well for her—you took a lot of gold.”
“Yes, but that was a present,” cried Kelch hotly. “ I never


said I would let you steal my future wife; I want Filina, not
your gold.”
Don t want gold ! said the Goblin in astonishment; “ you
are the first mortal I ever heard say that.”
“ I ve got no time to talk,” observed Kelch, raising the
phial, “so if you don t give me back my Filina, I’ll leave you
without a single subject.”
“ Stop, stop ! cried the Goblin in consternation ; “ don’t do
that. Come with me to my palace, and I will give you back your
Filina—on conditions.”
I won t make any conditions, said Kelch, as they walked
along ; “I want my Filina, and nothing else.”
Ihe Golden Goblin grinned angrily at this, but as Kelch
had the phial, and could make his subjects vanish, he was afraid
to say anything as they glided rapidly along to the palace. It
was gliding and not walking, for Kelch found that though his
legs did not move, still he seemed to be approaching nearer to
the great gold castle in which the Goblin held his court.
It was all built of shining g'old, with innumerable towers, and
huge windows of diamond glass. There was a great flight of
steps leading to the front door, and the Goblin ran up these,
followed by Kelch, until at length they came to a great hall
with many golden pillars, and an immense domed roof all
glittering with jewels.
The Goblin went to the end of this hall, and, having seated
himself upon his throne, which w r as cut out of one gigantic
diamond, he offered Kelch a goblet filled with liquid gold.
“ I won’t drink that,” said Kelch, and dashed the goblet out
of the little man’s hand.


“Just as well you refused,” replied the Goblin complacently,
pointing to a golden statue that stood near the throne, “ or you
would have become like that.”
Kelch turned to examine the statue, and saw to his grief
that it was pretty Filina thus changed. Every hair of her head,
every fold of her dress was there, but she was nothing but a
stiff golden statue.
“ I can’t take my Filina back like this,” he cried, turning
to the Goblin, who sat on his throne grinning at Reich’s
sorrow.
“I don’t mean you to,” retorted the Goblin ; “it’s far too
valuable a statue to give to you.”
“ Filina is still more valuable.”
‘ Would you rather have Filina than all that gold ? ”
“ Yes, a thousand times ! ” said Kelch boldly.
The Goblin looked rather discomfited at this, and nodded
several times as if puzzled.
“You’re too good for me,” he observed at length; “ I can
gain no power over you. But if I give you back Filina, how am
Ito pay my yearly tribute to the King of Fire ? If I don’t do it,
he will burn all my kingdom to cinders.”
“ He can’t burn it to cinders when it’s all gold,” cried Kelch ;
“but can’t I find you a substitute for Filina ?”
“ Ah, that’s a good idea! ” screamed the goblin, while all his
ugly little courtiers jumped with joy at this solution of the
problem. “ Bring me Hocky, and I’ll give you Filina.”
“ But what will you do to Hocky ?” asked Kelch anxiously,
for even to rescue Filina he was unwilling to bring harm to
any one else.


“ 1 11 give him to the King of Fire.”
“ But he’ll be burnt up.”
“Only the bad part of him,” said the Golden Goblin ; “all
that is good in him will not be touched by the fire. When he is
quite purified by the fire, he will be allowed to return to earth
again, and instead of being a bad man as he is now, he will be
very good.”
“ In that case I don’t mind,” replied Kelch, much relieved.
“ But how am I to give you Hocky in exchange for Filina ?”
“Oh, that’s easily done,” said the Goblin, holding out to
Kelch a cup filled with some liquor which sparkled like
diamonds. “ Drink this, and you will be immediately trans-
ported back to your cottage. There you will find Filina, who
will still be a statue of gold. Get Hocky to pull off the ring
that is on her finger and put it on one of his own, then
Filina will become flesh and blood once more, and Hocky will
vanish.”
“Where to?” asked Kelch, taking the cup of diamond
'water from the Goblin.
“ Down here,” replied the Goblin, grinning ; “ then I’ll give
him to the Kine of Fire, and when all the bad is burnt out of
him, he’ll go back to earth again. Come, drink up.”
“No tricks,” said Kelch, placing the goblet to his lips.
' “ On the honour of a king,” answered the Goblin, placing
his yellow hand on his yellow breast ; “but be quick, for there’s
no time to be lost.”
So Kelch drained the goblet to the dregs, and as he did so
all the golden palace seemed to spin round and round as he
fell down on the ground. He knew nothing more that happened


till he woke up, feeling quite bright and gay, when he found
himself lying on the floor of his own cottage, and the morning
sun shining through the window.
KELCH REGAINS FILINA.
Finding himself at home, Kelch jumped to his feet w ith a
cry, for at the end of the room he saw the golden statue of
Filina standing in the sunlight, with outstretched arms, as if she
were imploring him to release her from the enchantment. Kelch
hurried forward and saw the magic ring w r as still on her finger,
but it looked too firmly fixed to pull off, and although he tried,
he could not get it away. The only thing to be done was to
bring Hocky to the cottage and let him try, and as the Goblin
had fulfilled his promise of placing both Kelch and the statue
at home, the youth had no doubt that everything else would
soon come all right.
He hurried out into the open air, and found all the \ illagers
returning from the fields for their noonday meal. They scowled
at Kelch as he passed, and asked how a wicked magician like
him dared to return to the village from whence he had been
driven.
Kelch, however, never minded their anger, but ran to the
village green, where he found Hocky talking to Filinas father.
« Here’s that wicked magician!” cried Hocky when he saw
Kelch, for he hated the youth almost as much as the villagers
hated himself. “ Drive him away.”


“ He robbed me of my daughter,” said bilina’s father, lifting
up his staff, as the men and women of the village broke into
murmurs of anger.
“ I have come back to restore her,” said Kelch boldly; “and
if you come with me to my cottage, you will find her there.
On hearing this, Filina’s father, followed by Hocky and all
the villagers, hastened to the cottage, and there they saw the
golden statue.
“ It is my daughter sure enough ! ” cried Filina’s father, with
tears in his eyes; “ but she is changed into gold.”
“ Would you rather have your daughter living, or her golden
statue ? ” asked Kelch, looking at the old man.
“ Say the golden statue,” whispered Hocky, pulling the
father’s sleeve.
“ No, no ! ” cried Filina’s father, shaking his head ; “ no gold
would recompense me for the loss of my daughter.”
“ But your daughter is going to marry me,” said Hocky.
“ Yes, that is true,” replied the old man.
“ Then I would rather have her as a golden statue,” shrieked
Hocky avariciously, approaching Kelch.
“ You hear what he says ! ” cried Kelch : “ I love Filina
for herself, Hocky loves her because she is turned to gold, and
would rather see the father unhappy than let her be alive
again.
o
“She’s mine,” said Hocky rudely, getting in front of the
golden statue ; “ I have her father’s word, and all this gold is
my own.”
“What will you do with her?” asked Filina’s father tremu-
lously.


“ Melt her clown into broad gold pieces,” roared Hocky,
dancing; “into the furnace she shall go.”
“ What! melt my daughter ! ” said the old man in a wrathful
tone. “ Never! You shall not have her—sooner than that I’ll
give her to Kelch.”
“ Keep your promise, and I’ll change her into a living woman
once more,” cried Kelch eagerly. “ I love your daughter for
her own sake.”
“ Give me my daughter once more, and you will be her
husband,” said Filina’s father quickly.
“ No—no ! ” yelled Hocky ; “ the statue is mine—mine !
“ What do you all say ?” said Kelch, turning to the villagers.
“You drove me from my home because you said I was a
magician; now I have brought back Filina, and can restore her
to life, so you see I am not so bad as you thought I was.”
“ You shall be her husband !” cried the villagers ; “ we believe
o 7
you to be a good lad.”
“If you give him the golden statue, I’ll ruin the whole
village!” cried Hocky in a rage. “You know I can do it.”
And indeed it was the truth, for Hocky had lent the villagers
a lot of money, and in return they had given over their lands
and houses to him, so he was really owner of the whole place.
All the villagers were dismayed at this, and Filina’s father began
to weep, for he thought he would never hear his daughter’s merry
voice again, when Kelch spoke.
“ I’ll restore Filina to life and get rid of Hocky, if you with-
draw your accusations of my being a magician.”
“Yes, yes!” they all cried; “you are no magician—you are
a good man, and shall marry Filina.”


“And how will you get rid of me ?” asked Hocky, angrily
turning to Kelch.
“ By giving you more gold than you ever saw before in your
life,” replied Kelch. “ Will you agree to that ? ”
“ \ es, I will,” replied Hocky greedily, “ if you give me more
gold than I’ve got, and more gold than there is in this statue
of Filina.”
“ ery well,’ observed Kelch ; “in order to see more gold
than you ever saw in your life, all you’ve got to do is to pull that
ring off Filina’s finger and place it on your own.”
“ Hurrah !” cried Hocky, turning to the statue. “ I’ll do it
at once.”
He pulled the ring off the finger of the statue with the
greatest ease, and slipped it on his
own with a greedy laugh, when
suddenly there was a loud crash like
thunder, and Hocky vanished into
air, while Filina, once more a bright,
laughing girl, hastened forward to
kiss her father.
“Where is Hocky?” asked all
the villagers, when they had con-
gratulated Filina.
“ Gone where he’ll never trouble
you again,” replied Kelch, with a
laugh, taking his sweetheart in his
arms. “ Now, am Ito marry Filina ? ”
“ Yes, yes ! Hurrah ! ” every one cried
Then Filina put on her bridal dress, all the village was decked


with flags, the school children received a half-holiday, and Kelch
married his sweetheart that afternoon.
They lived long and happily together, and when Filina’s
father died, he left them all his property, and the gold Kelch had
brought from the castle of the Wicked Baron. Hocky never
came back again, which made Kelch think that he must have
had a lot of bad in him, as it took such a long time to burn out.
Kelch paid a visit to the oak tree and thanked the kind Owl;
when she, hearing that the Wicked Baron’s castle was in ruins,
left her oak tree and went to live there, where no doubt she is
still.
Kelch and Filina lived happily ever afterwards, and had lots
of children, to whom their father often told the story of his ad-
ventures with the Golden Goblin.


THE ENCHANTED FOREST
DO not know how long I was in King Oberon’s
library, as, being very much interested in the
books, I took no notice of the flight of time.
But reading becomes wearisome even in Faery-
land, so, feeling rather tired with study, I lay
down beside the marble - encircled pool, and
fell fast asleep on the soft green carpet. The delightful stories
I had been reading still ran in my head, for my slumber was
filled with the most charming dreams. I seemed to see beauti-
ful faces smiling at me from amid masses of golden clouds, long
ranges of marble colonnades stretching far away in dazzling
whiteness against a dark blue sky, mighty ranges of mountains
with snowy summits roseate with the flush of sunsets, and
sombre Egyptian temples, wherein lovely priestesses danced
their mystic dances before the unseen fane of the sacred Isis.
All these wonderful pictures passed through my visionary
brain, blending one into the other in inextricable confusion,
while strains of the most delicious music kept rising and
falling at intervals during this strange phantasmagoria ot
dreamland.


At length the music grew louder and louder, until I slowly
opened my eyes to find myself once more in the enchanted
forest, lying on the cool green grass, with the dark blue sky
silvered with stars above me, and the thin pale moonlight
shining down on the solemn trees and glimmering pool. The
music had now words to its melody, for a choir of faery voices,
clear and distinct as the sound of tiny silver bells, sang as
follows :
“ In the moonshine cold and chill,
Nightingale
To the woods so calm and still
Tells her tale.
Dance the fairies one and all
Lightly at the elfin ball,
To her singing’s dying fall.
In the moonshine chill and cold,
Oberon
Will the fairy revels hold ;
So begone
Mortal, who with daring eye
Elfish dances would espy,
Mocking our solemnity.”
After listening drowsily to this song for some time with
half-closed eyes, I sat up and saw that the whole glade was
alive with faeries all running hither and thither, evidently pre-
paring for the coming of King Oberon. As I had been warned
in this song to depart, I did not know very well whether they
meant it or not, when suddenly Phancie, now reduced to his
former size, appeared before me, and I put the question to
him.


“ t s not usual to allow any mortal to view our revels,” he
said thoughtfully; “still, as the King allowed you to see his
library, perhaps he will let you stay a little while, so you can
wait till he appears.”
“Has no mortal ever beheld the faery revels ? ” I asked, after
thanking Phancie for his kindness.
“ \ es—one Shakespeare,” he answered, nodding his head:
“ l° n §> long a go the King allowed him to see our solemnity ; but
he told all about it to the world, which made the King very
angry.”
“ But he told it so beautifully,” 1 pleaded.
“I don’t know so much about that,” responded Phancie
saucily. "He said Oberon and Titania quarrelled, which is quite
a mistake, for they are very fond of one another. Oh, I assure
you the affair caused quite a scandal at court; since then the
King mistrusts all mortals, and won’t allow them to see any-
thing.”
“ Perhaps, then, he’ll send me away.”
“ I can’t tell, but it’s very probable he will ; or perhaps he
will let you stay, and then cause you to forget all you have seen,
except what he wishes you to remember.”
“I hope he won’t make me forget the stories I have
read.”
“No, he won’t do that; he said you could remember seven,
and he never goes back from his word; but as to remembering
our revels, I’m afraid he won’t let you do that. But hush!
the court is approaching. Go and sit on that fallen tree
again.
I arose obediently, and, walking across the glade to the


tree, sat down on it; then, warned by Phancie, kept quite
silent.
“You mustn’t speak unless the King asks you a question,’
said Phancie pompously. “If he does, be sure to address him
as ‘Your Majesty.’”
“ I won’t forget,” I replied, and then Phancie, having seen
all was in order to receive the King, skipped off to meet the
procession, which was now approaching.
Between two great rose-bushes, which formed a triumphal
arch of beautiful red blossoms, came a company of merry little
faeries, blowing through white trumpet-shaped lilies, followed
by a number of crickets creaking in the most lively manner;
then came a band of elves ringing bunches of bluebells, which
chimed silver music ; next marched some fays dressed in thistle
down, playing with blades of grass on drums made of empty
acorn cups with rose leaves stretched tightly across them ; a
company of fierce-looking bumble-bees carrying thorns for
swords came next; and then a number of beautiful girl faeries
in lily-white dresses danced along, singing gaily. After these
appeared Oberon and Titania, riding upon two purple-winged
butterflies, and the rear of the procession was guarded by a
company of soldier elves, and lastly a disorderly crowd of
faeries, who played a thousand merry tricks upon one another as
they ran along.
When the King and Queen of Faeryland arrived near the
pool, Oberon struck the ground with his magic wand, and
immediately there bloomed a great white lily, on the golden
cushions of whose heart the royal pair took their seat, while all
the faeries disposed themselves around according to their rank,


and the elfin band played merry music, which rang shrilly in the
night air. From all sides of the glade now appeared beautiful
white rabbits with pink eyes, lithe brown hares, velvety moles,
spikydooking hedgehogs, and many other strange animals,
while thrushes, nightingales, linnets, cuckoos, and doves
perched among the branches of the trees.
The King and Queen were much taller than their subjects,
and Oberon was dressed in a crreen huntinpysuit, with a crown
O O
of dewdrops on his head and a silver wand in his hand ; while
Titania wore a delicate pink robe made entirely of rose leaves,
and her o-olden hair streamed from under a wreath of lilies
O
of the valley, a spray of the same flowers being in her tiny
hand.
When the royal pair had taken their seats, a loud-voiced
cricket chirped loudly to command silence, and then a wise-
looking owl made a very long speech, in which he bade the
King and Queen welcome in the name of their dutiful subjects.
The King was about to reply, when a grotesque figure with a
large head and pointed ears suddenly started up out of the
earth, and rolled like a ball to the foot of the throne.
“Ah, my merry Puck!” said Oberon, laughing at the jester
of Faery land ; “ where have you been ? ”
“ Plaguing mortals, please your Majesty!” cried Puck,
bounding on to the top of a great mushroom, where he sat
grinning at every one. “ I have played Will-o’-the-Wisp on
marshy ground to lead unwary wanderers astray; pinched
the lazy maids who lie slug-a-bed; frightened those foolish
mortals who believe not in faeries; drank the milk, spoiled the
butter, teased the cows, and played merry jokes everywhere.”


“ Ah, rogue ! ” said Oberon, smiling ; “ thou wert ever cruel
in thy pranks. Some day mortals will punish thee.”
“No, no,” said Puck, shaking his head; “why, they don’t
believe faeries exist.”
“You hear ? ” sighed Oberon, looking at me gravely ; “you
mortals don’t believe faeries exist.”
“I do, your Majesty,” I answered eagerly; “ and when I
return to earth, I will do my best to convince other people.
Besides, sire, children always believe in faeries.”
“ Yes, the dear children ! ” cried Titania brightly ; “ they are
our best friends. Ah, children will always believe in us,
although they do not see us.”
“If you would only show yourselves sometimes,” I suggested,
“it would make every one believe.”
“I don’t think so,” said Oberon, smiling; “you see your
wonderful grown-up people have proved conclusively that there
are no faeries, so it would be quite an impertinence for us to
appear and upset all their fine theories.”
“It might make their hearts better, your Majesty,” I ven-
tured to remark.
“ I doubt it,” replied the King of Faery. “With you it is
all greed of money, pursuit of pleasure, and desire of learning;
there is no room in your lives to believe that beings like us
exist; we can be turned to no practical use, therefore you
mortals regard us as unnecessary existences. But while the
world moves on, there will always be bright, happy children
who will keep our memories fresh and green in their hearts,
and perhaps some day, when the world returns to its childlike
faith of old, we may once more appear to mortals.”


Meanwhile ” —I began.
“ Meanwhile,” repeated Oberon a little sadly, “you will go
back to earth and write down the seven stories you have read
in my library ; when good children read them they may perhaps
hnd out their hidden meaning, and it will make them wiser
and more obedient, d ell your child friends that faeries do
nothing without having some good end in view, and if they
want to please us, they must try and be noble and good, for
there is nothing so hateful in the world as wickedness. And
now, mortal. I will permit you to see a faery dance, and then
you must leave us for ever.”
“ For ever ? ”
“Unless, said the King graciously, “you revisit us in
your beautiful dreams. Good-bye, mortal, good-bye :
I hough years may bring thee pain and grief,
In airy elves still have belief,
\\ hile thou of earth art denizen.
And may thou ever think as truth
The lovely idle dreams of youth :
This is the Faeries’ benison.”
Then from the elfin band rang out sweet, wild music, and on
the smooth greensward the merry faeries danced lightly in the
pale moonshine. They whirled in and out, swayed into grace-
ful circles, and melted away like foam on the crest of an
emerald wave, floated in long wreaths which wavered and
broke as breaks the mist on snow-peaked mountains, blended
together again in picturesque confusion, while sweet and shrill
sounded the weird music, blown through the warm air of the
summer night. The perfume of a thousand flowers arose from


the ground, strange blossoms bloomed suddenly under the
flying feet of the elves, and round and round the lily throne of
gracious Oberon and airy 1 itania whirled the elfin circle, singing
their farewell song to the sweet voices of the birds :
“ Flashing stars and silver moon
Waning in the western skies ;
Crimson is the east, and soon
Will the orb of day arise.
Chilly blows the morning breeze,
Dewdrops glitter on the lawn ;
Through the branches of the trees
Flushes now the rosy dawn.
Idle faery dreams have fled,
Not a moment can they wait ;
Visions of the night are dead,
Sleep has barred her ivory gate.
But when silver moonlight gleams,
Close your eyes, O poet true,
Then from Faeryland of dreams
We will come again to you.”
And through the branches of the trees shone the red glare
of the dawn, which seemed to come nearer and nearer. The
great boughs with their myriad leaves faded into the angry
scarlet, a veil of darkness enveloped me, and, awaking with a
start, I found myself seated in my arm-chair in the shadowy
room, with the fire burning redly in the grate.
Even the cricket had ceased to sing, and outside the white
snowflakes still fell, and the wind whistled shrilly round the
house. Was it a dream? Maybe! for it is only in dreams,
dear children, that we can ever hope to visit Faeryland, where


of Faeryland,
\
sv^.
■
S; .
'.•■v '*S
■ •;
"I. ,
ms,wmSgi ■
& • '
V, ■’ -v ,/i- * ;■ ■
— 1 ' -V r'T ,
*
I
dwell all those lovely fancies and beautiful thoughts which form
your enchanted world ; but the child who has once visited the
wonderful realm of gracious Oberon must try never to forget
what he has seen, so that, when he becomes a grown-up person,
he can remember his childish glimpse of the delightful Kingdom
MORRISON AND GIBB, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.


y\ \ \
\H f


*
.
V •
■
r ''
.
• **
4L
• **
♦
<#


♦ -A-
Jm'\4 In JffflrLrofl
[nMK URMb P#t ~|y-< , 1'tYfi
*


3 1508 00250734


