

THE WAR;
EVIL OVERRULED TO GOOD;
PREACHED AT TRINITY CHURCH, ADELAIDE,
SEPTEMBER 16th, 1855,
BY THE RIGHT REY.
THE LOKD BISHOP OF ADELAIDE.
THE PROFITS (IF ANY) WILL BE APPROPRIATED TO THE FUND FOR
THE ERECTION OF ST. LUKE’S CHURCH.
Uublwfjdi fit) Request
ADELAIDE :
. PUBLISHED BY T. MURPHY, RUNDLE STREET EAST.
1855.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




SERMON.
Isaiah xxvi. 9.
With my soul have I desired Thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within
me will I seek Thee early : for when Thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.
y\ jpl
The mixture of good and evil in the world exactly
tallies with its history as revealed to us in the Scrip-
tures. Thence we learn that it came from the hands
of God perfectly good. Thence, also, we learn that
the seeds of evil were quickly sown, and as speedily
overran the earth. The parable of the Wheat and the
Tares informs us that an Enemy did this j and farther,
that they may not be rooted out at once—that both
must grow together until harvest; that the immediate
rooting-up of the one would injure, if not destroy, the
other; nevertheless, at the last they shall be separated,
the one gathered into bundles to burn, the other to be
treasured up in the garner of God.
Whatever pain, then, or perplexity harass the
thoughtful mind—when iniquity abounds hr evils


overflow—when calamities overwhelm individuals, or
famine, disease, or war distress the nations —the believer
in Revelation has this consolation, that the wise and
good Creator suffers these dispensations for a time }
because more of evil and less of good—because greater
sorrow, nay, even the destruction of goodness itself
would ensue, if judgment were at once sent forth unto
victory, no time given for repentance, and no exer-
cise of virtue secured for the righteous, such as the
mixture of g*ood and evil at present brings to pass !
In the darkest hour, then, he who trusts in God as
“ Love in Christ as “ God with us,” knows indeed
that the creation (man and the earth in which he is
placed) was made- subject to vanity : not willingly —
not irreversibly; but in hope —nay in the assurance of
deliverance from the bondage of corruption unto the
glorious freedom of the children of God !
The like confident hope runs through the prophe-
cies of the evangelical Isaiah. Commissioned to de-
nounce the sins of Judah, and foretell the captivity at
Babylon * yet never does he cause the thunders of God’s
wrath to be heard, but he blends with it an undertone
of mercy; ever encouraging the contrite heart with
the hope of that blessed deliverance, which was brought
to light when the Man of Sorrows was taken from
prison and from judgment, and cut off for the sins of
His people ! Awful as was the chastisement of God
which consigned the nation to seventy years of capti-
vity, yet how fervently do the faith and love of the
prophet burst forth in the words of my text. How
does he look beyond the immediate suffering to the
spiritual blessings which would arise out of it! And
how does the conviction—that God was overruling all


to good —at once console his sorrow and enliven
his devotion. “ With my soul have I desired Thee in
the night } yea, with my spirit within me will I seek
Thee early.” And why? Because, “When Thy judg-
ments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the woild
will learn righteousness.”
w #
I desire to pursue this train of thought, applying
it to our own times, and to those awful scenes of blood-
shed and suffering which War has disclosed to us;
from which, while we are happily exempt, yet we may
dra w instruction and edifying thoughts of God’s moral
government in the earth. Get us pray that we may
see and ponder the truths thus calculated to lighten
the heart when reading the sickening tales of carnage
and disease wafted day after day to our shores 5 afford-
ing to the gay and thoughtless excitement for the
hour ; hut to the sober and thoughtful that righteous-
ness which God’s judgments are intended to inculcate.
Societies, nations, empires, all appear to have their
successive ages even like man himself. Feeble in in-
fancy and childlike in growth, they put forth the vigour
of manhood * are powerful for a time, and gradually
sink into the decrepitude of age. Such at least was
the fate of heathen empires of old. Scripture records
the triumphs of Nineveh and Babylon ; the greatness
and decline of Egypt; the rise of the Medes and
Persians ; their subjugation by the King of Graecia;
and lastly, the universal dominion of imperious Borne.
The Book of Revelation carries on the story, and shows
how the City of the Seven Hills surrendered its temporal
sovereignty to a younger and still more appalling
Spiritual Power, “the Mystical Babylon” of Rome.
That too rose from small beginnings, but grew up and


conquered Christendom, until its time was fulfilled, and
the feebleness of age crept on. In modern societies
and kingdoms there is indeed an element of preservation
which the Old World had not. It is the salt of the
Gospel—the pure unadulterated truth of God drawn
from His own Word. Where this is imbibed into the
heart of a nation, when this leavens a society—against
that nation and that society (as a portion of the living
Church of God) the gates of hell shall not prevail.
But if the salt have lost its savour; if the spirit of un-
belief or half-belief, the pride of Reason refusing to be
taught of God, and making its own finite infirmity the
measure of His mysteries—then faith and love, and
devotion and self-sacrifice, will give place to low carnal
selfishness, the Saddueean spirit of self-indulgence,
which, like a worm in the bud, eats out national virtue
and the spirit of a generous patriotism.
Such was the state of Jerusalem in the days of its
later kings, when Isaiah poured forth his prophetic
warning's of destruction and captivity. God used the
armies of Babylon to scourge His corrupted people;
and the prophet foreseeing the spiritual blessing likely
to follow from his judgments, fervently desires His
presence and coming ! “ With my soul have I desired
Thee in the nig*ht; yea, with my spirit within me
will I seek Thee early.” What carefulness, for example,
what humbleness, what faith, what godly sorrow did
Hezekiah manifest when the haughty message of
Sennacherib was brought to him ! His first thought
is to go up into the Temple, and u spread it before the
Lord.” Even so the great struggle in which all
Europe is engaged works the like effect on the minds
of God’s servants. They know that He alone can


direct the issue to good j and they pray earnestly that
He will do it; for “when His judgments are in the
earth, its inhabitants will learn righteousness.”
Let us trace, then, as far as we are able, the footsteps
of His power, overruling even these calamities, to good!
It is indeed a solemn moment when the rulers of a
g*reat nation resolve to draw the sword and shed the
blood of thousands. It is an awful step to turn aside
the current of industry, and intelligence, and skill to the
destruction of our fellow-man. Well may they who
are responsible before God for such evils be slow and
reluctant, and exhaust every means of reconciliation
and peace before they take the irrevocable step. But
ere this step is taken, tyranny and oppression are made
to work good in the moral aversion they awaken; the
resolution they inspire to protect the weak 5 to combat
on the side of truth and justice for no selfish interests,
no vain-glorious pride 5 hut to maintain the Public Law
of Equity even in the case of Aliens and Unbelievers: to
do, in short, unto other nations as we would be done
by. A country which makes war on such principles
has “learnt righteousness” even by the “judgments
of God,” which raised up the oppressor —the Pharaoh —
“in order to show in him His power !” This effect is
still more remarkable, and Hie lesson still more im-
pressive, when not a monarch or a few great nobles,
but the millions which comprise a nation, are animated
by one and the same sentiment —to fight for the weak
against the strong, to hear the burdens incident to war,
to carry its sorrows with unflinching resolution, so that
Eight do but prevail at the last.
And then, again, when we turn from the principles
on which this War was entered into, to the spirit in


which it has been carried on —great as have been its
physical evils ; on the other hand, what high and gene-
rous and Christian feelings have been brought into
exercise by the horrors of the battle-field, the dangers of
the trenches, and the sufferings of the hospital.
Contrast, for example, the idle self-indulgence nur-
tured in the piping times of peace, with the brotherly
kindness and stern endurance of hardship called forth by
actual service ! Who would recognise in the undaunted
calmness of many a youthful soldier, when winged
Death was showered around him, that gay and light
spirit which idled life away in sportive wantonness,
while no danger, no suffering, called forth the better
qualities of head and heart! No sooner had the
awful realities of War come upon him in a foreign land
than we were blessed to see the services of religion
held on the tented field, and many a veteran and
many a youth; many in command and many a sim-
ple soldier, kneeling side by side at the table of the
Lord, and receiving the emblems of His death for
sin, not knowing how soon they might put off this
mortal body, and appear before God, washed and
cleansed in the blood of the Lamb ! Depend upon it,
the man who is best prepared to meet his God, least
fears to meet death. The good soldier of Jesus Christ
will not shrink in the day of battle 5 and why ? for
him “to die is gainand thus the holiest and best
beloved have been foremost in daring, fearless when
thousands were falling beside them, and cheerful as
upon a bridal day. This is Christianity ! This is
the “ salt ”of the Gospel! This is the power of God's
grace! War did not make it, hut War called it forth ;
War gave it play, and strength, and maturity ; and


thus too the judgment of God in this infliction is made
to work righteousness in them that fear His name.
Indeed many there can be found, no doubt, who never
thought before of death and judgment and eternity,
who thought upon them in the silent night-watch, the
howling storm, the piercing cold, the booming of
cannon, the shrieks of the wounded, and amid the
stark and mangled heaps of the dying and the dead.
Men must be more , or worse than men, if they think
not of their souls amid such scenes of suffering! They
will surely learn righteousness when such judgments
of God are upon them.
Or, if we transport our view to the long’ corridors
of the military hospitals, where rows of wounded men
are laid in helpless agony —wasted with fever or
mangled by the shot—here, again, we can discern
the hand of God bringing good out of evil, and
overruling His chastisement to the saving of souls.
What but Evangelical Charity could mitigate the
horrors of such a Bethesda of sick and impotent
folk? Could the mere purchased labour of hired
attendants soothe the anguish of the sufferers? No!
despair would have tended them; ü busiest from bed to
bed”—wrath, and curses, and bitterness would have
chidden the lagging service of heartless hirelings;
and souls unnumbered would have winged their flight
to the realms of eternity, without the breath of prayer,
the consolation of hope, or the assurance of mercy!
a But when God’s judgments are in the earth, its in-
habitants learn righteousness.” In the Church of
Christ, if the salt have not lost its savour, charity will
have its perfect work ! Physical evil is the material
out of which spiritual good is wrought up. Were the


sick and dying to be left without the tenderness of
female care ? Were no words of consolation to be
addressed to the dying soldier as life ebbed away?
If it had been so—if none had come forward to do
this charitable service, then might the Gospel well
have been thought u a cunningly devised fable.” But,
no ! at once on the cry of suffering being heard, Minis-
ters of the Gospel, and highborn Women, who for very
delicateness mig*ht seem unfitted for the task, gladly
welcomed the call of duty, and gave themselves unre-
servedly to the work. Is it not a sublime testimony
to the power of God’s grace, infusing such love for
fellow-men, that instead of ease and luxury, and self-
indulgence and eleg*ant refinement, there should be
found devout and noble women, who preferred to these
enjoyments the scenes of anguish which a military
hospital must present, and who gladly resigned u the
purple and fine linen” of life, if, like ministering
angels, they might but soothe the pain of the wounded,
-or administer comfort to the despairing sinner!
You cannot have such sublime self-devotion with-
out the carnage of war; and in this world of trial
and probation , it does vindicate the permission of evil,
when it is thus overruled to greater good; when even
the horrid work of Satan is made subservient to the
spiritual elevation of our species. I dwell not so much
on the work of the Ministry in this matter, because it
is an obligation laid upon them to visit the sick and
dying * to preach repentance to the captives, and the
giving of sight to the spiritually blind ! And have we
not heard what blessed effects have followed upon their
ministrations, as well as from the devoted tender-
ness of those pious Women ! Instead of the frequent


blasphemy, or the contortions of ineffectual anger, no
sooner did the voice of Christian and womanly sym-
pathy make itself heard in the wards, where lay many
a rude unlettered sufferer, than silence, order, reverence,
gratitude, contrition* faith, piety, seemed to spring* up
into life. Dry as the wilderness before, when the
kindly shower and gentle dew of Gospel Love de-
scended upon the spot, first the green blade appeared,
then the ear, then the full corn in the ear! Many
who entered those walls doomed to death found there
the gate of everlasting life, through faith in that
Saviour, who endured, even for His enemies, a still more
agonizing death than any there experienced. Say not,
then, that there is not a God who judgeth the earth 1
Severe as are oftentimes His judgments, great as He
may suffer the u fury of the oppressor” to become, yet
by “ these judgments the inhabitants of the earth
learn righteousness.”
How signally again is this proved by the cessation
of national enmity between Saxon and Gaul, after
eight hundred years of continual warfare ! Now see
them linked together in the bonds of friendship;
laying the foundation of enduring union in common
dangers, common sufferings, common victories, and
mutual assistance! “ The envy of Ephraim has
departed. Judah shall no more vex Ephraim, nor
Ephraim envy Judah.” That which not years of
peace and commercial rivalry could have produced
has been wrought in a single twelvemonth through the
agency of a just and common War ! Surely we see
the hand of God in this, directing all things according
to the good pleasure of His will, and making all to
work together for good to them that love Him.


Nor is the prospect of good bounded here. While
luxury and selfishness have been driven from the rich
and powerful, and open-handed charity has largely
relieved the sufferers—while the noblest qualities and
tenderest feelings, and religious reverence have graced
those who have fought in the ranks—while genuine
Christian sympathy has been called forth in devoted
Ministers and holy Women —what, we may ask, in
the last place , may be the effect of this same War
upon the Religious Destinies of the East ? At its
commencement the members of the Greek Church
were subject to Moslem tyranny, without security for
life and property. “ Israel after the flesh” were in
still worse bondage; shut out from the precincts of
that mountain on which the Temple once rose in its
magnificence, and which was hallowed by the faith
of Abraham and the redemption of Isaac. What a
change in the councils of the Turk has followed on
this War !—while the fleets and armies of Christendom
have saved their existence as a nation !
Two centuries have passed since the learned Mede,
interpreting* the Apocalypse, foretold the absorption of
the “ horsemen of Euphrates,” or the Turkish power,
“that the way mig*ht be prepared for the” advent
of “the King*s of the East” to the kingdom of Messiah.
That Power has been absorbed. It exists by sufferance.
The g*lad tiding*s of the Gospel may be published freely
on Mount Sion and other chief cities of the old Maho-
metan Empire. From the shores of Morocco to the
banks of the Indus, Mahometan Turkey, Egypt, and
Persia already feel the shock which precedes the over-
throw of their Prophet's system! Henceforth the
Crescent must, like Dag*on of old, how before the


Cross. Such is the result of this sanguinary War, rc-
luctantly forced on our mother country; deplored by
those who unwillingly drew the sword ; carrying deso-
lation to many a hearth, numbering already half-a-
million of victims. And yet, looking* at its present
effects and future consequences, it does seem as if the
Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth were overruling
the pride and passions of one man , now summoned to
his account, to the correction of enervating luxury,
the fruit of long-continued peace; and subverting, by
the silent force of friendly protection and national
gratitude, the pride and falsehood of the race of Maho-
met ! If any one thing more than another could tend
to raise respect for the female character in that sensual
people, surely it would he the admirable purity, and
piety, and charity which sustain those devoted ladies
who have nursed the sick and dying* in the hospitals of
Scutari! All then is not clarh and hateful in this
fatal War l It has its softer features. There are
lights as well as shadows in the scene. Yiew it
only in its physical aspect , and it is full of horrors!
Trace it in its spiritual results, the truth of Isaiah’s
warning is exemplified! u God’s judgments are
in the earth, and the inhabitants of the world are
learning righteousness.” Better indeed it were that
society needed no such corrective dispensations ; but
w hen iniquity abounds, it must needs he that God arises
to judgment! He then vindicates His sovereignty by
overruling all to good. The Oppressor He has taken
away. The pride, and pomp, and circumstance of war
He has signally brought down by the storm and tempest,
by cold and nakedness, disease and death ! But faith
and love have been called forth and strengthened !


peace and amity have been rendered doubly precious !
heroic self-devotion and Christian tenderness have
been made conspicuous to the most sceptical and un-
believing ! the reign of the False Prophet undermined,
the way prepared for Eastern kings to adore the
Saviour. When, I say, such are the emerging con-
sequences of this War of wars, then may we believe
that God is judging the world in righteousness and
making* bare the arm of His sovereignty ! Whoso is
wise will consider these things, and amidst the over-
flowing of iniquity he will yet see the loving-kindness
of the Lord ; he will perceive that the Gospel of the
kingdom is flying forth on the wings of victory ; and
in the track of war the glad tidings of peace with God
and good-will to man are to he proclaimed in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, who must reign until all
enemies are subdued under His feet and His name he
great among the Gentiles, from the rising of the sun
unto the going down thereof.




PRATER
FOR THE
GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL,
GOD, from whom all
earthly power is derived, we beseech
Thee to bless Thy Servant the Governor of
this Colony, and grant that he 'may use the
sword which our Sovereign Lady the Queen
hath committed to his hand, with judgment
and justice, according to Thy will, for the
punishment of evil doers; and the praise of
them that do well: Enlighten him with Thy
grace; protect him with Thy providence;
and encompass him with Thy favour.
* [We beseech Thee, also, to bless the whole
Council; direct their consultations to the
advancement of Thy glory, the good of Thy
Church, and the safety and welfare of this
Province.]
Hear us, Most Merciful Father, for the
sake of Jesus Christ, our only Redeemer and
Advocate. Amen.
* This paragraph to be omitted when the Council is not sitting.
