

L 99
W
Jjl
T H E
|L Church of the Period;
<s §^> > ° r >
PRIESTCRAFT AND THE CONFESSIONAL
M) ■ L\ THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND; M*
%r j|)
<<^t>
ALSO, Vr
Y SEQUEL j|
TO THE
ifT “CHURCH OF THE PERIOD,”
/& *V WITH THE IW
AUTHOR’S REASONS FOR LEAVING- THE Jg)
CHURCH OF ENGLAND. cV^>
.1 11. v/ IV k 3 11 LJ itU\ J L ' k> JL V 7 ll j 11* U JL IXJLi
CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
W %
MTiV. yjSL
w m
’ ■" ; ' ' = “ - ,
BRISBANE: Jk^
5^P > PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM BOWNEY, QUEEN STREET.
v ' MDOCCTXXTX -




THE
Church of the Period;
PRIESTCRAFT AND THE CONFESSIONAL
IN THE CHUECH OF ENGLAND;
SEQUEL
TO THE
“ CHURCH OF THE PERIOD,”
WITH THE
AUTHOR’S REASONS FOR LEAVING THE
CHUECH OF ENGLAND.
BRISBANE:
PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM ROWNEY, QUEEN STREET.
MDOCCLXXIX.




to - 3 - T'S
THE CHURCH OF THE PERIOD.
It was only on Ascension Day last that I heard a preacher in
one of the leading West End Churches in London affirm that the
reason of Ascension Day becoming so neglected was the “ laxity”
of the “ Evangelical,” or, as some are pleased to call it, the “ Low
Church Party or, as the preacher on the occasion thought
proper to style it, the “ Puritan School in the Church of
England.” In this school, he affirmed, the event of Good Friday
was the chief topic of consideration, to the neglect of the event
of Easter Day, the Ascension. &e. His acquaintance with the
state of things in the Church of England, from the commencement
of this century, must be singularly imperfect; and I feel that it
would be unjust in me, with the knowledge of facts which 1
possess, not to take some step to defend the Evangelical clergy
from this and the other imputations of “laxity,” which the
preacher in question, and the preachers generally of what is
termed the “ Ritualistic School,” have cast upon them. I
entered the ministry in 1824, having been ordained by a bishop
of the Southern Province. 1 entered it with one altne object—
as a High Churchman (so called), to oppose the Evangelical
views of the day —to oppose the doctrines of grace—-believing
them to be dishonouring to God and prejudicial to the best
interests of man, and likely, from the ground they were gaining
everywhere, to swamp, as I thought, the Church of England. I
had entered at the Temple, but I gave up the Bar for this
purpose. I sacrificed much for this one object. Earnestly did
I labour to oppose the doctrines of the Evangelicals, or, with the
preacher above alluded to, the “Puritan Party.” Whenever my
friends of the High Church School derided them as “ Sa nts”
and “ New Lights” (the terms of the day), such was my earnest-
ness, my answer was always, “Come, let us not call them names,
but oppose their errors by preaching the truth ourselves.” I
ever retened to their doctrines in the pulpit, and opposed them ;
but if I ever referred to the men, it was only to commend them
for their zeal and self-denying labours. (The fact is—-but I did
not see it at the time—they were working like men who had love
in their hearts. We were working for “ the Church”
their Lord and Master, who had bought them with His blood)
And if one thing was more conspicuous than another in their
labours, it was their efforts to restore the observance of Ascension
Day, to bring their congregations to join in the services, instead
of the old “ parson-and-clerk” system which had prevailed (and
which the High Church Party now attribute to the i vangelicals
and affect to deride, whilst it was the universal custom through all


their own churches) —and to get up full services in the evenings
of the week, when men could attend, in lieu of simply prayers
on Wednesdays and Fridays at eleven o’clock, to t'.vo or three
old women who had nothing else in the world to do than to
attend. These things they gave their mind to ; and in visiting
and all parochial work, we could not measure swords with them.
Often did I say to my friends, “ Let us imitate their zeal , whilst
we oppose their errors.''''
But I appeal to common sense. We of the High Church
Party were the large majority at the time. Did the Evangelical
minority of the day bring about a neglect of Ascension Day,
and the fact we then commemorate, through the great majority
of the churches in the land over which they had no control ?
Or was the wretched “ parson-and-clerk” system, which was then
all but universal through the land, to be attributed to them ?
Were they, the few, the cause of “ laxity’’ in everything in all
the churches, even of their opponents P It is simply absurd.
Yet I find the preachers of the “ Eitualistic School” everywhere,
in their desire to get credit with the public, charging the Evan-
gelical clergy with “ laxity.”
I watched the words and all the movements of the Evangelical
party, as a determined opponent. I found they preached every-
where Christ. We were contending for Churchism, Sacrament-
arianism, and, with these, the exaltation of a Priesthood, present-
ing our dead congregations with a dry moral essay in lieu of the
gospel, which we did not know ourselves. If they, the Evan-
gelicals, determined not to know anything amongst men but
Jesus Christ and Him crucified, it was a perfect Saviour that
they preached —the crucified, risen, and ascended Saviour —the
Lord our Eighteousness ; and they never forgot that it was alone
by the power of the Holy Ghost that the truth could be brought
home to a sinner’s heart, or that heart subdued ; whereas in our
churches it might have been said at the end of every year, “ we
have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost.”
The great distinctive view of the High Church Party of that
day was Baptismal Eegeneration. On this they seemed to be
all alive —on everything else, dead. The great champion of that
school selected me, from a sermon he heard me preach, for a
church he had at his disposal, that I might there oppose Evan-
gelical views. He pronounced the preaching of this school to be
a voce etprceterea nihil, /believed it to be (not knowing what it
was) more dangerous still. I believed it must tend to licentiousness.
I viewed it as enthusiasm, and vigorously did I oppose it. But
when it pleased God to open my eyes to the truth, and to
show me the way of salvation (the recollection of which time
may He of His infinite mercy, never allow to pass from my
mind), I stated at once my convictions to a congregation of
upwards of two thousand, who had for seven years been accus-
tomed to hear me opposing the doctrines I that day, with all my
heart, proclaimed. Great was the consternation, It was appal-


ling, at one moment of silence, when I looked upon the astonished,
upturned faces before me. The Lord, however, left not his
word without witness, A young man of opulence, in the
higher walks of life, bowed under it, and became a follower of
the Lord Jesus, forsaking his ways of vice, and giving himself
up to a life of Christian devotedness,—a fruit that my seven
years of Churchism and Baptismal Regeneration and numerous
services never produced. I made many Churchmen —and good
Churchmen too (that is of the Church of England, not of the
Church —the Church of Christ) ; but I am not aware that,
through the instrumentality of the word I preached, one sinner
was brought to Christ. Thus did the Lord most mercifully give
me by the results an assurance whence the doctrine came ; and
in the full strength of that assurance I deliver his word to the
present hour, and have seen much of such fruit since—yea, even
up to, and through, the last year of my ministry. Besides, go
where I will, wherever I hear the saving Truth prayerfully,
faithfully, and fully preached, there I never fail to see that the
Lord accompanies and confirms his “ Word with signs following”
in the hearts of his people. The Gospel is as effectual now for
the subjugation of man to holiness and his God as ever it was, if
men will but trust God with his own truth, and not try to make
it other than “foolishness” to the “Greeks” of the present
day, knowing assuredly that “ by the foolishness of preaching ”
He is able “to save them that believe.” It is the preaching of
the love of God in Christ Jesus that breaks the stoney heart,
and melts it into love ; and our attempts to accommodate the
Gospel to the infidel of the present day, or to make it acceptable
to the wisdom of man, or to exhibit it as other than “ the
power of God,” must be given up : our Churchism, and
Church life too, must be “ cast away,” if we hope 1 to find true
spiritual life in Him, who is the Light and the Life of men,
ourselves ; or if we hope to be the means of imparting that life
to others.
And now, what is the history of the movement in what is
called the High Church Party that has led to the state of things
we witness in the Church of England at the present day ?
Wherever the Gospel was faithfully preached by true Evangeli-
cal ministers, crowds flocked to hear —-their churches were
thronged.* My friends of the High Church Party saw it and
began to get alarmed ; and, like the Chief Priests of old, “ they
doubted of them whereunto this would grow.” Their oim ser-
vices were very dead, and their congregations were glad when
they were over. At last came the question, “ Can we not do
* Ido not say it is, or will be, the case with some of the Evangelical
preaching of the present day, and for some time past; for much of it is
nothing better than (as has been well described) a pailful of water with a
slight dash of milk in it. It has been often remarked that the Ritualists
were chiefly recruited from the Evangelical School. It was from this class
of Evangelicals that the recruits came.


something to make our services more attractive ?” “We must
get up our music ” Then came Choirs —then professional sing-
ers—then intoning —till we arrived at the present state of things,
—crosses, vestments, candles, flowers, incense-burners, and pro-
cessions of decked-out men and women bearing lights, with scenes
that throw Drury Lane and Covent Garden Theatres into the
shade. Whilst this movement was going on, came the. “ Tracts
for the Times,” giving the whole an impetus in the direction of
Romanism. The High Church Party simply looked to Rome
and took a lesson out of her book. They got up a display that
should suit the tastes and passions of the world , and accordingly
they gained the world. Crowds will flock (as to concert rooms,
and other places of public entertainment) wherever there is to
be a treat or a show And these services they designate as
“ hearty ,” deceiving the souls that engage in them. To the man
of the world no purely devotional service can be hearty. It
must ever be irksome The service of the Church of England is
compiled for believers, and such will ever heartily engage in it, if
properly conducted; but the man of the world, long as he con-
tinues such, cannot. It would have been better, by the preach-
ing of the blessed G-ospel to have sought his conversion, than to
deceive him by a form of worship, and let him die (wrapped up
in this round of “sensuous” observances) in ignorance, of the
Truth, and of the power of Vital Godliness.
In the goryeous pageantry and theatrical exhibitions to be seen
in some of our churches, we behold Pagan and Roman super-
stition alike revived. Formalism takes the place of Spirituality:
in proportion as the former comes in, the latter goes out Of
the puerility that attaches to the vestment portion of the subject,
and of the facing this way or that way, I am afraid to allow my-
self to speak. It is a species of “ Will Worship” amongst
“ Priests” that might fairlv be left to that portion of the other
sex which hesitates not, in these sensational days of effrontery and
utter absence of shamefacedness, to present itself even in the
streets in masquerade attire. Millinery and dressmaking are
now called into requisition to give effect to scenes in the house
of G-od as well as in the theatre. I am not saying too much.
Take an account from a High Church paper of a scene in a
London church on Easter Day last First, there is the grand
object of attraction, the “ Priest, in a magnificent white satin
vestment, embroidered with gold, with two Acolytes, in scarlet
cassocks and white surplices, holding his train —before him go
the “Incense-bearer and Acolyte, in white surplice and bright
scarlet cassock,” —then the “ banner-bearer” and thirty choristers
in black cassocks and white surplices,”—others next “in black
and scarlet:” —then, after him, a “Guild in yellow and white,
eighty in number ;” —“ another Guild in white tippets, forty in
number banner-bearer —“brothers of the confraternity,
twenty in number, in red and white ;” —“ another Guild in purple
tippets, with medals and crosses, twenty in number;” —“ Sisters


of Morey, sixteen in number, in the full garb of their order ;
magnificent hlue and white silk banner , borne by a Sister gou-
GEOUSLT DRESSED IS BLUE AND WHITE ROBES AND VEIL ;
banner borne by another sister;” —another Guild, “ one hun-
dred in number, with banner of tbeir order ; another splendid
silk banner, borne by a Sister in blue and white ; the Guild of
the Virgin Mary, with sixty young girls in white veils ; another
banner —-then “ another Guild, eighty in number.” Some,
after having been “ crowned with coronets of red and white
flowers” by the Chief Priest, were presented by him “with
lighted tapers consecrated, which they are to keep till death, to
light them through the portals of the grave.” After this we
shall not be surprised to hear that, as in the theatres, there is
now in the church the “green room,” for we are expressly told
that “the sacristy was reserved for the young girls belonging to
the Guild of the Virgin Mary to robe in.”
Such is the description we are given of the procession as it
moved singing from the chancel; and such, English reader, are
the scenes enacted in our churches daily, with the tacit permis-
sion of the Bishops. They are done openly, and the time and
the manner in which they are to “ come oft ” is as well known
as the time or the manner of any scenic representation at Drury
Lane. The resemblance to the theatres may be even traced in
the public announcement that “ several new banners have been
obtained, and much oe the regalia being new, the scene was
even more imposing than on former occasions.” Well might
Father Gavazzi say, as he is reported to have said in Liverpool
the other day, “ The Ritualism in this country is much worse
than Romanism in Rome.”
It is in this same church, too, that the preacher, according to
the Qhurch Review , as quoted in the Guardian, took for his text,
“ Where the carcase is, there will the eagles. be gathered
together.” The carcase was the Real Presence, the Eagles were
the Communicants. “ The application was not a happy one,”
adds the Review ; —I think so too Another preacher in one of
these churches lately entertained us with constant reference to
“ Mary and her Boy.” Again, we read that prayers for the
repose of the souls of the late Archbishop of Paris and others
have been openly asked for in a parish church of the Establish-
ment, and similar requests have been made by some of the
clergy in our London churches ; whilst others announce, by
placards on the walls, “ Choral celebrations of the Holy Eucha-
rist and these are accompanied with a brass band. lam not
aware of any such dresses, or processions, or prayers, or incense-
bearers, or consecration of veils, and flowers, lighted tapers, or
“ celebrations ” with brass bands, being recorded in the Acts of
the Apostles. We read there of men “ mighty in the scrip-
tures and we hear the Apostle Paul, in another place, charging
Timothy, “ take heed to thyself and unto the doctrine ; continue
in them; for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them


that hear thee.” If I turn, on the other hand, to an Ecclesias-
tical papers of the day, I find, in the advertisements for labourers
in the Church of England, that the requirements are, not men
well skilled in the scriptures, and whose hearts are warmed with
love and zeal for souls, but men well skilled in music, and able
to look after and train surpliced choirs of twenty or thirty men
and boys ; they must also, we read, have some experience in
guilds, and be very particular to turn their backs to the people
at certain parts of the service. In fact, when we look at the
“ Priests,” and their movements and postures in the chancel,*
and the carefully studied movements, especially of the feminine
portions of their congregations, in their courtesies, bowings,
crossings and genuflections, it is not too much to say that the
Trinity of music, dancing, and gymnastics is set up to be
worshipped, whilst the world is left, as before, still to worship,
undisturbed, its Trinity of “the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life.”
The devotional character of the services (even in those
churches where the ministers for the present keep aloof from
direct Komanizing practices) is almost destroyed. Professional
singing, in the psalms for the day, takes the place of congrega-
tional worship ; and young ladies and gentlemen turn and look
at the orchestra to see the singers as they render their parts.
Let me not be mistaken. Ido not object to the psabns being
sung. Ear from it Let them be sung, if you like ; only, let us
have congregational worship.
There is a place of worship in a street not far from the
Edgeware Eoad, where the psalms are sung, and it would be
impossible to conceive anything more truly “hearty” and
devotional than the services, as conducted in the immense
congregation assembling there. No doubt, much of this hearti-
ness is to be attributed to the Truth so faithfully delivered there.
The Gospel makes people, when the inessage comes home to
them with power, wonderfully “ hearty ” in their devotions.
One or two specimens of the old High Church still exist here
and there, with dead services and dry moral assays. In some,
however, of their churches, it must be admitted that the dry
moral essay has given place to a statement of some of the lead-
ing fundamental truths of the Grospel (and for which, I believe,
they are indebted to the revival of Gospel preaching by the
Evangelicals) ; but these truths are like the bright spots, or the
vivid flashes that fitfully appear in the storm-capped sky at this
moment over my head—they are presently lost in thick and
impenetrable clouds (even where there is no incense) of church
routine, observances, and sacraments which hold no longer their
proper place in our sight, but darken and obscure the Saviour.
* I am a strong man, but I can most truly say, I could not poise myself in
the attitudes I see maintained for a length of time in the chancel, without
going through a course of “ training.”


The practices in all our Ritualistic Churches are one and the
same with those carried out by the Trvingites in all their places
of worship ; except that the Irvingites do not desecrate their
churches by profane processions with banners, et csetera; and
that they repudiate Mariolatry and other doctrines —abomina-
tions of the Church of Rome —which some of the Ritualists have
adopted.
Of the animus which the men, who carry out these practices,
exhibit, little need be said. They knew the law when they
sought their appointments as ministers of the Church of England,
and promised obedience to it. If the late judgment had gone in
their favour, it is probable we should have heard nothing of the
Court or the Judges ; but the judgment being against them, we
have had one of the most painful and pitiable exhibitions that
men in high position ever made before the public. Truth does
not always lie where eloquence pleads. The “ Great Gains” of
St. Paul’s may sound grandly and be very sonorous in their
defiance of law, but propriety and discretion are worth more
than sound.
Others, again, of a different order of mind, proceed even to
impertinent threats of what they will do, with an effrontery
rarely to be found amongst men holding place in the ministry.
The bravado so conspicuous in their writings reminds us more of
what we might expect from certain persons to be met with in
these days in the province of Munster, on the other side of the
water, than amongst the elite of London.
I do not quarrel with these gentlemen for their views, but, be-
cause, knowing both their views and practices to be opposed to
those of the Church of England, they hold their positions in that
Church ; and when judgments are obtained against them, openly
defy the law, continue their practices, and eat her bread still. A
parallel, so thoroughly disgraceful and unworthy, is not to be
found in any other profession. I differ, and can differ, from the
Roman Catholic, yet honour and respect the Roman Catholic. I
have had much to do with them and their priests, and they know
that I honour and respect them ; but I am inclined to think the
Romish Church would not care to recognise amongst its sons the
gentlemen I have referred to above.
And what has been the result of this tampering with the devo-
tional character of our services, and drawing, from expediency,
on the usages of Rome, inducing their congregation to believe
that they w T ere merely restoring that which was “ Anglican P” #
* It is an insidious term which the Romanising sect in our Church has
been allowed to use— “ Restorationeach and every point is clearly an
“ Innovation.” The absurdity of appealing to the “ Statute Boot ”on these
occasions may be seen in the fact that, only the other day, a solicitor claimed
to have his cause decided by mortal combat, and on inquiry the permission
was found to be still on the Statute Book. It had never been repealed. No,
but it had been virtually repealed by the voice of many generations. So with
all these things they call restorations. Some had fallen into disuse from their


It is this, Hint in proportion as their elmrelies have drawn upon
the usages of Rome, so they have been allowed to depart from the
truth and embrace the doctrines of Rome. In the more advanced
ones they have plunged into the worst errors of Romanism ;
hence in these churches we now hear of Confession to Priests,
Transubstantiation, Prayers for the Dead, and Mary the Mother
of God interceding for us in heaven ; —some of their ministers
boldly maintaining the power of the “Priest” to “make the
body of Christ,” and to impart to the penitent the remission of
his sins.
Having now returned to Masses, and the elevation of the Host,
and the intercession of the Virgin, I shall not be surprised to
hear soon of another “ Holy Maid of Kent and when to this I
can add that one clergyman, a man of note, had become so ripe
some years since as to declare in a large party that he should like
to see all their houses —the places of worship of the Low Church
party- —in flames, and their ministers suspended by their necks
from the lamp-posts in their parishes ; and that I have since seen
the effects of this teaching in steeling and case-hardening the
heart of even the tender sex, so that ladies brought up in refine-
ment should declare that nothing would give them greater
pleasure than to be permitted to put the match to the faggots at
the stake, it requires no great stretch of the imagination io
suppose that we may be on the verge of days in which another
Gardiner and another Bonner may turn up. Let those who
place such implicit confidence in the effect of civilization on
human nature think differently, if they can.
Such is the Church of England of the present day. These are
the blasphemies which we have to hear from church to church.
These things are done and uttered, and allowed by our Bishops
to be done and uttered. They must either “ love to have it so,”
or else can have no power to prevent it. If the Church of
England, in its government, is powerless, then it becomes us
seriously to reflect what we are to do. Are we to have our
churches made the arena for promulgating such blasphemies —-for
getting up such theatrical exhibitions—and tor encouraging
mountebank practices that are unworthy our Christian profession P
Sad has it been to behold, for years past, the effect of these
practices in our churches on the generation of men and women
that have grown up under their baneful influence ; till at last, as
if in contradistinction to all other times, writers have been t empted
to hold up the young men and women of the day to scorn in such
productions as “The Gihl of the Period” and “The Max
objectionable character, and others had grown into use, eg., “the black gown
and these things, in their use and disuse, stood confirmed by the voice of
many generations ; and more effectually confirmed than if settled by an act
of Parliament of the other day—the voice merely of one generation, and which
might be altered by the next. They had been confirmed in their use and dis-
use by the voice of generation on generation, and their alteration now is not
to be considered a “ restoration,” but clearly an “ innovation.”


OS' the Period.” But sadder still is it to find that as the
sensational cravings in their disciples increase (for present
attainments in sensationalism never suffice), our Romanizing
“ priests” are ready to feed the passion they have themselves
excited, and hesitate not to make our churches even outdo Rome
to gratify their cravings; till at last (in imitation of the lessees
of theatres), to meet the growing desires and rising tastes of
their votaries, who can no more any longer enjoy a pure worship
than the devotee of low novel-reading can take pleasure in sound
literature, they get up, as I have shown, ‘ ; xkw Regalia,” and
then fill their churches with processions of hundreds of men and
women, boys and girls, meretriciously decked out —some with
coronets, others with veils, with countless lighted tapers —“mag-
nificent banners”— clouds of incense—and “sisters” (sisters?)
“ gorgeously attired.” Ido believe we shall shortly have “ foot-
lights” to what they now call their “ altar.”
These gentlemen did not require much foresight to see that
they would not be able to palm off this on the British nation as
the Church of the Reformation ; therefore they soon began to cast
that overboard, and pronounce the Reformation an error It is
very certain no one will mistake this Church for the Church of
the Reformation: it may much more appropriately be called, —
The Chtjhch op the Period.
But this is the state of things we are to tolerate—are we to
help to sanction it by allowing that we can any longer belong to
such a Church, or any longer hold communion with it P The
necessity was not greater for coming out of Rome. The aim now
is to make the Church of England “ broad” enough to hold the
worst errors of Popery, and every species of infidelity that the
brain of man can concoct. You may make the Church of Eng-
land “ broad Church,” but you cannot make Christianity “ broad
Church.” Where “ the broad way” leads we know, and that
multitudes “go in thereat:” but “ strait,” we read “is the gate,
and narrow the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be
that find it.” We, who are opposed to these Romish doctrines
and Romish ceremonies, do not w r ant to leave the Church of
England ; but the time has arrived when faithful men, if no
alteration can be effected , must give up the whole to the Bishops
and their “ Priests,” and come out from amongst them. Many
are the families of the Church of England, and some of ifs best
members, too, who (the Evangelical churches being thronged from
wall to wall, and their own given up to Romanism) have been
obliged to take seats in Presbyterian and other churches in Lon-
don. If the Bishops cannot stop these practices in our churches,
their authority must be worse than useless. Churches must be
opened without them. We want the Church of the Reformation
—our Protestant Reformed Church. In fact, we want a new
Reformation.
Whilst these things are g dug on, let us remember w r e have in
our midst a generation of souls decked out in fantastic attire.


aping bent deformity in tbeir gait, “ walking and mincing as they
go,”—craving for sensational literature, — craving for sensational
pieces on the stage—craving for sensational scenes even in our
churches —feeding on vanity—and left to perish without the
Gospel.
A Wykehamist, a “ Pkiest” of 1821.
REASONS, &e
When I gave utterance to my thoughts, some time since, in the
pages of a little pamphlet, “ The Church of the Period,” my
object was to sound an alarm to the Christian community around
me, and to arouse them to stem and tide back—if haply, with the
blessing of God, it were not too late—the torrent of Popery
which then threatened to overwhelm the land. This was pub-
lished in 1871.
In November, 1874, I wrote as follows in the Christian
Standard, which I transcribe, with permission of the Editor: —
“It is not what the Church—the Professing Church —hath said ; it is not what “ the
Fathers” have said, hut what “ hath God said ?”
“ The correspondence that has for some time past appeared in
the columns of many of our religious journals on the subject of
the Eastern Position and the Millinery of the Minister, has
been carried to such a length that it has become thoroughly sick-
ening. Its puerility and effeminacy, one would have supposed,
would have deterred most men from engaging in such a con-
troversy ; but we find men of masculine minds—of manliness -
if we are to judge from their general masculine style on other
subjects, writing upon it as if it were a subject that warranted
all this serious consideration.
“ What have we to do with the opinions of men of ages gene
by F What have we to do with the ambiguous expressions of
men of former days, many of them vacillating between light and
darkness, in Rubrics that have come down to us ? What con-
cern have we with other ages, whether mediaeval and dark, or
comparatively enlightened ? We have the Bible, the charter of
our salvation. This, and this alone, is to be our guide. We
have the words of Christ. We have the account of His own
institution, recorded in terms sd plain by those who were chosen
to be His ‘witnesses,’ not only ‘in Jerusalem, Judea, and
Samaria,’ but ‘ unto the uttermost parts of the earth,’ that it
would require a ‘ trained’ Jesuit to misinterpret it. Our lan-
guage should be, ‘to the law, and to the testimony.’ If the
Rubrics fall short of this, let them be set aside. If they exceed
this, whether with the ‘ tradition of the elders,’ or ‘ fathers/ let


them be equally renounced. It is not from men that we are to
derive the truth, hut from God. Let everything else be re-
nounced but His ‘ Word.’
“ What are all these contentions and these letters and these
Congresses, but Satan’s artifices to entrap the faithful to lead
them from the light of heaven and of the truth to a dependence on
frail, fallen mail —to take the taper of bis flickering light, instead
of the Divine effulgence of the Sun of Righteousness, whereby to
see their way. This parleying, this discussion, where there is no
room for the faithful to discuss, may be very attractive, but it is
nothing less than a wily device of Satan to get the faithful man
to turn from the way of God, and entertain the idea that the
subject before him is open to discussion. It reminds me of
‘primitive’ times—‘Yea, hath God said?’ I believe it to be
nothing less than that old artifice. The aim of the English
Romish priests, or, as Lord Portsmouth calls them, ‘ Parochial
Popes,’ at the present moment is, by Congresses, to allure the
faithful into discussion, a discussion resting on, What hath man
said? to beguile them with the pleasures of the discussion, and
turn their attention from ‘ What hath God said? ’
“ The Archbishops, long since, whilst this controversy was
going on, declared that a considerable number of the clergy
desired to subvert the principles of the Reformation. Now, the
Archbishop of Canterbury appeals to his clergy, and to those
very men amongst them, to know what their views are, with a
view to the revision of the Rubrics —to the very men that are
seeking to undermine the Protestantism of the Church of Eng-
land Can the laity —can the British public, feel anything now
but disirust of the bishops and the clergy ? The faithful few
seem to have been beguiled from the source of truth. The whole
discussion, with them, seems to turn on, What is the law ? what
is the doctrine laid down for us by man ? Hence they not only
throw themselves open to the (worse than heathen) wretched
idolatry of Rome, but to the unhallowed and demoralizing use of
the Confessional.
“The effort now seems to be to widen the area of the Church
of England, to embrace the corruptions and the superstitions of
Rome, and to sanction that which the faithful of old laid down
their lives rather than embrace. Where are the faithful now?
Let them come forth - let them declare themselves on the Lord’s
side. Three years ago I wrote, ‘lf no alteration can be effected,’
then ‘ must we give up the whole to the bishops and their
“ priests,” and come out from amongst ihem.’
“ The time has now arrived, if the land is not to be overspread
with Popery again, for all faithful men boldly to demand, not
what have men said who were cradled in Rome —What ‘ hath
God said?’ ‘To the law and to the testimony.’ What is
‘ written? ’ and as they rise to action, let them prayerfully rest
on Him who has said, ‘ Them that honour Me, I will honour.’
“JSovmler 2,1874.” “A Wikkh/vmist.”


Again, in tlie same month I wrote: —
11.
“ When I was ordained in February, 1824, I came out dis-
tinctly as a High Churchman, and so continued for seven years,
holding Baptismal Begeneration —that figment of Home —and
the doctrine ever coupled with it, Apostolic Succession —that
absurdity derived from a priestly craving for power, and a
haughty assumption of insolent religious domination over the
consciences of men. Strongly as I held these notions of
Baptismal Regeneration and Apostolic Succession, having been
cradled in them, bad men in those days foisted on the Church
of England, the Mass, and the Confessional, with all the childish
effeminacy of tawdry finery, and changes of gaudy vestments,
which are now claimed to be her essential doctrines and practices,
then must I have left her pale, as being as unscriptural as that
of Rome itself.
“No doubt at the time of the Reformation there w r as, besides
a halting and a looking back, a lingering desire amongst many,
who had been from infancy saturated with Romish doctrine, to
retain a little of what they had so long been associated with.
There is, perhaps, too much truth in what Mr. Osborne Morgan
said the other day, that the Church of England was established
‘ with one wing resting on Geneva and the other on Rome ’
But, as the truth began to be known —as the unlocked Bible in
the hands of the laity opened their eyes —as men became more
generally acquainted with the Way of Life, the doom of priest-
dom was sealed. Rubrics and practices were allowed to become
obsolete, and at last, in the lapse of many years, stood virtually
repealed —repealed by the voice of generation after generation;
and the attempt now to resuscitate them by appealing to the
statute book is as rash and perilous as the Earl of Strafford told
the Peers, in reference to the obsolete act of Edward 111. and
others, it would be in his time to awake such ‘ Sleeping Lions.’
Lions in truth they w r ere; and lions that wall demolish the
Church of England if not speedily caged.
“ Are we now, then, with an open Bible so long before its, to
take a retrograde step ? After having been for so long a time
delivered from the excess of priestdom, are we to place ourselves
under its rule again, and not only under the dominion of priest-
craft, but under a sacrificing priesthood who claim to stand
between us and our God—to hold the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and to arrogate to themselves the power of our Great
High Priest, and only Priest, to open where no man can shut,
and to shut were no man can open ? The very idea must be
expunged from our Prayer Book. No term must remain there
that will allow these men to claim spiritual dominion over their
fellow-men No claim can be established from Christianity, as
exhibited in the Bible, for such a race of men. Priests ! we
have none amongst us. Nay, nor even successors to the apostles.
Scripture gives us no warrant for such. I do not say that I


cashier * Apostolical Succession ’ altogether. No, I do not.
But the only succ3ssor to the apostles which I acknowledge is
the Bible. The Bible, and the Bible alone, can be recognised as
the successor of the apostles. ‘ Neither pray I for these alone,’
said Jesus, ‘but for them also which shall believe on Me through
their word ” (John xvii 20). ‘ Their word.’ Tiny were 1o be
His chosen —His ‘witnesses,’ not only as I said in my last
remarks on the subject, 4 in Jerusalem, Judea, and Samaria,’
but ‘ unto the uttermost parts of the earth ’ They were to
wait till they were endowed with the necessary power from on
High. That power was given them on the descent of the Holy
Ghost. Then they became His witnesses b} their spoken Word,
and continued to be His witnesses now by the written Word,
translated as it is into the languages of the globe, ‘to the utter-
most parts of the earth.’ There is no successor to the apostles
but this written Word. They,the apostles,are the ‘ambassadors
for Christ,’ not we. We may accommodate the words in a
certain sense, and say, ‘we are ambassadors tor Christ,’ but,
strictly speaking, we are not. We, the ministers of the Gospel
of the present day, can alone point to the written word, it is
that, the Word of Christ, that shuts—it is that that opens ; and
it is only as ‘we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord,’ as we preach the same Gospel that the apostles preached,
that we can in any sense, and that a limited one, say ‘ we are
ambassadors for Christ.’
“ Some of the bishops of the Church of England in our day,
trampling, as it were, under foot the blood of our martyrs, and
practically endorsing the utterances of the sacerdotalists against
those holy men, propose conciliation and compromise. As truly as
the page of English history records the fidelity and firmness of un-
comp rom isuvo bishops of the past who would lay down their lives
rather than sanction fatal error, so surely will the future page of
history bear to the latest posterity the names of those compro-
mising bishops of 1871 who would open the gates of the Cnurch
of England, to admit once more the superstitions and the idol-
atries of the corrupt Church of Rome, to deliver us from which
our fathers bled and died.
“ In the late Conference held at Willis’s Rooms on the subject
of the Eastward position and vestments, and the powers of that
ecclesiastical mvth, Convocation, we were favored with the most
laboured and erudite disquisitions, in which everything that man
had said upon the subject seemed to be collected and stored up
as in a Theological Museum ; but in the midst of the gatherings
from the Rubrics and the fathers, and the learned research into
the dark ages, one little saying of Osiander to Cranmer shines
out like a bright constellation : ‘Tell me not of the heroes of
the dark ages ; go to Peter and Paul. Open your Bible, and
hear what the Master Himself says.’
“May the Lord Jesus be present with us —may the Spirit of


God be poured down upon ns, and may we, as a people, be given
grace to look only to His testimony,
“ A Wykehamist.
“ November 20, 1874.”
In the month of December T wrote again :
“ Another aspect of Eitualism is this, that it begets and
nourishes infidelity. Sacerdotalism, which is the life of Ritualism,
has ever been found, where intelligence prevails, to be the
most prolific hot-bed for the growth and development of infidelity.
“ Where savage hordes abound, or semi-barbarous tribes hold
sway, the priest will find in the credulity of the darkened mind
ample room to ply his deep, designing, and unhallowed trade;
hut the moment you bring these artful mummers, with their in-
cense, and their lights, and their gaudy vestments, and their
tinkling hells, and their turnings, and their stooping, and their
uplifting of vessels, and other antics, into the light of educated
intelligence, at once the most profound contempt for the mummers
and their whole system is kindled in the mind. The educated man,
horn on the soil of freedom, rises indignantly above such a farce.
He allows no mere fellow-man to assume spiritual power and
authority over him ; much less does he feel called on to make him
his God, and accept pardon and absolution at his hands. His
whole soul recoils from such a debasing and enslaving system of
priestcraft. See the case of young Mr. Browne and Dr. Manning,
in an able leader in the Standard of November the 24th.
“ In proportion as this priestdom subsided in this country, and
the light of truth prevailed, so did infidelity succumb bef■■re the
light and become comparatively dormant. Ungodly men
abounded; but, under the preaching of the simple Gospel, they
made no parade of their ungodliness. They ‘would not come
to the light lest their deeds should he reproved.’ But the
moment your high Ritualism arose, and your sacrificing priests
started up again, claiming to be our Popes and our spiritual
rulers, representing Christianity—the glorious Gospel of our
salvation—-in the light of a gilded bauble, a tinselled show, with
processions of gorgeous banners, decorated crosses, and women
and young girls decked out, some in fantastic, others in fascinat-
ing attire, carrying tapers ‘consecrated’ by their priests—
when all this started up again in the midst of cultivated intelli-
gence, what could we expect otherwise than that educated men
of the world, wrapped up in their worldiness, should take advan-
tage of it, and say within themselves, as the poor heathen used
formerly to say openly to the missionaries when ungodly crews
landed on their shores from Christian England, ‘ls this your
Christianity?’ Inexact proportion as overweening priestcraft
rises in the ascendancy, so will every intelligent mind rebel, and
refuse to be swayed by the gross superstition. Ido not say that
these priests will not have votaries. Their crafty designs with


women, especially those who have money amongst the ‘ Upper
Ten Thousand,’ will soon secure them worshippers in that
direction, and there are always a lot of* ‘old women’ (o£ course,
T mean men) who are ready to believe anything and go with the
multitude; and then there are others who, essentially steeped in
world iness, and wishing to continue so, will ever catch at a sen-
sational religion—in short, at anything by which they can
persuade themselves that they are attending to their soul’s con-
cerns ; it is, in fact, with them a sortol’ proxy work ; their priest
and their church, in the place of simple rest in Christ and that
vital experimental godliness which is (rod’s work in every case of
true conversion, suffice to lull the conscience.
“ When Christianity is thus presented by such devotees to the
educated man of the world, with gewgaw rites and processions,
little differing from those of the ignorant heathen, save that they
may have a greater admixture of puerility in them, no other
feeling can be excited but that which is produced by every false
religion and superstitious ceremony. It is not Christianity, for
there is not the shadow of a shade of authority for it in the life
and history of our Lord and His Apostles ; and it is surely from
them and »the written Word, which the Master Himself took
care to secure to us, that we are to derive a knowledge of what
Christianity is. When men of common sense only know Chris-
tianity as thus presented to them, it is no wonder that infidelity
abounds ; and is it any wonder that the scientific mind, destitute
of the knowledge of what Christianity is, except as thus con-
cocted by deep and designing priests in the chambers of the
Vatican, should consider the whole as a monstrous fable-—an
institution of priestcraft—and seek to undermine its authority,
and pour contempt on its existence ? I declare, if I only knew
Christianity from the dressy effeminate displays, and histrionic
performances worthy of only a second-rate theatre, in which the
sham priests - the Ritualists of the Church of England of the
present day—engage. I would do my utmost to help to extirpate
such buffoonery, in the name of religion, from the face of the
earth.
“ Every man of common sense can see that the whole scheme
has been devised to give a set of men, claiming to be gods
amongst us, pre-eminence and power over the people, just as the
Pope claims pre-eminence and power over nations They are his
emissaries doing his work. It is, in one word, ‘ Popery.’
“ Once upon a time, when I had just come of age. I saw some-
thing of the effect of these corruptions of Christianity on the
intelligent and educated mind. When on a visit to our Sister
Island I called at the Convent of . The property came to
me by inheritance from Lord . In course of years the
neighbouring city had grown out to the place —the noble mansion
had been given up by the family, and with a small extent of
ground reserved to it, had been let for a nunnery. Thus I called
pn the Lady Abbess there as my tenant, and ever welcome the


cheerful old lady made me—nor was she at all damped in spirits
by having been upwards of fifty years within its walls. She was
certainly the soul of liveliness One Saturday afternoon she
asked me if I would like to attend a service in their chapel.
To this I assented ; and the next day, service being over, and the
nuns having retired from their gallery, I accompanied the priest
through a private door into the mansion. As we walked along
its spacious hall, the priest, an intelligent and most agreeable
man, turned to me and said, ‘ Well, Mr. , I suppose this
has all been fine mummery to you.’ Looking round at him with
a smile I said, ‘and what has it been to you?' The conversation
was soon hushed, for in another moment we w r ere in the Lady
Abbess’s room, to which the youngest nun had been brought
down to play the piano for me, a treat which I was often per-
mitted to enjoy. On renewing my conversation afterwards with
the priest, 1 found him far too intelligent to be the dupe of the
system, and too gentlemanly, conscientious, and Imncst to be the
administrator of the system, although he had been brought up in
it. it seemed (if 1 may use such an expression) to go ‘against
his grain.’ He was not a Jesuit, and therefore evidently the
wrong man for the place ; for I hold that if a ma'ti is not the
dupe of the system he must be a Jesuit, and prepared to carry
it out for what it will return.
“ On the occasion of another visit to that country, some twelve
years later, I determined to travel with my own horses, that I
might stop where I pleaded, and see something of the people.
As I drove along one day towards a place celebrated for its
beautiful scenery, my attention was directed to a woman who
continued running alongside the carriage for two or three miles.
At last, calling to the servant to stop, 1 said, ‘ May I ask what is
the cause of your making such exertion ? If you are late, I will
take you up and carry you to the place to which you are going.’
‘ Och ! yer honour, then,’ said the simple woman, ‘ I am after
doing a penance the priest has given me, and I thought I should
like to have company.’ When I reached my destination, in
vain did I look for any of the educated ladies of the neigh-
bourhood performing these rounds of priestly serv’ce ; and me-
thinks if such had been imposed, their lords, who seemed to be
but ‘ Sleeping Partners in the Concern,’ would soon have been
roused to activity. The fact is, my experience in Ireland in 1832
exactly agrees with the correspondent of the Standard of Nov.
24th, 1874, in Home, ‘that, with the exception of a few fanatical
ecclesiastics, and a very few fanaticised lay followers of them,
there are no “good” Catholics in existence.’
“The truth is, the do-pel in its source is lovely and inviting—
in its history simple and attractive, and in its effect most glorious
—‘ The Power of (Ton to 8 v ovation.’ The most educated of
mankind, however deeply engulphed in the w >rld, will hear its
simple tale of love with reverence and respect; but a corrupted
Christianity —a Gospel mixed up with buffoonery and idolatry —


must ever create unbelief and disgust in an educated mind. In-
fidelity springs up and thrives in such a soil- —whilst the simple,
faithful, and fervent preaching of the Gospel never, in the
his'ory of age after age, produced infidelity.
“A Wykehamist.
“November 24, 1874.”
In vain have I watched, through five years, for any favourable
sign. The superstition has assumed a more determined aspect,
and if we are not willing to be carried away with it, I feel the
time has arrived when we must come out and separate ourselves
from the “ accursed thing ” altogether.
In the case of the intrusion into our churches of Romish
doctrine, Romish practices, and Romish ceremonials; have the
bishops, except in the case of Durham, shown any disposition
whatever to preserve to our congregations the simple worship of
the National Reformed Church p Have they not, when appealed
to by letters, given evasive answers? and have they not, by the
course which they have pursued in some of the new Churches
they have opened, sanctioned the worst phases of the superstition
amongst us, and perpetrated the evil which they were raised to
their present positions to oppose and suppress? A church
which was consecrated the other dav in the Southern suburbs of
London in the diocese of Winchester, with all its paraphernalia
and preparations for heathen worship, is a disgrace to any
sensible community. These are the things that produce infidelity.
Christianity is presented before the people in a fake aspect.
All this is as far removed from Christianity as the East is from
the West; and it naturally follows that educated and intelligent
men, who love the world and the things of the world, and do
i ot wish to be disturbed, seeing that this is nothing but priest-
c aft, cast Christianity aside when presented under such an
aspect
One bishop, a reputed Evangelical, and whose utterances
five-ana-twenty years ago gave promising hope for the future,
actually took credit to himself for his impartiality, since he came
to the See, in distributing Ins patronage equally between the
Evangelical men in his diocese and those who, traitors in the
camp, were stirring hand and foot to introduce everything that
was Romish into their churches—a novel and somewhat Irish
mode of checking false doctrine. The Bishop of London, and
others with him, have not hesitated to select those churches in
their dioceses for confirmations where doctrines avowedly Romish
were taught, and where ceremonials essentially Romish were
carried out with a bold effrontery, and an audacity worthy a
better and more honest cause. I myself was present at a visita-
tion under a bishop, somewhat sarcastically described to me by a
friend, a High Churchman, as ‘an Evangelical of the purest
water,’ who administered the Lord’s Supper on the occasion with a
toy brass cross (loose, and which might have been lifted off in a


moment) behind him on the Communion Table, and a number of
his clergy prostrate on the chancel tiles — so that it was with
difficulty 1 got up to the Table. I remained, not wishing to
cause any interruption ; but I have ever since regretted that I
did without requiring that cross to be removed. In a country
village near me, in this same bishop’s diocese, one of his clergy
had in his village church, on Easter-day morning service, 280
candles burning. And to five one, amongst many instances of
priestly tyranny which have come under my notice, I was one
day in the diocese of Oxford, going over a subscription list to a
public institution with the rector of a parish, a son-in-law of a
bishop, when he suddenly spied the name of one of his parish-
ioners, a young lady of high position and independent means,
and exclaimed with surprise, “What! has she given that?”
“ Well,” I said, “the sum would not have been printed to her
name if she had not given it.” To which, manifesting great dis-
appointment, he rejoined, “ There now, she gave me a promise
that she would not give anything to any cause without first con-
sulting me.”
And we have only to look at the case of Mr. Moore, the
other day, and his very cruel treatment at Coleshill, to see how
things are going on in this respect. Persecution is at hand.
This priestly tyranny —these doctrines and practices extend now
as far and wide as the broad acres of England.*
No ! the National Church is not sinking into Popery because
the bishops cannot prevent it, but because the bishops “love to
have it so and with that figment of Rome, Baptismal Regene-
ration, and its concomitant, Apostolical Succession, how can it
be otherwise? We have in these the essentials of Popery, and
a regular school for sacerdotalism and priestcraft. It is as-
tonishing how men, holding, to a certain extent , Evangelical
views, have imbibed these doctrines, and exulting in their
Churchism. and calling themselves “ Churchmen,” hand over all,
worshipping outside their pale, like Rome of old, into the
HERETICAL VORTEX, to be “ called up again” and dealt
with whenever sufficient power shall be acquired. If the Na-
tional Church assumes thus to lord it over God’s heritage, it
becomes a mere Church of Rome in England.
It is, I believe, through these unhappy doctrines and the self-
complacency they create, that the great body of our so-called
Evangelical ministers have imbibed such hatred against Noncon-
formists. It is not too much to say that, from parish to parish,
1 have seen stronger aversion manifested towards parishioners
who went to some Baptist, Wesleyan, or Congregational chapel
than, 1 should have supposed, could have been borne towards
any persons in the parish ; and this, in mauy cases where I have
known the persons to be holy and devoted Christian characters,
# Here I would refer the reader to the pages of that faithful paper, The
Rock of December the Ist, and its excellent article, “ Government by
Priests,” that he may see what is coming.


and not unfrequently members of families who had, generation
after generation, belonged to their peculiar denomination. It is
simply ROME under another name. I believe, notwithstanding
what I said in “The Church of the Period” of them, and of their
faithful and zealous work in the early part of this century, that
the Evangelicals of the present day in the National Church, as a
body, are as hostile to our Nonconformists as the most advanced
Ritualists that are to be found. Here, I must say, Ido not
speak of those who hold the distinctive doctrines of grace and
teach accordingly ; they have been baptized with the baptism
which is from above —have drank into the spirit of their Master,
and love all who love Him in sincerity and truth.
I have been for upwards of fifty years a minister of the Church
of England, loving her for her adherence to the truth in
her Articles. When I joined her ministry many Rubrics and
practices had been allowed to fall into disuse, and to my mind,
stood virtually repealed by the voice of generation after generation,
and more overwhelmingly repealed than by an Act of Parliament of
the other day. Now, if these “ Sleeping Lions,” as I called them
in my second article in the Christian Standard , are to be resus-
citated, then the National Church puts on a different character
from that which distinguished her when I joined her ministry,
and is taking a retrograde step to Rome, both in doctrine and
practice. This alone would be sufficient to make me dissolve
my connection with her; but she has been allowed, with the
sanction of her bishops, not only to return to Romish doctrines
and Romish practice, but to introduce into her sanctuaries and
services forms only becoming heathen temples ; and even to make
those sanctuaries scenes of histrionic performances and of childish
buffooneries not worthy of the wisdom and common sense of
ripe manhood.
But this is not all. With Transubstantiation, Prayers for the
Dead, and all the abominations of the Confessional, our bishops
have now allowed to be introduced the second part ot horrible
instructions for their “ priests” relative to the Confessional, and
which is secretly circulated amongst them without a publisher’s
name : and which, as Mr. Loraine says, “ suggests questions to
be whispered in the ears of young women and married women by
clergymen of the English Church which, if proclaimed on the
housetop, would heat to boiling point the blood of the English
people;”* and when we add to this the puerile extreme of
Ritualism, blended with the most absurd Pagan practices (vide
“ Church of the Period.” Guest, Paternoster-row. Page 16)
at which even Rome looks on with amazement and smiles, it may
well be asked, Can any faithful man remain within her pale?
All this has arisen, not from the bishops’ want of power, but
want of will. When the fire was burning, instead of trying the
engine of “ Power,” they heaped upon the flames most lavishly
* “ The Church and liberties of England.” Nevison Loraine,


their influence and patronage. It little matters, however, from
what cause it all proceeds —purposed intention or want of power.
The Church continues the same still. The question is, Can faith-
ful men remain ?
“ These altars,” as the late Rev. Mr. Park, of Openshaw, well
observed, “ crosses, candles, incense, consecrations, priesthood,
sacramental efficacy, fasts and festivals, decorations and idola-
trous practices, will worship and voluntary humility, are all in
actual antagonism to the Word of the living God.” “ The worship
of God,” he adds, is spiritual; the religion of Jesus Christ is
severely simple.” “It appears clear to me,” he again says,
“that Christ dealt a death-blow to all Ritualism for all time when
He expressed Himself as is recorded in John iv. Aye! to the
very Ritualism that God Himself had ordered for the instruction
of His Church in her infancy. As an old author has well
observed, £ These things (the rites and ceremonies, the fasts and
festivals, the sacrifices and symbols, of the Jewish dispensation)
were the playthings of the Church when she was young (the
“ schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ”;) “ but now that we
have become men, we have put away childish things.” Christ
Jesus is the substance of all those shadows.’ ”
If the bishops had been removed from the House of Lords
some forty years ago, when 1 first startled a large party by giving
utterance to the idea, it would have been well for their dioceses,
and well for the Church of England. From the Curates’ Act in
1824, at which the laity rejoiced at first, not knowing how it had
been tampered with, to the present; time they have managed to
get tacked on, as in that Curate’s Act, to every valuable Act
some clause giving themselves power to render the Act nugatory
Truly they have been the “ dead weight” round the neck of the
National Church —a weight which must soon sink it out of ex-
istence as a Protestant Church. If the bishops, as a body, had
held the views of the Bishop of Durham, and influenced
by those views, had acted with his fidelity, every faithful Non-
conformist would have gladly accorded the Church of England
room in the land, and we should not now have to listen to the
cry, “ Down with it! down with it!” on every side.
The elasticity which men want to give to the Church of
England now is only set up to make her an “ Omnium Gatherum,”
to give every man a hope in spite of the Word of Gon,
whether he be converted or not, speaking peace where there is
no peace —deceiving souls. I love a comprehensive Church, but
it must include all, and only those, who love the Lord Jesus, and
who reverence the written Word (John xvii. 20), the only suc-
cessor to the apostles which I recognise.
It is in vain that men any longer point to the Thirty-nine
Articles. For a long time I clung to the leading Articles of the
thirty-nine as a very photograph of the Church of England,
radiant with heavenly light; but, alas! when we enter now into


the “ dim religious light ” of her sanctuaries we can trace no
likeness —it is the likeness of one departed- “ Fuimus.”
Seriously taking all this into consideration, I cannot but re-
gard the National Church of this day as apostate ; and though
in the first year of my ministry I was offered a large sum per
annum, with a guarantee that it should never be less, if 1 would
leave the Church of England and come up to London—which I
positively refused to do—l must now, after having been a
minister of that Church for fifty-three years, renounce all con-
nection with her till she is presented to the country pure from
the defilement of Popery, and willing to admit within her pale
only those who can say they take the Word of God as their rule,
and hold to the simple truth as it is in Jesus, worshipping “ in
spirit and in truth.”
Once the shores of Britain enclosed an island that rang o’er
hill and dale with manly voices, “ Britons never will he slaves: ”
but I have lived to see the day when “ priests ” have set up
throughout the land a slavery more dire than any that ever beset
any land —the slavery of Priestcraft anh the Confessional.
It is no longer, “ Britons never will be slaves,” but from Berwick-
upon-Tweed to the Land’s End, it is,
(SACERDOTALISM ! SACERDOTALISM !
SACERDOTALISM !
Englishmen ! the poison of the confessional has already en-
twdned itself around your hearths and homes to an extent of
which many of you have not the slightest conception. From a
Church that would allow its introduction I fly ; and must remain
separate till she is wholly purged from the pollution, and is pre-
pared to place Christianity, stripped of all those meretricious
adornments and adjuncts derived from theatres and concert-halls,
in its simple Scriptural form before the people of the land—
with a revised Prayer Book; and wholly delivered, too, from
those babyish buffooneries which seem to have such fascinations
for a silly and effeminate “priesthood.”
I have hitherto subscribed myself a “ A W ykehamist ; ” it
must now be
John Ashley, LL.D.
December, 1876.
Brisbane; Printed by G. $ J. Black (Late W. Thorne), Edward Street.


TRACTS FOR THE TIMES.
Just Published—New Edition,
WITH PORTRAIT,
PRIEST, WOMAN, AND CONFESSIONAL;
Including the Confessional in Australia.
Price 4s. ; posted, 4*. fid.
AURICULAR CONFESSION IN AUSTRALIA.
Price 9 d.; posted, lOd.
WHO IS CHINIPY!
Important original documents, establishing the high character and standing
of Pastor Chiniquy when in the Church of Rome.
Price 9 d.; posted, 10 d.
PAPAL IDOLATRY:
An Exposure of the Dogma of Transubstantiation,
Price Is. ; posted, Is. 2 d.
PAPAL DOMINATION:
Being the Present Claims of the Papacy.
Price Is. ; posted, Is. 2d.
CHINIQUY versus HENNEBERY.
Price 2d. ; posted, 3 d.
ROME AND EDUCATION:
Being Archbishop Vaughan's Pastoral, and Replies by Rev.
T. J. .Tefferis, LL.B., and Canon Smith.
Price G d.; posted, Id.
COOK’S BOSTON LECTURES,
SIX VOLUMES, ON
Biology, Orthodoxy, Heredity, Transcendentalism, Conscience,
Marriage.
Price, each volume, 4.?. fid.; posted, ss. fid.
CHURCH OF THE PERIOD;
Or, Priestcraft and the Confessional in the Church of England ;
with the Author’s Reasons for leaving the Church of England.
Price Is. j posted, Is. 2d.
MITRED MOUNTEBANKS AND LAY AND SUR-
pliced Lunacy in contention with sound principles and
common sense. By David Buchanan, Esq., M.L.A.
Price fid. ; posted, Id.
Stamps may be sent for any of the above to
WM . ROWNEY,
BRISBANE.
