

THE
PARABLES OF CHRIST.
THIERSCH.




THE
Parables of Christ,
CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO THEIR
MORAL AND PROPHETICAL MEANING.
BY
HENRY W. T. THIERSCH D.D.,
LATE PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MAKHURGH.
TRANSLATED BY
REV. FRED. W. H. LAYTON.
SECOND EDITION.
LONDON;
G. J. W. PITMAN, 140, GOWER STREET, W.C.
1896.


CONTENTS.
I.
PAGE
The Parable of the Sower and of the Four different kinds of
Ground .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
The Parable of the Tares in the Field .. 13
The Parables of the Grain of Mustard Seed and of the Leaven .. 24
The Parables of the Treasure in the Field and of the Pearl of
Great Price .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
The Parable of the Net Cast into the Sea .. .. .. .. 42
The Seven Parables in S. Matt. xiii. considered in their connection 45
II.
The Parable of the Good Samaritan .. .. .. .. 52
The Parables of the Importunate Friend and of the Oppressed
Widow 63
The Parable of the Lost Sheep .. .. .. .. .. 71
The Parable of the Lost Piece of Silver .. .. .. .. 80
The Parable of the Prodigal Sou .. .. .. .. 87
The Parable of the Unjust Steward.. .. .. .. .. 101
The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus the Poor Man .. Ill
The Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican .. .. .. 1S2
III.
The Parable of the Unmerciful Servant .. .. .. 132
The Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard .. .. .. 143
The Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen .. .. .. 150
The Parable of the Marriage of the King’s Son .. .. .. 159
The Parable of the Ten Virgins.. .. .. .. .. 169
The Parable of the Talents .. .. .. .. .. .. 181


THE
PARABLE OF THE SOWER, AND OF THE
FOUR DIFFERENT KINDS OF GROUND.
S. MATT. xiii. 1-23.
Odb Lord, in His earlier discourses, as in His sermon
on the mount, and at other times, spoke with the same
plainness and unrestrained freedom to all alike who
assembled to hear Him. While the multitude were
astonished at His doctrine, numerous disciples gathered
round Him. But now, at the date of these parables,
another season had arrived. The resistance of the
scribes had begun; evil reports and blasphemous voices
were heard; and many of the people, who at first heard
Him gladly, were troubled. A time of sifting had
commenced among the hearers, and now the Lord spoke
after a different manner —that is to say, by parables.
These parables are of the nature of warnings to disciples,
and contain also great promises and mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. The Lord declared these warnings
and prophecies purposely in obscure language, in order
to hide their meaning from blasphemers and sceptics,
whose anger He was unwilling to excite, and yet so as to
confirm the faith of His disciples, to whom He explained
B


all things. The honest-minded were to be led further
into the truth, but only they. All who had treated the
earlier discourses of the Lord with levity and unfaithful-
ness, were to receive no further light. To them whose
hearts were not upright with God, were to be fulfilled
the words God has spoken by Isaiah —vi.: “Hear ye
indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but
perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert, and be
healed.”
The warnings and promises of these parables have
therefore an especial application to these last times,
when a great sifting is going on throughout the whole
Church, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand. To
those especially who are more deeply taught in the
Holy Scriptures, the time is come for them to learn
what are the real dangers that beset us; and this the
Lord shows in the parable under consideration.
The Lord Himself is the Sower. He who is from
heaven has passed over the earth, and scattered a
spiritual seed in the hearts of men, such as they
possessed not before. The growth of the seed, the
different properties of the ground in which it is sown,
the ripening of the seed, and the harvest, are figures
of the spiritual and heavenly grace which God Himself
has put into the hearts of His creatures. He is the


Creator of all things, visible and invisible. At the
foundation of the world, He so formed and set in order
the visible things of nature and of man, that there
is in them a reflection and likeness of heavenly things.
The fleshly-minded man perceives nothing of this; but
Christ, filled with the light of the Holy Ghost, as He
passed through the fields, and observed the works of
men, saw in them various images of the things of the
kingdom of heaven.
The seed corn sown in the earth germinates and
grows up in virtue of the vital power with which the
Creator has endowed it: so it is with the spiritual life,
which, by the word of truth and the holy sacraments,
is implanted in our hearts. Its growth is not of man,
but of God, who blesses the new creature and gives the
increase. It is by the operation of His grace that the
good seed of the kingdom ripens to maturity—“lt is
God that worketh in you both to will and to do of His
good pleasure.” This should move us to humility, to
godly fear, and watchfulness, that we may not hinder
God’s work in us, nor quench, nor grieve His Holy
Spirit. For if He were to withdraw Himself, and take
His Holy Spirit from us, nothing would remain in us
but sin, death, and perdition. But this truth gives
also consolation, especially to the ministers of Christ.
It is God alone who makes the seed He has sown to
prosper. The good work He has begun He will perform
and finish, until the day of Jesus Christ, if only we will


yield ourselves to Him. Without this assurance, the
servants of Christ would he discouraged; for of them-
selves they have no strength to preserve, or bring to
perfection, the good seed sown in the hearts of God’s
people. Just as the husbandman cannot make the fruit
to grow out of the earth. He can only fulfil his duty to
plough, sow, harrow, fence, and weed the field; and,
having done his duty, to wait upon God, who blesses
His creatures, who gives sunshine with the early and
latter rain, and averts the destructive storm. You are
God’s husbandry; you are God’s building: we are but
assistants in the work; yet S. Paul says, “labourers
together with God in His work.” We have only to fulfil
our duty with patience, and wait upon God. They who
sow in tears, will reap in joy—when the Lord comes.
Then is the time of harvest. Not till then will the
servants of the Lord, who from the first days of the
Church until now have laboured in His husbandry, see
the success and the reward of their pains. Then will
they praise the Lord and give Him glory; for it is He
who is the Author of all blessing and success, and who
brings all things to a happy issue.
I, Of the seed sown, “ some fell by the wayside, on
ground trodden down and hardened by the feet of
travellers and wayfarers, and the birds came and
devoured it up.” This is the sad result of a double
cause, viz., the hardness of the ground, and the activity
of the birds; that is, the indifference of the human


heart, and the- wiles of the devil. By this hard-
beaten ground are described insensible, frivolous, and
worldly dispositions, upon whom the word of God
makes no impression. They reject His severity; they
are unmoved by His goodness. Like the wicked before
the flood, they desire that God should depart from
them; and know not what the Almighty can do for
them. Many of these souls, hardened by the continual
wear and pressure of the world’s footsteps, are fre-
quenters of churches, and places where prayer is made
and sermons are preached. They do so from custom,
because others do; but they accustom themselves to
hear without attention, and understand nothing. The
word ministered passes by them, neither affecting the
heart nor enlightening the conscience. So they remain
unprofited, unchanged. Miserable people! in their
carelessness, they know not how near the devil, the
destroyer of souls, is to them. If only they would
apply their hearts to hear the Word of God, He, who
sees in secret, would show them their danger, and
that it is the wicked one who is busily catching away
the Word from their heart, lest they should escape his
wiles, and be saved. Sometimes the word of truth
makes a momentary impression upon this hard ground;
it even penetrates the conscience. But the enemy, who
goes about seeking whom he may devour, soon catches
it away. He whispers secretly to the worldly heart, or
cries aloud, by the voices of wicked men, “ Such doc


trine, that disturbs the conscience, is mere excitement;
it drives people mad: religious people themselves do
not act up to it, and many do not so much as believe
what they preach.” So it was said of our Lord Him-
self —“He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye
Him?” In the last days especially, when the Gospel of
the kingdom is preached, and the speedy coming of the
Lord announced, the enemy diffuses the blasphemy by
thousands of tongues, that the Gospel is a mere fable,
and the Christian Church is a human invention, to
delude the people. These are the legions of wicked
spirits, symbolized in the parable by the birds, who
snatch out of the hearts of men the truth they have ever
so little received, and bring them wholly under the
power of darkness. And even they who believe, and
are obedient to the truth, must experience such assaults
of the spirit of the power of the air. But God be
thanked, Christ and His Spirit are still with us; and
He who is in us, is greater than he who is in the world.
Whoever abides in Christ by faith, and under the pro-
tection and defence of the ordinances of His Church, by
obeying Him in them, can say to the enemy, “ Get
thee hence, Satan; ” and therewith repel all his fiery
darts.
11. Some of the good seed fell on stony ground, and
quickly sprang up, because it had no deepness of earth.
But under the heat of the sun it withered away. It
failed to strike deep root downwards, searching nourish


ment in the moisture of the earth, so as to he able to
endure the scorching sun, and bear fruit upward. This
stony ground represents those souls, who will not allow
the Word to be immediately taken from them. They
receive a lively impression; they accept the Word with
joy; in the warmth of their feelings they readily be-
lieve. The Lord, at the beginning of His ministry,
found many such disciples; hut they were not steadfast
in faith. When enmity and persecution arose against
Him and His followers, they drew hack —they went no
more with Him. Though yet for a time they retained
salutary recollections and feelings, these soon withered
away, and left their spiritual life cold, and dead, and
fruitless. This, therefore, is the second danger, which
will attack even those who have overcome the first.
And what is the reason why so happy a beginning ends
so lamentably ? Because, in this class of persons, the
Word has not taken deep root; that is, it has not been
allowed sufficiently to penetrate and enlighten the
conscience. They have received the truth in their
feelings and understandings, but they have not allowed
it to discover to them their inward corruption. They
are not thoroughly in earnest to gather the stones out
of the field; that is, to put away their old sins, per-
versities, and evil habits. They do not count the cost,
and determine, at all hazards, to become pure and holy.
Because they are not in real earnest with the inward
conflict between the incoming grace and truth of God


and the sin and error lying hidden, and hitherto undis-
turbed, the outward conflict with the contempt and
hostility of the world, is more than they can endure.
If they desired, above all things, to he cleansed from
evil, they would welcome the cross of Christ; that is,
they would accept gladly the mockery and persecution,
and every form of that tribulation which is inseparable
from the following of Jesus in this world, as a precious
means of cleansing from the filth of the flesh and of the
world. Instead of that, when decision becomes neces-
sary, they, in works, if not in words, deny the truth,
and become an object of sorrow and pity to Christ, to
His ministers, and to His people. But there is, never-
theless, hope for those who have fallen under these
dangers. God inflicts suffering which, like a sharp
ploughshare, cuts through and loosens the hard ground,
that it may become capable of receiving into its bosom
the good seed. The Lord knocks again and again at
the heart of the unstable, to make them sensible of their
danger; that by yielding to the truth, and suffering it
to take deep root, they may awake to a real earnestness
for their salvation, and despise all earthly loss for the
sake of the heavenly treasure.
111. Some of the good seed fell among thorns; and
the thorns sprung up and choked it. These thorns are
explained to mean the cares of this world, the deceit-
fulness of riches, and lusts of other things. These lusts
of other things mean the desires and wishes for other


things than the kingdom of heaven, and the things
belonging to it, of which the Word of the Gospel is the
•seed. These choke the Word, so that he who entertains
them, becomes unfruitful. Thus, when the two first
■dangers are overcome, there remains yet another.
When the Word is already received, and the first
•earnest step is taken in self knowledge and holiness, and
even somewhat of suffering has been endured with
■Christ, it may yet happen that the Word will be choked
in the heart, and at last bear no fruit. The unstable
ones fall away quickly; the indifferent, worldly-minded
ones can hardly be said to make a beginning in Christian
life, so soon is the Word caught away and devoured by
the wicked one. But here is a progress made, though,
unless the danger that threatens it be removed in time,
it must end disastrously. The seed remains, takes root,
but in the midst of thorns. The thorns are at first weak
and small, and therefore made no account of; but little
by little they grow up, —they strike their roots more and
more firmly, —they spread abroad above the earth until
they exhaust the strength of the soil, and leave no room
for the good seed to flourish and bear fruit, till they
finally choke the good seed altogether, and it dies.
The danger to which such souls as are here described
-are exposed, consists in this: that they scarcely perceive
the quenching of the spirit of life; the gradual with-
•drawal of grace which is the effect of the growth of the
thorns, of the increasing power of the cares of this world.


of the esteem and love of riches, and of other lusts.
They deceive themselves as to their real state. They
suffer from a spiritual consumption; and the evil of this
disease consists in this; that the sick person does not
know his true condition, and how near he is to death —to
spiritual death, which is perdition. The thorns are at
first small: that is, this evil does not begin with gross
sins, but with things that a man considers lawful and
innocent; such as anxiety about his livelihood, the love
of money, attachment to earthly possessions (like the
rich young man), in efforts to obtain a high position,
gratification in the honour that comes from man, seeking
after refined enjoyments and pleasures, the pride of
science, political excitement. All this is represented in
the thorn bushes, which exhaust the strength of godly
life in us, bring on a slow decay, which, unless a remedy
is found, must end in death and perdition.
This warning, above all others, applies to those who
receive the word of the hope of the kingdom in these
last days. Who would not be terrified at such dangers,
if he saw them ? Who would not receive it thankfully,
if the Lord, by His sore chastisements, sought to discover
to us such a state of soul? Who would be angry or
offended, if the Lord’s servants, with faithful kindness,
were to summon him to tear out of his heart such up-
growing thorns ? They must all be rooted out, before
they grow too rank. We would beseech the Lord to
tear them out, whatever suffering it might cost us, even


to the rending and wounding of the heart itself. No
self-discipline, no self-denial would seem to be too
severe, if necessary, that our godly life may not suffer, —
that our first works may not be lost, —that the Lord, who
looks for precious fruit from us, may not be disappointed.
What can he more distressing, than that a man who had
run well, who had nearly secured his crown, should ab
last be left behind in the race ?
IY. When, by the grace of God, these three warnings
have been duly heeded, these three terrible perils have
been overcome, then appears the good ground, the good
and honest heart, in which the heavenly seed brings
forth fruit to perfection. Yet, even here, a distinction
is drawn. Some bore a hundred-fold, some sixty, some
thirty. There is a difference among the children of
God, as there are degrees in the coming glory. “ One
star differeth from another star in glory.” There are
degrees in the calling and in the final position. Some
are appointed to be a blessing to many; some only to a
few. Some are to rule over many things; some over a-
few. To some is given a long course and a fruitful
activity in the service of the Lord; to others only a short
period of labour. Also among the children of God, there
are reasons why, in one the life of God is more effica-
cious, in another the same grace is less so. It is beyond
our power to fathom this mystery. But one thing is
certain. God has shown us great grace, and called us
to a high position in the world to come. If we remain


faithful, we shall be numbered among the first-born,
whose names are written in heaven; and this prize is of
such worth, that no man who strives for it will shrink
from any sacrifice, any watchfulness, any self-denial,
which is necessary to secure it. Wherefore, brethren,
lay aside every weight that hinders you in the race; let
Christ have no rival in your hearts; but make your
calling and election sure.


THE
PARABLE OF THE TARES IN THE FIELD.
S. MATT. xiii. 24-30.
God, the Almighty Father, created all things by His
Son. He made man upright, and appointed him to be,
in the midst of His creatures, the visible image of the-
Eternal Son of God.
The Lord looked on all that He had created, and,
behold, it was very good. He rejoiced in all His works.
But this goodness did not long continue. The enemy
found an entrance and sowed tares among the wheat.
From this a “falling away” arose in that original
world of mankind, upon which, when the tares reached
maturity, the judgment of the deluge came, while
Noah was saved, in order to commence a new and
better age of the world.
Such were the ways of God in the olden time; and
the Lord shows us in a parable the same purposes of
God, under the figure of the field which bears both
wheat and tares, and which are both to grow together
until the harvest. But our Lord’s object was not to
explain the past, but to reveal the future in a prophetic


parable containing mysteries which were to come to
pass in the course of the Church’s experience in the
world. “He who sows the good seed is the Son of
Man.”
The Son of God is become Man, and has appeared
among us; and now, by His Word and His Spirit, He
sows a seed, such as has never before been found in the
earth. Having abolished the curse, saved and sanctified
human nature, and brought life and immortality to
light, He deposits eternal life in the hearts of believers.
In the midst of this evil world He plants the children
of God, who are not of the world. They belong to
heaven; the glory which will be manifested in the
coming kingdom is in them already present. They are
the good seed, sown by the Son of Man. “ The good
seed are the children of the kingdom.”
The first Christian community who, being filled with
the comfort and power of the Holy Ghost, it is written,
found favour with God and all the people, was this good
seed. It was in the field; the field is the world—the
world of mankind, all nations. On the ground of the
old nature of man the seed was sown. The Church has
sprung up, and in it is seen the heavenly life, which it
receives from Christ. This seed still continues to live
in the earth. From generation to generation it has been
preserved and increased; but in the midst of it the tares
appear also. The tares are not the heathen, nor the
Pharisaic Jews; for these were already there before the


good seed was sown, before the Church was established:
but the tares of which the Lord speaks were first sown
after the noble seed was already planted. “ The enemy
that sowed the tares is the devil.” The devil could not
succeed in hindering the foundation of the Church, the
sowing of the good seed of the kingdom. Nor has he
been able, nor will he be able, to root up the good seed.
It was not in his power to hinder the resurrection of
the Lord; nor was it possible that he should hinder
the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, or frustrate the
operation of the heavenly gift; hence he adopted
another policy. What he could not accomplish by open
combat, by cruel persecutions, he attempted to effect
secretly and with subtlety. He mingled tares with the
good seed sown by the Lord. . “ The tares are the
children of the wicked one,” such as had not as yet
been found in the earth; the apostates who fall away
from Christ. They forsake the holy covenant of
baptism; they deny the Lord that bought them; they
do despite to the spirit of grace, and allow themselves
to be filled with the spirit of the prince of this world.
Jesus said to His disciples, “ If ye love me, keep my
commandments; and I will pray to the Father, and He
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide
with you for ever.” If the receiving and preserving the
gift of the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, be dependent on
keeping the commandments of the Lord, then surely the
breach of those commandments must be the condition


on which the spirit of Christ will depart, and the
spirit of Satan will enter in. To love Jesus, and to
keep His commandments, is therefore the character of
the good seed, the children of the kingdom. To despise
Jesus by disobeying His commandments is the character
of the tares, the children of the wicked one, i.e., of the
devil. The good seed, the children of the kingdom, are
such, because they are of Christ; they have received
and do keep His word and His spirit; the tares, the
children of the wicked one, are such, not because they
are heathen, or Jews, but because, being Christians,
they wilfully disobey Christ their Lord and Saviour—
reject His word of truth, quench His spirit of grace,,
and will not repent that they may be pardoned and
saved; but readily receive from the prince of thia
world, the devil, the spirit of falsehood, of unbelief, and
disobedience. They thus become, by their own choice,
of the wicked one—his workmanship, his husbandry—
the tares.
This falling away within the Church is the master-
stroke of the devil, and apostate Christians are his most-
dangerous instruments. Hence the Apostle Paul says,
when he announces the coming apostacy of the man of
sin: “ The mystery of iniquity doth already work.” It
showed itself at first in the dangerous heresies of the
ancient times. Then, as the Church became widely
spread abroad, and interwoven with the world, this same
falling away came to light, in the two forms of misbelief


and unbelief. In the ruin of the last days it will ripen
to a fuller maturity.
It was “while men slept,” that the enemy succeeded in
sowing his tares. These “men” are the servants of Him
to whom the field belongs; that is, they are the ministers
of Christ, to whom directly, or indirectly, He has
entrusted the oversight of His flock. The first disciples
of Christ, and all who after them have received this com-
mission, to care for His flock, are the “men” alluded
to in the parable. As the Church itself, consisting of all
who at any time have been admitted by the sacrament
of baptism into the Christian covenant, irrespectively
of any divisions or denominations, is, in God’s sight,
still but one Church ; so the Lord regards also all men,
who in all times and by whatever name have held offices
of ministry in His Church, as one ministry. While these
men slept, and were unaware of what was taking place,
the tares were sown. It may .be that the enemy would
have in some measure succeeded, had the guardians of
the field not been found sleeping at their post; upon this
we cannot speak with certainty; but so much is clear—
that the Lord gives a warning to His servants, that they
should not sleep, but watch over and protect His flock
from the subtle inroads of the devil. And this also is
unhappily clear and certain, that those appointed to
watch over the good seed have, in many cases, not kept
watch, but have fallen asleep. They have given occasion
to the work of the enemy by their negligence, and then,
c


too late, have become aware of the mischief for which
they are held responsible. This is the great fault which
we all in common have to acknowledge with humiliation
before God. And who, among all whom the Lord has set
as watchmen over the souls of His people, can release
himself from participation in this guilt ? What father of
a family—what teacher—what minister can stand forth
and say, that he has exercised such faithful oversight over
those entrusted to him, has borne them upon his heart,
has interceded for them in secret, has striven for them
openly against the enemy, so as the Lord has given the
example in His care for His disciples ?
When the servants woke up and saw this second evil
crop springing up, they were seized with fear; they could
not account for it; they complained of it to their Master,
and offered to go and root up the tares. They would
now remedy the evil by their own zealous and strenuous
efforts. But the Lord said, “no,” and adds the reason
why they should not: “lest while ye gather up the
tares, ye root up the wheat with them.” Here, then, is
another warning. When the evil is done, the servants
fall into the temptation to desire to undo it by unwise
and violent measures. But, unhappily, this warning
also lias been unheeded. There was a time, when the
rulers of the Church attacked with violence the heresies
they saw multiplying around them. They condemned
the heretics, and then handed them over to the civil
power to be burnt. It is true some people now-a-days


attempt to exonerate the rulers of the Church from the
guilt of this cruelty, from the sin of thus departing from
the word and spirit of the Lord, by arguing that it
was the civil power only that put heretics to death, and
not the Church. But they willingly forget that the
authorities of the Church taught that it was the duty
of the civil power to destroy those whom the Church
condemned, and were present at the execution of the
sentence.
The same spirit which was manifested by the desire
to pull up the tares actuated those who persecuted the
Jews because they did not believe in the Saviour, and
those who attempted to convert the heathen by the
sword. All those methods of propagating the Gospel
are condemned by the Lord. He will not have force or
temporal punishment employed. The solemn auto-da-fe
of the Spaniard, and the mean policy of the sectarian
who withholds his patronage from the man who refuses
to attend his chapel, are alike abhorrent to the Lord.
He has given no commission to His servants to root out
heretics. His words are, “ Let both grow together till
the harvest, and in the time of harvest I will say to the
reapers, gather ye together first the tares, and bind
them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat
into my barn.” They who take upon themselves the
office of separating the tares from the wheat usurp a
power which the Lord has reserved for Himself, and
which He will accomplish by other instruments; for


He says, “The harvest is the end of the world, and the
reapers are the angels ” (of the Son of Man).
By fleshly zeal can no man undo the evil which the
enemy has done in sowing tares in the Church, or in
the Christian family. The clergy are not called to
judge the world, in this age of the world, or to do what
the Lord has reserved to Himself at His coming in
glory. They are now to tread in those steps, of which
the Lord has left them the example on earth; to walk
in His gentleness; to contend only with the spiritual
weapons of the Word and of prayer; and in love to give
their lives for the sheep. The worldly power may
punish them who offend against the moral law, for God
has put the sword into their hand; but to Peter He said,
“ Put up thy sword into the sheath,” and has delivered
to him the pastoral staff, that he may wield it, as Christ
Himself has done when upon earth, who, “ when He
was reviled, reviled not again; when He was smitten,
threatened not; but committed Himself to Him that
judgeth righteously.”
But for the very reason that false teachers are not to
be exterminated, spiritual discipline must be exercised
for the protection of the children of God. The word of
warning and correction, suspension from the enjoyment
of the heavenly mysteries, and at last, exclusion from
the Christian community; these are the spiritual means
for the defence of the flock, the use of which the
servants of the Lord ought never to abandon; for this.


is the discipline of the Church, which our Lord did not
intend to destroy by this parable, but rather the more
to impress upon us its necessity. He said, “Nay, lest
while ye gather up the tares, ye root up the wheat with
them.” He saw, with prophetic eye, the frightful con-
sequences which followed the rejection of his admoni-
tion, when men began to root out heretics. Not only
the false teachers, but with them and instead of them,
the children of God and witnesses of the truth, were
persecuted and exterminated. As might be expected,
when men take upon themselves to do, not only what
He has not commanded them to do, hut what He has
warned them not to do.
The close of this age of the world is nigh at hand.
The Lord Himself gives us in this parable a sign, by
which we may know that the end of this world draweth
near: when both the wheat and the tares reach their
full growth and show their fruit, then the harvest is
near. The harvest is the end of the world. When
they who are of the kingdom of heaven, and they who
are of the contrary part —of the prince of this world,
the devil —develop fully their contrary principles into
contrary systems of organization and action, —when the
one preach and practise obedience, the other insurrec-
tion, —when the one live through faith by the grace the
Lord gives in the ministries and sacraments He has set
in His Church, while the other deny their power, and
have recourse to other means and other influences, —when


both thus ripen and show their fruit then the harvest is
near. And this sign is present. For there never was
a time like this, when the voice of blasphemy against
the Lord and His truth is heard from the lips of those
who should be waiting, and prepared for His appearing,
when on every hand the manifold signs of the apostacy
appear. Nor has there been, in the course of the past
years of this dispensation, a time like the present, when
the Lord gives His Spirit from heaven as the latter rain
upon the harvest-field, that the good fruit may ripen in
the hearts and lives of His children, and His Church
may grow up to the stature of manhood in Christ.
The sifting has begun—the separation between the
tares and the wheat. The sheaves of the first-fruits of
the good seed are gathered, and the tares are already
bound in bundles; that is, the unbelievers bind them-
selves in confederacies together, and strengthen them-
selves in a community of unbelief —not knowing that
thereby they become prepared for judgment. And
where are the faithful watchmen who have the courage
to warn them of their danger!
The tares are left lying in the field, while the wheat
is gathered into the barn. But when the wheat is
safely housed, then, and not before, the tares, heaped
up without, are given to the burning. Then is the
consummation of the great tribulation of the Christian
economy, such as never was, or ever will be, even as
the sin of the apostacy is greater than ever sin was.


It has its full likeness only in one event. The unhappy
city, Jerusalem, when besieged by the heathen, and
destruction came upon it, was cast into a similar furnace
of misery and woe. When this time begins on earth,
the children of God will have been brought into safety,
and hidden with the Lord. When this tribulation is
over, they will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father (Isaiah xxvi. 20).
As after a heavy storm, the clouds part asunder, and
the sun again shines forth, full of joy and goodness; so
will it be when Christ comes, and His saints with Him.
The life hid with Christ in God will then be manifested
in glory. Christ Himself, now hidden and unknown,
will appear as He is, and His image will be reflected by
His saints who surround Him. With them He will
work His works of love and blessing, and they with
Him, in joy that shall never pass away, will glorify the
Father in heavenly worship and service.


THE
PARABLES OF THE GRAIN OF MUSTARD-
SEED AND OF THE LEAVEN.
S. MATT. xiii. 31-33, Compare S. MARK iv. 31, 32 ; S. LUKE xiii. 18-21.
On another occasion (S. Matt. xii. 28), the Lord said,
“If I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the
kingdom of God is come unto you.” For He bore the
kingdom in Himself. It was contained in Him. By
His coming into the world, the kingdom was already
come in its real essence, though circumscribed, limited
to His person, unseen by men, small as a grain of
mustard-seed. The Lord did not remain permanently
visible upon this earth, hut before He left it He hid
in the hearts of His disciples the word of truth, and
breathed into them the spirit of life. He is the man
who took a grain of mustard-seed and hid it in his
garden, as S. Luke expresses it. The Word of God in
the little company of the disciples, who were assembled
in an upper room with closed doors for fear of the
Jews, was this grain of mustard-seed. From this small
beginning it has grown up —the Christian Church has
developed itself, as a tree of God’s planting. It was


like the vine of which it is written, “ The hills were
covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof
were like the goodly cedars.”
It grew like that mighty tree which Nebuchadnezzar
saw in his dream, “Its height reached unto heaven,
and it spread itself to the ends of the whole earth. The
leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much,
and in it was meat for all; the beasts of the field had
shadow under it; the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the
boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.” To such
greatness did the Catholic Church attain, that nations
from the east to the west, from the north to the south,
found protection under its shadow, and participated in
the treasures of its Divine ordinances. The Lord saw
this in prophetic foresight. When we consider His
words as they are delivered to us in the Gospel accord-
ing to S. Mark, the whole meaning of the parable appears
unfolded. But if we observe the connexion in which
the parable stands in the Gospel according to S. Matthew,
we perceive another prophetical mystery, to which the
Spirit of God refers us in these last days.
The Lord’s design in this parable, as in the two
former, and the next following one, is to give a
warning. The sowing of the good seed is attended by
the danger that a part of it might be lost, and that tares
might grow up with the wheat. On this occasion the
Lord alludes to a danger which is connected with the
visible growth and extension of His Church. If the


grain of mustard-seed becomes developed into a tree,
then the birds come and dwell in its branches. They
come to devour its fruits. An interpreter of the
Gospels, the Spaniard Maldonatus, relates, that in his
own country he has seen the birds collect in swarms,
and with a great noise settle down upon the mustard
plants, and eat up their seeds. What are these birds
under the heavens that devour the seeds of the mustard
tree ? The Lord Himself has told us in His explana-
tion of the first parable. In S. Matt. xiii. 19, as also in
S. Mark iv. 18, He gives the hint that the first parable,
that of the four kinds of ground, contains the key to
the understanding of the other parables. Jesus said to
His disciples, “Know ye not this parable; how, then,
will ye know all parables ? ” The fowls that came and
devoured the good seed sown by the wayside, the Lord
interprets to mean the wicked one, who comes to those
who hear the Word of the kingdom without under-
standing it, and catches away that which was sown in
their heart. So the birds which come and lodge in the
boughs of the mustard tree, grown up from the small
mustard-seed, are wicked spirits, devils, who obtain
entrance into the Church when increased so as to
include nations and multitudes in its organization.
The birds in the branches devour the fruit, as the wild
beasts make desolate the vineyard of the Lord.
The Lord said, when the hour of His agony drew
near, “ The prince of this world cometh, and hath


nothing in me.” So it was with the Christian Church
in her beginning. The world and its prince had
nothing of theirs in her. She was a strong city;
salvation God had appointed to her for walls and bul-
warks. She was a flock well guarded and watched
over. The wicked one prowled around like a devour-
ing lion, seeking whom he could devour. He had not
as yet set his foot within the fold, therefore he raged
without in cruel persecutions. But the persecutions
came to an end; the Church found rest from without.
From the reign of the Emperor Constantine she enjoyed
the protection and favour of the rulers of this world.
From that time onwards she enlarged her borders with
increasing energy. Whole nations were added to the
Church. She stood forth as a tree of gigantic stature,
spreading her branches over the earth, and now there
dwell more than two hundred millions of people under
her shadow.
Now all these baptised people ought, in mind and
conduct, as Christians grafted into Christ, to resemble
the first Christians, and on each branch and twig of the
great tree, the fruits of the Holy Spirit ought to live and
grow. But what is the condition of the Church as to
the purity of its life, as to soundness of faith, as to
uncorrupted worship, as to the spiritual power and
blessing of the ministerial office ? It cannot be denied
that there are branches innumerable on which the fruits
of the Spirit are sought in vain. Yet we may not say


of these branches, that they no longer belong to the
tree. They still are branches in the tree, though their
fruit is devoured, and their power to bear fruit is
impaired and corrupted. This is not the work of God,
but of the wicked one. To this, also, the words of the
Lord apply, “ The enemy has done that.” The powers
of darkness, while they could not destroy and extirpate
the tree, applied themselves to destroy its fruits.
Unholy living, false doctrine, abuse and then con-
tempt of the office of the Christian ministry, worldly-
mindedness, the corruption of the worship of God by
ordinances of men and by unbelief, these are the evils
of which the enemy is the author, and with which he
has succeeded in penetrating even into the inmost
sanctuary. And this is the danger against which the
great Prophet warned His disciples beforehand. The
more the Church extended her dominion over the world,
the more difficult it became to protect her from the
entrance of the unclean birds; and the watchfulness
and faithful decision of the appointed watchmen have
not increased with the increased responsibility, but
rather decreased, so little have they heeded the warning
of the Lord. As a tree that is stripped and devoured
by swarms of caterpillars or locusts, so does Christendom
now appear before the eyes of those who have received
light from God to be able to perceive and acknowledge
the common guilt and the common ruin. The sects say,
the tree is dead, we will plant a new one. But their


light is darkness. They know not the counsels of the
Lord, nor the thoughts of His heart. The Lord, and
they who are enlightened by Him, look on this tree,
with its boughs and branches filling the earth with the
name of Christ and the witness of the One Holy Catholic -
Apostolic Church, with other eyes. We all have been
unfaithful; the Lord alone remains faithful; and the
tree which His right hand has planted He has wonder-
fully kept and protected. The life of God is still within
it; and by His blessing from above it can recover
strength; so that by its renewed energy of life pervading
the boughs and branches, it can again bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.
When in the winter all trees are denuded of their
leaves, the living trees cannot easily be distinguished
from those that are withered and dead. But when the
spring returns, with its sunshine and gentle showers,
then it is apparent where life still remains. Such a
spring season has now arisen upon the Christian
Church. “Learn a parable of the fig tree,” said our
Lord; “when his branch is yet tender, and putteth
forth leaves, ye know that summer [the kingdom of
glory] is nigh.” The bitter winter is past, and new
life moves in the various boughs of the tree. But there
is especially one branch that buds and blossoms like
Aaron’s rod.
It belongs to us, upon whom the Lord, according to
His mercy and grace, has breathed the breath of life, to


justify His good Spirit, by keeping the truth in a pure
heart, that the fruit of the Spirit may be manifested.
As with the Church as a whole, so with each Christian
soul is this danger present, against which the Lord has
given warning—that after having received grace and
truth and the power of His Spirit, we do not give place
to the devil in our hearts, we do not suffer the spirits of
malice and wickedness, the spirits of pride, anger, or
lust, or envy, or any of the legion of wicked beings that
Lover around us under the heavens, to come and devour
the fruit which we should bring forth to the glory and
honour of God. It is precisely when we receive much
of His grace, and have experienced somewhat of
spiritual growth, that it behoves us to be on our guard,
lest the enemy find entrance, and room be given to
some unclean spirit to damage the work of the grace of
God within us, and so we bring no fruit to perfection.
THE PARABLE OF THE LEAVEN.
Again Jesus said, “ Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom
of God; it is like leaven, which a woman took and hid
in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.”
The kingdom of God is like leaven; that is to say, the
circumstances in which the kingdom of God is placed in
this world are as when a woman took leaven, and hid it
in three measures of meal, until the whole was leavened.


If the usual interpretation of this parable were
correct, then the Lord would have intended to represent
by the leaven, the Christian Religion, or the Gospel; by
the three measures of meal, the whole human race; by
the leavening, the beneficial influence of the Gospel on
all the relations of human life; and finally by the
woman who took and used the leaven, He would have
meant Himself. For it is He who brought life and
immortality to light by the Gospel, and planted His
Church in the world. But this interpretation does not
agree with the manifest design of the Lord in stating
the parable, nor with sound doctrine, nor with the sense
of the prophetic imagery employed. It is a view
widely diffused in the Church, that by the influence of
Christianity the world will become slowly and at first
imperceptibly, but at length with infallible certainty,
improved and ennobled, by becoming converted to
Christ. It is the doctrine of the gradual enlightenment
of the world. Kindred to this, are the representations
that humanity makes a steady and unceasing progress
towards perfection. War between nations will become
no longer possible. States will become more and more
Christian, and, by degrees, all heathen nations will
become converted and civilized.
These are different keys, in which one and the same
song is sung. Christianity is the leaven, so they think,
which, however slowly, penetrates the whole world. If
you ask those who entertain such deceitful hopes, how


they are consistent with the coming of the Lord to
judgment ? they answer, “ The Lord will not come
for a long time.” But these are unsound doctrines and
false hopes. True, the time will come when all the
kingdoms of the world will become the kingdoms of
God and of His Christ; when the earth shall be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea;
when the wicked shall be no more in the earth; when
all kings shall worship the Lord, and all nations shall
serve Him. The time will come when the curse shall
be taken from the earth, and the sighing of the creature
shall cease. But all this comes not in the present age
of the world, but in the future. The present age will
not be changed into the future, by a gradual and
imperceptible transformation; but the existing economy
of the world will end in the falling away from Christ,
the great tribulation, and the advent of the Lord to
judge the Christian nations. The tares in the field are
not gradually ennobled into pure wheat, nor does the
wheat always remain in the field of this world; but
there comes the harvest, which is the end of this world,
or age, that is, the separation, “the day of decision,”
the judgment, and, on the other side of the judgment,
another new and imperishable kingdom. They who
dream of a gradual enlightening of the world without
judgment, have not understood a line of the prophetic
Scriptures; or they have no reverence for the Word of
God, but place greater confidence in their own


imaginations, than in the testimony of Christ and His
Apostles. They must also wilfully close their eyes and
ears against the signs of the times, refusing to see the
fearful desolation, and to hear the thunders of the judg-
ments which are coming on the world. Let us give
no heed to loose doctrines, but stand in fear of the
Word of the Lord, and believe Him who has said,
“Heaven and earth shall pass away, hut my Word shall
not pass away.” The Lord has not taught that the
world which lieth in the wicked one, will one day be
transformed and become Christian, before the day of
judgment; and that Satan, in the course of time, will
be changed. Let us learn the meaning of this parable
from the teaching of our Lord, and from the words of
the Spirit of prophecy. Our Lord says, “Beware of
the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees.” S. Paul
warns the Chufch against the reception of false teachers,
or the toleration of wicked members, with the words :
“ A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,” and hereby
he gives a key to the understanding of the application
of the word “leaven” in our Lord’s parable. The
Apostle Paul says again, “Purge out the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened; ”
meaning by leaven the power of malice and wicked-
ness, when once allowed unrehuked in any members of
the Church, to corrupt and defile the whole community.
And he here refers to the typical law of the unleavened
bread. During the seven days of the feast of the
n


Passover, no leavened bread was to be found in the
houses of Israel. To partake of the paschal lamb,
and at the same time to eat leavened bread, was
forbidden on pain of death. It was also the design
of the Lord to give a warning and a prohibition
by this parable. No where in Holy Scripture does
leaven mean anything good. In the language of the
prophets and of the New Testament, the woman, used
as a symbol, means not Christ, but the Church. The
parable of the leaven is, therefore, a warning which
Christ gives to His Church against evil. The wheaten
meal means sound doctrine, the uncorrupted “strong
meat ”of the Spirit. As the Lord had already warned
His servants, not to permit the devil to sow tares
among the wheat, so here He warns the Church
not to mingle the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees
with the pure divine doctrine entrusted to her. The
leaven of the Pharisees is hypocrisy; the leaven of
the Sadducees is unbelief. Superstition (misbelief) and
unbelief are the two different forms of the “falling
away; ” of which superstition has first glided into the
Church, and then unbelief (hypocrisy being the middle
term), and the effects of both have been equally
injurious. The evil has entered unawares. The woman
has secretly inserted the leaven into the lump, but
the effect has become evident; the whole has become
leavened, as our Lord foretold. It has come to pass,
that no part of the Christian truth has remained


unaffected by it. First, the fleshly apprehension of the
mysteries of God has triumphed in superstitious ideas
and forms of worship; then the spirit of scepticism
Fas denied all divine mysteries; and the truth of God
being nowhere declared in its purity and fulness, the
blessing of its sanctifying power has been in like
manner withheld. But not only the doctrine, but also
the spiritual standing, of Christians has become wholly
leavened, as S. Paul had plainly announced before.
No one of the three great divisions of the Church,
whether Greek, Roman, or Protestant, shows forth the
fulness of truth and undefiled purity. The Lord
spoke these prophetic words, as may be perceived in
S. Luke’s Gospel, with sorrow. So ought we to receive
them with suffering, humbling ourselves in the dust,
that notwithstanding His faithful warnings, the evil
■should have so far prevailed. And since the Lord
has now begun to visit His Church, to purge all His
Christian people from the leaven, we should be careful
not to hide in our hearts any leaven of malice and
wickedness; no wickedness —that is, no unrighteousness
towards God; no malice, that is, no enmity towards
our neighbour. Let us serve God with an upright
heart, and in full assurance of faith; let us love our
brethren in sincerity of heart, and as much as lies in us,
let us live peaceably with all men.


THE
PARABLES OF THE TREASURE IN THE
FIELD AND OF THE PEARL OF
GREAT PRICE.
S. MATT. xiii. 44-46.
These two parables of the kingdom of heaven seem
particularly connected together among the seven, and
to reflect light on each other.
One man found, without seeking, a treasure hid in a
field. The other went out to seek pearls, until he found
one of great price. Thus the circumstances of the men
are different. The treasure of the kingdom valued by
both men is in Christ. He who wins and possesses
Christ has all. To some this treasure is brought in the
providence of God, almost unsought for. It has lain,
as it were, on his path through the world. It has
been hid in the hearts of his parents. He has heard
the fame of it from his childhood. At last he finds it
for himself. To others, on the contrary, the possession
has been the result of long and anxious, and often dis-
appointed search. Ho pious care cradled their infancy.
Ho father’s watchful eye and judicious word guided


their youth. No communion of saints, no Divine ordi-
nances, like the angels of Bethlehem, marked the place
-where the Saviour was to he found. But in this case
the difficulties attending the search were made of God’s
grace to serve instead of ordinances, to give per-
severance to the seeker until he should find, and
tenacity in keeping possession when he had found. In
both cases, though differing widely in the Providential
way by which they obtained the treasure, the effect was
the same. They both sold all that they had for the
sake of the treasure they had found. Thus Christ
teaches all, that whoever will win Him must be ready to
despise, renounce, and sacrifice all other things. As
He said at another time, “Whoso will not forsake and
hate all that he hath, all that is of himself, and take up
liis cross and follow Me, cannot he My disciple.” This
it was that the rich young man could not resolve to do.
This it is that so few of the wise, and of those of reputa-
tion in this world, are able to do. The Lord can only
make use of such servants as find their greatest joy in
knowing and following Him. Because He Himself so
loves, He desires to find in His servants the same love,
carried at least to the level of what the world calls
heroism, which rises above all earthly losses, and shame,
and suffering. “Whoever does not take up his cross
and follow Me, cannot be My disciple.”
Inasmuch as the Lord ranks together these two para-
bles, He seems to say to His disciples, that twice in the life


of a Christian such a sacrifice is required—at the outset
of our career and towards the end. If we would escape
the world and its nothingness, and embrace Christ who
is hidden from the world, true earnestness and firm reso-
lution are necessary ; as in the case of the man who sold
all, that he might secure the treasure hid in the field.
This is the conversion of the heart to God; hut still the
goal is not hereby reached. It is the earnest of the
kingdom, hut not its final possession. For such an one
“ the field,” that is, the world, has changed its aspect by
the discovery of the treasure hid within it; and for the
sake of the treasure he parts with the world’s worth. But
the costly pearl has yet to be secured; the jewel which
the heavenly calling sets before us, the crown which
the Lord will give in that day to those who have kept
the faith and finished their course, remains yet to be
won, after the heart’s desire has been set in that direc-
tion. The path of the Christian to this goal is narrow,
and will not cease to be narrow to the end of it. The
conflict requires to the last the most strenuous exertion.
The crown of life is worth the most constant self-denial,
and the greatest sacrifices that man can dare to make
for its sake.
Such is the purpose of the Lord in the admonition
He gives by these parables, and their moral application.
But there is also a prophetic sense lying hidden beneath
them; a representation of what the Lord is towards
His Church. As in the parable of the good Samaritan,


He tells us in these parables what we ought to do, and
shows us also what He does for us, that we may love
Him as He has loved us. The man who finds the
treasure, and the merchant who obtains the costly
pearl, signify, as the former parable of the sower, and
of the master of the field, the Son of Man; and the
field denotes, here also, the world. The treasure hid in
the field means the election out of all nations who are
in the world, hut unknown. But the Son of God
knows them that are His. He bestows His care on
those whom the Father gives Him for His peculiar
possession. He saw, in the fallen, ruined race of man,
the souls who, according to the Father’s secret and
eternal purpose, belong to Him, who form His elected
Church, and are destined to share with Him His
blessedness and glory. These He found hid in the field,
and desired to win; a treasure buried in the world,
which He would make His own; as He said, “ I pray
not for the world, hut for them which Thou hast given
me.” To gain these beloved souls He sold all that
He had. He left the glory He had with the Father.
He counted it not robbery to be equal with God, but
emptied Himself. He gave up the form of God and
took the form of a servant. He came down in perfect
love and became man for our salvation. The joy He
had in His elect, whom He knew before they knew
Him, moved Him to this. He alone knew of them.
His Incarnation and His purpose therein was a deep


mystery, hid from men and angels, and not made known
until He had obtained the treasure. To gain this
treasure He has bought the field: by His offering of
Himself, He has become possessor of the world; in
recompense for His obedience unto death, He has
received power over all flesh, that He may give eternal
life to the elect, whom the Father has given Him. God
has set Him as Head of the body. The Church is His
possession in a peculiar sense; she is bound to Him in
the most intimate manner, and she is, in His sight, of
more value than all the world besides.
When He gave Himself for His Church, there were
none prepared to be received to His glory. The Church
had first to be brought into the form of the heavenly
things, and to be perfected in holiness and love. He
seeks a Church holy and unblameablo,_ as she is described
in the Song of Songs, and in the 45th Psalm; lovely as
the holy city Jerusalem, resplendent as the morning
dawn, fair as the moon, glorious as the sun; the one
precious pearl, to which no other can be likened. Such
is the form in which the Church must be presented to
Him at His coming; as such He still seeks her, and as
soon as He has found her, He will take her to Himself in
His glory. But the labour is great to attain this end.
As He gave Himself for the Church by shedding His
blood on the cross, so is He ever giving Himself for His
Church until the number of His elect is accomplished,
and all the saints are perfected in one body, conformed


-to the measure of the stature of His fulness. For this
He also brings judgments on the world, that He may
■cleanse and purify His Church, and break her bonds
with the world, and then save her and take her out of
the world. For a time He leaves the world to itself,
for the Church’s sake, the perfection and possession of
which is to Him above all things. Yet He still loves
fhe world; hut it is only when the Church has entered
into glory that the world can receive its promised
blessing.
So intense, holy, and tender is the love which the
■Son bears to the children of God, that it can only be
likened to the love of the eternal Father for the only-
begotten Son, as He said, “Thou hast loved them as
Thou hast loved Me:” —“That the love wherewith
Thou lovest Me may be in them, and lin them.” How
intense and deeply-rooted should our love be for the
Lord, who has first loved us ! “We love Him because
Me has first loved us.”


THE
PARABLE OF THE NET CAST INTO THE SEA.
S. MATT. xiii. 47-50.
The net, which is the subject of this parable, remains-
for some time lying in the water, and becomes filled by
degrees with all kinds of fish. When it is full, it is-
drawn to the shore; then the good fish are collected in
vessels, the bad and useless fish are thrown back into-
the water. This net means the Church, as the insti-
tution of God for the gathering together of the elect.
The apostles and evangelists are the fishermen who
throw out the net, as the Lord said to S. Peter, “ From
henceforth thou shalt catch men.” The abundant
draught of fishes which the disciples took when the Lord'
teas with them in the ship, was intended to show them
what they would have to do in His service, and to assure
them that, with His help, they would prosper in their
painful labour. The Lord teaches us in this, that after
every gathering of this kind a sifting would also follow.
The Church, as aii institution established in the world,,
will be like a net sunk into the sea. Hence such men.
will be received by her as will not always remain in her,,
but will at length be found unworthy, separated from
the good and cast back into the world, to abide th&


doom of the world. The net has long lain in the water,
and we see it now filled with innumerable creatures, of
whom many, unhappily, belong to the class of un-
profitable fishes. Let us not think that the net will
always remain in the sea, that it never will be brought
to the land, and that a separation will never be made.
When the net is full, this separation must at last take
place; and truly it cannot much longer be delayed.
Fearful will be the lot of those rejected, while those
preserved will be taken to a place of happy security.
Thus the Lord gives a warning to the preachers of
His Gospel that they should be careful, and not, through
inattention, bring into His communion men that are like-
unclean beasts. He gives a warning to the pastors, that
they should endeavour with unwearied labour to cleanse
those entrusted to them, and to make the pure still more
pure, so that not one be found reprobate through their
fault. He gives a warning to each individual soul, and
to us especially, who have been made partakers of such
rich spiritual benefits. It is true we find ourselves in
the true Divine institution which is appointed for our
preservation and cleansing. But on that account no
pledge is given, that each one of us will be found saved
and chosen when the Lord comes and removes His
Church from the troublous sea of the world to the shore—
that-is, to the immoveable kingdom. Each one will be
proved; no brother can redeem another; each will have
to answer for himself, and bear his own burden. The


angels of God, the strong heroes, will accomplish the
separation of the wicked from the just. Who will be
able to withstand these mighty instruments of God?
Therefore it behoves us now to suffer ourselves to be
purified and kept, that when the conclusion of this age
and the translation into the new and better kingdom
arrives, we may preserve our place among the righteous
in the holy Church of Christ.


THE
SEVEN PARABLES IN S. MATTHEW XIII.
CONSIDERED IN THEIR CONNECTION.
“All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and
without a parable spake He not unto them: That it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in
parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the
foundation of the world.”—S. Matt. xiii. 34, 35.
“ I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of
old.” —Psalm Ixxviii. 2.
These words are the introduction given by the Psalmist
to the declaration of the works of God, from the
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt unto the setting up
of the kingdom of David. Those ways of the Lord
with His people have a meaning for all time; they serve
to enlighten and admonish us; and this applies to them
not only as events taken singly, hut also in the order of
their succession; and in their general connection, they
are full of meaning for us. Accordingly, as the
Evangelist gives us to understand, deep truths are
revealed by the Lord in these parables; in them are
hid, as Jesus Himself says (v. 11), the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven; and to the disciples it is given to
understand these mysteries, while the world is not able
to comprehend them.


In the Christian Church the understanding of the
sense of these Parables, taken singly, is not wanting;
hut must not also the order in which they are related,
and their mutual connection, have also a meaning?
The epistles to the seven churches in the Apocalypse,
according to the light which God has given now some
time past (and the first who has expressed this view was,
as far as I know, the learned prophetical enquirer, John
■Cocceius, of Bremen, who died a.d. 1669, and was
the teacher of Campegius Yitringa), contain a com-
prehensive prophetical representation of the different
spiritual forms which the Church has assumed suc-
cessively in the course of her history. Might not the
.seven Parables in this respect resemble the seven
epistles? If the meaning of each one, as we have
explained it, be according to the mind of the Spirit, it
furnishes us with the affirmative of this question, and we
may he convinced that the unity of these seven Parables
is not accidental or ahritrary, but is the design of the
Spirit of God, and supplies us with a solution of the
ways of God as a whole.
I. In the first Parable we see represented the
foundation of the Church. We see how the Son of Man
walked upon the earth and sowed the seed of the Word
of God. We learn how, from the beginning of His
ministry to the end, He met with a varied experience,
according to the efforts made by the enemy and by men
do frustrate the growth of the good seed, until at length


the Lord found a fruitful ground, in which the seed
could thrive and give the promise of a rich return.
11. In the next Parable we see the Church under the
management of the servants to whom the Lord, after
the accomplishment of His own personal work on earth,
■entrusted the care of the growing seed during the time
of His absence. Their task is to watch over and keep
the field of the Lord, that the wheat may ripen undis-
turbed, and that in the time of harvest they may
receive their full reward. But such is not the case.
The servants do not watch as they should have done;
the enemy, who could not hinder the foundation of the
Church, by subtle treachery injures the community
which the Lord established, and the commencement of
the “ falling away ” appears amongst them. The
servants are then tempted to employ force; they desire
to root out the tares; they attempt to execute the
judgment which the Lord has reserved to Himself at
His return; they attempt, with arbitrary power, and by
worldly means, to accomplish the victory of the kingdom
of Christ; and they thus betray their own spiritual
declension. This endeavour to anticipate the judgment
of the world, and the visible kingdom of Christ, is the
foundation of the character of the Church of the Middle
Ages, as it is the source of the errors of that period.
111. & IY. The warnings of the Lord are not confined
to the apprehension of these perils. In the two follow-
ing Parables He points out to us the still greater evils


which ensue when once the “falling away” has found
a beginning in the Church. We see the Church set.
forth as a mighty tree, spreading itself abroad in its full
growth; but then we see not only wicked men, hut also-
evil spirits establish themselves in its branches and
destroying its fruits.
We see, further, how the leaven of unsound doctrine
and impure life imperceptibly gains entrance, and with
steady, unceasing progress, extends its influence until
the sad effects come to light, and all Christian com-
munities are found to have suffered corruption and loss
both in doctrine and in morals.
Y. After these sorrowful revelations there is presented
to us in the fifth and sixth Parables a more cheering
aspect.
The Lord will not leave His Church in this condition.
He will bestow such care, that after these experiences
of evil, through the incapacity and unfaithfulness of
men, His power and faithfulness will he all the more
gloriously manifested. The saving truth of the gospel,
which from the beginning was preserved in Holy
Scripture, even in the darkest period of the Church’s
history, was never suffered to he lost. It was, at
times, not in full operation, the preaching of the
doctrine of salvation to a certain extent fell into disuse,
yet the truth was laid up in the Church, like the
treasure hid in the field. (For it is not inconsistent
with the design of the Holy Spirit, to apply this figure


of the treasure at times to the elect, and at times to the
truth of God). But whilst men forget the hidden gold,
the Lord directs His attention to it, and again brings to
light, in its time, the buried treasure. This happened
when, after the times when ignorance prevailed and
enquiry into the Divine Word was neglected, the Holy
Scriptures were brought forth again, and many un-
heeded original truths of the Church were renewed to
the consciousness of men. This was the value of the
Reformation, a blessing not only for the Protestants,
hut for the whole of Christendom; for even where
the Reformers were checked in their progress, the
Reformation was the occasion of an extensive correction
in the enunciation of Christian truth. For not only has
the hidden treasure been simultaneously brought to
light, but a gradual increase of light and knowledge is
observable in the more recent history of the Church;
and whilst already in the sixteenth century some parts
of the ancient truth of Scripture were promulgated, the
acknowledgment and appreciation of others have been
reserved for the present time.
YI. But the Lord is concerned not only for the truth,
hut also for the Church. It is not enough that the
Bible be circulated, and the preaching of sound doctrine
diffused, with which Protestantism is chiefly engaged.
Christ seeks the “goodly pearl.” He desires the
Church, of heavenly mind, ordered according to God’s
will, and richly supplied with His grace; that is His
e


care: the Church formed and perfected according to the
good pleasure of God, and fulfilling her calling and
election, is most of all precious to Him. For He has
loved her and given Himself for her, that He may pre-
sent her before the Father glorious and without spot.
At length He finds the costly pearl, the long sought
one. It is as His workmanship that the Church finally
attains to the true and divinely-appointed conformation.
He knows how to preserve His saints that sleep in Him,
and to prepare the children of God of the last days, that
united together, as the one people of God, they may
enter into glory.
YII. The seventh Parable places us at the end of this
economy, or dispensation, that is, at the present age of
the world. The time of grace and long-suffering has
long endured, so that some may even suppose that it
will last for ever. But it is as with the net that long
remained lying in the sea. It is at length lifted up out
of the sea, and the fishes that are found within it are
sorted; the separation of the wicked from the just takes
place, and the decision, by which is awarded to each
the lot which is his due. The sifting of the Christian
nations marks the close of this era, and the transition to
the new and perfect state.
Such are the intimations of the wonderful ways of
God, which, from the first appearing of Jesus on earth,
until His return in glory, are contained in these words
of the Lord, spoken by Him through the inspiration of


the Holy Ghost, and written for us under the guidance
of the same Spirit. We already see fulfilled the pro-
phetic signification of the first five Parables; we ought
now, at the present time, to be witnesses of the manner
in which the Lord works, in order to find the pearl of
great price. If the preceding has become verified by
facts, we ought to be the more firmly convinced, that
what remains to be fulfilled—all that is here said of the
ripening of the fruit, of the great harvest, and of the
glorious manifestation of the kingdom of heaven, of the
perfecting of the Church, and of the coming of the Lord—
will equally be fulfilled and established by the event as
the truth of God.


THE
PARABLE OF THE GOOD SAMARITAN.
S. LUKE x. 25-37.
This discourse is quoted as a parable, but 'when more
accurately considered, it will be found to be more than
a parable, to be a history. If, at least, something
closely resembling it had not actually occurred, our
Lord would hardly have attributed with such precision
this act of mercy to a Samaritan. Supposing it to be
no invention, but a real occurrence that our Lord
related concerning this man, it must have so much the
more confounded His hearers, who consisted of Jews
and scribes.
The man who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho,
belonged, apparently, to the Israelites who, three times
a year, went up to the house of God, to appear before
the Lord. He was on his way home when, in one of
the mountain gorges, through which the road passes, he
“ fell among thieves.” A priest and a Levite came by
the same road, either on their way to worship at
Jerusalem, or on their return from that city. Both
passed by the wounded man “on the other side.” They
might well have not been destitute of a movement of


compassion, but the better feeling was extinguished by
self-love, by the fear that they themselves might be
■overtaken by the robbers, if they tarried in the
dangerous place. They might also have appeased their
conscience by saying to themselves, the man is
apparently beyond help, he will probably die of his
wounds, if he is not already dead. So they left him
lying there, and sought their own safety. It was not
so with the Samaritan. He was not on the way either
to or from the house of God. He was, apparently,
travelling with his beast of burden, on his own affairs,
when he saw the wounded and plundered man lying on
the road. All other considerations vanished before the
feeling of compassion, and without delay he acted on
the impulse inspired by this feeling. He thought not of
himself, nor of the danger to which he exposed himself.
He did not say, the man is one of those Jews who have
no dealings with us Samaritans, and on every occasion
treat us with enmity. He obeyed simply the impulse
of compassion; he set himself to the work, and spared
no pains or expense to save the unfortunate man, and
to provide for his complete recovery. This active
compassion had a divine character, yet it often shows
itself in those who, like the Samaritan, are far from
soundness of doctrine, and are ignorant of the right
worship of God. While a corrupted creed and a
narrow religious zeal sometimes close the heart, and
paralyse the emotions of charity, it not uncommonly


happens that, in a time of distress, the most affecting
proofs of disinterested love are shown by men of no-
distinct religious profession. We perceive, from the
words of the Lord, that such acts met with His
consideration, and were well-pleasing in His sight.
Examples of this kind He presents to the scribes for
their imitation. He does not disapprove of the
orthodoxy of the scribes, nor blame their zeal for the
law and the service of God. But to these they should
unite a heart full of love and decision for all works of
love, otherwise they would fail to apprehend the mind
of the Lord and the whole object of the law and the-
worship of God.
They occupied themselves with such subtle questions
as, Who is my neighbour, whom I should love as
myself ? Is he who has injured me, or is a
or a Samaritan, the neighbour whom it is my duty
to love?
In such questions is apparent a narrow-minded,,
impoverished sense of charity. For true charity will
seek to do, not as little, but as much good as possible.
It rejoices in every opportunity of showing mercy to
others, of wiping away tears, assuaging sorrow, and
diffusing joy around. Charity seeks its blessedness in
seeing others blessed and happy. While the scribes
examined the question, “who is my neighbour?” they
neglected the opportunity of showing love to their
neighbour. In this they approached not nearer to God >


but withdrew themselves further from Him. They did
not grow in the knowledge of God, but their minds
became darkened. It is not theological enquiry, but
the active exercise of love and self-denial (as was seen
in the Centurian Cornelius) that is the best preparation
for receiving the Gospel, and the knowledge of the
Redeemer, who Himself is the impersonation of the love
of God for the children of men.
“Go and do thou likewise.” These words the Lord
addresses to us also. Enrich thyself with such practices
of compassionate love. Every one in need of help,
whom God brings to us, supplying us with the means of
ministering to his want, is our neighbour. When we
learn what a boundless sea of misery and sorrow this
world is, what we can do to diminish it seems infinitely
little. God does not make us responsible for the
unhappiness which is far off and out of our reach. But
when He places a poor Lazarus at our door, as with
the rich man in the Gospel, then He expects that we
shall not pass him by, like the priest and the Levite, but
treat him as did the good Samaritan. Many in our
day consider it a sufficient evidence of their Christian
charity, if they pay others to fulfil the works of
mercy. And indeed the good Samaritan paid the host
of the inn for the care of the wounded man. But
before all he wrought with his own hand, and spared
not the pains of dressing the wounds of the sufferer,
walking by his side after placing him on the mule.


When from a pure motive and with prompt resolution
we incur privation, sacrifice pleasure, and undertake a
painful personal labour for the benefit of a suffering
neighbour, a special blessing rests on us. Such an one
is blessed in his deed. He is rewarded by the testi-
mony of his own conscience. For “pure religion and
undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world.”
The Lord, who requires this of us, is Himself the
example and illustration of it. He does not give a
commandment to others which He Himself does not fulfil.
He, who proposes to us the good Samaritan as an
example, has Himself acted in the highest sense in the
spirit of this example. As in all His parables a deep
prophetic sense is hidden, so also this history, which
He has set forth as a parable, contains a prophetic
signification. Who cannot recognise in the form of the
good Samaritan, Himself, the Good Shepherd who has
given His life for us ? He who was stigmatised by the
Jews as a Samaritan and rejected from their community,
has acted towards them and us as this Samaritan. We
all, like that unfortunate man, have fallen into the hands
of robbers. The wicked one, who from the beginning
has been as a murderer towards men, has overpowered
us, has spoiled us of the robe of original righteousness,
and of the endowment of heavenly goods which we
received. He has sorely wounded our spiritual life.


Wo lay half dead under his assaults, and would surely
have fallen into spiritual and eternal death, had not the
Saviour come to us and had compassion on us, exactly
at the time of need. The priest and the Levite passed
us by and left us without help. The law of the old
covenant, although given from God, could not give us
life, or clothe us with righteousness. Then at length
appeared the Son of God. In perfect love and from
perfect love He condescended to us. Moved by com-
passion, He feared not for His own life, which He has
not only, like the Samaritan, exposed to danger, but
which, in His efforts to save us, He has actually sacri-
ficed. He has bound up our wounds, pouring in wine
and oil. By His wounds we are healed, the deadly
curse is taken from us, peace of conscience is restored.
Into our deeply-wounded heart He pours in oil and
wine by the sanctifying and gladdening operations of
His Holy Spirit. And as the good Samaritan was not
satisfied with this good work, but carried the sufferer
to the inn and cared for him there, so also the Lord in
His wisdom and goodness has brought us to an inn,
where we find shelter and care and nourishment. We
know this sheltering inn: it is the holy Church of
Christ. Here we have been received, here from our
childhood we have been nurtured, and have been
supplied with unspeakable treasures of goodness, which
the Lord has laid up there. But, alas ! we, and the inn,
and its ministrations, are now no longer in the order in


which the Lord, according to His wisdom and goodness,
originally placed us. Instead of being fully healed of
the wounds of the soul, we have fallen into new misery.
The murderous enemy and his instruments have suc-
ceeded in wounding us afresh, and in inflicting on us
immeasurable injury. Yes, we lie prostrate by the
wayside, sorely wounded, robbed of the endowment we
received in our baptism, without protecting shelter,
without the necessary care for our spiritual welfare.
But the Lord, who said by the prophet Ezekiel,
“ Behold I, even I, will both search my sheep and seek
them out,” has fulfilled towards us this His word.
Once again has He condescended to us, and stretched
out His hand towards us. He has begun a work of
healing. The wounds of conscience, namely, the tor-
menting doubt, whether we are God’s children or not,
whether God still looks on us with favour or has rejected
us, these wounds He has bound up. His Evangelists
have brought us this message from heaven; He remem-
bers His covenant; God acknowledges us still as His
children; He speaks to us as a father; the propitiation
for our sins is still valid in heaven; and the grace of
baptism, of which we had lost all knowledge, or looked
upon as lost, is reassured to us and confirmed, by which
peace has entered our hearts, and the griefs of our souls
are taken away. But the Lord has done still more for
us: He has poured oil and wine into our wounds. He
has not only confirmed our adoption, but, because we


are God’s children, He has given us the anointing of
His Holy Spirit. The effect of this is to seal and
sanctify, and establish the virtues of Christ within us.
He has given us the spirit of holy joy, so that we may
worship Him with rejoicing, and serve Him with glad-
ness in the place or calling assigned to each. We lift up
our heads with joy, looking for the day of redemption.
Such are the benefits dispensed to us by the Giver of
all good. But at the same time He has truly brought us
to the “inn.” All the salutary economy of His Church
is again set in order, and we see ourselves surrounded
by a fulness of blessing which the heavenly Father
has set in this house. We are committed to the care of
the stewardship of the house; the pastoral office has the
charge of seeing that nothing is wanting. The ministers
in their different orders, including the deacons, are all
set there to afford us help and guidance in the love of
Christ, that in spirit, soul, and body, we may he shielded
and sanctified. The merciful Samaritan supplied the
host with two pieces of silver, with the injunction to
apply them to the nourishment and healing of the needy
man. Thus the Lord has opened two springs of life, out
of which inexhaustible blessings flow to us: the two most
holy Sacraments. We are now made conscious of what
has been freely given us in holy baptism, and may
experience what heavenly gifts are contained in the
celebration of the holy Eucharist. In His care for us,
the Lord has entrusted the administration of both these


institutions to the pastoral office. He Himself is gone
away, but before His departure He gave the promise:
“If tbou spendest more, I will repay thee, when I come
again.” He has given the assurance that He will not
always remain absent, but will return, and will again
enter this house. In committing us in this world to the
•charge of those whom He has appointed to care for us,
He has not forgotten us, He bears us still on His heart,
and at length feels Himself moved to arise and visit us
Himself. He will come and demand an account of those
to whom He has entrusted His beloved ones, and what
they have done for their nourishment and relief, He will
repay with a rich reward. But is the Christian Church,
the congregation of the Lord, only a hospital for the
sick and wounded ? Yes, it is so indeed, but a hospital
in the true sense; not an asylum for incurables, for the
hopeless, but a place for the recovery of health, with
■ever increasing joy and strength. The Divine love,
which has brought us to this shelter, treats us as those
who are capable of being cured. We ought therefore thus
to regard ourselves, hoping for salvation; and so like-
wise ought the servants of the Lord to look on those who
are entrusted to their care, and labour for them with
that love which “hopeth all things.” To the Lord no
means of recovery are wanting, and He makes them
effectual by His power. If we can recognise in this
image the position into which the Lord has brought us,
we ought also to perceive, in the light of this parable, the


duties which lie on us. The servants of the Lord are
placed where they are, for the sake of His flock, and
ought to supply all the help which He has purposed
to give them. He came not to be ministered to, but to
minister, and give His life a ransom for many. And if
we, who are His servants, do not follow His example, we*
do not deserve to be called His disciples, and shall not
be able to stand before Him at His appearing. When
He comes again, He will address Himself first to those
whom He has set over His house. And whom will He
enquire for? For you, beloved in the Lord, He will
enquire, that He may know what has become of you-
Since He has committed you individually to us, He will
enquire after each individually, that we have cared for
you, and have not failed in any part of our duty towards
you. He alone is the Judge, whether in any respect we
have been negligent; He alone can know whether we
have finished our work. Unutterable will be the joy, if
those in charge of His house will be found to have been
faithful, when He will be able to say, “Behold I, and
the children which God hath given Me.” Therefore,
“ obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your-
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief, for that is unprofitable for you.” Despise not
their helping hand, and frustrate not the purpose of the
Lord, who has brought us together in His house, and
united us in this holy communion, that we may recover


spiritual health and strength, and so be able to wait for
His coming.
When the wounded man in the inn awoke out of the
peril of death, how he must have wondered at what had
befallen him; how he must have enquired after his bene-
factor, whom he saw not; how he must have longed, with
great joy, to see him, when he heard that the merciful
Samaritan was to return to the inn! Such ought our
feelings to be towards our, now unseen, great Divine
Benefactor. Let us awake to the consciousness of the
great things He has done for us, and of the great love
wherewith He has cared for us, that our hearts may be
warmed with thankfulness to Him, and that our inmost,
deepest longing may be, to be permitted to behold Him,
to “see Him as He is,” to give Him the joy of our
redemption and salvation, to offer Him in His own person
our thanks, and praise Him in endless worship.


THE
PARABLES OF THE IMPORTUNATE FRIEND
AND OF THE OPPRESSED WIDOW.
S. LUKE xi. 5-10; xviii. 1-8.
One of the disciples of the Lord had presented the peti-
tion in the name of all: “Lord teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples.” The Lord granted the request,
and part of His answer is contained in this parable of
the importunate neighbour who came to the door of
his friend’s house at midnight, and desired of him three
loaves, to set before his guest, who had visited him late
and tired from a journey. The friend at first refuses
him, as it was disagreeable to him to wake up his
children, who were sleeping in his bedroom, by the
knocking, calling, the lighting of a candle, and moving
about the house, which this untimely application would
occasion. But as the man below did not cease to knock
and call to him, he at length gives way. Although he
would not have granted his request because he was his
friend, yet he complies with it that he might be rid of
a troublesome and importunate petitioner, and obtain
repose. The other parable is similar, by which also the
Lord teaches men always to pray and not to faint. A


widow was oppressed by a usurer, who, by unrighteous
means, sought to rob her of everything. No one could
help her but the judge, but he was a man who cared
for nothing, having no fear of God, or regard for men.
But at length, because the widow did not cease, day by
day, to assail him with entreaties and complaints, he
yielded from impatience and disgust, and heard her
cause, only to obtain relief from her importunity.
Assuredly, these are two unusual parables that sound
strange, like that of the unjust steward. But the Lord
speaks to us, as to those who will apprehend His
meaning and understand His words in a good sense and
consistently with the character of God. What resem-
blance has God the Lord to a disobliging friend and an
unjust judge ? To this no answer can be given. For
He is the true Friend, He is the upright Judge. If
we, by unceasing prayer, can obtain help even from a
disobliging friend, and an unjust judge, how much more
from Him who is love and righteousness itself! By
these parables the Lord condescends to our infirmity, for
He knows this infirmity. He knows how negligent our
heart is in prayer, and how soon we become weary of
prayer, and yield to gloomy and distrustful thoughts
towards God. If the help sought is delayed, man is
deterred from asking, casts away his confidence, and
sinks into indifference. How often do we find sufferers,
who abandon prayer, and say, “we have prayed, but
have obtained no help.” But the Lord Jesus Christ.


knows the ways of God, who delays to give help, and
suffers His children to wait, in order to correct them,
that they may learn to pray with earnestness, and being
thereby proved, humbled and cleansed from evil, may
at length learn the better the excellency of His help,
and abound the more in thanksgiving. We should
not be led astray by such trials. We should believe in
the wisdom and goodness of God, even though our
experience and our feelings are opposed to such faith.
We should not be troubled, if, for a time, He keeps
silence, and is severe towards us. Christ the Lord
Himself acted towards the woman of Canaan, as though
He would not hear her, and gave her repulsive answers,
while His heart was full of compassion for her, and He
waited for the fitting time to show His power and His
love towards her suffering daughter, for whom she had
besought Him. “ Cast not away your confidence,
which hath great recompense of reward.”
I. In the first parable the applicant asks not for
himself, but for his guest, who has come to seek of him
shelter and refreshment. By that the Lord teaches us,
that our prayer is legitimate and well-pleasing to God,
when it springs from charity, and when our care is to
fulfil the duties of charity. If we pray, not so much
for ourselves as for our neighbour, we may the more
certainly hope to be heard. If we seek help and
consolation for our neighbour, we pray according to the
mind of Jesus. This applies to temporal need, from
v


which we see our brethren suffer, and of our own
means are unable to help them. It applies especially
to cases of spiritual need, when they whom we love
are destitute of light and grace. This need is felt by
parents, when difficulties arise in the education of their
children. This need is felt by Christian teachers, who
have the responsible task to supply their congregations
with spiritual nourishment, and to preserve and lead
them in the ways of the Lord. Whence shall we
obtain what we require for this ? We cannot draw
from our own resources what is necessary for the
training of our families, or for the direction of a congre-
gation. We must stand at the door of our heavenly
Father, and knock and call upon Him. With Him is
the fulness of grace, He will hear and answer, and out
of His treasury give us what we need to fulfil our duty
towards those who are entrusted to us.
The man came to the door of his friend’s house at
midnight, at an hour at which nowhere, except from a
friend, he could expect to obtain anything. This dark
hour represents to us the situation in which we are
sometimes placed, in which no light shines upon us but
that which God assures to them that believe in Him,
where around us no consolation and no help are to be
found; but our help stands alone in the name of the
Lord, who made heaven and earth. Into such a
midnight hour will every one be brought; and such
hours befall also the flock of Christ. The hardest trial


of this kind will come upon those who survive the last
days, but then also will the help of heaven and fulness
of glory be supplied to them.
11. The other parable stands in immediate connection
with the words spoken by the Lord respecting His
return. In the days which precede this event, the
situation of the Church on earth will resemble that of
the heavily oppressed widow. As she stood there
helpless, without the protection of a husband, without
assistance or advocate, so also will the Church have no
longer any defender upon earth. As the widow was
oppressed by a heartless creditor who would deprive
her of everything, and even take away her children to
sell them into slavery (compare 2 Kings iv. 1), so will
the Church in the last days have to sustain the most
violent assaults of her great adversary, the devil. And
as a widow, in such a situation, overwhelmed with
afflictions, has no strength, so also will the flock of
Christ be defenceless in the presence of her adversary,
and none but her Judge in the heavens can do her
justice and make her cause triumphant.
This will come to pass. “Hear what even the unjust
judge saith, I will avenge her. And shall not God
avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto
Him, though He bear long with them ? I tell you He
will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son
of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?’’
This, then, will be the result: God, the Judge of all,


will send His Son from heaven, who will bring with
Him eternal salvation. He will translate His flock from
her state of affliction to the joys of heaven. He will
raise up the humbled and despised one to His throne.
He will avow the cause that she has maintained upon
earth, and make her victorious. He will slay the
wicked with the breath of His lips, and destroy them
with the brightness of his coming. The judgment of
heaven will go forth against the great adversary; he
will he condemned, bound, and cast into the abyss and
shut up, that he may no more deceive the nations.
The time will have come for the blessings of the
government of Jesus and of His saints on the earth, and
the Church of Christ will be put in full possession of
the heavenly inheritance. That will be the answer of
the heavenly Judge to the unceasing prayer of the
children of God. Then it will be seen, that their
prayers, their sufferings and tears, their patience and
their perseverance have not been in vain.
This, then, is the mark to which we are directed, and
for the sake of which we ought not to be weary. As it
is a precious goal, so also time is necessary to attain it.
This was not at first understood by the disciples, and
yet the Lord declares it here so plainly. A long and
severe trial of patience must first be passed through;
and why should this surprise us, considering that no
further trial awaits us, but only “ the rich recompense
of reward.” The long-suffering of the Lord arises from


this, that He is unwilling that any should perish, and
because an unnumbered multitude, of whom the disciples
at first knew nothing, were to be brought to repentance
and prepared for the glory.
Thus plainly has the Lord set before us what should
he our hope, and the great object of our desires and
prayers, namely, His coming again. In this hope and
in the prayer, “ Come, Lord Jesus! ” the Church
should have continued with unwearied perseverance.
As the true widow, she should have waited for the
true help from the true Helper. But what has she
done ? A season of delay has come upon her, and her
waiting for Him who should come, has been given up.
Other hopes and false imaginations have succeeded, and
though individual souls have still waited for the Lord,
the cry of the Church for the coming of Jesus has
ceased. She has no longer as the Church made this
prayer to be heard in her united, solemn, and public
prayers and worship ; she has ceased to bear witness to
this, her true hope. With that all-searching eye, which
tries the hearts and reins, the Lord has also foreseen this,
with sorrow He has perceived it, and on this account
has uttered the question of doubt, “ When the Son of
Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?”—even
this faith, faith in Him that He comes again, this
trustful waiting for His appearing. Christian doctrines
.and religious convictions may yet be found, but where
is this faith, this hope ? The question proposed by


Himself He answers not. He neither affirms nor denies
it. He does not decide beforehand, whether this faith
will remain, or not. He sees with concern the great
danger, that it will be extinguished upon earth.
Whether it is actually extinguished or not, He leaves
undecided. It remains, therefore, to be hoped, that
this faith will not disappear, that the Lord will still find
it when He comes, will rejoice and crown with glory
those who have held fast the faith. What great things
He has done for us ! By His preventing grace He has
revived this faith in our time. For us, everything
depends on this, that we do not quench but cherish in
us this holy fire, that our expectation of Him who
comes, be no hypocrisy, no empty word, hut that we
keep it in truth and in power, and that, in looking for
the coming of the Son of Man we always pray and do
not faint.


THE
PARABLE OF THE LOST SHEEP.
S. LUKE xv. 1-7.
The Scribes and Pharisees were already embittered
against the Lord, and watched Him, if they could find
in His words matter of accusation against Him (chapter
xi. 58, 54). The Lord could have little more hope for
them, but He saw with secret joy, how, instead of them,
another class of people sought to approach Him, not
with evil design, but with the desire to gain from Him
comfort and consolation for their souls. These were
such as were excluded from the fellowship of Israel, or
excommunicated, who, although of Jewish extraction,
were despised as unclean, and on a level with the
heathen. They were not only shut out of the temple
service and the synagogue, but also in common life
avoided by the strict Israelites. Among them might be
such as, contrary to the law, had married heathen
wives. (Compare Nehem. xiii. 23- 31.) The publicans,
or farmers of taxes, especially belonged to this class
of sinners or unclean persons, and that for two reasons.
It was considered wrong by the strict teachers of the
law, to pay tolls or taxes to the heathen emperor of
Rome. Now the tolls taken at the frontiers and in the
market-places were farmed by the Roman governors


for a fixed sum. Consequently, the Jews who con-
tracted such bargains, took the part of the heathen
oppressors against the people of God. At the same
time it was well known that they enriched themselves
in an unrighteous way, by exacting from travellers and
traders more than was prescribed by the tariff, on
account of which John the Baptist said to them,
“Exact no more than that which is appointed you.”
For these reasons they were laid under the greater
excommunication, and were despised in civil life as well
as in their ecclesiastical relations. With them came to
Jesus, with the desire to hear Him, the outlaws of the
country where He was staying; and as He not only
received them, but even openly ate with them, He gave
the impression which one of us would do, who allowed
himself to be seen in company with convicts recently
released from prison. On this account the zealous
adherents of the law murmured, and uttered the
contemptuous words, “ This man reoeiveth sinners, and
eateth with them.” They had hitherto found Him,
although they did not believe in His Divine mission,
highly estimable in His whole conduct. But this now
added to their misgivings concerning Him, and they
sought to influence others with their feelings. The love
of God was not in them, but dwelt in Jesus, and
therefore they could not understand His way of acting.
These stern judges were utter strangers to compassion
for those who had fallen under the dominion of sin, and


were in danger of being wholly lost. But the heart of
Jesus was filled with this compassion. The teachers in
Israel might have just cause to excommunicate these
publicans and sinners, the Saviour did not dispute that.
But had they been right-minded, they would have held
open the door of repentence to these excommunicated
people, and have spared no labour of love to bring
them back into the right way. They should have
hoped for the recovery of the sinners, and rejoiced at
the first sign of their conversion. When the Saviour
opened to sinners the door of repentance, they who
thought themselves righteous should have sympathised
with Him, and been grateful to Him. But now they
murmured, “This man receiveth sinners and eateth with
them.” They thought not that their reproachful words
were indeed the highest praise of the Divine love, which
has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but that he
should be converted and live. Without intending it,
they bore witness by their grievance, that this Divine
love and compassion, which long before had been
announced in the words of the prophets, were now
personally brought to light in Jesus Christ.
The Lord speaks in a parable of a man, who, in a
desert land, where there were no human habitations,
and no cultivation, but only a grassy wilderness, feeds
a flock of a hundred sheep. The one stray sheep
concerns him more than all the others; when he has
found it, it gives him more joy than all the rest, and at


his return home he imparts his joy to his friends and
neighbours. Such interest does the - man show for a
thing of perishable value, for a dumb animal that bears
no comparison to himself. In this manner the Lord
endeavours to put to shame the elders of Israel. Should
they have no heart for the wanderers of their people,
take no steps to win them back, feel no joy at
their recovery? Should they not take to heart the
immeasurable value of the souls that were in danger of
being lost ? The Lord condescends to open to them His
own heart. He is Himself the man who has lived to
know the joy of finding the sheep that was lost. He
rejoiced in spirit, to see Himself surrounded by the
publicans and sinners, who listened to the word of life
from His lips. The Pharisees gave Him great offence
by misapprehending His intentions, and even wounded
His reputation. But none of those things moved Him
or provoked a reply. He sought rather to overcome
evil with good. He treated those who insulted Him,
not as enemies, but as friends and neighbours. He did
not reproach them as their offensive words deserved, but
replied with the invitation of a friend, “ Rejoice with
Me, for I have found the sheep that was lost.”
We may not forget that these words of Jesus were
addressed to the Scribes. We too often think it lawful
to repulse roughly the pharisaic professors of religion.
But we here learn with what gentleness the Lord treated
such persons. Their uncharitableness towards Him


and the penitent publicans merited the sharpest censure.
But the Lord adopts other means. He seeks to melt
their cold indifference by the declaration of His charity.
In this chapter we admire with reason the Lord’s love
for penitent sinners. But we do well to notice and
admire, what often escapes observation, His love for the
Pharisees. He did not abandon the hope of winning
them, and He honoured in them the office they bore as
shepherds of the people.
And now let us examine ourselves, whether we have
the mind of Jesus, or whether unconsciously we are not
in accord with the Pharisees rather than with Him.
If great sinners are converted, and through the mercy of
God attain to the fellowship of the full blessings of God’s
house, let us then rejoice with Jesus and the angels in
heaven. But there are yet other tests by which we may
know whether we have the mind of Christ. Seeing, as we
do, so much gross sin and prevailing corruption around
us, we far too easily give up all thought of the conversion
of these sinners, and all hope of their obtaining grace and
sanctity. But that state of mind reveals a resemblance
to the Pharisees rather than the love of Christ. When
a small community, enjoying the blessings of God’s
house, is contented with the possession of these
advantages, while there are multitudes of Christ’s flock
around them in a state of spiritual misery and moral
ruin, they follow the example, not of the Lord, but of
the Scribes, who were satisfied with their knowledge of


the Scriptures, and their observance of the law, but did
nothing for the conversion of the publicans. A religious
community without zeal for the salvation of sinners,
■without hearty desire to stretch out the hand to those
who have gone astray, that fears the trouble or the scorn
that attend such labours of love, is affected by the mind
of the Pharisees. It is good and necessary before all
things, that we should bear the testimony of a holy
conversation, and thereby win the confidence of men.
But if we never make a profitable use of this confidence,
so as to bear an earnest testimony to the judgment to
come, to the salvation of souls and the love of the
Saviour, assuredly we partake of the cold-heartedness of
the Pharisees. For they, too, grieved the Lord, not only
by their hateful murmurs at His receiving sinners, but
quite as much by their indifference and inactivity in the
midst of the spiritual misery in which these outcasts
were found.
The Lord, who came from heaven, and who alone can
tell us what takes place in heaven, gives us a precious
revelation of the unseen and higher world; “I say unto
you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just
persons, which need no repentance.” He thus exhibits
to us a world of pure and happy spirits, who look upon
us while we see them not; who are acquainted with our
ruin and our salvation; who of their own will and love
are afflicted, and suffer a diminution of their happiness


when we fall into sin, and again sympathise with the
holy joy of the Lord, when He accomplishes our
salvation from ruin. Such are the friends we have, yet
take it so little to heart. Such influence have our
actions in heaven above, and we heed it not. Such is
the relation God has placed His Church in towards His
holy angels, for which we are so little grateful to Him.
When we in humility find acceptance with God, when
we experience the consolation of the Holy Ghost, and
render thanks to the Lord for all His goodness, we are
not alone in this heavenly joy, the angels of God feel it
with us and for us. Their joy unites itself to the joy
of our hearts, and it is really true that the holy angels
blend their canticles in heaven with the prayers and
spiritual songs of the Church of God on earth.
This parable also has a deep prophetical sense, winch
was well known to the ancient Christian Church, as
appears by the holy Irenseus. The Son of God, by
whom all things were made in heaven and in earth,
the principalities and powers in heavenly places, as well
as the children of men, He is the great Shepherd of the
sheep, to whom one of His sheep became lost, while the
remainder went not astray. The angels in heaven
continued steadfast, and needed no repentance, while
man fell and became a sinner. The Son of God left
the heavens, the abode of the holy angels, and came
down to seek the lost sheep here below in desolate
places. He feared not the path of humiliation. He


exchanged the glory He had with the Father, for the
form of a servant, and took the path of obedience and
suffering, that He might save the lost sheep. He was
moved to do this by the love He bore for His creation:
for while He saw us lying in ruin and horrible evil, He
forgot not that we were the work of His hands, and
were originally made in His image. He sought out and
found the lost sheep, and because it could not of itself
find the way of salvation, He has taken it on His
shoulders and brought it to His home, that is, He has
taken man’s nature in order to save it. He has taken
upon Himself our human nature and borne it as a
burden; and truly the load He took on Him became
heavy, for with our human nature He has at the same
time taken upon Himself the sins of the world. In His
passage through the world He has died under the
burden, but He is risen again from the dead, and has
now borne home our human nature, ransomed, sanctified,
and glorified, to the mansions in heaven, where He
presents Himself holy and unblameable before His
Father. There He has called upon His friends and
neighbours to share His joy, and they have rejoiced with
Him. When he was born into the world and found
His lost creature, the heavenly host rejoiced in songs of
praises over the salvation that had come to us. And
when He was received into glory at His ascension to
heaven and was seen of the angels, having exalted
human nature in holiness to the throne of the Father,


the hosts of heaven again sang praises and rejoiced with
the great Shepherd of the sheep at the accomplished
work of the wonder of Divine love. What will it then be,
when He raises up the first fruits of His new creation,
and exalts His holy Church from the nothingness of this
earthly life and out of the dust of death, and leads them
into the mansion which He has prepared with the
Father! Then at last He will have finished the work of
His love for His lost and recovered creatures. Then He
will again renew the summons, “ Rejoice with Me,”
and the whole heavens will re-echo His joy.


THE
PARABLE OF THE LOST PIECE OF SILVER.
S. LUKE xx. 8-10.
Again the Lord condescends to justify before men the
joy of His heart over the conversion of publicans and
sinners. Again He endeavours to melt the cold hearts
of the Pharisees with the revelation of His love. He
would put them to shame for the indifference, even the
repugnance, they showed at the repentance of them that
were lost. “ There is joy in Heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just
persons, that need no repentance.” He would say, you
indeed have no need of such repentance as these
publicans must experience, for you have not fallen into
such gross sins as they have, but what is the inward
condition of your hearts ? The angels in Heaven rejoice
over the recovery of these lost ones, but you, instead of
feeling their joy, you murmur. That is not the mind
with which you can become a citizen of Heaven. The
joy which is in Heaven ought to find an echo in your
hearts, or you are not fit for the kingdom of Heaven.
You will remain without. By your disposition you
shut yourselves out of Heaven.


In the former parable, the Lord spoke of a shepherd,
who had lost a sheep; here He speaks of a housewife,
who has mislaid a piece of silver; there He showed His
servants, here He shows the Church, of what spirit it
ought to be. The house of Israel, and especially the
community of the Pharisees, were to learn from this
what duty they had to fulfil towards those who had gone
astray, and what pains they should take to win back
those whom they had lost. The housewife invites her
friends and neighbours to rejoice with her, because she
had regained possession of her lost piece of silver; in like
manner, in the name of the fellowship of the disciples of
Jesus, the synagogues of the Jews, and the colleges of
the scribes, are required to rejoice over the conversion
of the publicans.
Here also a prophetic image is presented to us. The
housewife, who possesses a treasure of the pieces of
silver, and carefully watches over them, is she not the
Christian Church ? She has received an endowment of
heavenly treasure—ten is the number of the kingdom—
and she ought to administer it faithfully, with wise
and thrifty management. Here is therefore a warning
from which we learn how easily it may happen to the
Christian Church to lose a part of her endowment, and
this unhappily has been the case. Alas ! has she not,
in the course of time, become deprived of much of her
original dowry of holiness and power, of truth and love !
This has imperceptibly befallen her; for a long time she
a


has not heeded it, but now the hour is arrived in which
she becomes aware of it with terror. God be thanked,
that a great part of Christendom is awaking to this con-
sciousness, for it is the first thing necessary, and is the
first step towards obtaining help. But the Word of the
Lord shows us what is the next step to be taken. The
woman lights a candle, to throw light into every corner;
she sweeps her house and searches carefully, until at
length she finds the lost silver. There exists a com-
munity of faithful Christians, who have taken deeply to
heart the common loss, and will not allow themselves to
be satisfied with the ordinary topics of consolation and
expedients of contentment. If others say, the division
of the Church and the loss of visible unity are a necessary
historical development, an unavoidable progress, and are
even beneficial, this cannot remove our sorrow, nor allay
the feeling of our common guilt. The attempt is made
to console us under the destitution of spiritual gifts, by
saying, If it had been the will of God, that they should
have continued as in the beginning, they would have
remained in the Church. But this cannot quiet our
conscience, and ought not to lessen our desire that Jesus
Christ should be glorified by spiritual gifts. We see in
the parable that the woman would not be contented
under the loss she had sustained of the treasure of her
house. These Christians at the present time, our fathers
and brethren, who have taken the impoverishment of the
Church of God deeply to heart, have received grace to


light a candle in order to enlighten the dark places of
the house of God. God has revived among us the gift
of prophesying, to which we do well to give heed, as
S. Peter says, “as to a light which shineth in a dark
place.” By the word of prophecy, the condition of the
Church, and the deepest causes of this sad condition,
have been laid bare. The mysteries of Holy Scripture
have been opened, and a heavenly light has been poured
out on passages which, until now, were totally unin-
telligible. And besides this, the house has been swept
and brought into order. The gracious work of the Lord
did not merely enlighten those who sought Him, on the
present defects and abuses, but it was given to them in
the light of prophecy, and according to the truth of Holy
Scripture, to restore the long-lost and forgotten Divine
order of the Church. The woman in the Gospel searches
the house thoroughly, in the conviction that the lost
piece of silver could not be wholly lost, hut must still be
there, and capable of being found. And this conviction
is justified by the result, and the pains bestowed in that
hope are not in vain. Thus God hath put this conviction
into our hearts, that He is faithful, and that His gifts
are without repentance. We have trusted in Him, that
He has taken nothing away of the original endowment
of His Church. The Lord remains always the same:
He is the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the
ending, the first and the last. However unfaithful we
have been, He still remains faithful, and cannot deny


Himself. He has not withdrawn the heavenly gifts,
which He entrusted to the Church in the beginning, but
rather held them in reserve; and when she seeks, she
shall find them.
And behold ! she has found them. The most impor-
tant, the most valuable —on the possession of which all
else that had been lost depended —she has found again :
the office by which the Holy Spirit is given. The Lord
has again brought to light the apostolic office, and all
the blessings connected with it, which no man can
rightly appreciate, unless he learns what they are. Then
was joy in Heaven and upon earth. The angels broke
forth in praises, and here below the song of victory was
heard in the habitations of the just. The Church of
God had recovered her full endowment, and her heart
and mouth poured out praises to the wisdom, the love,
and faithfulness of Jehovah, who changes not, who is,
and was, and is to come.
The woman, who was so happy in finding her lost
treasure, had friends and neighbours, whom she calls
together, to make them partakers of her joy. Christen-
dom is distributed into various communities and divisions.
There is one which first and before the others experiences
the blessing of the newly revived gifts and ordinances.
This community has the charge and duty to communicate
the intelligence to all the others, and call upon them to
rejoice with her. This has been done. It commenced
by the delivery of a testimony, in the year 1887, to the


beads of Christendom, and since then the evangelists
have lifted up their voice in all Christian lands, calling
on all people to rejoice with them and partake of the
blessings which God has restored.
By this testimony the Lord teaches us not to regard
the different Christian confessions or denominations as
enemies. Whether they show us kindness or do us
harm, our sentiments towards them must not be changed,
but must continue to be those of friends and neighbours;
end our language and our whole behaviour must agree
■with these sentiments: “ Render not evil for evil, nor
railing for railing.” “Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good.” The invitation to rejoice at
the returning grace of God has, in general, met with
little sympathy from Christian people, and here and
there it has been received even with enmity.
The patience of the Lord is your salvation; that is,
we ourselves can hope for deliverance only in the
unutterable patience of the Lord for us. Wbo then
•dare be impatient with others ? The message of peace
and joy is not yet silent, and we ought to labour with
love and intercession, that it may find entrance into the
hearts of men.
Our fathers and our brethren have laboured for us,
and through their faithful service, the blessing of the
apostolic office has been won for our advantage. How
then should our thankfulness to the Lord grow cold ?
Now is the time to prize the treasure that has been


found, to profit by it faithfully, and to acknowledge with
daily renewed joy what good things the Lord has done
for us. The painful experience of by-gone times ought
not to be in vain for us, we should learn true wisdom
from it: Watchfulness over the gifts we have received
of God, and faithfulness in their use, that we may not
have received them in vain, and that we may not lose
our work, but have a full reward.


THE
PARABLE OF THE PRODIGAL SON.
S. LUKE xv. 11-32.
The care of a shepherd for a stray lamb, the trouble of
the housewife for a lost piece of silver put us to shame,
if we, like the Pharisees, remain unconcerned, when
immortal souls, that are exposed to danger, are to be
saved, and heavenly graces that have been lost, are to be
recovered. Both parables equally make known to us
what Christ, the good Shepherd, feels for those who
have erred, and what He has done for us, who have
gone astray. The following parable imparts to us a still
greater and more glorious revelation of what is in the
heart of Jesus Christ and of our heavenly Father. For
this parable furnishes an example of the best and noblest
impulses that yet remain in fallen humanity, that of
parental love. It is to parental love that the Lord refers
us when He would awaken our dull and unbelieving
hearts to the feeling of the love of God, saying, “ If ye,
being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your Father, which is in heaven,
give good gifts to them that ask Him.” And He here
shows us in the generosity and tenderness of a father’s


heart, as in a mirror, however imperfect, what is the
disposition of God towards us men, however fallen and
degenerate. A most consoling discovery is here imparted
to us, of more value than all the wisdom and knowledge
of the whole world! We may know what is the mind
of God towards us, we learn how we may come to God,
how we may seek and find Him; we receive this
knowledge from the best source, even from Him who
alone came down from heaven. He reveals what no
man can tell us, what no human understanding can
discover, what no human heart can conceive of the love
of God for us. For no man has seen God, but the only-
begotten Son of God, who is in the bosom of God, He
has declared Him to us, that God is love. No man
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal Him, and the substance of this revelation is,
that His mercy is great as Himself.
The immediate object of our Lord is to explain and
justify His conduct to the Pharisees, who were offended
at it, and He thus represents Himself in the father of
the two sons. “ God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto Himself.” The love of Christ is the love of
the eternal Father; when the heart of Christ is revealed
to us, we see the heart of the Father ; the mercy of the
Father and the mercy of the Son are the same; as
our Lord said to Philip, “ Believest thou not, that the
Father is in Me, and I in the Father ? He who hath
seen Me, hath seen the Father,” or as S. Ircnseus


teaches, “ The Son is the Father made visible, the
Father is the Son unseen.”
Some would find in this parable the evidence that
man may come to God without atonement, and that God
qpardons without requiring satisfaction for the sin of the
world. But they have not learned the mind of the
Lord. They think that man can come to God without
,a Saviour; they would find the Father, in passing by
the Son. But the Son says, “No man cometh to the
Father, except by Me;” and He who says this of
Himself, is the propitiation for our sins. He is chosen
and predestinated from eternity to he the spotless Lamb,
who should bear the sin of the world, therefore He has
power on earth to forgive sins. He it is, who forgave
the publicans. He it is, against whom the scribes
murmured. He it is, who relates this parable, in which
He points to Himself and teaches us to draw near to
the Father through Him, and to find the Father in
Him.
In the prodigal son we recognise, first of all, those
lost sheep of the house of Israel, who then came to
Jesus and were received by Him. In the elder son we
recognise the Pharisees, who had closed their hearts
against their fallen brethren. The Lord Jesus is
He, who, like a faithful father, has ever borne on his
heart the degenerate children, and has never forgotten
them. The father advances to meet his perverse and
angry son, who will not enter the house, and refuses to


rejoice, and he replies to the unbecoming reproaches of
this son, “ Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine; it was meet that we should make merry
and be glad, for this thy brother was dead and is alive
again; and was lost and is found.” It is the address of
Jesus to the Pharisees, that we hear in these words.
He acknowledges what is praiseworthy in them, their
zeal for the worship of God, their careful observance of
the law; He affirms that they have their part in the
goods of His house; He will only bring to their
consciousness the one great injustice, their unkindness
to their brethren, and melt the coldness of their hearts
by the breath of His love. Instead of repelling those
unfriendly brethren, He invites them with condescension
to rejoice with Him over the brethren that have been
reclaimed.
The Lord shows Himself also in this parable to be the
great Prophet, and unfolds. the deeply hidden mysteries
of God concerning humanity and the Church. Who
cannot recognise in the two sons the people of Israel and
the heathen world? There is one God and Father of
all. He is not only the God of the Jews, but of the
heathen. The Jews, like the elder son, have remained
with Him and in His house. They have preserved the
original revelation and acknowledgment of God. The
true worship of God has continued with them from the
patriarchs of gray antiquity. They have served God a
thousand years long, and held His law in increasing


honour. The heathen people, on the contrary, like
the younger son, have forsaken their Father’s house, and
gone their own ways. They have taken with them their
portion of His goods. They also retained at first the
acknowledgment of God, sacrifice and primeval holy
usages, honourable manners and laws. But as they did
not continue under divine guidance, their heart turned
away from God. They did not preserve faithfully the
original light, and, like the prodigal son, they gradually
wasted their inheritance, from generation to generation
they departed more and more from the ways of God,
their foolish heart was darkened and they fell under
the slavery of the most opprobrious vices.
Man, who at first bore the image and likeness of God,
is at length debased to be the slave of the devil, and to
become as a feeder of swine; to appease the hunger of
his soul, he addicts himself to magic arts, yet without
satisfying his want. Far from his heavenly Father, in
the deepest self-degradation, he languishes in the misery
of his soul, and feels in himself the fire that is not
quenched, the gnawing worm that does not die. All
the accumulated evils that can come on them who
forsake God, were and are still the condition of the
heathen world. But the fatherly eye of God has never
ceased to watch over this poor heathen world. They
have forgotten God, but He has not forgotten them. As
in the parable the love and faithfulness of the sorrowing
father secretly influenced from afar the heart of the lost


son; so did the preventing grace of God act upon the
heathen, and the time at length came for them to return.
The Son of God thought upon them. In regard to the
heathen He said to the Jews, “Other sheep I have which
are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall
hear my voice.” He has kept His word, for when He
rose from the dead, He, the great Shepherd of the sheep,
sent forth His Apostles with the command to make
disciples of all the nations of the heathen. They have
heard His voice. The drawing of the Father towards
the Son has not been in vain for them. The heathen,
when the gospel came to them, were awakened, like the
prodigal son, to the conciousness of their deep misery.
The remembrance of their heavenly Father, and the
longing desire for Him and for man’s true home with
God were quickened within them. They arose like the
lost son, they acknowledged their great sinfulness, and
found a loving reception above all human expectation.
When S. Paul was sent to the heathen, and when our
heathen forefathers (and we with them) were brought
into the Father’s house, the Church of Christ, and
-clothed with the dignity of a Christian, then was fulfilled
the joy, of which the Lord prophetically speaks.
But what in the meantime became of the elder son ?
When the heathen were received into the Father’s house,
and through His mercy were invested with the full
rights of children, the people Israel rejoiced not, but on
the contrary, the calling of the Gentiles by S. Paul and


his fellow labourers gave them the greatest offence.
Even those Jews who believed in Christ, could hardly
reconcile it to themselves, that the heathen should be so
highly favoured without first becoming Israelites, and
submitting themselves to the law of Moses. The mul-
titude of the Jews were altogether excited to hatred
against the converted heathen, to murmuring and resis-
tance against the wonderful ways of God. Instead of
accompanying them with joy into the Father’s house,
they remained standing outside before the door of the
Church of Christ; and there they yet stand, always full
of evil thoughts towards the faith of Christ, still always
displeased with the ways of God, who has brought so
great a salvation to us heathen.
But ought we to return to them hatred for hatred,
and anger for anger ? Whoever thus acts, has not the
mind of Christ. But in this parable the Lord teaches us
quite the contrary. If the Father speaks kindly to the
elder, murmuring son, should not also the younger
brother advance with friendship towards his brother
and seek to win him by love? Hence we ought to
acknowledge the good which the Jew possesses, and not
forget, that the riches of grace, in which we rejoice,.
were first intended for them. We ought, like S. Paul,,
to love them for their fathers’ sake, and remembering
the place which God has assigned to them, hope for
their conversion and future restoration.
Also amongst us, to whom have been vouchsafed the


blessings of Christian baptism and training, there are
alas! so many who, like the younger son, have forsaken
their Father’s house, and wasted their noble patrimony
of innocence and virtue, of the faith and the confession
of Christ, who live as strangers to the Church of Christ,
far from God, without God in the world. To them also
it has happened, that being the freeborn children of the
heavenly Father, they have fallen into the bondage of
sin, and bear the yoke of the prince of this world,
and are perverted to be his instruments for the dark
purposes of his kingdom, for which they receive the
wages of misery, death, and ruin. As the baptised
Christian is raised above a heathen, so, if he becomes a
feeder of swine, that is, if he indulges in, and serves base
lusts and pleasures, his degradation and self-desecration
are worse than of the heathen, his sins weigh more
heavily, their effects upon him are more deadly, the
misery of his soul greater, his prospects of eternity more
dreadful, than with the heathen.
Such is the misery and the danger of every baptised
man who lives in sin. But the day of grace is not yet
closed; the patience of God still prevails for the rebel-
lious Christian, and the heavenly Father still waits for
the return of His wandering children. Who dares to
assert or even to hope such a thing of himself ? But
behold, the word of Jesus Christ is our security. He
has received gifts even for the rebellious; He still
stretches out His arms to a gainsaying people; He


bears witness to us from Heaven through His Spirit
that divine love and mercy have not ceased. 0 that this
witness, borne by troops of the messengers of peace,
might reach all who have gone astray, that their hearts
might be turned to their heavenly Father!
The preventing grace of God operates at various times,
and in different manners, on the hearts of His lost
children, especially by sufferings and alarming events,
by which the conscience becomes awakened, and a
desire excited to return to the faith of childhood, and to
the bosom of the Church. But the unhappy man, so
soon as he takes the first steps towards returning to his
Father, has always anxious and sometimes distrustful
thoughts of God. As he knows himself to be unworthy
to be called a child of God, the utmost he dares hope
for is to be received as a hireling or servant in his
Father’s house. Then he approaches his home; im-
poverished, disfigured so as not to be recognised, he
returns. It appears from the parable that none of the
household had recognised the stranger. One only
perceived him at a distance and recognised him: that
was his Father. He saw in him still his son; his heart
kindled with compassion at the sight of him; he hastened
to meet him; he enfolded him in his arms and kissed
him, and as the son uttered his humble confession, he
suffered him not to finish the words, “ Make me as one of
thy hired servants,” but renewed to him the expression
of his love, and reinstated him as his son. He over


powers him with entreaty and sympathy. With as-
tonishment, with holy awe and with joy, the inmates of
the house witness this transaction, and the generosity
with which the father treats his child.
Is there one of us, whom sin has separated from his
God ? then let his heart be melted by this testimony
of the love of God, proceeding from the mouth of Jesus-
Christ; let him be moved to confess all his sins while
it is yet time, and he will know the unutterable mercy
of our heavenly Father.
The time is come when this divine mercy is revealed
in an especial manner towards the Christian Church.
It is not merely certain individual souls that resemble
the prodigal son, but we all have broken our baptismal
vows in one way or another, denied the dignity of our
Christian standing, forgotten the blessed privilege of
the children of God, closed our hearts against our
heavenly Father, and given them up to the world; we
have forsaken the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and
obeyed our own selfwill more than the commandments
of God. We have neglected the heavenly gifts with
which the Church, at the first, was richly endowed, and
entire communities of the Church have fallen into
spiritual poverty and declension. The worship of God
has fallen into contempt; unity and order are dissolved,
faith perishes, love is grown cold, and hope has failed.
From these evils the whole Church suffers, and the most
disastrous results affect the moral and spiritual welfare


of the individual members, even of those who still retain
some measure of faith, so that they suffer a spiritual
decay, instead of growing together in one body, and
attaining the perfection to which they are called.
Whoever has a love for the Christian Church, will
feel somewhat for her and in her name, of the hunger,
destitution, and degradation which are represented to
us in the image of the prodigal son. What we most
suffer from is, that we have lost the consciousness of our
adoption as children, and forgotten the obligation of
children of God to holiness of heart and life, and lost
the confidence of children through Christ towards the
Father. This is the cause of the many forms of declen-
sion apparent in Christendom and the source of the
abounding spiritual wretchedness. But whilst we have
forgotten our heavenly Father, He has not forgotten us.
We have turned aside from His covenant, but behold!
He remembers His covenant, and renews His mercy to
His people as when of old He appeared to Moses in the
burning bush and said, “ I have seen the affliction of
My people in Egypt (in bondage to the world and the
flesh) and have heard their cry, for I know their
sorrows” (Exodus iii. 3-7). The Lord sends us a
message from Heaven by His servants, and behold, He
speaks to us as His children. He still acknowledges
our adoption, which we have not held fast, and our
baptismal grace, which we have so little regarded, or
have considered as lost, and He declares Himself to
H


us as our Father in Jesus Christ. Full of love, He
advances to meet us and seeks to revive in us the re-
membrance of what He has wrought in us in holy
baptism, that we may with deep repentance become
sensible of our estrangement from Him, and turn our-
selves to Him with upright hearts and full confidence.
He opens to us again His heart, and therewith also His
paternal home, furnished with heavenly benefits, even
His holy Church, and leads us into it, not as hirelings
and servants, as we thought, but as favoured and justified
sons and daughters, as the Lord sets before our eyes in
this parable with significant and comforting images.
The father said to the servants, “Bring forth the best
robe, and put it on him.” He clothes his returning son,
who appeared in tattered and defiled garments, with a
pure and beautiful robe, such as he had worn in his
father’s house before he went astray. This is the robe
of Christ’s innocency, the white garment with which we
were clothed in our baptism, and which is now —washed
and made white in the blood of the Lamb—restored to
us as the precious gift and the riches of the grace of our
Father. We receive it at the hands of the Lord’s
servants who, by their ministry of word and act, assist
us in the cleansing of our conscience, and the renewing
of our baptismal vows. The father said further to his
servants, “Put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet.” The golden ring, not worn by servants and
inferior people, but only by the sons of nobles, is the


mark of noble birth and of the title to inheritance—is
the gift of the Holy Ghost, given to the children of the
Highest, and to no one else, the earnest of the inherit-
ance in Heaven and the first-fruits of the coming glory.
This gift also is ministered and assured to us through
the ministry of the servants of God in a holy rite. The
prodigal son receives also shoes for his feet. We are
supplied with new strength, that from henceforth we
may go in and out the house of our heavenly Father as
obedient children, able to walk in His ways. “Bring
hither the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be
merry.” We may perceive from these words, that the
father in the parable, during the absence of his son, had
made a vow and provided a thank-offering and peace-
offering in the hope of his return. This sacrificial feast
of joy is now made ready and solemnised with song and
music, and the processional dance. Has not God also
prepared this joyful solemnity in the holiest service, in
the heavenly feast of the sacrifice of Christ, the new-
testament passover, the holy Eucharist? He gives us
grace again to celebrate the day of the Lord in a proper
manner as a day of holy joy, to unite with the angels in
their songs of praise, and to refresh us at the altar which
He has established. We are here assembled in His house
as the people whom He has blessed, and live to see the
fulfilment of the prophetical words of Jesus. The joy
in the Holy Ghost, with which we are here filled, is the
rejoicing over the recovery of the lost, and the expression


of the eternal love and faithfulness of our God, who
cries to all that are His, “ Let us rejoice and be glad,
for this my son was dead and is alive again, was lost
and is found.”
Yet many of our brethren, who, like the elder brother,
hear of these things from a distance, cannot understand
what is going on, nor conceive that the Lord can bestow
such esteem and favour on the unworthy. Instead of
entering and taking part in the blessings which He
gives, they remain standing without and are displeased.
How we ought to behave to them we may learn from
the parable, namely, with gentleness, with patience and
deference, and with gracious invitation, as we perceive
in the words of the father to the elder son. For the
Lord loves these also, and we therefore must love them
also; as we have received much grace, we ought to
regard ourselves as debtors to our brethren, and the
good the Lord has done to us, we ought to recompense
to them. But to Him, the Father, who has so loved
us, let us henceforth render a joyful service, abide in
Him all the days of our life, and follow Him with
unchangeable faithfulness.


THE
PARABLE OF THE UNJUST STEWARD.
S. LUKE xvi. 1-13.
Both the discourses of the Lord contained in this
chapter, that of the unjust steward, and that of the rich
man and Lazarus, have evidently a primary application
to the wealthy. We have seen (S. Luke xv. 1) that all
the publicans of the place where the Lord abode at that
time, came to Him to hear Him. But when we read
(chap. xvi. 1), “He said also to His disciples,” it must be
understood that He addressed Himself more immediately
to those of His disciples that were rich; whilst the earlier
called disciples, and especially the twelve Apostles, had
forsaken all and followed the Lord in His poverty. These
more recent disciples, who had not, for the most part,
acquired their earthly goods in a right way, stood in need
•of such instruction as is here given. Of this number was
Zaccheus, “chief among the publicans” (chap. xix. 5),
who turned to the Lord and said, “Behold, Lord, the
half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken
anything from any man by false accusation, I restore
him fourfold.” The object of the Lord, in this parable
of the unjust steward, is to move these publicans to a


similar resolution. “ I say unto you, make to yourselves
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.”
He shows them the right use which they should make of
their earthly treasures: they should succour the poor
and the afflicted therewith. They should loosen their
hearts from dependence on mammon. They should
learn the true worth of money, which consists in this,
that we are thereby enabled to give help to the needy,
to soothe all kinds of earthly want and care, and wipe
away the tears of the unfortunate. Such poor ones they
had not far to seek; for the Lord was surrounded by
disciples who were either of the poorer class, or who
had consumed their goods in following the Lord. The
Lord sympathised with the need of these disciples, and
He would so much the more rejoice, if anything were
done by those newly added to alleviate their situation,
and thus friendship and a communion of love might be
established between the two parties. Hence He says,
“Make to yourselves friends of the unrighteous mam-
mon.” He foresaw the persecution which would come
on all who believed in Him, whereby they would suffer
the spoiling of their goods. (Compare Heb. x. 34.)
He would prepare them for that by the words “when
ye fail” (German, “are in need”). Then they would
be forced to sacrifice all: for which reason they should
make a virtue of necessity, and rather now voluntarily
give their goods to the friends of God, i.e., to His poor


ones, than later, be compelled to abandon them to His
enemies. “ That when ye fail, they may receive you
into everlasting habitations.” Earthly houses and palaces
are perishable habitations. Even the commonwealth of
Israel, to which until then the disciples of Jesus belonged,
was a perishable tabernacle, which was soon to be broken
up. But our enduring city, and our eternal habitation,
is the Christian Church, the tabernacle of God with
men, which can never be destroyed; the Christian com-
munities, over which the Lord has placed His Apostles
and other servants as fathers of families, are the ever-
lasting habitations. The publicans hitherto had only
taken the first steps in the following of the Saviour, and
were as yet but weak beginners in the faith. Hence the
Lord describes to them the goal after which they should
strive, namely, to be received into the full communion
of His Church ; then they would become fellow-citizens
and of the household of God, and it is a good preparation
to attain to that if they now free themselves from all
mammon-worship, out of love to God and to the poor,
by offering up their goods. Such a deed reacts healthily
on the doer of it, binds him more firmly to God and to
the children of God, and saves him from many conflicts,
temptations, and dangers in after life. This can be
maintained as true and certain; it harmonises with the
words of the Lord, and with experience. We insist on
this, and yet do not therewith preach the merit of works.
If any one could infer from the words of the Lord that


a rich man could purchase an entrance into the Church
and even into Heaven with money, he has never appre-
hended the mind of Christ —“ Without faith it is im-
possible to please God.” What the Lord requires is
“ faith, that worketh by love; ” and what He promises is,
the blessed fruits of the love which springs from faith:
hut a private personal merit of man, of which to boast,
and on which to found a claim to enter Heaven, the
Lord never acknowledges; nor can we acknowledge it.
Admission into the everlasting habitation is not
granted arbitrarily, nor yet by favour or for payment,
and yet the keys of the kingdom of heaven are committed
to the servants of Christ; that is, the Lord, by His
servants, grants to those who knock, an entrance into
the everlasting habitations, and His servants assist those
who stand at the threshold of His house to enter
therein. But in this they must act according to His
mind, and in His light examine those who seek ad-
mission. In order that those new in the faith may
attain this blessed end, full union with the Church of
Christ, the sacrifice of love, which the Lord here
counsels them to make, is serviceable, as a preparation.
“ The children of this world are wiser than the children
of light.” The rich man in the parable praises the
steward, notwithstanding the dishonesty and shameful
deceit he had practised against his master, because he
had acted wisely. By falsifying the bills or farm con-
tracts, and with the use of his master’s receipt, lessening


the amount which the debtors or farmers had to pay to
their lord, he attained a double object. He at once
concealed his wasteful expenditure by making the rents
or inventories agree with the bills, and secured himself
for the future by conferring obligation on the farmers.
It was not to be expected that they would betray him,
for that would injure themselves; it was more probable
that they would support him, that he might not betray
them, and bring them into trouble. Such was the
cunning and the courage of this man of the world. We
are to leam, not from his dishonesty, but from his
wisdom. We need not be shocked that a deceiver is
proposed to us as an example. We must distinguish
between his shrewd calculation and his deceit, and
imitate the former after a spiritual manner that is
pleasing to God, but abhor the latter. When the Lord
says, “Be wise as serpents,” He certainly does not
mean, be venomous as serpents; and when wisdom says,
“Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and
be wise,” it is meant, that a sensible man will learn and
be put to shame by the industry and providence of ah
irrational insect; but certainly it is not meant that in
other respects he should take for an example the want of
reason of an animal. The Lord says to His unwise
people, “ The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master’s crib.” Even so He condescends to us, the
children of light, who so often are guilty of slothfulness
and irresolution, and fail in wisdom and foresight, and


refers us, to our shame, to the prudence of men of the
world.
Now the wisdom which Jesus Christ would teach us-
is not the earthly, hut the heavenly wisdom. To
manage our houses and affairs, so as to he consistent in
the use of temporal things, and pass honourably through
the world, we do not properly need a Saviour, hut we
may learn such things by our natural reason and
experience. Nevertheless, because the children of light,
who strive after imperishable things, sometimes, un-
happily, show themselves deficient and unskilful in
temporal things, He comes to our help in His Church in
these things also, by means of the deacons, of whom we
may obtain counsel in our temporal concerns. But here
the Lord would teach us a higher wisdom, which has to-
do, not with perishable, but with imperishable objects.
The children of light are not sufficiently wise in their
generation, that is, in the spiritual sphere, in the wor-
ship of the Lord, in seeking after eternal life, and in
laying up heavenly treasures. In this respect we are
ofttimes negligent, and show ourselves visionary, in-
dolent, and indifferent. We ought to be ashamed when
we look upon the (.servants of mammon, their restless-
activity in the acquisition of money, their bold and well-
calculated enterprises, the use they make of time and
opportunity, their exertion of mental and physical power
for objects of perishable value. Why do we serve the
Saviour with less zeal and devotion? Why do we


employ for the salvation of our souls, and for the honour
of the Lord, less diligence, earnestness, and decision?
Should we not at the very least serve Him as faithfully
as the worshippers of mammon serve their god? Our
love should move us to this; and such an activity in our
love is true wisdom, which becomes the children of light
in their generation.
But let no one suppose, that the Lord would recommend
or excuse unfaithfulness, deceit, or wastefulness with
our temporal goods; for in praising the unjust steward
He adds, “He that is faithful in that which is least,
is faithful also in that which is much: and he that
is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If there-
fore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
riches ? And if ye have not been faithful in that which
is another man’s, who shall give you that which is your
own ? ” Thus He speaks, who is able to give or to
refuse heavenly treasures, to whom the Father has given
power to appoint to us or take from us the eternal
inheritance. He now, who will decide our eternal
destiny, directs His attention to us, and observes how we
conduct ourselves in this temporal life. And indeed He
considers not only how we deal with His gifts of grace,
which are presented to us by word and sacrament, but
He marks also how we act with regard to our money
and property, and whether we show ourselves faithful or
not in the discharge of the duties of our earthly calling,


and in the employment of our time and labour day by
day. Indeed, He shows us, that the daily simple duties
of our calling, and the employment of earthly goods, are
a test which He Himself applies to us. If we cannot
pass through this trial, but show ourselves indifferent,
trifling, and unconscientious, or coveteous, dishonest,
and selfish in small things, He accounts that to us as
unfaithfulness towards Himself, and has no pleasure in
entrusting to us heavenly goods, namely, growth in
faith, hope, and charity, a spiritual gift or office in
His house. Earthly treasure is “ that which is least; ”
spiritual blessings are “that which is much.” Mammon,
that is, money and what can be procured with money,
is deceitful; the gift of the Holy Ghost is a real
and enduring possession. Temporal goods are borrowed
wealth; for they are lent to us for a short time, and
then taken away again; but our part in the place which
Jesus Christ prepares for us in heaven, is our true
property, which, when it is appointed to us, will never be
taken from us. Thus may the Lord direct our regards
to that which is highest, and to that which is least, and
teach us to recognise in the faithful fulfilment of the
least task here below, a school of preparation for
entrance upon our imperishable inheritance in heaven.
Under the head of faithfulness in the use of our earthly
possession, He places before all, liberality—“ Freely ye
have received, freely give.”
The parable of the steward has, according to the


intention of the Lord, a still higher signification. S.
Paul says, “ Let a man so account of us as the minis-
ters of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.”
These stewards, who administer the goods of the house
of God, have somewhat to learn from the parable.
Such stewards were at that time in the highest places
over the people Israel, and they had not fulfilled their
office faithfully and according to the mind of God.
They were about to hear the word, “ Give account of
thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer steward.”
Now they were counselled to employ rightly the little-
remaining time that was given them. Their chief fault
was, a want of love and compassion towards penitent
sinners. They should now come to the help of those-
who were God’s debtors, that they might free them
from their debts. They should, like John the Baptist,
Jesus Christ and His disciples, kindly extend their hand
to sinners, who acknowledged and repented of their sins,
and prepare them to appear before God.
Such is now also the task‘of stewards in the Christian
Church. God has entrusted to them the treasures of
grace and truth, not to guard them for themselves, as
their privilege to the exclusion of others; not for their
self-complacency in such, a possession and therewith to-
glorify themselves; hut that they should freely com-
municate truth and grace, and set right all those who
felt themselves spiritually poor and debtors towards
God. For this is the purpose of the Lord, when He


puts into our hands either temporal or eternal benefits.
The lords and proprietors of the earth strain every
nerve to retain and increase their goods and chattels,
let what will become of the poor. But God is love,
and imparts His treasures, that we may use them
liberally for the advantage of our brethren; and He
will have pleasure in those who act thus, as His
faithful servants.


THE
PARABLE OF THE RICH MAN AND
LAZARUS THE POOR MAN.
S. LUKE, xvi. 19-31.
As with the good Samaritan, so with the rich man,
with his five brethren, and the poor man Lazarus, it
will readily he thought that what the Lord here relates
is not a mere parable, but something that has actually
happened. It is probable that Lazarus had actually
lived at that time, and had died in the misery described,
and the hearers of the Lord might have understood who
was alluded to by the nameless rich man and his five
brethren. Not that we know it to have been so; but
however that may be, the discourse of the Lord is
equally significant, impressive, and consoling. We
know little of the state of the soul after death, and Holy
Scripture rarely speaks of it. It refers us much more
to the resurrection, and to the judgment which is
connected with the resurrection. But here we find an
exception to the rule. The impenetrable veil which
ordinarily conceals the realm of the departed is here for
a moment drawn aside—we see the dead, and hear them
speak. And He, to whom we are indebted for these


revelations, is the only one who was not of this earth,
but came down from heaven—the great Prophet, of
whom God the Father says, “ Whoever will not hearken
to the words which He shall speak in My name, I will
require it of him; ” the true and faithful witness, who
could say, “ Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My
words shall not pass away.”
The fault of the rich man was not, that he was rich,
for Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea were also rich,
and are nevertheless numbered among the disciples of
Jesus. Nor did his fault consist in his living suitably
to his position, for a prince or a man of rank who sustains
his position among men, does not thereby sin, provided
that he “be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the .living God, rich in good works, ready
to distribute, laying up in store a good foundation
against the time to come, that he may lay hold of
eternal life.” With this rich man the contrary to all
this was the case, and therefore he lost his soul. His
heart was lifted up with pride, his trust was in mammon;
he thought not of liberality, and he sought his highest
good in transitory enjoyments. God proved him by
placing at the door of his palace the sick and helpless
Lazarus. Lazarus was not saved because he was poor;
and if any man concluded from this parable that a man
need only be poor, in order to be saved, he would not
understand the Lord’s words. Only so much the Lord
has taught us, that it is easier for a poor man to enter


the kingdom of heaven than a rich man; and the
apostle does not say that no rich men are called, but
only, that “ not many rich, not many noble, not many
wise men after the flesh.” But Lazarus was saved by
this, that he accepted his humble condition, and in his
heart turned to God; that he trusted in God, and bore
his sufferings with God, and sought and found heavenly
treasures. How great his wretchedness was, and how
cruel the indifference of the rich man appears from this,
that Lazarus in vain desired to be fed with the crumbs
which fell from the richly provided table of the wealthy
man, and that the servants of the rich man did not so
much as drive away the unclean beasts, the dogs that
ran about the street.
Both died, the one soon after the other, and now
occurred the great change for these men in their several
conditions which the Lord discloses to us. The soul of
Lazarus was carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom.
Men had rendered him no help, but the angels of God
had watched over him, and now rejoiced to be able to
serve him. As he entered the unknown land, he was
joyfully received by those pure and happy spirits, who
are sent forth to minister, as deacons, to them who are
the heirs of salvation, surrounded by them, lifted up
and borne on their hands to those abodes of light, which
the Lord calls the bosom of Abraham, and on another
occasion, paradise. There he found, not only Abraham,
but all the just of past times, the genuine sons of
i


Abraham; Lazarus was gathered to his fathers and to
his people. He found himself no longer alone, but in
the midst of this pure, worthy, and peaceful company.
The burden of earthly misery was removed from him;
deep, inward peace filled his soul. The society and
intercourse of the hosts of elect souls, the experience of
divine goodness and faithfulness, and the feeling of
nearness to God, consoled and indemnified him abun-
dantly for all the bitterness which he had endured on
earth and from men.
The rich man also died and was buried. His funeral
was magnificent, nor likely to have failed in funeral
orations. That was the only recompense the men of
the world could give him, whose friendship he had
preferred to the friendship of God and of the children
of God, and of this reward the rich man could not
even be conscious. In the midst of his luxurious and
sumptuous life he was transferred, unexpectedly and
unprepared, into a totally different world. There were
no servants at his command, no flatterers and merry
companions ready to entertain him. Shuddering, he
found himself alone in the gloomy abode. No angels
of light stood at his side, and, as if by an invincible
law of gravity, he was drawn down into a dark abyss,
where no rest of soul, no ray of light, no drop of con-
solation was to be found. What is said in the parable
of a flame, of a tongue, of water, of a finger, must
be understood figuratively; but these images express


realities. The wicked passions which the rich man had
strengthened by indulgence cleaved still to his soul,
but the objects with which he had sought to gratify
these passions were all taken from him, and his desires
burned within him like an unquenchable fire. He had
drowned the admonitions of his conscience and perhaps
endeavoured to silence them by raillery; he had de-
ceived himself in the destruction of his spiritual life:
now all these deceits were unmasked, now the reproaches
of his conscience gnawed his neglected soul like an
undying worm.
“ Lazarus was comforted, but thou art tormented.”
These are the natural, the necessary consequences of a
life lived in God and of a life lived without God.
These consequences follow immediately after death;
these has the justice of God ordained. Yet the condi-
tion which is here described is not the final one; it is
not until the resurrection, when the Lord comes to
judgment, [that every man will receive the definitive
sentence which determines his position in the future
immoveable kingdom.
It appears, that ordinarily, in the realm of the
departed, no intercourse, and no communion exists
between those who are above in the regions of paradise,
and those who are far below in the place of sorrows.
Like is associated with like, and separated from the un-
like. “Between us and you,” says Abraham, “there
is a great gulf fixed,” which cannot be passed over from


either side, like the vast empty space which is spread
out in the visible world between the heavenly bodies
and the earth. But on this occasion, as it appears, God
has allowed an exception to the rule. The unhappy man
in Hades looked above, and there was granted to him an
insight into the distant realm of light. As he looked
eagerly at the abode of peace, there was shown to him,
by Abraham’s side, a former acquaintance, the same
Lazarus, whom in his life-time on earth he had seen
lying at his gate as a beggar covered with sores. How
changed was everything now! At this time, not Lazarus,
but the rich man lay helpless before the door, and looked
in vain after the enjoyments which were to be found in
the hall of joy. As the crumbs from the rich man’s table
had been denied to Lazarus, so now not a drop from the
refreshing streams of paradise was afforded to him who
had revelled in earthly delights. When it became his
lot to behold such a spectacle, and hear such words,
must they not have awakened in him the consciousness
of his sin and a remorseful avowal of it ? W T ould he
not say, God is just, and I have deserved what I now
suffer, on account of Lazarus and my former sins. But,
alas! he says nothing of the kind. It is true some
good shows itself in him, in that he thinks of his five
brethren, who were living as he had done, and prays
for them, that they might not also come to this place
of torment. But at the same time he gives no sign of
self-knowledge, or of true repentance. He consents


not to the judgment of God, he does not acknowledge
himself guilty. He thinks rather, that if he had been
warned in sufficient time, he might have changed his
life, and would not have come to this place of torment.
In excusing his brethren, he would (at least, so it
appears) excuse himself and blame God, as not having
sufficiently warned him and his brethren. “ They have
Moses and the prophets,” Abraham answers him, “ let
them hear them.” But the unhappy man persists in
justifying his brethren and himself. “No, father
Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead, they
would repent.” It would seem, that he and those who
belonged to him, were of the Sadducees, who believed
no resurrection, no immortality of the soul, and there-
fore, no judgment after death, and alleged, that the
Scriptures of the old covenant contained no sufficient
proof of these truths. As long as their gainsaying
would last, so long must their suffering and their
punishment continue.
Such is the nature of the fearfully solemn revelations
which are here made known to us by the lips of Wisdom
Itself. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, and whoever is not brought to His fear by
such words of God, will never learn to be wise unto
salvation. Let us now briefly apply them to ourselves
and to our condition.
I. Serious sins against charity, such as the rich man
allowed himself to be guilty towards Lazarus, affect


our eternity, and react as an intolerable burden on those
who are devoid of charity. “ Whoso hath this world’s-
goods, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up
his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the
love of God in him ? ” If even the love of God has at
any time dwelt in such a heart as this, it must have
departed from him, if he in such a manner omits to
love his neighbour. In these last days, the misery of
the labourers, and the numbers of the poor, who have
nothing, increase continually, while the rich, even with-
out labour and effort, multiply their riches. However
this very sad state of things may be accounted for,
still the melancholy fact is a standing reproach to
Christendom, and a grievous, common sin must lie at
our door. This sin we all have to bear, and our hands
are not pure. We cannot wholly change this state of
things, but when God places a Lazarus at our individual
doors, we ought not to withhold our aid, but show
mercy and liberality. And when we frequent the
church, we ought, in our prayers and supplications, to
bring before God, with heartfelt sympathy, the cry of
the poor and needy, the widow and the fatherless, the
sick and dying, and seek to hasten the day, when
the true Helper of the miserable, the Saviour of the
oppressed, shall appear, and relieve the sighing of the
creation.
11. Not only with earthly goods, but with spiritual
also, a man may revel, and enjoy them in a selfish


manner. This may be done, when anyone makes an
unfaithful use of them, so that the grace received
becomes ineffectual in producing a holy life. To this
applies what the Lord says by Ezekiel, concerning His
flock (xxxiv. 18), “ Seemeth it a small thing unto
you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must
tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures ?
and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul
the residue with your feet? Therefore behold, I will
judge between the fat cattle and between the lean
cattle.” Many Christians suffering from spiritual
poverty would be happy and thankful if they could only
enjoy a little of the truth, and the consolation with
which some are so richly provided. They would come
and refresh themselves therewith, if we, who have
greater privileges, would inspire them with confidence
by the good fruits of our holy conversation. But if we
do the contrary, then we foul with our feet the opened
fountains of salvation, and make them unfit for the
solace of the thirsty, A further warning is necessary
for us, who are in the full enjoyment of the word of God
and the holy sacraments, if we are indifferent to the
welfare of those who, in spirtual hunger and sickness,
lie without before the door of the house of God.
111. We live in a time in which the Sadduoean
spirit prevails, and men will believe nothing but what
they can see, and handle with their hands, or discuss
with their intellect; some, indeed, will believe in no


thing but what they can eat and drink. They reject all
divine truths, because they have no palpable evidence
of them. Hence many pretend that they would believe,
if they saw with their own eyes, some miracle wrought
by God, or if anyone came to them who had risen from
the dead. But no irresistable proof and no miracle
will be given them. “ They have Moses and the
prophets,” they have yet more, they have Christ and
His apostles, who speak to them by the Scriptures of
the New Testament, and by the Christian Church, “let
them hear them.” “If they believe not these, neither
will they believe though one rose from the dead.”
Every baptised Christian has in his spirit a faculty by
which he may recognise the voice of truth, and perceive
the call of God to his heart. Whoever rejects the
testimony of the Spirit in the word of truth, will not
be led to believe by a miracle, nor by scientific proof,
and will at last have as little excuse as the five brethren
of the rich man.
IY. But, in conclusion, let us hear and hold fast with
a joyful and thankful spirit the unerring declarations
of Jesus, concerning the lot of those who have fallen
asleep in faith. Death has torn from us children of
God who are near and dear to us—they have been
carried by angels to Abraham’s bosom. And since
Jesus Christ, in the interval between His death and
resurrection visited that invisible realm, and the light
of His glory has shone into it, greater light and refresh


ment have been vouchsafed. Now are assembled there
not only the “ spirits of just men made perfect,” of the
old covenant, but also all the holy ones out of all the
generations of the Christian Church, who with joyful
expectation look for their approaching perfection, when
they shall be manifested with Christ in glory.


THE
PARABLE OF THE PHARISEE AND
THE PUBLICAN.
S. LUKE xviii. 9-14.
In this discourse, which seems equally to rest on a real
occurrence, the Lord explains to us what our worship
ought to be, in order to please Him. Two men went
up to the mountain of the Lord’s house, to pray in the
vestibule of the temple. They both addressed their
prayers to the true God; they both took part in the
worship which He had ordained; they appeared at the
place which He had chosen; but the prayers of the two
men did not find the same acceptance with God; for the
one, the publican, returned to his house justified in
preference to the other, the Pharisee. It is not said
that thej Pharisee was rejected, but rather, that the
publican received much grace through his prayer, while
the Pharisee, with his prayer, received little. What
was the reason? There was really much good in this
Pharisee. It is difficult to pass through this world
without fault; and it is not to be undervalued, if a man
can stand before his fellow-men and say, I am no
robber, nor unjust, nor adulterer, etc. The fasts of
the Jewish people of Monday and Thursday were not
indeed commanded by God, yet it was praiseworthy in


the Pharisee to adhere to the custom appointed by his
forefathers. It was right that, in compliance with the
command of God, he should olfer to the Lord the tenth
of all that he possessed. It was right that he should
join in the worship of God; and should he not give
thanks to God for the good that was in him ? Assured-
ly so, and yet for all this he found little favour with
God. His performances, his prayer and thanksgiving,
all lost its value in God’s sight on account of two faults
that were in his heart, and which were betrayed in his
words. The Lord spoke this parable to certain persons,
who trusted in themselves that they were righteous and
despised others. These are the two faults.
When a man is well dressed, when a man rides on
horseback, or has more money in his pocket than usual,
there immediately arises within him a vain opinion of
himself. He is pleased with himself, and is inwardly
pulfed up with pride by the possession of these worthless
things. This is a temptation to which the human heart
is at all times exposed, hut it is especially powerful and
dangerous, when we observe in ourselves moral and
religious advantages over others. We are then inclined
to be contented with ourselves, to contemplate ourselves
spiritually as in a mirror, to find satisfaction in the esteem
and praise of men, of which at least in part, we ascribe
the honour to ourselves. This was the fault of the
Pharisee, by which he injured himself in God’s sight.
In words, it is true, he gave to God the honour of the


advantages he possessed; but in his heart he claimed
to himself a part of the honour, as he betrayed by
the self-conceited enumeration of his performances and
his contemptuous reflection on the publican. For his
contempt of others, was the second fault by which his
worship was defiled. He was a Pharisee; that is, he
belonged to the strictest sect of the Jews ; he held him-
self separate from all that could defile him, especially
from such Israelites as were under the sentence of the
church, like the publicans. His circumspection against
all impurity was right; but in the fulfilment of this duty
he omitted charity and mercy. Thus the royal com-
mandment, “ Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,”
was neglected, and coldness and contempt of his brethren
were found in his heart instead of kindly sympathy.
Thus, while the Pharisee could lay claim to so much
good, for which we must esteem and almost envy him,
all was nevertheless worthless before God, and profited
him nothing, because he was wanting in the cardinal
virtues of humility and charity.
We know the commandments of God, and great
grace is given us in true Christian worship. The Lord
calls us to His altar, and permits us to take part in the
solemn acts of adoration, which are ordered according to
His mind. We do well to appear in the holy place, and
unite in the prayers and songs, by which man gives
honour to God. But does it necessarily follow that the
worship of every one of us is agreeable to God ? For


the very reason that the sacrifice of the Christian
Church is in itself pure and holy, ought it to he
offered with a pure heart and holy hands. And here
we may learn what can make void and worthless the
most perfect order of Divine service, even trust in one’s
self, and contempt of others. Whoever in respect of his
virtues and performances allows that dangerous self-con-
ceit to arise within himself, has either never deeply
examined himself, or has forgotten what fashion of man
he is by nature and left to himself. Otherwise he would
know that in him there is no good thing, All the germs
of evil are found in thee, that is, in thy flesh, in thy
natural man. If the evil that is in thee has not come to
light, and thou standest unreproved before men, thou
hast only to ascribe it to the preservation and mercy of
God. These have been thy guides. But if thou seest a
fellow-man deeply fallen, then think: if I had received
as little training, and had been exposed to as much
temptation as he, my condition had been as had or even
worse than his. “ What hast thou that thou hast not
received; if therefore thou hast received, why dost thou
boast, as though thou hadst not received ? ” It is indeed
very dangerous to exalt our performances and successes
before God or man, and to make mention of what we
may have suffered and sacrificed. Such boasting does
not sound well before God, and we deceive our own
souls thereby.
If we have received grace and light, we shall he all


the more humble on that account. When the Spirit of
God shines into a man’s soul, he becomes nothing in his
own eyes. Such thoughts and experiences as make a
man proud, are not of God, The work and the Spirit
of God will be discerned in man, when he becomes
lowly and humble. If we have received much in the
house of God, we have so much the more reason to how
ourselves to the dust, because, notwithstanding all we
have received, we have hitherto accomplished so little.
Sacrifice and worship without the love of one’s neigh-
bour, and without a compassionate heart, are not acceptable
to God. If we look around us and perceive Christians who
resemble the publicans in the gospel, this spectacle ought
not to raise us in our own estimation, but rather to excite
our sympathy for them. We should include the sorrows
of sinners in our prayers, and make intercession for
them. We must not think of our neighbour who lies in
unbelief or sin, that nothing can be done with him, that
his conversion cannot be hoped for; but our heart must
he filled with the love that hopes all things, and when
we appear before God, we must bring this love with us.
If our worship be such as will please God, our dis-
position must resemble that of the publican in the gospel.
He came to the holy hill with the heartfelt desire to be
delivered from the burden which lay on his conscience,
and to be cleansed in heart and life from the stains which
defiled him. He entered the court of the temple, and at
the sight of the altar of burnt-offering, and of the holy


house where the presence of God dwelt, he was over-
powered with the sense of his unworthiness. He did not
venture to approach nearer; he stood still at the entrance;
he smote upon his breast and prayed with sighs,
uttering only the few words, “ O God, be merciful to
me, a sinner! ” God looked upon him graciously; the
Lord Jesus Christ, who knows the Father, and knows
what is in the Father’s heart, says to us, “ This man
went down to his house justified.” His prayer pierced
the clouds, his sighs reached the heavenly throne of God.
It was there that forgiveness was awarded to him; from
thence the peace of God descended into his heart, and
with this peace, and armed with strength for a holy life,
he returned from the worship of God to his own house.
With such humility ought we also to appear before God,
and, like the publican, smite upon our breast. We need
not feign any sins, nor exaggerate charges against our-
selves. When the light of the Lord shines upon us, and
when we look upon His divine glory, we shall find cause
enough to humble ourselves as deeply as did this publican.
And besides, we do not appear before God for ourselves
alone. We are bound up with all other Christians by a
holy bond, of which God Himself is the Author, and
which is still valid with Him. This oneness is founded
on holy baptism ; this oneness stands fast, and God sees
us as Christians, not separated from one another, but as
the one Church, which is the body of Christ. The
Israelites also, as a people, formed one unity. It was


this that the Pharisee denied, when he looked down with
contempt on the publican. He forgot that this man was
also a son of Abraham, and thought not that he might
and ought to be raised up again. Let us not fall into
the same error; and when we come before God, let us
not deny the unity of the family of God, and the bond
which includes all his children, even the rebellious also.
When we appear before God, we are in the midst of
Christendom, and we are surrounded by the whole
Christian Church. We are supported by the faith and
the prayers of all Christians, but we are also laden with
the common guilt of all Christians. We should not, like
the Pharisee, shake off from us the sins and offences we
see and hear, but we must take them to heart, and in-
clude them in our own confession of sin. In the suppli-
cations of the Litany, we make common cause with the
greatest sinners. With them, in the midst of them, and
in their behalf, wc cast ourselves in the dust, and invoke
for them and for ourselves the mercy of God, with the
words, “Lord, have mercy upon us.” This is the
humility of the publican, to which God has respect, and
upon which follows the answer of peace from heaven.
Who can doubt that the Lord intended this parable
also to contain a deep prophetical truth ? We see in the
Pharisee the Jewish people, who, with their praiseworthy
zeal for the law and the temple of the Lord, were
blinded by the illusion that no Mediator, no Lamb of
God to bear the sin of the world was necessary. There


fore they scorned Him, in whom alone we can he
justified. As the Pharisee looked on the publican, so the
Jews regarded the heathen with contempt, instead of the
charity which bears and hopes all things. In the
publican we recognise the spiritual misery and moral
degradation of the heathen world, who heard the voice
of God in the publication of the gospel, and awoke to
the deepest sense of their unworthiness. The heathen
rose up to seek the Lord, and they found Him in His
temple, the Christian Church. They were justified, and
they received far more abundant grace than ever had
been imparted to the Jews.
But must not the parable have also a prophetical
application to the Church, and especially to the Church
of the last days ? Alas ! a Pharisaic mind has also come
upon Christians. Although true humility is the character
of many individuals, yet religious parties consider it
right to boast against each other, so that each one holds
up the advantages of his own party to the disparagement
of the others. The service of God offered in this spirit,
however it may otherwise contain much that is true and
grand, must nevertheless fail to he truly pleasing to God.
But when such people are found in Christendom, or
rather, when the Lord prepares such people for Himself,
as will abide in charity towards all Christians, who take
to heart the sin of all, and humble themselves on account
of all, as well as of themselves, it may then he hoped
that the Lord will graciously accept their worship as He
K


did the prayer of the publican, that He will justify, and,
according to His tender mercy, lift up such as thus
humble themselves before Him.
Let us yet make two special applications of this parable
to ourselves: —
I. Let us be penitent in our prayer, but also joyful.
God accepts our humiliation. The publican in the
gospel was justified, although at that time, the reconcilia-
tion had not been accomplished. Ought we not to trust
in our justification, now that the reconciliation has been
made, and the day of salvation has dawned? We have
a sure place in Heaven, for our Redeemer lives there at
the right hand of God, He stands at our head, He Him-
self leads our worship and represents us before the
Father. It is not right to think that all the prayers of
the children of God are the mere repetition of the
publican’s prayer, that the whole of Christian worship
should be a Kyrie Eleison, nothing but a petition for
forgiveness. Ho, let us not perpetually stand, with the
publican, in the outer court of the temple. As we have
received grace from Heaven, so let us enter the Holiest
with our High-Priest, Jesus Christ, let us take part in
the heavenly sacrifice He there offers, and unite our
voices to the angels’ songs of praise.
11. This publican was excluded from the common-
wealth of Israel. These had rejected him, but God
received him. The rulers of the temple and the
guardians of the law had excommunicated him, but God


justified him. The time was come when they should
have loosed him from that bond ; they delayed to do so,
but the grace of God anticipated them, and hastened to
the help of the penitent. So when God, the Almighty
Ruler, sees that a censure of the Church has been
originally undeserved and hastily pronounced, then this
sentence is unacknowledged in Heaven. Where, as in
the case of the publican, the censure has been well
deserved, but meanwhile, the grace of God has wrought
in the heart of the sinner, so that the cause of the ex-
communication has been overcome and removed, and an
acceptable state restored, then the gracious and righteous
God does not wait till His servants and stewards annul
the censure of the Church. He bestows on the publican,
righteousness, peace, and joy, Avhile the Israelites still
held him to be unworthy of admission to their worship.
To those who fear God, it is a hard trial to be excluded
or removed from the Church through the misunder-
standing or want of care of the legitimate rulers of the
Church. If it befel us, that for the truth’s sake, we
should be esteemed as the publicans, we might well be
afflicted, but we ought not on that account to tremble or
hesitate. Let us, in such a case, persevere in humility
and love, and seek unto God, who will accept us as the
publican, and refresh our souls with the riches of His
consolations.


THE
PARABLE OF THE UNMERCIFUL SERVANT.
S. MATT, xviii. 23-35.
The Lord foresaw that offences would arise among
His disciples, one against another. He desires that
they who are His, should abide in peace and harmony
together; and it grieves Him deeply when differences,
grievances, and exasperation happen amongst them.
On this account He has pointed out a way, by which
these evils may he prevented, and a difference composed
that has already arisen. He says, “If thy brother shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses every word may be established.
And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him
he unto thee as a heathen man and a publican ” (S. Matt,
xviii. 15). But we, for the most part, unhappily act
quite otherwise. If a grievance happens to us, we
usually speak of it to others; we complain of our
brother, until we put ourselves more and more out of
temper. To him we at first say nothing, when at last, in


a fit of exasperation, we break forth in reproaches that
Avound his self-esteem: he becomes aware how Ave have
spoken of him to others, is roused by a sense of
provocation, and an irreconcilable enmity ensues. The
teaching of Jesus directs us to employ a method the
exact contrary to this. We go rather to any one else to
find fault with our brother, but the Lord says, “Go to
thy brother first, and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone; and then, if thou prevailest not,
communicate it to others; but even then, not to speak
evil of thy brother, but to obtain their help to gain thy
brother.”
This, then, is the fundamental law which Christ has
laid down to His Church for the preservation of peace.
We are directed to approach our neighbour with
openness and honesty, with manly courage and
confidence. We ought to trust him, that a good word
AA'ill find a good acceptance with him. We ought not
to wait, until he perceives his fault of himself. The
love of peace, sorrow for discord among brethren, ought
to move us towards the offending brother, and although
aa t 6 feel ourselves guiltless, to take the first step towards
reconciliation.
The devil seeks to obtain entrance into a community
by means of divisions : whoever is the occasion of
difference and bitterness, opens thereby the door to the
destroyer. Hence we must immediately resist his first
approaches, as the Apostle says, “ Neither give place to


the devil,” i.e., the slanderer. Evil thoughts and mistrust
of the brethren arise from the whisperings of Satan.
Against such we must close both the outer and the inner
ear, and resist the accuser of the brethren. For
it is he who, by the lips of men, and by the evil
suggestions of our own hearts, seeks to excite us
against the brethren. Therefore we ought to resist
him; and the way in which we are to effect this,
the Lord teaches us by His word. When this is
obeyed, the enemy cannot succeed in disturbing the
Church of God by discord. When such a generous
and placable spirit reigns in the Church, it is like a
city defended by walls and bulwarks, effectually pro-
tected from the assaults of the adversary.
If we will obey this word of the Lord, we must be
ready to forgive from the heart, so soon as our
neighbour perceives his fault. S. Peter well understood
this doctrine, and it appears to have given him some
uneasiness. He seems to have felt that it enjoined an
excessive readiness to forgive, beyond what his heart
admonished him he had as yet attained to. From this
disquietude arose the question (verse 21), “Lord, how
oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him ?
till seven times ? ” Are seven times enough ? Such is
the heart of man, even when so much good is found in
him, as was there in S. Peter. Men are not disposed to
show too much love and forbearance towards their
brethren. They think there must be a limit to these


feelings; that is, the human heart is totally ignorant
of perfect love. But it dwells in the heart of our
Saviour. We see in this the difference between S. Peter
and Christ. S. Peter thinks that to forgive seven times
is enough; Christ says no, that man must forgive until
seventy times seven. He not only says so, but He does
it. He commands an unwearied and inexhaustible love,
and He Himself fulfils this command.
For what was His behaviour towards His disciples,
who were so heavy a burden to Him? a continual
endurance, patience, loving and forgiving. And what
is His procedure towards us, now that He from heaven
labours to save and to sanctify us ? Until now He has
forgiven us our faults from day to day ; as often as we
have sought Him, He has made His face to shine upon
us, constantly renewing His blessing, not remembering
our innumerable past transgressions. Truly He has
forgiven us seventy times seven times. “It is of the
Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed, because His
compassions fail not. They are new every morning:
great is thy faithfulness.” (Lament, iii. 22, 23).
It can scarcely happen amongst men, that one has
the occasion to forgive another until seventy times seven
times; this can apply only to parents, whose children
trouble them with ever-recurring infirmities and faults.
The heart of a father or mother may forgive four hun-
dred and ninety times. Such should be the temper of
husband and wife towards each other; such should be


the readiness to forgive of those who are brethren by
nature ; and such should be the behaviour of the mem-
bers of the Christian community towards each other.
Such can be the Divine love, which through the Holy
Ghost is shed abroad in our hearts. It is the fire of the
Lord, which many waters cannot quench.
The purpose of the Lord, in the following parable, is
to show to us the love of God in its true light, so as to
enlighten us on our duty to be in a state of reconcilia-
tion with our neighbour. From this we learn, first, our
indebtedness to God is immeasurable. Secondly, God
forgives even great sins. Thirdly, God desires of us, in
return, that we forgive our neighbour. Fourthly, He
can, if we do not forgive, withdraw the pardon He has
promised.
I. The servants in this Gospel are the officials to
whose management the king has entrusted his land and
its revenues. Hence it happened that one of them, in
rendering his account, had to pay 10,000 talents, which,
according to the value of the Hebrew talent, would
amount to £8,421,875. Such was the value of the
property entrusted to this man; and he appears to have
squandered the whole, or the greater part of it. By this
it is represented to us, how deeply we are indebted to
God, the great King. If He were to enter into judg-
ment with us, we could not answer Him one of a
thousand. He is the highest Majesty and Love : we
owe Him perfect homage, worship, and love. Our


bodily and spiritual powers; all the opportunities of
■doing good; every lesson of His truth; every ex-
perience of His grace : these are goods He has entrusted
to us, and which we ought to employ according to His
mind.
Even the poorest of us has received much from the
hand of the Lord, if we only think of our baptismal
grace and Christian education —of the season of grace
we have enjoyed, of the manifold blessings received
in the Church, and our preservation from so much evil.
If even we have committed no gross sins in the sight of
men, yet if God were to take account of us, we must
stand before Him deeply indebted: so defective have
been our thanks for all we have received, so small our
faithfulness, so frequent and obstinate our resistance of
His good Spirit. Nor can we pay Him anything: we
cannot make up for our neglect, or undo our fault; for
even if we now bestirred ourselves really from hence-
forth to give our whole heart to the Lord, and serve
Him with all our strength, we could do no more than
we ought always to have done under all circumstances.
In breaking off our sins by righteousness, we make no
compensation for sins committed. Our guilt is in fact
so great, that God the Lord would be justified, if He
did as the king in the Gospel, who resolved to depose
the servant from his office, to deprive him of all that
had been committed to him, and sell him into slavery.
We should deserve to be banished from the presence of


God, and be condemned as having forfeited the glorious
freedom of the children of God, which we have hitherto
enjoyed.
11. God forgives even great sins. At the supplication
of the prostrate servant, the king had compassion on
him, and not only restored to him his forfeited liberty,
but generously remitted the whole claim We also
have been brought to the consciousness of our obligation.
Enlightened by the word of truth, we have confessed,
and sought of the Lord forgiveness for our personal
offence and our part in the common offence of His
people. In the prospect of His glory and of His instant
appearing, we have reason to cry out, with Isaiah,
“Woe is me, for I am a man of unclean lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips.” We
confess in our services that the sins of many generations
lie heavy upon us, who have grievous individual sins to
lament. And behold, God meets us in His mercy. He
absolves us from all sin, and confirms us in baptismal
grace and in the adoption of children. He renews to us
freely the gift of His Spirit and all the noblest gifts with
which the Christian Church was endowed at the begin-
ning, and which have been slighted, neglected, and
forfeited by her. How could the magnanimity of the
Lord appear in clearer light than in the re-establishment,
of His people from their fall and ruin, and in the steps
He now takes to prepare us for the imperishable, fault-
less, and unfading inheritance in heaven !


There exists a false interpretation of this parable, as
though God forgave men without a Mediator and
Redeemer, and as though we needed no sacrifice and
no satisfaction of Jesus Christ. But the king in the
Gospel, according to the tenour of the concluding words
of the parable, is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
—the Father, whom no man knows but the Son, and
he to whom the Son will reveal Him ; the Father, who
is in the Son, and the Son in Him; the Father, whose
loving-kindness and condescension have appeared in the
Son, and who, through the Son, will judge the world.
We owe the forgiveness and the manifold grace, of
which we are partakers, to the atoning sufferings of
Jesus Christ, to His ascension to the Father, and His
intercession. The great remission of sins, which is now
offered to Christendom, flows from the merits of Jesus
Christ, and is the most glorious witness to the power of
His blood.
111. What shall I render to the Lord for all His
benefits towards me? The Lord gives us the answer
in the parable: the generous king expected that the
servant whom he had forgiven would show a like for-
giveness to his fellow-servant, and forgive him also his
debt, as he could never repay the king the benefit he
had received from him.
His fellow-servant owed him a hundred pence, or
denarii, about £34 of our money; a trifle compared
with the debt which the king had forgiven him, and


which amounted to above a hundred thousand times as
much. It may he that a brother has grievously sinned
against us; yet his fault, compared with the immeasur-
able reckoning with which God might charge us, is only
a single small item. If we feel ourselves deeply injured
by our neighbour, our judgment must be softened, when
we look on ourselves and on the Almighty, and think of
His goodness towards us. If anyone remains unmoved,
while his neighbour begs forgiveness, it is a sign that
his own repentance was not sincere. Perhaps he has
besought God’s forgiveness from abject fear, without a
true sense of his own ruin: without inward humiliation
and shame; without a deep and penetrating feeling of
his wrong-doing ; for this feeling, with a thankful sense
of the grace bestowed on him, would certainly have
softened his hard heart, and disposed it to gentleness
and reconciliation. The penitence of a man, who im-
mediately after shows himself implacable, is mere
hypocrisy, as it is written in the 78th Psalm, verse 36,
of the Israelites in the wilderness, when they were in
fear : “ They flattered Him with their mouth, and lied
unto Him with their tongues.”
After that God has laid us under so great obligation
by His forgiveness, He refers us to our neighbours and
says: Are you willing to show Me thankfulness, then
show esteem to your brethren, and do to them as I have
done to you. 8. Paul had incurred great guilt by per-
secuting the Church: the Lord forgave him, and then


S. Paul, having received this grace, considered himself
“a debtor to all men —to the Greeks and Barbarians, to
the wise and to the unwise.” He held himself hound
to show to them somewhat of the love which the Lord
had shown to him. If the son of one of my benefactors
were to meet me in the world, and needed my help, I
should rejoice at the opportunity of repaying to him
somewhat of my debt. If a brother has sinned against
us, it is our duty, not only to reconcile him to us, but
also to help him to obtain deliverance from the sin
which he has thereby committed against God, so that he
may regain his peace with God. “If he hears thee,
thou hast gained thy brother; ” thou hast gained him
not only for thyself, but for God.
IV. The servant behaved towards his fellow-servant
according to the strictness of justice, in casting him into
the debtor’s prison. The fellow-servants were very
sorry, and communicated it to the king: they desired
not so much punishment for the merciless man, as help
for the prisoner. The king, full of displeasure towards
the merciless servant, retracted the pardon he had
already pronounced, and now suffered the severity of
justice to take its course. If God has already shown
us much favour, He is nevertheless not bound, if we
conduct ourselves like the wicked servant, to continue
to us His grace. The state of grace and unmercifulness
towards the brethren are incompatible. If we speak
harshly against our neighbour, if we allow ourselves in


wicked words and uncharitable feelings towards' him,
the loye of God must be withdrawn from us. If we
begin to judge harshly the faults of the brethren, God
will begin to treat us harshly; and if we pray, He will
not hear. “He that saith he is in the light, and hateth
his brother, is in darkness even until now.” He con-
siders himself religious and upright, but “darkness has
blinded his eyes” (1 John ii. 9-11). Yet further:
“ Whoso hath this world’s goods, and seeth his brother
have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion
from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? ” If
he has already experienced the love of God, that love
must depart from such an one, how much from him who
refuses forgiveness to the entreaty of a fellow-servant.
There is, therefore, a time of grace and patience, and
it still endures for us; but there will come also a time
wdren, if man has not profited thankfully by that grace,
severe justice will be executed; and that such a time
may not come upon us, we must now be rooted and
grounded in love, show mercy and forgive from the
heart; for “he who dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God,
and God in him.”


THE
PARABLE OF THE LABOURERS IN THE
VINEYARD.
S. MATT. xx. 1-16.
There is no kind of field-work so laborious as that of
the vine-dresser; but also no fruit so valuable as that
of the vine. For this reason the Lord has more than
once compared the work of His servants with the
labour of the vineyard. They must prepare themselves
for indescribable labour and care, but in the end the
success and reward will be most precious. The special
matter that the Lord intends to declare by this parable
is this, that the work must be undertaken and carried
through in the spirit of unfeigned love to Him. In the
former parable (S. Matt, xviii.) love to one’s neighbour,
in this, love to the Lord, is the main object.
We perceive this from the foregoing context. The
Lori had seen with grief the rich young man go away.
He loved this young man; he had laboured with success
to preserve to keep himself from gross sins; he had
preserved his purity from his childhood, and this is a
precious gift of the grace of God. The Lord would
have willingly numbered him among His disciples ; for
He desired servants who would devote and sacrifice
themselves for Him and for the children of God. He


was already on the way to Jerusalem, where He was-
te suffer many things, and He foresaw that His flock
would have to follow Him in the same path, and
especially would be obliged to suffer the spoiling of
their earthly goods. He now wished to see whether
the rich young man could endure such a trial, or
whether he would desert Him in the hour of temptation.
He considered it not right to give too easy a reception
to a new disciple, who might afterwards fall away, and
deny the truth for the sake of worldly things. He also
considered it better, that the wealth of the young man
should now be employed for the relief of the poor, than
that later it should be confiscated by the enemies of the
truth. For these reasons He said to him plainly,
“ Sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thon
shalt have treasure in heaven ” —that is, thou shalt be
richly compensated by spiritual growth and imperishable
inner good things—and He added, “ Come, and follow
Me,” I will keep thee with Me, and preserve thee for
ever in My fellowship. Then it was evident, that the
young man had a greater attachment to his houses and
lands, and to his position in the world, than to the Lord
Jesus Christ. To be with Jesus, and to serve Him, he
did not esteem above all things: love for that which
perishes was stronger in him than love to the Lord.
The one strove with the other; the young man went
away sorrowful; he would have willingly remained
with Jesus, only this demand was too hard for him.


He had not the true heroic bravery of love to God and
to Jesus. The Lord saw in this example, and signified
it to His disciples, how hard it is for the rich to
disengage themselves from the often deeply-concealed
love of mammon; indeed, “ with men it is impossible,
only with God is it possible ” —only when man sets
about it with God, can it succeed. The Lord cannot
release His believers from the necessity of this trial.
It belongs to Him to determine if it be necessary, and
when they should outwardly give up the possession of
temporal riches and honours; but He desires of all His
believers, and at all times, that they should be inwardly
free, and that they should be always prepared, at His
bidding, to forsake all things outwardly also. Indeed,
all that is perishable, what the world counts gain, we
must esteem as loss, when it is the question to win
Christ, to be found in Him and to remain for ever united
to Him (Phil. iii. 7-11). As the Apostle says, “ They
that have wives be as though they had none;
and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they
that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that
buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use
this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this
world passeth away.” (1 Cor. vii. 29-81). The time is
short: this concerns us especially in these last days.
S. Peter was reminded, by the occurrence with the
rich youth, of the day when he himself, with his brother
Andrew and his friends James and John, had forsaken
u


all at the call of Jesus, though indeed not such wealth
as the rich young man possessed. He asked, “What
shall we hare therefore ? ” To this question the Lord
gave a double answer. He replied at first by a noble
and genuine royal promise for the Apostles and for all
who should sacrifice anything for His name’s sake, and
then with a warning, “ Many, who are first, shall be
last, and the last shall be first.” This warning He now
explains by the parable of the householder, who went
out to hire labourers into his vineyard.
With the labourers whom he hired early in the
morning, he agreed for a penny a day. These made a
contract with him ; like S. Peter, they therefore asked,
before they commenced their work, What shall we have
for it ? On the other hand, those who were hired at the
third, sixth, ninth, and eleventh hours, made no contract
with the householder; it was sufficient for them, that he
said, “Whatsoever is right I will give you;” they
did not ask, “ What shall we have therefore?” They
were glad that they also received work, and as regards
the reward, they placed full confidence in the house-
holder. These labourers pleased the householder better
than the first. Thus, when we have opportunity to
serve the Lord, we ought to do the same; we ought to
regard it as joy and honour to be allowed to do anything
for Him; not to hesitate, not to bargain and traffic, not
to ask for the reward, but to go to the work with child-
like confidence in Him.


The Lord gives us a still further lesson. He has
power to do what He will with His own; He has
authority in Heaven and earth to rule over all things
temporal and eternal, and it is His delight richly to
reward every one in whom He finds a childlike devotion.
When the eventide came, the labourers of the last hour
received the full reward even as those of the first.
S. Peter was already tried, when he asked, “What
shall we have therefore ? ” The Lord gives him now to
understand, there will yet be another trial for you, my
first-called disciples, when hereafter you will see how
others will enter into the work, and beyond expectation
will be blessed and rewarded by Me. Then beware of
envy; he not jealous, if I show Myself gracious and
liberal. Eather rejoice, if lam bountiful to others.
Then it will appear if you have laboured in sincere love
to Me. If this be not the case, if you fail in sincere
love to Me and to the brethren, if there he found in you
a slavish feeling towards Me, and jealousy of your
fellow-servants, it will be so much the worse for you.
It will profit you little, to have been of the first called.
“ Many who are first, shall be last.”
This is the moral signification of this parable. We
are warned, lest when the work advances and comes to
an end, any murmuring he indulged by us. Yet it is
not asserted that any such murmuring of the first
labourers will necessarily come to pass. Nevertheless
this parable has a prophetic application. The morning


is the beginning, the evening is the end of the Christian
dispensation. Then, when the work is done, and the
Lord comes, all His faithful servants will at the same
time receive their crowns from His hand (2 Tim. iv. 6).
Those who have gone before us still wait for their
reward, for they will not without us he made perfect
(Heb. xi. 40). Then will they who sowed at the
beginning of the great day’s work, and those who have
reaped at the end, rejoice together (S. John iv. 26).
Further, the Lord, the great Prophet, gives His first
disciples to understand, that after them other servants
will yet assuredly receive a mission from heaven. This
was accomplished, by anticipation, when the holy
Apostle Paul was sent forth. Without consulting the
first labourers, without informing the holy Apostle
Peter, Jesus Christ called His servant S. Paul, fitted
him for his work, and sent him as Apostle to the
Gentiles. When S. Peter learned this, it was not
altogether easy for him to understand it, and it was
a great mark of humility and love, that SS. Peter,
James and John gave the right hand to SS. Paul and
Barnabas in token of fellowship. They thought as
humble followers of Jesus : Now, these are the labourers
of a later hour, of whom the Lord in a parable spoke to
us; and they rejoiced without envy at the glorious success
with which the Lord had blessed these His servants.
But also still later, we learn this, that such a mission
will take place; and especially that in the last, the


eleventh hour, labourers will be appointed to the work,
who, in every respect, will be equal to those of the first
hour. The Lord, before the great eventide arrives, in
■order to accomplish the work which yet remains to be
done, gives servants like unto those whom He sent at
the beginning of the long, laborious day.
We gather from this parable, each one for himself,
that we must walk humbly with childlike feeling in the
service of Jesus Christ, and must persevere in this
childlike feeling while the work lasts, even though we
have to bear the burden and heat of the day. We have
joyfully taken our place and enjoyed happy days in the
beginning of our following of Jesus. In this joy let us
continue. Let us speak little of the reward, and never
of the merit. Let us never boast of what we have done,
and rather avoid mentioning the sufferings we have
endured. It would sound ill before the Lord and injure
us. Let our unceasing, surpassing feeling be this: it is
the highest honour and joy to be permitted to serve
Jesus Christ. “I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of my Clod, than to dwell in the tents of ungod-
liness.” I am not worthy to be called Thy child, Thy
servant; but Thou, in Thine unutterable love hast made
me this; therefore, I will, with delight and love, cleave
to Thee and labour for Thee; the future will I wholly
commit to Thee; only let me be wholly Thine, and
never, in eternity, be separated from Thee.


THE
PARABLE OF THE WICKED HUSBANDMEN-
S. Matt. xxi. 33. S. Mark xii. 1-12. S. Luke xx. 9-18.
The enmity of the rulers of Israel against the Lord had
already risen to its height. He had solemnly entered
Jerusalem, and stood in the forecourts of the temple
in the presence of them, who, a few days later, passed
sentence of death upon Him. There He gave them yet
one more withering warning through this parable, in
which He declared to them their sin and the sin of their
fathers, and the great danger which impended over them.
The vineyard, which God, the Lord, had planted, is, as
Isaiah (v. 7.) had already announced, the chosen people
Israel. The hedge, with which He has fenced off His
vineyard, and protected it against the inroads of robbers
and wild beasts, is the law. This He has erected as a
demarcation between Israel and the surrounding nations,
and appointed to be a protection to His people against
the irruption of heathenish vices and idolatries. The
wine-press in the midst of the vineyard means the
temple and the service of God, that divine institution by
which Israel should glorify God in the worthy offering
of their sacrifices and prayers, as the fruit of the


vineyard. The tower for the watchman who should
guard and defend the vineyard, means the kingdom of
David which God had established as a protection of His
people and their land against the enemy. The husband-
men to whose industry and care He has entrusted the
vineyard, are the rulers of the people —the kings, the
priests, the elders, and scribes. The high council of the
seventy-two —the Sanhedrim, as it then consisted —was
formed of men of the family of the high priest, princes
of the royal race, and of men learned in the law; so that
each of these three classes consisted of twenty-four men,
and had their president: these three presidents —the
high priest, the prince, and the teacher or doctor —
presided in the Sanhedrim. These were the husbandmen
in the time of Jesus.
“ The householder went into a far country; ” that is,
God the Lord, after He had ordered all things wisely,
withdrew Himself for a certain time, and waited to see
how the fruits of the vineyard would thrive, and the
husbandmen would fulfil their duty. When the time
at length came, when He might expect and desire ripe
fruits, He sent servants, distinct from those who were
the established keepers of the vineyard, furnished with
an extraordinary commission, that is, Prophets. But
the first band of His prophets, Elijah, Elisha, and their
contemporaries, were badly received. Afterwards there
appeared, in the times of the later kings, a second band
of the servants of God, the prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah,


and others, whose books are preserved in Holy Scripture.
But these were not better treated than the former, as
S. Stephen exclaimed (Acts vii. 52); “ Which of the
prophets have not your fathers persecuted and slain ? ”
The last of these servants was S. John the Baptist.
The Lord of the vineyard had not received the fruit
which he claimed and to which he had a right. He
could have summoned the husbandmen before a tribunal,
but he resolved, in the first instance, to try the effect of
confidence and love. He sent to them at last his only
beloved son, saying, “ They will reverence my son.”
But at the sight of him the wickedness of the hus-
bandmen rose to the highest pitch; they said to each
other, “ This is the heir: come let us kill him, and the
inheritance will be ours.” When Jesus appeared and
came to His own, His own received Him not. The
rulers of the people out of envy delivered Him up to the
heathen. They wished to be the masters themselves,
they had forgotten that they were but stewards. Their
evil conscience made them fear that their time was
coming to an end; they saw with vexation, that all the
people took Jesus for a prophet; they felt that their
influence was vanishing away. Instead of doing homage
to the Man of God themselves, and of committing them-
selves to God, they looked only on the Eomans, and
feared lest they would come and take from them their
land and people. They formed the terrible resolution,
by a sudden stroke of policy, to put the Son of God out


of the world, and intended thereby to confirm their
dominion over the people Israel for ever. They thrust
Him out of the vineyard; that is, they subjected Him
and His followers to the greater excommunication, and
caused their sentence of death to be executed by the
unjust, that is, by the heathen outside the holy city.
But so great were the love and forbearance of the Most
High, that He did not immediately execute His
judgment upon them, hut yet once more offered them
grace through the Apostles and the witness of the Holy
Ghost. But they stoned the holy Stephen; they
attempted to put Christ a second time to death in His
witnesses and His Church.
After that came the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
prophecy was fulfilled: “ The Lord of the Vineyard will
miserably destroy those wicked men and will let out His
vineyard to other husbandmen; the kingdom of God
will he taken from you, and given to the heathen, who
will bring forth the fruits thereof.” Christ was preached
among the heathen, God turned His face with grace
towards them, whilst He hid himself from the Jews.
He prepared for Himself a holy people, which consisted
almost entirely of the heathen. From henceforth the
Christian Church became His vineyard. The apostles,
the bishops, and the other servants of Christ are the new
husbandmen, to whom He now entrusts His vineyard.
Thus has God revealed His severity and His goodness;
and His mysteries, as Christ saw and declared them,


have become fulfilled. In all these we perceive truths
which nearly concern us Christians.
I. The ecclesiastics of all the divisions of the Christian
Church are now these husbandmen, to whom the Lord
has committed His inheritance. As the Christians- of
the different parties are regarded in God’s eyes as but
one Church, so the ecclesiastics of these different parties,
however disunited among themselves, constitute the one
ministry, the one household of Christ. They have
received their charge from Him; they have a right to
our confidence, reverence, and obedience. Yet they are
not the lords and owners of the vineyard. They are
only stewards, and it is their duty to take care of the
Church for the Lord, to bring them into a state that
shall be pleasing to Him, to cultivate the fruits of the
Spirit, and all that is good in them. Since such a
laborious work and heavy responsibility is laid upon
them, we ought so much the more to love them, and to
support them with our hearty intercession.
H. The great danger which besets the Christian
ministers, as well as in other times the Jewish rulers,
lies in this : to consider themselves absolute, and to
regard the power, which is only lent to them, as their
property, to say in their hearts, my Lord will not come
for a long time, or that He will not come at all. If the
Church is regarded as a worldly institution, if she
establishes herself as such in this world, the spiritual
ministry will suffer loss, the blessing of the Lord and


godly living will be impaired. Apostacy will then
commence, and when this reaches maturity, it will
bring upon us Christians the judgment, as formerly
upon the Jews.
111. We learn further from this parable: The rulers
of the Christian Church must also expect that the Lord
from time to time will send servants to them with a
special message. As it is written in the gospel, “ The
householder went into a far country for a long time ”
(S. Luke xx. 9), so the Lord has been absent a long time,
and has looked on in silence at what has been passing in
His Church. All things have gone on in an ordinary
course, and so the erroneous opinion has taken root, that
in the history of the Christian Church no extraordinary
mission can appear, and no unexpected message can be
sent to it. The so-called natural development is the
right one, and may not be interrupted. But the hand
of the Lord is not shortened. He has reserved to Him-
self the power, to call His messengers when and where
He will, to prepare and send them with a commission to
the ordinarily appointed keepers of His vineyard. This
He has done in these last days, and the message which
He sends bears the same purport as that of the servants
in the gospel. They remind the husbandmen that the
vineyard belongs to the Lord, that the Lord desires the
fruits of the vineyard, that the keepers of it owe Him a
reckoning, and that soon after the coming of these His
servants, He, the heir, will Himself come to His vine


yard. This message, by its contents and the spirit in
which it is delivered, commends itself to the consciences
of the hearers as genuine, and as proceeding from the
Lord above all others. It remains now, not to close the
heart against this appeal, penitently to acknowledge past
neglect and failure, and with the help of the grace of
God to prepare for the advent of the Heir.
IY. If those who have been hitherto the keepers of
the vineyard close their hearts against the claims of the
Lord, if they delay to fulfil His demands, and to yield
themselves to His councils, then He has unlimited power
to make such disposition of His property and such
changes in the administration of it as it pleases Him.
As He substituted for Eli and his sons, another priest,
Samuel; as He took away the kingdom from Saul, and
gave it to David; so He can also act in His Church: He
can send new overseers into His vineyard, and no man
may say to Him, What doest Thou ? He is willing to
honour and spare the husbandmen of the old order, but
He cares more for the vineyard, and its precious fruit.
It is His will that the planting of His hand shall be cared
for, and that its precious fruit shall at length ripen and
give Him pleasure.
V. We are now such a vineyard, of which Isaiah has
sung of, in a very fruitful hill, a vineyard which the
Lord has fenced and cared for, in which He has planted
the choicest vine, and upon which He has caused the
rain of Heaven to descend ; the Lord expects that this


vineyard shall bring forth grapes (Isa. v. 1-7). What
more could be done to us, that the Lord has not done to
us ? Upon this rests our responsibility. Now must
each one of us seriously endeavour to please the Lord by
good fruit. See that no man receive the grace of God
in vain. The spiritual and temporal goods He has lent
to us we must regard as borrowed goods, that we may
therewith labour for Jesus, and in Him serve our
brethren.
The Lord, at the close of His discourse, reminds His
hearers of the stone which the builders rejected, but
which became the head of the corner. “ This is the
Lord’s doings, and it is marvellous in our eyes ” (Ps. cxviii.
22, 23). Thus David was rejected by Saul, and was
obliged to hide himself as a fugitive in deserts and caves;
but God, who had anointed him, exalted him in His own
time to the throne of honour. So was Christ cast aside
by the appointed master-builders as a useless stone; but
they did not thereby make void the purpose of God, but
rather contributed to its fulfilment. Precisely through
His death and resurrection is He become the eternal
headstone of His Church. The Incarnate Son of God,
received into Heaven, very Man now and for ever, and
very God from everlasting, is the Eock upon which the
Church is founded, as a building, imperishable as Him-
self. Although in Heaven He is not far from us, and
the men who reject His word, stumble at Him, Himself.
They cannot remove Him, but only dash themselves in


pieces against Him. “ But on whomsoever He shall fall
He will grind them to powder.” So it has been ex-
plained by Daniel: The stone which without the hand of
man, was loosened from the mountain summit, struck
on the feet of the giant-image, and ground it to dust.
So will Christ, when He comes hither again, reduce to
nothing the last empire of the world with its head, the
man of sin. Then the stone will become a mountain,
and fill the whole earth; then will the kingdom of Christ
be revealed in glory, and encompass Heaven and earth.
But whoever shall stand on this precious stone, as
Isaiah says, shall not be confounded. We are built up
together on this foundation, and now it remains for us to
have firm confidence in Him, and to abide in our right
place, that is, to remain in the fellowship of the Lord,
and not to swerve from the place which in the Divine
order of this building is assigned to us. Thus shall we,
through the love of God who has chosen us, and built
us upon Christ, have part in the common perfection and
glory of this indestructible, spiritual temple of God.


THE
PARABLE OF THE MARRIAGE OF THE
KING’S SON.
S. MATT. xxii. 1-14 ; S. Luke xiv, 16-24.
When the rulers of the people sought to lay hands on
Jesus and put Him to death, He once more set before
them, in a last parable, the mystery of the love of Hod,
and showed them the terrible consequences which would
follow their refusal to acknowledge the time of their
visitation.
The kingdom of Heaven is likened to a certain king,
who made a marriage for his son. God, the heavenly
King, purposes to prepare a feast for the joy and honour
of His only-hegotten Son. From the foundation of the
world He has fore-ordained an election out of mankind
made in the image of God, for the peculiar possession of
His Son. This election is to be made like the Son in
holiness and love, and will at last share His glory; it will
partake of His heavenly joy, and be a help meet for Him
in the establishment, goverment, and perfecting of His
kingdom. The day approaches, when the Church of
Christ will be solemnly installed in this high dignity.
This is the day when the song of praise will be sung by
numerous hosts : “Let us rejoice and he glad and give
honour to God, for the marriage of the Lamb is come,


and His wife hath made herself ready” Eev. xix. 19).
All the servants of our God, all who fear Him, small
and great, will unite in the songs of joy which will then
resound from Heaven (Eev. xix. 4,5).
The Lord gives us by this parable an insight into this
future glory, which He has revealed to His servant John
in the Apocalypse, only it is not here fully brought to
light, inasmuch as the guests only are spoken of, and
the distinction between the Bride and those invited
to the wedding is not mentioned. All who are assembled
at the marriage feast, whether called to the highest or
the lowest places, are here described indifferently as the
invited guests, both those who belong to the Church of
the Firstborn, who will reign with Christ, and those in
a subordinate position, who are governed by Christ and
His Church, and are permitted to enjoy the blessings
of the kingdom of Heaven.
From the beginning of the world the great King has
already made preparation for the marriage feast, which.
He has proposed as the final object of His creation, and
the glorious term of His wonderful ways. Then, at
the appointed time, He sent His servants to call the
guests to the marriage ; that is, He sent the prophets of
the old covenant to the people Israel whom He first
elected, to bring them to Him, that He might impart to
them a foretaste of the blessings of the kingdom of
Heaven. But they would not come. The children of
Israel resisted the Divine call from generation to genera*


tion; they closed their hearts. But the Lord did not
yet close His heart against them. He did not suffer
Himself to be hindered in the execution of the decrees
of His love. When the time was come, He gave His
only-hegotten Son, through whose sacrifice by death and
by whose resurrection Heaven was opened to all who
believed in Him, and all the heavenly riches provided,
which the people of Israel until then had known only
by warnings and types. Then followed the second great
mission. A new host of servants of the heavenly King
went out to announce to them who had long been bidden,
that is, to the Israelites, in the name of their God:
Behold, I have prepared my feast, the great sacrifice is
offered, and all is now ready, come to the marriage.
But what was the reception given to these servants,
the Apostles and Evangelists of the new covenant, by
the Jewish people? One part, and indeed far the
greatest, concerned themselves about it not at all; they
went their way, one to his field, another to his trade.
Some, according to S. Luke, went so far as to excuse
themselves on the ground of their previous obligations
and affairs ; but another said, without a word of excuse
or regret, “I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot
come.” The great fault of all these people was their
contempt of the sacrifice of propitiation. They thought
they had no need of any such thing. The love of God
and the sufferings of Jesus affected them not. Some
were too much absorbed in earthly things, while others,
M


and those the strict and zealous Israelites, were too much
attached to their legal works, and to the expectations
connected with them of a worldly kingdom which they
thought they could introduce according to their own
plan, and by their own efforts. But there was one part
of the long-invited guests who behaved much worse,
they seized the servants of the great King, insulted and
killed them in return for the honourable invitation, the
evidence they had brought of the goodness and love
of the King. Thus they treated the greatest and
holiest of all the servants of God, Jesus Christ, thus
they treated His messengers. “ When the King heard
that, He was angry, and sent out His army, who
destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city.”
This is the event which Jesus Christ foresaw in the
spirit of prophecy, and on account of which in those
days He shed tears as He looked on the holy city—the
destruction of Jerusalem (S. Luke, xix. 41-44). The
armies of the great King, by which He executed this
punishment, were the legions of the heathen Romans,
whom He called from the far west. Under the orders
of Vespasian and Titus they executed the divine judg-
ment, without knowing what they did, without under-
standing the reason why the Jewish people were so
heavily visited. They had not known the time of their
visitation —of grace.
Then the King said to His servants, to the messengers
of peace of the new covenant, “ The wedding is ready,


but they that were bidden were not worthy, therefore
go out quickly into the highways and footpaths, and as
many as ye shall find, bid to the wedding.” This is the
third great mission, the going forth of the servants of
the Gospel into the wide world, to the heathen, who
lived outside the city, that is, who did not belong to the
dispensation of the old covenant, who expected no
Messiah, and until then knew nothing of God, nor of
His decrees, nor of His invitation to the kingdom of
Heaven. This third mission began with the appearance
of the Apostle Paul; it gained a great impulse after the
destruction of Jerusalem, and it continues until now.
By this message, people of many tongues have been
gathered into the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church; we also have heard this message, “God hath
saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to His own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
world began.” The servants went out and brought
together all whom they found, bad and good. The
heavenly provision should not be prepared in vain, the
divine mercy inclines itself even to the greatest sinners,
and leads them through the opened door of the kingdom
of Heaven. The servants announced to the King,
“ Lord, it is done as Thou hast commanded, and yet
there is room.” The King says to them, “Go out into the
lanes and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my
house may be filled.”


With these words the Lord gives us a profound
explanation of the purposes of His heavenly Father.
Instead of the Jews, who refused the offered entrance
into the kingdom of grace, we heathen are now called
and brought in. The branches of the noble olive-tree,
which, under the careful nurture of the Lord, had grown
up from the root of Abraham, because at the appointed
time they yielded no fruit, have been cut off. We, who
were branches of the wild olive-tree, of the heathen
world abandoned to itself, have been taken out of the
tree to which we belong by nature, and grafted into
that nobler, and to us, foreign tree, in the room of the
branches that have been cut off. Through holy
Baptism we have been transplanted into Christ and His
Holy Church, and made partakers of the powers of the
heavenly life. Thus is the great breach filled up, which
had been made in the kingdom of God, by the thrusting
out of the Jews. This instruction of S. Paul (Rom. xi.
17-24), is supported, as we have seen, by the words of
the Lord Himself in this parable. His house must be
filled. The calling and bringing in of the guests must
continue until all the tables of the royal wedding-feast
are occupied, or, in the words of S. Paul, “ until the
fulness, that is, the full number, “of the Gentiles be
come in” (Rom. xi. 25); then the Lord will appear.
There is therefore a fixed number of the elect, who are
to attain to a joint possession of the highest heavenly
riches. This number is known to God only; when it is


filled up, then the present mission of the servants, and
their work in which they have been engaged until now,
will have an end, the existing dispensation will have
reached its conclusion, the Lord will appear to the
assembled guests waiting for Him, and a new era, that
of the kingdom of heaven in open manifested glory, will
break forth. When the mansion was filled with guests,
seated at table, the King entered to see His guests, to
rejoice with them in their happiness, to receive their
homage, and to perfect their joy by His presence. It
might be expected, that it would be said in the parable,
that the King’s Son, the Bridegroom entered; but it is
said the King Himself, for it is the hour in which the
Son does not only solemnise His marriage, but at the
same time takes His kingdom and ascends His throne.
He appears no more in the form of a servant, but in the
form of God. Christ is acknowledged as God, and
every knee must bow before Him; God appears in His
Son. Therefore it is said, “ the King entered.”
While He surveys the guests, He observes one man,
who had not on a wedding garment. He says to him,
‘ ‘ Friend, how earnest thou in hither not having a
wedding garment? But he was silent.” If the guests
had been obliged to provide themselves with the festal
garment, the inquiry and the displeasure of the King
would not have been intelligible to us. The man need
not have been silent, but might have appealed to his
poverty. Whence could people, who had been picked


up behind hedges, obtain wedding garments ? The
answer is: they received them as a gift as they entered
the King’s palace. Thus Samson gave his wedding
guests thirty changes of raiment (Judges xiv. 12, 19).
Hence the servants of the great King took out of His
treasury handsome wedding garments and delivered
them to those who accepted the invitation that they
might worthily appear in the palace in the presence of
the King. This is the arrangement made by Divine
Wisdom and Love: they who believe and obey the
gospel, receive as a first gift from the hand of the Lord
clean and glorious apparel; they receive it as an earnest
and pledge of other still more costly riches of the king-
dom of heaven reserved for them. It is the robe of the
innocency and righteousness of Christ, given us in holy
Baptism of unmerited grace, to which is added, at the
reception of the sealing, a still more precious ornament
of jewels, that is the gift of the Holy Ghost, and this
equally of free grace, not as the reward of merit, but as
the fruit of the atoning sufferings and glorious victory of
Jesus Christ. This garment we ought to keep clean and
white, and carefully preserve the jewelled ornament,
that we may appear and abide before the Lord, at His
coming. These presents are bestowed by the servants-
of the King. No one receives them directly from the
King’s hand. Baptismal grace and the seal of His
Spirit are imparted to us by the hands of His servants.
Why then has this guest no wedding garment ?


Either he had disdained the proffered gift in the opinion
that his own garment was good enough to appear in
before the King; or he accepted the gift, but not
esteeming it of much value, he threw it away, or so
defiled it as to make it incapable of being recognised.
In this one man, who was thrust out of the festive
hall of the King, we see the falling away, which can
gain admittance among Christians, placed before our
eyes. The lot of this unhappy man is not a warning to
the Jews, but to those who are baptised, and confess
Christ with their lips, who take part in the holy
assemblies of Christians and in the blessings of the
house of God. This guest in the King’s house deceived
himself; he considered himself a worthy partaker, he
expected to be acknowledged by the King with the rest.
Too late his eyes were opened. He now discovered
with inexpressible horror his unworthiness, and he could
bring forward nothing in excuse for himself, for he
ought to have perceived his unworthiness sooner, and
might have done so. The servants do not appear to
have observed his unbecoming apparel, or if they had,
he would not allow them to speak to him. However it
came to this, that at length he was obliged to hear the
dreadful sentence : “ Bind him hand and foot, and take
him away, and cast him into outer darkness.” The
apostate are at last thrown into a state of bondage, in
which they can neither lift up their hands to God, nor
with their feet walk in the ways of the Lord. They are


shut out from the holy city, far from the dwellings of
light, and no ray of divine consolation penetrates their
darkness. That is the end of the falling away, the apos-
tacy, which has crept in among the fellow-heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, among the people of the new
covenant. This falling away has many forms : at last it
will reach its summit in the man of sin, and upon him
will the word of the heavenly Judge fall the heaviest.
Thus we see, in a pleasing picture, the position into
which the grace of God has brought us. We are
already assembled in the house of our God, and
presented with the festal robe through His prevenient
grace. Inasmuch as the Lord prepares for us His Holy
Supper, we place ourselves at the table of our heavenly
Father, and are permitted to taste somewhat of the first-
fruits of the coming kingdom. Now are we the blessed
of the Lord, one thing only do we desire and wait for,
namely, the appearing of the heavenly King. What is
required of us, but to be thankful and true, to keep a
pure heart and ever to abound in the work of the Lord,
to hold fast from hour to hour the earnest and joyful
hope of His appearing, and to guard ourselves by
watching and prayer against self-deception! For we
learn from the word of the Lord: it is possible that a
man may sit amongst those who are waiting for His
coming, and yet, when the Lord comes, he may be
banished from His presence.


THE
PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS.
S. MATT. xxv. 1-13.
The image which the Lord here makes use of, is taken
from the customs of the East, which explain what is
meant by the coming of the bridegroom. The betrothal
has taken place, but the bride is still in her father’s
house, where she was born and brought up. In like
manner the bridegroom is in his home, and he has to
come and fetch home the bride, and with her to occupy
the habitation he has in his father’s house. It is there
that all the preparations are made for the solemn
observance of the wedding-feast. Meanwhile the bride
awaits the arrival of the bridegroom, and with her also
the playmates of her childhood, who accompany her as
bridesmaids, and as guests of honour take part in the
bridal festival. These bridesmaids carry lighted lamps,
as they go before to meet and welcome the bridegroom,
who comes to fetch the bride. This whole scene, taken
from Eastern life, which the Lord here makes use of
as a parable, has already been employed by the Spirit
of prophecy under the old covenant as an image of
heavenly things and future events, as in the song of
praise concerning the heavenly Bridegroom (Psalm xlv.).
There, also, the King’s daughter, the Bride, in


embroidered garments, is led forth to meet Him; her
companions, the virgins, are at her side: they are
brought with joy and gladness; they enter the King’s
palace.
If we now look at the parable, as the Lord brings
it before us, we recognise Himself as the Bridegroom,
who is to come. He remains now in His Father’s house
in heaven. We continue also in our birthplace on
earth. But we wait for the hour when He will fetch
us away to the better home, which He has prepared for
us with the Father. Then we shall behold Him face to
face, and remain with Him for ever. This hour is not
the hour of death. The Redeemer, for whom we wait,
is not the angel of death, but Christ, the Prince of life;
when He appears as the Prince of life, death will be
swallowed up in life, and that will be the true hour of
redemption. The Lord could not have meant the hour
of death, because this comes to each one separately, one
after another, while the hour of which the Lord speaks
comes to all His disciples at once; it is the hour of His
personal return in glory, which He has compared to the
lightning, which shines from the east to the west in a
moment, from one end of heaven to the other (S. Matt,
xxiv. 27).
But why does the Lord say nothing of the Bride in
this parable? Is not the Church of His disciples, for
whom He has given this promise and warning, the
Bride of the Lamb, as it is named in the Apocalypse ?


Or do the ten virgins mean other souls, who are less
near to the Lord than the Church of the firstborn ? By
no means. The ten virgins mean the elect disciples of
the Lord, who are called to receive the heavenly crown,
and are nearer to Him than all others. He has spoken
this parable precisely for these. They were His most
confidential disciples, who surrounded Him as He sat
there on the olive-mount, looking down on Jerusalem.
They asked Him, “What will be the sign of Thy
coming?” And this parable forms part of the answer
they received. After (in chap, xxiv.) He had given
prophetical discourses of His return, He follows them
up (in chap, xxv.) with three illustrations of the great
event: The parable of the virgins, the parable of the
servants, and the discourse of the gathering of the
nations before the throne of the Son of Man. What is
now the difference between these three illustrations ?
This, that the partaker of the kingdom of heaven is
spoken of at first from the narrowest circle, then from a
wider, then from the widest circle. There is no word
in Holy Scripture which more nearly and properly
concerns those who have received grace and have been
brought into the most intimate friendship with the Lord,,
than the parable of the ten virgins.
But why is the Bride not at all mentioned? Why
are the ten companions named instead of her ? There
is a deeply-hidden reason in the holy reserve, tender-
ness, modesty, with which the Lord treated the


mysteries of God. He Himself has never spoken of
His Bride. S. John the Baptist has indeed, after the
manner of the prophets of the old covenant, described
the people of God as the Bride of the Messiah (S. John
iii. 29), hut Christ has never used this image. He has
in that given us an example, with what circumspection,
with what consideration, with what sacredness such
images should be employed by us. It is permissible,
after the precedent which S.Paul gives, and even of
our Lord Himself in the Apocalypse, which He gave
from heaven to His servant John, to speak of this great
mystery, of the Church as the Bride of Christ. But we
all, both teachers and learners, should take the warning,
that we never, otherwise than with pure hearts and clean
lips, allow ourselves to use such mystic forms of ex-
pression, lest we grieve the Spirit of God, and cause
mischief.
Never in Holy Scripture, either of the old or new
covenant, is the individual Christian soul called a bride
of Christ, or Christ called a bridegroom of the soul.
This occurs in the writings of the mystics, and in many
evangelical spiritual songs, especially of the Moravians.
But this is an abuse and a sign of an unsound spiritual
tendency. It is not according to the analogy of Scrip-
ture, nor of the language of the ancient Church, and it
ought not to appear in our hymns, prayers, or sermons.
The Church only is the Bride of Christ.
Here therefore the Lord speaks of His disciples singly,


whom He alludes to under the image of the five wise
and five foolish virgins, as He immediately before had
said: one shall be taken, and another left. Also the
virgins on Mount Zion (Apoc. xiv. 4), denote individual
souls. The simplicity and innocence in which we should
stand, are thereby described. Hence our task is, after
we have received grace and heavenly preparation, to
wait upon the Lord, and so to behave ourselves, that we
may be able to go forth to meet Him with joy, when He
comes in that hour that we think not. The virgins had
lamps, and also vessels for the reservation of oil, that
from this provision they might keep their lamps burning.
Every one could perceive the light of the lamps; but
that was not all. They had need also of a provision of
oil in vessels, which no one perceived. What means
the oil ? It is not enough to say that it means faith, for
no man can maintain that the five foolish virgins, who
still were also virgins, also waited for the Lord, and
also went forth to meet Him, mean souls without faith.
The oil is rather, in prophetical language, the symbol of
the Holy Ghost. Such was the oil in the seven-branched
golden candlestick, such was the oil with which Saul
and David were anointed; therefore the gift of the
Holy Ghost is called the anointing, and also the oil used
for the anointing of the sick means the quickening and
healing power of the Holy Ghost (S. James v. 14).
Therefore, the Holy Spirit of God, by whom we are
sealed to the day of redemption (Ephes. iv. 30), is the


gift with which the ten virgins were furnished. On
that account they had burning lamps, they caused the
light of the Spirit to shine in their profession, their
conduct, and in their religious worship. The foolish
virgins caused their light also thus to shine. In what
then consisted the difference between the wise and the
foolish? The hour came at which the lamps of the
foolish went out, for they had neglected at the proper
time to supply themselves with a sufficient stock of oil.
It is therefore not enough that we received baptism
and the laying on of hands. That will not serve us,
even if we take care not to reject and forfeit the gift
received. As the lamp must he continuously replenished
with oil, so we must constantly draw supplies of grace
out of the fulness of Christ; we must abide in living
connexion with heaven; we must continually pray for
the Holy Spirit, seek for Him that He may abide within
us. We must so keep our hearts that the good Spirit
may both dwell in us and increase in us His manifold
gifts. We should never stand still; for whoever makes
no progress in spiritual life will inevitably fall back;
whoever does not aim at becoming richer, will become
impoverished, as oil in a lamp, unrenewed, imperceptibly
and unceasingly decreases and wastes away. Art thou
conscious of no wickedness, of no great sins, thou art
not on that account safe, for that, on account of which
the virgins came too late, knocked in vain at the closed
door, and were condemned to hear the word: “ I know


you not,” is not called wickedness, nor uncleanness, but
folly. Thus it is folly, thoughtlessness, indifference,
carelessness, hy which, after receiving the highest grace,
and are so near the prize, we may bring on ourselves
so severe a judgment, that, at the coming of the Lord,
when others are received hy Him, we must remain
behind, having come too late, and so lose the heavenly
crown intended for us—a lot more terrible than death
itself. Supposing also, that thy lamp as yet gives some
measure of light, thou art not thereby assured that it
will also burn brightly when the Lord comes. Supposing
that the servants who watch for our souls, are unable to
point out any present fault in thee, thou hast thereby no
security, that thou wilt continue so to the end. We
can easily see if the lamp burns, but we cannot see
within, into the vessel of thine heart, if there, in secret,
a sufficient treasure of grace is laid up. If there is a
failure there, make it manifest to thyself through the
admonitions of the Lord in thy conscience, be like the
wise virgins, who with their lamps took oil in their
vessels. Say not, “I am rich, and have enough, and
am in need of nothing,” but acknowledge thy poverty,
hasten and draw at the right time from the true sources
a new measure of the spirit, and be ever richer in faith,
in hope, and in charity.
The summons had reached the virgins, to go out
to meet the Bridegroom, and they had obeyed the
summons. With joyful emotion they looked forward to


His speedy arrival; but contrary to expectation, He
delayed, the hours of the day passed by, and He was
not yet there. For a time they were kept awake by the
excitement of expectation, but at last they all slumbered
and fell asleep. Thus the Lord teaches us, that after we
have received the summons to prepare for the Lord’s
coming, a season of delay will follow with a very severe
trial of our perseverance and watchfulness. It will
come to this, that to all appearance we shall have been
deceived, that the world will be able to mock us and to
say: Where is now your God ? Where is now the
coming of your Lord, that you have preached to usP
Thus will the Lord allow us to feel our weakness to the
utmost. It is part of His work to bring to light the
powerlessness and natural unfitness even of His most
faithful servants, and so to humble them, that at the end
the honour of their salvation must be ascribed, not to
them, but to Him. All the virgins became sleepy and
slept. There is then no severer temptation than this, to
become spiritually weary and to relax from the joy of
hope and confidence.
This delay of the Lord’s coming has a general
acceptation. After the Apostles and the believers of the
first age had died, and after the great persecutions had
come to an end, the hope of the Lord’s coming grew
cold, and although it yet remained in individual
believing souls and small communities, it became
estranged from the Church at large. If you attend the


public services, or read the formularies and books of
devotion of the various denominations, you find nowhere
this hope enunciated as the hope of the Church, and
nowhere has the Church made her voice to be
distinguished by the words, “Come, Lord Jesus.”
Because the Bridegroom has delayed His coming for so
many ages, the ten virgins, who represent the kingdom
of heaven, that is, all the communities which jointly
make up the one, holy Catholic Church, have fallen
asleep, and instead of waking up and directing their
eyes towards the sun-rising, where first the morning
star and then the sun itself should appear, the church-
parties sleep, having no thought of the signs of the times
and of the coming events, or they dream of the successes
and triumphs of their party, and of the speedy execution
of such designs and purposes, as are not the purposes of
God, but the fancies of men. Meanwhile the night
advances, the light of faith among the Christian nations
becomes dim, the signs of the falling away grow more
and more apparent, and while men dream of triumphs
and better times, the great snare and the midnight hour,
when the Lord will come as a thief in the night, are
impending, and them only who wait for Him, He will
take to Himself, but the rest He will leave to the great
tribulation.
In Martin Luther’s Table-Talk, in the chapter of the
Last Days, there is the following prediction; The world
will become altogether Epicurean (that is, it will no
N


longer believe in God and in immortality, and will give
itself up wholly to its wicked lusts), then at midnight the
cry will be heard, “Behold, the Bridegroom comes.”
According to the tenour of this prediction, so it has
actually come to pass. The night of unbelief and the
corruption of Epicurean life are spread over the nations
of Christendom in a degree that has never before been
known. When now, after long silence, the voice of the
Holy Ghost was again heard in the midst of slumbering
Christendom, the first words spoken in the spirit of
prophecy were these; “Behold! the Bridegroom
cometh ! ” Thus did the present work of the Lord begin,
and from its beginning, it has shown itself to be in
accordance with the word of God. This is the call
which has pierced through our hearts, “Go ye forth to
meet Him.” And herein we occupy ourselves, that we
may be able to receive with joy Him who is coming, and
hasten to meet Him. This is our desire. As yet He
has not appeared, but He has given the last sign of His
coming. Yet once more the cry will be heard, “ Behold,
the Bridegroom cometh,” and then will He be here, and
His reward with Him.
The anxiety and confusion of the foolish virgins was
great, when they perceived that their lamps had gone
out. Give us of your oil, said they to their wise sisters,
but this request could not be granted. The righteous
can hardly be saved. The wise virgins had no oil to
spare, they had only enough to nourish the light of their


own lamps. Here we learn, no man can redeem his
brother. They who obtain acceptance cannot, however
much they might desire it, take others with them who
are unprepared.
The wise virgins have no other counsel to give than
this, “Go to them that sell (where we have obtained our
oil) and buy for yourselves.” You should have prayed
and sought at the right time, to he richly provided with
the Holy Ghost. In the Church of God, through the
faithful partaking of the sacraments, by the true
observance of God’s ordinances, with continual watching
and prayer, all the grace, necessary for us, can be
•obtained. But now for the foolish virgins it was too late.
When the Lord is come, and has taken His own to
Himself, the wells of salvation will no longer flow as now,
there will then be no longer the opportunity to ripen to
perfection through the gentle yet powerful operations of
grace in the Church. The foolish virgins come too late,
in vain they cry, Lord, open to us, and knock at the
already closed door. When Noah and his family had
entered the ark, the Lord Himself shut to the door, so
that no one else could enter the place of safety. And
Noah could admit no one, however much he might have
desired it.
Within the closed festive hall of marriage there was
the light of joy and gladness, which the Bridegroom
shared with his guests. Without was darkness, and
here, full of grief and misery the foolish virgins were left


to wander. They who remain behind at the Lord’s-
coming, find themselves involved in the great tribulation,
and their lamentation is so much the more bitter, the
nearer their salvation was brought to them. Now is our
salvation nearer than when we (first) believed. May we
embrace it. May no one bring on himself, what must
he his lot, if he belongs to the foolish virgins.


THE
PARABLE OF THE TALENTS.
S. MATT. xxv. 14-30. S. LUKE xix. 11-28.
The Lord was pursuing His last journey to Jerusalem;
many people accompanied Him, full of expectation that
He would presently sit upon His throne in the city of
the great King, and that the kingdom of God would be
revealed in glory. But the heart of the Lord was filled
with other thoughts: He knew that His hour was come
in which He should be perfected through the suffering
of death and should go to the Father. His absence
from the earth and from His disciples concerned Him
much, and He explains the reason of this absence in
this parable.
Here also He connects the parables of the kingdom
of heaven with an occurrence in the world’s life, not
unknown to His hearers. After the death of King
Herod the first, his son Archelaus wished to mount his
throne; he sailed beyond sea to the distant Italian
land, to Home, and obtained from the Emperor Octavian
the grant of the princely authority over Judaea. He
then returned to Jerusalem. Meanwhile his adversaries
in Jerusalem had sent an embassy to Rome to make
representations to the Emperor why he should not make


this man their prince. But they did not succeed. Now
that Archelaus ruled in Jerusalem, he revenged himself
on his political adversaries.
The Lord lifts up our thoughts to heavenly things.
He is Himself the nobleman, the royal dignity in Israel
belongs to Him; He is indeed appointed King over all
kings. Yet He does not enter on His kingdom
immediately, also He does not set the crown on Himself;
hut He leaves this earth and goes into a far country,
into the heavenly dwelling-places, to receive the crown
from One greater than He is, even from His Eternal
Father, and at last, when the time is fulfilled, to return
as King to this earth. The time till this return is long;
it is intended for the proving of His servants. They
thought they would take part in His glory immediately,
but in this prolonged interval they were first to approve
themselves His faithful servants, and to labour for Him.
They see Him not, and the world around them maintains
that He is dead, and of His return they wish to know
nothing. So it must be, that our faith and our devotion
to the Lord may he proved, and at length bear off the
prize. Looking to Him, who is about to come, is our
consolation in this world, the hope of His appearing
makes us at the same time faithful in all that is
entrusted to us.
The servants, to whom the Lord entrusted the
administration of His goods before His departure, accord-
ing to the most exact and proper meaning of the


parable, are the apostles and other office-bearers in the
Christian Church, to whom the Lord has committed the
fulness of spiritual grace to dispense to others. When
the Lord comes again, He will require of His Church
what He, at the beginning, before His departure,
entrusted to her; nothing else, and surely nothing less
than her original endowment will He expect to find.
Her task is not to endeavour to appear before Him, as
she may have been in the time of the Reformation, but
in the disposition of mind, with the spiritual advantages,
and in the order, which the Lord gave her in the
beginning. He has, by His infinite merit and through
His ascension to the Father, gained heavenly riches, and
has placed them in the hands of His disciples, for them
to preserve and employ for the benefit of the children of
God. The grace of God has this peculiarity, that by
faithfulness, and right distribution, it is not lessened but
increased. Whoever communicates to others liberally,
and in a legitimate way, what he has received, will not
thereby become poorer, hut on the contrary, richer in
knowledge and experience, in faith, in hope and charity.
The grace of God, at first deposited in the Apostles and
first disciples, multiplies itself in the Christian Church,
as from one light many others are kindled, or as a
capital laid out at interest, by degrees doubles and
multiplies itself. This increase, this propagation of His
grace it is that rejoices the Lord, and for which He will
give a royal recompense to His faithful servants.


To one of His servants He gave five, to another two
talents or pounds. The official degrees are various, so
also the gifts and charges allotted to each, but this is
common to all, that every office, every gift, all know-
ledge and spiritual power, is not our property, but
another’s, taken from the treasury of the heavenly King,
obtained by Him at great cost, the precious fruit of
His obedience unto death. Nothing can be more
contrary to the mind of the Lord, than for His servants
to take honour to themselves from any dignity or gift
entrusted to them, to assume distinction or self-compla-
cency therefrom. So S. Paul says to them who
esteemed him and Apostles too highly: Let a man so
account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards
of the mysteries of God. Stewards, who divert
anything from the property of their lord, and apply it
privately to their own profit, are unfaithful servants.
The Lord is love, and then only are we His true
servants, when we serve the brethren. All grace
received we must apply with disinterested love, humility,
and devotion, to the highest advantage of the brethren,
as the Apostle says, “As every man hath received the
gift, so let him minister the same one to another, as
good stewards of the manifold grace of God.”
Nothing so valuable can the Lord entrust to us as
the souls of His faithful people; they are dearer to Him
than ought else, for He has given Himself to death for
them, and the greatest concern of the fulness of His


heart, He expressed in the words, “Feed My sheep.”
The work of grace in the heart of God’s children should
not fall off and be extinguished, but grow and bear
fruit. For this the servants of God have to care.
Since the Lord has said, each soul is mine, so assuredly,
when He comes, He will take reckoning with His
servants, and ask after each individual soul He has
•entrusted to them. He will ask after each one by
name; what has become of this, or that? As parents
before the judgment-seat of Christ may not say of any
ef their children: this one concerns us not, we can give
no account of him, so it is also with the ministers of
Christ; they must give account of each individual
member. For this reason so many painful feelings arise
in the hearts of them who feel truly the care of souls.
Sympathise with your pastors, love them the more for
the responsibility that lies on them, quiet their sorrows,
•change their griefs into joy, as S. John says, “I have
no greater joy than this, that I hear my children walk
in truth.”
Why does the Lord, on so many occasions, speak of
servants, householders, stewards ? He would wholly
free us from the delusion, which lies so deep in the hearts
■of men, that we are lords absolute, independent pro-
prietors, answerable to no one. True, many are so
situated that their dependents and neighbours dare not
say to them: What doest thou with thine office, thy
talents, with thy wealth? But although no man puts


this question, the Lord nevertheless will address it to
everyone. In that day He will found His requirements
and His judgments on this, that our spiritual and natural
gifts were not handed over to us, that we might dispose
of them at our will, hut were lent to us for a certain
time, to be employed for the praise of God, and for
the profit and service of our neighbour. Oh, if we
understood this aright, truly we should show ourselves
faithful, loving, and wise in the use of heavenly and
earthly gifts.
This faithfulness is indeed not to be found everywhere.
How is this to be accounted for, since we all know we
are only servants and stewards of the Lord ? The cause
lies in the human heart. The Lord discovers it to us in
the wicked and slothful servant, who buried his talent in
the earth. This servant might have done still worse, he
might have spent and wasted his talent on himself.
That he did not do, and yet so severe a judgment was
pronounced upon him. This judgment is founded on
the condition of his heart. For what influenced him to
bury his talent, instead of putting it out to interest, was
partly indifference towards his lord and his lord’s interest,
and partly slavish fear. I knew, said he to his lord, that
thou art a hard man, thou reapest where thou hast not
sowed, and gatherest where thou hast not strewed, there-
fore I was afraid. Such dark representations lay at the
foundations of his sloth; he desired to have as little ae
possible to do with his master; he had no desire to please


him; he had no confidence that his master would
generously reward his servants. This is the natural
state of man’s mind towards God, and as long as man is
under the law, he remains in this false state of heart.
This slavish fear does not advance man in what is good,,
but palsies his activity in the things of God.
He who has a childlike confidence in God, would
gladly do as much as possible for Him. He who has it
not, but in the bottom of his heart is conscious of a
slavish anxiety before God, will always render the least
possible service. He who has the heart of a child, counts
it joy and honour to he permitted to serve God, but to-
him who has the mind of a slave, it is a burden and an
infliction. If it be admitted that under the old covenant
it was possible to serve God in the condition of bondage,
under the new covenant it is no longer possible. It
would he a fruitless task, to attempt to serve God in a
slavish fear, and in the form of a servant. We have not
received the spirit of bondage, hut of adoption. Either
we shall serve the Lord in this spirit, in that of children,
or if we will not, we shall render Him no service at all,
and like the unprofitable servant, shall receive no
acknowledgment from Him. Of what is this the token,.
that this servant wrapt his pound of gold in a napkin
and buried it in the earth? This is a heavenly gift,
that was placed in his hands, but by earthly-mindedness
he has made it unprofitable. Only where the childlike
spirit prevails, is there desire and joy for what is


heavenly. Where the slavish spirit prevails there is no
seeking after the things that are above; no longing of the
heart after Christ, who is at the right hand of God; no
striving after heavenly treasures. A man’s heart must
have some supreme good, to which he attaches himself,
and if he has not his treasure in Heaven, he will seek it
■on earth. “ Where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.” Such a heart will be wholly entangled
in earthly care and labour, in covetousness and ambition,
the heavenly dowry, whether it be baptismal grace, that
•of the sealing, or of holy orders, will be hid in a napkin,
buried and covered with earth. The divine life is
■choked, the fire of the spirit is quenched, and the man
■sinks into the grave of a spiritual death. When at last
the Lord comes, and asks such an one, what has become
of the heavenly gift entrusted to him, the utterances of
the servile spirit will profit him nothing. Why hast
thou not continued in the standing of baptismal grace
and in the spirit of the children of God? He who
regards himself from the servile point of view, and as
under the law, will be judged according to the law, and
there no man can stand. “Take from him the pound,
.and cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness.”
We hear another still more severe word concerning
the citizens of the nobleman, who would not have him
king over them, and protested against it, “ Those, mine
enemies, bring them hither, and slay them before me.”
.Such enemies who would not that Jesus should reign


over them, were the unbelieving Jews, who, after His
ascension, persecuted and sought to slay Him in His
disciples. Such hostile citizens are, at the present time?
Christians who have fallen away from the faith, who,
deceived and incited hy the lies of the devil, declare the
Son of God to he a mere man, or a fiction, who will not
have Him recognised as Lord, King, and God, as the
God of the earth ; and to be able to etfect this, they wish
before all things to abolish every Christian institution,
and extirpate Christ afresh. The word of the Lord was
fulfilled to the Jews, when at the destruction of Jerusalem
they fell by the edge of the sword; it was the day of His
recompense to His hostile citizens of the Jewish common-
wealth. Just as certainly will His day of recompense
come for His hostile citizens of the commonwealth of
Christendom. To the apostate Christians the end will
be assuredly as mournful when the Lord comes, as
formerly to the gainsaying Jews.
Truly generous and kingly will be the treatment of
Him who comes, towards His faithful servants; “Well
done, thou good and faithful servant, thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over
many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
These are not empty words, but realities. This will be
the reward of the servants of Christ, that they will rule
in the world to come, with Him and for Him. He who
has the love of Christ in him, finds his joy in making
others happy and in imparting good things. He who


has exercised himself in these works of love here below,
to him shall this joy be imparted in the kingdom of
Christ in the highest degree and undisturbed by any
adversary. In the coming kingdom there will be both
kings and subjects, and great companies of these subjects
will be portioned out to the glorified servants of Christ
to be enlightened, to be instructed in the ways of God,
to he blessed and saved by them. Such are the purposes
of the love of God, and when He sees that His love also
dwells in us, He will satisfy the longing and prayer of
our hearts in such an inexpressible and glorious manner.
THE END.




