



THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The President, Mr. E. F. Danaher, and Members of the Birchip Progress jAssociation.
Enthusiastic and
Mr. Edward F. Danaher,
One of Birchip’s Leading Townsmen.
Leading Members of the Birchip Racing Club
An Appreciation
I received splendid and enthusias-
tic support from the progressive
business men and farmers of a
very up-to-date, go-ahead town,
and in return have endeavoured
to issue, to the best of my ability,
a fair, unexaggerated description
of Birchip contained in a book
that I trust will be appreciated by
the Public. No reasonable ex-
pense was spared in bringing
forth this production.
Thanking one and all for
genial and practical assistance.
I remain,
Sincerely yours,
J. EDWARD ROBERTSON.


THE
Progress of Birchip
A WONDERFUL RECORD.
I^2)
Compiled and Published by J.
EDWARD ROBERTSON.
FEBRUARY, 1911.
Panoramic View of Prosperous and Progressive Birchip.
It is merely left to the imagination of the majority of Victorians
to picture the past and present of the Mallee generally, and the
gradual rise and prosperity into an embryo city of Birchip and sur-
rounding district. There are men, however, now enjoying that
prosperity which has arrived during the past few years, still residing
in the town and district, who feel proud to look back on the success
attained against very great odds—the odds, notably, being rabbits,
drought, and consequent poverty. Still, the past of Birchip is only
a re-echo of the past in many other parts of Australia, and it is
but necessary for one to picture a wild, waterless, almost trackless
wilderness held by the tenant that paid no rent—the dingo, rabbit,
and kangaroo. That was only thirty years ago. The sturdy settler
came along, and, in some cases, necessity made him stick to the
Mallee, while with others it was a strong, deeply-ingrained belief
that it would eventually become an oasis instead' of a desert. The
chemist and the agricultural implement maker came to the Mallee


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
farmers’ rescue, and, during the past few years, the surrounding
country of Birchip presents a pleasing sight, with its waving corn-
fields, the stock browsing knee deep in grass, and a class of sheep
that each year is improving in quality. Everywhere one inspects
there are practical signs of the greatest energy and progressiveness—
the land is not gradually, but yearly being quickly used to its greatest
advantage. Again last year the returns show that the area under
wheat cultivation has greatly exceeded the previous year’s, as also
has the wheat yield, which is in the neighbourhood of 13 bushels
average. In many cases yields of up to 30 bushels per acre have
been obtained.
WHEAT YIELDS'.
The Birchip district comprises Watchupga, Curyo, Kinabulla and
Birchip, and the following returns for 1910 demonstrate the great
wheat-producing qualities of the land;—23o,ooo bags were delivered
at the station sidings—allowing for, say, 10,000 bags stacked on the
farms—the total returns amounting to 690,000 bushels. This year
the returns are likely to even exceed those of last year.
It is a fine sight nowadays to watch the bullock and horse teams
—often 30 to 10 teams —laden with wheat, pass through the main
street. Each team in perfect condition, and equal to any the writer
has yet observed. Yes, without doubt, prosperity has come to stay,
and, even with an occasional dry year, it will not be sufficient to
seriously deter progress. The farmer and the business man always
had a big heart, but he’s also got a solid banking account now, and
that’s a great standby.
Meanwhile, in the town itself, buildings on an up-to-date scale
are being erected, and Cumming-avenue is an enterprising modern
thoroughfare that reflects on the keenness and progressive nature
of the people. During recent years many handsome residences
have been erected—notably those of Messrs. Hancock, Williams, Car-
lisle, Cutts, Grace, Hardiman, Lockwood, Thompson, and others.
Three years ago the pleasure a garden affords was unknown, but,
owing to the splendid water service now provided, many have been
laid out, and certainly add to the general appearance of the town.
In time, with the laying down of a bowling green, the planting of
more umbrageous trees, and other general improvements contem-
plated, Birchip will not be only a great business town, but a very
pleasant place to live in. The climate is delightful, and, even in
summer, the air is so pure and bracing that it is not felt to any
great extent.
Birchip’s population is now perhaps over 1000, and is gradually
increasing. New buildings are being constructed, and the post office
which is in course of erection will be a handsome, commodious one,
which is being built on modern principles, and will be a distinct
ornament to the main thoroughfare. A modern station, handsomely
designed, is nearing completion, and, as there is nothing like giving
people a good first impression of Birchip, the new station will do
this admirably. It is necessary, in order to give one an adequate
idea of the progress of Birchip and district, to give a few authentic
details concerning the early days.
It was not until 1880 that a few hardy pioneers settled on the
land then held as pasture leases, and known as the Karyrie, Wirrim-
birchip, Narraport. and Marlbed runs.
Messrs. H. Campbell and J. Watson, who are still living in the
town, were two of them. They selected in 1881. Portion of their
original selections is now covered by town residences. At Corack
which was then and is still a village, there was a country store kept
by two young men—Messrs. E. J. and J. T. Glowrie. As settlement


A group of Mem-
bers, Birchip Gun
Club,amongst which
numbers some fine
Sportsmen and
genial fellows.
Office-Bearers and
Members of the
Druids’ Lodge,
Birchip.
The Birchip Brass
Band has done
much towards en-
livening the town,
and through their
efforts a consider-
able sum has been
raised for charit-
able objects. Mr.
J. Lockwood is
President.
The Birchip Rifle
Club is a most
enthusiastic one,
and has always
held its own with
other Victorian
Clubs. Their re-
cord is a splendid
one, both in Club
and Individual
Matches.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
moved north, they followed same, and pitched on a site at the
junction of five main roads for a branch of their store. Three acres
(the area allowed for a rural store) were purchased from the
Government, and the store erected in 1882. That was the beginning
of Birchip. No town site was surveyed nor thought of at that time.
Business at the store was confined to the few selectors on the plains.
One road ran through station properties to Wycheproof, another
through Corack to Charlton, and the third through Morton Plains
to Donald. Five years after the dowries opened the store, Mrs.
Blencowe, of Donald, bought a block of land from Mr. Campbell
alongside, and built a small accommodation house, for which a wine
license was obtained. Subsequently it became an hotel, and is now
known as the Birchip Hotel, so ably managed by Miss L. J. Holman.
One of the best townsmen any town or city in Victoria could
possess came along in 1888, in Mr. J. Lockwood, who purchased
Messrs. Glowrie’s business, which was then an unpretentious struc-
ture, standing on a lonely spot on the fringe of Mallee scrub; in
fact, surrounded by it. It is shortly intended to erect a handsome new
structure. Through thick and thin—or, perhaps, a better qualification
would be, through dust, drought, much mental worry, and hopeless
insolvency staring him in the face—Mr. Lockwood stuck to his store,
and to-day this store is one of the most solid and flourishing in
the Mallee.
It is now only some ten years since Birchip entered on an
uninterrupted successful career. When Mr. Lockwood arrived, there
were barely thirty settlers for twenty miles in the surrounding coun-
try. The Mallee was regarded, quite rightly, as useless for farming,
and particularly wheat growing, partly on account of the lack of
knowledge, lack of more modern machinery, and the rabbit and
dingo pest. In addition to Mr. Lockwood’s store, there were Blen-
cowe’s public house, a smith’s shop, and a curiously-shaped mud
brick hall on the site where the “ Shamrock Hotel,” so ably con-
ducted by Mr. A. Nonmus, now stands. This mud hut was erected
by a handful of hardy settlers, and was used principally for religious
services, various meetings, and a half-day school, the first master
being Mr. J. C. Blythe. Mr. Lockwood leased a 20-acre block and
cultivated sufficient for horse-feed, with a frontage to Cumming-
avenue (named after Mr. William Gumming, the owner of Marlbed
station, and representative of the district in the St. Arnaud Shire
Council).
In 1890 this block was subdivided into quarter-acre blocks, and
sold at auction. The sale was successful, and, later, the Government
proclaimed some 100 acres to be a township reserve. Mr. J. E. Cutts
had erected a store on the site where the flourishing business of
Messrs. Hannah Bros, now stands, and, in fact, portion of the original
structure is still being used.
Donald had the advantage a railway gives in 1882, and it took
many years’ petitioning and agitating before the extension was an
accomplished fact, in the year 1893. All goods had to be carted over
bad roads from Wycheproof, 21 miles away, on another railway line.
In 1891, Birchip secured a coach connection with Wycheproof and
Donald. Two years afterwards the railway reached the town. In
1895 the Shire of Birchip was created.
The town was originally called Wirrimbirchip, after the old sta-
tion, but later was altered to Birchip! The conquest of the Mallee
for farming operations by the use of the mallee roller and stump-
jump plough, the extension of the railway, and the water supply
provided by the Government and the municipalities have been the
chief factors in the prosperity of the town and district.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
When one considers the life history of this town, from the rural
store at the cross-roads to its present promising growth, it is ap-
parent that no enterprise on the part of individuals would have raised
it beyond a hamlet if these forces had not been in operation. They
have shaped its destiny. More than that, they give the keynote to
the unlocking of this great sweep of territory along the great bend
of the Murray, and over to the South Australian boundary. There
are millions of acres lying there waste to-day, out of which many
Birchips will most assuredly spring up by precisely the same forces
if they are only applied.
In 1885 the Government, in response to the demands of settlers
on the fringe of the Mallee, erected the vermin-proof fence from
near Swan Hill to the South Australian boundary. That appeared
then the last word as to the hopelessness of settling the Mlallee.
The fence was designed to save the settlers on the fringe from the
View of the Shire Hall, Birchip, and the President and Members of the Shire Council; also Mr. Lefebre, Secretary Progress
Association ; Mr. Fred Grantley, Editor “ Birchip Advertiser”; Mr. Peart, Manager National Bank.
invasion of rabbits and dingoes. It ran within six miles of Birchip
All beyond the fence was abandoned as hopeless for settlement.
Yet it is this abandoned Mallee which has made Birchip. It was
not, however, until some eight years after the erection of Glowrie’s
store that the first attempts at cultivating the Mallee were mads.
They were hopeless failures. Even after South Australians had
shown Victorians how to use the Mallee roller and stump-jump
plough, the work was unprofitable, because of the ravages of rabbits,
which are now no more a pest. Implements for Mallee cultivation
have been improved, and methods of cultivation perfected. Sheep
husbandry is combined on nearly every farm with grain-growing.
Th e good seasons of the last five or six years have given excellent
returns. Land values have risen. Mallee land bought from the
Crown ten or twelve years ago at 10/- to 15/- per acre is selling at
£3 to £5 per acre. Frontages on the main street in Birchip have
sold at £7/10/- per foot, and even in one case as high as £l6
per foot.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
In the Birchip office of the State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission, the working plans of Mr. Scott, the engineer in charge of
the district, show to what extent water supply has been extended.
The water for the Birchip and Sea Lake water scheme is obtained
from the Richardson River, thirty miles away, at Donald; while the
water supply for Wycheproof is obtained from the Avoca River. A
main channel, with a bed width of 9ft., brings the water to Birchip.
Other main channels, with 6ft. bed width, and distributories of 4ft.
and 3ft., carry it away north beyond Sea Lake, sixty miles, and east
and west twenty miles. An area of 2400 square miles is intersected
with these channels. Three towns —Birchip, Wycheproof, and Sea
Lake —are supplied. Over 100 tanks, ranging from 2000 to 8000 cubic
yards’ capacity, constructed by the shires of Wycheproof and Birchip,
are regularly filled by the system of channelling. Every farmer
within the area may have his own tank filled by making a channel
connection with the system. Nearly all of them do. There was no
scarcity of water last year. There is abundance this year.
The town of Birchip has two earth tanks, holding, when full, ten
million gallons. The water is pumped out of the channel into these
reservoirs, and from these into an elevated iron tank, 90ft. high, which
holds 60,000 gallons. From this the town is reticulated. The town
supply, including reticulation, cost £5500. The town water rate
last year gave £533, and it is increasing, owing to the number of
new buildings being erected.
Mr. D. B. Scott is engineer of this extensive district, and to
his wise administrative ability a great deal of praise can very
generally be extended him. The farmers are well satisfied, also the
townspeople, and everything runs along smoothly and successfully.
Mr. N. S. Chalk is also a capable secretary and collector, who
carries out his duties assiduously and in a level-headed manner.
At the present time there are some 3200 water assessments in
the three districts (urban and rural) —Sea Lake, Birchip and Wyche-
proof. The urban rate is—Birchip, 2/6; Sea Lake, 3/-; Wycheproof,
2/-, which is based on the municipal valuation. In the rural dis-
tricts the rates are based on the valuation which is made by the
Water Commission, and properties are divided into three divisions—
No. 1 rating division. No. 2 rating division, No. 3 rating division.
Naturally, the farmer receiving water through the channel first, or,
in other words, nearest the service, is in the first division; the
farmer owning property adjoining in the second division; and the
rural division is for the farmer farthest away, and who may receive
advantage at present or in the near future. The rates are 27-
in the first division, 1/- in the second, and 6d. in the third. Thus,
as an example, if a person’s property is valued at £lOOO, the valuation
would be, probably, £5O. According to that valuation, he pays
his rate to the value of the land held in whichever division he
may have been placed by the Water Commission. In the first
division he would pay £5 per year, in the second £2/10/-, and in
the third 25/- per year. Surely that is cheap to anyone to pay
for the boon of having an adequate supply of water.
The railway returns are each year showing a great increase. The
figures for 1910 speak for themselves, and give a good indication of
the town and district’s progress. From passengers, £2433; parcels,
£558; inward and outward goods, £10,205; carriage of live stock,
£2431, which, together with the miscellaneous, brings the total up
to £15,800.
THE PROGRESS ASSOCIATION.
The Progress Association, formed in 1890. has done much good
and creditable work in forwarding the interests of the town and


Tank Sinking in the
Mallee.
Mr. Grace’s Private
Residence, Birchip.
Methodist Church,
Birchip.
Mr.Hancock’sCom-
fortable and Pretty
Residence, Birchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
district. Amongst many of the fruits of their labour might be
mentioned the improvements to roads, dams, etc., and their per-
sistent demands for the extension of the railway to Birchip. The
latter came at last. Mr. Lockwood was the first president, and
the idea of promoting this association arose through the fact that
Birchip in 1890 was only a distant portion of the Donald Shire,
and,! not unnaturally, Birchip was almost forgotten when money
was expended on improvements in various directions. The associa-
tion expounded their cause, and were successful in many directions,
notably securing postal and coach communication, and joining with
other Progress Associations to secure beneficial amendments to
legislation concerning Mallee Land Bills then before Parliament.
The able president at the present time is Mr. Edward Felix Danaher,
and the secretary Mr. A, E. Lefebre. The membership is a large
one, and the matters chiefly being considered at the present time
are the beautifying of the town in various ways, securing a tele-
phone system within the town and outlying district, and generally
taking an interest in agitating for improvements where required and
necessary in the sanitary, postal, railway and municipal state of
the town.
THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE.
The Mechanics’ Institute and Library was erected in 1890,
through the energy of a few of the townsmen who became personal
bondsmen for the cost of same. At the time of its erection the
Birchip Hall was then noted as being the finest in the Mallee.
Gradually improvements have been made with the progress of the
town, and to-day it is a fine, handsome hall, capable of accommo-
dating over 400 persons. The stage is commodious, enabling the
various companies calling on Birchip to perform with ease and
comfort. There are dressing rooms for both sexes, and the scenic
screens are highly creditable. The library and a reading room is
in charge of Mr. Chapman, who has now occupied the position of
librarian for many years. He is a fine type of the stalwart
“ Britisher,” and, although past 90 years of age, is still hale and
hearty, and withal a courteous and obliging librarian. The library
is a most complete one, and contains over 2000 volumes, while in
the reading room will be found a large range of newspapers. The
president is Mr. Lockwood, and the committee are Messrs. Sheean,
Hillgrove, Danaher, Hannah, Chalk, Thompson, Lilburne and Wil-
liams. Messrs. Lockwood, Sheean and Hillgrove are three of the
original members.
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.
The Agricultural Society, whose first president was Mr. Lock-
wood, have battled through many storms during the 18 years of their
existence, but during the past six years the shows have been
wonderfully successful, and the society is now on a very solid
and prosperous footing; in fact, the last show was the finest yet
held from every standpoint. In the quality of stock exhibited, the
attendance, and the number of exhibits, also the financial receipts,
last year was easily a record one. The grounds cover an area of
10 acres, encompassed by a galvanised iron fence. Improvements
have gradually been made, and it is intended this year to give
larger ring accommodation and increase the number of stalls for
horses and pens for sheep, cattle, etc. Entries are received from
every portion of the Mallee, and the horse exhibits at the Birchip
show are a leading feature. In 1909 Mr. Beckham occupied the
presidential chair, but last year once again Mr. Lockwood took
that much coveted position. Amongst the keenest and most loyal


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
supporters of the Birchip Show might be mentioned Messrs. H.
Campbell, John Fraser, Joseph Watson, T. Green, Barber Bros.,
Bennett Bros., Dunstan, Sheean Bros., Andy Sheean, Hillgrove
Bros., M'Lelland Bros., O’Donnell Bros., and Connolly Bros. Mr.
W. J. Stevens puts his whole heart into the work and is a most
indefatigable secretary.
FIRE BRIGADE.
The Birchip Fire Brigade, although only established some
12 months, has reached a high degree of efficiency under their
captain, Mr. M'Leish, and the secretary, Mr. C. J. Long. Much
practice is indulged in with reel and hose, and the men are en-
thusiastic in their work.
SPORTING CLUBS.
The Birchip Racing Club has now been in existence some 20
years, and, in spite of many vicissitudes, has always weathered the
bad weather, as it were. During the past two seasons the club
has sprung into prominence, and this year’s meeting will probably
be a great success, as a liberal programme has been framed, and
entries are likely to be large. Mr. W. Beckham is the president,
and Mr. A. E. Lefebre the very courteous and genial secretary.
The Golf Club can boast of a large membership, the president of
which is Mr. A. Thompson, with enthusiastic D. J. Byrne as sec-
retary. The links have been selected in a very suitable place, and
much enjoyment is found in this pastime.
Bowling Club.—A much required want.
Tennis Club.—Mr. Lilburne has recently been appointed presi-
dent. There are many tennis enthusiasts in Birchip, and the club
during the summer should be a strong one.
Cricket Club.—The Birchip Cricket Club is now in full swing,
and some very fine young players have been found, also some
“ old ” players. They should well hold their own with clubs in the
adjoining towns as in past years.
Birchip Football Club.—Birchip people are very enthusiastic
lovers of football, and last year’s team was a strong one, and
succeeded very well in the various matches played. Mr. A. E.
Lefebre is president. During the past two years the Birchip club
have been runners-up in the football competition, being second
to St. Arnaud. The Birchip club has on several occasions chartered
a special train, and played against Mildura, with success in nearly
every game.
The Birchip Gun Club members usually hold weekly pigeon
and sparrow matches. The membership is a large one, and the
club is in a prosperous state. Mr. Long is secretary.
The Birchip Rifle Club is a most successful one, and was
formed in 1899. Mr. N. M'Donald has been captain for many
years. The range is splendidly situated, and has three targets. The
900 yards range ranks amongst the best in Victoria. The Birchip
club has been on top of the musketry course during the past
four years. During 1901 the club fired 45 matches against various
clubs, winning 39 and losing 6 The Birchip club is always well
represented at V.R.A. matches, and last year H. Watson won
the “ Marshall,” with 10 bullseyes at 600 yards, and C. Matthews
was second with 73 (possible 75) in the “ Sargood.” Individual
members of the club have won over £2OO value in trophies. Mr.
S. Carlisle is secretary, and Mr. Collins, the donor of many trophies,
a valued patron.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
THE BIRCHIP BRASS BAND.
The Birchip Brass Band has been formed many years, but from
time to time they have lost and gained valued players. At the
present time it is an excellent combination, and on various oc-
casions assists in enlivening the residents of the town. Messrs.
Jenkin, Perrin, Grcig, Stevens and Fielding, jun., are amongst
the enthusiastic members, and work hard to keep the instrumen-
talists together, both by example and precept. The band has suc-
ceeded in raising a very large amount towards the maintenance
of the St. Arnaud Hospital. Last year was a record one, the
collections amounting to £243/1/- nett, the contributions from
Birchip alone amounting to £BO/9/1. Mr. J. Lockwood has been
closely identified with the welfare of the band since its formation, and
the benefits they have been able to confer on others is in a
great measure due to his zeal and unselfishness. Mr. J. Greig is
a hard working secretary and an excellent organiser.
LODGES.
There are four friendly societies—the Druids, M.U.1.0.0.F.,
A.N.A., and Rechabites. Each can boast of a large membership,
with increasing funds. The Masonic Lodge has recently built a
very handsome temple, quite typical of the lodge’s ideals. This
building is one of the finest, if not the finest, in the Wimmera and
Mallee portions of Victoria.
CHURCHES.
There are four churches—the Methodist, the minister in charge
being Mr. Brady; the Church of England, vicar, Rev. Coles; the
Roman Catholic Church, Fathers Barry and Reidy; and the Pres-
byterian, Rev. G. S. Brodie. Each church claims many adherents,
and the congregations are fortunate in having excellent shepherds
to guide them in their spiritual lives.
“THE BIRCHIP ADVERTISER”
is published weekly, and has a large circulation throughout the
Mallee. Mr. Fred. Grantley is proprietor and editor.
BANKS.
There are also three banks—the Commercial, National, and the
Victoria. Each does a large volume of business.
HOTELS.
There are three excellently managed hotels—the Commercial,
the Shamrock, and the Birchip.
STOCK SALES.
Birchip is an important stock sale centre, and sales are held
at regular intervals by the various firms of auctioneers. The
yards, which are privately owned, are centrally situated, and each
auctioneering firm has equal opportunities of selling there. That
is a first-class idea, for it concentrates buyers and sellers. The
following are the firms carrying on auctioneering, stock and station
agency business in Birchip-—Messrs. Morrow and Co., Hancock
and Malcolm . Frank O’Donnell, Blencowe and Ackland, and
M'Lelland, Barber and Co.
BIRCHIP SHIRE COUNCIL.
The Birchip Shire Council meets monthly. The following are
the members—Messrs. J. Lockwood (president); W. Beckham, W.
Barber (Central Riding); John Spittle, D. Allison, R. T. Lawler


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
(North Riding); S. W. Fielding, M. Connellan and E. A. Warne
(South Riding). Mr. J. M. Kensley is secretary and clerk of
works. The council building, which was erected in 1906, is one
of the adornments to the town. It is built of brick, and is com-
modious, and, withal, delightfully cool in summer.
THE BIRCHIP ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANY.
The Birchip Electric Light Co. was formed with the idea of
supplying light and power for the town of Birchip. Four thousand
shares were issued, and were quickly taken up. Everything is well
forward, and in June of this year Birchip will have the great
advantage electric lighting gives. This enterprising scheme’s suc-
cess is assured, and the council have arranged to light up the
principal thoroughfare, Cumming-avenue, with several large arc
lamps, and various other portions of the town with electricity. The
advent of electric light will add still further to the general pio-
gressive appearance of this embryo Mallee city. The directors
of the company are Messrs. J. Lockwood (chairman), Nonmus,
Benness, Phelps, Williams, Lilburne and Hannah; while the sec-
retarial duties have been accepted by Mr. J. M. Kensley.
THE POST OFFICE.
The Post Office is in charge of Mr. J. F. Faulkiner, who is
appreciated by the townspeople for his courtesy to one and all and
general capable management.
A GENERAL REVIEW.
In a brief review, the compiler feels it incumbent upon him
to mention the meritorious services many of the early pioneers
rendered in building up and laying out the present modern town
of Birchip. Notable amongst many are the names of Messrs. J.
Lockwood, E. Simpson, A. Sheean, H. Campbell and J. Watson, all
of whom are active men to-day in Birchip’s community, both com-
mercially and socially.
©ne of the finest and most noble-hearted women who ever lived
in this State was the late Mrs. Joseph Watson. She was the life
and soul of Birchip and district in various ways, and her humane
and philanthropic actions will live for many years. The carrying
out of a humane action was actually instrumental in causing her
demise. Her husband, Mr. Joseph Watson, an unassuming, estimable
gentleman, is hale and hearty, and resides in the district still.
Although 215 miles from Melbourne, Birchip has now reasoiv
able railway communication with the city and other large centres.
The greatest drawback, in common with other country towns, is
the length of time the train takes to crawl along the journey, also
there is far too much time lost in waiting at sidings and stations
very little better than sidings. The rapidly expanding railway
revenue at not only Birchip, but various stations on the line from
Maryborough to Mildura will, no doubt, be noted by the authorities,
and further gradual improvements be made in the train service.
Last year proved a record one in every way, and, therefore,
the fact that so many fine buildings are being erected in the town
is not surprising. The new railway station is a grand improvement,
and the post office, which not only greatly enhances the appearance
of the town, was badly required, and will be much appreciated by
the townspeople. On every side one notices improvements being
made, and the town on sale day is a veritable hive of activity,
every’ business sharing in the present prosperity. Birchip is for-
tunate in having business men of ability and possessing the pro-
gressive spirit, which is generally found lacking so much in older-


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
established towns. In the latter, they get into a rut, as it were,
and are content to just live and die in the same old way. With
the younger settled towns and districts it is entirely different, both
business men and farmers, possessing a great deal of energy, must
have an outlet —that outlet one finds in “ progress.” Sinking a large
dam on one’s property, cultivating more land each year, erecting a
new homestead, buying motor cars, improving the breed of sheep,
enlarging the business premises, knocking them down and putting
up new ones to keep pace with the times and the progress of
Australia, with hundreds of other projects, are all signs of the
progressive nature; and the compiler has nowhere found solid,
prosperous progress more than in Birchip and district, and in his
publication has endeavoured to enable people of Australia, wherever
his book is despatched, to give them a fair and unexaggerated
description.
Apart from the letterpress matter, the illustrations speak very
loudly. With such persevering, energetic townsmen, liberal farmers,
an adequate water supply, electric light, ice factory, good railway
service, and, most important of all, good seasons, Birchip will, no
doubt, continue to expand rapidly, and will become a still more
important business centre than even at present.
Two interesting Views of Mr. Sheean’s Farm near Birchip. No. 1. The Homestead. No. 2.
Crops grown by Mr. Sheean, which are amongst the Finest in the Mallee.
Showing


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
CONNELLY BROS., Hay and Corn Merchants
Agents for —Massey-Harris Co., Cliff and Bunting, Blackstone
Oil Engine, M’Glashan (St. Arnaud), Crown Separator, Scottish
Union Co., A.M.P, Society, Oils, Twine, etc., Vulcan First-class
Horse Spice and Sure Cure for Bots. Wheat Buyers. Chaff-
Cutter (travelling.; Private Weighbridge, 15 tons, guaranteed.
View showing the arrival of wheat teams at
“ Connelly’s ” Store. Wailing to go on the weighbridge.
Mr. Connelly’s well-conducted Coffee Palace,
“ The Victoria.”
Messrs. Connelly Bros.’ hay and corn store has been established
since 1891. In addition to this store being the first store of its
kind, it is also the most important, and a large retail and wholesale
trade is done. Standing crops are bought outright, and this firm,
having a travelling chaffcutter, principally sell their own fodder;
occasionally, however, work is undertaken for farmers. A large
area of Malice land is held by the firm under review, and cultivation
and farming is engaged in on a large scale. The whole of the
wheat delivered at Birchip goes over their weighbridge, which regis-
ters up to 15 tons. Mr. J. M. Connelly is one of the old pioneers
of the district, having been a 26 years’ resident. It was Mr. Con-
nelly who used the first four-furrow, stump-jump plough in the Bir-
chip district. He has been a councillor some six years, and there
is a strong feeling in the town and district to once more prevail
upon him to represent them on the Birchip Shire Council.
THE VICTORIA COFFEE PALACE.
Mr. Connelly is also proprietor of the above well-managed and
excellently conducted coffee palace and wine saloon. This coffee
palace being so popular, the accommodation is taxed to more than
its utmost, and it is intended in the near future to erect a handsome
(possibly two-storied), extensive structure, embodying all modern
ideas, and when completed will be another distinct ornament to that
fine thoroughfare—Cumming-avenue.


THE COMMERCIAL HOTEL, BIRCHIP. K. SLATTERY, Proprietress.
Exterior View oi Miss K. Slattery’s Splendidly Conducted Hotel, Dimming Avenue, Birchip.
Interior View of one of the Dining Rooms at that well-managed and The s Commercial.”


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The Commercial Hotel
BIRCHIP
A Decidedly Comfortable and Splendidly
Conducted Hotel
The Commercial Hotel, Birchip, has always been recognised as
a first-class hotel. Some twelve months ago the freehold was pur-
chased by Mr. A. E. Lefebvre, and Miss K. Slattery became the
licensee of the hotel.
The belief, often expressed, that a capable, clever woman is
necessary in the conducting of an hotel on thorough lines was never
better illustrated than in the business under review, and the gener-
ally systematic manner arrangements are made—the comfort one
meets with at " The Commercial ” amply justifies it being placed
in the same category as one of the best commercial hotels in the
Wimmera and Mallee.
“The Commercial ” is situated at the northern end of Cumming-
avenue, convenient to the railway station and post office. This
hotel being a commodious one—the rooms are large, well ventilated,
and kept in perfect order. There are two dining-rooms—No.
1 and No. 2. The menu is a varied and carefully thought out one,
and in every way possible an excellent repast can be enjoyed.
Attached to the hotel is a well-appointed billiard room, where a
quiet game of billiards is always assured. Commercial travellers
find a great convenience in being able to obtain a room in which
to show their “ samples.” Wise provision has been made for bath-
ing and lavatory accommodation; and, in fact, everything possible
to add to the comfort of patrons at the hotel has been done by
Miss Slattery. A large yard adjoining the hotel is made available
for farmers and others, and is utilised by scores on sale and other
busy days. There are also bait and livery stables.
The bar is a well fitted up one, and all the best brands of
liquors, wines, etc., are stocked. The draught beer is always beauti-
fully clear; and here, as elsewhere throughout this well managed
hotel, everything reflects the greatest credit on the licensee.
“The Commercial Hotel” can very genuinely be recommended
to those requiring a first-class hotel, where comfort, quietness, clean-
liness and liberality is desired. It will all be found at this hotel,
which is every month becoming more and more popular.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Thomas Grace’s Butchering
Establishment
GUMMING AVENUE, BIRCHIP
Interior of Mr. Grace’s Butchering Establishment.
Birchip's townspeople and farmers In the surrounding district
have much to thank Mr. Thomas Grace for —prime meat and ice.
The latter is a necessity in summer time in the Mallee, and Mr.
Grace, having a progressive nature, decided to instal a modern
refrigerating plant, and he now supplies the townspeople, not only
with the primest of meat and small goods, but ice to keep it prime
for two or three days if necessary. This butchering establishment
in Cumming-avenue is one of the cleanest the compiler has yet
visited, and reflects credit on Mr. Grace and his foreman, whilst
the mutton and beef on view demonstrated the splendid fattening
quality of the Mallee country. The ice plant is capable of turning
out 15 cwt. of ice per day, and the cool storage chambers are com-
modious and sufficient to hold a large quantity of meat, which is
kept to any required temperature. All small goods are made on
the premises, and an up-to-date mincer and sanitary silent cutter
are in use. The refrigerating works and other machinery are driven
by a &y 2 h.p. oil engine. Mr. Grace is to be complimented on his
progressiveness, and he can now pride himself on possessing one
of the most complete butchering establishments in the country towns
of Victoria.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
J. T. BALES, Baker, etc.
BIRCHIP.
Exterior View of Mr. J. T. Bales’ Premises, the Leading Bakery Business in Birchip.
Mr. J. T. Bales is generally recognised as the leading baker of
Birchip, and, since establishing his business, 18 months ago, the
turnover has increased wonderfully. In fact, during the past 6
months, the quantity of flour used has been more than doubled.
A branch of this business has been established in Cumming-avenue
in a central position, and the tea-rooms, where light refreshments
can be obtained, are much appreciated by the townspeople and
members of the farming community. Catering is carried out on
a liberal and thorough scale, while wedding and birthday cakes can
be secured in many designs. The high-class quality of the small-
goods and bread which are delivered daily are equal to those sent
out from any similar business in the country towns of Victoria.
A Pretty Corner in Mr. Lockwood’s Fernery. Lake Danaher, a fine sheet of water in the
vicinity of Birchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The Shamrock Hotel
BIRCHIP
Mr. A. NONMUS, Proprietor
The Shamrock Hotel, which is centrally situated in the main
thoroughfare—Cumming-avenue—of Birchip, has always ranked
amongst the best conducted and finely appointed commercial hotels
in Victoria, and since Mr. A. Nonmus took over the management of
this large business concern in April, 1910, that reputation has been
well upheld, and even added to.
Exterior View of “The Shamrock Hotel,” Birchip, one of the best Country Commercial Hotels in Victoria
Mr. NONMUS, Proprietor.
The proprietor, being a keen, observant and courteous business
man, has made many minor improvements for the comfort of
patrons, with the natural result—a steady and gradual increase in
business and greater popularity than “ The Shamrock ” has yet
enjoyed. The tables, in both the
reflect the greatest credit on Mrs.
the domestic portion of the hotel,
and comfortably furnished ones.
No. 1 and No. 2 dining-rooms,
Nonmus, who ably superintends
and the bedrooms are fine, airy
The sitting-rooms are com-
modious and comfortable to a degree; while an excellent game of
billiards can be relied upon in the well-appointed billiard saloon
attached to this hotel.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The No. 1 Dininj Room, “ The Shamrock Hotel,” Birchip.
The No. 2 Din'ng Room.
Mr, Nonmus believes in providing only one quality for his
patrons, and the best of wines,
will be found exposed for sale
bar. The general management of ‘
Mr. Nonmus in every way, and such
pirits, ales, cigars, etc., only
in the splendidly fitted up
“ The Shamrock ” is a credit to
i management raises considerably
the tone of hotel-keeping. As a citizen, he takes a keen interest
in the welfare of the town, and Mr. Nonmus' name is invariably
found amongst those in any progressive movement tending to
advance the interests of Birchip.
... THE SHAMROCK HOTEL ...
Best Brands of Wines, Spirits, Ales, and Cigars in Stock


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
J. P. KENSLEY’S BUTCHERING ESTABLISHMENT,
Gumming Avenue, Birchip.
Exterior View of J. P. Kensley’s Flourishing Butchering Establishment.
Mr. J. P. Kensley first gazed on the Mallee country surround-
ing Birchip 16 years ago, and, after being engaged in farming pur-
suits for several years, he purchased the butchering business then
carried on by Warne Bros., 4 years ago. His establishment is in
Cumming-avenue, and is an up-to-date and flourishing one, where
everything is kept scrupulously clean, and the primest of meat only
is offered to the public. All small-goods are manufactured on the
premises from the best material. Whether for price or quality,
Mr. Kensley can well hold his own, and the manner in which the
business is conducted is a distinct credit to him.
The Presbyterian Church, Birchip.
The Church of England, Birchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Blencowe & Ackland,
Auctioneer, Stock
and Station Agents,
GUMMING AVENUE, BIRCHIP.
One of the usual large yardings of sheep at Blencowe end
The Birchip Office of Blenctwe & Ackland.
Mr. A. G. Blencowe, who has been residing in the Birchip dis-
trict many years, and is favourably known throughout the Mallee,
recently entered into partnership with Mr. F. G. Ackland, and an
auctioneering, stock and estate business has been inaugurated, with
the probability of a very successful future. Mr. Blencowe has had
several years' experience in stock and station agency business, and
was connected since lt!09 with the firm of Blencowe and O’Donnell.
On the latter retiring from the firm, Mr. Ackland, who has been
engaged in farming pursuits in the Watchem district, joined Mr.
Blencowe. The new partner is well-known for his straight-going
qualities and principles. Fortnightly sales are held at Birchip and
Watchem, while clearing sales are conducted in any part of the
Mallee. This firm, whose head office is in Cumming-avenue, Birchip,
intend to devote great attention to the land branch of their business.
Birchip is very glad to have met Mr. Ackland, and it is gratifying to
record the new firm’s early success.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCH IP.
y* Mallee Furniture Arcade
A. W. G. DUNTON, Proprietor
Complete House Furnisher, Cabinet Maker,
Upholsterer and Picture Framer
“ The Mallee Furniture Arcade,” which is a very fine, handsome
establishment, and quite an ornament to the town of Birchip, has
been established since 1909, and is now both creditably and capably
managed by the proprietor, Mr. Dunton. The commodious ware-
house carries a large stock of furniture, and, judging by the quality
of the goods displayed, Mr. Dunton is a keen buyer, and has a
thorough knowledge of the Mallee farmers’ and townsmen’s require-
ments. Linoleums in many patterns, 13 feet wide if desired, crockery
ware, hearthrugs, etc., are also largely stocked.
With such a fine warehouse in their midst, it is not surprising
that the Birchip people are practically showing their appreciation
of Mr. Dunton’s energy, by purchasing from him at prices quite on
a par with the city’s. Upholstering is undertaken, and furniture re-
paired. Many articles of furniture are manufactured in Birchip, and
shortly Mr. Dunton intends to go into this branch of the business
far more extensively.
Mr. Dunton is agent for gramophones, bicycles, and a large range
of records by the world’s greatest artists. He is also local agent
for Ronisch and Gors and Kallmann's pianos, and the Aachen and
Munich Fire Insurance Co.
There’s a moral to this article. Call and inspect, and if you feel
satisfied that the prices and quality are fair and reasonable, support
the local man. He’s got a reputation to keep, for the success of his
business was built on reputation.
y Mallee Furniture Arcade


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP
Exterior and Interior Views of
“THE MALLEE FURNITURE ARCADE,”
which business is a distinct credit to Birchip and the
Proprietor, Mr. A. W. G. Dunton.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
W. T. Jenkin, Plumber & Tinsmith.
Galvanised Tanks, all sizes, from 100 gallons
to 7,000 gallons. Tinware of every descrip-
tion. Water Laid On. Guns Repaired.
Mr. W. T. Jenkin’s Business Premises and Private Residence, Birchip
Mr. Jenkin is admittedly the leading plumber and tinsmith of
Birchip, and, since 1891, the progress has been well sustained, until
to-day his business is a flourishing and prosperous one. He has
secured an excellent name for thorough workmanship in all jobs
entrusted and carried out by him. Acetylene gas installations are
undertaken, and estimates given of all classes of plumbing and tin-
smithing work. His premises are in Cumming-avenue, and a large
stock is carried. He is agent for Bryan Bros.’ (Colac) windmills,
and Cygnet stoves. The repairing of guns is a special feature of
this business.
W. T. JENKIN,
Gumming Avenue, Birchip,
All Correspondence Receives prompt attention.
Established 20 years.
Agent Bryan Bros.’ (Colac) Windmills and Cygnet Stoves.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Some of Eirchip’s Old Identities
and Various Views of Interest.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP
The Birchip Coach Factory
J. T. LILBURNE
Coachbuilder, Wheelwright, General Black
smith and Farrier.
Mr. J. T. Lilburne’s handcome and comfortable Private Residence.
Mr. J. T. Li.burne’s Old Factory Premises. (20 years ego).
Vehicles of all kinds built to order. Repairs carried
out promptly. Horses carefully shod.
Painting and Trimming undertaken at reasonable Prices.
VEHICLES BOUGHT, SOLD OR EXCHANGED.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The present large and prosperous coachbuilding, wheelwright
and blacksmithing business has now been established some 20 years
by Mr. J. T. Lilburne, and the growth of same has been consider-
able, especially during recent years. The photos, accompanying this
article depicts- the “ old ” premises, 20 years ago, and the handsome,
modern factory of to-day, which so easily ranks amongst the best
and largest in the Wimmera and Mallee provinces of Victoria. Mr.
Lilburne has worked his way up in the commercial world of Vic-
toria by grit, determination and a level-headed trait in his character.
Also, while being true to himself, he has been true to his customers,
and the quality and finish of vehicles sent out from Lilburne’s factory
is a by-word in the Mallee. In fact, wherever exhibited at agricul-
tural shows they have proved invincible against all comers. Now-
adays there is no necessity to exhibit the class of work turned out
from the factory. Air. Lilburne’s reputation has been gained by
merit, and by merit in the work he intends to hold that reputation.
For high-class vehicles of any kind, there is not one factory in
Victoria where the public will receive fairer treatment, elither in
price, quality of the work, finish, and prompt delivery.
Air. Lilburne is also a large wheat buyer, and purchases big
quantities each year. With the advent of electricity in Birchip, Mr.
Lilburne (who is one of the directors) intends to use same in his
thoroughly modern and well-equipped factory, which can justly
boast to possessing thoroughly experienced tradesmen in the various
departments.
Mr. J. T. Lilburne’s laidsome modem Facto;y of to-day.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Mr. C. J. Sheridan’s High-Class and Modern Photographic Studios, Cumming Avenue, Birchip.
C. J. SHERIDAN, Photographer
(Established 7 years)
CUMMING AVENUE, BIRCHIP.
A Modern Studio
Life-like Portraits, Bridal Groups, Enlargements.
Style and Finish equal to the City. Reasonable
Prices are the leading feature at “Sheridan’
Photographic Studios.”
The publisher of this book feels
that a few words are due to Mr.
Sheridan for the exceedingly able
manner in which he has carried out
the photography for reproduction in
this work. If the blocks are good,
the photos, must be very good indeed,
for the former are reduced a great
deal. The public of Birchip are for-
tunate in having a resident photo-
grapher in their midst equal to the
best the compiler has yet secured.
Promptness, which so many photo-
graphers lack, is also a creditable
point in Mr. Sheridan, and when he
promises one of his clients a proof or
photos, they are ready right up to
time. For all classes of photography
Mr. Sheridan is undeniably an actual artist, and one cannot say more
than that.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCH IP.
Three Fine Views of WINDARRA ESTATE, the
Property of Mr. Thomas McClelland.
This well-managed Estate comprises some 8,000 acres, and can carry
fully 6,000 head of stock. The land is especially suitable for hay and
wheat glowing, and the yields have ranked amongst the highest in the
district. Mr. McClelland has been connected with the Mallee during 15
years, and by dint of hard work has made Windarra Estate equal to
some of the finest in Victoria.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The Birchip Hairdressing Saloon,
Messrs. WILLIAMS & BLENCOWE, Proprietors.
Interior view of Messrs. Williams & Bler.cawe’s sp'entia saloon.
The leading hairdressing and shaving saloon is that conducted
so well by Messrs. C. Williams and J. Blencowe, in Cumming-
avenue, Birchip, adjoining the Shamrock Hotel. Three hands are
employed, and are kept busy from early morning until closing time.
One's toilet is as well attended to in Birchip as in the city. Civility,
cleanliness and promptness are this firm’s watchword, and they keep
up to it very well indeed. The partners are popular in the town
and district, and Mr. C. Williams is a great enthusiast of sport in
all its branches. For a quick, easy shave by experienced barbers
an artistic hair-cut, shampoo, etc., there is not a better saloon in the
Mallee and Wimmera.
No. 1. Wheat Stacks at Birchip in the early days. No. 2. Arrival of the First Train at Eirch.p.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Mr. J. A. Caldow, who was born at Barkly in 1863, is one of
the Birchip district’s most respected pioneers, having settled on the
land some 28 years ago. He has gone through much privation in
the lean years of Mallee farming, but to-day is comfortably off
< n his well-cultivated and improved GOO acre farm, 12 miles from
Birchip. He is an enthusiastic supporter of the Racing Club, and
was one of the original members, and has acted as starter for
many years.
D'stant View of Cuimi'ng Avinue,*Birchip.
N. McOONALD, Carrier, etc.
Mr. N. M'Donald is the recognised carrier of Birchip, and has
been so during the past 14 years. Goods, parcels, etc., are delivered
promptly, and his prices are reasonable. Mr. M'Donald has for
many years been captain of the Rifle Club, and is still an excel-
lent marksman and an enthusiastic member.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
FRANK O’DONNELL,
Auctioneer, Land and Estate Agent
Mr. Frank O’Donnell’s Business Premises, Birchip
One of the best-known and most popular men in the auctioneer-
ing world of Birchip is Mr. Frank O’Donnell, who was associated
in partnership with Mr. A. Blcncowe for some considerable time.
Mr. O’Donnell, however, feeling he would have more scope for his
energy, dissolved partnership, and has commenced in business as
an auctioneer, stock and station agent. Mr.’ O’Donnell is fortunate
in securing offices in the Shamrock Hotel buildings, the site being
central and most convenient. He is holding fortnightly sales at
the Birchip yards, and is giving every attention to land, stock and
agency business.
Mr. O’Donnell, whose family are engaged in farming business
in the Birchip district, has been some 20 years in the Mallee
country, and is a thoroughly experienced man with all kinds of
stock, and also knows the value of land well. He is much respected
in the district, and since commencing 'cn his own account has been
very successful. Farmers can put every faith in any work entrusted
to Frank O’Donnell. His principle is to do the best for his clients,
and give both buyer and seller a fair deal. Advice on any matter
affecting land or stock he is only too willing to give.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Some of Birchip’s Progressive Business Men.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
HANNAH BROS.
(Established 24 Years)
“The Ballarat Store,” DONALD
“Victoria House,” - BIRCHIP
GENERAL STOREKEEPERS, DRAPERY
ESTABLISHMENT & BOOT EMPORIUM
DEPARTMENTS: Grocery, Drapery, Millinery, Tailoring, Boots & Shoes,.
Ironmongery, Crockery ware, Furnishings, Furniture, Costumes, etc.
ALL FARMERS’ REQUISITES.
‘‘The Ballarat Store,” Donald (Messrs. John and R. C. Hannah,
jun.) has been established 24 years, but it was not until four years
ago that this firm, with commendable enterprise, commenced in
business at Birchip.
The “ Victoria House,” which is the name given to the business,
is situated centrally in Cumming-avenue, and is easily one of the
finest and most up-to-date stores in the Mallec. “Victoria House”
is a commodious establishment, and the modern plate-glass windows
enable Hannah Bros, to display sufficient goods to give a very
fair idea of the quality and range of goods that lie on the shelves
and in the reserve stores.
Hannah Bros.’ business has trebled itself during the past two
years, and the chief reasons for this are—they are imbued with
progressive ideas; they are keen, observant buyers; with 24 years’
business experience of the Mallee, they understand the Mallee resi-
dents’ requirements; they pride themselves on keeping a stock equal
in quality to any firm in the country towns of Victoria.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Interior View of Messrs. Kannah Bros.’ Well-equipped Grocery Department.
For all farm requisites—a tailor-made suit; chic, dainty, fashion-
able millinery; a pretty shoe that will wear well —a boot of high-
class quality; groceries (continental delicacies included); drapery of
every kind—the place to visit is
“ VICTORIA HOUSE,” GUMMING AVENUE, BIRCHIP
Interior View of Messrs. Hannah Bros.’ splendidly appointed Drapery Department.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Hancock
and.
Malcolm,
Auctioneer,
Stock
and
Station
Agents,
BIRCHIP.
Snapshot View of Hancock & Malcolm’s invariably “ Full Yardings ” at their Birchip Fortnightly Sales
This business was purchased from Messrs. Simpson and Fricke
in June, 1909, and, prior to that, had been successfully conducted by
them for many years. The present firm’s auctioneer, Mr. H. A.
Hancock, was formerly in the stock and station agency business in
Shepparton and the Western District, and for a considerable period
was with Dalgety and Co. in various capacities.
Regular fortnightly stock sales are conducted in the Birchip
yards every alternate Saturday, and monthly sales are held at their
Woomelang branch, which is under the management of an ex-
perienced officer.
Every facility for the inspection of Mallee properties, which have
■been in such demand during recent years, is provided by the firm,
and the turnover for the last twelve months approaches closely to
a cjuarter of a million pounds.
The business is actively conducted under the personal super-
vision of the principals, and clients may rely upon receiving every
consideration in their dealings with the firm under review.
Messrs. Hancock and Malcolm’s sales are well attended, and
large yardings are always assured. Both the Birchip and Woome-
lang offices are securing an increasing number of clients each year,
a fact that practically illustrates the sound and solid business methods
of this firm.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
OAKLEY & THOMPSON,]
Solicitors, etc.
A corner in Mr. Thompson’s;
beautifully laid out garden.
Mr. Archibald Thompson.
Messrs. Oakley and Thompson’s
Brsiness Premises, Birchip.
The members of the firm are George F. Oakley and Archibald
Thompson. Mr. Oakley has been practising in Donald for nearly
30 years. Mr. Thompson joined in this successful partnership in
1906, and managed the extensive Birchip branch. The firm now
employs 11 clerks, and the business is still growing. Efforts have
been made to induce this firm to open branches in the neighbouring
towns, but they are unable to do so, on account of the pressure of
work in Donald and Birchip. They are solicitors to the Shire Coun-
cils of these towns. Mr. “Archie” Thompson is connected with the
various sporting clubs in the town. He played football with the
Geelong senior team for some 8 years, is president of the Birchip
Golf Club, past president of the tennis club, and one of Birchip's
leading cricketers.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Long’s Coffee Palace, Birchip,
Exterior view of Long’s Coffee Pala:e, Birchip.
Three years ago Mr. C. Long took over the old-established
Coffee Palace, carried on for fifteen years by Mr. Jackson, in Cum-
ming-avenue, Birchip, and there is little doubt he has made a great
success of his undertaking. “ Long’s Coffee Palace ”is a commodious
one, containing, as it does, some 22 rooms, with sitting-rooms, par-
lours, fine dining-room, which, in spite of its great dimensions, is
very often unable to accommodate all of Mr. Long’s customers.
This Coffee Palace is more popular than it has ever been, and the
prosperity enjoyed is in a great measure due to the capable man-
agement by Mr. Long. Adjoining the Coffee Palace is a.cool drink,
ice cream, etc., shop.
Long’s Coffee Palace can be recommended to those requiring
comfortable accommodation.
Mr. Denis Coffey, one of Birchip’s young,
progressive business men.
Mr. A. E. Lefebvre, Secretary of (he Progress
Assrelation, the Birchip Facing Club, Football Club,
and one of the most enthusiastic, genial and
progressive men in B rchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
MORROW & CO.,
Auctioneers, Land and Estate Agents,
BIRCHIP.
Messrs. Morrow and Co., whose head office is at Inglewood,
rank amongst the oldest established and most important auctioneer-
ing firms in Victoria. Mr. Thomas Morrow laid down the founda-
tion in 1871, and since that time the firm have gradually and solidly,
expanded, until to-day one finds they have flourishing branches in
Bendigo, Charlton, Wycheproof, Boort, Sea Lake, Kaneira, Woome-
lang, Bealiba, Logan, Newstead
Quambatook, Ultima and Birchip.
most progressive of these several
reputation stands very high in the
Pyalong, Lancefield, Kilmore.
The Birchip office is one of the
branches, and Morrow and Co.’s
Mallee. Mr. P. Hardiman, who
is an auctioneer, is in charge of the Birchip branch, and is a very
zealous and energetic business man. A motor car is used to convey
buyers and sellers to wherever necessary. This saves a great deal
of time, and from every standpoint is a great convenience. Sales
are held fortnightly in Birchip, and clearing sales in any portion
of Victoria. Great attention is paid to the land, stock and financial
departments of the firm under review. In every way possible Messrs.
Morrow r and Co. show the utmost liberality to their clients, and it
is not surprising to be able to record the complete success this
firm enjoys.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCH IP.
Several Interesting Views of Birchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The Birchip Saddlery Depot
Mr. D. J. BYRNE, Proprietor.
Mr. Byrne’s Business Premises
During the past 13 years Mr. D. J. Byrne, of the Birchip
Saddlery Depot, has been recognised as one of the leading saddlery
and harness depots in the Mallee, and to-day one finds it still
forging ahead. Mr. Byrne is a thorough tradesman, a capable
business man, and withal a keen buyer, who, through lengthy
experience with the Mallee farmer, knows exactly what his require-
ments are, and buys accordingly. A large stock is carried of
saddles, single and double harness, etc., veterinary instruments,
including drench bits, etc. The whole of the harnessware on
sale at Mr. Byrne’s establishment having been manufactured by
his employees, he can genuinely give his customers an assurance
on the point of quality and finish. Repairing work of all kinds
is carried out expeditiously and well. There is little doubt that
Mr. Byrne carries a fine range of harnessware, and one not often
seen in a country saddler’s shop. Mr. Byrne is also proprietor of
the Birchip Cycle Depot, where B.S.A. cycles are built, repairs
undertaken, and accessories of all kinds kept in stock. Phono-
graphs and hundreds of records are on safe, and there is no
reason, considering the cheap price these “ ’phones ” are obtainable
at, for farmers net to have music in their homes. Mr. Byrne, who
is one of the Malice's most respected business men, has introduced
a harness and boot dressing to Birchip. It is a splendid article,
and, being good, is iust good enough to use on Byrne’s harness,
which is equal to the best in the Mallee; in fact, any country town
in Victoria.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
The Birchip
Flour Mill.
Messrs. SHEEAN BROS., Proprietors.
Messrs. Sheean Bros.’ Modern and Well-equipped Flour Mill, Birchip.
The roller flour mill, now so successfully carried on by Messrs.
Sheean Bros., was erected in 1893 by Mr. E. Richardson, and passed
into the hands of Sheean Bros, in 1898. The building is a handsome
two-storied one, and the flour milling industry is an important and
beneficial one to Birchip and district. The mill is thoroughly up-to-
date in every respect, improvements in the machinery having been
made from time to time. The motive power is secured by steam.
The two grain sheds, which are generally full in the wheat season,
can accommodate 55,000 bags. As showing the amount of flour
manufactured at this mill, it might be mentioned that over 30,000
bags of wheat are put through during a single year. The “ Orient ”
brand of flour is noted throughout Australia for its quality, and the
firm find no difficulty in securing a market. Mr. Andrew Sheean,
who has been connected for many years with the welfare of the
town and district, is manager.


Polytechnic Store, Birchip.
S. L. WILLIAMS &! CO., Proprietors.
Mr. S. L. Williams was born and educated in London, where
he secured a sound commercial training. After arriving in Victoria,
he obtained a position at Foy and Gibson’s, resigned, and com-
menced in Birchip, where he bought Mr. MWicar’s business. Two
years later he erected a commodious brick store, which 12 months
after being opened was burned to the ground. Although a heavy
loser (over £6OOl. Mr. Williams indefattigably started building
again, and the present handsome structure in Cumming-avenue is
the result. Williams and Co. import direct from the manufacturers,
and are therefore able to offer to the public specially cheap lines in
crockery, cutlery, glassware, electro-plate and fancy goods ; The
general drapery department is always well stocked; the millinery
department is also fashionably stocked. Costumes, skirts, and under-
clothing is a rapidly increasing department, the quality, variety and
keen prices at which the goods are marked making it a decided
saving to the purchaser. For tempting lines in dress goods, Man-
chester and blankets the firm invite comparison with the keenest
Melbourne and Ballarat firms. Should a client be unable to wait
for a suit being made (which for fit and style are the very best
at reasonable cost), they can procure a first-class article from their
well-assorted stock. The boot department is well supplied with a
great variety of shapes and styles.
The “ Polytechnic Store ” is a home of quality. They supply a
reliable article; they are not afraid of competition, their goods
being offered at bedrock prices; and quality is never, never sacri-
ficed for ouantitv. An agenev is held by Williams and for
the Royal Insurance Co.; also Mt. Lyell manures, A.N.A. machines,
Vacuum Oil Co.
Mr. Williams, who is a prominent townsman, is a supporter
of cricket, tennis, football, etc. Purn<j the drought year he acted
as secretary to the relief fund, and did much good work. Fie has
a lovely home in the “ Toorak ” of Birchip, a view of which appear;
in this book.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Three Fine Views of the “Old Wirrimbirchip Station,” which, since passing into Mr. T. Dunstan’s
hands, has become one of the most improved properties in the Birchip District.
The views appearing in this publication are of Wirrimbirchip
Station, now owned by Mr. 1 hoinas Dunstan. It is 7 miles from
Birchip, the town having been named from this station, the first
portion very wisely being cut out. It was, in 1850, the P.R. Ci
640 acres was acquired from the Crown by Mr. R. Bell. This
old property changed hands several times, and came into the
possession of the Mogg family, from whom, about 20 years <rgo>
the late Mr. Alexander Barber purchased the homestead portion,
where he lived a partly retired life, using the land pricipally for
grazing. The present owner (Thomas Dunstan) speaks glowingly
of it as a grazing property for wlich he is mainly using it. A
fair amount of cultivation, however, has been done on this pro-
perty, and the results have been excellent, clearly demonstrating
to Mr. Dunstan the value of this property with its rich, sandy
and chocolate soil. The owner has gradually improved the pro
p er ty it ranks amongst some of the best in the Mallee.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
William Hicks, Jeweller,
etc.
Exterior View of Mr. William Hicks’ Jewellery Establishment.
Mr. William Hicks’ jewellery and watchmaking establishment
has now been in existence 15 years, and is generally recognised as
the leading one of its kind in Birchip. The stock of jewellery car-
ried is a comprehensive one, also up-to-date, and good value is
assured to all purchasing at Mr. flicks’, who carries out all watch-
making and other repairs to jewellery expeditiously and at reason-
able prices. For jewellery of any kind, watches, clocks, etc., there
is no better place to purchase than “ Hicks’.” A trial is solicited,
and satisfaction guaranteed.
The National Bank, Birchip. Mr. Peart, Manager. The Roman Catholic Church, Birchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Messrs. A. Nonmus & Co.,
Wool, Skin and Hide Merchants.
Exterior View of Messrs. A. Nonmus & Co.’s Business Premises, Birchip.
Messrs. A. Nonmus and Co. are perhaps the biggest wool, skin
and hide merchants in the Mallee and Wimmera, and the growth of
the business has been like that of Birchip—solid and fast. Their
buyers call on farmers in the surrounding district, who soon recog-
nised that the prices offered were equal, and, ip many cases, better,
than they secured in Melbourne. Also, by disposing to Nonmus and
Co., they received cash, and avoided the trouble of sending to Mel-
bourne and waiting a considerable time for their returns, which, in
very many cases, to say the least, were disappointing. This firm
each year purchase quite three parts of the wool grown in the
district. A branch of the firm has been established at Wycheproof.
Aerated Water Factory.
Messrs. Nonmus and Co. are also the proprietors of the Birchip
Aerated Water and Cordial Factory, and practically supply the
whole of the town. The factory is a thoroughly up-to-date one.
Three large filters have been installed, and the machinery is of
the latest pattern. The quality of the water and cordials are
equal to any the writer has yet sampled.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
“The Blue Store,” Birchip
YOUNG & COFFEY, Proprietors.
Exterior View of Messrs. Young and Coffey’s Up-to-date General Store, Pirchip,
“ The Blue Store ” has been in existence some 20 years, the
first proprietors being Messrs. Simpson and M'Kinnon. It has con-
tinued on its successful career since then, and six months ago Messrs.
Robert Young and John Coffey took over this large general store,
and are not only keeping up its splendid reputation, but are adding
to it. The store is a handsome, commodious one, centrally situated,
and a very large stock of groceries, furniture, timber, paints, oils,
colours, hardware, etc., are on hand. They are agents for various
kinds of machinery, Sunshine harvesters, Braybrook implements,
and the Victoria Fire Insurance Co. Wool, skins, hides, etc., are
purchased at highest market rates for cash if desired. This store,
under the management of Messrs. Young and Coffey, is very capably
conducted, and the new firm, by their courteous and straight dealing
methods, will more than uphold the prestige “ The Blue Store ” has
always held in public esteem.
YOUNG and COFFEY,
General Merchants, Birchip.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
THE BIRCHIP HOTEL,
MISS L. J. HOLMAN, Proprietress.
Exterior View of the well-managed and comfortable Birchip Hotel. Miss Holman, Proprietress.
The Birchip Hotel, since June, 1910, has greatly improved, under
the clever, capable management of Miss L. J. Holman, and the cash
register records in a loud voice that the business is more than
double when first taken over. To succeed in an hotel, one must
study the requirements of the public—that is the keynote of Miss
Holman’s success. Everything right throughout this hotel shows
signs of excellent management, and if one is seeking comfortable
accommodation, a solid, well-cooked meal, or a good drink, they
can’t do better than visit “ The Birchip Hotel.”
Beer of the Best
only.
Wines, Spirits and
Quality


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Mr. W.
Quihampton,
Saddler and
Harness Maker
Although Mr. Qui
hampton has been
connected with the
Birchip district for
many years, it was
not until June, 1910,
that he became es-
tablished as a har-
ness maker and
saddler in Camp-
bell’s Buildings, Bir-
chip. He opened in
good style, with a
fine assortment o£
saddles, single and
double harness sets,
collars, h a m e s,
plough chains,
whips, etc., and has
gradually worked his
business up to a suc-
”1 and pros-
perous one. He is not only a great “ grafter,” but a thorough
tradesman in every branch of the saddlery business. Much repair
work is undertaken and carried out as expeditiously as possible, also
at fair prices. As a townsman and a business man, Birchip is glad
Mr. Quihampton settled amongst them. Farmers should call and
inspect his iarge stock.
Members of the Birchip Fire Brigade.
An earnest body of men.
Chairman (Mr. J. Lockwood) and Directors of the
Birchip Electric Light Co.


No. 1. Mr. Lockwood’s Newly Erected Modern Private Residence.
No. 2. Mr. J. Lockwood’s Timber Yards —A very large stock of all Building Material is carried.
No. 3. The Exterior of Mr. J. Lockwood’s Store. A modern, commodious building is shortly to be erected.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
W. H. Lockwood & Son,
GENERAL STORE, BIRCHIP.
“ A Universal Provider.”
The general store controlled so successfully during the past 28
years by Mr. Joseph Lockwood was established in 1882 by Mr. J.
T. Glowrey, of Corack, and is probably the oldest and amongst the
most thriving in the Mallee. This store is a general store in the true
meaning of the word, and Mr. Lockwood can rightly be styled an
universal provider, for practically every requirement the farmer or
townsman desires can be found at Lockwood’s.
For some time past Mr. Lockwood has found the present building
quite inadequate to meet the great expansion of trade during the past
few years, and it is his intention to shortly commence the erection
of a very fine, commodious, modern store, which will have all the
latest improvements—including large cellars for the storage of goods.
These are a necessity, for Mr. Lockwood buys in large quantities,
such a fact being reflected in the reasonable prices charged at this
store.
The grocery department is a special feature of this business, and
a splendidly selected stock is on hand There are also the various
other departments, including hardware, boots and shoes, stationery,
sporting department, etc. Local agencies are held for Federal har-
vesters, skim ploughs, disc cultivators (which work one way only),
T. Robinson and Co., South British Insurance Co., “ Sickle ” brand
manure (which is generally recognised as the best in the markets,
and very suitable for Mallee soils), Lilywhite washing machines,
Trustees and Executors Agency Co. A speciality is made guns
and ammunition, and two lines worth especial mention are Hol-
loway’s ” guns and “ Infallible ” cartridges. Large stocks of timber,
galvanised iron, fencing wire, droppers, and all building material are
on hand at the commodious timber yards. This branch of the
business is a very extensive one. Mr. Lockwood does a very big
trade, not only on account of the quality of the material stocked,
but the prices are right, and the pub'ic have found that they can
buy as cheaply in Birchip as by sending to the city.
Mr. J. Lockwood is a son of Mr. W. H. Lockwood, who has been
continuously acting as engineer to the Whittlesea Council for a
period of 41 years, and is still occupying that position. His son
has not only proved a good business man, but a fine townsman, and
one who has done much for Birchip and district. He is one of the
oldest J.P.’s in the Northern part of Victoria, having
honourably carried out duties in that capacity for 22 years.
He has been a councillor since its inception, and has
thrice occupied the presidential chair with dignity, honour
and ability. He is Deputy Coroner for the district, and a special
Justice for the Consent of Minors; has acted as chairman of the
local Police Court bench for 17 continuous years; is president of
the Mechanics’ Institute; is an enthusiastic supporter of the gun
club, football club, brass band; and, in fact, every institution in the
town and every townsman would keenly feel the loss of Mr. Lock-
wood were he to leave the district. But there is little fear of
and recently he has erected a comfortable, prettily designed brick-
house, and now, with the advent of his new store, the principal
thoroughfare’s appearance—Cumming-avenue —is still further to be
improved by his progressive action.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Large Dam in homestead
paddock, Blantyre Estate,
showing a number of the
fine young cattle.
Interesting views
of Blantyre Es-
tate, 14 miles from
Birchip, the pro-
perty of Messrs.
George and Fred
Eivingstone. It
comprises some
2,500 acres,with a
very comfortable
homestead and
many other im-
provements. The
soil is mostly
chocolate and 600
acres of land set
apart for wheat
growing is cap-
able of growing
up to 10 bags to
the acre.
View on Blantyre Estate
adjoining the homestead.
Mr. S. E. D. CARLISLE, Chemist,
Gumming Avenue, BIRCHIP.
Mr. S. E. D. Carlisle has now
been carrying on his pharmacy in
Birchip some 11 years. He carries
a full range of drugs of the purest
quality, and the public have every
confidence in doing business with Mr.
Carlisle, who is one of Birchip’s best
townsmen, and generally appreciated
for his zeal in business. He is
retary of the Birchip Rifle Club, and
one of the finest shots in the State.
His residence, surrounded by a beau-
tiful garden, is one of the prettiest in
the Mallee.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
THE PH(ENIX STORE
(Established 1880)
Gumming Avenue, Birchip.
H. PERRIN, Proprietor.
Mr. H. Perrin’s Up-to dale Premises, Gumming Avenue, Birchip.
The Phoenix Store and General News Agency has now been estab-
lished since 1880, but it is only 12 months ago since an enterprising
business man in Mr. H. Perrin took over same from Mr. H. A.
Watson. The premises are handsome ones, and carry a full stock
and range of fruit (fresh daily), and a choice assortment of confec-
tionery in one of the departments. There is also a well-selected and
varied assortment of fancy goods, and the news agency business is
complete in every detail. Mr. Perrin’s stock of confectionery de-
serves special mention for its excellence, as it ranks amongst the
finest in the Mallee. He is also agent for the Lancashire Insurance
Co., Wertheim’s pianos, sewing machines, and separators.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
JAMES PHELPS,
The Birchip Foundry & Waggon Factory
Two Views of Mr. James Phelps’ Foundry and Waggon Factory, Birchip.
The Progress of this factory has been great during the past few years, the Proprietor being a most progressive business man.
The Interior of The Birchip Foundry, showing portion of the Modern Machinery installed in recent years.
Correspondence Invited.
Repairing of Motor Cars is a Special and New Feature of this Business


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Birchip Implement and Waggon Factory,
Stripper and Machinery Repairs carefully
and promptly executed. Five-furrow and
Stump-jump Ploughs a Speciality.
JAMES PHELPS, Proprietor.
It is always a pleasure to describe a progressive business, and the
one under review is essentially so. Established in 1890, the pro-
prietor, Mr. James Phelps, had a hard fight to “keep going” during
the drought years. Still he is endowed with a plentiful supply of
dogged perseverance, and, in spite of all set-backs, to-day has the
pleasure of owning a solid, sound, progressive business that each
year is expanding.
The accompanying photos, will serve to demonstrate the importance
this factory has attained, chiefly through the solid work and first-
class material that is put into every vehicle and implement that is
sent our from the factory, which is a modern one in every respect,
various up-to-date machines having been installed in recent years,
the motive power for which is supplied by a 10 h.p. oil engine.
Mr. Phelps has been for over 30 years connected with the manu-
facturing of Malice implements, and it is not therefore unnatural
that he should understand the requirements of the Mallee farmer
thoroughly. His five-furrow, stump-jump ploughs have received much
kudos from Mallee farmers, and difficulty is found in coping with
orders, which come in so freely. The same rush to get out orders
is noticeable in the waggon and coachbuilding branch, and the
greatest difficulty, Mr. Phelps finds, is in securing sufficient trades-
men to cope with the demand. He employs a large number or men,
but could do with many more. Tyring is carried out on the latest
principles, and a sinking platform is in use. Motor car repairs are
carried out, and it is understood that Mr. Phelps, to meet require-
ments, intends to set apart a portion of his factory as a garage.
This is a good idea, because there is likely to be quite 20 Birchip
owned cars before Easter time.
Mr. Phelps takes a keen interest in the w r elfare of the town, and
was one of the first prominent men on the Show committee. He
is also a director of the Electric Light Co. The compiler is glad
to record the success of Mr. Phelps, for he is genuine to the back-
bone, and a man who gives every client fair and just treatment in
every way.


Mr. Edward Felix Danaher’s Handsome Business Premises, Birchip.
EDWARD F. DANAHER, Land and Finance Agent, etc
Mr. Edward Felix Danaher is a descendant of the well-known
Colac family of that name, and he was amongst the first pioneers
who settled in the Mallee—that was in 1877. Mr. Danaher, who
was a schoolmaster, gave up charge of a higher-grade school in
order to settle on land taken up at Corack. After remaining in
charge of the State School at North Corack for some time (until
1881), he left the service his special gifts had done so much for
and became agricultural reporter for the “Age,” under Mr. J. L.
Dow. It was during this period that, at Goulburn (N.S.W.), Mr.
Danaher became a bosom friend of Mr. Hugh Mahon, member for
Coolgardie, and late Minister of Home Affairs and exr-Postmaster-
General, etc. In 1884 an auctioneering business was established at
Corack as Glowrey, Danaher and Co. Mr. J. T. Glowrey, who is
now an M.L.C. of W.A., sold out his interest, and the firm then
became Danaher Bros. Glowrey, Danaher and Go. claim to have
held the first auction sale in Birchip (1885 was the year), and the
sales was held on the site where
stands. Mr. Danaher is the
he has held some l‘J years. It
ments have been made on same
the property, some 25 feet deep,
in honour of the bearer of the
notable one, being attended by
Mr. Phelps’ implement factory now
owner of Wongwarra Estate, which
is a fine estate, and great improve-
There is a fine sheet of water on
which was named “ Lake Danaher,”
name. The ceremony was quite a
the leading townspeople, and many
happy and serious speeches were made. Thus Mr. Danaher’s name
will go down to posterity. There is every likelihood that the
land surrounding this lake will in time be utilised as an experimental
Mallee farm by the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission.
Mr. Danaher, who is a prominent business man of Birchip, repre-
sented, from 1885 to 1891, the South Riding in the St. Arnaud Shire,
resigning in 1891 on account of absence through ill-health. He was
president last year of the Birchip and District Progress Association
a very strong and active one—and this year had again the honour
of being unanimously elected. He is also on the committee of the
Mechanics’ Institute and a leading member of the A.N.A.—in fact,
generally speaking, the name of Mr. Danaher is connected with any
and every progressive movement in Birchip district.


Mechanics’
Institute,
Birchip,
erected by
Mr. Fielding.
View of
Duncan St.,
“ the Toorak
of Birchip.”
The Birchip
Offices of the
State Rivers
and Water
Supply Com-
mission.
Mr.D.B. Scott
is Engineer in
Charge.
Mr. N.S.Chalk
Secretary.
The Newly-
erected
Masonic Hall,
a line,
handsome
structure.
Mr. Fielding
was the con-
tractor for


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Two Views of “ The While House ” (Brays).
H. V. BRAY’S Drapery Establishment,
“ THE WHITE HOUSE,”
Is noted for the High-Uass Quality of their Goods.
They buy in the Markets of the World, and employ
buyers who understand the requirements of the Mallee
Residents.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
H. V. BRAY’S
Drapery .Establishment, Birchip.
“THE WHITE HOUSE.”
A House Noted for Quality, Quantity and Fair Prices.
A few points concerning the “White House.” “Brays” are
represented in St. Arnaud, Casterton, Mildura, Corowa, Rutherglen,
Mirboo, and in West Australia. They buy largely and buy well —that
is the secret of their great success wherever established. They offer
the public a fine assortment in the various departments, and sell at
rock bottom prices.
“The White House,” Birchip, is a noted place, and, under the
management of Mr. Adamson, assisted by Mr. W. Coode, is every
month securing greater patronage. They are educating the farmer
to the fact that quality at reasonable prices is better than shoddy
goods elsewhere, where quantity at low prices is predominant.
Tailoring is a special feature of “The White House.” They,
pride themselves on turning out an excellent suit. A large stock
of boots and shoes are on hand, and repairs are carried out expe-
ditiously and well.
If you haven’t yet visited “The White House,” you should do
so, for “ Brays ” are a straight-going firm, who cater very liberally
for the public. Their turnover in the Birchip business alone is enor-
mous—therefore, they can afford to take small profits and quick
returns.
H. V. BRAY’S
Drapery Establishment, Birchip.
“THE WHITE HOUSE.”


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Lachlan McKinnon’s
Drapery Establishment.
THE BIRCHIP CASH STORE.
Exterior of Mr. Lachlan McKinnon’s Premises, Gumming Avenue, Birchip.
Mr. Lachlan M'Kinnon’s record in Birchip is a worthy one, and
goes back to 1892, when his present large and important drapery
establishment was established in a central position in Cumming-
avenue. The drapery, footwear, and men’s wear departments are
well stocked with high-class goods, and anything purchased at
“ M'Kinnon’s ” can be relied upon to wear well and give satisfaction.
A speciality of millinery is made, and for the latest creations in
hats “ The Cash Store ” is the best place for ladies to visit. Dress-
making is carried on on an extensive scale, and the male portion
of Birchip’s population might note that “ M’Kinnon ” has secured
a great name for the quality and finish of all tailoring orders en-
trusted to him in the past. After a lengthy residence in the town,
the proprietor’s name is well respected for his fair business methods
and his creditable life as a fellow-townsman.


President and
Members of
the A N.A.,
Birchip.
The President
of the Birchip
Agricultural J
Society, Mr.
Lockwood, >
surrounded by
many of its
most energetic
and leading
Members.
Officers and 1,
Membersofthe
M.U.1.0.0.F.
Lodge,Birchip.
Mr. Lockwood
(Chairman), B
Committee and
(he Librarian
cf the Birchip
Mechanics’
Institute.
Sheridan, Photo,


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCH IP.
Barber & Co.,
McClelland,
Auctioneers, Land, Finance and General
Commission Agents, BIRCHIP.
Messrs. McClelland, Barber & Co.’s Premises, Birchip
The auctioneering firm of M'Clelland, Barber and Co. ranks
amongst the largest and most important in the Mallee and Wim-
mera districts of Victoria. The senior partner is Mr. M'Lelland, who
has been a resident of Birchip district during the past 28 years.
For 12 years Mr. M'Clelland carried on a successful business in
partnership with Mr. Simpson. Selling out his interest 6 years ago,
he commenced business as a commission agent, and 18 months ago
the enterprising firm of M'Clelland, Barber and Co. became estab-
lished. Stock sales are held fortnightly at Birchip, and clearing
sales right throughout the Mallee. M'Clelland Barber and Co. pay
great attention to the land department of their business, and, as
showing the extent of their operations, it might be mentioned that,
during the past 12 months, over 100,000 acres of land have passed
through their hands at satisfactory prices to both sellers and buyers.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
DENIS COFFEY,
Gumming Avenue, Birchip,
News Agent, Bookseller, Stationer and Tobacconist.
Exterior View of Mr. Denis Coffey’s Premises, Gumming Avenue, Birchip
Although only established some twelve months, Mr. Denis Cof-
fey has made great headway in that time, and has proved a capable
and popular business man, one whom Birchip has been very glad
to meet. The premises carry a large and varied stock of books,
stationery, tobacco and smokers’ requisites. He also has a news-
paper agency. There is a fruit, vegetable, cool drink and ice cream
department to the business, and the class of fruit, etc., on sale will
always be found of the highest quality. Mr. Coffey is agent for Place
and Co., monumental masons (Maryborough), Mitchell and Co.’s
machinery, De Laval separator, MTntyre Bros.’ tea, Manchester
Accident Assurance Co., Welsbach lamp burners, “Age,” “Argus,”
and monthly periodicals.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Mr. W. H. FIELDING,
Builder, Contractor and Undertaker
The Exterior of Mr,
Fielding’s Factory, Birchip
Mr. W. H. Fielding has now been established some '2O years as
a builder, contractor, plumber and undertaker. His commodious
premises are in Cumming-avenue, Birchip, and a large stock of gal-
vanised tanks are on hand, while painting, paperhanging, etc., is
carried out. It is chiefly as a builder that Mr. Fielding has secured
a great reputation, and those entrusting the building of a house,
cottage, pigeon-cot, or a mansion, can rest assured they will be well
satisfied with the price, material and workmanship. Several of the
finest buildings in the town have been erected by Mr. Fielding, not-
ably the Shire Hall, Masonic Hall, National Bank, Mechanics’ Insti
tute, Mr. Carlisle’s private residence, etc. Funeral arrangements are
carried out in a thorough manner in their entirety, while kerbing,
railing, and headstones are erected where desired. Estimates are
given cheerfully for work in any part of the Mallee. Several first-
class men are employed in the joinery department of this successful
and flourishing business.


THE PROGRESS OF BIRCHIP.
Mr. E. G. CUTTS, Land and Finance Agent
GUMMING AVENUE, BIRCHIP
LOANS ADVANCED at Lowest Rates
on Freehold and Leasehold Properties.
Mr. E. G. Cutts’ successful land
and finance business, Birchip, has
been established several years, and
has become a very large and im-
portant business concern. The
sales of land, to which Mr. Cutts
gives special attention, have been
gradually increasing, and during
the past year his sales of land
have amounted to a very large
total, beating all previous records.
Mr. Cutts lays himself out as
an agent to act fairly both to the
buyer and seller, and this has been
a great factor in the success he
enjoys as a business man. Far-
mers desiring a loan, or to secure
land, can consult Mr. Cutts with
every confidence. Advice on land
matters is given freely and
promptly, and, as Mr. Cutts’ ex-
perience of the Mallee has been
gained practically over a lengthy
period, his advice is generally
found worthy of appreciation.
Mr. E. G. Cutts.
The Bank
of Victoria
A branch of the above bank, although only established in July,
1910, has made considerable headway, under the local management
of Mr. J. E. Landrigan. The Bank of Victoria believes in dealing
with the public on a liberal scale, and much of the success attained
is due to the courtesy of the local manager.
The Illustrations.
The Blocks for this publication were made by C. E. Campbell,
Eondon Bank Chambers, Ballarat. Quotations for Engraving, Etching
and Halftone Work sent on application.


The Commercial Hotel
BIRCHIP.
A Splendidly Appointed Hotel Throughout.
First-class Accommodation
for the Farming Community
and Travelling Public.
Fine Airy
Bedrooms.
Excellent Tables Kept.
yLarge Accommodation Yards.
Central Position.
Comfortable Billiard Room.
Best Wines and Spirits
Stocked.
The Commercial Hotel,
Gumming Avenue, Birchip.
K. SLATTERY, Proprietress. All Correspondence Promptly Attended To.
Wilke, Mitchell & Co , Printers, 7 Flinders Court, Melbourne
