

PRICE 3 OZUTXS SHILLIRTGri
oolgardie
(^oldfie
WESTERN AUSTRAL!
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S. I
Lecturer on Mining in the University of Melbourne; Late Lecturer on Geol
to Mining, Bendigo School of Mines; Consulting Mining Engineer;
of "The Golden Quartz Reefs of Australia," &c., &c., &c.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
George Robertson and Company
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE
And at LONDON




F (2,3 J
THE
COOLGARDIE GOLDFIELDS
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S. Lon.
Lecturer on Mining in the University of Melbourne; Late Lecturer on Geology as applied
to Mining, Bendigo School of Mines; Consulting Mining Engineer; Author
of “ The Golden Quartz Reefs of Australia," fee., fee., &c.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE
And at London




M&SdS ( Fl 3ss
I i 7-7 7
*J*N presenting these few remarks on the Ooolgardie
Goldfields to the public, I must explain that they
have been hurriedly thrown together in time stolen from
my Christmas and New Year’s holidays, whilst supposed
to be recruiting prior to returning to Ooolgardie.
If this little pamphlet should meet with a favourable
reception I shall be encouraged to gather and to give
more information, and otherwise improve a future
edition.
THE AUTHOR.
Melbourne, January , 1895.




CONTENTS.
I. —Geographical Position 7
2. —Extent of Goldfields 8
3.—Desert 11
4. —Contour of Country 12
5, —Prospectors 15
6.—Climate 17
7.—Timber 18
8.—Water Supply 19
9. —Dust 23
10. —Rocks and Quartz Reefs 25
11. —Minerals in Reefs 27
12.—Reef “Formations” 28
13. —Outcrops op Reefs 28
14.—Forms of Reefs 32
15.—Strikes of Reefs 32
16. —Underlies of Reefs 34
17. —Shoots of Gold 35
18.—Quality of Gold 35
19.—Nuggets of Gold in Quartz 36
20. —Alluvial Gold-Mining 37
21.—Twisted Reefs 39


22.—Granitic Veins - 41
23.—Faults oe Reefs, etc. 41
24.—Hannan’s (Calgoorlie) Goldfield - - - - 42
25. —White Feather Goldfield 43
26.—Broad Arrow Goldfield 44
27. —Bardock’s (Niggers’) Goldfield 45
28.—Black Flag Goldfield 48
29.—Limestone 50
30.—Camels and Bicycles 60
31.— Payable Quartz 51
APPENDIX.
Exports of Gold from Western Australia, 1888-1894 - 53
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Mosaic Pavement 14
Bayley’s Reef Outcrop 28
Gold Crystal (Large) 35
Twisted Reef (Macintosh’s) 40
Faults of Quartz Beefs - - - - - - 41


THE COOLGARDIE GOLDFIELDS,
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
i.—GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION.
Where is Coolgardie? Briefly, it is 362 miles nearly
due east of Perth, east longitude 121 and south latitude
31° (Perth being 32°). It is nearly half-way from the
western seaboard to the South Australian boundary ; and
who will say how much of the country from Coolgardie to
that boundary is not auriferous ?
From Perth the railway extends 248 miles east to
Southern Cross—-the present terminus. Prom Southern
Cross to Coolgardie is 11 miles by bush road, and a very
bad one.
The survey preliminary to the letting of the contract for
the construction of the railway from Southern Cross to
Coolgardie has been completed, and it is reported by the
surveyors to be one of the cheapest and most easily con-
structed railways ever known in Australia. It is expected
to be completed before the end of 1895.


2.— EXTENT OF GOLDFIELDS.
Before we proceed further in this brief outline of the reefs,
&c., of Coolgardie, it should be understood that the author
is only partly acquainted with the country within about 50
miles of the town. The goldfields of Coolgardie extend for
240 miles north and south and 310 miles east and west.
With the difficulties at this time presented to travelling
through the district, a man can do very little in a few
months towards making himself conversant with the reefing
country even within 50 miles round Coolgardie town, and
the reader must not forget that the author is not attempt-
ing to give anything more than a flying sketch of such
portions of that area as came under his special observation.
Away further north slate rocks predominate, and in them
rich reefs have been found, it is reported by many reliable
men of wide experience.
A quartz miner’s experience gained at Bendigo, Ballarat,
Hillgrove, Adelong, and Charters Towers in exploiting
auriferous reefs is not of much use here, having regard to
the difference in the modes of occurrence of quartz reefs.
It would be wisdom on the part of men with such like
knowledge to keep that knowledge in the background as a
good reserve to draw on, and in the meantime to remember
that as the rocks differ in which reefs occur, so will the
characteristics of the reefs contained in them vary. Some
of these characteristics of the Coolgardie reefs are roughly
sketched in this pamphlet, in the hope that the extensive
experience of the author in all classes of auriferous rocks
may be of service to eastern mining managers, miners, and
others who may feel disposed to try their luck at Coolgardie,
and to those now on the fields.
The Coolgardie goldfield cannot be compared to any one


of the abovementioned goldfields. It is not a concentrated
goldfield. It is a goldfield made up of goldfields. Within
its north and south length the great Bendigo and Ballarat
belts of reefs—each one hundred miles in length—can be
compassed, even supposing them to be placed end on.
Would it not seem absurd to call those two great reef
belts one goldfield, when within them there are at least a
score of good goldfields, including many of the richest in
the world 1 Why, the Ooolgardie goldfields covered an
area—before Dundas, at its southern end, was cut out of
it—considerably larger than the colony of Victoria. Even
now the Ooolgardie goldfields occupy 74,400 square miles,
whilst Victoria occupies, in round numbers, 88,200 square
miles, and Great Britain 89,650 square miles. These
figures will perhaps assist people to realize what they are
talking about when referring to Ooolgardie as a goldfield.
It’s all very fine to say, “ Oh ! you are going to Oool-
gardie ; so and so and are there, and so is the
mine; you are sure to see them,” &c., &c. The chances
are you won’t see them, especially if far outside of
Ooolgardie town. If you take a buckboard and pair of
horses, and keep them a week in food and water, it will
cost you from £25 to £3O. You can’t travel the Ooolgardie
goldfields without a big purse, as this item will make plain;
and everything else is in proportion, whether in labour or
goods. It costs a lot of money and time, and some
hardship, to get there, and people will often say, if you
grumble at the prices, they don’t spend their days in the
very outskirts of civilization and discomfort, and unmen-
tioned risks, &c., without they make money. And they
are quite right too, as the following paragraph from the
Goldfields Courier of the Bth December last says :
“ Low fever and other ailments incidental to the advent of
summer are now prevalent on the goldfields. Every other camp or


tent has its sick man, and in not a few the empty bunk speaks as
eloquently as does the silent sorrow and sadness which hangs about
the tent of some poor dead mate or chum who has passed in
his checks. . . . Low fever sufferers are mostly young men,
who know little or nothing of fever treatment—quite a number
have died from sheer neglect—and the tents of the sick are occupied
by men for the most part in straightened circumstances, and unable
to pay for medical attendance and skilled nursing. ”
It was the writer’s fortune to spend a night in a tent
at a certain camp that was—temporarily, let me hope —
vacated by the owners, the one mate having a day or two
previously taken his sick partner to the hospital, some
50 miles away; and I can’t say that the intelligence
imparted to me, just as I was rolling myself up in my
rug, on a stretcher of one of the mates, cheered me off to
sleep.
Yes, the Coolgardie goldfield is made up of goldfields,
hardly scratched—much less developed—at the present
time: for example, Coolgardie proper, which embraces,
say, Bayley’s, the Londonderry and Mt. Burgess, &c. ; White
Feather, Hannan’s, Black Flag, Broad Arrow, Bardock’s,
Kurnalpie, Wealth of Nations, 25-Mile, 45-Mile, 90-Mile
(Roaring Gimlet), 60-Mile (Siberia), Menzies’, &c., &c., &c.
That the fields will be permanent there cannot be the
shadow of a doubt. Gold-mining is come to stop at Cool-
gardie and its surrounding fields. That any one of those
fields which are specially mentioned in this pamphlet will
rival Ballarat, or Bendigo, or Charters Towers, the author
cannot see sufficient reason to believe ; but that a con-
siderable number of individual mines in the Coolgardie
goldfields are very rich—and will be very rich in the future
—is certain, and that they are new mines, and still
contain their riches, is greatly in their favour. Com-
parisons of rich mines on these very different goldfields
(new and old), or of the goldfields themselves—in the


present primitive condition of the Coolgardie goldfields—
must be mere guesswork, and of no practical value, quite
apart from the great dissimilarity in the prevailing rocks
of the goldfields—viz., lower silurian (slates and sand-
stones), granitic rocks, hornblendic diorite, &c. The series
of rocks that prevail at Coolgardie, and through which the
quartz reefs run and are bounded on either side, are
notorious for containing rich deposits of gold; and the
numerous dykes and slides, or faults, that occur in these
rocks and reefs simply assist in confirming the general
belief of men of experience that the Coolgardie goldfields
will not be an exception to other rich goldfields situated
in similar rocks and under like circumstances. Its output
of gold hitherto is something to be wondered at when we
consider the absence of water—or, rather, the scarcity of it
—and that only one small battery has been at work
crushing rich quartz, the rest of the gold having been
dollied out or “dry blown.”
3. —DESERT.
It’s not so very long since that Coolgardie was included
in the region marked on maps as Spinifex or the Great
Victoria Desert. Behold, what a change has come over
the scene in but a brief period ! And now the pioneer
prospectors are out gold-hunting we never know from day
to day what surprises may be sprung on us out of the so-
called desert. That there is a belt of more or less mineral
bearing country crossing this unprospected region is pretty
well established by reports of flying prospecting parties,
and a series of specimens submitted to myself by explorers,
and the possibilities, viewed under the light of recent
discoveries, in the Coolgardie goldfields are enormous.


4.— CONTOUR OF COUNTRY.
The first impressions of a gold-miner of experience as he
pursues his way from the town, say in a southerly direction,
towards the Londonderry, is that the contour of the
country possesses the usual familiar characteristics of a
goldfield so pronouncedly that he cannot but wonder how
explorers could have gone through it and omitted to
recognize this country as auriferous, even without
attempting to prospect for gold.
Such feelings predominate to the north as well as to the
south; to the north-west, in the Wealth of Nations
country; to the north, at the Black Flag and Bardock’s ;
to the north-east, at the Arrow; and to the east, at Hannan’s
and the White Feather (the latter specially marked).
Some people imagine that there cannot be any scenery
in the neighbourhood of the Coolgardie goldfields, in a
land formerly known as a portion of the Great Victoria
Desert, but this is quite a mistaken idea. Half a mile
to the south of the town, on the top road to the Burbank’s
and Londonderry mines, there is a magnificent view from
the crest of the Coolgardie range right across the eastern
line of reefs (Tindall’s and others), situated in a valley,,
and away over the opposite diorite ranges to the distant
Hampton Plains. Whilst on the western side of the range,
although the immediate foreground is not so precipitous
in its descent, the view is uninterruptedly spread out along
the ranges up which the Southern Cross road is cut
through the forest to the obscure low hills on the distant
horizon. The many whiff's of dust rising from that
twisting bush road over the tops of the trees indicate the
returning waggons to the railway terminus in the far
west, or the approach of conveyances and coach with


merchandise and new adventurers to try their luck in the
Eldorado of the West.
Then, again, perhaps the loveliest sight all round Cool-
gardie will be found some twenty miles to the north, out on
the Black Flag road. Here there is a small salt lake to be
crossed, and as you descend to it from the sandy range and
heavy road a scene bursts on the view that can hardly be
surpassed. A lake of what appears beyond doubt to be
water is spread out before the traveller for several miles, to
the far-distant cliffs and banks of the lake shore. The
cliffs and banks are thinly clad with clumps of trees and
bushes. In the midst of the lake are seen three islands,
tinted green by moss and the colour of the rocks (which
consist of green diorite or greenstone). The bushes, trees,
cliffs, banks, and islands are all reflected more or less clearly
in the visionary pellucid water. In places flat bed rock
crops up in the lake, traversed by many white bleached
marble-like caps of quartz reefs, which, in the distant bed
of the lake, give the impression you are looking at pleasure
boats or gondolas covered with white awnings shimmering
and quivering in the blazing sunlight—these boats, too,
surrounded by rippling water, although the greater part of
the lake seems to lie in unruffled calmness, as if over-
powered by the dazzling heat of the day.
Away to the far north, along the more remote shore, the
mirage gradually changes its lighter tints into dark purple
and azure, with the background filled in by indigo blue
and darkly-coloured hills distinctly defined and picked out
against the cloudless pale blue sky. It all seems so delight-
fully real and true to nature that involuntarily one is
possessed of a preparatory feeling preliminary to a joyful
sail or a cool swimming bath ; and when you recollect that
sheets of water larger than what may be contained in a
bucket or a corrugated iron tank are memories of the past


to the Coolgardian, and that to reach this delusive sham
lake he has been pretty well smothered in dust, his feelings
of disappointment can better be understood than described
by mere words.
What are these lakes % They are large or small flat clay
pans, which catch the drainage from the surrounding higher
lands. Into these lakes jut out headlands, some consisting
of white quartzite traversed by a network of quartz veins
that appear to have formed like agate.
Around the margin or shore of the lake has accumulated
a band of quartz sand for twenty or thirty feet in width.
This sand looks as if it had been blown across the bed of
the lake and gathered at the foot of the cliffs or banks.
One quartzite headland ran for a quarter of a mile at least
one hundred feet in height, running N. 50° E. This was
on the western side of the lake, on which side the land was
much the highest. Around the margin of this white head-
land or promontory had gathered a quantity of irregular
quartz pebbles, which further out on the lake bed formed a
mosaic floor, almost equal to those found in Pompeii. The
cementing material in this case is, however, not calculated
to withstand traffic or lapse of time, as it consists solely of
salt. As you walk on this natural pavement it crunches
under every footstep, and leaves the imprint of your boot
at least a quarter of an inch below the surrounding surface.
A closer examination of this mosaic pavement shows that
it is made up of small angular bits of quartz, each one
poised on a slender pedestal of salt and clay. And
Natural size.
these bits of quartz do not quite touch one another.


Probably the continuous dry winds have blown or weathered
away the fine sand, clay, and salt from around and beneath
these bits of quartz, thus leaving them undermined and
with but weak supports. All the lake bed is very nearly
covered with a clay deposit, in which is distinctly left the
wheel tracks, horseshoe tracks, tracks of emus and of
camels, made when the clay was moist. When dry these
tracks have become the receptacles for dry blown salt,
which causes them to look as if they had been made in
snow.
Such tracks are signs of life certainly, but of actual
existing life, beyond ourselves, it resolved itself into a
perfectly grey lizard—the exact colour of the sand—of
about four inches in length, and a tiny red robin about
the size of a large beetle. That was all! No, I forget :
we passed at the further end of the lake a solitary dark
Jew on a tall grey camel. A strongly marked Jew, who
never opened his mouth even to give us good day as we
passed, and it would not have cost him very much. That,
too, all depends on whether he was out for his first
ride on a camel or not. He and his camel suited their
surroundings on the lake so naturally that I have my
doubts whether they do not form a part and parcel of the
mirage.
S.— PROSPECTORS.
Venturesome prospectors are crossing and re-crossing this
country in all directions beyond 100 miles distant from
Coolgardie, yet I say that the country is unprospected
within fifty miles of that town. And there is plenty of
room for strong camel syndicates to push out to the far
distant land; for co-operative mining syndicates in the


middle distance; and for miners, two or three in a party,
to try the inner circle (50 miles from Coolgardie).
Prospectors there are in great numbers, and the majority
of them are going through a rough apprenticeship to the
business. Amongst them are lawyers, bankers, brokers,
parsons, and men of all conditions and grades of society ;
younger sons of good English families, and of the best
Australian. All honour to our prospectors. They are
there to earn honest money—fortunes, or a living for wives
and children, parents and sweethearts living in distant
lands. And we wish them all good luck.
Not one who visits Coolgardie and stays to see how
manfully young and old (for there are very many old
men, too) put their shoulders to the wheel to give it
another turn in their favour, but will be proud to
belong to the same race of people. Many a broken
fortune are they endeavouring to mend in the western
Eldorado. And so will it ever be with the Anglo-Saxons,
who cannot rest content to stay at home wringing their
hands unavailingly over the bitter past, present, and future.
Lots of brave young and old men have found their last
resting place in God’s acre at Coolgardie, and the new
bush track to that sacred ground is all too soon being
ground into dust. Better be killed fighting in the west
than die rusting in the east.
How bright is the other side of the picture, with the
hundreds of bronzed men making their way to eastern
homes during the gazetted holidays with pouches full of
nuggets and money, eagerly anticipating meeting good
friends, good plunge baths, fresh fruits and meat, &c., &c.,
and all the minor delights that go to make up civilized life.
Eor the time adieu to tinned sheep’s tongues, beef, mutton,
jam, fruits, condensed milk—to camel snarls, to break-o’-
day flies, to pannikins, to “billy tea” (!), and to dust.


{U.N.O.) Probably U.N.O. requires an explanation.
This is the land of “ you knows.” It is “ you know”
this and “ you know” that, all day long and everywhere.
Can it be that W.A.’s are too lazy to trouble to properly
explain their meaning, and after a slight hesitation get
over the difficulty by saying “You know”? But “you
know” is spreading east, for surely it is more common
there to-day than it was—(“ don’t-cher-know ?”) It is,
however, sufficiently prevalent in W. A. to have induced a
party of co-operative miners at the White Feather to call
their claim the “ U.N.0.”
Before finishing his remaks about “ prospectors,” the
author desires to give these pioneers of mining and
civilization his impressions about a belt of country which
should be well worthy of careful examination, viz. :
Take a centre north-west line from the White Feather
to the 45-Mile—which line can be extended each way
further to the north-west or south-east—the country on
each side of it, for at least five miles, is likely to be
auriferous. Having crossed this belt of country six times,
the author is disposed to think highly of its prospects, and
makes the suggestion to prospectors that they might go
much further out and fare worse in many ways.
6. —CLIMATE.
By-the-by, we said Coolgardie was in S. latitude 31°, and
so is Broken Hill, and the climate and surroundings are
very similar, excepting that the nights are as a rule more
cold in the former than in the latter, principally accounted
for by the difference in the elevation, Coolgardie being
1,620 feet above sea level, whilst Broken Hill is 700 feet.
And what about the healthiness of the climate of Cool-


gardie 1 Given fresh food and fruit and vegetables (which
the railway will soon supply) and more water (which will
come in good time, as it did at Broken Hill), then we say
the field is not only very healthy, but its climate is invigor-
ating. The sky as a rule is clear and as bright as that of
Italy, and the atmosphere is buoyant. Those who
remember Bendigo, Castlemaine, Maryborough, and Spring
Greek rushes, and such like dry goldfields in the early days,
know nearly as much about dust, heat, colonial fever,
typhoid, and flies as do the Ooolgardians of the present
day.
Prospectors run fewer risks of being struck down by
fever than any other residents on the field, and next to
them come the miners, who, as a rule, camp on the mine
areas in which they work, and do not congregate in the
new townships, where sanitary arrangements are not only
imperfect, but rarely receive any attention whatsoever.
Even the ever-ready and costless dry dust, which makes a
first-class deodorant, is but rarely utilized on the field.
7. —TIMBER.
It is not generally known that the Coolgardie goldfields
are situated in the midst of ranges of low hills, covered in
great part by well-grown trees, making what Australians
would generally call “ thinly covered forest country.” This
timber makes very good firewood and props and laths for
underground support.
The soil changes with the rocks underlying it, and the
vegetation changes with the soil on which it grows. The
soil derived from the gold-bearing rocks is, as a rule, equal
to that of the best agricultural land in Australia, and it
sustains an open forest of salmon and gimlet (so-called


from the twist of its trunks) gums and morral trees. The
chief characteristic appearance of this forest is the
umbrella-shaped tops of the trees, accompanied by the
absence of lower limbs or branches of noticeable size. The
leaves in the umbrella tops are of a beautiful bright green
colour, appearing, when set in motion by the constant wind
and sparkling in the brilliant sunlight, as if they had all
been freshly varnished.
Across the sand plains or the salt lake country the scene
is the reverse of pleasant to the eye ; the soil is barren and
the vegetable life stunted and of the poorest description,
consisting of low mulga scrub and spinifex.
As the traveller passes from west to east, from
Southern Cross to Coolgardie, he traverses for the most
part barren country, and thus he arrives at Coolgardie,
after a two-days’ tedious and uncomfortably dusty coach
journey, quite unprepared to find that the country around
Coolgardie is well timbered and the soil of the most fertile
description.
B.—WATER SUPPLY.
Water will be cut in the hundreds of shafts that are being
sunk on the underlies of reefs, or to cut them vertically,
and with plenty of condensers at work the price of water
will, in all probability, never again go above sixpence for
any lengthened period of time, and we doubt very much if
it will not be continually kept below fourpence per gallon
within half-a-dozen miles of Coolgardie. Beyond that
distance even now the price in a large number of places is
fourpence, with a tendency downwards. Splendid catch-
ment areas exist almost everywhere on the goldfield. If
we take it for granted that large reservoirs are made in
these areas, two questions arise : How much water will be


absorbed by the bed rock of the reservoirs ? and how much
will disappear by the evaporation of the sun and by the
•everlastingly blowing dry winds ? Quite one-third. The
absorption difficulty may be overcome by puddling the
first water inlet, and the second, we are inclined to think,
by filling up the interior of the dams with, say, coarse
(granite quartz) sand, so that the water will be in a
similar condition to what is usually known as soakage. By
adopting this plan the water capacity of the reservoirs will
be diminished, but this will undoubtedly be more than
compensated for by the preservation of the water that is
caught, and especially would this be the case could a scheme
be devised by which we could make a clay skin or cover
on top of the sand.
No resident of Coolgardie can doubt but that the evap-
oration of water openly exposed to the sun and the dry
winds will be something enormous, for everyone has
suffered comparatively severe losses from even closely
covered tanks.
By sinking wells in the granitic rock areas no doubt small
quantities of fresh or nearly fresh water will be discovered.
If small quartz veins or large joints occur in this rock, then
will the quantity of water largely increase over what will
be found in close-grained, unjointed, or non-veined rock.
Then water will undoubtedly be found by sinking wells in
the alluvial covering of deep valleys on the one side or the
other of the auriferous belt of rocks which forms in this
goldfield a dividing range with numerous branches.
Brackish water is conserved by Nature for us in these
valleys, and in salt lakes, by the covering silt and soil, and
we would be unwise not to take a hint from Dame Nature
and attempt to likewise preserve the rain water dammed
in catchment areas by artificial banks constructed at great
expense.


Immense salt lakes and numerous small salt pans bound
the Coolgardie goldfields (so far as at present known) on
its eastern side, and stretch in a broken line for a distance
of 240 miles from Lake Carey in the north to Lake Cowan
in the south. The inestimable value of these great lakes
and pans to the future of this goldfield does not seem to be
realized as yet by miners and mining men, &c. Here are
enormous reservoirs of water conserved by nature at
shallow depths on the eastern fall of the goldfield dividing
ranges—-consisting of salt water certainly, but the cost of
condensing salt water is steadily diminishing, as improve-
ments in the system adopted are being constantly made.
And now a few words about condensers. They have been so
often described that it is useless giving more than a brief
outline of the method most commonly adopted on the field.
A condenser usually works two ordinary 400-gallon
iron water tanks. These are sometimes built in with
stonework separately, each one having a short chimney
at the back ; others are simply placed on two low walls,
say 1 foot or more in height and about 3 feet apart.
The fire is placed between these walls at both ends.
Again we find tanks placed on edge with one fire
serving two tanks. From the top of a tank rises
a pipe that bends round and runs off horizontally,
with only a small incline downwards, for say
30, 40, or more feet to a galvanized iron drum (about
the size of a nail can), into which the pipe enters at the
upper portion of one end, the drum also being placed
horizontally. From the lower and same end starts another
pipe, with a somewhat steeper decline, and this pipe runs
back beneath the top one. The whole of the galvanized
pipes and drum are supported by rough trestles, and at the
bottom end of the lower pipe is placed a tank. Salt water
is placed in the square iron tank, and the fire is started,


the water boils, generates steam, which escapes along the
top pipe and into the drum, by which time most of it is
•condensed into water, and runs, with just a little steam,,
down the lower pipe into the freshwater tank. Naturally
this water is hot and fresh. The fires should not be tooo
hot, so as to induce priming, which often takes place if thee
operation is forced, the consequence then being that thee
water tastes of salt, and it of course becomes unfit forr
human consumption, although it will do for washing
•clothes, &c. Now there are many hundreds of thesee
condensers at work all over the fields, and consequently
the consumption of firewood is enormous, as condensing is
carried on night and day. And the inroad the condensers
are making into the thin or thick forests—the formerr
prevailing—is already too perceptible, and firewood is now
being carted for miles to the condensers. At this ratee
there will soon not be firewood for crushing or winding-
steam engines, nor timber for underground support.
Before proceeding further, it should be mentioned thatt
the salt in the iron tanks soon accumulates, and so fills
them up that it must be blown off or tapped as brine,,
which runs round the condensing plant or into a hole im
the ground, and the stranger must be careful at many o£
these plants where he steps. In fact, the surroundings of
many condensers are anything but clean; and cleanliness
in these establishments is of vital importance to the lives
of the inhabitants, who rely on them for the water they
drink.
Under the circumstances above mentioned, and the vital
consequences that are involved to the future of mining
and the health of the people of this field, it will not be
out of place to suggest that every man desiring to conduct
the business of condensing should be licensed, and should
pay, say, £1 per annum for such license, and 10s, a year


for a license to cut firewood. The fees thus accumulated
would enable the Government, free of expense, to appoint
officers to inspect the condition of condensing establish-
ments and to see that all proper precautions are taken to
secure the purity of the water • and perhaps also to fully
pay a forest ranger to guard the young and old trees from
wanton destruction, not only by thoughtless firewood
carters, but by those persons camping out, who use fire
carelessly and cause a dreadful waste of most valuable
timber through allowing the bush to catch fire. At
present it’s no one’s special business to perform either duty,
each of the utmost importance to this goldfield in the
present and the future. Look at the rapid disappearance
of the forest immediately round the town of Coolgardie,
and you can realize what will as surely happen to all the
surrounding country as it has happened in Coolgardie
proper. The warning experience of all the older goldfields
in Eastern Australia emphasize emphatically the above
remarks. Water supply will not be an insurmountable
difficulty to miners or mines.
9.—DUST.
Everybody has heard something of Coolgardie and its gold
and the hardships of its thirsty people in a parched land ;
of its lucky miners, and of those that have perished in the
eager hunt for gold • of its dust and its dust-begrimed men
that are daily painted—red on the yellow, yellow on the
brown, and brown on the tanned skin—as they travel over
the bush tracks which are buried deep in dust that ever-
lastingly changes colour with the variety of rocks traversed.
And a shocking dust it is, too, in many ways, for it hides
the morral tree roots from view that send the travellers


who are making speed high up out of those hard buck-
board seats to return to them (if lucky), or to use local
forcible language and blessings if chucked into the dusty
road.
Now, why is Coolgardie dust so excessively and so
stiflingly in evidence all over the field ? Because the pre-
vailing rocks consist of more or less decomposed diorite
and hornblendes, which rocks contain little or no per-
ceptible quartz, excepting in the shape of quartz veins or
reefs, and as these form but a small percentage of the
whole mass of “ country ” rock, the natural consequence of
continued traffic over such tracts of rock, in an extremely
dry season, must inevitably be the production of a fine
light dust in immense quantity. Many new tracks made
within a few weeks have become so cut up as to be almost
impassable to travel over, excepting at a slow pace or by
walking. In granite belts there are sandy (quartz grains)
plains, little dust, and heavy roads.
In dusty goldfields it is not uncommon to find swarms of
fleas, and the remark of “ fleas, flies, and forests ” may
stand good for the Northern goldfields, but so far as the
“ fleas ” are concerned Coolgardians deny that this precept
will apply to their field. No, you cannot find a solitary
flea, excepting in the cats or dogs, at Coolgardie. Nor can
you hear or see or feel another night fiend (bloodsucker), the
mosquito. The point of the wit in the Bulletin sketch
some years ago, where “Miss Quito” is sharpening her
proboscis on a grindstone, and says to her brother, “ Turn
faster, Billy; this is going to be a hot summer,” is doubtless
still keenly felt in Sydney and appreciated there at its full
value, but at Coolgardie “Miss Quito” jokes fall flat on
people who have to trust to their memories ere they realize
that such worriers of men exist. Yes, the miners of
Coolgardie have cool nights, and their slumbers are undis-


turbed by either flea or mosquito. That they sorrow for
their mosquito and flea-bitten brethren in other parts of
Western Australia and in the eastern colonies is a
certainty.
10.— ROCKS AND QUARTZ REEFS.
The most common rocks on the field are varieties of
diorite and hornblendes and greenstones, then follow
talcose and chloritic slates, the latter being found fre-
quently in the selvages (casing) of the reefs. In several
mines we observed there were tracts of slate formations
observable in the beds of the gullies adjacent to the reefs,
or underground, in some cases forming the hanging walls
of reefs, whilst diorite formed the footwalls.
The central main Coolgardie gold belt of reefs extends,
so far as is known at present, from Bayley’s to the London-
derry mines in a S.S.W. (or JST.N.E.) direction, and runs
roughly parallel to a low range of hornblendic diorite hills,
and still further to the west by an extensive granite
formation, which here and there shows above the level
country in low rounded outcrops.
At Coolgardie the quartz reefs run through a country
rock consisting, for the most part, of diorites and horn-
blendic rocks, traversed occasionally by small granite veins.
Within the hornblendic diorite rocks run channels of
talcose and chloritic slates, which commonly contain the
rich quartz reefs and veins forming so conspicuous a feature
of this goldfield.
The reefs undoubtedly follow, in many instances, the
twists and turns of the strata in which they occur, even
dividing into two parts with the strata, as may be seen
vertically or horizontally in Bailey’s or Burbank’s mines,


&c., &c. They may also be seen to make a roll upwards
with the turn in the bounding slaty rock, and again bend
round and turn downwards, retaking the prevailing angle
of underlie of the reef above. Where a reef thickens
there it may be observed that the bounding strata follow
suit by opening out; where the quartz pinches there the
lines of stratification on both sides are seen closing
together, only to reopen further downwards, or longitud-
inally. I mention these facts for the assistance of
managers and miners new to mining in this class of rocks,
to save them from many misgivings and mistakes of
judgment, and shareholders from disappointments and
premature condemnations of mines but little developed
either vertically or laterally.
Small and large veins of quartz, more or less rich in
gold, may also be seen in many parts of the district—in
shafts, open cuttings, and in trenches—to run irregularly
through the diorite, in much the same manner as in
numerous places in Victoria and New South Wales.
In the central portion of the Wealth of Nations mine
the slatey diorite forming the hanging wall of the reef
strikes N. 50° E., whilst the reef itself runs nearly north
and south, which circumstance suggests the idea that this
lenticular body of quartz follows a fissure line in the strata,
and is not interbedded; and this idea is further supported
by the fact of the hanging wall being formed of a thin
coating of talcose slate, smooth and polished, but irregular.
The bedded diorite rock abutting on this hanging wall
forms, consequently, a series of triangular pieces of rock,
like what miners sometimes call “ ironing box ” pieces,
which usually prove to be treacherous ground when ex-
tensively opened. The next shoot of quartz north of this
place is intermediate between a grey slate hanging wall
and a diorite footwall. This quartz shoot and the grey


slate run parallel to one another in strike and underlie,
the latter being in this spot at an angle of 33° from the
horizon.
At the White Feather some of the bounding rocks of the
reefs remind one very strongly of those of the Gympie gold-
fields, Queensland. The somewhat angular conglomerates
and greenstones of the latter field resemble the boulder
greenstone of the former. The underlie of the beds at
Gympie averages 25° towards the north-east, and those at
the Feather underlie in the same direction at an average
angle of 45°.
11.— MINERALS IN THE QUARTZ
REEFS.
Talc and chlorite are commonly found in the reefs. As a
rule, in the richest mines galena and zincblende (blackjack
of the miners) accompanies iron and arsenical pyrites, in
the proportion of, say, one to three per cent, to the quartz,
much the same as in Victorian and other Australian gold-
fields. Siderite (carbonate of iron) is of more rare oc-
currence in the quartz reefs than the abovenamed minerals,
and it is usually accompanied by iron pyrites. Green and
blue carbonates of copper are also present in a few large
reefs in small quantities, and occasionally a little native
copper is discovered. Black oxide of manganese occurs in
very delicate and beautiful dendritic forms on the joints
of the white quartz, and more commonly associated with
ironstone at and near the surface. A mineral, decom-
posed, like bournonite occurs associated with the gold
in the Nemesis mine at White Feather.


12.—QUARTZ REEF FORMATIONS.
One point I noted as often omitted from the calculations
of the owners of mines and other persons, and that is the
value of the “ formation,” which often extends for a width
of at least six inches on either side of the quartz veins or
reefs, and in many cases for feet on each side. In this
“ formation,” or broken rubbly country rock, it is com-
monly found that thin irregular quartz veins occur, which
most certainly will be crushed with the quartz when these
mines have their batteries erected. Above the water level
some of these formations carry what miners call ironstone,
in which is commonly found coarse as well as fine gold.
The “ formations ” void of ironstone also contain both these
classes of gold. Most of the reefs at Coolgardie run
through “ channels ” in the country rock.
OUTCROPS OF QUARTZ REEFS.
Outcrop of Quartz Reef, Bayley’s Reward Gold Mine, Coolgardie,
The strike of the reef is N. 80° W. with a tendency to
underlie to the north. The outcrop above sketched is
about 36 feet in length, 6 feet in width, and 12 feet in
height. It stands up on the top of a hill surrounded by


the remnants of a thin forest of gum trees, like a benevo-
lent Sphinx with a fixed, well set smile of welcome to all
those who, like wise men, approach him at sunset from the
east. Although there is no altar beneath his breast, the
smoke rising from which might have tickled his nostrils,
yet it will not be long ere he gets a whiff of dynamite and
a chip off his nose to more forcibly remind him and us of
that other old artificially sculptured counterfeit in the
Egyptian desert.
Sprinkled throughout this wide-spreading auriferous
country are very large, and sometimes gigantic, outcrops of
quartz reefs, and the quartzite hills and ranges are only
surpassed (so far as my Australian travels tell me) by
those of the Hodgkinson goldfield in North Queensland
where these ranges weather along their crests into more
fantastic shapes.
Sometimes the Coolgardie quartz reefs outcrop in roughly
conical forms, but more commonly like partly broken-down
walls built of blocks of white quartz stretching away across
the untrodden country for long distances. Two such
crops I observed about 5 miles to the south-east of the
Broad Arrow camp, at, say, a quarter of a mile distant from
one another and running parallel in a north-easterly
direction. The larger of the two on the south-eastern side
extends across the country like a huge quartz barrier,
which for a long distance stands up above the soil for
20 feet in height. It varies in width from 6to 10
and 12 feet. If this brief description of a big crop and
its locality should induce any prospector to look it up and
try what it’s made of, and the reef turns out trumps, of
course, in miners’ phraseology, he will “ give me a show ! ”
Anyway, I have ear-marked it, my friends, if I have not
pegged it off according to regulation, so you will all please
take this timely notice.


It has been the rule in Australia hitherto, and in every
gold-mining country in the world, that quartz reefs existing
close to the surface possess distinctly marked outcrops
showing more or less conspicuously above the surface.
But in the Coolgardie goldfields there are many notable
examples of rich reefs existing that have no outcrops.
Perhaps the most remarkable and best known instance of
this mode of occurrence is at the Burbank’s Birthday Gift
mine, situated about miles to the south of the town of
Coolgardie. In this mine there are at least five partly
developed and richly gold-bearing lenticular formed reefs,
only one of which can be said to have cropped above the
surface, and that but for a very short distance. You natur-
ally ask what is the cause of these exceptions to the rule.
The answer is because such reefs are located on the sides-
of hornblendic diorite hills, which rock decomposes into
an alluvial soil covering, that slowly accumulates on the
hill slopes almost in situ because of the absence of rain to
wash it away and scour the hillsides down to the hard, un-
decomposed rock. After this manner are doubtless hidden
from view lots of rich gold-bearing reefs in this district
that will only be discovered by “ learning,” or, as we more
appropriately call it for this field, “ dry blowing. ”
Many reefs show only at the surface patches of small
broken angular white quartz, whilst others, but more
rarely, are nearly black, through the presence of man-
ganese and iron, Numerous outcrops form the crowns of
small rises in the contour of the surface ; and were they
not so white, and thus presenting so strong a contrast to
the unusually dark-coloured rock or soil surrounding them,
would not be noticeable, although protruding sensibly
above the soil. The outcrops of reefs, and the mass of
quartz below the surface, frequently consist of pure white
amorphous compact quartz, and almost as commonly of


granular brown-tinted quartz, which miners call “ sugary”
quartz. Both kinds of quartz in reefs carry rich shoots of
gold, just as they do in the eastern colonies of Australia.
There are also observable what miners call throughout
Australia “ buck ” reefs — i.e., great masses of quartzite,
usually tinted brown or grey. And, remarkable to relate,
very rich gold specimens from one of these great “ buck ”
reefs were recently exhibited in Coolgardie. We have
examined the specimens, but saw the reef before the
discovery of this rich gold was made, as we drove past it
at a distance of a few hundred yards. We call it a “ buck ”
reef from hearsay. It is located a short distance to the
north of the Black Flag, and is sometimes called by the
local prospectors the “ Wall of China.” To the north-west
of the Hodgkinson (Q.) goldfield there was a large “ buck ”
reef, hardly recognizable from an ordinary quartz reef,
which had on its footwall a small true reef that contained
gold equal to from one to three ounces per ton. Should
this “ Wall of China” reef prove to contain a large deposit
of gold in what is commonly denominated as “ buck ”
quartz, then miners and others must prepare themselves in
the future not to hastily “ taboo ” prospecting “ buck ” reefs.
It is a dangerous thing to condemn quartz of any kind
and pronounce it non-auriferous, or likely to be so, in
Australia. The wider a man’s experience is, the more
careful he becomes of what he “ taboos ” as non-auriferous,
whether rocks or reefs. Too many mistakes of this kind
have been hastily made by so-called scientific men, and in
the name of science,* on a very slender foundation of
experience, and with too few facts to guide them. In this
way science has got into disrepute with the mining
* Science has been defined by Professor Huxley as “ organized
common sense ; ” but some scientific (?) men would have us dismiss
our common sense when they put pen to paper.


community, and it suffers from self-constituted law-makers,
who set themselves up to dictate from comfortable arm-
chairs the laws of nature to the Great Creator.
14. —FORMS OF QUARTZ REEFS.
The majority of the reefs are of lenticular form, and
although these shoots of quartz pinch out, others commonly
occur in the same line of strike of the reefs, so that we
find the term so often applied to reefs in Victoria—viz.,
“ line of reef ” —is applicable to many of the reefs on the
Coolgardie goldfields.
15.—STRIKES OF QUARTZ REEFS.
Baylby’s Reef.—The strike of this reef is north-westerly,
as may be seen very distinctly by its several outcrops at
the surface, and its underlie is towards the north-east, but
very little from the vertical.
The strike of the Londonderry reef is approximately
north and south, and its underlie is towards the west at an
angle of about 64°, modified by “ strike ” slides (flat floors),
which fault the reef into its footwall. The Londonderry
Consolidated reef, which runs parallel with and to the
east of the Londonderry reef, strikes N. 20° E., and
underlies east 60°. This reef is one of the most regular
in strike on the goldfield. The underlies of these two
Londonderry reefs being in opposite directions at the same
angle give support to the idea that there is a probability
of an anticlinal formation here in the country rock. This
reef and the Londonderry agree in another respect—viz.,
they both appear to split into two reefs going north, the


Consolidated reefs both striking east of north, whilst the
Londonderry eastern reef strikes N. 20° E., and the western
strikes about N. 30° W. Still further to the west there is
upon the crest of the diorite range a small vertical vein
striking N. 30° E.
Burbank’s Birthday Gift reefs strike from N. 45° E.
to north 55° E., the No. 1 reef being nearly vertical, with
a tendency to underlie towards the south-east, whilst
the No. 2 reef underlies to the north-west. This would
indicate an anticlinal in the formation of the country rock
if the reefs were in the same line of strike, which anticlinal
has not however been discovered, whilst a cross trench
between the two shafts has shown a disposition in the
rocks to form a synclinal. It might therefore be inferred
that the No. 2 shaft reef in its underlie west is simply
on the eastern side of the synclinal, whilst the No. 1 shaft
reef in its underlie east lies within the western side of the
same synclinal trough.
The Wealth of Nations line of reef is, judging by surface
indications, simply formed of lenticular shoots of quartz
apparently pitching south, and striking on the average,
say, N. 5° W. These large shoots of quartz have in-
dividually a more easterly course than the average strike
•of the whole line of reef, and especially does this last
remark apply to the most southerly shoot, which strikes S.
30° W., or N. 30° E.
The Golden Crown reef at the White Eeather strikes on
the average—so far as opened—N. 20° W., whilst other
parellel reefs in its vicinity strike N. 35° W. and N. 10°
W.


16.—UNDERLIES OF QUARTZ
REEFS.
With regard to the underlies of reefs, several near the
surface had a fast underlie to the east or west, but this
was modified in many cases by “ strike ” slides, which,
underlying in opposite directions, threw them back into the
footwalls. It therefore follows that calculations based on
observed underlies near the surface are very apt to lead to
error. The miners on this field most frequently call the
slides referred to “flat floors.”
Examples illustrating the above remarks can be seen at
the Londonderry and at Burbank’s mines, &c. The Lon-
donderry reef underlies, where beyond the influence of
slides, at an angle of 64° from the horizontal to the west.
The underlies of the lenticular shoots of quartz forming
the Wealth of Nations reef are to the west, at angles
varying from 33° to 45° from the horizon. Burbank’s reefs
vary from nearly vertical to 80° from the horizontal, and a
newly-discovered reef at the south end of the mine is, so
far as can be judged in a large trench, a flat reef, corru-
gated by large bends (a few feet up and down). This flat
reef underlies or pitches towards the north-east. Bayley’s
reef underlies to the north-east at a very steep angle—viz.,
about 85° from the horizontal.


17. —SHOOTS OF GOLD AND QUARTZ.
In Bayley’s gold mine the shoots of gold and of quartz have
a southerly “ pitch.” So far as they have been developed
the shoots of gold in the Londonderry mine appear to pitch
to the south at an angle of, say, 75° from the horizon.
Only a small amount of work has yet been done on them; no
more will be done until the London proprietary are placed
in full possession of the mine. In the Wealth of Nations
mine there appear to be three shoots of gold at least, all
of which provide more or less evidence that these shoots of
gold and quartz pitch towards the south.
18.—quality of gold.
Gold Crystal from the 1.0. U. Diggings.
The above sketch is just a shade larger than the original,
which is now the property of Samuel R. Walters, Esq., of
Melbourne, who first showed it to the author at Coolgardie,
and then very kindly lent it for illustration in this pam-
phlet. It was discovered by “ dry-blowing ”at the 1.0. U.
The quality of the gold throughout these goldfields is, as
a rule, very good, but little silver being associated with
it. The gold from Bayley’s mine realizes at the Mint
(Melbourne) over per ounce. The gold found at Siberia
is 22 carat, value nearly <£4 per ounce.


19. — NUQQETS OF GOLD IN QUARTZ.
The magnificent display of gold nuggets in ironstone and
quartz that has been exhibited to the visitors at Bayley’s
gold mine during the past few years has gone far to
impress strangers with the great possibilities of this gold-
field. Through that “ iron-lined safe hut” have con-
tinuously passed thousands of ounces of gold nuggets
which have been extracted from Bayley’s reef. A quartz
gold nugget was found near Gordon’s shaft, at the surface,
which weighed in the gross just 1,032 ozs., and contained
500 ozs. of gold. At the Londonderry reef a hole was
sunk on the outcrop of the reef of the following
dimensions, viz., 6 feet square and 4J feet in depth, and
from it have been extracted some 7,889 ozs. of gold, valued
at £31,556. The specimens sent to London were estimated
to contain £lO,OOO worth of gold. It seems almost
impossible that the rich quartz from this Londonderry
shoot of gold could ever have been surpassed in the world.
Quartz-bearing nuggets of gold were discovered close to
and just below the outcrop of the Wealth of Nations
quartz reef or lode. The quartz was slightly laminated,
white, and somewhat iron-stained. One block weighed
152 lbs., and was estimated to contain at least half gold.
The whole of the specimens sold at the Melbourne Mint
weighed 6 cwt. 2 qrs. 19 lbs., and realized £10,462,
Wonderfully rich quartz gold nuggets are constantly
being sold to the Coolgardie banks which have been
■extracted from the quartz reefs. Many of them should
have been placed on record, as important factors bearing
on the question of the “ origin of gold nuggets,” which
has been a subject of debate for many years.


20.—ALLUVIAL QOLD=MININQ.
The rainfall at the Coolgardie goldfields is notoriously
small—about 7 inches per annum—and the decomposi-
tion of the rocks, therefore, is mainly due to the action
of the air—miners know only too well how quickly rocks
“wind” and crumble underground after being broken—and
rapid changes from heat to cold (expansion and contrac-
tion), accelerated by dews and occasional thunderstorms.
It will, then, be readily understood that as the rocks
decompose, and their contained reefs and veins fall to
pieces for want of their support, so their reduced frag-
ments remain in situ, or nearly so, in the absence of rains
to wash them down the hillsides; and thus we have here
no concentration (as in Eastern Australia) by Nature’s
sluicing operations, into the gullies and creeks, of the
heavier materials, such as gold, quartz, and undecomposed
hard pebbles, whilst the greater portion of the lighter clays
and fine sands would be swept down the valleys still
further away from their original positions in the hills
and ranges. It thus happens—as the miners say—the
nuggets of gold are not “ shed ” far from the reefs in which
they originally existed, and why “ custom ” has permitted
the “ dry-blower ” to dig and work the alluvial deposits to
20 feet from the reefs, within a quartz-mining lease. Out
of this “ custom ” may arise trouble in the future to the
Mining Department, to the quartz miners, and to the al-
luvial miners, for when gold leases are granted and issued
to miners by the Government, to mine and work for gold
on those leases, it is hardly likely that the leaseholders will
allow other gold-miners to enter those leaseholds to mine
for and extract gold without their permission. In such a
remarkably law-abiding community as is to be found on


these goldfields much trouble can hardly be apprehended,
and the warden’s decision in such matters will be accepted
by both sides.
As there are no rains sufficient to concentrate the gold
into gullies and “ leads,” the whole width of the flats are
“ dry blown,” and the gold is found in isolated patches, and
not in anything like continuous gutters, such as are so
commonly found in New South Wales, Queensland, and
Victoria. The only portion of the field that we could
except, up to date, from the foregoing remarks is the White
Feather, for there the gutters and leads are fairly well
concentrated, and are typical of the alluvial gold deposits
of Eastern Australia. The “ cement ” gold deposits of the
Feather are undoubtedly the results of water concentration,
as the well-rounded pebbles and gold, &c., sufficiently in-
dicate, but whether by fluvialite or marine action must at
present be left an open question.
Prospectors, loamers, and dry-blowers are all subject to
the vicissitudes and tantalizing changes of fickle fortune.
Numerous instances of experiences such as the following
could be given : —A prospector, walking across country,
sees what looks like the end of a small bar of gold sticking
out of the soil. He takes hold of it and draws it out—not
a yard in length, only five and a half inches by one inch
by one quarter of an inch, and as nearly solid as if it had
been smelted and run into a mould.* Although the length
might have been disappointing when the end so quickly
arrived, still the prospector had good reason to believe it
would not be there alone. So he camped with his son, and
they delved all round and over that ground in which this
gold centre peg had been stuck, for days, like Tantalus
only to be tormented with a prospect that was never realized.
* This nugget was sold to the Bank of New South Wales,
Coolgardie.


A colour or two of gold alone was got in addition to the
gold “ pig,” as some of our good Irish camp neighbours would
call it (for when these gentlemen marked off a lease they
notified they did so by sticking their pigs in).
Rich gold quartz specimens are often found right on the
surface soil, almost as if gathered together by niggers for
sport, or perhaps by the prospectors of 1884, whose
skeletons, with only axes lying beside them, were found.
But if the latter, these bony prospectors must have had a
very busy time of it, because similar specimen heaps have
been found here and there all over the field, consisting of
angular quartz, and nothing but decomposed rock or
alluvial all round and down to a dozen feet in depth—not
a trace of a reef visible. What blasted hopes such incidents
have created will live for ever in the memories of many a
prospector in the Coolgardie goldfield—a repetition of old
diggers’ experiences in Eastern Australia.
2i.— TWISTED QUARTZ REEFS.
In many cases the lines of reef run very straight for a
•considerable distance ; but in still more cases others have a
wavy, twisted line. And to such an extraordinary extent
was this observable that some reefs double back on
themselves in underlie or strike. In one case, at Parker’s
Ranges, about 50 miles south of Southern Cross, we
examined a reef that had been extensively worked, which
pursued a serpentine course, like a capital letter M with-
out angles. Another singular thing about this reef was
that it was cut through by a large and a small granitic
vein (very coarse-grained). On one side of the large vein
the water was visible where some underhand sloping had
been done, just below the bottom level. On the other


side a winze had been sunk some 60 feet in the perfectly
dry quartz reef.
Plan of Macintosh’s Reef, Parker’s Ranges, south of Southern Cross.
This reef has been the largest producer of quartz and of
gold in the Parker’s Range field.* Another similarly
twisted reef occurs at the Homeward Bound mine, nearly
three miles to the north-east of Macintosh’s. It twists
from west towards the east, and underlies to the north.
Twisted reefs like those above referred to exist in the
Coolgardie goldfields, but they have not yet been sufficiently
developed to demand further mention in this pamphlet. It
may, however, be remarked in passing that bent, horseshoe,
* 3,538 tons of quartz yielded 4,107 ozs. 7 dwts. 12 grs. of gold,
averaging 1 oz. 3 dwts. 20 grs., up to the end of July, 1892.


loop, and saddle reefs are not uncommon in the eastern
colonies, and that the greater number of them are more
than ordinarily rich, although often short in length.
22.—GRANITIC VEINS.
Through another rich reef, the Londonderry, at Cool-
gardie, I observed a small granitic vein dividing the quartz
of the reef into two parts, longitudinally, and this granitic
vein in parts was very rich in gold, which metal could be
seen surrounding the large plates of mica, and running
right through, from side to side, of a large specimen taken
from it.
33.—FAULTS OF REEFS.
We have previously referred to that most interesting reef of
Macintosh’s, at Parker’s Range, which has been severed by
what is locally called the “ big mica bar ” and the “ small
mica bar,” which, like the basaltic lava dykes of the Bendigo
goldfield, cut through the quartz reefs, but do not fault
them.
The above sketches of “ strike” slide faults are typical of those
most common on the Coolgardie goldfields.
It may now be considered an established rule that the
richest reefs in Australia are faulted by slides. All the


faults in Bayley’s mine underlie towards the east. At
Coolgardie the faults usually deteriorate the gold-bearing
qualities of the reefs they intersect for a few feet in their
immediate vicinity. In the Londonderry gold mine a
“ strike ” slide, running N.N. W. and underlying to the S.E.,
cuts through the reef, which underlies to the w T est, and
slightly faults it, throwing the reef back into its footwall a
few feet.
In the Burbank’s Birthday Gift mine “ strike ” slides
occur in the Nos. 1,2, and 4 shaft reefs. The slide in the
No. 4 shaft throws the almost vertical reef to the east two
feet. This slide underlies to the east. The “ strike ” slide
in the No. 2 shaft reef underlies to the west at an angle
from the horizon of 50°, and it throws the reef downwards
and to the west about a couple of feet.
On the Pearl line of reef, near Coolgardie, a “ strike ”
fault (or flat floor) cuts through a nearly vertical reef with
a slight underlie to the east, and throws the reef east and
downwards about 4 feet.
24.—CALQOORL1E (HANNAN’S).
The Government Assistant Geologist says of the Galgoorlie
(or Hannan’s) goldfield, in a recent report (6th July,
1894): —
“A great number of leases are worked in this locality by parties
and syndicates, and, judging from already exposed ore deposits,
Calgoorlie will become one of the richest gold-mining centres in the
central goldfield of Western Australia.”


25.—WHITE FEATHER.
In the range just above the old canvas town of White
Feather occur rich quartz reefs and numerous flat veins.
A greenstone dyke runs through this range in a direction
of N. 70° W., whereas the reef formations—which, by the
way, are very soft—strike from nearly east and west to
N. 70° E., and underlie at an average angle of 60° to the
south from the horizontal. The reef formations have
proved to be of greater width than the shafts or works
disclose ; consequently other veins and reefs than those at
present worked may, and probably do, exist in either the
hanging or footwalls.
Some of the small quartz veins (U.N.O. mine) strike
N. 50° E., and underlie flat to the south in a large grey
felspathic dyke. Many of the veins contain nearly 50
per cent, of more or less decomposed iron pyrites, and they
appear to have formed in the shrinkage joints of the dyke.
The veins are accompanied by talc. Iron pyrites is also
observable in the mass of the bounding rock as isolated
cubes.
In the Nemesis gold mine the reefs are formed of the
common amorphous blue-tinted white quartz. Gold occurs
in the solid quartz and in cavities associated with pyrites
and a decomposed mineral like bournonite. The natural
joints of the quartz are coated with peroxide of iron, or
stained brown by it. Below the water-level the minerals will
be found unaffected by decomposition, and there will then
be no doubt as to what the softer sulphides are. In the
smaller veins the iron pyrites occurs in large cubical
crystals, turned black by partial decomposition, in which
the gold can be distinctly seen in patches and strings—
another proof, if more were wanted, of the great richness
of the pyrites in the reefs of the Coolgardie goldfields.


26.- BROAD ARROW.
At the Broad Arrow McDonald’s rich quartz mine stands
on a prominent hilltop. The main reef strikes on the
average N. 30° W., and it underlies to the south-west, say
at an angle of 50° from the horizontal. This reef has for
its hounding rock talcose slate, which rock, in fact, con-
stitutes the whole of the hill.
About a couple of hundred yards to the east of this
hill rises another hill of talcose slate having the same
strike, and capped by a large deposit of iron ore. Still
further to the east, and in the same vicinity, occur three
other large cappings of iron ore, which appear to be due
to the outcrops of a diorite dyke that stretches away
to the north-east (about N. 65° E.)
At M‘Donald’s mine the reef is being opened from the
crown of the hill, where lies the No. 1 shaft about 70 feet
in depth, and by two other shallower shafts on the
north-western fall of the hill. The reef is from 2 to
3 feet in thickness, and is very rich in gold. The mine
is worked by a private co-operative party. They have
erected just below their main shaft (No. 1) a three-stamp-
head battery, the motive being horse power, applied in
just the same manner as to the ordinary machinery on a
farm. The stone put through this little battery averages,
so I was informed, over 10 ozs. of gold to the ton.
The reefs lying still further west in the same belt of
country strike N. 40° W. for about half a mile in length.


27. —BARDOCK’S.
About 10 or 12 miles to the north-west of the Arrow
lies, on a still more elevated tract of country, Burdock’s
diggings and quartz reefs.
The alluvial deposits here are something like those of the
White Feather— i.e., there is a disposition to the concentra-
tion of the gold into gullies and leads. These diggings
appear to be on the main dividing range of this part of the
country.
The principal lines of reef strike nearly north and south,
parallel with the strata, which consist of talcose slate,
diorite slate, and beds of quartzite, the latter very fine-
grained and almost bedded in character —so much so in
one place that it might almost be taken for a laminated
quartz reef. The reefs that came under my notice were
those from Mount Eva to the south. At nearly right
angles to the main reefs, which run north and south, are
numerous branch cross veins and reefs, some of which
contain heavy gold. It is but a few months since the
Burdock’s rush took place, and after the supposed best of
the “ dry-blowing ” ground was worked out attention
began to be directed to the quartz reefs, consequently but
little actual quartz mining has yet been executed, and
there still remains a lot of prospecting by surface trenches
to be done on reef and vein crops that have not been
touched.
The Bank of England mine is situated about a quarter of
a mile south of the Mount Eva, on an eastern line of reef,
up to which from its eastern side a lot of the ground has
been “ dry-blown ” with rich results. The main reef in
this mine strikes N. and S. and underlies to the west at
an angle of about 70° from the horizontal, the reef


being quite feet in width, and carrying gold from
hanging to footwall—but especially near the latter,
where it has been exceedingly rich close to a beautiful
talcose slate “casing.” The “formation” or channel of
country rock which encloses the reef and its small veins is
four feet in thickness, and it seems not at all improbable
that the whole width may pay in the future to put through
the crushing battery. Running down through about the
centre of the reef is a clay seam of from two to four inches
in thickness. From this shaft has been extracted a con-
siderable quantity of very rich gold quartz and ironstone
specimens. The reef, I observed, contained galena, zinc-
blende, and iron pyrites, all of which minerals will no
doubt be found to increase in quantity below the water
level and beyond the reach of decomposing influences.
These sulphides are commonly associated with gold on this
field as in Eastern Australia, and particularly is this the
case with the iron pyrites. The ironstone, which in this
reef is phenomenally rich in gold, is the result of the decom-
position of iron pyrites saturating the clayey rocks in its
vicinity like iron rust, and this ironstone wherever found
in the Coolgardie goldfields contains gold, and frequently
in large quantities, such as in this mine, Bayley’s, and
Burbank’s, &c.
There are other reefs at Burdock’s, both to the west and
east, from which gold is being raised. One reef, half a mile
to the east, is now occupied for one mile in length. This
reef underlies to the east, and runs nearly parallel to those
above mentioned.
Burdock’s is not made so familiar to the public as many
other diggings in the Coolgardie mining district, by reason
of its being a terminus. It is only reached from Coolgardie
by very roundabout tracks—for example, via the Black
Flag and the Arrow, or through Hannan’s and the Arrow ;


and having reached Bardock’s, there is not a good
track to any other diggings. Further north-west, the 90-
Mile (or Roaring Gimlet) is the nearest diggings, and
that is 20 miles away as the crow flies, through rather
dangerous nigger country. But of late these gentle people
have solely amused themselves by robbing food, knives,
pannikins, &c., from tents, and pulling out the bungs
of water-casks, for which sport they get occasionally
hunted by the diggers for 30 or 40 miles. Having
referred to the niggers, I may as well say a little more
about them. They are the meanest-!ooking specimens of
humanity that ever stalked on two legs. Legs ! oh, yes !
you should see the black gins’ legs! Poor things, they
don’t attempt to hide them. If all the broomsticks that
ever supported human beings in the universe were collected
together and exhibited at Ooolgardie you would only
require to catch the first gin met in the street, run her
into the show, and walk off straight with the best prize.
No need to select your gin. What lots of money the panto-
mime managers have missed this year through not cap-
turing a few Ooolgardie gins and exhibiting them as a
contrast to the whites ! However, it’s trespassing on a
rather delicate subject; so we must be content to drop it,
with this hint to the theatrical managers, who are better
judges of how to cater for the public edification than a
miner can possibly be.
Speaking of the natives generally, they may be briefly
described as by far away the poorest samples of the Austral-
asian nigger extant; and with that statement we will
dismiss them as unworthy of further notice.
Bardock’s diggings was an unfamiliar name to the public
until a couple of months back, when this name was asso-
ciated with the mysterious and horrible murder of a digger,
the perpetrator of which has yet to be discovered.


28.—BLACK FLAG.
The Black Flag is a couple of miles to the north of
Mirage Salt Lake. Between the Flag and the lake a
low range rises out of the flat country, which consists of
fine-grained sandstone in beds, striking M. 70° W. and
underlying flat to S.W. at 45°.
A quartz reef 1 foot in thickness occurs interbedded in
the strata, its hanging wall “ casing ” being formed of
talcose slate. This reef is being prospected, not only on
this hillside, but also away to the west on the flat, where, we
are informed by one of the prospectors, the reef improves,
is much wider and better looking—which is evidently the
case, judging by the specimens exhibited, containing
coarse gold. Remarkable to relate of a reef in the Cool-
gardie district, water was there struck in the prospecting
holes in quantity at less than 20 feet in depth. A
short distance to the north of the Black Flag condensers
rise out of the flat country rather abruptly low ranges, in
one of which very rich gold has recently been found, in
what is usually denominated a “ buck ” reef, and so ex-
tensive is this discovery said to be that the miners in the
neighbourhood call it the “Wall of China.” Some five
miles still further to the north occurs another line of reef,
which has quite recently been marked out and leased, and
worked for two miles, and very good gold prospects have
been found in large outcrops of quartz reefs for about one
mile and a half in length. No recognized name has
yet been given to it, unless it is to be called the A A line
of reef, after two of its prospectors whose names begin
with A, or it is called the Gladiator reef, after the name
of the lease in which the biggest outcrop of the reef occurs.
This line of reef strikes very truly N. 70° W., and


apparently from the little work done it underlies to the
south-west. The prevailing rocks bounding what appear
to be lenticular shoots of quartz which form this line of
reef are diorite and hornblendic schists and talcose slate.
The selvages or walls of the quartz shoots are composed of
chlorite and talcose slate, together with a serpentine slate-
like rock. Chlorite and talc occur within the reef in patches
and seams, associated with gold. The talcose slate, which
appears to form a large part of the “ country ” rock,
in places strikes on the average N. 25° W. over a
considerable area. This reef makes in large outcrops
from 100 to 400 or 500 feet in length, some of the
outcrops being four and a half feet and up to 15 feet
in width. Nearly all of them show gold (coarse), iron
pyrites, and galena in the solid quartz, and the latter
sulphides occur in extraordinary quantity close to the
surface. Very little more than surface scratching has yet
been done on this great line of reef, but the prospects are
certainly most promising for the future development here
of several large and permanent gold mines. This discovery,
which gives the impression of being a very important one,
although no phenomenally rich specimens have as yet been
found in it, illustrates to the prospector what good chances
may still lie exposed at the surface within a reasonable
distance of Coolgardie.
The Black Flag diggings and surrounding country,
like large tracts all round the other diggings,, are most
imperfectly examined or prospected by either the “dry
blower ” or the quartz prospector, and especially by the
latter. But attention has of late been specially directed to
the Flag, and no doubt the country is now being scoured and
tried—probably too hastily, for prospectors seem to be too
eager to do any place justice unless they find course gold
very readily in the one class of deposit or the other.


29.-LIMESTONE.
Some dozen miles out from Coolgardie on the road to
Hannan’s (or, as it is called officially, Oalgoorlie) occur out-
crops of limestone beds, which strike IST. 45° W. The
beds appear to be of considerable width, and here again
has been made an important discovery, geologically as well
as commercially, for if fossils are found in the limestone
it will greatly add to the knowledge of the age of some of
the rocks of this wide-spreading goldfield. At present
this limestone is being raised and burnt to supply the
contractors with lime who are building the Government
offices and other private buildings in the town of
Coolgardie.
30. —CAMELS AND BICYCLES.
The only animal fit to travel with or to work, and by far
the most economical, is the camel. Suppose, for example,
you desire to send out food, tools, explosives, and water to
a camp, say 50 miles from Coolgardie. If you were to send
these stores by horse teams, you must also load up your
waggon with feed and water for your horses on the out-
ward and return journey. Camels are watered before they
start, and there is splendid feed for them in the bush in
almost every direction you like to travel, and when you
return to town in four or five days’ time you then re-water
the camels at the original starting point. Feed for your
camels is not purchased, and water is required only at the
cheapest depot once in five or six days. Camels are quite
commonly used in waggons like bullocks or horses, and it


is a question that is now being threshed out as to whether
it is cheaper to load up camels individually or to load up
waggons and let the camels pull the load instead of carry-
ing it. If the team is going to travel for a few days the
loading up and unloading many times is saved. And to
load a camel is by no means a pleasant job, although usually
performed to a melodious camel solo accompaniment. I
think the waggons will win where there is a dray track
cleared. The camels are coming surely enough—from
Bourke, from Adelaide, from India, and from Afghanistan,
in hundreds. They have already located themselves in -this
great dry goldfields district by thousands, and they are a
fixture. This is the future home of the camel and of the
bicycle. A bicycle requires no water nor any feed except
a little oil, and 10 miles an hour is very frequently accom-
plished on most of the tracks where a pair of horses in a
buckboard on an outward journey, loaded up with horse
feed and water, &c., will only cover at the most 6 miles,
with the roads as they are now. The bicycle, it will thus
be seen, has also come to stay as a rapid and economical
means of locomotion at Ooolgardie.
31.—PAYABLE QUARTZ.
What may be payable quartz at Ooolgardie can best be
judged by what is payable or profitable at the Southern
Cross goldfield. The Southern Cross mines have gone
through successfully the almost exact repetition of circum-
stances, events, and difficulties that now present themselves
to the miners and mining companies at Ooolgardie. The
practical importance of the following quotations will there-
fore be clearly understood and appreciated :


■“Fraser’s South Gold Mining Company, Southern Cross, W.A.
“ Directors’ Report for the half-year ended 7th March, 1894 ■
“ Quartz crushed, 5,755 tons; yield of gold, 2,340 ozs. 7 dwts.
12 grs.
“Average per ton, 8 dwts, 3 grs. ; value, £3 7s. per oz.
“Dividends. —Your Directors were pleased to be able to declare
two dividends of 3d. each, payable on 21st September and 21st
November, 1893.
“ Yilgarn Railway. —This line is now completed to within eleven
miles of Southern Cross, and will be handed over to the Government
in June. We then anticipate a considerable reduction in the work-
ing expenses.
“ Water. —Since the date of the Manager’s report splendid rains
have fallen at the mine, filling the dam. ”
The author is indebted to Captain William Oats, the
mining manager, for the half-yearly report above referred
to, whose efficient and skilful management of the mine is
duly recognized by his directors in their report.


APPENDIX.
increasing
speaks eloquently for itself.
EXPORTS OF GOLD FROM
The above
the rapidly ir
of gold exports needs no comment, as
output of gold shown by the figures
* Return of gold from the Melbourne Mint only, which is well
known not to have received the whole of the gold.


A Line of Reef, 48
Alluvial Gold-Mining, 37
Anticlinal, 33
Appendix—Export of Gold, 53
Auriferous Quartzite, 31
Bank of England Mine, 45
Bardock’s Goldfield, 45
Bayley’s Mine, 25, 32, 35
Bicycles, 50
Bifurcated Reefs, 32
Black Flag, 13, 31, 48
Bournonite, 43
Broad Arrow, 29, 44
Broken Hill, 17
Buck Reef, 31, 48
Burbank’s Mine, 25
Carbonates of Copper, 27
„ of Iron, 27
Calgoorlie, 42
Camels, 50
Channels, Soft Reef, in Coun-
try, 25
Chlorite, 27
~ Slate, 25
Climate, 17
Comparisons of Goldfields, 9
Condenser’s License, 22
Condensers, 21
~ Inspector, 23
Contour of Country, 12
Coolgardie, 7, 23
~ Goldfields, Extent of, 8
~ ~ Area of, 9
~ ~ Travelling,
Cost at, 9
Copper, Native, 27
Crystal of Gold (large), 35
Decomposition of Rocks and
Reefs, 37
Desert, 11
INDEX
Diggers’ Custom, 37
Diorites, 25, 44
Dry-Blowing, 30, 45
Dust, 23
Dykes, 43
Evaporation, 20
~ Suggeston to Ob-
viate, 20
Export of Gold, 1888 to 1894, in
Appendix, 53
Faults, 41
Firewood, 22
~ License to Cut, 22
~ Protection of, 23
Flat Floors, 34
~ Reefs, 34
Fleas, Absence of, 24
Formation, Reef (rich), 28
Forms of Reefs, 32
Fossils, 50
Fraser’s South Mine, 52
Galena, 27, 49
Gladiator Reef, 48
Gold Export from Western
Australia, 53
Gold Crystal, 35
Gold Nuggets in Quartz, 36
Gold, Quality of, 35
Golden Crown, White Feather, 33
Goldfields, Coolgardie, Extent
of, 8
Granitic Veins, 41
Gutters, Alluvial, 38
Gympie, 27
Hannan i’s Goldfield, 42
Homewaxrd Bound Mine, 40
Hornblemdes, 25
1.0. U., 335
Iron Pyrrites, Auriferous, 43


Iron Ore, 43
Ironstone, Rich, 46
Lake (Mirage), 13
Leads, Alluvial, 38
Leases, Gold, 37
Limestone, 50
Lizard, 15
Loaming, 30
Locomotion, 50
Londonderry Consolidated Reef,
32
Londonderry Mine, 25, 32, 41
M'Donald’s Mine, 44
Macintosh’s Reef, 40
Manganese, Black Oxide, 27
Mines, Rich, 10
Minerals in Quartz Reefs, 27
Mosaic Pavement, 14
Mosquitos, Absence of, 24
Mount Eva, 45
Natives, Australian, 47
Nemesis Mine, 27, 43
Nuggets of Gold, 38
~ in Quartz, 36
Outcrops of Reefs, 28
large, 30
Payable Quartz, 51
Parker’s Range Reefs, 40
Pearl Line of Reef, 42
Prospectors, 15, 39
~ Hints to, 17, 29
Pyrites, Iron and Arsenical, 27
~ ~ Auriferous, 43
Quartz, Amorphous, 29
~ Crushed, 40
~ Granular, 25
~ Payable, 51
~ Reefs, Forms of, 28, 32
~ ~ Outcrops, 28
~ ~ Twisted, 39
~ ~ RichestFaulted,4l
George Robertson and
Railway to Coolgardie, 7
Rainfall, 37
Red Robin, 15
Reef Channels, in Country,
Soft, 26
Reefs Bifurcated, 32
„ Flat, 34
~ Formation, 32
~ Lenticular, 33
~ Line of, 32
~ Minerals in, 27
~ Parallel to Strata, 25
~ Roll, 25
~ Strikes of, 32
~ Twisted, 39
~ Underlies of, 34
~ Without Outcrops, 31
Rocks and Quartz Reefs, 25
Salt Lake, 13
~ Mirage, 13
Scenery, 12
Siderite, 27
Shoots of Quartz and Gold, 35
Slide Faults, 41
Soil, 18
South Australia, 7
Southern Cross, 7, 52
Strikes of Reefs, 32
Synclinal, 33
Talc 27
Talcose Slate, 26
Timber, 18
Transport of Goods, &c., 50
Travelling, Cost of, at Cool-
gardie, 9
Twisted Reefs, 39
Underlies of Reefs, 34
U.N.0., 17
Wall of China, 31
Water Supply, 19
Wealth of Nations Mine, 26, 33
White Feather, 27, 43
Zincblende, 27
Company,
Printers, Melbourne.


