

THE GREAT GOLD FIELD
MACKAY
18 5 3
SR 994.403 M153


THE
GREAT GOLD FIELD:
A PEDESTRIAN TOUR
Through the < FmrtjjfceovEEED Gold Pistrict or New
South months of October
. and ®^yember/1852,
A
BY
ANGUS MACKAY,
( Special Reporter to The Empire, Daily tfoprnal, )
f SYDNEY:
W. R. PIPPIN GTON,
GEQKGE STBEBT.
1853.
PRICE ONE SHIELING AIiIfeIXPEHOE.




THE GREAT GOLD FIELD.
THE WESTERN GOLD FIELDS.
NO. I.
Sofala, October 19, 1852.
The country about Bathurst has an uncommonly verdant appear-
ance, in consequence of the quantity of rain which has fallen
during the last few months. On Bathurst Plains the grass is very
luxuriant, and although the wet weather has sadly interfered with
mining operations, the country has, in other respects, felt great
benefit from it. A good deal has been said about the probable auri-
ferous character of Bathurst Plains, but I must confess that I have
very slight hopes on that head. It does not appear to me that
the debris of which the Plains are composed, is that of auriferous
rocks. Should it be otherwise, a rich field of enterprise would be
opened in those open undulating plains, which would alford profita-
ble. occupation to many thousands of diggers for years to come. On
the route to Sofala, the first stream of water which is met, is the
Winburndale Creek. The road from Bathurst to this place passes
through a level country, thinly wooded, and apparently of granitic
formation, with no auriferous indications. The Winburndale is at
present, after the wet weather, running pretty strongly. At the
point where the Sofala road crosses it, there are none of those gold indi-
cations which exist further down the creek towards the Macquarie
In place of this, however, there are miles of extent of alluvial flats
completely emerald with the rich and luxuriant grass and young
crops of grain. Some nine or ten miles further down the creek,
some two hundred diggers are at present located, who, according to
accounts which may be relied on, are doing very well— many of them
averaging half an ounce each, a day. The diggings are in the banks
of the creek, as the water has been too high to allow of the bed
being worked, and the gold is of a very fine scale description, called
drift gold, and apparently washed down from some higher point.
Several parties have lately left the Turon for the Winburndale, and
there is a general opinion that the bed of this creek towards the
Macquarie will turn out. very rich. As it is seldom known to
been dry, however, it is likely to be a long time before it can * be
thoroughly worked.
sr .


The next creek over which the road passes is Clear Creek, where
also there are beautiful alluvial flats of great extent, embosomed
among the mountains, and snug little farms with blossoming
orchards—images of peace and contentment. Here the auriferous
formation become more perceptible, and hence to Wyagden Hill in-
creases in distinctness. At Clear is a public-house called
the Shearers’ Arms, which is worthy of notice in point of comfort
and cleanliness. Cheshire Creek is the next stream of water which
is fallen in with; and lower down this creek gold has been found,
but there are at present no diggings on it worthy of notice. A new
public-house, called the Wyagden Hotel, kept by Mr. Ashdown, lies
between this creek and the hill, where the traveller experiences al-
most as much comfort, and fully as much civility, as in any public-
house in Sydney. The road from Bathurst to Wyagden traverses a
country for the most part comparatively level, but here it meets the
ranges of mountains which extend along the course of the Turon.
The ascent of the road up Wyagden Hill is very steep, and it is up-
wards of half a mile in length. After the top is reached, the road
passes over a table land, comparatively level, to the head of the two
Oakey Creeks. ' The rock at Wyagden appears to be clayslate with
veins of quartz, and on the top the fragments of slate have the dark
and burnt appearance of the rocks on the ridges at Oakey Creek.
There is no doubt that deposits of gold exist here, but no diggings
of any consequence have been opened. At present, there is one
camp situated in a water-course leading from Wyagden, but the in-
mates do not appear to be doing anything. Several tents were
pitched here some time back, but it would seem that they did not find
the place remunerative.
The table land to the head of the Oakeys consists of a succession of
slight rises and hollows, and has all the indications ofbeing auriferous.
No diggings have been opened, however, until we approach the Oakeys.
A miner just returned from the Victoria diggings, where he had
done very well, was travelling along the road with me towards the
Turon, and he frequently remarked the similarity of the country to
that at Bendigo, where the diggings are all in the hollows of undu-
lating table land called there “ gullies,” adding, that if the Port
Phillip diggers were here they would soon turn this ground over.
This description of country extends for several miles, and during the
present season has been abundantly supplied with water, but in dry
seasons it must be badly off for that necessary element. On nearing
the Oakeys I found that the diggers had commenced to open claims
in the slight hollows and swamps at the heads of the various water-
courses. This was the case at Wattle flat near the Bathurst road.
Piper’s Flat, the Flats at the head of little Oakey and its Tributaries,
and jhh Flats at the head of the Tributaries of Big Oakey. As this
is a new feature in the diggings at the Turon, it deserves special no-
tice. Isolated instances have formerly occurred in which holes have
4


been opened in such situations, but nothing like a systematic working
of them has ever before been attempted. Diggers at the Turon have
thought no places worthy of attention where the banks were not
somewhat steep, the channel of the creek well defined, and where the
bed rock did not offer facilities for crevicing. They were at home
in river and creek working, hut had no faith in flats and table land-
The Braidwood, the Victoria, and the Tambaroora diggings, have
opened their eyes, and there is every reason to believe that new
localities will now be brought to light in the vicinity of the Turon,
abounding in deposits of the precious metal, where it never was dream-
ed that it existed. The number of persons at work on the table land
spoken of, is probably about one hundred and fifty. The holes hither-
to opened are generally in the centre of the hollows, and their usual
depth is about five feet. The average earnings are half an ounce a
day for each man in the holes which pay, which are about half the
number of those opened. The holes are dug through a loose top
soil of a greyish colour, about a foot deep, and then through a tawny
coloured clay or loam, very stiff. The gold is found at the bottom
of this, on a stratum of greenish marl, called by the miners rotten
rock. This marl is full of black sand, known generally by the name
of emery, among the diggers. Below this marl no gold is obtained,
but I do not think that any attempt has been made to penetrate to
the solid rock. Little labour is required at these diggings, as they
are no great depth, the soil to be penetrated is not hard, and there is
no water to be contended with. There are very few miners at work
on the other portions of the two creeks, as the water is now, and has
been for many months, constantly running. Some few, however,
stick to them, and I met one digger who was crevicing among the
rocks, who had been in Oakoy Creek for the last twelve months. It
was evident that he had not remained so long at this place because
it did not pay him, and I believe he has cleared a good round sum.
In Solitary Creek, a tributary of Oakey, I fell in with a mulatto,
recently from California, a fine, handsome specimen of the genus
homo who was working a small “tom” by himself, with which he had
cleared half an ounce up to twelve o’clock that morning. He stated
that he could generally make an ounce a day by himself when there
was plenty of water. However, he complained of the poverty of
these diggings as compared with those of California, and expressed
his disbelief in the existence of the celebrated hundred weight, which
was only the creation of the newspapers to puff up the Australian
diggings. At a moderate estimate, I think, that there is room at
the head of these creeks for 2000 persons, who could profitably engage
in gold digging. Should dry weather set in, of course, the ground
cannot be worked for want of water, but the bed of the Turon, and
of the creeks themselves, is not far off to fly to.
The Turon has at present a very dull and deserted appearance.
There are a few gold diggers’ tents along its banks, and the streets


of Sofala are very different from former rimes. The river is still
high and nothing can be done in the bed, but preparations are being
made for the anticipated dry season. A few parties are working suc-
cessfully in the dry diggings at Golden Point, and many are doing a
fair stroke washing the drift in the bed of the river at this point.
They have to stand nearly up to the middle in water to get oat the
stuff, and when X passed I saw a woman in this very agreeable occupa-
tion, getting out a bucketfull of stuff. Those who choose to undergo
the fatigue and discomfort of this working, can make from a quarter
of an ounce to an ounce and a half a day at it. At the Sheep Station
Point some parties are doing well. To-day a party of five took
upwards of 9oz. out of the bank at the lower end of this point.
At Church Hill several holes are being worked, but with indifferent
success.
Xt is in contemplation to establish a Company here for the pur-
pose of working the bed claims, to be called the Sofala Gold Asso-
ciation- It is to be established on the co-operative principle, that is
of uniting all the diggers who hold bed claims to join as partners in
the company for the purpose of having their claims worked.
The Directory is to be local,—composed of persons who are well
acquainted with the river and the value of the various claims.
The principle of the proposed society is a most excellent one.
It is pretty evident that the bed of the Turon never will be through-
ly worked unless by the organization of capital and labour* and
eventually the whole of the bed would fall into the hands of the
various foreign companies now commencing to work. This would
be so far objectionable, inasmuch as those who have so long
waited for an opportunity of working the bed of the river, and who
have spent so much money and labour in vain attempts to. do so,
would not after all reap the reward of their industry. Again
foreign companies are not acquainted with the bed of the Turon,
and would, consequently, as they have done already, spend many
thousands in unprofitable undertakings. Of course this error would
be almost wholly avoided in a company composed of persons who
have held the best claims on the river, for many months, and who
are well acquainted with the value of them, though physical difficult
ties place it entirely beyond their reach. The project is a very im-
portant ope and X heartily wish success to it. Xam given to under-
stand that the merit of originating the Company belongs to Mr
Capps the Postmaster at Sofala, who is of course deeply interested
in the welfare of the township in which he holds his Government
appointment.
NO. 11.
Tambaroora, October 19th 1852
The road from Sofala to Tambaroora, after following the course of
the river for four or five miles, crosses the Turon at the Circus Point


in one place, and at the Lower Wallaby Rocks in another, proceeding
to Peek’s Point, or upper crossing place, and ascending the ridges
on the opposite side to the elevated table land on the south-west of the
Turon. Another crossing place is lower down than Peek’s store,
and the road leads up a gully to what is called the Big Hill. Very
few parties are working on the banks of the river at these places,
although a tent may occasionally be met with. There is not a single
person at the Lower Wallaby, formerly the scene of so much labour
and profit. The only hope at this bar is in the bed of the river, and
the wet seasons have indefinitely postponed its realization. Before
leaving Sofala, I heard very good accounts of a creek several miles
below Peek’s Point, called Nuggetty Creek. According to all ac-
counts there are several parties on this creek doing a first-rate stroke,
and it would seem that they have it all to themselves. Nuggetty
Creek falls into the Turon from the south-west or Bathurst side of
the river. On leaving Peek’s Point, instead of following the regular
cart road, I took a bridle path which led up a gully, and which
brought me out on the high road, near the Big Hill as it is called.
This hill is situated on the table land adjacent to the Turon, a mile
or two below Peek’s store, and is one of the steepest on the diggings
which carts are required to ascend. After getting up the Big Hill the
road is pretty level. The soil, however is soft and boggy, and during
wet weather is very difficult for teams to travel over, as the wheels
sink several feet in the soft yielding surface. I met with quartz
strewn over the ground in more fragments on this road than at any
part of the diggings. Not only was the road covered with them,
but the hills and the low eminences were quite white with quartz
masses and fragments, in which the white and the yellow mica
gleamed like silver and gold in the glare of the sun. The rocks on
this road would present an interesting study to the geologist. Quartz
was every where conspicuous, of every colour. Granite lay in masses
on the slopes of the road, gniess was not unfrequently met with and
the clay slates studded the ground with their vertical laminae, whilst,
in the water-courses fragments of all these rocks, and felspar and other
rocks were met. I fell in, also, with very good specimens of the slate of
commerce, used for the roofs of houses and for schools, lying scattered
over the surface of the ground. On the road to Tambaroora, there are
two houses of accommodation, one of which, about nine miles from the
diggings, is called “ Tom’s” accommodation house. The other house
is about half-way between Sofala and Tambaroora, but a public house
is in the course of erection near this place, which will be a great
benefit to travellers. I could not but think that nearly all the hol-
lows in the table land I was passing, were more or less auriferous,
seeing that the fragments met with were those of the auriferous
rocks, an opinion which was very much strengthened by what I ob-
served subsequently at the Tambaroora and the Bald Hill on the
road.


During the time I walked from Bofala to Tom’s accommodation-
house, it rained almost throughout the day, and towards the evening
the rain fell without ceasing. I wrapped myself up and trudged on
regardless of the weather, but do as I would my clothes got com-
pletely saturated with the wet. An old pair of digger’s boots, how-
ever, obstinately and successfully resisted the encroachments of the
mud and water, although the road was so muSdy in every place, that
almost every step my foot sank in it over the ankles Almost tho-
roughly drenched with the driving showers, although protected in
some measure by an oilskin, I reached Tom’s about dark on Tues-
day evening, and there I stayed for the night. Next morning I ar-
rived at Tambaroora, about nine miles from Tom’s. Passing over
one of the worst pieces of road I ever saw, hut through a country pre-
senting the strongest indications of richness in deposits of gold. The
distance from Sofala to this place is about 27 or 28 miles.
NO. 111.
TAMBAROORA.
October 22,1852.
Between the Turon and the Pyramul, a high dividing range
extends almost from the junction of the Crudine with the former
river, to within a few miles of the Macquarie. On each side of this
range there is a considerable extent of table land, from which creeks
and watercourses innumerable take their rise, and fall on the one
side into the Turon, and on the other into the Pyramul. Towards
the junction of the Turon and the Macquarie, the Pyramul
River, instead of maintaining its parallel direction to the former,
turns towards the westward, and joins the Macquarie, much lower
down that river than would have been expected. At the place where
this turn is taken, the table land between it and the Turon is more
extensive than usual, is well grassed and thickly wooded, and is of an
undulating description, gentle eminences alternating with wide and
slight hollows, in the centre of which, during the present rainy
season, rills of water are flowing. These hollows on the Turon side,
for the most part, unite, in what is called the Bald Hill Creek, and
on the other side of the dividing range, where they are of greater
extent, they join a watercourse, which, after running for a short
distance over a level surface, plunges into a deep ravine, and flows
through a broken and mountainous region for five or six miles, into
the Macquarie, a few miles below the junction of the Turon. This
is the Tambaroora Creek. Towards the Pyramul, another creek
trends from the same table land, and indeed at its head only a slight
rise separates it from the Tambaroora. This is called the Dirt Holes
Creek. These are the three main portions of the Tambaroora gold
field, which, it must be remembered is entirely confined to the table
land, on which the richest diggings have been developed in this place.
As Golden Gully, though leading into the Tambaroora, is of consi


derable extent and has been very rich in its yield of the precious
metal, we may consider this gold field as divided into four portions
—the Bald Hill Greek, the Dirt Holes, Golden Gully, and Tamba-
roora proper.
Ist —BALD HILL CREEK.
Gold was discovered in this Creek, shortly after the opening up of
the Turon, some fifteen or sixteen months ago. After flowing over
the table land for a mile or two, in a wide valley, it contracts its
channel, and runs between steep banks over a rocky bottom, and about
two miles from its source its waters pour headlong from the perpen-
dicular rook into a gulch among the mountains lying 150 feet below.
When the winter’s rains have poured a large volume of water into
the creek, the scene at the falls where the turbid and rushing waters
launched into the abyss, are lost in air, is represented to be exceedingly
grand. Thence to the Turon, the creek pours along its rugged way
down a steep ravine for a couple of miles. It has received its name
from a peculiar conical mountain near its source, which is covered
with very luxuriant grass, and with very few trees, forming a great
contrast to the densely wooded heights around. This Creek was
worked both above and below the falls many months since, and a
large quantity of gold was taken out of it, especially in the former
part. I saw only one party on the portion of the creek near the falls,
but the bed has not yet been completely worked out, as the wet
weather prevented this being done. Splendid yields were obtained
here, and it is believed that a large quantity of gold will still be
found. Pounds weight have been taken out here in a day, and out
of one small point, it is said that between two and three hundred
weight of gold have been dug out since it was first tried. Higher up,
where the creek flows through a narrow valley, there are many men
still at work tunnelling the bed of the valley, and are making fair
wages, but that is all, as the best of the creek has been worked out.
The general average is an ounce a day to a party; though the usual
fluctuations and vicissitudes of luck at the diggings are shared by this
locality. I descended some of the shafts and examined the tunnels.
The few pebbles in the soil are not much water-worn, and the gold
obtained shews few indications of the wear and tear which the gold on
the Turon has undergone. The soil is soft and easily worked through.
The holes are not very deep, being from five or six to nine or ten
feet. The bed rook in most of the holes is a soft clay slate of a
whitish grey appearance, covered with a coating of what the miners
call pipe-clay—on which and in which the gold is found. The holes,
as at all these diggings, are round like a well, and when the bottom
is reached, tunnels are driven in various directions, wherever the
gold lead is, or is likely to be. Various specimens of rooks are found
in this creek, granite, gniess, several descriptions of slate rock, and
quartz. There is one public-house on this creek, and one store, and


the number of diggers cannot be over a hundred. The ground al-
though apparently all wrought, is really not so, and there is still
plenty of room, especially in the lateral gulleys and watercourses, for
a large addition to the present population. Water is at present
abundant, though it is very doubtful, even in ordinary seasons,
whether there will be a sufficient supply in the upper portion of the
creek for washing. There have been some surface diggings on some
of the slopes and low rises on the creek, which have turned out very
well. Some extensive work has been done here, and there can be
no doubt that at one time a large population was spread over the Bald
Hill Creek.
2nd —THE DIRT HOLES.
This creek was discovered shortly after the Bald Hill, to be rich in
gold, and those who were fortunate enough to get on it in time, dug
out large quantities of the precious metal with comparatively little
trouble. It is an open valley like the rest, but the current of water
has cut a deep furrow in the bed. Like the Bald Hill Creek, it
seems quite turned over, and has been frequently deserted, but as
often resorted to again, and at the present time many parties are
sinking new shafts, and tunnelling right below the bed of the creek
and doing very well. There are about two hundred men at work at
this place, and on the whole they have no reason to complain, being
able to secure at least an ounce a day among three. Some months
ago there were a great , many miners located on this creek, but at pre-
sent the number is considered to be very small, though they are flock-
ing to it again. Many of the holes have turned out very rich, seve-
ral pounds weight having been got in a day, and at present there are
holes which yeild with tolerable regularity from 2 to 5 ounces a day.
The shafts are of depths varying from 10 to 30 feet. There is one
public-house and a couple of stores at the Dirt Holes. Although an
immense amount of work has been done here, it does not appear to
me that the place is half or one quarter worked out, although the
cream may have been skimmed off of it. On the slope of one of the
ridges contiguous to the creek is an auriferous quartz vein, for which
applications have been sent in by a number of persons, among whom
is Mr. Walford of Sofala. The ground is strewn with fragments of
white quartz with red and clouded veins, and on close examination
it is found that many of these fragments axe studded with specks of
gold extremely small. I picked up what is looked upon as a very good
specimen of the richness of this vein, being a piece of quartz the size
of a fist, containing a great number of minute grains of the precious
metal. A shaft about seven or eight feet deep has been sunk in the
ridge where the gold quartz is found. After penetrating the top
soil, it passes through a hard day slate, next through a vein of
quartz about a foot thick, and then through a strata of soft clay slate.
Singular enough these strata instead of being placed at high angles,


as is almost uniformly the case with these rocks, are almost horizon-
tal or inclined at a very low angle. From the numerous portions of
quartz which I picked up in the vicinity, in the vicinity in which
the gold was visible, I am inclined to think that this vein may pay to
work it. Its distance from Tambaroora is not more than two miles.
3rd. —GOLDEN GULLY.
On the north-west side of the Bald Hill several small water-courses
take their rise, and meet in a long narrow valley which, about a mile
further down, opens into the Tambaroora flats. This valley is called
Golden Gully, though it is not at all deep like a gully, but merely
a slight hollow between rising ground. This gully has been very
rich, and even now there are some claims in it which yield largely,
and there is ground not yet tried, though it must be confessed that
all the likely places have received the greatest attention from the
diggers, who have been fully sensible of the likelihood that in so rich
a place they could work profitably localities which in other inferior
diggings, they would not attempt. On this gully there are at present
about 150 persons at work. The yield of the holes is from one ounce
up to ten or twelve, and the lowest average earnings are about twelve
shillings a day, though few of the miners will work a hole which
yields less than a pound a day. The depth the shafts have to be sunk
averages from 10 to 15 feet, but there are several holes sunk to a
depth of 30 or 40 feet. The ground however, is soft, and a miner with
whom I conversed stated that he could sink a hole 40 feet deep in
a week. This is probably a slight exaggeration, as towards the
bottom of the hole the soil is pretty hard. Many parts of this gully
are completely undermined into subterranean chambers and passages,
many hundred feet in length. The present number of persons work-
ing at this place is very much less than that employed here a few
months ago. There are one or two public-houses and store-keepers
in Golden Gully. At its very head there are some surface diggings
which are yielding fair wages, as well as on the road to the Bald
Hill Creek, were some slightly rising ground is yielding gold.
4th. —T AMB AKOOEA.
Tambaroora is a native name, and, I am given to understand by
those who profess to have some knowledge of aboriginal philology,
means “ sweet grass.”. Native names have always a significance, and
in this instance the term is well applied, as the level ground in the vici-
nity of the Tambaroora has a rich soil, and is well grassed. It seems to
have been a favourite resort for kangaroos in olden times, for during last
winter several of these animals came leaping through the assembled
diggers to the water-holes, and seemed quite astonished and bewil-
dered at finding themselves in the very midst of those bipeds whom
they have such cause to dread. Several kangaroos were run down
by dogs, and at length the appearance of one was the signal for a


general chase among the diggers, thus enlivening the monotony of
their lives by a kangaroo hunt. Reverting for a moment to the
aboriginal nomenclature, I may remark that the appropriateness of the
names given by the blacks is well exemplified in two instances at hand.
The serpentine course of the Turpn has frequently been the subject of
observation, and those who are not already aware will be interested to
know, that the beautiful native name “ Turon” signifies a “snake.”
So in the case of the “ Pyramul,” which in the aboriginal language
signifies “ twisting,” the appositeness is not less striking, for this
river is remarkable for its sharp, sudden bends. To return to Tam-
baroora. This is a populous and important place, and contains not
only a large number of. diggers, but also five or six public houses,
and upwards of a dozen stores. Diggings have been opened in all the
gullies leading into the creek, and large yields have been obtained,
but the chief diggings are situated in the flat opposite the Commis-
sioner’s station, which is the lowest part of the broad flat ground in
which the main water holes of the creek are situated. At this part
the channel of the creek contracts and descends more rapidly, so that
the part immediately above seems like a basin into which the other
gullies open. Where the channel contracts, the holes cease to pay
well, and the claims held in the basin of the waters from the adjacent
high land, pay by far the best. Many holes at this part of Tamba-
roora, have proved small fortunes to their lucky holders. Upwards
of twenty ounces a day have been taken out of one or two claims,
and there were several, and are now, in which four and five ounces a
day are not looked upon as extraordinary. For about three hundred
yards square the holes are as thick as they could be put down, and
numberless mounds of earth, and a forest of Yankee windlasses, that
is, long levers for the purpose of raising the stuff out of the holes,
meet the sight among the trees which have yet escaped the axe of
the digger. From descriptions and pictorial illustrations of the Vic-
toria diggings, it is very evident that the Tambaroora hears a close
resemblance to the gold fields of the sister colony, in being situated
on table land, almost flat, the hollows of which are worked, and in
the gold being obtained by sinking, and tunnelling on the surface of
the bed rock. At both places, too, they have to depend on the pre-
carious supply of water afforded by a few water-holes, and the timely
fall of showers of rain. At this part of Tambaroora, there are, in
all probability, some four or five hundred persons at work; which,
with about two hundred more higher up the gully, on the road lead-
ing to the Dirt Holes, and the diggers at Golden Gully, Bald Hill
Creek, and other places in the vicinity, may make in all about 1200
or 1300 who are located about Tambaroora. The lowest earnings
are not less than 1 Os. or 12s. a day, for a hole which will pay no
more is soon forsaken. Thers is no doubt that there are hundreds
who, on an average, have not made even that; and I fell in with
several instances of singular ill fortune, where parties had been


working for many months, and never had the luck to light upon a
hole which would pay. However, taking the general run of a man’s
stay at these diggings, he is well rewarded for Ids labour. The chief
deposits of gold are found here on the bed rock. When a claim is
obtained, a shaft like a well is sunk to the bottom, varying from 7or
8 to 20 or 30 feet deep, and tunnels are driven in various directions,
wherever the gold is most thickly deposited. The soil to be dug
through is quite soft, as is the case on all these diggings, and if the
tunnels are well proportioned, and proper supports are left for the superin-
cumbent soil, there is no fear of its falling in. The most dangerous
agent is a heavy fall of rain, which often causes a depth of several
feet of water in the hole, destroying the cohesive power of the mass.
Tambaroora is the chief locality of a district extending several
miles around. A Commissioner is located here, a Court of Petty
Sessions, and a small Debts Court, are held, and mail communication
with Sydney, mirabile dictu, is enjoyed once a week. So miserable
an extension of the benefits of postal communication is ridiculous in
the extreme, to a district which is not only populous and important
in itself, but is connected with other districts in which a large number
of persons reside. The inhabitants hero are supplied with water,
both for digging and for domestic purposes, from a chain of pqpds or
water-holes in the flats. This water is almost utterly unfit for domestic
use, in consequence of the washings of the cradles flowing into the holes,
and render it thick and muddy. But this evil, severely as it is felt,
will be very much aggravated if the Commissioner carries out his in-
tention of letting out the water-holes to be drained, as the water
supply of the district will be wholly cut off. Complaints and pro-
tests have been made by the miners against any interference with
these waterholes, which any one acquainted with the district, and
seeing the precarious nature of its supply of water, must acknowledge
are well founded. Below the flat a large water-hole has been
drained, about a hundred feet long, by 40 wide, and 15 deep, but as
yet although nearly half of it is worked, the quantity of gold ob-
tained has been very insignificant and, it is feared that the hole will
not anything like repay the expense of working it. The washing
stuff at Tambaroora is very stiff, and must be puddled before it can
be passed through the cradle. This is done by putting it into
troughs slightly inclined, into which water is continuously poured,
and the mass is worked with shovels until the clay is dissolved and
run off. Long toms are frequently attached to these troughs, and
thus a great quantity of stuff can be put through in a day.
The prices of provisions and other articles are not unreasonable at
Tambaroora, when the wretched mountain road which leads to it is
considered. Tea is 2s. and 2s. 6d per lb., sugar 6d. to Bd., coffee
25., best American tobacco Bs., flour 655. and 70s. a cwt., corn 20s.
a bushel, cheese Is. per lb., butter 2s. 6d., bacon Is. 3d., pork 9d*,
beef 3d., mutton 2s. to 2s. 6d. the quarter, spades and shovels, No. 3,


Ba. each, picks 7s. 6d., cradles at every price, from £3 downwards,
wash-pans 65., zinc buckets 6s. 6d. and 75., strong boots from 18s.
to 245. a pair, bread Is. 3d. per loaf, rum 6d. a glass, and brandy
Is., milk Is. per quart, salt 6d. per lb., candles Is., soap 9d., mus-
tard -Jib bottles Is. 6d., pickles pint bottles 25., and all other arti-
cles in a similar ratio. The wages of labourers at the diggings, are
from £2 to £3 a week, in proportion to the competency of the per-
sons employed.
There is a gold quartz vein on the ridge opposite to the Commis-
sioner’s tent, for which I am given to understand) an application has
been sent in. The claim will include the richest alluvial diggings
at Tambaroora. It is hard to say what future field there is here for
employment A great deal of the richest ground has been rooted up,
though not thoroughly worked, but there are miles of extent where a
spade-has not been put into the ground, and where there is as much
reason to expect gold as on the Tambaroora flats. Should the wea-
ther continue to be wet, 1 may venture to recommend this gold field
to the intending miner, but should it prove dry, there will be
a scarcity of water, and river diggings will be the best. A horse and
cart will be found a very useful addition to an outfit, as the stuff may
have to be carted some considerable distance to water. I understand
that steps are about to be taken to establish a church and school
here, which are very much wanted, as there is a large number of
children running about apparently without any religious or secular
instruction whatever. Having wandered down the Tambaroora some
distance, and got almost bewildered among its wild and deep ravines,
towards the Macquarie, where it makes ample amends by its rugged-
ness, for its level character on the table land above, I may venture to
anticipate that very rich diggings will be opened up in some of these
gulches towards the junction of the creek. Everywhere,. auriferous
indications are apparent over an extent of country which would give
employment to thousands of persons.
NO. IV.
LOUISA CREEK.
October 25, 1852.
When about leaving the Tambaroora for this place, I heard from
some diggers who had come for provisions, that several parties were
doing an excellent stroke on the banks of the Macquarie, some three
or four miles below the junction of the Turon. It is impossible at
present to work the bed of this stream, and indeed it is doubtful
whether this can be done during the most favourable seasons, but
the banks and points of the river are rich in auriferous deposits, and
excellent dry diggings have been opened on them. It is on one of
these points that the present diggers are located, and it is said that
the washing stuff is of the unusual depth of eight feet. As much as
five and six ounces a day have been obtained, and it is confidently


expected, when the dry season commences, that diggings will he de-
veloped here fully as rich as those on the Turon.
Since this was written, some new diggings have been opened on
a bar of the Macquarie, upwards of a mile above the junction of the
Turon. A considerable number of people are at work, and as much
as two or three ounces a day are obtained to a cradle. The gold is
nuggetty, and lies chiefly in the crevices of the bed rock.
The forest about Tambaroora consists of blue and white gum trees,
stringy bark and wattle. Box and apple trees are few in number,
but on the slopes of the ridges, towards the Turon, these are the trees
which most abound. The same description of timber is met with at
the Dirt Holes, and on the road to Louisa. On leaving the Dirt
Holes, this road passes over an undulating table land of the usual
description met with in this part of the country, and then descends a
long sloping ridge into the Green Yalley Creek. This creek rises
from the table land in the vicinity of Tambaroora, and flows towards
the Pyramul. I believe that gold has been found in it, but at pre-
sent no parties are at work here. Granite, or a rook strongly resem-
bling it, is frequently met with on the ridges hereabouts, as also
clay slate and a slate of a granitic appearance. The surface of the
ground is not so plentifully bestrewed with broken fragments
of quartz as some localities, but here and there, there are immense
heaps of this rock, consisting mostly of large blocks. After crossing
the Green Yalley, the road about a mile further comes to the Pyra-
mul at Suttor’s station, which here, though flowing in a rapid stream,
has but a small and unimposing channel. No diggings have been
opened hereabouts, and indeed the place has not a very auriferous ap-
pearance. The ridges are by no means steep, nor do they offer such
difficulties to the traveller as at the Turon. Its want of gold is,
however, recompensed by its sweet and clear waters, and the pasture
land on its banks. Mr. Suttor’s station at this place is reckoned to
be seven miles from Tambaroora. After leaving the Pyramul, the
road crosses three or four creeks, among which, in the order they are
met with, is the Dundun, the Waddon, and Campbell’s Creek; gold
has been found in all these creeks in greater or less quantity, but at
present there are no parties at work. The creeks are but small, but
I am given to understand, when the weather was fine, that good
wages could be made in them. Near Campbell’s Creek is a public
house kept by one of the numerous clan of that name. Gold has been
found in a watercourse near the house, and in one of the ploughed
paddocks on the farm, which consists of three sections, comprising
some very well grassed and watered table land. Singular enough,
the landlord was never more than two days at the diggings, although
he is living in the midst of a rich gold country, and he is distant
only six miles from the Great Nugget Vein. On approaching the
Louisa, the road passes over very boggy ground, which in rainy Wea-
ther must be impassable. The banks of the creek are here very flat,


and the hills are of no great height. The road to the Nugget vein
crosses the creek to the eastward, and then descends into a valley called
“ Lewis’ Ponds,” where the Company’s works and houses are
erected, and where, pretty tired with the days travelling, I received a
friendly welcome from the present manager, Mr. Gideon S. Lang.
THE GREAT NUGGET VEIN.
A chain of ponds called Lewis’ Ponds lies within a few hundred
yards of the Louisa Creek, which at this place flows over a very level
country. On a slight eminence adjacent to the small but wide valley
in which these ponds are situated, and on the side next to Louisa
Creek, the celebrated 1061bs. embedded in the matrix were found.
Along the top of this low eminence the vein of quartz, to which the
great nugget belonged, runs in a north and south direction, and this
ridge is, even now, quite covered with fragments of this mineral, not-
withstanding that so much has been taken away for the purpose of
crushing it. A considerable deal of surface digging has been per-
formed in the vicinity of the place where the hundred-weight lay,
and here it was that Peter Brenan’s lump was found. The present
Company who hold this vein, worked some portion of the soil for
alluvial gold, and took £SOO out of it.
Asa considerable space of ground, under the present regulations,
is granted to holders of quartz claims, on each side of the veins,
their claims of course include the adjacent alluvial diggings, which
it is most likely are the richest in the district, being so near the
main source whence the gold was disseminated, and far from which
it is seldom carried. If this view is correct, and lam supported by
the instances of the diggings at the Tambaroora and the Dirt Holes,
the valley or hollow of Lewis’ Ponds, which has not yet been tried,
as the water is too abundant, must contain deposits of gold, not
merely the richest in the district, but in all probability the richest
in Australia. This valley is very similar to that of Tambaroora
which is also contiguous to a quartz vein, that of the Messrs. Samuels,
but which has not shewn anything like the indications of the rich-
ness of the Great Nugget Vein. lam certainly of opinion that the Com-
pany possess alluvial diggings of importance little inferior to that of
their quartz vein. Were a thousand diggers to be allowed to work
in this gully, the riches of the place would be developed, whereas
at present it is lying idle. The Company have worked some allu-
vial diggings further down the valley, as well as in the vicinity of
the place where the great nugget was found, to which I have alluded.
The soil on the bed rock at these diggings was not more than three
or four feet in depth. The only part where the gold was obtained
was in a channel in the rock, of the depth of six or nine inches.
This channel having been hit upon was found to contain gold, and it
was followed in a winding and zigzag direction for about a hundred
yards, when it ran out. A similar channel was hit on adjacent to


this but the winter prevented its being worked. These channel*
seem to have been worn in the soft clay slate by streams of water
running over its surface, and as it would be quite likely that a per-
son might sink a dozen holes or more before hitting them, diggers
should take a lesson from this, and not be daunted by one or two
failures; and also they should see the necessity of cutting a narrow
channel, or driving a tunnel insearchof the lead of gold. Mr. Lang, who
has hitherto been the manager of these works, has constructed an appara-
tus for obtaining the gold from alluvial soil, which so far as I know, has
at least the merit of originally. For the purpose of effectually pud-
dling the clay, and separating the gold from it, he contrived what
may be called a circular trough, being a channel about three feet
wide, two feet six deep, and fifty or sixty feet in circumference, cut in
the ground, paved with wood standing on end, and boarded at
the sides. The soil was put in this channel, a constant stream of
water by means of pumps kept on it, and a heavy harrow dragged
through it by a horse attached to the beam of an upright windlass
fixed in the centre of the space. It was found that this most
effectually separated and dissolved the clay, which was allowed to
run off; and the gravel and sand were conveyed in barrows to a cra-
dle rooked by the action of the windlass, and supplied by water from
the same pumps as the circular trough. By this contrivance, which
is called a pug-mill, as much as a hundred loads a day could be wash-
ed, and 100 ozs. of gold have been obtained in the same time. At
present, the Company are not engaged in any alluvial diggings,
although there is no doubt that they will find it their interest, at no
distant date, to develope them.
Let us revert to the quartz vein. This has been quarried into in
several places, and it is found to rise to the surface in the form of an
arch. When this arch is quarried through, two parallel veins or
walls of quartz are disclosed, six feet wide each, and about six or
seven feet apart. These walls, tending towards each other, join at
the top, and form the arch. At the base of the hill on the west side,
two adits have been driven into it, twelve or thirteen fathoms long,
striking the lodes five fathoms below the surface of the top of the
hill, and the specimens of the quartz obtained here, though no gold
was observable in them, and they were regarded as an inferior
sample, yielded at the rate of 25 dwts. to a ton. The workmen are
at present engaged in sinking three shafts, about one hundred and
fifty feet apart, which are to be carried to the depth of ten or fifteen
fathoms, to test the value of the vein below. One of the shafts is ten
feet deep at present, and the others are only just begun. The rock
in which the quartz vein is bedded is a soft clay slate, extremely
easy to be worked, and forming a great contrast to the adamantine
hardness of the quartz. Another quartz vein has been opened on
the claim running parallel to this, and gold has been obtained from
it. The Great Nugget Vein itself has been opened in various places.


and portions of it tried; and gold in greater or less quantity has inva-
riably been found. The quartz rock is for the most part blasted out,
and at present there are 250 tons ready for the crushing machine.
In appearance the quartz is semi-transparent, and abounds in crystals
of every size. It is streaked with red veins occasionally, but its dis-
tinguishing characteristic are dark bands permeating the mass, which
are considered to denote the presence of gold. Close to these dark
veins the nodules and specks of gold are found, and among the
pieces blasted out of the quartz, one can seldom turn over many
without noticing gold. Besides gold, there is a considerable quanti-
ty of iron in the quartz, the joints of which are covered with rust.
Iron pyrites in cubes are also found, and bismuth and garnets
are said to have been obtained from it. There is no doubt
that, from the general unaoquaintance with the more precious stones
and minerals, very valuable specimens have been over-looked.
The quartz, having been quarried out, is conveyed to the crushing
mill, situated on the other side of the chain of ponds. This mill is
worked by a steam engine of six-horse power. By a simple contri-
vance like that used for pile-driving, a heavy iron-headed stamp is
rapidly lifted up and let-fall upon the quartz, which is placed in a
strong iron box beneath, with a bottom formed of iron bars, between
which the quartz, when crushed small enough, falls in fragments
about the size of marbles, It is then shovelled into an iron basin, in
which two vertical iron wheels revolve, and crush the fragments on the
iron floor under their broad surface These wheels, attached to an up-
right spindle, are turned with it, and at the same time revolve on their
own axles, reducing to powder whatever lies beneath the edge. I be-
lieve this plan is used in some parts of South America, but it is not
generally reckoned so good as that of reducing the quartz to powder
by means of a number of heavy stamps. I understand that it is the
intention of the Company to adopt this latter plan in the new and
extensive machinery they are about to erect. Each of the rollers or
wheels at present employed weighs 22 cwt. Revolving with them,
there are drags which rake all the quartz fragments under the edges
of the wheels to be properly crushed, and there is another drag which,
when dropped, shovels the pulverised quartz through an aperture into
a receptacle, where it is taken up by a “ Jacob’s ladder,” exactly
resembling what is called the Californian pump, and conveyed into
sieves above> by which the fine powder is separated from the coarse
sand } the latter is returned to be again pulverised, and the former
passes into a cradle to be washed. This cradle is worked by the en-
gine, which also works a force pump, by which a supply is obtained
for the boilers, the cradle, and other necessary purposes. The coarse
gold having been separated from the fine sand, mercury is used for
obtaining the gold from the latter, but it does not seem to me that
this process is fully understood or well managed. However, they
only seem to be experimentalising at present, and probably asatisfae


tory issue will be arrived at. The finer sieves have not yet been
brought into working operation, and the powder is spread on a screen
over which it is brushed, and thus the finer portion passes rapidly
through it. The present machinery can grind only one ton of quartz
per day, and in fact may be regarded merely as an experiment upon
the productiveness of the vein. As the average amount of gold
looked for is one ounce to a ton of quartz, of course, with the present
machinery, the working could not be carried on with profit. With
proper machinery, instead of one ton a day, 200 tons could be crush-
ed, and this, at an ounce per ton, which is the lowest average ex-
pected, would yield at the rate of £3 ss. a'n ounce, about £200,000
per annum. Experiments have been made on the productiveness of
the quartz, and samples, selected on account of their unpromising ap-
pearance, called ‘'hungry quartz,” yielded 13 dwts. per ton, while
samples selected as favourable gave 35 ounces to the ton. With the
machinery necessary to crush 200 tons of quartz, an establishment
of at least 200 men would be required, with a staff of 12 or 18. At
the outside the annual cost would be under £50,000, which would
leave a handsome profit. As the present experiment has not suc-
ceeded with the inefficient machinery, and it would be a considerable
time before requisite apparatus could be brought out from England,
negotiations have been opened with an English company lately es-
tablished, whose agents have visited the locality, and whose
machinery is on the way out, for the purpose of working the vein.
The terms have not yet been settled, nor indeed is it certain whether
the English company will enter into the undertaking at all, but the
great probability which there is of ultimate profit from the richness
of the vein makes it likely that a satisfactory arrangement will be
come to. *
Several improvements have been made on the claim. Huts have
been erected cajjhble of accommodating 60 men, some of them bark,
and others “ peeza” as it is called, that is, made of lumps of clay
fashioned into a wall, when soft. The superintendent’s house is of
weather boards. Besides the engine and machinery house, there is a
carpenter’s and a blacksmith’s shop. At present, there are only 30
men engaged at the work, besides the manager and the superintendents,
Messrs. Jackson and Atkins. Mr. Lang, who has been acting as tem-
porary manager, has just been succeeded by Mr. Jatnes S. Mitchell, as
Manager of the Company’s operations in this district. Labour has
been easily enough obtained here, and employment by the company
much sought after, as the wages, the rations, and the treatment were
good. Strict discipline, was, however, maintained by Mr. Lang
among the men, add the establishment has been very well managed.
It was a project of Mr. Lang’s to form a reservoir about half a
• Since the preceding; remarks were penned, it has been announced that
arrangements have been made for the working of the Great Nugget Vein, by tha
English Company alluded to, the Colonial Gold Mining Company.


mile up the chain of ponds, on a place where, by making an embank-
ment ten feet high in the centre, a reservoir containing seven million
gallons of water could be formed. The drainage of a large extent of
country can be collected here, and at the place where it is proposed
to form the embankment, the force of the floods would not be felt.
This project is that of a gentleman well acquainted with the circum-
stances of the colony, who is aware that such rainy seasons as
we have lately experienced are exceptions to the ordinary rule, and
that they are likely to be succeeded by long seasons of drought.
no. y.
THE MEROO.
Devil's Hole Creek, October 27.
The road from the Louisa to the Meroo, in the direction of
Richardson’s Point, which is up the river, soon leaves the. table land,
and approaches the mountain-girt valley, through which the Meroo
takes its precipitous course towards the Cudgegong. The scene here
forcibly recalled the Turon mountains to memory. There was the
same billowy horizon around, and on the ridges near band the box
and apple trees sparingly studded the reddish surface soil to their very
summits. Instead of the level or the gently-undulating surface of
the table-land I had just left, here the slopes of ridges descended
at abrupt angles to the banks of the river or the numerous creeks;
and profound ravines in deep shadow brought the outlines of the
mountains into stronger relief, and gave additional picturesqueness to
thegrand scenery which lay extended before me. Here and there, nes-
tled among the mountains, valleys of bright emerald marked the
spots where stood farms and sheep stations, and contrasted richly
with the brown hue of the surrounding country. The road down to
the Meroo descends by a sloping ridge a mile and a half long, on the
right of which a creek called Oakey flows through a deep valley into
the Meroo. Masses of a kind of granitic slate here capped the high-
est points, and quartz and slate of various sorts, chiefly clay slate, lay
scattered on the slopes. The path was fringed with wild flowers of
every hue and fragrance, some new to me. The Meroo, at this part,
is not so large as the Turon, either in the valley or the channel.
The road up to Richardson’s Point skirts the river, and is tolerably
regular. Thence to Point Pure, on Long Creek, it passes over a very
level and verdant country, which has much the same character to the
Devil’s Hole Greek, which it leaves on the right. Of the Meroo gold
field, which is very rich and extensive, not the least important por-
tion is that creek which bears this anything but euphonious name,
and which, as it is most convenient to do so, I shall describe first.
THE DEVIL’S HOLE CREEK.
This creek takes its rise in the table land between the Turon and
the Meroo, and after a course of some seven or eight miles joins the


Long Creek a mile or two above Point Pure, which is situated two or
three miles from the Meroo. The very ugly name of this very pleas-
ing little creek arose from the exclamation of a shepherd who lost
his sheep in the upper portion of it, that it was the “ devil’s hole.”
The diggings extend between two and three miles up the creek from
the junction with Long Creek. The Devil’s Hole resembles the
Dirt Holes in appearance, though the ridges and slopes are more
verdant, and the hills are higher. Last summer, there were very
good diggings in the bed of this creek, but the rains, which have so
generally interfered with the Western Gold Fields, prevented
its being properly worked. At present there are about three or four
hundred people on it, and they are, generally speaking, doing very
well. Most of them can make a pound sterling a day, but in some of the
holes several ounces a day have been obtained. On Spring Flat,
which is nearly a couple of miles up the creek, the holes are turning
out very well. Two men —Lang and Emblem—in three days made
£4O, and on several occasions turned out four and five ounces. The
claim still continues good, and at the worst they can make three
pounds a day. Another claim worked by Sullivan and his party, has
yielded 4 and 5 ozs. a day. At present the bed of the creek is un-
workable from the prevalence of water, and the workable diggings
are confined to the banks and flats in the vicinity. The diggers
have to go down from ten to five-and-twenty feet before coming to
the washing stuff. Notwithstanding this depth of top stuff very lit-
tle tunnelling is done, as the earth is so loose and gravelly as to render
it unsafe, and, saturated as it is at present with moisture, it is more
than usually dangerous to attempt it. One or two lives have been
lost by unskilful attempts at tunnelling having caused the superin-
cumbent earth to fall in. The valley of the creek between the
ridges, is pretty wide, and has been filled up by a deposit of clay,
pebbles, and earth, through which the creek has cut a channel some
ten or twelve feet deep. The gold obtained here is one of the best
specimens I have seen, being coarse and solid, very much waterworn,
and of a very rich appearance. Several nuggets have been dug out,
one of which was got the other day, and weighs ounces.
Although a large quantity of gold is obtained both at this creek and
at Long Creek, it does not appear in the lists of the consignments
from Avisford, being chiefly purchased by buyers from Sofala,
which is not more than twenty-five miles off. There are two public-
houses here, and several stores, and they all seem to be flourishing,
though there are now but few people comparatively with last season.
Many went to Bingaxa, from which most have returned disappointed,
and others have left for Port Phillip. There seems, however, to be
a perceptible increase in the number of the diggers every day. I
fell in with several who had just returned, haying left and remained
at home during the winter. It seems to me that this part of the
country holds out great inducements to the gold seeker. At present


there is plenty of room for new comers, who are likely at least to
make good wages; and when the weather will allow of the bed of the
creek being worked, they will have a chance of doing something
more. Near Mr. Tebbutt’s public-house, on the flat, some profitable
surface diggings were opened up, and a hole has been dug here about
twenty-five feet deep. The gold has beenreached, and there is every in*
dication that rich yields will be obtained. If appearances are to be
trusted, heavy deposits of gold will be found higher up the creek,
where no parties have yet attempted to open any new ground. It is
the character of these creeks to be richer towards their source on the
table land than further down towards the river into which they dis-
embogue, —such is the case with the Tambaroora, the Dirt Holes, and
the Bald Hill Creek. The chief rock at this place is slate. In the
bottom of the claims, the laminse of the slate rock stand on their
edges with deep crevices between them— a cheering sight to the dig-
ger, when the gold in his hole is found on the bed rock. A large
supply of gold may be looked for from this creek, whenever the po-
pulation receives an accession to it.
THE MEROO 111 V E 11.
Louisa Creek, October 29.
This river takes it rise at Mount Bocoble, near the Mudgee
road, and after a tortuous course in a north-west direction, joins
the Cudgegong, some miles above the junction of this river
with the Macquarie. Presenting auriferous indications itself,
more or less strongly marked, throughout its course, it receives a
number of tributaries chiefly on the southern side, on which
gold in considerable quantities has been found. These are
Campbell’s Creek, the Married Man’s Creek, Long Creek, and the
Louisa. “ Meroo ” is an aboriginal word, and lam given to under-
stand means “run-away” It is applied with great propriety to
this river, the channel of which is inclined at a considerable angle,
and the floods, which rise with most extraordinary rapidity, subside
equally rapidly, so that the torrent which over night was flowing
bank and bank, in the morning is down nearly to its ordinary level.
At Richardson’s Point, I met Dr. Poulis, who has been for some
months a resident on the river, from whom I received much interest-
ing information concerning the general characteristics of the Meroo.
The digging on this river has been very desultory. Few localities
have been properly tried, and where any work has been done at all,
the ground has not been all taken up, and over large portions the
surface is yet undisturbed. In fact, the mining operations on the
Meroo, have hardly altered the natural features of even the most
populous and richest points. To one who has witnessed the ener-
getic and wholesale manner in which the banks of the Turon have
been turned over, the diggings here appear to be in reality mere
scratching, hardly deserving the name of mining operations, and cer


tainly not all calculated to develope the auriferous wealth of the
district. The Meroo appears to me to offer a most favourable field
for mining enterprise, and I cannot but think that its capabilities
have been very much under-rated, or, in fact, entirely overlooked.
Unlike the Turon, it has a great extent of alluvial flats on either side,
throughout which gold is deposited in a greater or less quantity—
consequently, dry diggings must abound on the Meroo. The late
wet season would have been very favourable for the working of
these diggings, but the number of diggers has been so very limited
here, and those placing their dependance in the river bed, became
disheartened at their repeated disappointments from the heavy rains,
and left the district, entirely overlooking the rich ground which lay
around them. That the level banks of the Meroo abound in gold
deposited high above the present level of the river is proved by
many instances. Here and there along its course, places may be
noticed where the surface soil has been dug out to the depth of a
foot or two and to the extent of some forty or fifty feet square, and
you are told that these were very rich surface diggings. Near Mait-
land Bar, the path to the Louisa winds for two miles up a gully, at
first only gently ascending, but afterwards climbing the steep ridges
and sidling along the abrupt descent into a deep gully until it
reaches the top. I had the felicity of toiling up this path last even-
ing, after sunset, to reach the Louisa Creek, after having travelled
from the head of Long Creek to its junction with the Meroo, and
thence along the river for some ten or twelve miles, to the Maitland
Bar, and I have no desire to do it again. The ascent seems
eternal, and is so steep that your foot is constantly slipping back to
the imminent peril of losing your balance, which would in all pro-
bability, cause a catastrophe. Yet this almost inaccessible path is
worn by the feet of the laborious gold digger, who endures any
amount of toil and privation in the pursuit of gold. About three
or four hundred yards from the Maitland Bar, before the path loses
its level character, it passes over a portion of ground where the soil
has been dug up to the depth of two feet for some twenty yards.
Not a soul is at work here now, and in fact one party of miners could
do in a week all that has been done. Yet these were the celebrated
dry diggings on the Meroo which were discovered by the rain wash-
ing some of the gold bare, and which yielded several thousand
pounds worth of the precious metal. Had such a place been dis-
covered on the Turon, all the ground in the vicinity would have
been turned over, and in a few days shafts would have been sunk to
the bed rock and extensive tunnelling carried on. Here, however,
no one thinks of this, and a locality, which I feel certain will yet
be found to contain rich deposits of the precious metal, is entirely
overlooked, and the miners leave for other poorer localities which
are more in fashion.
A rush has lately been made to Maitland Bar, which is situated


on the part of the river close to the Company’s claim on Louisa.
The accounts of the richness of this bar have been somewhat exagger-
ated, but it is not at all unlikely that the concentration of a large
number of diggers here, attracted by the favourable reports, will
have the effect of developing new auriferous localities. The bar is
situated about three miles below Avisford, the Commissioner’s station,
and is on the south bank of the river. The diggings are on the flat
above the river bed, and the holes have to be sunk to a great
depth before the washing stuff is reached. During the winter, there
were only about twenty persons on this bar, but there are now about
one hundred and twenty, and it is likely that the number will be
increased. A good deal of work has been done in the bank which has
turned out pretty well. The new diggings have been opened behind
these, and farther from the river. The holes are from nine to
twenty feel deep, and, singular enough, instead of tunnelling, the
miners strip off the enormous quantity of sixteen or seventeen feet in
depth of top soil before coming to the washing stuff which is onthe rock.
In the bank, close to the river where the holes are not so deep, and
the soil is very loose, stripping is, no doubt, the best course; but in
the new holes opened, where the soil is a firm cement, and the depth
to the bed rock so great, it is a piece of the greatest folly to clear off
the top stuff. It shows what little experience the miners here have,
and how much they are the slaves of custom. Tunnelling is not
generally practised on the Meroo, because the banks usually worked
are composed of very loose earth, and when the miners come to places
where tunnelling is really the only profitable means of working the
ground, the old laborious and expensive system is still pursued. So at
Tambaroora, where the ground is worked by tunnelling, many claims
in which the bed rock is so near the surface that the best way would
be to strip off the top soil, are tunnelled by the diggers, as it is the
fashion. Out of the twenty or thirty parties at work on Maitland Bar,
about half are doing well, that is, they can make 2 ozs. a day. As
much as 12 ozs, have been taken out of a claim in a day, and two
good sized nuggets, one weighing 7 and the other ozs., have been
lately got. I saw a sample of the gold. It is all of a nuggetty and
coarse description, and much water-worn. Pieces from 1| oz.to 3 or
4 dwts. abound. The gold, however, is very unequally distributed,
and as is the case at all the diggings, rich and poor claims are often
adjacent to each other. There are two stores at this place, and also I
believe, two sly grog shops.
From Maitland Bar to the junction of the Louisa, a distance of
about four miles, there are not more than twenty persons at work,
who are only making wages. Several miles further down the river,
towards the World’s End, there are several parties located, and great
expectations have been formed of this portion of the Meroo. Any-
thing like a systematic development of the hidden wealth erf the
Meroo, here especially, has not been attempted. The river from the


Maitland Bar downwards resembles the Tnron more than it does
above. There is not so great an extent of alluvial flats on either side,
and the mountains approach near the channel than.is the case above
Richardson’s Point. The latter point is about ten miles higher up
the river than Maitland Bar, and nearer the junction of Long Creek.
Very little digging has been carried on on any portion of the river
between these places. At Avisford there are the signs of some sur-
face diggings. Avisford is situated on the Mudgee side of the
Meroo, and consists of half a dozen slab huts and a few tents, being
residences for the Commissioner and the police. On a point some
three or four miles from Richardson’s Bar, I passed some two or
three parties at work. They did not speak in very favourable terms
of their success, not being able according to their own account to
make more than three-quarters of an ounce a day among four. At
California Bar, a couple of miles above this, a great deal of work has
been done on a part of the bar, and I believe a considerable quantity
of gold has been taken out. At present there are five or six parties
on the place, who, by their energetic exertions, appeared to me to be
realising satisfactory earnings, though they were very uncommunica-
tive on this point. One of these parties consisted of a man and his
wife and a boy. The. woman rocked the cradle, and in a style
which shewed that she was no novice at the employment. At all
these diggings the washing stuff requires troughing, that is, worked
with a spade in a trough, formed out of the hollowed trunk of a tree,
into which the stuff is put, and a plentiful supply of water poured on
it. By this means the clay is dissolved, and there is no difficulty in
getting the gold by the cradle. Higher up a new bar has been
opened, which has been christened Gifford’s Bar, in compliment to
the discoverer. There are only a few holes opened, but these pro-
mise well, and parties can average 1 oz. a day out of them.
Half a mile above this, Richardson’s Point is situated. The
alluvial flats here have a very pleasing appearance, covered as they
are with the richest verdure. At this point there are two public-
houses, and three or four stores. The road from the Turon to the
Meroo, which passes Long Creek, comes in at this point, and it is in-
tended, I believe, to form a township here, for which the place is cer
tainly admirably adapted. The diggings about this place paid very
well, butthere are not many persona working at present. To me, how
ever, itseems that the ground has not been half worked or half tried.
In some places a miserable little hole will be met with, two or three
feet deep, probably filled with water, and dug apparently to test the
ground. Such prospecting is quite laughable, but there can be no
doubt that strangers, seeing these deserted holes about, conclude that
the ground has been tried and found to be worthless. The yield of
this place was very good at one time, three or four ozs. a day being a
common average in some of the claims. Two miles above this, a bar
hasbeen recently opened called the Turon Bar, as it was prospected by


Turon miners. I understand that this bar has very promising
prospects, many of the holes yielding several ounces a day, and a
claim was sold here the other day for £6O. From this upwards, to-
wards Bocoble, there are only a few scattered diggers at work, though
the river presents a very favourable appearance, and a wide field for
mining operations lies open. As I before remarked, the Meroo is
characterised by extensive alluvial flats existing along its course,
throughout which gold is found. The bed rock is reached at an
average depth of ten feet; in some parts it is much less, in others a
great deal more. In the majority of cases, the water flows in and im-
pedes the operations of the miner, so that, to work the Meroo proper-
ly, pumps are a sine qua non, and, singular enough, although this
article is so necessary here, I did not meet with a single pump on the
river. When the weather has allowed of any diggings being opened
in the bed, it has been found to be very rich, and great hopes are
entertained of ir. when the water has subsided sufficiently. The de-
scription of gold on the Meroo, from a point a few miles above
Richardson’s to Avisford, is light drift gold, of an uniform appearance.
Above that, and below Avisford, it is coarse, and abounds in nuggets.
The rocks on the Meroo, are chiefly quartzose schists, and quartz.
Clay slate abounds, and a description of rock resembling granite, being
of a coarse granular texture, but having a laminated structure This
rook lies on the ridges in immense masses, having a rounded appear-
ance, caused, it is said, by the exfoliation which is perceptible on all
of them. Dr. Foulis, the gentleman whom I have already mention-
ed, states that topazes, emeralds, and garnets, have been found in the
cradle this on river, though of an inferior description ; but he is con-
fident, when the miners become more experienced, that very valuable
precious stones will be discovered. Mr. Stutohbury has reported that
precious stones exist in the Cudgegong or Mudgee river, and as the
auriferous formation extends along the greater part of its course, it
is probable that this is the case. The number of persons at work on
the Meroo at the present time does not seem to me to exceed
600 at the outside. From a personal inspection of this river,
throughout its chief portion, I have the impression that a very great
extent of ground exists along it. which may be profitably worked)
although its gold deposits may not equal those of the Turon. From
many indications, it may indeed bo conjectured that gold lies in some
parts of the Meroo in very great quantity. There is, however an
extensive deposit of sandy debris on its banks, which, to those accus-
tomed to judge other places by the Turon, does not augur well; but
it is said that many of the richest streams in California are charac-
terised by the same sandy accumulations. With a large population,
and a favourable season, I have no doubt that the Meroo will take
high rank among the Australian gold fields.
THE LONG CREEK.
Gold wag found on this creek shortly after the discovery of the


great nugget. It takes its source near the Pyramul Hill, and after
the usual amount of turning and twisting, and after receiving the wa-
ters of the Devil’s Hole and the Married Man’s Creeks, it joins the
Meroo about a mile above Richardson's Point. Long Creek has per-
haps been the richest portion of the Meroo gold field, but a
large portion of it is worked out. Above the junction of the
Devil’s Hole it is a very insignificant stream, and it is a question of
debate which is the main stream. As that is a point of no import-
ance just now, I shall say no more in reference to it. Long Creek,
above the junction of the other creek, though it has plenty of water
in its bed, is really only an insignificant water-course, of more than
usual length, among the hills. Its channel is scarcely in any spot so
wide that a man could not jump across, but this insignificant-looking
rivulet has yielded a large quantity of gold, and in its bed and on the
adjacent flats and slopes there is abundance of the precious metal yet
undisturbed. There are five public houses on Long Creek, one at
Point Pure, one at the junction of the creeks, two near Suttor’s
sheep station, and one up Nuggetty Gully. There are stores without
number, and butchers shops in abundance, and it is hard to say, how, at
present, when there are so few persons on the creek, they all manage
to pay. Proceeding by the Turon road, which goes up Long Creek,
we first come on Point Pure, where there must be nearly 150 men at
work. The creek here is on-flat open land, through which its waters
have cut a deep channel. The average yield of the claims is 1 and
oz. per day. The claims run from 12 to 20 feet deep, and the gold
is obtained on the rock. There is no tunnelling, though in many
places the ground would stand it very well. The washing stuff is
from 6 inches to 2 feet in depth. The claims are opened on the bank,
some fifty or sixty feet from the river, but it is known that the bed
will pay well, though the prevalence of water has kept the miners
from working it. Hunter’s Point above Point Pure, resembles it very
much in all its characteristics, though it is not so populous, and I be-
lieve not so rich. The parties working this point are scattered, but
a good deal of work has been done on it. The creek has cut a chan-
nel here through the level ground as at the other place, aud it is be-
lieved that the bed, which has not yet been worked, will pay well.
The holes are very deep, from 12 to 20 feet, and at the bottom there
is the usual stratum of indurated clay and pebbles in which the gold
is found. The amount of stripping that must be performed here,
before the gold is got at is enormous, and the place must be very rich
to pay for working it. Blacksmith’s Point, the next bend of the
creek above this, which was very rich, is worked out. In all its chief
features it resembles the other points, and the bed of the creek is yet
to be wrought. One claim here averaged for a length of time £SO a
week. From the j unction of Long Creek with the Meroo to this
point, there is abundance of ground unoccupied along the banks, and
especially on the adjacent flats, which there is no good reason for be


lieving is one whit less valuable than that already occupied. Some
thousands of diggers could at once locale themselves on this ground,
which extends in a similar formation up Devil’s Hole Creek.
Above Blacksmith’s Point, Long Creek flows through a hilly
country in a small channel at the base of low hills, and the working
is on the bed or the banks immediately adjacent. A few isolated
parties are at work up the creek till we come to Nnggety Gully,
which is a steep narrow water-course like the creek, with the hills
sloping directly into the channel. It comes in from the left hand
side. At present there are very few, comparatively, working in Nug-
getty Gully, which at one time had a large population, and was graced
with two or three sly grog shops. Burton had a circus here, which
shows that it was pretty populous. Most of the diggers made
2 ounces a day, and much as 14 ounces have been obtained. Nug-
gets of all sizes up to 13 ounces in weight have been dug up, and to
all appearances this little spot has been one of the richest on the dig-
gings. Though regarded as worked out, it seems to me that there
are several spots which would yet pay for working.* The word
“ gully ” seems to be a general term for all hollows or valleys from the
slightest perceptible undulation to the deepest ravine. Golden Gul-
ly at Tambaroora is very different from Nuggetty Gully at Long
Creek, the former being a wide regular hollow between low eminen-
ces, and the latter the angle formed by the opposite sides of steep hills
meeting at the bottom. There are about a hundred persons in Nug-
getty Gully, and the same number in the remaining portion of Long
Creek. The general average of earnings here is at the least lOs. or
12s. a day. Those who choose to work and who use common judg-
ment and energy in their operations, can make sure of this with a
probability of doing something better. There are good surface dig-
gings now and then discovered on the adjacent flats, and were any-
thing like a systematic search made, do doubt they would be found to
be more extensive than is supposed. The depth of the diggings up
the creek is from one to ten feet. The gold is coarse and nuggets are
common. The country is in many places open and well grassed, es-
pecially in the vicinity of Foster’s public-house, and a little further
up the creek. Long Greek extends some eight or nine miles from the
Mefoo. I found a party which I was in search of, located in a se-
questered hook of the creek near the head, above some rocks over
which the stream forms a little cascade. They had contrived a means
of carrying off the water by sheets of bark forming a shoot, which in-
terrupted the stream, and carried it over their claim, thus enabling
them to work it comparatively dry. They had only got to work a
week before, in consequence of the wet weather, and had made some
• Soon after writing the preceding remarks, I heard of a well authenticated in-
stance in which a miner in Nuggetty Gully made three or four thousand pounds in
two or three months, and out of the takings of his cradle, from £5O to £6O worth
of gold was obtained.


five or six ounces. There was no depth of top stuff to throw off, and
the gold was found in coarse nuggetty pieces, many of them weighing
half an ounce. As it was drawing towards evening, lof course ac-
cepted the invitation to stop for the night, and there being an hour
or two of sunshine, I amused myself crevicing in the rook, and wash-
ing the stuff in a pan, by which I amassed the sum total of two or
three pennyweights —a nice sample of Long Creek gold—which, how-
ever, cost me the excoriation of my finger ends.
The Married Man’s Creek joins the Long Creek from the east
side, and Campbell’s Creek falls into the Meroo higher up. There
are, perhaps, 200 persons at work on these creeks. The former creek
runs in a flat through which it has cut its way. The gold is very ir-
regularly distributed. There is plenty of room here for farther dig-
gings. On Campbell’s Creek there are large alluvial flats in which
gold abounds, but the water is as yet troublesome, and pumps would
be required to work the claims, which are very deep, in a proper
manner. The gold is of a moderately coarse description, but not nug-
getty. On either of these creeks, the miners can earn from 10s. to
20s. a day. There is another creek in th ; s part of the country called
the Dog-trap Creek; where some diggings have been opened. Gold
of a nuggetty character has been obtained, but I have not been able
to learn whether the diggings are likely to be profitable. On the
opposite or north side of the Meroo, between this river and . Mudgee
is the Grattai Creek, where gold has been found, but no diggings
have as yet been opened. There are many other creeks on the far
side of the Meroo, in which gold has been obtained, but no attempt
has been made to work any of them.
LOUISA CREEK.
October SOth.
One of the most interesting portions of the Meroo gold field is the
Louisa Creek, from the large masses of the precious metal which have
been found in its vicinity. The interest is by no means sustained by
personal visit and inspection, for after all the high expectations which
one forms of the richness of this locality, the reality very much dis-
appoints him. The creek takes its rise some five or six miles from
the Meroo, and after passing for several miles over a" very level
country, and being joined by Lewis’s Ponds, it approaches the moun-
tainous valley of the river, and becomes very rugged and abrupt.
The stream two or three miles above its junction with the river, outs
a chasm through the rocky barriers, and tumbles in a series of falls
for several hundred feet, into a deep ravine. The falls are well worth
seeing, though it is a somewhat dangerous task to clamber round
the almost perpendicular sides of the mountains to get a proper view
of them, as I can bear testimony. When a large volume of water
dashes headlong down these precipitous rocks, and the distant
thunder of the torrent far beneath, reverberates from the abrupt and


stupendous walls of the chasm, the effect must he very imposing.
The bed of the creek in the most populous part seems to be com-
pletely turned up, and the diggers are leaving the place daily, stating
that it is worked out. However it seems to me that there is a great
deal of ground contiguous to the creek which would pay for being
tried, and which has not been touched. There are not more than
200 persons at work at present, although three months ago there was
twice that number. The holes opened are chiefly in the bed, an d
the weather has been very unfavourable for such operations lately.
The depth is from five to ten feet, and there is hardly any tunnelling,
except in the banks. All parties who are inclined to work can make
wages, 1 believe, that is, about ten shillings a day while working, but
there are are no instances of remarkable good luck, or at all events
they are very rare. It was when the miners were allowed to work
the alluvial lands at present included in the Great Nugget Vein
Company’s claim, that the large lumps of gold Were found in the vi-
cinity of the quartz ridge. This was on Lewis’s Ponds, which joins
Louisa Creek. As 1 stated, I think, in a former communication, the
Company worked some portion of the alluvial diggings, but
the ground may be looked on as comparatively untouched. Two and
three ounces a day are looked upon as large yields here. I noticed
two claims at the junction of the two creeks which were very well
wrought. The cuttings were as smooth and regular as if done with a
line and plummet. One was worked by Stubbs’s party, consisting of
five men. The depth is nine feet, and in the bottom of the hole the
slates stand on their edges, forming beautiful pockets. This parly
have got at the rate of an ounce of gold to every square yard. In
the other claim they have been more fortunate, having made as much
as six ounces a day, and taken four ounces out of one trough of stuff.
Another party in the vicinity have got at the rate of one ounce to
twenty-four buckets, which would average three or four ounces a day.
Out of a small water-course between the two creeks, upwards of a
thousand pounds have been taken, and I am inclined to think that
there are many other places which would turn out equally as good,
but the diggers will not take the trouble, nor have they the patience
to try the ground. Notwithstanding this, Ido not think that the
creek has anything like fulfilled the expectations which were enter-
tained of its richness.
The Australian British Gold Mining Company are engaged in
draining the waterhole at the junction of the Lewis’s Ponds with
the Louisa, and in working some claims higher up the creek. They
have the large- number of 86 men employed, the most of
whom came out from England under agreement. The Company’s
camp has quite an imposing appearance, composed of six or seven
round canvass tents with high conical tops. At the waterhole, they
out a channel for the water of the ereek to run off, and then soon
emptied the waterhole with a Californian pump. They have got to


washing stuff in one place, but it has not yet turned out so well as
expected. Still it is almost certain that there is a large amount of
gold deposited in this waterhole, as it is very favourably situated.
It has a large surface, being of a circular form and about eighty feet
in diameter. The gold is got among the soft slate at the bottom,
which is easily broken up. Besides their work here, they are dri-
ving two tunnels in the bank higher up the creek. In one of these
they got a nugget weighing 38 oz, having a very slight admixture of
quartz. The ground here is about nine feet deep, and the tunnels
have been carried several yards being made about three or four feet
high. The tunnels are to be properly supported by timber. There
are two men and a boy to each tunnel, and it is calculated that
every 100 buckets of washing stuff yields 2 ozs. of gold. Fine wea-
ther is much desired, and it is intended when the season becomes
drier to form a reservoir of water for washing. One of the earpen -
ters attached to the company has framed a small model of a machine
to wash the stuff. The principle is very simple. A large hopper
with the bottom perforated with holes like the common hopper is
suspended in such a way that it can only move backwards and for-
wards in one direction. A rod is attached at one end to the hopper,
and at the other to an upright crank which is made to revolve by
wheels connected with a vertical axle turned by a horse. The
quick short motion communicated to the hopper is well adapted for
separating the clay from the gold. To make the thing complete,
a long tom must be placed under the hopper to receive the stuff
that passes through the holes. A constant supply of water must
be kept up by a pump. The plan is an ingenious one—whether it
will succeed is another question. It does not appear that the com-
pany’s operations have been remunerative hitherto, but at gold
digging there is no certainty even with companies. To-morrow’s
good fortune make up for the losses of to-day. Everything depends
on the richness of the locality chosen, and that is almost a matter
of mere chance.
A waterhole was drained here by Dr. Lindeman with some
success. In three weeks he took out 80 ozs. of gold, among
which were two nuggets, weighing 20 and 15 ozs. respectively.
The other day he sold one part of the claim for £ls, and the other
part for a fourth of the proceeds. There will be very few persons at
this creek in a short time, unless the weather becomes settled, so
as to allow of the bed being thoroughly worked. The country in
in the immediate vicinity is however almost untouched j and so far
from there being any reason to think that it is not rich in deposits of
the precious metal, there is every reason to' believe the contrary.
no. vi.
Burrandong, October 31st 1852.
In leaving the Louisa to join the Burrandong road, I was much
struck with the large portion of the creek, at its upper part, both bed


and bank, which remains almost untouched, in consequence of the
quantity of water in the ground. Pumps are much required at this
creek, but they have been used only in a few instances, by companies
and moneyed persons. The cost of getting a pump up from Sydney
is to serious ah outlay for the miners. A pump-maker is very much
required on the creek, for the ground will never be worked out pro-
perly without this very necessary article. There are three public-
houses on the Louisa, and a considerable number of stores.
There is a track which leads from the creek into the Burrndong
road, which I attempted to travel by, and in consequence lost my
way. It was for no want of tracks— there were a great deal too
many of them, leading in all directions, and as there was no distin-
guishing mark on the particular path wanted, and the sun was en-
tirely obscured by clouds, so that I could not ascertain the points of
the compass, I was fairly in a fix, and walked for several miles with-
out making headway in any particular direction. While slowly
toiling up an ascent, hoping to see some landmark by
which to guide my course, the vertical laminae of the
slate rock, striking north and south, suggested to me the idea of
using them as my compass. I accordingly regulated my course by
them, and steered in a west by north direction. After an hour’s
travelling, I came on the beaten road to Burrandong, and found that
although I had been upwards of three hours walking, I was not five
miles from where I started. The road passes for ten miles over com-
paratively level table land, throughout which I observed indi-
cations of the presence of gold. I passed more than a dozen
creeks and water-courses, as yet undisturbed by the digger, which dif-
fered in no outward respect from the Louisa, or Long Greek. On
many of the ridges, blocks and fragments of quartz, lay in snowy
heaps, and the common slate rock was everywhere visible. At the
Black Willow Creek, where there is a deserted station of Mr. Sutter’s,
I am certain that rich diggings will one day be found. The
creek is a tributary of the Macquarie. From this to Burrandong the
country becomes extremely mountainous and broken up, and the road
is, of course, not quite so level as a bowling green. Here it dives in-
to gloomy gullies, along the swampy bottom of which it leads for
some distance, and there it climbs the spurs of high mountains, giving
abundance of healthful exercise to the lungs. For a mile or two it
passed along the summit of a very high range, from which there was
a fine prospect of the mountainous country to the westward, through
which the Macquarie flows. Such a jumble of conical summits, and
lines sloping at"ah angle of 45 ° with not a single horizontal line,
would be sufficient to break the hearts of half adozen road projectors.
But it in no-wise daunts the adventurous energy of the gold-seeker ;
for hidden among these mountain masses is the Mookerwa Creek, to-
wards which hundreds are flocking. Leaving the high mountain
range the road descends, a very steep and long ridge into a valley


thinly timbered and covered with the richest verdure.- Through this
valley an Oakey Creek, with a full clear stream, meanders. Herds of
wild cattle were clustered for the night’s repose in the most luxuriant
meadows, where the grass reached the waist, as I passed at dusk- The
unwonted sight of a stranger set them all scampering off, and bellow-
ing in groundless apprehension; and, to speak the truth, I was very
glad to get quit of their company. Daylight left me in the valley,
and darkness began to surround me as the road became more uncer-
tain and rugged. No longer able to see the track, I advanced by feel-
ing it, as it was hard and not grassy. The sinuosities of the creek com-
pelled me to cross it several times, no easy matter in one or two in-
stances, and at last I lost the road and could not find it. There was
a station two or three miles a-head, on the Macquarie, which I had cal-
culated on reaching when I started, but my blunders in the morning
had delayed me. How was Ito reach it now when I had lost the
track, and the banks of the creek, which every now and then inter-
cepted my course, were becoming rugged and precipitous ? I made
up my mind to camp out for the night; but although there was
plenty of water to make tea, grass for a bed and wood for a fire, there
were no bushes to make a gunyah; the clouds were threatening, and
premonitory spittings of rain were falling. I might as well walk a
few miles further in any case, so I proceeded. I had only gone a few
yards when a dead limb of a tree tripped me up, and between timber,
rocks, and holes, I had about a dozen tumbles, though I managed to
fall lightly. A star now and then on the horizon, glimmering
through the trees, raised the vain hope that it was the light of the sta-
tion a-head. Crossing the creek was the worst, as the holes were
deep and the fords were not easily found. To avoid crossing, I tried
to sidle the steep side of the opposite ridge, but it was a choice
of evils. There is generally a footpath along the margin of creeks
and rivers, and I fell in with one here, which looked lighter than the
dark ground near it, so I got on much better. The night became
more gloomy. The wind sighed heavily in the swamp oaks, drops of
rain began to fall fast, and the shrill screamings of curlews, passing
overhead, met with wild response from their fellows in the neigh-
bouring marshes. The creek assumed a different aspect. The stream
dashed over its bed with increased violence, large rocks intercepted
the way, and the banks became very high and steep. At this
juncture the path brought me to the road again where it rose out of
the channel of the creek and mounted the hill. I followed it rapid-
ly, feeling for the wheel ruts when in doubt, and, after I had sur-
mounted one or two low hills, the light of the cattle station belong-
ing to Mr. Suttor was immediately before me. When safely housed,
I heard the rain coming down in heavy showers, I thought of my
persevering under difficulties with some self-complacency, but I men-
tally determined never again to go road-prospecting in a strange and
wild country, and to eschew cattle tracks.


BURRANDONG.
Ophir, 3rd November, 1862,
The Macquarie River, before the Cudgegong joins it, has extensive
alluvial flats on each side which lie between the ranges and the bed
Of the river. The secies of flats on the east side of the river is
called Burrandong, and consists of very rich alluvial lands, covered
With luxuriant grass. Small creeks, having their source in the
mountains some three or four miles back, have cut channels through
these flats to the river. The creek along which I scrambled to the
station on the Macquarie is called Spring Creek, because its source
is traceable to a hole in the rock supplied by a spring in a ravine
among the mountains. Gold has been found in this creek, but no
diggings have been opened. Another creek, some four or five miles
down the river, resembles this. It goes by the name of the Devil’s
Hole, which seems to be a favourite term among the settlers. On
this creek the Burrandong diggings are situated, and a considerable
quantity of gold has been obtained here. At present there are not
more than twenty or thirty persons at wofk, The reason is, that
the diggers who Me nearly all resident in the district, are required at
Utber duties at this busy season of the year, and the place is so
much oat of the way that very few strangers find their road thither.
The Work is very light. There are only about four feet of stuff to
strip, and the gold which is nuggety, is found in the crevices of the
slate rock. In a dry gully not far from this creek a party named
Thomson’s, took out £BOO of gold in four months. In another gully
two men did a very good stroke too. In a short time they sent 140
ounces to Sydney, and took 20 ounces with them when they left.
They had averaged one ounce each man a day. There was a still
more remarkable instance of good fortune. Renwick’s party of four
got £ISOO of gold in four weeks, and they had to go no deeper in the
Creek, than two feet. I saw a man who, in the same gully, got five
ounces in one day, using an axe for a pick. The gold, of which I
was shown a sample, consists chiefly of coarse nuggets, from 2 ounces
to a quarter ounce. The Cudgegong joins the Macquarie about a
mile below the creek which is being worked, and it is expected that
it will yield large quantities of gold during the ensuing summer.
There is nothing like a systematic attempt to develepe the riches of
this part of the country. Those Who work are chiefly residents in
the district, who got gold as long as it was easy to do so, hut who
will hot take the trouble to go deep and teat the ground. There afe
a few parties preparing to commence operations oh the banks ©f the
river at Burrandong, should the weather hold fine. On tire undular
tions of the flats, a mile or two back from the rivet, there are ship-
loads of waterworn pebbles strewing the ground, evidencing very ex-
tensive and violent actipn of water hete at one time.
There is a ford of the Macquarie here oh the read to Mookerwa.


A canoe generally plies across, but when I arrived, the man was dead
drunk, so there was no help for it, but to attempt to cross by wading.
The river was running strong, and the water reached to my middle;
had it been an inch higher I thing X should have been carried off my
legs. The road to the Mookerwa passes over a description of country
similar to Burrandong—undulating alluvial flats, through which water-
courses have cut their way to the river. They are thinly timbered,
and are covered with the most luxuriant and delicious verdure. Mil-
lions of flowers of exquisite hues, with their bosoms spread to the
sun, spangle the waving fields. Who, from the top of the rocky and
barren ranges, cm the road from the Louisa, could believe that
so beautiful a country lay in the drear mountainous and uninviting
landscape beneath him. The road crosses several creeks, in some of
which I believe gold has been found, and in all of which the rocks are.
of the usual class at the gold fields. In one creek rugged conglomer-
ate, or pudding-stone, was the prevailing rook. After passing over a
distance of nine miles, the road crosses the Mookerwa Creek, where
the present diggings are opened.
' THE MOOKEBWA.
This creek, which is about ten miles long, flows into the Macquarie
from the south-west side. The only profitable diggings which have
been opened on it are situated about four or five miles from the head.
They are bank diggings, and a considerable quantity of work has been
done. At present there are not much more than 100 persons on this
creek, out of whom a few parties are doing well, some are making fair
wages, and many are doing little or nothing. The gold appears to foe
most unequally distributed over the ground. One party last week
made 16 ounces; and another made six ounces in one day, and have
generally done pretty well. A nugget weighing four ounces has been
found and several others of a smaller size. The bed of the creek is
said to be very rich, but a full stream of water at present flows in it.
When it can be worked, no doubt a considerable quantity of gold will
be got, but under present circumstances there is not much chance of
doing The success which a few parties met on the creek hav-
ing been noised abroad, a rush was made to it, but, in the majority of
oases, the adventurers only met with disappointment, and soon left
for other localities. The reports which have been spread concerning
the Mookerwa are much too favourable; there are dozens of unsuc-
cessfol persons at it, and the ground which has been tried appears to
be exhausted. There is certainly a very large extent of ground on
tiie creek which has not been tested, for what reason I do not know,
and in this, good diggings may be discovered. Two months ago
there were many more persons at work here, but they are leaving
fast. A great number of holes were opened in a flat lower down the
creek than the main diggings, but not one of them turned out profit-
able. Flour is selling here and at Burrandong at 52a. the lOOlbs.,
and the price for gold is £3 per ounce.


From Mookerwa to Ophir is between thirty-six and forty miles.
For the first ten or twelve miles the road passes over a very level
country of the schistose and quartzose formation, and crosses several
creeks and water-courses, having the same general appearance as the
auriferous streams of the district. In some portions the country did
not present any favourable indications, but on approaching the
farmstead of Mr. Finch, the appearance was highly favourable. The
low elevations here are covered with quartz fragments, and the
ruts cut by the wheels of vehicles show a ferruginous clay in which
the quartz fragments are embedded in great quanti ties. After passing
Finch’s, the road leads through a broken and more mountainous
country, in which there are numerous swamps, being the com-
mencement of water-courses, tributaries of the Macquarie. Carry-
gorack, on which, near the Macquarie, gold has been found, and
Washee’s Creek are passed, together with many other rivulets. On
nearing Ophir, the road passes up a gully through the alluvial bed
of which a water-course has cut its way. It would seem that the late
floods have caused the stream to make a new channel, as in one place
the underlying strata close to the rock were exposed to view, and
appeared as fresh as if cut out the same day. These strata exactly
resembled the washing stuff in the dry diggings on the Turon, con-
sisting of pebbles, and boulders of quartz and other rocks, firmly cemen-
ted in clay of a ferruginous character. The table land near Ophir is
thinly timbered and richly grassed, and presents that undulating ap-
pearance so favourable for the formation of gold deposits. It is
doubtful, however, whether any diggings of consequence will be
found here, for although- there is abundance of quartz pebbles, the
rock is chiefly trap lying in round boulders. Passing Wilbraham’s
cattle station, the road after turning and twining for three miles
round the sides of the hills and the banks of steep gullies, descends
into the Summerhill Creek, at Fitz Boy Bar, the modern Ophir.
OPHIR.
Tambaroora, November 5, 1852.
It was with feelings somewhat akin to those with which we greet
an old and long absent friend, that I again saw Ophir. But what a
change had taken place since last I walked along its rugged banks
fifteen months ago. How had its glory departed? On Fitz Roy Bar,
where the first diggings in Australia were opened, and where congre-
gated thousands turned over the soil in the wild expectation of
shovelling up a fortune—-where nuggets as large as a man’s fist were
dug out like a cluster of potatoes —and where the right of the
Crown to the precious metals of the colony was first proclaimed—the
only persons now to be seen were half-a-dozen urchins washing
the drift soil in a tin dish, The swamp oaks which grew on the Bar
have all been cut down, which gives the place a naked and forlorn
aspect. On the bank above the Bar is Ophir; consisting of a public


house, two stores, and several tradesmen’s dwellings. The public
house is kept by Mr. Davis, and certainly appears to be one of the
best conducted on the diggings. There is another public house at
Newtown, two miles further down the creek on the bank opposite to
Golden Point, kept by Mr. Lucas, and appears also to be very or-
derly and respectable. The publicans say that although the creek
seems quite deserted, they manage to do a tolerably fair business. A
story is current at Ophir, which shows the richness of this place, and
at the same time is an instance of the tricks which are resorted to
to puff up many localities. I cannot vouch for the truth of the tale,
but so many different persons concurred in the same version, that I
have no hesitation in believing it. During the late rains, some boys
prospecting on the Fits Roy Bar, found a nugget weighing 10 ounces,
slightly intermixed with quartz, which they sold for £BO to a store-
keeper. A storekeeper at Mookerwa, seeing the nugget, offered the
purchaser a greater price than he gave, obtained the sample and ex-
hibited it at his store at Mookerwa, as having been procured at that
placet ' The excitement caused was very great, but when the trick was
discovered, many persons could hardly be prevented from laying violent
hands on the author of it. There are not more than one hundred
and fifty persons digging at Ophir, and these are at work chiefly up
the creek and in the gullies and small water-courses in the vicinity.
Several parties are doing very well at some dry diggings on the
creek, a few miles above Ophir. Most of the water-holes at Ophir
have been taken by parties for the purpose of draining them, and
there can be little doubt that many of these holes will well repay the
trouble and expense. The water-hole at the junction of Summer-
hill and Lewis’s Ponds Creek, has been taken by Sir Osborne Gibbes,
The water-hole which was partially drained by Messrs. Samuels and
M'lntosh, but which the floods prevented from being wholly worked,
is deserted at present, but it is said that when dry weather comes,
another attempt will be made to work it out. Mr. Lucas, the publi-
can, has made application for a water-hole above Golden Point, in
which it is believed that there is a great quantity of gold. Several
other applications of a similar nature have been made, I believe, and
should the ensuing summer be a dry one, we shall see the Summer-
hill Creek once more the scene of bustle and animation, were it only
in consequence of the operations of companies and capitalists. The
creek, although at present it is running strong, and is at a . good
height, is considerably lower than it has been for some time; and in the
event of its subsiding sufficiently to allow of its being worked, thou-
sands of diggers, who are well acquainted with it, will flock thither
to share in the nuggetty treasures of its bed. Golden Point has been
for some time entirely deserted, but this morning, seven or eight per-
sons, the most of whom came from Tambaroora, set in at this point
to cut a new channel for the river, and work the old oUe. If they
can manage this, their success will be indubitable, for the gold which


has been washed from the cradles here in the tailings will almost
pay them. shere is a gentleman belonging to the medical profession
connected with the others in this undertaking, who was working at
this place when X last visited the Summerhill, and who has remained
here ever since, faithful and constant to his first love. He has a claim
in the feed of the creek above Golden Point, for which he has been
patiently watching, without having ever been aide properly to work it.
On one or two occasions, the slight intervals of fine weather allowed
him to get a few days work at it, and in that time he made several
hundred pounds. He knows that the gold is there, and has seen it,
and I think has acted with great judgment in biding his time, in-
stead of chasing birds in the bush at other diggings. Some men are
working in a gully or blind creek near Golden Point, and have done
very well, having a day or two ago sent 12 oza. into Bathurst, the
fruits of only a few days’ labour. Four men began yesterday morning
to cut the channel of the river at the junction water-hole deeper, so as
to drain some of the water off Fits Roy Bar, to allow of their working it.
As I passed, they were up to their middle in the stream, moving large
boulders out of the way. I could not help thinking that those who
begrudge the diggers their bard earned profits, and endeavour to place
restrictions upon them, should be condemned to a week’s recreation
at this pastime. X think that even Mr. Darvall, who looks upon
gold-diggers as u hordes of licensed ruffians, who are plundering the
public treasure,” would be disposed after a few days initiation into
the system of plundering, to admit that, after all, briefs were a much
easier and more profitable means of income than bed claims. But
these are natters for after consideration, and at present I must con-
fete myself simply to narrating such details as I eould gather respect-
ing the diggings. After having seen the manner in which all the
ctoefes, blind gullies, add hills in the vicinity of the Turon have been
worked or tried* Xam astonished to find that the ground adjacent to
the Summerhill Creek has been almost wholly untouched. Banks,
that at the Turon, would have been cut down, and small creeks
whose beds would have been quite toned over, remain as they
originally were. Upon reflection the reason of this is apparent.
These who went to Summerhill at first were almost all inexperienced
persons who had no notion where to loth for the precious metal, and
consequently did net try localities which would have well repaid
them. They left for the Turon and ether places, and have too bitter
recollections of Ophir to think of returning. Those again, who
had claims which paid them on the different points, as soon as these
wear© wo*!ked out, believing that only the bed of the creek wouldpay,
and seeing no chance of working it, also left, and flocked to thedig-
K most in vogue. Those who have benefited by experience at , the
l and other places have, I am certain, no notion that the coun-
try about Ophir, and In fact all the country lying between Ophir and
the jwMftidaofthe Turon, has not been touched. Yet here is an


extensive field for mining enterprise, situated almost in the centre of
the diggings, having the same superficial indications as rich localities,
and actually untouched. 1 have seen small samples of gold procured
here, but no one would Stop to give the ground a fan: trial, with the
attractions of the Turon before him. There has, in fact, never been
a population of experienced diggers to develope the riches of this por-
tionof the country. The same may be said mextenaooi the whole aurifer-
ous districts of the colony, with the exception of a few months at the
Turon. At present our diggings are worked chiefly by inexperienced
hands, The practised miners, those who developed the riches of the Tu-
ron, have gone to Port Phillip. This is the reason, I think, why the
seeming anomaly is explained that the district where gold was first
found, and where thousands tried in vain to make a living, is in fact
very little worked at all.
I revisited many well known spots at Summerhill, where once the
tents stood in thick clusters, and all was life and animation. Now
the young verdant grass was growing over the formerly well-trodden
ground. The ruins of bark huts, too, still remained, whilst here and
there, on the site of some once densely populated encampment, were
cast away clothes, old boots, bottles in every variety, fragments of
boxes and cases, broken tools, and in one place an old carpet bag. One
might have thought that he had come on the old camp of a retreating
ariny. The contrast between the present scene, and those still in
my memory, was very striking.
There are several auriferous quartz veins in the neighbourhood of
Ophir, for which applications have, I have been given to understand,
been sent in. I was shown several very fine specimens erf gold,
in quartz, which had been procured at some quartz ridge in the vi-
cinity. The large quartz blocks at Ophir, on the opposite side of the
creek, apparently belonging to a vein of immense thickness, are well
worthy of attention. The idea is suggested, that the nuggets found
on the bar were broken out of the quartz dyke, which evidently once
traversed the channel of the creek, by the action of the stream of
water for so many years.
The old hands still on the diggings, and the knowing ones, have
their eyes on the bed of the Summerhill Creek. I met with several
persons at other diggings, who informed me, half confidentially, that
they were only waiting for dry weather, to return to the old place.
Now is the time for a person to mark out his ground. In a few
weeks, should the weather remain so fine as at present, and the wa-
ter subside in the channel of the creek sufficiently to allow of its be-
ing worked, thousands of persons will again congregate at Ophir.
Water at TaMbaroora.—Nothing has struck me more as con-
nected with this district, than the precarious and unwholesome
supply of water available at Tambaroora, not only for auriferous
soil washing, hut for domestic purposes the culpable abuse
of the water-holes by the miners—and the Very reprehensible


neglect of them by the authorities. All the table land about
Tambaroora is dependent, in dry seasons, on these water-holes;
and, will it be believed, that even during the present season
there is not a single hole, the water of which is fit for use. If such
is the case at a period remarkable for the quantity of rain which has
fallen, what may be expected when the dry season sets in ? The
water used by the miners for cooking, is quite thick and yellow from
the quantity of clay held in solution in it. Yet it seems that this
eviljhas been aggravated by the Commissioner granting licenses to
persons to drain some of these holes. Operations have beeen com-
menced in one or two instances, channels have been cut to drain
the water off, and this has been done in one case and no futher steps
taken to wash the stuff. It seems as if the only intention was to
drain the hole in a place where water is of more than ordinary
value. Such superlative folly can scarcely be credited. Hardly any
care is taken to prevent the tailings of the cradles and troughs wash-
ing into the holes. Had the Commissioner of the district, Mr.
Miller, I believe, ordinary sagacity and energy, he would long ago
have caused water-holes at certain distances to be fenced in and de-
voted exclusively to domestic purposes. lam aware there is a feeling
among some of the miners at Tambaroora hostile to the Commis-
sioner, and I have no wish to join in the cry. But this question of
the water supply of this district is of great importance, and I feel
that attention should be directed to it in time before this fine dis-
trict is spoiled by the neglect and abuse of these water-holes. Any
persons conversant with simple means of filtering muddy water would
really do good service by suggesting them in a letter to the public
prints. I believe charcoal may be advantageously employed for this
purpose, and there is no doubt that there are many substances which
have the property of precipitating the earthy solution to the bottom,
leaving the water clear and wholesome *
Tambakoora Table Land.— The table land from the Big
Hill to Tambaroora, in every probability, nas places where the
precious metal is deposited in quantities which will well pay
the finder. I have already alluded to the surface indications
a# being very favourable, and subsequent examination confirms
me in my opinion. In fact from Tambaroora to the Pyramul
Hill the country has all the requisites, not merely of an auri-
ferous district, but of one very rich. The other day a man on his
way to. Tambaroora prospected a place on the road where the
indications appeared favourable, and he procured a very good sample
• In reply to tie above invitations several letters Lave appeared in the Empire
suggesting means by which water can be clarified. Alum appears to be the best
agent for this purpose. One correspondent, a ship captain, states that it was for-
merly the custom on board ships when taking in water at Calcutta, to clarify the
muddy and filthy water of the Hooghly by means of a small piece of alum of the
size of a walnut to each cask.


of light scale gold near the surface in quantity sufficient to satisfy him
that the place would pay to work it. The advantage of such exten-
sive and remunerative dry diggings, flanked on one side by the
Turon, and on the other by the Pyramul is too obvious to require
comment.
NO. TO.
Sofala, November 8, 1852.
The route from Ophir to the junction of the Turon and the Macquarie,
once so much frequented, is one not easily followed by a person
unacquainted with the country. I cannot however, plead inexperi-
ence, as I have travelled over the ground pretty often, but I never went
twice the same track. The road usually taken ascends from Ophir
to the high land on the left side of the creek, and after running
parallel to it for five or six miles, crosses at what is called “ Pullen’s
crossing place,” from which a. bridle-road passes Pullen’s cattle sta-
tion, then a sheep-station of Cummins’s, and leads into the Mac-
quarie about a mile below the junction of the Turon. When near-
ing the crossing-place a marked tree line shows the track to be follow-
ed from the high road to the crossing place. I missed the place
where this line branches of, and consequently walked an hour more
than I calculated I should, before I found my mistake. The road led
over a high and undulating country, traversed by many small creeks
and water-courses, having every appearance of being auriferous.
The chief rock was clay-slate, with vertical laminae, having a north
and south direction. Quartz strewed the ground in abundance, both
in blocks and small fragments, and the soil and clay were precisely
similar to what are usually found at the diggings.
The sun was getting very low when I at last came to the unwilling
conclusion that I had mistaken my way. I had kept the cart-road;
too long, and thus passed the marked tree line; I now turned my
face towards the east, having the sun behind me, and for three hours
I advanced in that direction, without seeing any sign of the creek.
Ridge after ridge, in apparently endless succession, was passed by me,
and, as I kept as nearly as possible a spur of the range, I passed deep
and extensive gullies on the right and left. These were thinly tim-
bered and well grassed. The ridges were covered with low shrubs bear-
ing wild flowers having a delightful perfume, and with box and apple
trees. The rocks were of the prevailing description, but in some
places the slate had a coarse granitic texture. Quartz was, as usual,
abundant. The sun set, and I began to despair of reaching Pullen’s
before nightfall. Following my course with increased speed, I at
last came to the lofty summit of a mountain from which I descried
the Summerbill Creek, flowing at the bottom of a tremendous ravin®
beneath. The locality was entirely new to me, and I concluded that,
I had come on the creek near its junction with the Macquarie, for at
a little distance to the left appeared very lofty mountains enclosing


what seemed to be the valley of a large river. The creek took a turn
in the direction I was going, and I descended to the ridge which
flanked it. It was now dark, and I knew that it was folly to attempt
to travel in such a country at night, or to descend into the creek. I
therefore tracked a small gully on the ridge till I came to water and
there made preparations for passing the night. The place was thick-
ly covered with flowering shrubs, among which I soon made a lair.
Dry grass underneath, and a few bushes placed overhead, together
with the thicket of shrubs, formed quite a snug retreat. A fire was
soon blazing in front, and in half an hour after stopping I was enjoy-
ing a hearty meal— a pot of tea, some damper, and a frizzle of
bacon, which I had discretion enough to bring with me for fear of
accidents, supplying all that could he desired. The first three or four
hours hung rather heavily on my hands, but I managed to gel through
the night very well, without having much sleep, however. An alarm
from what I fancied was a snake couched beside me—a visit from two
native dogs who stole curiously round, and several starts from the
sudden and heavy flapping of the wings of large night birds passing
close over me—were all the interruptions I met with. It grew very
cold towards morning, and I found it necessary to replenish the fire
pretty often.
At dawn I proceeded on my way, following the ridge to the point
where it sloped into the creek. The dew lay thick on the long grass,
and was by no means a comfortable accompaniment, notwithstanding
the pearly appearance of its glistening drops. In this part of Sura-
merhill Creek, I observed two tents pitched on the right
bank, looking from the height at which I stood like two good sized
blocks of quartz. There was no other camp within miles of them.
It was too early and they were at too great a distance for me to visit
them, but it is only reasonable to believe that they would not pitch
their tents and remain in this wild and difficult place without getting
something like a good remuneration for their toil. As near as I can
guess, they were situated three or four miles below Pullen’s crossing-
place.
Following the elope of the ridge, which went in the direction I
was going, after walking a mile or thereabouts, I got into the channel
of the creek. The stream was here very full and rapid, and it was
with some difficulty I crossed it. Below this ford extended a mag-
nificent sheet of water, two hundred yards long, and thirty or forty
wide, fringed with verdant banks. In this water-hole, I saw several
“ duck-hilled platypi ” or “ duck-billed moles ” as they are called
by the colonists, paddling about. They are extremely shy, and dive
directly they notice the approach of any one. I disturbed a pair of
wild ducks and their young brood of ducklings in the sedgy shallows
of the water-hole. The sun now'rose over the mountains, and the
scene around me was one of the most picturesque that can be con-
ceived. The dew drops glistened in the Sun’s rays with all the co


lours of the rainbow. Thousands of parrots with their exquisitely
coloured plumage glancing in the light, streamed through the
branches of the trees, and with the thrush and soldier bird, kept up
an incessant screaming, chattering, ®.nd whistling. Nature seemed
suddenly to have started into life. The luxuriant vegetation, and
the flowers and blossoms of Spring, charming alike by their fragrance
and their varied and beautiful hues, contributed to the enchantment
of the place in this wild mountain ravine, where sterlile and rugged
ridges, towering into the blue sky, affording every variety of pictur-
esque grandeur, enclosed this small spot of beautiful and animated
nature. I sat down for half an hour, where the crystal stream of a
wild and rocky oakey creek, ran brawling over its pebbled channel,
into the Summerhill, and forgot a-while all toil, care, and trouble.
As this oakey creek came from the direction in which I to
travel, I determined to follow its channel up, a determination which
the difficulties and the dangers of the ascent up it, gave me some
reason afterwards to repent. The creek, in fact, after the first mile
was merely a series of waterfalls in a deep and narrow ravine. The
indications of gold were plentiful enough during the first mile, and I
should have liked very much to prospect it, but the valley of the
creek seemed too narrow to admit of any very extensive deposits of
the precious metal having been formed. In several places in this creek
there were floodmarks very high in the trees, and I omitted to notice
that on the Summerhill, at this part, one of the most remarkable
features, was the accumulation of immense piles of drift wood and
rubbish, in places where any obstacle was presented to their being
carried further down by the torrent. Many of these accumulations
were upwards of twenty feet high, and I have no doubt that cradles
would be found in some of them, which had been carried by the floods
from the upper part of the river.
In ascending the channel of this creek, I had to climb several
waterfalls, one 70 or 80 feet high. After surmounting one 60 feet
high, where the smooth surface of the rook gave very little hold for
the hands and feet, I came upon a water-hole in the rock, upwards of
twelve feet in diameter, almost covered in by arching rocks. The
waters of the creek found their way into this hole by a very small
opening. Although the water seemed perfectly transparent, I could
not see the bottom of the hole, such was its great depth. Having got
out of this pass with some difficulty, I took the ridges, and after half
an hour’s walk fell in with the well defined bridle road to the Turon,
which leads over the sources of this creek. This was only five miles
from the junction. The sloping land near the head of this creek has
every appearance of possessing rich gold deposits, and none of the phy-
sical difficulties to its being worked are offered such as the lower part
of the creek must present.
The road after passing one of Cummins’s sheep stations, now
deserted, and climbing several low hills, descends a very steep ridge


into tbe Macquarie. The ridge on the opposite side of a small creek
which falls into the river is very lofty, and has a very picturesque
appearance from the number of pine trees which grow on it, rearing
their pyramidal outline at regular intervals. The kurryjong tree,
too, with its richly coloured foliage is seen here and there, clinging
to the sides of the mountains and ravines.
The Macquarie at this point shows unmistakeable proofs of
the violence and extent of the late floods. The channel of the river
has quite a changed appearance from what I remember it to have
had. Immense drift heaps of fine sand have been deposited high on
the banks, and accumulations of shingle made in new places. The
swamp oak trees are bent down with the direction of the torrent, and
drift wood is seen in their branches at great heights above the present
level of the river. There is nobody at work at this part of the river,
though one place showed that a considerable amount of work had been
performed at some time.
The-river was still so high, notwithstanding the late dry season,
and running with such rapidity that I saw it would he a matter of
difficulty to get across. Some one recommends in order to cross
a rapid river, that a heavy weight should be carried, to give the body
firmness enough to resist the force of the Waiter. I tried this expedi-
ent, sltfng a heavy Stone in a belt, which I carried over my shoulder,
and waded'across the river nearly breast high, without being influ-
enced by the force of the current, though the rocky bottom, full
of deep holes, was very difficult to walk over without falling.
The valley of the Lower Turon, towards its junction with the
Macquarie;, narrows very considerably. Tbe mountains on either
side at this part are very high and approach each other much nearer
than the mountains near Sofala. The stream of water at the Lower
Taton seems to be less than it is higher up, and it has the peculiar-
ity of being quite limpid. The mingling of the two rivers where the
clear greenish water of the Turon meets the turbid torrent of the
MaCquarie is very well defined. There are several very deep water-
holes at this portion of the river, very clear, and apparently never
dry. They abound in beautiful large fish. Very little Work has been
done here, although there are several very promising points and bends
Of the river. The prevalence of water must prevent their being worked
for a length of time. About a mile and a-half up the river is
Tinker’s San, where a large quantity of gold has been obtained, and
on the liar below it also a great deal of work has been done. On
the former Bar four and five ounces a day were obtained, and the lat-
ter turned out exceedingly rich. There are also some good dry dig-
gings in this vicinity. At present there are not more than a score of
persons at work from the junction to the road up to the Bald Hill
Qrfeek some three or four miles, though gold abounds in this place.


NO VIU.
THE TURON.
Sofala, November 9, 1852.
The Turon, which has occupied so prominent a position among the
gold fields of Australia, has been so often described that there is no
necessity whatever for my doing more than stating the present posi-
tion of mining operations on its banks and in its bed. My first, com-
munication, dated Sofala, some three weeks ago, when I was only at
the commencement of my tour, described the river as extremely dull,
the diggings almost entirely deserted, and very little business being
transacted in the township. Now, on my re-visiting this place with-
in the short period of time which has elapsed, a considerable change
for the better has taken place, and I can state with confidence that
the Turon is experiencing a revival which will this summer equal
the glories of its palmiest days. No one can mistake here that he is
in a gold field of unparalled richness. Yields per day are computed
not by units, but by tens of ounces. Earnings which at other dig-
gings would be regarded as exceedingly good, axe here not considered
as worth talking of. Operations are contemplated, and are being
carried out involving a great outlay of capital, such as would startle
the Meroo miner out of his propriety. Persons are flocking hither
from all parts. The continuation of fine weather and the prospect of
a dry summer, in which the richness of the bed of the Turon will be
at length developed, are producing their natural effects. The old
holders of bed claims, men that have so often suffered disappointment
and loss, are inspired with renewed hopes, and are preparing to enter
upon another campaign, which it is to be hoped will turn out more
favourably than the preceding. Should the weather continue fine, of
which there is every prospect, and the bed claims become workable,
from the junction of the river to its head, its channel will be crowded
with diggers attracted from all parts hy the certainty ofdoing well, and
our produce of gold will bear a favourable comparison even with that
of Victoria, In fact, within the last few days I have fallen in with
so many holders of bed claims, who have made little fortunes by them
in favourable seasons, and who expect yet to get thousands of pounds
out of the same claims which have already yielded thousands, that I
am fully persuaded there is hardly a piece of ground in the world,
either of dry or river diggings, equal in extent to that between the
Upper Wallaby Rooks and Rose Hill, which hats richer auriferous de-
posits. lam satisfied that neither Bendigo nor Mount Alexander,
taking square mile for square mile, surpasses it. It must be
remembered that those bed claims which have already yielded so
much, are not by any means worked out; that Golden Point,
Paterson’s Point, or Munday Point, on which fortunes nut of certain
claims have been made, still possess fortunes in them; and that Ihe
richest parts of the channel of the Turon bate never been touched,


nor can they be worked, until capital and skill, aided by favourable
weather are brought to bear on them. Meanwhile the Turon daily
receives large accessions to its population—the river bed is becoming
enlivened by the carrying on of mining operations —Sofala is assuming
a bustling appearance, and the publicans and store-keepers are kept
busier and look more cheerful than of wont.
The old dry diggings are very nearly exhausted, and no new dis-
coveries have been made, nor will they until a large increase of popu-
lation takes place. Those who remained on the river during the past
winter, were engaged in working the dry diggings out. A little is
still doing on Bation Hill and Golden Point, though the bed claims
have attracted all parties from other diggings, and cutting races,
forming dams, and getting pumps in working order on all parts of
the river, form the order of the day.
At Golden Point, the Channel of the river has been deepened, and
yesterday nearly a hundred men set in to open the claims on the
Bar where their working had been interfered with. The floods had
levelled the shingle again, and there was no external sign of the
former working of the claims. Judging by the openings made, and
from inquiries, it would seem that upwards of half the distance from
the bank to the far side of the channel has been worked on the mid-
dle of the Bar, but at either end not a third of the distance can have
been worked, covered, as they have mostly been, with water. It will
thus be seen that even at Golden Point, so long wrought and out of
which so much gold has been taken, the ground is not anything like
worked out, and even in the portion said to have been exhausted, it
would pay to work the ground over again. The extraordinary rich-
ness of this Bar may be conceived from the fact that during the
winter many persons made something more than a good livelihood by
washing the drift gravel in the channel of the stream. Even now,
several parties are doing this up to their middle in the water, so that
it must yield them something to repay such toil; and many indi-
viduals go so far as to say that every flood brings down a fresh
deposit. To-day I visited the Bar again, and found that one party
had got down to washing stuff in the afternoon. They washed 4(1
buckets of stuff mixed with a good deal of worthless sand and gravel,
with a long tom, and got between 4 and 5 ounces of coarse gold.
The gold could be seen in the stuff and on the stones covered with
blue clay. The claim, which is held by a man named Byan, is
situated near the centre of the Bar, and what is called a Californian,
but more properly a Chinese, pump, which lifts a great deal
of water, is employed to work it.
At the junction of Oakey Creek a splendid race has been cut
which drains the upper claims at Munday Point, and many of the
claims at the junction. The race is about 200 yards long, is 12 feet
wide, and from 10 to 15 feet deep. Such a work, which has been
done by the diggers themselves, and well done too, is something


more than mere scratching. Some of the claims here, where the bed
rock is high, are being worked at present by the aid of powerful
pumps, but the results are not very surprising, as I am inclined to
think that the rock is rather too high. On the lower part of the
Bar or Flat extending from Munday Point, several claims formerly
worked here, near the river, are again being opened. In one claim
where the washing stuff has been come to, 4 ozs. were got on Satur-
day afternoon when the parties washed, but this is not looked upon
as anything like what will be obtained. In one of these claims last
autumn as much as 25 oz. in a day were got, and generally very
large yields. There are about fifty persons here at present, and on
the upper part of the point at least as many more.
At all the Points and Bars the diggers are only commencing
operations, and are engaged chiefly in cutting races or in deepening
the channel of the river. At the Maitland Bar there are seventy or
eighy persons cutting a race. At the Sheep Station Point there are
about the same number, but the most of them are attempting to work
their claims by means of powerful pumps, in many cases with great
success. I did not notice a person at wort at the dry diggings here.
One or two of the claims, such as Roberts’s are turning out re-
markably well under all the adverse circumstances.
At Bathurst Bar and Reuben’s Bar a fine'race is about completed,
which will enable the diggers to work their claims on these bars.
There are about forty men engaged in this work, and it is expected
that everything will be ready for the opening of the bed claims in
eight days. There is a public-house and a store at this locality.
At Paterson Point the channel of the river has been deepened, and
two or three of the claims on this very rich point are workable.
There are about one hundred and fifty persons at this part of the
river on both sides. Miller’s party of six, washed out last week 95
ozs. of gold, but it must be remembered that this was the product of two
or three weeks work Another party of six shared last week £45
each, the result of the week’s washing. Another claim belonging to
Macpherson and Forbes is very rich, as rich in fact as any on the
point, but they have been unable to work it for six months. The
former gentleman has already taken upwards of a thousand pounds
sterling out of it for his own share, and he is quite confident of ob-
taining another thousand, and even more. They have made applica-
tion for an auriferous quartz vein on the ridge above the Bar, the
white blocks of which, are visible strewing the ground. A small
specimen was shown to me in which minute particles of the precious
metal were visible in great quantities. There are two public-houses
at this part of the river, two or three stores, and several tents, form-
ing altogether a populous locality, which it is expected will be
crowded when the bed claims are all workable. There are dry dig-
gings on Paterson’s Point, now almost exhausted, which have proved
uncommonly rich, and from the appearance of the ground, I think


that good diggings will be found still further up the hill.
There are about twenty persons at Poor Man’s Point, below
Paterson’s, waiting for the subsiding of the river. The channel here
is too deep, and the banks too rocky, to allow of the cutting of a race.
At New Zealand Point, close by the Upper Wallaby Rocks, upwards
of a hundred persons are located, who have almost run out the dry
diggings, and are now depending on the bed. At both these places
there are very rich claims not, workable oh account of the water.
Returning up the river, above, the junction of Oakey Creek, at
Thompson’s Bar, the holders of bed claims are cutting a race to drain
off the water, but the river must be very low before this Bar can be
worked, as I have had reason to know. During the autumn several
of the claims were worked, and at the lower end very large yields
were obtained. One claim averaged 6 ozs. a day. In another 22
ozs. were got in one day, and in another 76 ozs. in 10 days. That
there is plenty of gold on the Bar is certain, but it will cost a good
deal of silver to get it.
Above this there are very few persons at work on the river,,
although towards Razorbaok there are several rich points and bars.
Captain Hams, who has prospected the Turon for upwards of 20 miles
above the township, and who has located himself on a bar near
Razorbaok, thinks very highly of the auriferous character of this part
of the Turon, and believes that a large population will devtlope dig-
gings here equal to those of the middle portion of the river. I have
traversed the river, twelve months ago, to its; head, and see no reason
for believing that this portion of the Turon does not partake of the
auriferous character of the ether portions. • -
I shall now notice the operations carried on by the two English
companies on the; river. Lucky Point is part of a peninsula, formed
by a remarkable bend of the Turon, having an isthmus, not more
than 100 yards across,, between the river at Maitland Point and at
Sheepstation. The facility with which this isthmus could be tun-
nelled through, the stream directed through it, and thus the present
bed of the river for three quarters of a mile, drained and rendered fit
to he wrought has frequently been noticed, and it is now intended to
carry out the idea. The holders of bed claims on Maitland, Lucky,
and the upper part of the Sheepstation points, have engaged the ser-
vices of the British Australian Gold Mining Company to cut the,
tunnel through, and this morning they commenced measuring and
pegging out the distances. The neck of land through which the
tunnel is to be cut is high and consists of a hard but brittle clay
slate of a dark and burnt appearance, in a metamorphic state, I be-
lieve, but it is supposed that the rock is softer than its interior por-
tion. An open cut will he first made from the river through an al-
luvial deposit to the rocky ridge. This cut about 80 yards in length,
is to he 12 feet wide at the top, and seven at the bottom, and to be
as deep as requisite to convey the stream wholly from its present


channel. A tunnel will then be driven through the rock. This
tunnel must be seven feet broad and six feet high, and its length will
be thirty-five fathoms. When driven through, an open cut from its
other side to the river must be made. The company have contracted
to do the whole work and make a complete job of it, within three
months for £ISOO. The claim holders will have to pay at the rate
of seven shillings for every foot in width of their claims, so that the
whole length of the river which will be benefitted is 4300 feet. It
must be remembered that claims run across the channel, or in other
words, across the length of the river. Claim holders who wish to be
employed on the work are to have a preference over strangers, and
are to get the usual rate of wages. Many are of opinion that the
company cannot complete the contract without loss, while others
again believe, if they act judiciously that they will clear £SOO or
£6OO. It very much depends on the character of the rock in the
interior of the isthmus which the tunnel will have to pass through.
The undertaking is one full of interest, as its success will greatly
benefit the district by stirring up a spirit of enterprise, without
which many parts of the Turon never can be worked. Mr.
Colquhoun, the Director of the Company’s operations at the mines,
most readily afforded me every information concerning the under-
taking.*
Above Erskine Point, where, by the way, preparations are also
being made for working the river bed, a delta has been formed just
below the junction of Little Oakey Creek. This delta goes by the
name of Erskine Island, and it has been taken by the Australian
Mutual Life Association, for the purpose of working it and the river
beds at each side. The Association does not pay any license money,
but an application has been made for the purchase of the island, to-
gether with a portion of Erskine Flat, and some arrangement is to
be made respecting a royalty on the gold obtained. Messrs. Barker
and Moggridge, who superintend the operations of the Company,
have 20 men in their employ, but at present there are only 14 at
work. They are engaged in cutting a race to carry off the water
of the river. It is about 125 yards in length, is 12 feet wide
at the top and 8 at the bottom, and has an average depth of 8 feet.
The men have been already three weeks in cutting it, and in another
week it will be carried through. There is a cross-cutting which has
been begun also for the purpose of a race, which I think is by no
* This work, after having been commenced by the Company, is now at a stand-
still, in consequence it is said of the Government having demanded a license fee
from the men engaged at it. This demand it seems was not anticipated by the
Company, and as they were not prepared to meet it, their operations were necessa-
rily suspended. As to the wisdom of exacting the license fee under the circum-
stances I say nothing. It is very certain that Companies should not he invested
with privileges, witheld from the miners in general, but the whole transaction
furnisnes an excellent commentary upon the absurd and restrictive policy which
the Government is pursuing with respect to the gold fields.


means judicious. I cannot see the necessity for it. Its effect must
be to convey the water from one side? of the ground to another, which
will have the effect of interfering with its working. As an opening
to get to washing stuff, the cut might not be thrown away. In the
race at present being cut, a thin surface vein of gold was fallen
in with, but it was not considered worth while to delay the work by
washing. A hole has been sunk at the upper end to test the value
of the ground, but the washing stuff is not yet come to. The com-
pany will use long toms for the purpose of washing the stuff. Great
expectations are entertained of the richness of this island. It is
known that at some places it is very rich, but whether the delta
throughout contains sufficient gold to pay for working, is of course a
question. As it is situated at the junction of Little Oakey Creek,
and lies between places of proved richness, there is, I admit, a
strong presumption that deposits of the precious metal to a great ex-
tent and of a very heavy description have been made here. But the
value of ground can never be known until actually proved. The
place never had a very favourable reputation, but it is true that it
presents difficulties of no ordinary character which desultory diggers
are not likely to surmount. The delta is very extensive and will
supply, at least, three years’ work. Everything depends on the
manner in which this is conducted to make the speculation at least
not a very losing one. As soon as the ground has been effectually
drained, narrow cuts should be made intersecting it, so as to find
the leads of gold, for they may be narrow, and much ground
utterly worthless might he turned over in an indiscriminate search.
It is a place where plenty of money can be sunk in a very short
time, without any very satisfactory result, even granting that there
are deposits of gold in it equal to any on the river, which I am dis-
posed to admit is not improbable
I called on Mr. Assistant Commissioner Maclean, to obtain such
official information as he could supply me with, and that gentleman
received the application with attention and courtesy. From the offi-
cial records I ascertained that up to this day, the 9th instant,. 512
diggers’ licenses have been issued for the current month for this dis-
trict. The number of traders’ licenses issued is 118. This shows
an increase upon the number of licenses issued for the corresponding
portion of last month, and it is expected, should the weather ho'd
fine, that the number will be very considerably increased. There
are 39 licensed public-houses'in the district. Some of these are
included among the traders’ licenses, hut others are not, as the
houses stand on private property. The number of applications for
quartz ridges is quite astounding, but a very small proportion indeed
of these is bona fide. Twenty-four applications have been made for
quartz veins down the river, where it seems there is the greater
number, and six applications for veins up the river. Every water-
hole in this part of the Turoh has been taken up for the purpose of


draining whenever the weather will allow of this being done. The
Commissioner seems to have no power to give to the discoverer of new
auriferous deposits any preference over those who may come after, —
such as twice the extent of ground for a license granted to any one
else. Some encouragement should be held out to persons to develope
new ground. At present the enterprising explorer is in no better
position than the casual traveller who might fall in with him at work,
and who has been at no trouble or expense to find the place. The
first has, of course, the advantage of choice, an advantage not held
out by the Government, however, but a necessary one. In the large
majority of cases, what is this worth, however ? The rich spots can-
not be known by the outward indications.
The holders of bed claims on the river who have been prevented by
the weather from working them, must begin to look sharp. Their
claims will be secured to them against all strangers, provided they
are on the spot in time. But if any portion of the river become
workable, the ground must not lie idle, and, therefore, if the former
holders do not appear to work their claims when they can do so, they
will be given to others who choose to take out licenses for them.
These are the words of the Commissioner himself, and nothing ap-
pears more reasonable. The arrangement has an equal regard for
the interest of claim holders who have suffered so much already by
floods, and for the public, whose workable lands must not lie idle.
The owners of bed claims must therefore be stirring, for the Turon
is going down at a rapid rate, and, if the present weather continues,
nearly all the points will be workable in a month.
Jobbing in claims seems, by all accounts, still to be pursued, and
many individuals have managed to get possessed of dozens of
valuable claims, by what means remains to be seen. Anything like
monopoly must not be permitted, but several cases have been related
to me which look very ill, and it is to be hoped that the Commission-
ers will set their faces against all dirty work of the kind.
Fresh arrivals keep pouring in, chiefly from Tambaroora, which, it
seems, have been the winter diggings for the Turonites. The in-
creasing prosperity of the Turon will, therefore, be at the expense of
this and other fields, until a population extensive to occupy all the
country shall have' arrived.
no xx.
THE LOWER TURON.
Bathurst, 11th November, 1852.
In my last communication respecting the Lower Turon, I was com-
pelled to close rather hurriedly to be in time for the mail. When
near the junction of the river with the Macquarie, I endeavoured to
find the whereabouts of the quartz vein belonging to the Turon
Golden Ridge Quartz Crushing Company, but was unable to meet any;
one who could give me any authentic information respecting it. At


a bark hut near the junction of the Bald Hill Creek, I understood
that on the ridges, on the right hand side coming up the river, there
was a gold quartz ridge which was taken by a company, which I con-
cluded to be the same. My informant wished to impress me with the
idea that it was he who first found this gold quartz vein, and he in-
sinuated that he knew of some other quartz ridges bearing gold,
which, however, he did not intend to make known unless he were
paid handsomely for the secret. Possibly he mistook me for an
auriferous quartz ridge hunter, and fancied he could make a
few pounds out of a new chum. This person described the ridge in
question as being very rich, and, of great width. He said that he
could at any time go and find very rich specimens of gold in quartz
on it. The gold is dispersed throughout the rock in very small but
numerous particles. The quartz vein or dyke lies near the road
to Bathurst, from this part of the Turon, and strikes in a northerly
direction from the Macquarie to the Turon, thus cutting off, as it
were, an angle of the table land enclosed on the two other sides by
these rivers. From a survey of the country, from the top of the Big Hill,
near the Bald Hill, it appears to me that this quartz vein continues in a
northerly direction, right over the Bald Hill, the Tambaroora, and
the Dirt Hole Diggings; hence the richness of these places. It has
occurred to me that localities, lying in the direction of the strike of
an auriferous quartz vein, even where the latter is not visible on the
surface, will be found to contain gold more or less. At the Meroo,
near Maitland bar, where nuggets have been found in great abun-
dance, the ground lies in the direction which the great nugget vein
appears to take. If this point were attended to, and allowance made
for the action of water in removing the gold a little distance from the
matrix, —for I am persuaded that nothing except the small light
scale gold is carried to any considerable distance by water,—
the country could be prospected to more advantage than at present.
Certainly gold quartz veins may not be auriferous throughout their
length, and even where they contain gold, there must be very con-
siderable difference in the comparitive richness of the vein in differ-
ent places. Persons at the diggings would do well to accumulate
all the facts connected with the deposit of alluvial gold, or its exist-
ence in the matrix, that they can, for it is only by establishing a
large number of these, that anything like the true theory of gold
formation and its deposit in alluvial beds can be ascertained.
While on this subject, I may notice a paragraph which appeared
in the Herald of Tuesday last, showing the probability of gold being
found in the Sydney, sandstone. When travelling over Bell’s Line
of Hoad twelve months ago, I was struck with the number of quartz
pebbles which strewed the whole surface of the ground. These
quartz pebbles were precisely similar in appearance to those which
are found at the gold fields in the channels of large streams. On
examination I found that their presence was owing to the decompo


sition or disintegration of the coarse sandstone rook in which they
had been embedded, and of which they had formed a part. Sand-
tone itself is composed almost entirely of quartzose debris cemented
by iron. But the sandstone formation is not metalliferous, except in
rare instances, although it is composed of the debris of a rock, the
most remarkable for its metalliferous quality When the quartz and
other rocks containing quartz were disintegrated, it is evident, that
from the specific gravity of gold which exists in it in a native form,
an immediate separation took place, and it is not by any means pro-
bable where immense beds of sand were formed either in the ocean
or elsewhere, that gold was also carried and deposited with the sand.
It is within the bounds of possibility, that a quartz pebble contain-
ing gold in so small a quantity as not materially to increase its gra-
vity, may be found embedded in the sandstone rock but to look in
the debris of this rock for a deposit of gold in any quantity —in such
quantity as to render it worth notice—is in my opinion to form
an expectation against which there is an infinity of chances, such
long odds in short, that for all practical purposes, sandstone may be
regarded as a non-auriferous rock. Even on the Turon and the
Meroo, which are auriferous rivers to all intents and purposes, there
are in many places accumulations of drift sand, such as if cemented
together would form sandstone rock, but in which sand no person at
the diggings would dream of looking for gold, although in all proba-
bility in the clay, on the rook beneath, gold would be found. Now
if we suppose that immense accumulations of this sandy debris are
washed by torrents into the ocean, and these are deposited in succes-
sive layers until a depth equal to the sandstone formation is atained
that this immense extent of sand is firmly cemented together, and
then elevated into dry land and mountains-—is there any probability
of finding gold in such a rock ? I think there is none whatever.
The Australian gold fields are sufficiently extensive without expect-
ing them to include the sandstone formation.
Most of the points on the Lower Turon have been partially worked,
but anything like the extensive and systematic operations conducted
near Sofala, are nowhere to be seen. Parties have run over the face
of the banks, where the water has allowed them to get at the bed
rock. In very few instances have they attempted to work the banks
themselves, and the prevalence of water has prevented them from
working the bars at all, near the river. To show how little really
has been done towards working the bars of the Turon, I found on
visiting a bar near the junction, where sixteen months ago I had a
claim, and where the rise of the river prevented our continuing our
working in the direction of the river, in which the claim was becom-
ing richer, that the ground had not been worked two feet further
than when we left it. This I knew by the shrubs and weeds
which were growing in the same position as of old.
When returning from Tambaroora to Sofala, I took the wrong road.


■which by-theby it is very easy to do, and instead of reaching the
Big Hill near Peek’s point, I reached by sunset the Pyramul Hill
on the Crudine. I felt conscious that I was not on the right road,
as the scenery was somewhat new to me, and on my left
I had a more mountainous and broken country towards the
Pyramul than I should have had, if I had gone right. How-
ever, I proceeded at an accelerated rate, hoping like Mr. Micawber,
in David Copperfield, that “something would turn up.” Nothing,
however, did turn up, not even a sheep station or a shepherd, until I
got to Pyramul Hill, where I fell in with a bullock team camped
halfway up the hill, and learned that I was twelve miles either from
Peek’s Point or Sofala. With true bush hospitality a pot of tea was
handed to me, and although it was in all probability the worst des-
cription of hyson, no gunpowder or pekoe ever tasted more deliciously.
My good stars however prevailed, and I had reason to be glad
that I had missed the road I had intended to take, for at Mr. Clap-
ham’s, at the foot of Pyramul Hill, on the Crudine, I obtained a
considerable amount of useful information, respecting both the
Pyramul and the Crudine Creeks, which I should otherwise have
found some difficulty in procuring. The road through which I had passed
possessed everywhere the most striking auriferous indication, and if
there is no gold there, no faith is to be placed in slate rock, abund-
ance of quartz in blocks and fragments, and an undulating country,
where a pretty general decomposition and disintegration of gold-bear-
ing rocks having taken place. I think that there is every probability
that diggings similar to those at Tambaroora, will ere long be opened
on this table land.
THE PYRAMUL.
I crossed this creek on the road from Tambaroora to the Louisa,
but as I heard of no diggings of any great importance on it, and
as it would take me much out of my way to examine it, I observed
no more of the Pyramul than was to be seen at the crossing place near
one of Mr. Suitor’s stations. By careful enquiry, however, of persons
resident in the vicinity of the creek, and from the statements of
others who have visited the diggings on the Pyramul, I have obtained,
I think, a pretty accurate idea of the general character of the creek,
and the mining operations at present carried on there.
The Pyramul takes its rise near the Boga Mountain, and after a
tortuous course, generally parallel to that of the Turon, joins the
Macquarie, between the junction of the Summerhill Creek and Bur-
randong. Throughout its course, it flows through the auriferous for-
mation of rocks, and as it is in certain seasons a large and rapid stream,
and in many places has formed large alluvial accumulations, there is
every reason for conjecturing that its bed will be found to contain
extensive gold deposit. The existence of gold on its banks, in quan-
tities which will well repay the working of it, has been shown in
more than one instance.


At the upper part of the Pyramul the banks of the creek and the
adjacent country are generally level, but towards the Macquarie it
flows through a mountainous district, and its banks are for the most
part rugged and precipitous. The Green Yalley Greek joins the
Pyramul two or three miles below Suttor’s station where I crossed
it, and five miles below this junction a friend of mine in search of
horses whilst I was at Tambaroora, came across two parties working
on a bar of the creek. They had only about four feet of gravel to
strip before coming to the washing stuff, which lay among the crevices
of the slate rock. The gold was coarse, abounding in small nuggets.
While getting out stuff for the cradle the nuggets could be seen, and
at least an ounce and a half was picked out by one party in the space of
an hour. The chief rocks are clay slate, and quartz, the former in
immense slabs on their edges, and the latter in large blocks and small
fragments whitening the ground. Gold has been found on various
points on the Lower Pyramul, but the superfluity of water has
prevented extensive diggings being opened. That rich and extensive
summer diggings exist here is certain, and at places where the valley
of the river is wide, and alluvial banks have been formed, rich dry
diggings will be found.
It is at the upper portion of the Pyramul, however, that the most
important diggings on this river have been opened, near Mr. Suttor’s
bead station, not far from the road from the Pyramul Hill to the
Louisa. Here upwards of a hundred people are located, who are
digging on the flats in the vicinity of the creek. The gold is very
coarse, a nugget lO ozs. 16 dwts. having been found. I saw several
nuggets which had been obtained here, one a very beautiful specimen
of gold mixed with a little red quartz, weighing about 3 ozs,
Lower down the Pyramul, some four or five miles, a considerable
number of persons are at work and are doing well. At the Boga
Creek, too, there are a few parties at work who have done very well.
One party of two obtained in two days 22% ozs. Another party of
two. Crooks and Morris Ring, 7 ozs. one day and 6-J the next. The
gold about here is all of a coarse nuggetty description, not much
waterworn, and evidently not far removed from the matrix. Its dis-
tribution over the ground is very uncertain and irregular. A rich
hole may be immediately adjoining a very poor one; and the vein
often suddenly runs out. The number of people engaged in digging
here has, at no period been sufficiently great to develope the real
riches of the district, and the few who have opened holes, as soon as
the hole runs out, fly off to other places, there to perform the same
trifling process—half prospecting and half digging.
THE CRUDINE.
This creek is marked on the maps as Cunningham’s Creek, and it
affords a very felicitous instance of the superiority of the Aboriginal
names over those given by the Europeans. What comparison is


there between the beautiful and euphonious name “Crudine,” and
prosaic one of “Cunningham,” suggestive of butcher’s meat, or of
broadcloth. The “I ” in the second syllable is pronounced long.
I have not been able to ascertain the meaning of the word, but I
have no doubt that, like all the aboriginal names, it has been given
with the utmost propriety. This creek takes its rise near the Cherry
tree Hill, and after a meandering course of some thirty miles joins
the Turon in the bend of the river, above the upper Wallaby Bocks.
At its junction it flows through a very narrow gorge in the moun-
tains, but for many miles above this, its banks though in some places
lofty and precipitous, are generally very level, and extend to a con-
siderable distance from the the stream, the country being level and
thinly timbered.
The Crudine, although in the very centre of the gold fields, and
flowing over auriferous rocks, has held a very curious position,
being generally tabooed by the diggers. The first prospectors on the
creek met with singularly bad luck, and with what truth it is hard
to say, but the Crudine has been regarded as worthless in an aurifer-
ous point of view. Rumours have, however got afloat from time to
time, of large hauls being made on this creek, and many believe that
its bad character is owing to the industriously circulated statements
of persons living on it, who wish to secure the golden wealth to
themselves, whenever the water will allow them to commence digging
Gold has however, been found on this creek, and at Tambaroora.
I met with a former acquaintance in Oakey Creek, who informed me
that he had made two or three hundred pounds on the Crudine.
The water has always been too high to allow of digging in the bed,
but at present it is subsiding fast. The supply of water here is
abundant at all seasons, and there are very large waterholes in the
creek several hundred yards long, very deep and wide, and abounding
in excellent fish. On a bank of the creek, below Mr. Clapham’s
public house, at the foot of the Pyramul Hill, several parties were
about to commence opening some holes when I was there. Mr. Clap-
ham himself had caused three holes to be opened, but the water had
prevented his getting to washing stuff, though ha expected he
would be able to wash in a day or two. The compound of clay and
pebbles in the holes was precisely similar to what is found on the
Turon. Quartz is abundant in the vicinity, and there seems to be
every probability of gold lying on the bed rack in large quantities.
Gold has been found from the Cherry-Tree Hill to the junction, and
at Warrangnnnia, several miles up the creek, there is every prospect
that extensive deposits will be discovered. The gold about this place is
coarse Several parties are about to commence operations imme-
diately. Gold has been found in nearly all the blind creeks and gul-
lies leading into the Crudine. The course of this creek has suffered
considerable change by the extensive floods, and many of the water-
holes are fast filling up. It is singular, that on the Crudine the


strike of the rook in many places is rather in an east and west than
in a north and south direction. I cannot speak definitively on the
subject, because surface appearances may mislead, but in several
places where the strata of the rocks appeared exposed to view, I
noticed this to be the case. Should the ensuing summer be a dry
one, the question of the auriferous character of this stream will be
settled one way or other.
The Crudine is joined a little above its junction by a small stream
called the Two Mile Creek, which flows parallel to the Turon, in the
valley to the northward of the mountains above Golden Point, Mait-
land Point, &c. Auriferous indications are prevalent here, and
although gold has not been found on it in any considerable quantity,
it is expected that rich deposits will be found in its bed when the
water subsides.
Gold at Long Creek.—An intelligent gentleman, resident
between the Crudine and Long'Creek, informed me that gold had been
found on the latter creek two years and eight months before the dis-
covery of Mr. Hargraves proclaimed to the world that Australia
abounded in the most precious of metals. The person who found it
knew what it was, but did not think that there was any quantity,
and was, of course, entirely ignorant of the manner in which it could
be procured. My informant, after his attention had been thus
directed to it, often found specks of gold lying on the surface, after
heavy rains.
NO X.
Bathurst, November 13th, 1352.
When leaving Sofala, en route for Bathurst, I determined to go by
the Lower B.aad, in order that I might learn what operations were
being carried on down the river, and observe the description of
country along this road.
There is little else of interest to relate respecting the Upper
Turon. In Big Oakey and Little Oakey Creeks, in the lower portions,
the subsiding of the water is rendering the bed workable. Several
parties are commencing operations, which bid fair to be crowned with
success. In one instance, a party with a long tom, have been doing
well in the larger creek. It is well known among the old hands,
that in both these creeks, but especially in the latter, there is a very
large amount of nuggetty gold in the bed, among the crevices of the
rock, which the diggers never have been able to get at, in consequence '
of the prevalence of water. The rooks in-Oakey Creek,, in the rich
parts will pay well if broken up with a sledge hammer and
wedges. Coarse gold is found in the joints and crevices of these
rocks, where they have been exposed to the action of the stream. I
have known persons make several hundreds of pounds by this kind of
gold-seeking in Oakey Creek, in which the bed rook is perhaps richer


in the precious metal than any creek in the colony. When passing
the Upper Wallaby Rocks, I came to a bar regularly staked out in
claims, although there was not a single teat near it. At Gwynne’s
Bar there are about 40 persons at work. The mar is apparently low
enough to enable them to work the bed claims, bat certainly hot to
work the best portions of the claims on this rich bar. There
are several parties at Circus Point waiting for the going down, of the
water. At the Rower Wallaby Rocks I saw one party, who were
apparently prospecting it. At some dry diggings on a high bank,
between this place add Peek’s Point, two parties were at Work when
I passed. About this portion of the Turoa, in fact from the Wallaby
Rooks for severed miles down the river, the yield has been very
regular, though not large. At what may be termed a very moderate
computation, 200 small buckets of washing stuff produce an ounce
of gold. There have been no such instances of extraordinary good
fortune as have taken place higher up the river, and the consequence
is, that no one will stay to work this portion of the Turon, as long as
there is room at places where, if the certainty of making a livelihood
is not so great, prises now and then turn up which it is worth while
venturing for. At this portion of the Turon there is an extensive
area of ground which will afford permanent and remunerative em-
ployment to many thousands of persons.
When the lower road to Bathurst leaves the hanks of the Turon,
it climbs the Box Tree Ridge, a long and fatiguing ascent, which
flanks Nuggetty Creek, a deep gully which opens into the Turon. A
rush was made to this place from the Upper Turon nine months ago,
and several of the claims turned out very rich. At present there are
not more than three or four parties at work in it, but I believe that
they are doing well. After leaving the Box Tree Ridge, and
descending the bill on the other side, the auriferous indications are
not so striking until we approach Cheshire Creek, where the surface
appearances become very favourable. Gold will no doubt be
discovered about here in remunerative quantities when the country
is properly explored. After passing over some low barren ridges
where, however, quartz strews the ground in very large quantities,
the road approaches Clear Creek. On the verdant flats adjacent to
this beautiful little stream ©f water, is Brucedale, the residence
of Mr, Suitor, M.O. Gold has been found here, but no systematic
effort has been made to open regular .diggings. Here the road from
Sofala and that from the Lower Turon meet at the. village of Heel,
which consists of two public houses and a few scattered residences.
I obtained here more particular information respecting the Winburn-
dale, and as there has been a slight change there since I noticed
these diggings in a former communication, it maybe of interest.
THE WINBURNDALE.
This creek rises at the Green, Swamp, near the Sydney Road,
about twelve miles from Bathurst, flows for several miles through a


very level country, and then, as it approaches the Macquarie,
through a country broken and mountainous. It is 80 or 40 miles
long, following the winding, and joins the Macquarie Bor 10 miles
above the junction of the Turon. The diggings are about five miles
below the village of Peel, and some eight or ten miles above the
junction, by the straight road. Several points have been tried on
the Winburndale, bat on one only have the miners persevered. The
diggings at this place are dry diggings on the bank, and a few of the
holes have turned out daily 8 and 4 ozs. of gold. Gold is found in
small specks anywhere you choose to try along the creek. The staple
rook is elay slate on its edges, and quartz in blocks and fragments
abounds. Specimens of gold in quartz have been found on the Win-
burndale. The gold at present procured is of a scale description, but it
is evident that nearer the matrix heavy gold will be found. There were
about 1,50 persons at work on the Winburndale about a month ago,
but at present there are not more than 7© or 80, and these are leav-
ing fast, attracted by the richness of the bed of the Turon, which
there is now some prospect of developing. Those who know the
Winburndale, are satisfied, however, that when the water goes down
sufficiently to allow of their working its bed, there will be no
necessity of removing to the Turon to get well remunerated for their
labour. The diggings are ohiefiy surface diggings—no holes of any
depth have been soak. The banks in the vieinity are flat, but to-
wards the Macquarie they are steep and rugged. There are many
other places which, there is no doubt will well repay the trouble of
of working, but the gold diggers will not take any trouble to test the
ground where there is so much unoccupied. They content themselves
with hanging about the places which accident or the explorations of
some more enterprising party have brought to light. The Win-
burudale has many of the most promising points and bends
favourable for the deposit of the precious metal. There are quartz
veins on its banks and in the vicinity, of immense thickness, and
should any of these prove to be auriferous, a permanent supply of
this mineral could be procured for the operations of a company, with
the utmost facility. I have been informed by a gentleman that good
specimens of lead ore were procured on the Winburndale by himself
and a party long before gold was discovered by Mr. Hargraves. I
am satisfied from what I have seen of the Winburndale, and the in-
formation I have received from various parties, that it occupies no
mean position among -the auriferous streams of this district.
Sly Hot© DiaoiNO.~lt seems clear to me, from circumstances
which now and then transpire, that in many a retired creek and
gully the gold digger carries on his operations and makes good round
sums, without the Commissioner or any one else being a bit the wiser.
Many a pound troy of gold is obtained in this way, which never paid,
nor ever will pay, a farthing to the Government in the shape of license
fee. I fell in with a rough fellow at Mr. Howard’s, at the the vil


lage of Peel, going into Bathurst to enjoy himself, or, as he termed it,
to have a “week’s spell.’’ On my asking where he was working he
became very uncommunicative, but at length he let me know that
his party and another had a snug little gully all to themselves,
where they were “ doing it up brown.” His party averaged 20
ozs. every strip of about 4 feet wide by 8 long, and as soon as one place
fell off in the least they left it and tried another. From random
questions, I managed to leam that the gully was somewhere between
the Lower Pyramid and the Lower Turon, but that was all.
NO. XI.
Sydney, November 20th, 1852.
Having been laid up at Bathurst for several days with a severe
attack of the epidemic, then ravaging that part of the country, on feel-
ing somewhat better I determined to fulfill my intention of exploring
the Abercrombie and Tuena Gold Fields, with which, from the
descriptions I had heard of the scenery, and the auriferous indications
of the country, I felt much interested. I was accompanied on this
occasion by Mr. Forbes, storekeeper, of Bathurst, who kindly
furnished mg with a horse for the occasion.
The road proceeds in a southerly direction from Bathurst, follow-
ing the Yale Creek for several miles over a portion of the Bathurst
Plains. There are several fine country residences along the road,
surrounded with beautiful gardens and orchards—delightful retreats,
devoted to the enjoyment of rural pleasures and retirement. The Vale
Creek rises on the high land called the Mountain Run, and descend-
ing into the plains has cut a deep channel through the rich alluvial
deposits of the plains, and joins the Macquarie at Bathurst.
After passing a few small farms, the road enters a more broken and
wooded country, and ascends by a long slope the Black Range
or Mount. In the ascent of this hill the auriferous rocks, schists and
quartz, again appear, the former somewhat different from those met
with to the north of Bathurst; the latter strewing the ground with
innumerable small white fragments. The soil is of a very promis-
ing description for gold, consisting chiefly of the red ferruginous
earth and clay, so characteristic of the gold-diggings at the Mountain
Run. We rested for an hour at the hut of a small settler here,
known to Mr. Forbes, by whom we were very hospitably received.
What with a recurrence of my illness and the heat of the sun, I felt
completely knocked up, and laid myself down, not earing whether I
moved a step further. A refreshing draught of milk, with the slight
“spell” did wonders, however, in reviving me and changing
my opinion. I saw at this place several very handsome specimens of
auriferous quartz, which had been procured at the Kalula Creek, (I am
not sure of the orthography,) some five or six miles off. The quartz
had a very dark appearance but the vein did not seem by the speci-
mens to be more than three inches thick, which of course it would
not pay to work.


Three or four miles further on, we came to Poster's Valley,
which is 16 miles distant from Bathurst, and 9 from the Summerhill
Copper Mine. There is a public-house here, kept by Mr. Lewis,
which, in point of roominess and good accommodation, would do credit
to any town in the colony. It has been the private residence of gome
country gentleman, which accounts for this.
At Brown’s Greek, a few miles from Foster’s Valley to the west-
ward, and four miles from Kalula Creek, some forty or fifty per-
sons have been digging during the winter, but they have now nearly
all gone to other places. These were engaged in digging in the bank,
though it was generally believed that the bed of the creek, as usual,
would pay best when the subsiding of the water would allow it to be
worked. The holes were sunk as deep as nine feet, and the gold ob-
tained was very fine scale. I could learn but little of the success of
the diggers except that one party was known to have cleared during
one week £9O.
Four or five miles from Foster’s Valley we passed Pepper’s Creek,
the country around which has a very rich appearance both as regards
agricultural and auriferous capabilities. There is a public-house here
and several dwellings.
From this to the Grilmandyke the country is thinly timbered, well
grassed, and abounds in the most promising metalliferous indications.
Quartz, having a burnt and dark appearance, everywhere strews the
ground, especially the tops and sides of the ridges. The country is
very undulating, but not precipitous or rocky. A great number of
dead trees with bare stems and leafless branches —images of desola-
tion—are observable, and it is said that these are always to be found
in the neighbourhood of copper mines.
The Grilmandyke Creek, in the vicinity of the Summerhill Copper
Mine, has a wide valley with moderately sloping banks, and these
consist of the richest alluvial land, covered with luxuriant grass
where it has not been occupied for the purpose of cultivation. There
are very extensive river flats, however, under cultivation, where the
soil appears to be of the richest description. That extensive
deposits of gold exist in the bed of the Grilmandyke Creek and in its
flats and banks at this place appears to me very certain. At one place,
near the copper mine, numerous specks of gold are found after heavy
rains, on the side of a hill in a little channel formed by the water. As
gold seeking would, however, interfere with the working of the mine, by
diverting the attention of the men engaged at it, Mr. Clements, the
proprietor of the ground on which the mine is situated, will not
allow of any digging on his land. Some miles higher up than the
mine, several parties have done very well on the Grilmandyke, and
there is every reason for believing that very rich and heavy accu-
mulations of gold will be found on this creek.
There is a public-house in the vicinity of the copper mine, kept by
Mr. Sadler, where I met Mr. Samuel Peek and Mr. Ferris, on a Visit


to the mine, and Mr. Clements, the proprietor of the land. Mr.
Peek, who is one of the largest shareholders, and is very much in-
terested in the success of the undertaking, procured me every
facility for obtaining full and requisite information respect-
ing it.
THE SUMMERHILL COPPER MINE.
This copper mine is situated on the banks of the G ilmandyke
Creek, a tributary of the Campbell’s River. The creek flows into
the river from the south-west, about twenty-three or twenty-four
miles south from Bathurst, and the mine is about two miles from
the junction of the creek. The shafts have been sunk on a low ridge
a few yards above the bed of the week on the left band side, just
above the junction of the Triangle Creek, which joins the (jil-
mandyke two or three hundred yards further down. Between the
ridge and the channel of the creek is an extent of level ground, on
which the Company’s works have been erected.
Three shafts have bees sunk, one of which seems, however, to he
utterly useless. The other two are on the lode. The chief one is
called the engine shaft, as an engine of several horse-power will be
erected over this, to draw off the water and to raise the ore. At
present a whim worked by one horse is used for this purpose.
Tbs shaft is at present 14 fathoms deep, and of a good width. At
the bottom of the engine shaft, the lode of ore, which is copper
pyrites, having a rich bronze and gold appearance, measures 6 feet in
width. According to the statement of Captain Tlitehins, who has
been recently engaged to manage the works, the Lode at that place
from one side to the other, without cleansing, will produce 20 per
cent of copper, and for 21 feet to the W.N. W. it is nearly as wide
and good, hut not quite so deep. The average yield of the Lode is
calculated to be 15 per cent., but in the engine shaft ft is gradually
growing wider and richer. In feet, the indications which were pre-
sented at the surface, when the mine was opened, were not very good,
but the Lode has been improving as it goes deeper, both in size and
quality.
The Company are at present engaged in euttinf an adit from the
banks of tbe creeks to the engine shaft, at its present depth. The
adit is within five or six feet of being completed. It has been a most
laborious and expensive work, as the reek thrash which the miners
have to tunnel is a dark compact trap of the hardest description,
called by the miners “el van.” The miners first tunnelled from the
creek into the hill, and they are now making a drift from the engine
shaft to meet the other. The wnterin the Engine shaft will not rise
beyond a foot or twa, «s it ft carried off by the adit, even although
the latter is not completed. When this work is finished, the water
in the Engine shaft will be pumped up by the Engine into the
adit, and wall thus be carried off. A tramroad will also be made in
the adit, by which the ore raised in the shaft to the level of the adit,


will be carried Out to the smelting works on the banks of the
creek, thus obviating the necessity of a perpendicular lift fourteen
fathoms higher, and afterwards of conveying the ore down the hill.
The other shaft is called the feotvmy shaft, by which the miners
decend into the mine by a series of ladders-. Having enveloped our-
selves in red shirts to save our clothes from the dirt and wet on the
sides of the shaft, and taken each a lighted candle in his hand to
show us the way, we began cautiously to decend, I really cannot gay
much of the facilities for a comfortable descent into the mine, though
there are abundant facilities for a rapid descent, but with ordinary
care and looking well before yon take a step in Some places, there is
no danger to be apprehended. The lode narrowed and widened in
in this shaft very considerably in different places. In one place it
was not more than six inches wide, though in others as much as six
feet. In several places rim ore was very poor, sad pieces of it may
be found at the shaft consisting of semi-transparent quarts mingled
with the beautiful bronze and gold lustre of copper pyrites. The
rock on each side of the lode, technically called the "country,” is at
first steatite or soapstone, which is a soft tuck and easily worked, but
afterwards the hard trap is met. By the light of the candle, rich
green and crystalline incrustations may be observed On the sides and
the roof of the excavation which the visitor traverses. In one place
the miners came on a large cave or natural hollow in the solid rook
several fathoms from the surface. As we approach the engine shaft
the light of day shining down the shaft renders everything more
visible, and the rich lustre of the lode may be observed even below
the water. To the left the men are engaged in driving the adit,
wedging out, boring and blasting the adamantine rock. This is no
work for soft hands or weak arms. According to time-honoured
custom, we had to pay our footing. In vain I demonstrated that a
reporter was a privileged animal. Such distinctions might he drawn
in the upper world, but we had “ marched thus far into the bowels
of the earth,” and must Subscribe to the customs of the new country.
We were appealed to simply as gentlemen, and, of course, felt bound
to maintain our character as such.
After having ascended into the open air, which felt extremely
warm after the -coolness of the mine we had just quitted, we
adjourned to the smelting works erected on the banks of the creek.
The smelting works are at present idle, and Captain Hitchius says,
that he does not intend putting them to work until he has 1900 tons
of ore at the surft.ee ready for being smelted, and the mine in a
position to supply him with 500 tons monthly. There are three
furnaces on the ground, already built,—a refining, a reducing, and a
calcining furnace. Firewood can be procured at the present time of
any size, and in any quantity, delivered on the ground, at ss. per ton.
With the numerous ftcilitieson the ground, Captain Hitehins says,
that he can smelt the ore into fine copper at a cost of £3 per ton.


The Company are very fortunate in having all the facilities they can
require at hand. The numerous -water-holes of the Gilmandyke furnish
a never-failing supply of that necessary element. They have clay on the
ground with which they have made good common bricks, and fire-bricks,
and they can procure lime at a little distance. On the opposite side of
the creek they have a quarry of soap-stone, from which they can ob-
tain abundance of stone for building purposes, and what is Still more
valuable, of Stone which answers for the furnaces. Soap-stone, or steatite,
although soft, has, it is well known, the property of withstanding the
effects of intense heat. The furnaces are reverberating. In the re-
ducing furnace, it is calculated that 7 J tons a day can be smelted.
It was at first the intention of Captain Hitchins to smelt the ore into a
regulus having 60 per cent, of copper, which he calculated he could
do at a very small expense, and with great facility; but after having
seen the roads between Sydney and the Copper Mine, and noticed
the expense of carriage, he thinks that it will be more economical to
smelt the ore into pure copper on the ground. There are now
between 60 and 70 tons of ore ready for being smelted.
The establishments on the ground, besides those already noticed,
ire the house in which Captain Reed, who presides over the mining
operations of the Company, lives, which is built of stone; and
fifteen huts for the miners, although they are not at present
inhabited. There are in addition eight new huts to be built, and
there is a blacksmith’s and a carpenter’s shop. The number of per-
sons in the employ of the Company is at present 22, of whom nine
or ten are experienced miners, and six or seven labourers, a black-
smith, a cooper, a carpenter, and a bullock-driver. Thirty Germans
are expected to arrive in a fortnight, who have been engaged to work
on the mine at 15s. a week and rations. The Company I believe
have written, or are about to write for more.
Captain Hitchins, who was for three or four years Manager of the
Kapuiida Smelting Works, has been engaged by the Bathurst
Copper Mining Company to superintend the working of the Summer-
hill Copper Mines, especially of the Smelting Works connected with
it, at a salary of £5OO a year. He was for six years in the Congo
Soco Gold Quartz Mines, in the Brazils; and subsequently, for three
years, Manager of the Copiapo Smelting Copper and Amalgamation
of Silver Works. He states that there are only two copper mines in
South Australia superior in richness to the Summerhill Mine, viz,,
the Burra Burra, where the ore is of a different description; and tho
Kapunda mine, where it is of the same description —copper pyrites.
Captain Hitchins furnished me with all the information in his power,
and took the utmost trouble to show me everything connected with
the mine. He is a very intelligent gentleman, and seems to me to
possess the most extensive practical information respecting the work-
ing of copper mines. I believe that the Company have secured in
him a valuable acquisition.


There is another lode of copper ore on the opposite side of the
creek, where a shaft has already been opened. It is 150 fathoms
distant from the main lode—which by the way is called Roberts’s
Lode—at the surface of the ground, but is parallel to it. This is
called the Gilmandyke Lode, and has an underlay to the W.S.W. of
foot in the fathom. Roberts’s Lode, on the contrary, has an un-
derlay of the same extent per fathom to the N.N.E. Thus the under-
lay of the lodes is towards each other, and if the same direction and rate
per fathom are kept, the two lodes must meet at a depth of 300
fathoms, whore a “ bunch of ore ” will, in all probability, be found.
Besides the establishments already enumerated, there is a flour-
mill on the ground, belonging to Mr. Clements, worked by a small
steam-engine. Mr. Clements has also a store adjacent to the public-
house.
The Bathurst Copper Mining Company has now a capital of
£30,000, having lately increased it by creating 3000 new shares at
£5. Of these, 1000 are reserved, to be distributed among the origi-
nal shareholders, and the remaining 2000 shares have been taken up,
chiefly by the old shareholders, who have the preference. Only 500
shares have been disposed of to new shareholders, but applications had
been made for 2000 shares. It is the intention of the Company to
apply next session of the Legislative Council for a Bill to limit the
responsibility of the Shareholders.
This Company have already produced five tons of pure copper in
ingots, the chief portion, or the whole of which has been shipped
to England. It may be remembered, that on the occasion of this
copper being shipped, a few details respecting the operations of the
Company were published in the Umpire. They have not been
hitherto so successful as they should have been with a mine of such
ascertained value, but when the difficulty of procuring a cheap sup-
ply of the requisite labour, and above all, the great difficulty of ob-
taining the necessary skilled and experienced superintendents for
conducting the operations of the mine are considered, this must cease
to be wondered at. In the present circumstances of the colony, all
undertakings requiring science and skill to direct them, must suffer
for a while until persons possessing them are obtained. For this
reason almost all our attempts to develope the metalliferous resources
of the colony have hitherto been failures, or very little better. It is
to be hoped that now, when the attention of all scientific and
practical men is directed to the vast field for associated and individual
enterprise, which the mineral treasures of this colony afford to
them, a new chapter in its history will be opened. The Bathurst
Copper Mining Company have, for a long time, contended with
difficulties which their own inacquaintance with such undertakings
prevented them from foreseeing or readily grappling with. They
have now secured the services of a really efficient manager— they have
every confidence in his skill and experience, and will furnish him


sufficient capital to carry on the undertaking efficiently—they haye a
mine of indubitable richness, and nature has bountifully placed every
necessary and convenience for their use immediately at band; -what,
doubt can there be that their operations will eventually be crowned
with success ? That success will no* merely be the gain of a
few shareholders, but if will be the gain of tjbe Colony at large.
Public attention wild be arrested. Capitalists will be stimulated to,
new enterprises, and Australia will progress rapidly in her career of
prosperity and greatness-. The Divine and Beneficent Creator when
He endowed Australia with millions of acres of rich pasture land,
enriched it also with mines of the precious, the valuable and the use-
ful metals. When availing ourselves of the former, we must not ne-
glect the latter.
NO. XII.
Sydney, November 22nd, 1852.
On Campbell's River, in the vicinity of the Summerhill Copper
Mine, there are a few parties at work, digging for gold, whose
success, however, at present, from the height of the water in
the river, is not by any means very great. They expect that the bed
of the river is very rich, and that when they can work it, they will
he amply remunerated for their labour. The gold procured here has
a very rich brilliant appearance, but the samples hitherto got are chief-
ly of a fine scale description. Some are pretty coarse though, and
show that heavy gold will in all probability, he found on the bed
rock. The Campbell’s River is the same river known at Bathurst,
and thence to Wellington, as the Macquarie. It is known in this
upper portion of it also by the name of the Fish River. Diggings
were opened at it, called the “ Ravil ah Diggings,” at the time when
the if uron was first worked, but the superior richness of the latter
and a visit from the Commissioner, quite crushed the incipient gold
field, and sent all the gold seekers to the Turon. Since that, little
or nothing has been done but many parties who know the place,
well, are sanguine that a gold field exists here, as rich as any of those
yet discovered in the colony.
At the Copper Mine, I found myself quite unable to prosecute my
journey among the Abercrombie and the Tuena districts as I intended,
and I was forced to return to Bathurst. It was with much reluct-
ance that I relinquished the pleasure of visiting the celebrated Caves
on the river near the Mulgunnia Creek, of traversing and inspecting
a district so little known, of seeing its magnificent mountain,
scenery, and visiting the diggings on the Tuena, to learn the true
state of affairs as connected with them. But influenza was lord
paramount; and caves, mountain scenery, and gold digging, weighed,
as nothing, when compared with quiet comfort and repose.
A few days previously having met with Mr. Zpuch, at Bathurst,
who is Commissioner at the Tuena, I obtained from him a great


number of interesting particulars relative to this goldfield, whieh, in
tbe event of my being unable, to, visit it myself, I' intended to make
use of, Mr. Zoueh has been a long resident in the colony, and is
well qualified for his present post by previous habits and experience.
He was Lieutenant of the Detachment of Mounted Police, sent to
ascertain the fate of Mr, Ounniagham, the Botanist, who accompanied
Sir Thomas Mileholl on his, expedition to explore the Darling,
wandered from the party, and was killed by the blacks on the Bogan
at an early period of the journey,
THE THEN A.
The Tnena is a tributary of the Abercrombie. River, and joins it
from the southern side. It is about 18 miles long from its source to
its junction with the river, and geld has been found on it throughout
16 miles of this distance. The place where the greatest number of
diggers is concentrated, and where the greatest amount of work has
been done, is about 6 or 8 miles, above the junction of the creek.
The number of persons on tbe creek at present is very small, not
more by Mr. Zouch’s account than 150, but it must be remembered
that Commissioners always see fewer gold diggers than other parlies, for
a very obvious reason. There was formerly a much greater number
of persons on the creek, and lately there were many new arrivals,
but the news respecting the Ovens drew away a large portion of the
old diggers, and the new hands followed their example, Mr. Zouch
thinks that the regular diggers on the Tuena. took pains to give all
new arrivals an unfavourable idea of the place
The diggings are on the hanks of the creek, being what are called
“ dry diggings.” The holes are from 10 to 15 feet deep, and some
parties have tunnelled on the rock and done well, though not so
well as was expected. The diggings are chiefly, however, confined
to the surface, and very few parties will take the trouble of sinking.
It certainly seems strange that where the surface diggings are so rich
and have proved so remunerative, the bed rook haft net been found to
contain any extensive deposits of the precious metal,
There have been many instances of great success at the Tuena.
Qne party of six last September got 150 o.zs. in the dry diggings on
what is called Liverpool Point. It haft this name in the same way
as Maitland Bar at the Meroo and many other places, because
the chief portion of the diggers on it are from Liverpool and jts vicir
nity, and Mr. Zouch gives them a high character for steadiness, and
industry. Many other parties have obtained as much as-10, 15> and
20 ozs. in a day. The gold has been got from 3; oz. nuggets down
to fine dust.
Nobody is working the bed of the creek, as it will he impossible
to do so for some time, in consequence of the height of the water.
Yery sanguine expectations are entertained, and it seems with
justice, of the richness, of the Tuena,bed. During,some dry weather.


one party attempted to work it, and they could have made three or
four ozs. a day regularly, if the water had not interfered with them.
The Tuena is represented as being just the Turon in miniature.
It has a hill similar to Ration Hill, and points resembling Mundy,
Sheepstation, and the Commissioner’s Points. Quartz is seen
everywhere in the greatest abundance. The pasture land in the
vicinity is much ricfier than at the Turon. An auriferous quartz
vein has been discovered at Nobb’s farm, about 8 miles from
the Tuena diggings. There are some diggers here at work on pri-
vate land, doing very well.
The number of licenses which it is probable will be issued for the
present month, at the Tuena, is upwards of 100. There are no
public-houses on the creek, though there is reason to suppose that
there are one or two sly grog-shops, but they keep themselves very
quiet. There are 3 stores and some butchers’ shops, and provisions,
are as reasonable as elsewhere. The Tuena has a never-failing
supply of good water at all seasons.
The Abercrombie River, which it is well known is the upper part
of the Lachlan, resembles the Turon on a large scale, being about
double the size. There is much the same formation of banks and
points, and the soil in the vicinity, and the appearance of the bed
of the river are similar to those of the Turon. The Abercrombie
has several tributary creeks besides the Tuena—the Mulgunnia, the
Grove, Isabella, and Copperhannia Creeks, and the Little River—on
all of which gold has been found, and on some of which, the Copper-
hannia and Mulgunnia, I believe, diggers are at present at work.
The Abercrombie has never been properly tried. A few parties
wrought for a time near the Sounding Rock, but did not persevere.
Some parties have made’as much as 8 ozs. a day crevicing among the
rooks, but it Was merely on the surface. No one ever took the
trouble to sink a shaft in any place.
It must be evident from the few particulars I have just stated
respecting the Abercrombie and the Tuena, that a vast and a rich
gold field exists in this district almost wholly untouched. Mr. Zouch
was for several months Commissioner at the Turon, and of course
is pretty well competent to judge of the probable capabilities of the
Abercrombie district. He describes the indications presented by the
latter as being fully as promising as those of the former, both
in respect of the rocks which are present, the great water action
which has formerly taken place, and the alluvial deposits in the vi-
cinity of the stream. When we shall have more knowledge of the
rich districts in the interior, yet unexplored, than we have at present,
the Abercrombie, and its tributaries, will stand high in our list of
auriferous streams.
i’. Ccnninghame, Pbintee, 113, Eixs Stkbet East, Sydney.


