

"' EWAN’S •• |
GEOGRAPHY |
OF THE 0' ~
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES, i
m
h — t n
Price One Shilling. fi
, <** r


/y f &


THE
GEOGRAPHY
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS, AND ADAPTED TO THE
SCHOOL MAPS OF AUSTRALIA AT PRESENT IN USE.
BY JAMES EWAN,
■>o J
Fbllow of the Educational Institute op Scotland; Author of an
Epitome of Modem Geography, and First Reading Book for School*.
PRINTED BY WILLIAM NATION, HARRINGTON STREET; AND PUBLISHED BY
W. AND F. FORD, GEORGE STREET;
AND TO BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.
[Price One Shilling.]




PREFACE.
In preparing the following Geography of Australia, I h ave en-
deavoured to collect as large an amount of information as possible,
stated in as brief and concise terms as is consistent with a work ex-
pressly intended for the use of schools. From the very nature of
the work it may easily be conceived that I lay no claim to the
possession or introduction of any original information in regard to
the Australian colonies. Accuracy of statement, with an arrange-
ment of the materials, adapted to the capacities of those who may
have to use it as a Text Book, is all that I have aimed at, or at-
tempted to accomplish : —my main object being the compilation of a
simple and useful Geography, easy and pleasant for the Pupils,
practical and full of subjects of examination for the Teacher.
For the purpose of obtaining accuracy of statement, I have availed
myself of every work whose information could be depended upon ;
and for the purpose of adopting the least objectionable arrangement
I have not only been guided by my own experience acquired as a
public teacher during the last twenty years ; but have likewise
studied the Reports of Her Majesty’s Committee of Privy Council
on Education, in which the various methods of teaching Geography
in Britain, Prussia and America, occupy a very conspicuous place.
To such Teachers as may be desirous of introducing this little
work into their schools, I would here very briefly explain my own
method of using it. The pupils should be required to commit to
memory pages 5 and 6 ; the subjects being explained to them as
stated in the article “ Physical Geography ” in my “ Epitome of
Modern Geography for advanced classes.” The information con-
tained in pages 7 to 31 is not committed to memory, but is carefully
read in the class, a portion of about a page, or a page and a half
being the lesson for two or three successive days, according to the
nature of the subject treated of; a strict examination, by catechising
the pupils with closed books, being made each day by the Teacher,
thus Discovery of Australia, page’?.—.
“What nations lay claim to the discovery of Australia ? Did any
na'ion know of the existence of Australia previous to its discovery
by Europeans ? What Spanish nobleman sailed from Peru for the
discovery of Australia? How many ships had he under his com-
mand ? Who was his second Officer ? Wlun did he sail ? Where
is Peru ? By what name was this supposed continent then known ?
What led Europeans to suppose the existence of such a continent ? What,
is the meaning of the term Australia ? W hat land did Quiros discover ?
By what name is the land discovered by Quiros now known ? PouH
it out on the Map. Is it a portion of Australia ? AVho first dis-
covered that it was not a portion of Australia ? When did TorresO"
make this discovery ? How was Torres engaged after bjs separation
from the Admiral? What strai's are now called after f oms/and


where are they ? When and by whom was Torres straits first dis-
covered ? Whal circumstances led to so many noblemen about this time
engaging in voyages of discovery ?” (See article, “ Henry the Navigator”
in uiy Epitome ot Modern Geograph}). &c. &c * Besides proceed-
ing in this way through the general information contained in the
above pages, the Pupils are required to commit daily a short task to
memory beginning at page 34, they being occasionally exercised on
the towns Sc. on the map as they advance. The information con-
tained in the Notes under the Topography of Australia being taken
\tp after the General Information is concluded. This plan pursued
steadily and perseveringly will convey to the pupils a minute know-
ledge of the Geography of this country, in a manner pleasing to them-
selves and satisfactory to their teachers.
J. E.
Free Church Normal School,
Sydney, Jan. 27th 1851.
* The answers to the questions in Italic will not Be found in the Text.
The reason is obvious, children are delighted when their curiosity is awakened,
and when such questions are put and not answeied, the Teacher should
leave them unanswered till the next day, when in all probabilitv he will find
that they have been endeavouring to find out what he wants. Hence a
Geography with questions and answers is a positive injury to the pupils.
Irksome and uninteresting because it is learnt by lote —urdnsti active, because
they study to learn the words, not to acquire a knowledge oi the informa-
tion communicated. A facility in catechisng is an essential requisite of a
good teacher, and if he wants this facility he should labour most assiduously
to acquire it ; but it should always be remembered that no teacher can cate-
chise his pupils efficiently, unless he thoi oughly understands the subject on
which he is endeavouring to instinct them.
Wk '■ j C-r
- <25 (iteMjy.


Boundaries of Australia .. .. ..7
Historical sketch ol the discovery of Australia .. .. G
Historical sketch of the causes which led to the formation of the
Biitish settlements in Australia .. 9
Formation of the Settlement of New South Wales .. ..10
Historical sketch of the Jurther progress of discoveries in
Australia .. .. .. ~11
Discoveries in the Interior of Australia .. 12
Historical sketch of the Governors of New Souih Wales .. *l5
List of Governors and Lieutenant Governors of New South
Wales with the dates of their accession to office ~ IS
Remarkable events which have occurred since tlie settlement of
the Colony ~ .. ~ ..17
List of Mayors of the city of Sydney .. ..19
List of Mayors of the city of Melbourne ~ ]y
Physical Geography of Australia .. .. 19
Vegetable Productions of Australia.. .. ..21
Total number of acres under cultivation for Agricultural pur-
poses. &c. .. .. .. .. 22
Total number if acres in cultivation as Vineyards &c., from
1843 to 1850 ~ ~ ~ ~22
Historical sketch ot the Aborigines of Australia, their manners,
customs, &c. .. .. ... ..22
Animals of Australia .. ~ ~ 24
Amount of Live Stock in the colony from 1843 to 1850 .. 24
Historical sketch of the introduction of fine woolled sheep to
Australia .. .. ~ ..24
Captain Macarthur’s statement to the British government in re-
gard to the introduction of line wooded sheep ~ 25
Decision ot the Privy Council in regard to the introduction of fine
woolled sheep .. .. ..27
Abstract of the Squatting regu ations presently in force in Aus-
tralia .. .. .. ..28
Quantity of hue woo! shipped from Australia from ISO 7 to 1850 30
The'Settlers ai d ( olonists of Australia ... ~ gy
Political and Statistical Geography of Australia .. 30
Form of Government .. ... ..30
Laws and Courts in Australia .. .. 31
nan* .i 11 u v_/ v» ci iis in iXUs>ll cUI3 . . •• Oi
Police in Australia ~ ~ .. 30
Religion in Australia .. ~ ~ .. 30
Monetary System and Finance .. ~ ~ 33
Bank Notes in circulation, deposits, paid up capital &c , as at
June 30th, 1850 .. ~ .. ~ 3*3
The Exports and Imports of Australia Irom 18 40 to 1850 .. 33
Topography of Australia .. ~34
Counties and towns ol New South Wales, the physical character
of the counties, with the situation of the towns, their popu-
lation and distances from Sydney ~ 34
The Unity Northern Counties of New South Wales with the
towns, their position and population .. 39


The seventeen Southern and Western counties of New South
Wales, with the towns, their position and population .. 40
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours of New South Wales .. 41
Islands of New South Wales .. ~ .. 41
Capes and headlands of New South Wales .. 41
Mountains of New South Wales .. .. .. 41
Rivera of New South Wales to the east of the Blue Mountains 42
Rivers of New South Wales to the west ot the Blue Mountains .. 44
•Boundar'es of the colony of VICTORIA ~ 45
Counties of Victoria .. ... ~ .. 45
\>UUlHlco Ul r IClUriu • 4 »s § ) • | iv
Principal towns in Victoria with their situation and distances
from Melbourne ..46
Gulfs and Bays in Victoria .. .. ..46
Capes and headlands of Victoria .. .. ~46
Mountains of Victoria .. .. ~ ..46
Rivers of Victoria flowing to the South .. ~ ..46
Rivers of Victoria flowing towards the Interior .. ..47
Lakes in Victoria .. .. .. ..47
Boundaries of the colony of SOUTH AUSTRALIA .. 47
Conditions on which the colony of South Australia was founded
(note ) .. .. .. .. ..47
Counties of South Australia .. .. ..47
Principal towns of South Australia, with their situation &c. .. 47
Lead and Copper Mines of South Australia .. ..48
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours of South Australia .. ..48
Capes and headlands of South Australia .. ..48
Islands belonging to South Australia ~ .. .. 48
Mountains of South Australia .. .. .. 48
Rivers of South Australia .. .. ..49
Lakes of South Australia .. .. .. .. 49
Boundaries of the colony of WESTERN AUSTRALIA .. 49
Counties of Western Australia .. .. .. 49
Principal towns of Western Australia, with their position, &c. 49
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours of Western Australia .. 50
Capes and headlands of Western Australia •• ..50
Islands of Western Australia .. .. .. 50
Mountains of Western Australia .. ... . .. 50
Rivers of Western Australia .. .. ..50
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA, its Rivers, Bays, Capes &c. .. 51
Boundaries of the Colony of TASMAN IA .. .. 51
Historical account of the settlement of the colony of Tasmania ... 51
Counties of Tasmania ~ .. .. •• 52
Principal towns of Tasniania, with their position, and distances
from Hobart Town and Launceston .. ..52
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours of Tasmania .. •• 53
Capes and headlands of Tasmania .. .. •• 53
Islands of Tasmania .. .. .. .. 53
Mountains of Tasmania .. .. .. •• 53
Rivers of Tasmania .. .. .« ..53
Islands in Bass's Straits, between Australia and Tasmania .. 54
Errata .. .. •• •• ..54


GEOGRAPHICAL TERMS.
Geography is a description of the earth. It makes known
to us the form of the earth, and the position, names, and
figures of its several parts.
The top of a map is North / the bottom, South ;to the
right hand is the East ; and to the left hand is the West.
A great circle, equally distant from each of the poles, is
represented as dividing the earth into two equal parts,
called the Northern aud Southern Hemispheres. This circle
is called the Equator.
Other circles are represented as passing through the poles
and dividing the earth into equal parts, called the Eastern
and Western Hemispheres. These circles are called Meri-
dians.
The distance of a place north or south from the equator,
is called its Latitude \ the distance of a place east or west
from the first meridian, is called its Longitude.
The polar circles are, the Arctic Circle twenty-three de-
grees and a half from the North Pole; and the Antarctic
Circle, the same distance from the South Pole.
The Tropics are, the Tropic of Cancer, twenty-three de-
grees and a half north from the equator ; and the Tropic
of Copricomn twenty-three degrees and a half south from
the equator.
By the polar circles and the tropics the globe is divided
into five portions, called Zones, viz, the North and South
Frigid Zones, th North and South Temperate Zones, and
the Torrid Zone. The North Frigid Zone is between the
Arctic Circle and the North Pole ; the South Frigid Zone,
between the Antarctic Circle and the South Pole; the
North Temperate Zone, between the Arctic Circle and the
Tropic of Cancer ; the South Temperate Zone, between the
Antarctic Circle and the Tropic of Capricorn ; the Torrid
Zone, between the Tropics.
The surface of the earth presents the tw r o grand divisions
of Land and Water.
The Land is subdivided into Continents, Countries , Is-


lands, Peninsulas, Promontories, Capes, Isthmuses and
Coasts or Shores.
The subdivisions of the water are— Oceans, Seas, Lakes,
Gulfs, Bays, Harbours, Creeks, Straits, Estuaries or
Friths, and Rivers.
A Continent is a very large portion of land,
A Country is a smaller portion of land, known by a
particular name, and occupied by a particular people.
An Island is land surrounded by water.
A Peninsula is land almost surrounded by water.
A Gape is the point of a promontory. This is likewise
called a Naze or Ness, a Point, a Head or Midi.
An Isthmus is a narrow neck of land between two seas
uniting two portions of land.
A Coast or Shore is the edge or margin of the land next
the sea.
An Ocean is a vast expanse of salt water.
A Sea is a smaller extent of salt water.
A Lake is water surrounded by land.
A Gulf is a body of water nearly surrounded by land.
A Bay is a portion of water running into the land, but
not nearly surrounded by it, A Harbour or Haven is a
small bay.
An Estuary or Frith, is a portion of the sea running into
the land with a large river falling into it.
A Creek or Inlet is a narrow portion of water running
into the land.
A Strait or Sound is a narrow passage of water connect-
ing two seas.
A Channel is a broader passage of w r ater.
A River is a stream of fresh water flowing through the
land into the sea, or into another river.*
• For detailed explanations of the above terms, &c., see the
article “ Physical Geography ” in “ the Epitome of Geography.”


AUSTRALIA.
Australia, the largest island in the world, is bounded on the North by
Torres’ Straits and the Sea of Timor, which separate it from New
Guinea and the Moluccas ; on the East by the Pacific Ocean ; on the
South by Bass’s Straits, which separate it from Tasmania or Van Die-
mn’s Land, and by the South Pacific Ocean ; and on the West by the
Indian Ocean. It lies between 10 ° and 39 ° of south latitude, and
between 112° and 153° east longitude: measuring about 1,800
miles from north to south, and about 2, 300 miles from east to west,
being supposed to contain about 2£ millions of square miles, with a
coast line of about 8,000 miles.
DISCOVERY 01 AUSTRALIA. The French, English, Dutch,
and Spanish lay claim to the discovery of Australia, but there are
strong reasons for believing that the Chinese were aware of its exist-
ence previous to its discovery by Europeans. In 1605 Don Pedro
Fernandez de Quires, a Spanish nobleman sailed with three vessels
from Peru, one of his objects being to discover “ the great South
Land,” which was supposed to occupy a considerable portion of the
southern hemisphere lying westward of America.' Quiros, after the
discovery of several islands, came to a land which he named
Australia del Espiritu Santo (the Cyclades of Bougainville, and the
Hebrides of Captain Cook,) supposing it to be a part of the
great southern continent; but Luis Vaes de Torres, his second in
command after his separation from the Admiral found that the territory
discovered was an island. Torres continued his discoveries and
spent months in the navigation of the Straits, now called by his
name, which separate Australia from New Guinea. About the
same time the Dutch yacht Duyfhen, was despatched from Bantam
to explore the coasts of New Guinea, and sailed along what was
thought to be the west coast of that country, as far as 13-£o south
latitude, but which was really a portion ol Australia. In 1616 Cap-
tain Dirk Hartog commander of the outward bound Dutch East
India ship Endraght saw the coast of Australia, in 26| south lati-
tude, and sailing northward to 23° south latitude, gave the name
Land-de-Endraght to the country so discovered. In 1618 the
Mauritius, another outward bound Dutch ship, touched at Willems’
river near the North West Cape. In 1619 Captain Edel, commanding
another ship belonging to the same nation, discovered the land from
290 to 26° south latitude, and called it after his own name; and in
1620, the ship Leuwin touched the land as far south as 35° giving


the name to the Cape in latitude 340 9’ longitude 1150 6'. The
Dutch yachts Pera and Arnheim were desj atched in 1623, from
Amboyna for the further discovery of New Guinea: Carstens, the
commander of the expedition, was murdered in New Guinea
together with eight of his crew; but the survivors pursued their
voyage, and discovered what they called thegreat islands of Arnheim
and the Spujt: the Arnheim returned to Amboyna, the Pera pro-
ceeded along the west coast to Cape Keer Weer (Cape Turnagain
where the Duyfhen had been,) and from thence explored the coast
further south as far as 17° latitude; the land was then seen stretch-
ing to the Westward, and the Pera returned to Ambovna. The south
coast of Australia was discovered in January 1627 by the Dutch
ship Guide Zeepaard ; it was called Nuyt’s Land, but whether Pieter
who was afterwards ambassador at the court of Japan and governor
of Formosa, was at the time captain of the ship, cannot be now ascer-
tained. In 1628 the Vianen, one of the ships which returned to Europe
under the command of general Carpenter saw the coast ■ in 1629
Francisco Pelsert commander of the Batavia, was shipwrecked upon
a reef called the Abrolhos, or rocks of Frederic Houtman, lying off
the west coast about latitude 28° 13' south, whence coasting along
in his boat to 22° 17' he proceeded to Batavia, and obtained°assist-
ance for some of his people left behind him; and in 1636 Gerrit
Tomaz Pool was sent from Banda with the yachts Klyn, Amsterdam
and Wezel, on a similar expedition to that of Carstens, gpd on his
meeting with the same fate, his crews pursued their voyage and
coasted along the Arnheim coast for 120 miles south of 110 latitude
without seeing any people.
TheDuich government of Bataviabeing anxiousto ascertain howfar
the south coast of ‘ the great unknown land,' extended towards the Ant-
arctic circl ’, despatched Captain Abel Jans Tasman from Batavia in
1642, with two vessels. Tasman after touching at the Mauritius
steered south and east, and on the 24th November 1642, made some
high land in 400 south latitude, and 163° 50' east of Teneriffe
which he named in honour of the governor-general “ Anthony Van
Dieman's Land.” Having sailed along the south coast of Van Die-
man’s Land without even supposing it to be an island he then
proceeded to the eastward. In his second voyage of discovery in
1644, he sailed round the Gulf of Carpentaria and then west-
ward and southward. In 1663, Thevenot published his chart of the
west coast of the great South Land or Nova Hollandia, as he calls
it, giving a connected outline of the coast.. In 1688, the western
coast was visited by the celebrated navigator Dampier with bis Buc-
caneers, where they careened, and refitted their ships in about 16°
south latitude; he also again visited the west and north-west coasts
in his Majesty’s ship Roebuck.
In 1768, the British government despatched Lieutenant (after-
wards Captain) Cook in the ship Endeavour accompanied by Mr
(afterwards Sir Joseph) Banks, and the Swedish Naturalist Dr
Solander, for the purpose of making discoveries in the Pacific Ocean.
Having obsemed the transit of Venus at Otaheite, JuneS, 1769 and
carefully explored the neighbouring islands, he, on the ’2oth April


1 1 70, sighted the Ram’s bead near Cape Howe in Australia, and on
the 28th of the same month anchored in Botany Bay near Sydney.
On the 30th of April he buried one of his crew named Forbes
Sutherland, and from that circumstance he called the point which the
land forms at that part of the bay where the man was interred,
Sutherland Point, Having carefully surveyed the south-east coast,
he returned to Britain and was raised to the rank of Master and
Commander in the British navy. In 1772 Captain Marian, a French
Officer with two ships, skirted the coast in search of the supposed
southern continent. In July 177‘i, Captain Cook again sailed for the
South Seas having under his command two ships the Resolution com-
manded by himself, and the Adventure commanded by Captain Fur-
neaux. In 1773 the Adventure made the West Cape, and steered east
close to the rocks called Maatsuyker’s bv Tasmati, snd afterwards an-
chored in Tasman’s Storm Bay, which he called Adventure Bay, (not
however, the Storm Bay of the present charts, but D’Entrecasteaux’s
channel which runs inland for ten leagues, and then communicates with
the true Storm Bay of Tasman.) Captain Furneaux then sailed along
the coast of Van Dieman’s Land, to discover whether it was joined to
New Holland, or was a peninsula running out from the mainland ; but
he returned home giving it as his opinion, that “there was no strait
between Van Dieman’s Land and New Holland, but only a very deep
Bay.
Whilst these important discoveries were being made by Captain
Cook in the Southern Ocean, events which led to the colonization of
Australia were occurring in another quarter ot the world. A century
before (1607) Britain had formed colonies in North America, and
to these colonies she had been in the habit of sending her criminal
population, until by voluntary emigration, and involuntary exportation,
the various British colonies in America had become a great and
powerful nation. In 1764? the Parliament of Great Britain passed
an Act continuing the duties on certain articles imported into the
colonies; in 1765 the Stamp Act was passed, and soon after a bill
was brought in authorising the quartering of troops in the colonies.
These acts of the Imperial Legislature were received in America with
universal opposition, and a General Congress (or Assembly) of the
colonies was held at New York, which adopted a declaration of
rights and grievances, asserting, taxation by themselves alone, and trial
by Jury, as the inherent right of British Subjects in her colonies. In
this state of affairs in the colonies, the Stamp Act was repealed
(March 18, 1766), but at the same time, a declaratory Act was
passed, maintaining the right of parliament to bind the colonies in all
cases whatever. Carrying out this principle, June 1767, an Act
was passed imposing duties on glass, paper, pasteboard, white and
red lead, painters’ colours, and tea. This Act increased the exasper-
ation of the American Colonists, and the duties on the articles above
specified were repealed, excepting the duty on tea which was con-
tinued. The colonists immediately ceased to use it, or procured it
from foreign countries, and the British Ministry feeling themselves
defeated by this act of the colonists, in 1773, procured the passage of
an Act enabling the East India Company (by giving them a draw-


back on all teas imponed to America,) to sell them after paying the
duties imposed by the Act of 1767, at a cheaper rate than they could
be purchased from any foreign country. Large shipments were
made, but in Philadelphia and New York, the vessels were not al-
lowed to land their cargoes; in Charlestown it was put into stores but
not permitted to be offered for sale ; and in Boston, where the British
Authorities refused to allow the vessels to return, without having
been entered, the tea was thrown overboard. Thus the American War
broke out, which terminated in the complete separation of the
Colonies from the British crown and the formation of a new and in-
dependent empire, established on purely democratic principles,
under the title of “ The United States of North America.”
SETTLEMENT OF AUSTRALIA. Britain thus deprived of
its usual depot for criminals, now availed itself of the important dis-
coveries of Captain Cook, and accordingly in 1786 the Commissioners
of the British Navy advertised for vessels to convey, from seven to
eight hundred prisoners of both sexes, to a settlement to be formed
by them, on the coast of New South Wales.* Captain Arthur
Phillip was appointed to the command of the squadron, and also to
the office of governor, as soon as they should land at the place of
their destination. He hoisted Ihs flag in the Sirius, with Comman-
der Hunter as second, and Lieutenant Ball as third in command.
Captain Phillip had six transports and three storeships with a de-
tachment of about two hundred soldiers. The number of convicts
taken out, was 757, of whom 192 were women.
The fleet sailed from England on 13th May 1787, and after touch-
ing at Teneriffe, steered for Rio Janeiro, where they were provided
with plants or seeds of coffee, cocoa, cotton, banana, orange, lemon,
guava, tamarind, prickly pear, rose apple, ipecacuanha and jalap.
Leaving Rio, they steered for the Cape of Good Hope, where their
stock of vegetables Tor culture was augmented by the fig tree, sugar-
cane, bamboo, the Spanish reed, various species of the vine, the
apple, the pear, the quince, the strawberry, the oak and the myrtle.
They also took on board a limited number of horses, cattle, sheep,
goats and hogs, for the purpose of continuing the breed of these an-
imals in the new colony. On the 20th January 1788, they anchored
in safety in Botany Bay. They had been out eight months, includ-
ing stoppages, and during that time they had sailed over a distance
of about 16,000 miles, equal to nearly two-thirds of the circumference
of the globe. On landing at Botany Bay, they found the country
barren and deficient in the supply of fresh water, so that they resol-
ved to seek for a more eligible site for the colony. Accordingly
Captain Phillip, little suspecting that one of the finest harbours in
the world was within a few miles distance to the northward, proceeded
* The objects to be accomplished by the formation of the Colony were
thus defined. “ Ist. To rid the mother country of the yearly increasing: num-
bers of prisoners, who were accumulating: in the gaols; 2nd. To afford a
proper place for the safe custody and punishment of the criminals, as well as
for their progressive and ultimate reformation; 3rd. Jo form afreeCoionv
out of the materials which the reformed prisoners would supply, in addi-
tion to families of free emigrants, who might settle in the country from time
to time.” —Sic fords Etruria crevit,


with three boats and some of bis officers to examine what Captain
Cook had termed Broken Bay ; but while proceeding thither, he
resolved to examine an inlet, which in Cook’s chart, was marked as a
boat harbour, and to which he had given the name of Port Jackson,
after the seaman at the mast head, who had first descried it while on
the look-out. Having entered within the heads and discovered the
large and commodious harbour, he immediately resolved to make it
the capital of the infant colony. The whole fleet removed from
Botany Bay to Port Jackson, and the colony was founded on the 26th
January 1788, at the head of Sydney Cove, the town being named
after the Right Honourable Lord Sydney, at that time the first Lord
of the Admiralty. On the morning of the 24th January 1788 previous
to the removal of the fleet from Botany Bay, two large slips under
French colours were seen making for the land. These were the
Broussole and Astrolabe , French discovery ships, under the command
of the unfortunate La Perouse. They had lost M. de I’Angle, the
junior captain, with several officers and seamen, and both the ships’
long boats, in an unfortunate skirmish with the natives at the Navi-
gators’ Islands, and had reached the coast to refit for the prosecution
of their voyage. M. de la Perouse remained nearly two months in
New South Wales, during which a mutual interchange of civilities
was kept up between the English and French officers, and during
this period M. le Receveur, a French priest, of the order of Friars
Minims, who accompanied the French expedition in the capacity of
Naturalist, died of wounds he had received at the Navigators’ Islands,
and was buried at Botany Bay.' Shortly after La Perouse sailed from
Botany Bay, both vessels struck one stormy night on a dangerous
coral reef off the Manicolo or Malicolo Islands, to the northward and
eastward of Port Jackson. None of the survivors ever reached
Europe. *
On the 27th January 1788 (the day after the founding of the colony)
every man was set to work. Captain Phillip marking off the sites
for the buildings, storehouses &c; the ground was cleared, tents
pitched, the live stock landed, (consisting of one bull, four cows, one
bull calf, one stallion, three mares, and three colts,) the stores de-
posited, and the little colony established amounting in all to 1030
individuals. On the 7th February 1788 the new government was
promulgated, Captain Phillip being proclaimed the first Governor
General of New South Wales.
THE FURTHER PROGRESS OF DISCOVERIES IN AUS-
TRALIA.—In 1791 the south coast of Australia was visited by
Captain George Vancouver, on his way to the north-west coast of
America ; he made the land on the 26th September at Cape Chatham
in 35° 3’ south latitude and 116° 35’ east longitude; he then sailed
east along the coast till the 28th when he anchored in a sound, and
named it after King George 111. (King George’s Sound.) Bad
weather prevented his doing more than verifying a part of the coast
laid down in Nuyt’s chart of 1627. In 1792 Brune D’Entrecasteaux,
a French rear-admiral, with two ships of war, La Recherche and
L’Esperance, made the coast of Van Dleman’s Land to obtain sup-
plies of wood and water, and while intending to enter the Storm


Bay of Tasman, he entered the Adventure Bay of Furneaux, up
which he sailed thirty miles, and found it to be separated by a small
island from Storm Bay. The island he named Brune, and the chan-
nel D’Entrecasteaux, and then sailed to the eastward without making
any further discoveries. After the formation of the settlement at Port
Jackson, attention was paid to the eastern and southern shores; and
Mr Bass, surgeon of the Reliance, and Lieutenant (afterwards Cap-
tain) Flinders with a boy, in a little boat called “Tom Thumb”
eight feet long, commenced a survey of the coast. Mr Bass was
afterwards reinforced with a whale boat, six men and six weeks pro-
visions. In this open boat and in boisterous weather, he'explored the
coast for 600 miles, entered what Furneaux considered a deep bay, and
became satisfied that there was a strait separating Van Dieman’s Land
from New Holland. On his return to Sydney, Governor Hunter was in-
duced to verify the result of Mr. Bass’s observations, by sending Lieu-
tenant Flinders and Mr Bass in the colonial schooner Norfolk, of
25 tons burden ; with this little vessel they sailed through the strait
now called Bass’s strait, and by circumnavigating Van Dieman’s
Land demonstrated, for the first time, its insularity. In 1800 Grant
discovered the coast to the west of Bass’s strait up to Cape North-
umberland ; and this portion of the mainland from its discoverer
was called Grant’s Land,
TOPOGRAPHICAL DIS r OVERIES IN AUSTRALIA.-
Previous to the year 1813 all the settlements were situated at no
great distance from the sea coast, on the belt of land more or less
narrow, between it and the Blue mountains ; but at the close of that
year these mountains were, for the first time crossed by Mr Evans
the deputy-surveyor of the colony. On reaching the opposite side,
he found the herbage to be extremely good, the vadleys well watered,
and the mountain streams running to the westwatW To two of these
which assumed the character of rivers, he gave the name of the Fish,
and the Campbell, and to their united streams that of THE
MACQUARIE. He pursued its course for ten days, passing over
rich tracts of country, clear of timber, well watered and abounding
with kangaroos and emus. To this new and promising region,
Governor Macquarie gave immediate directions for a road to be
made, passable by carriages, which, though extending in length up-
wards of 100 miles, was completed early in 1815, and over which
the Governor proceeded in person, in the spring of that year, as far
as Bathurst plains. From this place the Governor despatched John
Oxley Esq. R.N. the Surveyor-General of the colony, with a party
to examine the country to the south-west, in which direction another
river had been discovered, afterwards named the Lachlan. On
reaching the point of the Lachlan river, where it becomes navigable,
the country assumed the appearance of a perfect level, and the soil
seemed poor, except on the banks, which were high and steep, and
on which alone large trees were found growing. The width of the
river was here from 30 to 40 yards The country was evidently
subject to inundations, and as the travellers proceeded, they found the
grass in some places nearly breast high, coarse, thick and so en-
tangled as to be almost impenetrable; in oilier places were extensive


swamps, interspersed with dwarf box and gum trees; swans and
other water fowl were in great abundance. The navigation of the
river was frequently interrupted by fallen trees, and so winding was
its course, that the distance by water was nearly three times that by
land. On the 11th May, the party had reached a spot of the dead
level through which the river flowed, where it appeared to lose itself
in a multitude of branches among marshy flats; and where a rise of
four feet would have been sufficient to sweep them all away, since
there was not within sight the smallest eminence to retreat to. Mr
Oxley therefore determined to strike off to the south-west for Cape
Northumberland, knowing, that if any river emptied itself into Bass’s
strait, between Spencer’s Gulf and Cape Otway, that course would
intersect it; and that, if the Lachlan united itself into one stream
beyond the marshes, he would thus be most likely to fall in with it.
The party accordingly commenced their journey, and at the end of
five weeks came again unexpectedly, upon the banks of the Lachlan,
much diminished in size, but still running in a tolerably brisk stream
towards the westward. The country over which they had travelled to
gain this part ot the river, was of the most miserable description,
and the sufferings of the party from fatigue and want of water, were
very great. In some places they fell in with a little grass in patches,
just sufficient to keep their cattle alive, but this was of rare occur-
rence. “It is impossible,” says Mr. Oxley, “to imagine a more des-
olate region ; and the uncertainty we are in, whilst traversing it, of
finding water, adds to the melancholy feelings which the silence and
solitude of such wastes are calculated to inspire.” As the party ad-
vanced to the north-west, they came to a low range of stoney hills,
equally barren with the sandy deserts which they had passed ; these,
however, abounded with dogs, whose bowlings were incessant by day
as well as by night. As there was no appearance of any kind of
game, it was concluded that the principal sustenance of these wild
animals must be rats, which had undermined the whole country. On
the 23rd June the appearance of a flock of large kangaroos, ot emus
and bustards, and the change of the soil from loose sand to stiff ten-
acious clay, bearing evident n arks of occasional inundations, left
little doubt on the minds of the party, that a river would be met with
at no great distance: and accordingly they all at once found them-
selves on the banks ot the Lachlan, the course of which they now
determined to follow. The face of the country continued to present a
dead level on all sides, and the neighbourhood of the river was full of
bogs and swamps. Our travellers still proceeded down the stream
till on the 7tb July, it became evident that the channel was the bed
only of a lagoon, the current being now imperceptible, and the waters
and morasses so intercepting each other, as to render all further pro-
gress impossible. The wafer was muddy, and the odour arising from
the banks and marshy ground, offensive in the extreme. Mr. Oxley
now determined to return, concluding rather summarily, that the inter-
ior of this vast country was a marsh and uninhabitable. “ Perhaps,” he
says, ” there is no river (he history of which is known, that presents
so remarkable a termination as the present; its course in a straight
line from its source to its termination exceeds 500 miles, and includ-


ing its windings, it may fairly be calculated to run at least 1,200
miles; during all which passage, through such a vast extent of coun-
try, it does not receive a single stream in addition to what it derives
from its sources in the Eastern Mountains.”
CAPTAIN STURT went still further to the westward and dis-
covered the river Darling ; he left it running south-west in latitude
30° 20' south, longitude 145° 30' east, beyond which point
nothing was known. He proceeded again in 1830 from Yass Plains
westerly, and keeping along the banks of the river Murrumbidgee,
lie discovered its junction with the Lachlan; descending it in a boar,
he came to a second confluence of a river from the south-west, to
which he gave the name of Murray, and still farther in latitude 34 c ,
he found a third, formed by a river from the north-east, having all the
appearance of the river Darling, which he left in latitude 30° 30'.
Prom this last junction it took him nineteen days to reach the embou-
chure at Lake Alexandrina, and the sea in latitude 139° east, the
farthest point that had ever been reached by an overland journey from
Sydney.
MR. ALLAN CUNNINGHAM King’s botanist, and to whose
memory a monument is erected in the Botanical Gardens, Sydney,
setting out from Paterson’s River in la ilude 322°, travelled 300
miles northward to the parallel of 28<> (Moreton BayJ, keeping al-
ways on the west side of the mountains, and generally at the distance
of about 150 miles from the coast. The first track he crossed was
Liverpool Plains, and beyond this be found some tracts of good soil,
but the country taken generally, was of the same description with
that previously known, the only fertile land consisting of a stripe
extending along the back of the chain of mountains, which changes
gradually into barren plains as you proceed inwards. Extensive
downs, affording the finest pasturage for sheep, with a soil formed
by the decomposition of whinstone, is the general characteristic of
the country, while numerous rivulets all running to the northward
and westward, and rich flats for cultivation, offer every inducement
for a speedy settlement of the country.
SIR THOMAS LIVINGSTONE MITCHELL, the present
Surveyor General, made three expeditions into the interior 1832-36.
He penetrated farther than Sturt, and met the Darling in latitude
290. He also was the first who laid open to European enterprise
the splendid country which he has called Australia Felix, now known
as the colony of VICTORIA, of which the Capital is Melbourne.
DR. LEICHHARDT made an overland journey from Moreton
Bay to Port Essington, which occupied about thirteen months. Ihe
most important results of which were, the discovery of numerous
rivers, fine countries, and a communication between the east and
north-west coasts of Australia ; he is at present engaged in an over-
land journey from Sydney to the Swan River settlement, the results
of which are unknown.
In 1846, SIR T. L. MITCHELL’S fourth expedition was pro-
ductive of many valuable di coveries ; and whilst ihe surveys of Mr.
Tyers, between Port Phillip and the river Glenelg : —of Mr. Dixon
at Moreton Bay, together with those of P. E. De Strzelecki, at


Gipps’ Land, has added much to our knowledge of these districts:
the labours of the corps of Surveyors, under the superintendence of
the Government, will greatly increase our knowledge of the vast
interior of Australia.
THE GOVERNORS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Captain Arthur Phillip, as already stated, was the first governor of
New South W'ales. Finding his health on the decline, he embarked
for England on the 11th December 1792, carrying with him the best
wishes of the colonists for the noble efforts he had made amidst almost
incredible difficulties. He was succeeded in the government by Cap-
tain Hunter, R.N. 7th August 1795, who had commanded the Sirius
frigate, when the settlement was first formed, and who appears to have
been an honest straightforward seaman; his administration lasted five
years, and during this period the colony made considerable progress ;
several settlers arrived from England, and a regiment called the New
South Wales Corps (afterwards the 102nd regiment of the Line) was
formed. The number of the inhabitants free and bond, was, on Cap-
tain Hunter’s departure in September 1800 about 8000; of these about
2,500 were settled at Sydney, and the remainder at the agricultural
establishments at Parramatta, Prospect, Toongabbee, and Castlehill.
Captain P. G. King R.N. who, as Lieutenant of the Sirius, had
effected the settlement at Norfolk sland, was appointed to succeed
Captain Hunter. His administration lasted for six years and was
distinguished by an outbreak, commonly called “ the Irish Rebellion.”
Several hundred convicts, attached to the establishment at Castlehill,
twenty miles from Sydney, struck for their liberty ; but being only
armed with pikes, were after a brief contest, discomfited by the mili-
tary at Vinegar Hill, a few miles from Parramatta; a few were shot
by the troops, some of the leaders taken and hanged immediately,
and the rest returned quietly to their labour. This is the only in -
stance of an insurrection of the convict population of New ,South
Wales.* Captain William Bligh R.N, next succeeded to the gov-
ernment in August 1806. His acts excited feelings of much dis-
content in the mind of the colonists, and led to his deposition by the
colonists of Sydney, aided by the officers and men of the New South
Wales Corps, after he had been governor for a period of eighteen
* The ludicrous outbreak of the female prisoners at Parramatta may be
here related. The third class prisoners in the female factory there had been
denied their allowance of tea and suear as a punishment for their refractory
conduct. They refused therefore to woik any longer, and after spending two
days in sulkiness, they warned the matron, that, unless their tea and sugar
were restored, they would leave the factory. Mrs Falloon laughed at their
threats. On the third morning 200 of “ the ladies” attacked the workmen,
took from them their hammers and sledges, broke open the prison doors, and
rushed into the town, attacking the bakers’ shops &c. The troops were
ordered out, the light company of H.M. 57th reciment in advance ; the women
beat a retreat towards the hills, while the bugles of the troops sounds da
charge. After various marches and countermarches, thebngles sounded a
parley—the battle was considered a drawn fight—and a treaty agreed to, in
which it was stipulated that “the factory ladies” should march back within
the walls and gates of the factory, with all the honours of war, all delinquencies
being forgiven, and the usual allowance of tea and sugar restored;


months. The government at home now ceased to send naval officers
as governors of the colony, and in accordance with this resolution
Lieutenant-Colonel (afterwards Major-General) Lachlan Macquarie
of the 73rd regiment, assumed the government on the Ist. January,
1810; the New South Wales Corps was ordered home, and the re-
gular troops of the line were enrolled for service in the colony. During
General Macquarie’s administration of twelve years, the colony made
great progress, the population was greatly increased, and by the aid
of a carte blanche on the British Treasury, many public buildings
were erected, —roads constructed, —the fine Bathurst country over
the Blue mountains explored, and several government farms estab-
lished. The convict population received great encouragement from
General Macquarie, his maxim was, to make every convict consider
his European life as a past existence, and his Australian one a new
eia, where he would find “ Honesty to be the best policy, and good
conduct its unfailing reward.” Sir Thomas Brisbane who succeeded
General Macquarie was an amiable and scientific man although defi-
cient in the energy of character displayed by his predecessor. He
governed the colony from Ist December 1821, to 30th November
1825. He was succeeded by Lieutenant General Ralph Darling
who was a governor of no inconsiderable talents. During his ad-
ministration and that of his successor, the price of land in Sydney
and in its vicinity rose to an enormous price. In 1831, Mr Went-
worth sold nearly two acres in the main street of Sydney for £7,800,
which might have been bought ten years before for £350. Six
acres on the Surrey Hills bought by Mr Unwin in 1828 for £650, sold
in 1830 for £lBOO ; in 1828, Madame Rens bought at auction a
frontage in the main street of Sydney of 150 feet, with a depth of 80
feet, for £l2OO, and sold half of the same plot to Mr Jones in 1829,
for £lBOO. These facts shew the rising prosperity of the city. It is,
however, but fair to state, that in various parts of the colony, property
has from time to time been sold much below the original purchase
money; but, upon the whole, the value of landed property has
advanced very considerably. Major General Sir Richard Bourke,
succeeded to the government on the 3rd December 1831, and acted as
overnor till sth December 1837. He, with the assistance of a
Legislative Council, endeavoured to steer a middle course between
the extremes of party, but met with much opposition. He was suc-
ceeded by Sir George Gipps, who held the reins of government till
10th July 1816, when he was succeeded by Sir Charles Augustus
Fitzroy, the present governor of New South Wales,
LIST OF GOVERNORS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
L CAPTAIN ARTHUR PHILLIP, R. N., 7th February, 1788,
to 10th December, 1792.
Captain Francis Grose, (Lieutenant Governor,) 11th December, 1792,
to 14ih December. 1794.
Captain Paterson, New South Wales Corps, (Lieutenant Governor,)
15th December, 1794, to 6th August, 1795.
11. CAPTAIN HUNTER, R.N., 7th August, 1795, to 27th Sep-
tember, 1800.


111. CAPTAIN P. G. KING, R.N, 28th Sptember, 1800, to
12th August, 1806.
IV. CAPTAIN WILLIAM BLIGH, R.N., 13th August, 1806,
suspended 20th January, 1808.
Lieutenant Colonel G. Johnstone, Lieutenant Colonel Fovcaux, and
Colonel William Paterson, all of the New South Wales Corps,
Lieutenant Governors during the suspension of Governor
Bligh, from 20th January, 1808, to 28th December, 1809.
V. MAJOR GENERAL LACHLAN MACQUARIE, from Ist
January, 1810, to Ist December, 1821.
VI. MAJOR GENERAL SIR THOMAS BRISBANE, K.C.8.,
Ist December, 1821, to 30th November, 1825.
Colonel Stewart, 3rd Regt, (Lieutenant Governor,) from Ist Decem-
ber, 1825, to 18th December, 1825.
VII. LIEUTENANT GENERAL RALPH DARLING, from
19th December, 1825, to 21st October, 1831.
Colonel Lindesay, C. 8., (Lieutenant Governor,) from 22nd October,
1831, to 2nd December, 1831.
VIII. MAJOR GENERAL SIR RICHARD BOURKE, K.C.8.,
from 3rd December, 1831, to to sth December, 1837.
Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Snodgrass, (Lieutenant Governor,)
from 6th December, 1837, to 23rd February, 1838.
IX, SIR GEORGE GIPPS, from 24th February, 1838, to 10th
July, 1846.
Sir Maurice C. O'Connell, (Lieutenant Governor,) from 11th July.
1846, to 2nd August, 1846.
X. SIR CHARLES AUGUSTUS FITZROY, (the present
Governor,) from 3rd August, 1846.
REMARKABLE EVENTS, &c.
Landing of Captain Phillip at Botany Bay, Jan. 20, 1788
Founding of the Colony of New South Wales, Jan 26, 1788
First harvest reaped at Parramatta .. .. .. 1789
The first settler (a convict) took possession of the
land allotted to him .. .. .. .. 1790
First brick building finished .. .. .. .. 1793
First purchase of colonial grain (1,200 bushels,) by
government .. .. .. .. .. .. 1793
First Church built, (St. Philip’s Sydney) .. .. 1794
The first theatrical performance .. .- .. 1796
The Juliana, first ship with female convicts arrived 1799
Frist copper coin circulated .. .. .. .. 1800
A shock of an Earthquake felt at Sydney Jan. 17 .. 1801
First newspaper printed .. .. .. 1803
Lieutenant Bowen in the name of the British Gov-
ernment, took possession of Van Dieman’s Land 1803
Lieutenant Governor Collins’ first settlement of Van
Dieman’s Land .. ~ ~ 1804
Fort William built .. .. •• .. 1804
First vessel built ~ «« .. ~ 1805


The first census, school, toll-gates, police, naming of
streets, markets, races and race ball at Sydney .. 1810
The first Pound established .. .. ... 1811
The first fair held .. .. .. .. .. 1813
The first Steam-engine worked .. .. .. 1815
The Bank of New South Wales established April, 8, 1817
The Supreme Court established .. .. 1817
First Benevolent Society formed .. .. .. 1818
Orphan Institution founded .. .. ~ .. 1819
First Spirits distilled, and colonial tobacco sold .. 1820
First Wesleyan and Roman Catholic Chapels built . 1821
Freedom of the Press granted, and formation of
Reading and Agricultural Societies .. .. 1822
The Charter of justice granted, Legislative Council
appointed, (the Members being nominated by the
Crown,) and first Court of Quarter Sessions held . 1824
First Jury empanelled in the Supreme Court, first
Archdeacon ordained, first Coroner appointed, and
first constitutional County Meeting held., ... 1825
Sydney Dispensary formed .. .. .. 1826
First daily newspaper established .. .. .. 1827
First Circuit Court opened .. .. .. .. 1829
Settlement formed at Swan River ~ 1829
First Meeting of the Legislative Council, August 21, 1829
Trial by Jury in Civil cases established, October 9, 1829
First Civil Jury erapanneiled, and first College
founded .. .. .. .. .. 1830
First Colonial Steam boat (The Surprise) launched
March 31, 1831
Savings’Bank instituted, August 18, .. .. 1832
The School of Arts formed.. .. .. .. 1833
Land sold at Sydney at £lO,OOO per acre !.. .. 1834
First sitting of the Court of Requests, and establish-
ment of the Settlement at Moreton Bay, Sept. 2, 1834
The Bank of Australasia commenced business,
December 14, .. .. .. .. .. 1835
The Gas light Company of Sydney established .. 1836
The Colony of Victoria (Australia Felix) founded
May 19 1837
The Colony of South Australia founded, May 25, 1837
The Eden, the last convict ship arrived, Nov. 18, 1840
Transportation to New South Wales ceased .. 1840
Gas first used in Sydney, May 24, .. .. .. 1841
First Municipal election in Sydney, November 1, 1842
First election of Members for the City of Sydney to
the Legislative Council, June 15,.. .. 1843
First Meeting of the Legislative Council, (a portion
of the Members being elected by the people,) Aug. 1 1843
Foundation stone of the Australian Library laid
February 14, .. .. .. .. .. 1843
Commencement of the first Railway J uly 3,,, ~ 1850


f.
J. Hosking, Esq.
1842-3
ir.
J. R. Wilshire, Esq.
1843-4
nr.
G. Alien, Esq.
1844-5
IV.
T. Broughton, Esq.
1845-G
V.
H. Mac Dermott, Esq.
1846-7
VI.
J. F. Josephson, Esq.
1847-8
VII.
E. Flood, Esq.
1848-9
VI11
G. Hill, Esq.
1849-50
MAYORS OF THE CITY OF MELBOURNE.
I.
H. Condell, Esq.
1843-4
11.
H. Moor, Esq.
1844-5
Ilf.
I. J. Palmer, Esq.
1845-6
IV.
H, Moor, Esq.
1846-7
V.
A. Russell, Esq.
1847-8
VI.
W. M. Bell, Esq.
1848-9
VII.
A. J. A. Greeves, Esq.
1849-50
MAYORS OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY OF AUS-
TRALIA.
The Colony of New South Wales has, as yet, its boundary imper-
fectly defined. It may be said, however, to extend from Cape Howe
to about latitude 28° south; while the greatest distance yet settled
inland, can scarcely be said to extend more than 200 miles. The
line of coast throughout the territory of New South Wales, presents
in general an aspect of bold perpendicular cliffs of sandstone lying
in horizontal strata. The cliffs are occasionally interrupted by sandy
beaches, behind which the country is low and flat, the high land re-
tiring to a considerable distance. The strata of sandstone consist of
beds lying one upon the other in the most regular manner, so that
their original relative situation has evidently never undergone any
change. This sandstone is principally silicious ; sometimes indeed
it is argillaceous, and in this state it is generally found over coal, in
which situation it is soft and very decomposible. The Blue Mountains
run from North to South, through the whole of New South Wales, at
no great distance from the coast. From this cause the rivers which
fall into the sea on the East coast, are generally short and abrupt,
whereas those rivers which are to the west of these mountains, have
a very lengthened course. The Colony of Victoria extends from Cape
Howe to the 141 ° east longitude, and is separated from New South
Wales by a line from Cape Howe, bearing north-west to one of the
branches of the river Murray, and on the north by the river Murray
till it comes to the South Australian frontier, in the 141° of East
Longitude. The soil of this colony is in general rich, and the climate


salubrious. The principal ranges of mountains are the Australian
Alps, Snowy Mountains, Granitic Range, Alexandrine range, the
Pyrenees, Grampians, &c. The Colony of South Australia extends
from 141° to 132° east longitude, and is bounded on the north by the
Tropic of Capricorn. This country is intersected by three great mount-
ain masses—the Mount Lofty, Mount Barker, and Wakefield ranges.
The Mount Lofty range runs from north-west to south-west, and
after attaining acennal elevation at Mount Lofty, of about 2459 feet,
(12 miles east from Adelaide), it falls to the south-west, terminating in
low cliffs at the sea shore, to the north of the Onkaparinga. The
Mount Barker range runs in a direction parallel to the Mount Lofty ;
aad the Mount Wakefield range can scarcely be considered as a dis-
tinct formation from the Barker range,but rather a disruption from
its south-west extremity. The whole of this country may be said to
consist of one-third of land adapted for agricultural purposes and
graxing, one-third covered with stringy-bark forest, and the remain-
der with unavailable scrub and rock. Lake Alexandrina which
bounds this country on the east, is a fine sheet of water, sixty miles
long and varying in width from ten to forty miles. It is navigable
across from the Upper Murray to the Lower Murray, for vessels
drawing six feet of water, and the entrance to the sea, may, by means
of a breakwater, be rendered safe in moderate weather, for vessels of
the same draught of water. The Murray itself is navigable for steam
vessels for many hundred miles, thus affording an outlet for the pro-
duce, not only of the settlers along its banks, but also to a great por-
tion of the back settlements of New South Wales. The Colony of West-
ern Australia includes all that portion of country which is situated to the
westward of the 129° of east longitude, and embraces the whole of
the west coast, with a portion of the south and north coast of Aus-
tralia ;it therefore enjoys a larger amount of sea-hoard in proportion
to its number of square miles than any other colony in Australia.
The absence of considerable mountain ranges, forbids the chance of
finding any considerable river of a permanent character, and it is
somewhat remarkable, that one of the largest rivers known, whose
course is not less than 200 miles, disappears entirely as a stream,
and ceases to run long before the end of the dry season. The coast
of this colony is fronted by indentations, bays, straits and islands,
and abounds in the finest harbours imaginable. The rise and fall of
the tide in some places, amounts to thirty-five feet, affording oppor-
tunities for building docks, or for laying ships on shore at a trifling ex-
pense. The whole of the occupied portion of the territory appears to
rest upon a granitic base, but as red sandstone is found on the north-
west coast, and tertiary formations on the shores of the Australian
Bight, it is probable that the general dip of the country is in a direc-
tion a little to the north of east. The surface of the country generally,
is covered with those substances which are technically called earths,
in contradistinction to soils-, the extreme drought of the climate, and the
summer conflagrations appearing to prevent the growth of succulent
plants, as well as any great accumulation of soil from decayed vege-
tation. But although the country is not remarkable for richness of
soil, it is favourable in other respects for farming purposes. The


whole of the north and north-east coast of Australia from the boun-
dary line of Western Australia to the boundary line of New South
Wales, may be said to be as yet entirely unoccupied. It is probable,
however, that in a short time this vast extent of country, will be
divided into two or three new colonies, and in the mean time,
in the proper place, we will give all the information yet obtained
regarding it.
VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS &c.
There has never yet been found in Australia either the majesty of
the virgin forests of the new world, the variety and elegance of those
of Asia, or the delicacy and freshness of the woods in the temperate
countries of Europe. Vegetation is in general, dark and sombre,
and resembles the shade of the European evergreens and copses.
Woods of different kinds, adapted for every useful purpose, have been
found ; grain succeeds well ; wheat, maize, oats and rye, are culti-
vated, the two former in largest qaantity. Those parts in which
different trials have been made, have rather too warm a climate for
common barley and oats, though these grains have been found to
succeed tolerably well on the poorer soils. The skinless barley, or
Siberian wheat, arrives at great perfection. Potatoes, cabbages, car-
rots, parsnips, turnips, pease, beans, onions, and all the vegetables
grown in England, thrive most luxuriantly. The whole of Australia
is now famed for the goodness and variety of its fruits; peaches,
apricots, nectarines, oranges, lemons, guavas, loquats, cherries, wal-
nuts, almonds, grapes, pears, pomegranates, and melons, attain the
highest maturity. Forest timber, brushwood and grass, are not
formed into zones, according to their elevation, as in countries of
more uniform surface and severe climate. It is the soil chiefly
that determines the native vegetation of Australia, and as that is
continually varying with the form and the exposure of the surface,
the native pastures come much nearer to landscape gardening than
anything that is met with in any other country. There is a grove
here, a lawn there, a shrubbery in another place, and in another still,
a natural wall of the light coloured stone appears at the openings of
the foliage, as if it were part of the enclosure of a garden. Some-
times, all these are upon so small a scale, that they would suit a
labourer’s cottage; at others, they would answer for a villa ; and
sometimes there is a vast extent, with a few clumps and scattered
trees, as a domain ample enough for the most splendid palace. On
the elevated country to the north-east of Bathurst, and that for a
very considerable extent, a stranger would find some difficulty in
persuading himself that he was in a country, not only which the
hand of man had not touched to improve, but where there was net
one fixed, and hardly even a wandering inhabitant. Some of these
delightful regions lie under the disadvantage at present, of being ap-
proached with difficulty, although even this, with railways springing
up around us, will he only temporary ; but to those who would be con-
tented w ith the produce of a fertile soil, and the enjoyment of a genial
climate, few places are more inviting to a settler than Australia ;


88,910
in
wheat ..
• •
.. 1,421,750
Bushels
31,773
9 9
maize ..
, ,
870,400
99
9,215
9 9
oats
, #
.. 216,783
99
9,390
99
barley ..
.. 193,835
99
259
99
rye and millet.,
. ,
4,179
99
6,537
99
potatoes
. .
18,329
Tons
2'.; 8
99
tobacco..
2,087
Cwt.
considering, also, that the passage from Europe is the safest that can
be undertaken, and that the expense is even less than what would be
incurred, in settling an emigrant comfortably on his own land in
British America *
TOTAL NUMBER OF ACRES UNDER CULTIVATION (ex-
clusive of vineyards, orchards, and gardens,) with their produce.
Acres The produce of which was
37,221 ,, grass, oats, &e., for hay .. 42,754 Tons
QUANTITY OF LAND UNDER CULTIVATION in Australia
as Vineyards from, 1843 to 1850, with the wine and brandy produced.
YEARS. ACRES UNDER WINE. BRANDY.
CULTIVATION.
Acres. Gallons. Gallons.
1843 512 33,915 751
1844 566 50,666 1,018
1845 643 55,210 1,41-3
1846 827 54,977 1,383
1847 1000 55,335 1,432
1848 995 103.606 1,263
1819 1127 101,063 1,781
THE NATIVE INHABITANTS OR ABORIGINES.
Australia seems to offer at least three native varieties of inhabitants
all belonging to the race of Papuas or Oceanic negroes. In the neigh-
bourhood of Glasshouse Bay, they have large heads, which in shape
resemble those of the ourang-outang. Their very limited intellects,
their hairy bodies, and habitual agility in climbing trees, seem to
bring them near the monkey character: at the same time their in-
corruptible fidelity and unshaken attachment when employed as
guides, or as native police, demand our respect and approbation.
Perhaps no people in the world has made less progress towards civi-
lization. They are simply divided into families or tribes, each of
* Individuals about to emigrate from Britain often commit a great mistake
on this subject. They calculate the passage from Liverpool or Glasgow to
Amer ca. and imagine that this is all the expense to be incurred, forgetting
that they have thousands of miles to travel into the interior after leaving the
ship, before they can make a corr.fortab’e settlement. Whereas in Australia,
after they reach the port of their destination, the journies inland are of very
short duration, before an immigiant obtains a situation suitable for his settle-
ment. This mainly arises from the insularity of its position.


which is distinguished by adding the syllable gal to the name of its
place of residence. Thus, for instance, the native name for the
South shore of Botany Bay is Gwea, and the tribe that lived there
was called Gwea-gat. All the aborigines of Australia possess the
thick prominent lips, sunken eyes, high cheek bones and calveless
legs of the African, differing however, in the hair, which is long and
coarse. They are of the middle height, the women are small and
well made; some of the males have long beards, but most of them
pluck out the hair by the roots. The adult males have generally
the front teeth struck out, and the females are frequently observed
with a joint or two of the little finger cut olf. In regard to religion,
no form, no ceremony, no idol has ever been discovered among them;
they have very faint notions of a future state, believing that at death
they shall either roam through the regions of the air like cockatoos,
or return to the clouds from which they originally came—a notion
common to them with the Altoors in the island of Ceram. They are
also enslaved by superstition, magic, sorcery and ghosts, and if a
woman dies while suckling an infant, the latter is buried alive in its
mother’s grave. Yet these poor creatures are seen crying over the
grave of a child or a friend, their eyes, humanised by the tears of
affection, turned upwards towards heaven. Their Corrobaries, or
nightly meetings at the full moon, resemble in many respects the
devil worship prevalent among the mountain tribes of the island of
Ceylon. In the interior their numbers seem to be diminishing from
famine and internal war, and in Sydney, Melbourne &c., where they
exist chiefly by begging, vice and disease are rapidly exterminating
them. Their nearest approximation to ingenuity is the fishing net,
prepared by the women from the fibres of grass. Their only cutting
implements are made of stone (sometimes of jasper), fastened be-
tween a cleft stick, with a hard gum. Their weapons of offence
or defence are the spear, boomerang, several kinds of waddics or
nullah-nullah, a small stone tomahawk and a shield made of bark.
The spear is about ten feet long, as thick as a man’s finger tapering
to a point, sometimes jagged or barbed and hardened in the fire ;
this they can throw from fifty to sixty yards with great precision,
the impetus being greatly increased by the use of the womera or
throwing stick, which is a piece of wood from two to three feet in
length, about three inches broad at one end, and going off to a point
at the other, to which a hook is fastened ; the hook is inserted into
a small hole at the extremity of the spear, and the womera being
grasped at the broad part, acts somewhat on the principle of a sling,
enabling a powerful man to send the spear above a hundred yards.
The Boomerang is still more curious—it is of a curved form made of
a piece of hard wood, thirty to forty inches in length, two and a half
to three inches wide at the broadest part, and tapering away at each
end nearly to a point; the concave part is from one-eighth to one-
fourth of an inch thick, and the convex quite sharp. A native can
throw this simple instrument forty or fifty yards, horizontally skim-
ming along the surface not more than three or four feet from the
ground, when it will suddenly rise into the air to the height of fifty
or sixty yards, describing a considerable curve, and finally fall at


1843
62,017
1,017,316
57,767
5,055,337
1814
71,169
1,159,432
56,242
5,604,644
1845
82,303
1,348,022
60,008
6,202,031
1846
88,126
1,430,736
45,600
7,906,811
1847
104,271
1,614,967
62,670
10,071,625
1848
113,895
1,752,852
70.875
11,660,819
1849
121,359
1,810,213
58,674
12,102,540
his feet. During the whole of this evolution, the boomerang keeps
turning with great rapidity, like a piece of wood revolving on a pivot,
and with a whizzing noise. In the hands of- a European it is a
ticklish instrument, as it may return and strike himself, but a native
can inflict with it the most deadly wounds on others. The waddy
and nullah-nullah are clubs of different sizes and solidity: the toma-
hawk is a piece of sharpened stone, fixed in a cleft stick with gum ;
with this they cut notches in the tyees, and ascend them to the height
of sixty feet, though without a branch and far too thick to be
grasped They live principally by bunting or fishing, or on gum
and bulbous roots. No houses are constructed, an overhanging rock
or a slip of bent bark serving for a temporary shelter.
ANIMALS.
The only native animals worthy of being mentioned are the kan-
garoo, the opossum, and the wild dog. The great kangaroo is the largest
native quadruped ; there are several varieties, some of them diminu-
tive in size, but their numbers have been greatly thinned by a
destructive war which has been perpetually carried on against them
by the European settlers. The wild dog or dingo still abounds, and is
a! ways on the alert to attack cattle and sheep that are left exposed dur-
ing the night; they are however easily scared or warded off. Besides
these the Wombat, the Porcupine Ant-eater, and the Platypus, are
sometimes met with. Among rapacious birds eagles, falcons,
and various species of hawks abound ; as well as the Emu, a bird
resembling the ostrich. A vast variety of the parrot tribe
exists, comprising many beautiful species of parroquets and cock-
atoos, unrivalled in the gaudiness and variety of their plumage:
water fowl are also numerous. Fish is abundant long the
coasts, seals are found to the southward, and the whale fishery
is of great importance. Snakes and smaller reptiles, very few
of which are venomous, are found in various parts of Austra’ia.
Mosquitoes are a source of considerable annoyance. The domesti-
cated animals of Europe thrive well and are in abundance.
LIVE STOCK IN AUSTRALIA FROM 1843 TO 1850,
YEAR. HORSES. HORNED CATTLE. PIGS. SHEEP-
INTRODUCTION OF FINE WOOLLED SHEEP
TO AUSTRALIA.
The chief product of Australia is wool. The introduction of this
article into the colony was owing to the late John Macarthur Esq.


So long back as 1792 that enterprising gentleman became convinced
that the grasses and climate of New South Wales were adapted to
Merino sheep. About two years after he obtained a ram and
two ewes from Captain Kent R.N. who had brought them, with some
other stock for the supply of the settlement, from the Cape of Good
Hope, to which place some of the pure breed had been sent by the
Dutch government. Mr. Macarthur immediately began to cross his
coarse fleeced sheep wiih the Merino, and in ten years his flock,
which consisted originally of 70 Bengal animals, was increased to
4,000, although the wethers were slaughtered as they became fit for
food. In 1803 Mr. Macarthur revisited England, exhibited samples
of his wool to a committee of manufacturers who happened to be
then in London, and it was so much approved of that Mr. Macarthur
appeared before the Privy Council, and laid before them his plans
for rendering England independent of foreign countries for a supply
of the best wools. The Privy Council adopted Mr. Macarthur’s
views, and with their encouragement, he purchased from the Merino
flock of his Majesty George the Third, two ewes and three rams with
which he returned to New South Wales in 1806, appropriately call-
ing the vessel in which the sheep were embarked “ the Argo.”
Such was the origin of the rapidly increasing flocks of Australia
whose numbers now exceed twelve millions, and whose wool has
brought as high as 10s. 4d. per lb in the London market. As the
"O'l trade is one of national importance, and as the decision of the
Privy Council in 1804 has formed the basis of all the Squatting
regulations since adopted we here subjoin : Ist. The statement of
Captain Macarthur addressed to the Colonial office 26th
July, 1803. 2nd. The decision of the Privy Council after
the examination of witnesses dated 14th July 1804: 3rd. Abstract
of the Squatting regulations at present in force in the colonv dated
(Act of Parliament 28th August 1846) and (Privy Council Regula-
tions 9;h March 1847.) 4th. Return of the quantity of wool shipped
up to the present time, ' 1
Isi. Statement of Captain Macarthur. —“ The samples of wool brought
from New South Wales having excited the particular attention of the
merchants and principal English manufacturers, Captain Macarthur
considers it his duty respectfully to represent to his Majesty’s minis-
ters, that he has found, from an experience of many years, the climate
of New South W'ales peculiarly adapted to the increase of fine woolled
sheep; and that from the unlimited extent of luxuriant pastures with
which that country abounds, millions of those valuable animals may
be raised in a few years, with but little other expense than the hire of
a few shepherds.
“ The specimens of wool that Captain Macarthur has with him have
been inspected by the best judges of wool in this kingdom, and they
are of opinion that it possesses a softness superior to many of the
wools of Spain; and that it certainly is equal, in every valuable
property, to the very best that is lobe obtained from thence.
“ The sheep producing this fine wool are the Spanish kind, sent
originally from Holland to the tape of Good Hope, and taken’ from
thence to Port Jackson.


“ Captain Macarthur being persuaded that the propagation of those
animals would be of the utmost consequence to this country, procured,
in 1797, three rams and five ewes; and be has since had the satisfac-
tion to see them rapidly increase, their fleeces augment in weight,
and the wool very visibly improves in quality. When Captain Mac-
arthur left Port Jackson in 1801, the heaviest fleece that had then
been shorn weighed only 3£lbs., but he has received reports of 1802,
from which he learns that the fleeces of bis sheep were increased to
51bs. each ; (in the grease, the average weight of the fleeces of fine
woolled sheep in New South Wales, when washed, is 2£lbs.) and
that the wool is finer and softer than the wool of the preceding year.
The fleece of one of the sheep originally imported from the Cape of
Good Hope has been valued here at 4s. 6d. per lb., and a fleece of the
same kind bred in New South Wales, is estimated at 6s. per lb.
“ Being once in the possession of this valuable breed, and having
ascertained that they improved in that climate, he became anxious to
extend them as much as possible ; he therefore crossed all the mixed
bred ewes of which his flocks were composed with Spanish rams.
The lambs produced from this cross were much improved ; but when
they were again crossed the change far exceeded his most sanguine
expectations. In four crosses, he is of opinion, no distinction will be
perceptible between the pure and the mixed breed. As a proof of the
extraordinary and rapid improvement of his flocks, Captain Mac-
arthur has exhibited the fleece of a coarse woolled ewe, that has been
valued at 9d. per lb., and the fleece of her lamb, begotten by a
Spanish Ram, which is allowed to be worth 3s. per lb.
“Captain Macarthurhas now about 4000 sheep amongst which there
are no rams but of the Spanish breed. He calculates they will, with
proper care, double themselves every two years and a half; and that
in twenty years they will be so increased as to produce as much fine
wool as is now imported from Spain and other countries, at an annual
expense of £1,800,000 sterling. To make the principle perfectly
plain upon which Captain Macarthur founds this expectation, he begs
to state that half his flock has been raised from 30 ewes, purchased in
1793, out of a ship from India, and from about eight or ten Spanish
and Irish sheep, purchased since. The other half of his flock were
obtained in 1801 by purchases from an officer who had raised them in
the same time, and from about the same number of ewes that Captain
Macarthur commenced with. This statement proves that the sheep
have hitherto multiplied more rapidly than it is calculated they will
do in future ; but this is attributed to the first ewes being of a more
prolific kind than the Spanish sheep are found to be; for since Cap-
tain Macarthur has directed his attention to that breed, he has ob-
served the ewes do not so often produce double lambs.
“ As a further confirmation of the principle of increase that Captain
Macarthur has endeavoured to establish, and which he is positive
time will prove to be correct, be would refer to the general returns
transmitted from New South Wales, In 1796 (since when not 100
sheep have been imported), 1531 were returned as the public and
private stock of the colony. In 1801, 6757 were returned: and
although between those periods all the males Lave been killed, as


of°633* they became fit » y et there is a surplus over the calculation
Captain Macarthur is so convinced of the practicability of supply-
ing this country with any quantity of fine wool it may require, that he is
earnestly solicitous to prosecute this, as it appears to him, important
object, and, on bis return to New South Wales, to devote his whole
attention to accelerate its complete attainment. All the risk attend-
ant on the undertaking he will cheerfully bear; he will require no
pecuniary aid, and all the encouragement he humbly solicits is, the
protection of government, permission to occupy a sufficient track of
unoccupied lands to feed his flock, and the indulgence of selecting
trom amongst the convicts such men for shepherds as may, from their
previous occupations, know something of the business.
London, 26th July, 1803
(Signed) “ John Macarthur."
2nd. Decision of the Privy Council, 14 th July, 1804.—“ The Lords of
the committee having resumed the consideration of the several papers
relative to the breed of fine woolled sheep, &c. in New South Wales
and of the examination thereon of Captain John Macarthur, John
Planter, Esq., formerly Governor of New South Wales, and John
i rmsep, Esq , a merchant of the city of London, from w hom a pro-
position was some time since received, and has undergone some con-
sideration, relative to opening a regular trade with Pert Jackson
their lordships were pleased to order that a copy of the memorial’
presented by Captain Macarthur, and of a proposal submitted by him
to the lord’s commissioners of bis Majesty’s treasury for establishing a
company to encourage the increase of fine woolled sheep in New
booth Wales, be transmitted to Edward Cooke, Esq., for the infer-
mation of Lord Camden, with a letter stating that their lordships are
ot opinion, from the evidence in the papers lelating to Captain Mac-
art bur’s petition, from the opinion of the manufacturers of cloth
stated in their memorials, and from the examination of the gentlemen
befoi e mentioned, that it is probable wool of very fine quality, suited
to the manufacture of fine cloth, may be produced in New South
W ales, and brought to this country at a price which the manufacturers
can afford to give for that material,
“ That their lordships also conceive, that without more knowledge
than they now possess of the nature and state of the colony, and with-
out full communication with the governor of the settlement, incon-
venience might arise from recommending an unconditional grant of
lands to Mr. Macarthui, or to a joint company, or to any individual,
as such grant might retard or prevent the other inhabitants of New
boulh Wales from turning their attention to the growth and improve-
ment of fine wool, or perhaps, in other respects, counteract the im-
provement of the colony,
“ That the lords of the committee, however, are of opinion that en-
couragement ought to be held out to the inhabitants of New South
Wales to keep a breed of sheep with fine wool, and to improve its
quality as much as possible.
“ r I hat the Committee are inclined to recommend that Mr. Mar-
artbur s plan should be referred to the governor of New South Wales,


with instructions to give every encouragement to the growth of fine
wool, and to report his opinion on the petition of Mr. Macarthur,
and on the plan of a joint company,; and that he should be further
directed to state also in what manner he conceives the growth of fine
wool can best he encouraged, together with the hopes he may enter-
tain that a supply of that article can be afforded from New South
Wales, and to what extent such supply is likely to be obtained, and
within what space of time.
“ That the lords of the committee think it right to observe that a
conditional grant of lands of a reasonable extent may be, perhaps,
with safety granted to Mr. Macarthur for the pasturage of sheep only,
or to other persons, provided a power be reserved in such grant to
resume the same at any future period, on giving other land further
distant from the cultivated land of the colony (with reasonable in-
demnification for expense incurred in fencing &c.,) and that such
conditional grant would not cramp the cultivation of the colony, or
be attended with bad (ffects in any manner apparent to the lords of
the committee.
“ That in addition to these encouragements, it occurs to their lord-
ships tbat the governor should be directed to provide mutton for the
food of the convicts rather than to feed them on salted provisions ;
and that it might equally tend to encourage the breed of sheep with
fine wool if it were recommended to the governor to purchase only
that description of sheep for tliat purpose, or at least to give a prefer-
ence to sheep of that description over any other kind, and to give an
advanced price for the sheep with fine wool, lhat many other ways
may, however, occur to the governor, from his local knowledge, of
promoting an object so important to this country ; and that be should
be directed to state the same to Lord Camden .
“ That from the information obtained, from the fleeces brought from
the settlement in question, and from the description given of the
climate of the colony, the lords of the committee are led to imagine
and entertain hopes that wool of a fine quality may be produced in
this colony ; and that as wool of such fine quality is much wanted and
desired by the manufacturers of cloth in England, it being mostly
drawn at ibis time from a country influenced, if not dependant on
France, their lordships entertain no doubt lhat it is well deserving the
attention of his Majesty’s government to encourage the produce of
fine wool in the colony of New South Wales.
3rd. Abstract oj the Squatting regulations at present in force in Aus-
tralia.—l. The whole lands in Australia shall be considered as di-
vided into three classes as they may be situated in districts to be
respectively denominated the settled, the intermediate, and the
unsettled districts. 11. The settled districts are, the nineteen con-
tiguous counties, the boundaries of which were settled and proclaimed
before Ist January 1888. The counties of Macquarie and Stanley—
the lands which may be within a distance of twenty-five miles, to be
measured from any point of the corporate limits of the town of
Melbourne in the county of Bourke—the lands which may be within
the distance of fifteen miles from any point of the outward limits of
the town of Geelong in the county of Grant —the lands which may be
within the distance of ten miles as aforesaid from any of the follow-


ing townships, viz,; Portland, in the county of Normftnby, Alberton,
in the district of Gipps’ Land, Eden in the county of Auckland,
Bathurst, in the county of Roxburgh, Wellington in the county of
Wellington. The town at the head of the navigation of the Clarence ;
the town of Maquarie, and the town of Ipswich. The lands which
may lie within the distance of two miles from the sea, throughout the
extent of the colony ; the lands which may lie within the distance
two miles from either of the two opposite bßnks of the rivers Glenelg,
Clarence, and Richmond; and two miles on either side of any rail,
way actually formed and in operation. 111, The intermediate districts
are, The jands lying within the counties of ilourke, Grant, Nor-
manby, in the district of Port Phillip,; the county of Auckland ; the
entire district of Gipp’s Land ; all the counties, either foimed dr
intended to be formed between the county of Auckland and the
county of St. Vincent, and any county or counties of which the
boundaries may be fixed or proclaimed on or before the 31st Decem-
ber, 1848. IV. The unsettled districts are, all the lands of New South
Wales not comprehended under the settled and intermediate districts
aforesaid, V. Within the unsettled districts land maybe (based for
any period not exceeding fourteen years. Each run shall be capable
of carrying four thousand sheep, arid shall not in any case be let at a
lower rent than £lO per annum, to which £2 10s, per annum shall
be added for every additional thousand sheep &c., which the land shall
be capable of carrying, but the squatter shall not be permitted to grow
tiny more grain, hay, vegetables, fruit, &c,, than what is sufficient for
the supply of the family and establishment of the lessee ; dUririo- tile
continuance of a lease the lands shall not be open to purchase by any
other person except the lessee thereof, and the lessee ednnot purchase
a less quantity of the run than one hundred and sixty acres nor be-
low the general minimum price of £l pound per acre: at the
conclusion of a lease the lands shall be revalued and the refit
for the ensuing period shall be estimated according to its im-
proved capabilities of carrying sheep and cattle instead of its unim-
proved state: at the termination of a lease the governor may effet
the lands for sale, and the upset price shall consist of the joint value
of the land and the improvements, and if the land is sold the amount
of the improvements shall be paid over to the previous lessee, the
government retaining the balance. VI. In the intermediate districts
lands may be leased on the same conditions as above stated, but shell
leases shall not be made for more than e ght years, and the governor
at the end of each year of the lease, may offer for sale, all" or arly
part of the lands, subject to the same conditions in favour of the
lessee, as are laid down in regard to lands in the unsettled districts.
VII. Jh the settled districts land may be leased for pastoral purposes"
only, for terms not exceeding one year, and the governor may makij
genera! rules under which the holders of purchased lands malt be
permitted to depasture, free of charge, any unoccupied Crowfi lands’.


YEAR.
lbs.
j YEAH.
lbs.
1807
24.5
1829
1,005,333
1808
56 2
1830
899,750
1809
no return
1831
1,401,284
1810
no return
1832
1,515,156
1811
107
1833
1,734,203
181-5
32,971
1837
7.273,140
1816
73,171
1838
7,406,000
1817
13,616
1839
8,643,860
1818
16,525
1840
7,032,960
1819
74.284
1841
9,378 720
1820
99,415
1842
9,354,000
1821
175,433
1843
12,530,880
1822
172,880
1844
13,147.680
1823
198,240
1845
14,549,280
1824
275,560
1846
15 854,880
1825
411,600
1847
18,464,640
1826
552,960
1848
22,509,600
1827
407,116
1849
25,519,680
1828
834,343
ilh. Return of the quantity of wool shipped from Australia, from the
year 1807 to ISSO.
1812 no return 1834 2,246,933
3 813 no return 1835 3,893,927
3834 no return 1836 3,693,241
SETTLERS. The Colonial population of Australia is rapidly
increasing every year. In physical respects there appears to be a
slight deterioration ; tlmy grow up more rapidly than in the
mother-countrv and begin to decay sooner. In regard to intellectual
ability, the powers of the mind are developed earlier than in Britain,
manifesting a greater aptness at an earlier age lor commercial pur-
suits, and for the ordinary business of life. It is very probable that the
Colonial born population will more nearly resemble, physically and
intellectually, the Anglo-Americans of the United States, than the in-
habitants of'the British isles, but as yet we haveno sufficient data for
arriving at a correct determination of the question.
POLITICAL AND STATISTICAL
GEOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALIA.
FORM OF GOVERNMENT. When the colony of New South
V'aies was first established the whole Executive powers were vested
in the Governor alone; in 1824 a council was appointed to assist
and control the Governor nominated by the Crown, not exceeding
seven individuals, and not less than five; and in 1829 the Legislative


Council was again reconstructed in virtue of an Act of the Imperial
legislature, and consisted of the Governor, seven individuals holding
office in the colony under the Government, and seven colonists
nominated by the Crown; in all fifteen. In 1843 the Legislative
Assembly was again changed, consisting of 36 members, twelve
members chosen by the Governor, of whom six were Government
officers, and the remaining 24 by the people. In 1850 another
change took place, the Port Phillip district and Gipps’ Land were
separated from New South Wales, and erected into an independent
colony, having a Legislature of its own under the title of the colony
of Victoria, and the other three colonies of Australia viz., (Van Die-
man’s Land, South Australia, and Swan River Settlement), obtained
Elective Legislatures similar to that of New South Wales; the franchise
having been reduced from £2O to £lO, full powers having been be-
stowed on each of these Legislatures to increase the number of mem-
bers as they from time to time should see cause, the government re-
taining the power of adding one third of nominee members. The Go-
vernment, therefore, of each of the five colonies of Australia, consists of
I. The Governor, as the representative of her Majesty. 11. Thb
Executive Council, consisting of the Governor, who is president,
the Commander of the Forces, the Colonial Secretary, and the
Colonial Treasurer. 111. The Legislative Council, consisting
of six officers of the Government, six Government Nominees, and
twenty-four Members elected by the people.
LAWS AND COURTS. The statute laws of England are in
force in the colony so far as they are applicable to their circumstances,
aided by Acts of Parliament and local enactments; an Insolvent
Debtors’ Act is also in operation. The execution of the laws de-
volves upon a Supreme Court, presided over by a chief and two
puisne judges, whose powers are as extensive as those of the Court of
Queens’ Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer at Westminister.
The Supreme Court is a court of oyer and terminer and gaol delivery—
it is also a court of equity with all the power within its jurisdiction of
the Lord High Chancellor of England—further, it is a court of
Admiralty within certain limits ; is empowered to grant letters of ad-
ministration, and is an insolvent debtors' Court. From the Supreme
Court an appeal lies in all actions when the sum or matter at issue
exceeds the value of £SOO to the Governor oT Acting Governor, who
is authorised to hold a Court of Appeals, from which a final appeal
lies to the Qu<=en in Council. The Supreme Court is provided with
an Attorney and Solicitor General. The Sheriff exercises by his deputies
the duties of his office over the whole of each colony. Circuit Courts
are held in differents parts of the colonies; they are courts of record
and stand in the same relation to the Supreme Court, as courts of
oyer and terminer, and of assize and nisi prim in England, do to the
Queen’s superior courts of record at Westminster. Courts of General
and Quarter Sessions have the same powers as those in England. A
Vice Admiralty Court, presided over by the Chief Justice of the Su-
preme Court, takes cognizance of civil causes only, such as seamen’s
wages &c. Courts of Requests for summarily determining claims not
exceeding £lO sterling, are held in almost every county town


thioughout the colony ; these courts are presided over by a Com-
missioner appointed by the Crown, whose decision as in England, .s
final Juries now sit in civil and criminal cases; formerly, military
and naval officers formed the criminal Jury, and civil cases were de-
termined by a Judge and two sworn assessors.
POLICE. This important branch has been well managed in
Australia • there are Benches of paid as well as unpaid magistrates
within the located districts, and police stations are very extensively
established, having a police force at each station. Police 1 owns
and Stations in New South Wales. Sydney, Parramatta, Liver-
pool, Campbell town, Camden, Wollongong, Bernma, Cod burn,
Picton, Bungonia, Braidwood, Broulee, Queanbeyan, lass, Windsor,
Penrith, Hartley, Bathurst, Orange, Carcoar, Wellingl ton, Mud gee,
Gosford, Newcastle, Raymond Terrace, Dungog, Maitland, Vi ollombi,
Paterson, Singleton, Muswellbrook, Scone, MurrurUndi, Cassihs,
Port Macquarie, Brisbane. Victoria or Poßt Phillip. Melbourne,
Geelong, Portland, Alberton. Beyond the Settled Districts,
District of Maneroo , Eden, Cooma, Bombala Murrufnhagee.
Tumut, Albury, Wagga-Wagga Laclilan. Binalong Gun
dagai. Wellington. Molong. Bhgh. Dubbo. Lower Darling.
Balranald. Liverpool Plains. Tam worth, Guyder, War.alda, Wee
Waa, New England. Armidale, Wellmgrove, Tenterfield. Dat-
lin<r Downs. Drayton, Warwick. M'Leay River. No township
hamed. Clarence River. Grafton, Tabulan. Moreton Bay. Ipswich.
In Wide Bay, Burnett, and Maranoa, no townships have as yet been
hamed.
RELIGION Here, as in Great Britain, there is a variety of forms
t,f religion. The Episcopal Church consists of five Dioceses viz ; the
Diocese of Sydney, Newcastle, Melbourne, South Australia, and
Tasmania. these five along with the Bishop of New Zealand,
constitute the Provincial Synod of Australasia. The Roman
Catholic clergy are numerous, and are governed by an Archbishop
and Vicar-General. The Presbyterians are divided into three bodies,
I The Synod of Australia, in connection with the Established Church
of Scotland, which consists of five Presbyteries, viz the Presbyteries
of Campbelltown, Maitland, Melbourne Sydney, and Windsor. 11.
The Synod of Eastern Australia, and the Synod of Australia Felix, con-
sisting of those who separated from the Synod of Australia on the
10th October 1846, at the annual meeting of that oody, because of its
departing from resolutions come to at two previous annual meetings,
to The effect that the existing connection with the Scottish Establish-
ment should be broken up, and an altogether free and independent
position assumed. HI. The United Presbyiertan Church of Australia.
consisting of those congregations who hold the voluntary principle,
that is, who consider their pastors should be supported by the hee-
will offerings of the people, and not by any State assistance or sup-
port. The Wesleyan Methodists have a number of Churches. There
are also various bodies of Independents or Congregationalism, Bap-
tists, &c., &c.


1840
1,399,692
8,104,189
1841
1,023,097
2,527,988
1842
1,067,411
1,455,059
1843
1,172,320
1,550,544
1844
1,121,115
931,260
1845
1,555,988
1,233,854
1346
1,481,539
1,630,522
1847
1,870,046
1 982,023
1848
1,830,368
1,556,550
1849.
1,891,270
1,793,420
MONETARY SYSTEM AND FINANCE. The Bank of New
South Wales was in 1817 incorporated by a charter under the seal ot
the colony, with a capital stock of £20,000, raised ini shares of £UO
each. The amount of shares subscribed was £12,600, note
were issued by the bank t»r 2s. 6d., 55., 10s., 4'°' . • t n.
are, however, now issued of less value than £!• 1 h' s IS , a
bank, and each shareholder is responsible for the whole of the p -
ceedings. The capital is now much increased. The attairs oi in
institution are managed by a president and eleven directors, w .
elected by the shareholders out of their own number. Every £,ou oi
paid up'capital has a vote. The Commercial
Sijdneu was instituted November 1834, with a capital ot £3O >
3000 shares. This is also a joint-stock bank, and m mos .
resembles the Bank of' New South Wales. The Bank of Australasia
is an Anglo-colonial bank, incorporated by Royal Charter, w
capital ot £200,000, established March 1834, and commenced bus ness
in the Colony 14th December 1835. The shareholders m this banK
are only responsible for the amount of subscribed capital, hut are
subject to the regulations of other chartered banks. The Union Bank
of Australia is another Anglo-colonial bank. _ The Savings Banc wa
established under an Act ot the Colonial Legisl^tute.
Notes in circulation, deposits, paid up capital, Sc., of the
different Banks, at June 2>Bih 1850.
eXta? Al
South wllfs! W 35,078 280f164 107,628 125,286 10 pr ct
179,784 80,950 94,634 10 pr ct,
trßankofAus- m>ssl (jo o,ooo 3 pe cl.
of Aultral. B a! nl< 99,708 533,675 204,491 820,000 6pr ct.
The Exports and Imports of Australia from 1340 to 1840,
YEAR. EXPORTS, IMPORTS.
£ £
Total Excess of Imports over Exports for the last ten yeags
£3,242,273.


TOPOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALIA.
Ist. the colony of new south wales.
I. CUMBERLAND, a Sydney, b the capital of New South Wales,
the residence of the Governor, and seat of the Legislative Council and,
Supreme Court, is surrounded on three sides by. the waters of Port
Jackson; it is divided into six wards. Population, including
the suburbs &c., about 60,000. Parramatta, 15 miles by land
and 18 miles by water from Sydney, situated at the mouth of
the Parramatta River, at the head of the navigation of Port
Jackson. The governor has a country residence here, and in this
town the County Courts are held. This was the first county town
formed in New South Wales, having been fixed upon by Governor
Phillip, November 2nd, 1788. Population 4454. Windsor, 20 miles
from Parramatta, and3s from Sydney, situated at the confluence of
the South Creek with the Hawkesbury, which at. this point is 140
miles from the sea, and navigable for vessels of 100 tons, five miles
above Windsor. The land in the vicinity of Windsor is rich,
and carefully cultivated. Population 1679. Richmond, situated
on the banks of the Nepean, 30 miles from Sydney, contains many
handsome cottages. Population 746. Liverpool, the leading
thoroughfare to all the Southern Districts, situated on the George's
River, which is here navigable for vessels of fifty tons, is 20 miles
from Sydney. Population, 601. Campbelltown, in Aird’s district, 33
miles from Sydney, and 12 miles from Liverpool. Population, 451,
a The County of Cumberland is an undulating plain, bounded on the north
and west by the rivers Hawkesbury and Nepean ; on the S. W. and S. hy the
Nepean, the Cataract River, and a line bearing E. 20° S. to Bulli on the sea
coast, which forms the southern boundary. The county is in length from north
to south about 53 miles, and in breadth from the sea to the base of the Blue
Mountains 46 miles, and contains about 900,000 English acres. Population,
73,538, inhabitants. The maritime boundary of this county is generally bold
and rugged. For the distance of five or six miles from the coast, the count ry
weirs a bleak and barren aspect, consisting of ridges of stratified sandstone; the
soil poor, and in some places swampy. Beyond this coast girdle, the aspect begins
to improve ; an undulating country extends for ten miles, and where the hand
©f cultivation has not been in active operation, a stately forest of Eucalypti
appears. At the distance of 20 to 25 miles from the coast, the scenery becomes
more beautiful, the forest is lofty but not dense, and there is little or no un-
derwood. Throughout the whole of the county, the land can scarcely he
considered elevated, but a continued series of undulations, until it approaches
the Nepean and Hawkesbury, where extensive plains, the fertility of which is
inexhaustible, border those noble streams.
b The City of Sydney, the metropolis of Australia is situated nearly equi-dis-
tant from the extreme northern and southern extremities of the County < f
Cumberland. It contains 7709 houses; of which 255 are under £5 of annual
rental, 1493 from £5 to £lO, 1757 from £lO to £2O, and 4204 above £2O per
annum. The streets are long, wide, and quite English in their appearance.
The shops are, in many instances, well laid out, and are not, as in America,
“ Stores” where every article may be bought under the same roof but each
trade or business has its own warehouse. The views from the higher parts <<f
Sydney are hold, varied, and picturesque ; the irregular appearance of the city,
the magnificence of the harbour of Port Jackson, with its numerous bays, stud-
ded with islets, the infinite diversity of hill and dale, towering forests and pro-
jecting rocks, give it an air of grandeur and wildness which is seldom mot with.


Caiilereagh, about 7 miles from Penrith and 39 miles from Sydney,
®n the road leading from Richmond to Penrith. Appin, at King’s
Fall’s, where the road to lllawarra crosses Tuggerah Creek, 46 miles
from Sydney. Population, 125. Balmain, opposite Sydney, but 7
miles distant by land. Population 1700. St. Leonard's, on the north
shore of Port Jackson, opposite Dawes’Point. Population 412. Pitt
Town, near the Hawkesbury, 44 miles from Sydney. Population, 229.
Penrith, near the river Nepean, on the Great Western Road, S 3 miles
from Sydney, Population, 291. Longhottorn, a neat village on die
Parramatta road, miles from Sydney.
11. CAM DEN. c Berrima, the county town, situated near die
Wingecarribee river, 80 miles distant from Sydney. Populations 77.
Kiama, on the sea coast, 88 miles from Sydney. Wollongong, on the
sea coast, a favourite resort for invalids; 60 miles from Sydney. Popu-
lation 515. Wilton, on the Cordeaux river. Picton, on the Stone-
quarry rivulet, 46 miles Irom Sydney. Population, 120. Camden, on
the Cowpasture river, 35 miles from Sydney. Population, 242.
Murrumha, on Paddy’s river, 99 miles from Sydney.
11l ST. VINCENT.d Braidtvood, near the Shoalhaven, 164 miles
from Sydney. Population 206. Huskisson on the shores of Jervis’ Bay.
Ulladulla, a seaport town 136 miles from Sydney, is a boat harbour,
and frequently called “The Holy dollar.” Broulee, a seaport town a
few miles to the north of the Moruga river. Population 22. Nerriga,
on the Endrick river. Tianjara on the Aalwal creek. I‘arnham, on
the Wandragandria preek.
IV. NORTHUM BERLAND.e East Maitland, the county town,
situated on the river Hunter, at its junction with Wallis’ Creek,
c The County of Camden is bounded on the north by the County of Cumber-
land : on the west by the river Wollondilly to the junction of the W mgalla,
(commonly called Faddy’s river) i and by the Wingalla and Barber s creek,
forming the boundary between Camden and Argyle, to the Shoalhaven river;
on the south hy the Shoalhaven river which constitutes in this direction tho
boundary of the county. The length of the county is 66 miles, and the breadth
about 55 miles ; the superficial area being 2200 square miles. 1 opulation, b,3.w.
The physical aspect of Camden is more than undulating ; it is a continued,
succession of hill and dale, the former sometimes rising into mountains, whose
steep sides are clothed with varieties of lofty timber. The Mittigong Range runs
S.B. through the whole length of the county, terminating close to the sea in
the lllawarra Mountain, 50 miles south from Sydney. There are several large
tracts in this county unsurpassed for fertility. Of these the most noted are the
Cow-Pastures, so called from large herds of cattle found there, which had lor
their original stock three runaway cattle belonging to the herd lauded troxn
H.M.S. Sirius, soon after the founding of the colony : they occupy an area of
60,000 acres, the greater part consisting of a fertile light sandy loam, on a sub-
stratum of clay. This county is also celebrated for containing within its bound-
aries the fertile and romantic district of lllawarra or the Five Islands, which
extends for the space of 18 miles along the eastern coast. The soil is a deep
unctions vegetable mould abounding in large heaps of decayed marine shells.
d The County of St. Vincent is situated along the sea shore to the southward
of Camden County bounded on the north and west, by the Shoalhaven river, is
in length 8-1 miles, breadth 40 miles, area 27U9 square miles. Population 2,102.
e The County of Northumberland is bounded, on the north by the river
Hunter, on the south by the Ilawkosbury, and on the west hy Hunter
county ; its length being 61 miles, breadth 50 miles, with an area of 2342 square
aiil«i. Population, 13,355. Its general aspect is a sene* of undulations ana


127 miles from Sydney, 20 miles from the sea coast in a direct line
from Newcastle, and 3 miles from Morpeth, at the head of the navi-
gation of the Hunter, Population, 910. West Maitland, f separated
from East Maitland by the Wallis creek. Population, 241)9. (Coal
mines are woiked in the neighbourhood of these towns on a large
scale.) Newcastle, at the mouth of the Hunter, 80 miles from
Sydney. This town is fast rising into eminence from its position
and neighbourhood to the coal mines. Popula ion, 1471. Singleton,
situated at Patrick’s Plains, on the south bank of the Hunter, 120
miles from Sydney. Population, 535. Morpeth, at the head of the
navigable part of the Hunter, 29 miles by water above Newcastle.
The extensive wharf of the Hunter River Steam Navigation Com-
pany is here, and throughout the year, constant communication to
and from the metropolis, is kept up by the steam vessels of the
Company; a considerable number of sailing vessels also, trade be-
tween this place and Sydney. Population, 635. Hexham, on the
Hunter, about halfway between Newcastle and Maitland. East
GvsJ'ord at the head of the Brisbane water, 35 miles from Sydney ;
the scenery here is beautiful and picturesque. West Gosford, on the
Brisbane water, near to the Narrara creek. Wollombi, on the banks
qf the Wollombi creek, mil s from Sydney Population 76.
V. GLOUCESTER. g Raymond Terrace, situated on the Hunter,
at its junction with the William river, and about 20 miles from New-
castle. Population, 263. Carrington, on Port Stephens harbour 180
qniles from Sydney. Stroud on the river, Karuah, the head quarters
of the Australian Agricultural Company.
VI. MACQUARIE. h Port Macquarie, at the mouth of the Hast-
ings, 278 miles from Sydney. Population 819. Mariaville, at the
bead of the navigation of the Maria river, about 52 miles from Port
Macquarie. Kempsey on the M'Leay river.
elevated plains, intersected by numerous creeks, streams, and rivulets. It
qbounds in excellent coal. The fine river Hunter affords a water communication
tli rough out its northern boundary, and along its alluvial banks are situated
Borne of the most flourishing farms and estates in the colony.
X The town of West Maitland, from its population and extensive trade, may be
considered as the metropolis of the northern districts.
a The County of Gloucester is bounded on the south and west, by the river
Gunter, to its confluence with the William River; on the S.W. by the William
River to its source, and by the Mount Royal Range to the principal source of the
Manning; on the north by the Manning River to Farquhar inlet, and on the
east by the sea. It is 74 miles long, 69 miles broad, and contains 2701 square
miles. Copulation, 2399. This county partakes of the general features of the
gbunties previously described, is well watered, and possesses the fine harbour of
Port Stephens. The Australian Agricultural Company’s estate of 437,102 acres
ia in this county.
h The County of Macquarie is bounded on the smith by the Manning ; on
the west by a line from the confluence of the Manning and Bernard rivers to
Mount Sea-View, thence by a line to Kippara, a pass in the range dividing the
jvaters of the M’Leay from the Wilson ; on the north by that range to the
source of the south branch of the Maria river, thence by that stream to the
boundary of the parish of Ivalateenec. and tbcnce to the M.'Leay river ; on the
M.W. by the M‘Leay river to its mouth; and on the east by the sea. It is 60
miles from north to south and 50 miles broad, and contains 2294 square miles
Copulation, 1973.


VII. DURHAM.) Paterson, on the riverPalerson 130 miles from
Sydney. Population 141. Muswellbrook, at the junction of the Mus-
wellbrook with the Hunter, 99 miles from Maitland. Population 208.
Seaham, on the William river. Clarence Town, on the William river.
Population 93. Dungog, on the William river. Population, 124.
Hinton, at the junction of the Paterson and Hunter, nines troin
Morpeth. Merlon, at Twickenham Meadows, near the confluence ot
the Goulburn and the Hunter, 140 miles from Sydney, and 16 mi es
from Jerry's Plains. Camberwell, on the Falbrook, between Singleton
and Muswellbrook, Aberdeen, on the Hunter, 160 miles from
S> VIH. HUNTER. j Jern/s Town, on the Hunter, 122 miles from
Sydney. St. Alban’s, on the Macdonald River, 70 miles from
Ix/cOOK* Hartley, on the river Lett, 78 miles from Sydney.
Population 62. Emu, on the river Nepean at Emu Plains, on the
Great Western Road, 35 miles from Sydney; Eden-glassie is about
two miles further up the river on a fine reach, capable of floating
a dozen ships-of-war, and is navigable for many miles upwards.
Bowenfels, at Bowen's Hollow, near the junction of the roads leading
from Sydney and Mudgee to Hartley. East Rydal on Solitary creek.
Wilberforce, on the banks of the Hawkesbury, opposite to Windsor;
this is a beautiful town but liable to floods in the rainy season. Com,
on the river Colo. . m
X. WESTMORELAND.J o‘Connell Town is 115 miles bom
Sydney.
i The County of Durham is hounded on the north by the JigfUZwnt
Manning and the range of Mount Royal; on the west by the County ot^ r ®-
bane; on the south by the counties of Hunter and Northumberland. andoa
the east by the County of Gloucester. Length 60 miles, breadth 40 miles, area,
2117 square miles. Population, 7554. This county is well watered.
7 The County of Hunter is bounded on the north by the counties of Durham
and Brisbane; west by the counties of Phillip and Roxburgh ; south by the
County of Cook ; east by Northumberland. Length 71 miles, breadth ii miles
area 2056 square miles. Population, 1190. The mountains of this county are
wild and romantic.
7c The County of Cook adjoins the County of Cumberland, and is bounded on
the north by the County of Hunter ; on the west by the counties of Roxburgh
and Westmoreland ; on the south by the counties of Weatmoreland and Camden ;
and on the east by Cumberland and Northumberland. Length 56 miles,
breadth 50 miles, area 1655 square miles. Population, 3098. A great poruon
of this county is occupied by the Blue Mountain Range, across w 6ich the flne
road from Sydney to Bathurst lies. A large part is table land from 2000 to 0000
feet above the level of the sea, abounding in picturesque scenery: m l lanm
and several fertile valleys compensate for the large quantity of rocky soil, me
Vale of Clywd runs along the foot of Mount York; its rich soil irrigated by
Cox’s river, running easterly into the Hawkesbury, and by the Fish and
Clarence rivers flowing westerly into the Macquarie.
I The County of Westmoreland is bounded on the north by Roxburgh ; on
the west by Georgiana; on the south by Argyle and Camden ; on the east by.
Cook. Length 69 miles, breadth 38 miles, area 1592 square miles. Population,
1576. It partakes of the general features of the county of Argyle, and contains
within it a portion of the Blue Mountain Range, whieh towers from three to,
four thousand feet above the level of the sea.


XI. ARGYLE.ot Ooulburn, on tlie banks of the Wollondilly, 123
miles from Sydney, and 44 miles from Berrima. Mamlan, 109 miles
from Sydney. Bungonia on Bungonia creek, 125 miles from Sydney.
Population, 98.
XII. MURRAY, n Queanbeynn, beautifully situated on the Quean-
beyan, 182 miles from t'ydney, and 44 miles from Berrima Popula-
tion 208. South Yass, on the south side of the river Yass, and
separated from North Yass by the river, 179 miles from Sydney.
Population of North and South Yass, 274. Bungendore , on Turallo
creek, near Lake George, 160 miles from Sydney. Population 30.
Larbert , on the Shoalhaven.
XIII. KING.o Gunning, on the Great South Road, 152 miles
from Sydney. Population, 95. North Yass, on the north side of the
river Yass, 147 miles from Sydney.
XIV. GEORGIANA. p Bingham, on the Isabella river; Buck-
burridgeo, near the centre of tire county ; Cook's Vale, near the centre
of the county.
XV. BAT HURST. <7 Bathurst, on the river Macquarie, 121 miles
from Sydney. Population, 1883. Carcoar, on the Belubula river, 144
miles from Sydney. Population 73.
XVI. ROXBURGH./- Kelso, on the Macquarie river, near
Bathurst, 120 miles from Sydney.
m The County of Argyle is hounded on the north hy Georgiana and 'West-
moreland ; on the west by King ; on the south by Murray; and on the east by
St. Vincent and Camden. Length 60 miles, breadth 30 miles, area 1950 square
miles. Population, 5000. The face of the county consists of tolerably high and
extensive ridges, the Mittigong Range ramifying in various directions, with
swelling hills, and irregular plains and valleys between them, watered by various
branches of the Hawkesbury and Shoalhaven rivers, besides a number of small
rivulets and ponds containing water all the year round. Lake Bathurst, which
Is from three to five miles in diameter, is in this county, also Goulburu Plains,
consisting of 35,000 acres without a single tree of natural growth. Although
Argyle cannot be said to be deficient in timber, still compared with other
Bounties, it is but thinly wooded, and large tracts called brushes, are altogether
barren.
n The County of Murray is hounded on the north by King and Argyle ; on
the west by Cowley ; on the south by Berefford ; and on the east by St. Vincent.
Length 72 miles, breadth 56 miles, area 2247 square miles. Population, 2721.
o The County of King is bounded on the north by Georgiana and Bathurst ;
on the west by Monteagle and Harden ; on the south by Murray; and on the
east by Argyle. Length 76 miles, breadth 43 miles, area 1781 square miles.
Population, 1665. The most remarkable plains are the Boorowa and Vasa
plains.
p The County of Georgiana is bounded on the north by Westmoreland and
Bathurst; on the west by Bathurst and King; on the south by King ; and on
the east by Argyle. Length 55 miles, breadth 50 miles, area 1924 square miles.
Population, 953.
q The County of Bathurst is bounded on the north by Roxburgh and Wel-
lington; on the west by Ashburnham and Monteagle; on the south by King
and Georgiana; and on the east by Westmoreland. Length 72 miles, breadth
68 miles, area 1860 square miles. Population, 4391. This county consists, in
general of broken table land, in some places forming extensive downs. Pairy
rings are frequent, and on most of them grow fungi of a large size. This is ono
of the most flourishing districts in the colony, and so salubrious is the climate,
that the first natural death did not occur till twelve years after its settlement.
r The County of Roxburgh is bounded on the north by Phillip; on the west


XVII. PHILLIP. s Ryahlone, near the Cudegegongriver; Cooyal.
on the Cooyal creek, 171 miles from Sydney.
XVIII. BRISBANE. t Scone, on the Dartbrook. Population 117.
Murrurundi, on the Pages river. Population 52. Merriwa, on Gumcnum
creek. Population, 42. Ailsa, on the Crui river. Population 13. /«-
vermein, on the Dartbrook; St. Aubin’s, also on the Dartbrook,
Population 103.
XIX. BLIGH. m Cassilis, on the Munmurra river ; Montefiores, at
the Junction of the rivers Bell and Macquarie, 250 miles from Sydney.
Population 129.
XX. ELLINGTON, v Mudgee, on the Cudgegong river, 150
miles from Sydney. Population, 131.
THE NORTHERN COUNTIES OF NEW SOUTH
WALES*
I. Dudley, on the coast, to the north of Macquarie. 11. Raleigh,
on the coast, to the north of Dudley. Ilf. Clarence, on the coast, to
the north of Raleigh. IV. Richmond, on the coast, to the north of
Clarence, V. Rous, on the coast, to the north of Richmond. VI.
Ward, on the coast, to the north of Rous, VII. Stanley, on the
coast, to the north of Ward. VIII. Canning, on the coast, to the
north of Stanley. IX. March, on the coast, to the north of Canning.
X. Lennox, west from Ward. XL Fitzroy, west from Lennox. XII.
Cavendish, south from Fitzroy, and west from Canning and Stanley.
XII. Aubigny, west from Cavendish. XIV. Churchill, south from
Cavendish, and west from Stanley. XV. Merivale, south from
Aubigny, and west from Churchill. XVI. Buller, west from Rou.,
XVII. BentincJc, west from Buller. XVIII. Drake, west from
by Wellington and Bathurst; on the south by Bathurst and Westmoreland;
and on the east by Cook and Hunter. Length 53 miles, breadth 43 miles, area
1519 square miles. Population, 2353. 'This county is hilly and broken, but
abounding in rich pasturage.
s The County of Phillip is bounded on the north by Brisbane and Bligh; on
the west by Wellington; on the south by Roxburgh ; and on the oast by Hun-
ter. Length 62 miles, breadth 38 miles, area 1618 square miles. Population, 641.
t The County of Brisbane is bounded on the north by Parry, Buckland, and
Pottinger ; on the west by Bligh, on the south by Phillip and Hunter ; and on
the east by Durham. Length 90 miles, breadth 40 miles, area 2344 square miles.
Population, 1406. this county consists of several ranges of table laud ; Mount
Wingen, a burning mountain, is situated on the south-eastern side of the divid-
ing range, which separates the lands of the Hunter River from Liverpool Plainr,
u The County of Bligh is bounded ou the north by the Liverpool range ; on
the west by Napier and Lincoln; and ou the south and east by Wellington,
Phillip, and Brisbane. Length SO miles, breadth 40 miles, area 1883 square
miles. Population, 598.
v The county of Wellington is bounded on the north by Bligh and Lincoln :
on the west by Gordon and Ashburnham ; on the south by Bathurst ; un i o \
the east by Roxburgh and Phillip. Length 72 miles, breadth 42 miles, ar t
1656 square miles Population, 1199. This is one of the finest districts in the
colony ; Wellington Valley is peculiarly adapted for grazing or agriculture.
* The whole of these counties, with the exception of the County of Stanley
are intermediate, lands. (See Squatting Regulations, pag*-tB.)


Richmond. XIX. Clive, south from Bentinck. XX Gough, west
from Drake. XXI. Gresham, west from Raleigh. XXII. Hardinge,
west from Gresham. XXIII. Sandon , west from Dudley. XXIV,
Inglis, south-west from Hardinge. XXV. Darling, west from Inglis.
XXVI. Vernon, west from Dudley and Macquarie. XXVII. Parry,
west from Vernon. XXXVIII. Halves, south from Parry and
Vernon. XXIX. Buckland, west from Parry. XXX. Pottiuger,
yyest from Buckland.
The Principal Towns in these Counties are,
North and South Brisbane, County of Stanley, on both banks of the
river Brisbane, which falls into Rloreton Bay. Population, North
Brisbane, 614 ; South Brisbane, 346. Ipswich, County of Stanley,
pn the Brewer. Population, 123. Drayton, County Aubigny, on
the River Brisbane, 68 miles from Brisbane. Warwick, County
at Canning Downs, on the Condamine. Grafton, County
Clarence, on the river Clarence. Armiddle, County Sandon, in the
district of New England, 144 miles from Murrurundi. Tamworth,
County Parry, in the district of Liverpool Plains, on the river Peel,
154 miles from Maitland.
THE SOUTHERN AND WESTERN COUNTIES OF
NEW SOUTH WALES. *
I. Gower, to the west of Pottiuger. 11. Napier, to the south of
Gower. 111. Lincoln, to the west of Bligh. IV. Gordon, to the
south of Lincoln. V. Ashhurnham, to the south of Gordon. VI.
Rfonteagle, to the south cf Ashburnbarn. VII. Harden, to the south
of Monteagle. VIII. Clarendon, to the west of Harden. IX. Cow-
ley, to the south of Harden, and west of Murray. X. Buccleugh, to
tlie west of Cowley. XI. Wynyard, to the west of Ruccleugh.
XII. Goullmrn, to the south of Wynyard. XIII. Wallace, to the
south of Buccleugh. XIV. Beresford, to the south ot Murray and
east of Wallace. XV. Dumpier, on the coast, to the south ot St. Vin--
cent. XVI. Auckland, on the coast, to the south of Dampier XVII.
Wellesley, to the west of Auckland. The counties of Auckland,
Wellesley, and Wallace, form the extreme southern boundary of New-
South Wales.
The Principal Towns in these Counties are,
Dubho, County Lincoln, on the Macquarie river, 28 miles from Mon-
tefiores. Binalong, County Harden, district of Lachlan. Lookham,
County Harden, district of Lachlan, on the Port Phillip road, 20
miles from Yass. Downing, County Harden, on Derringullen creek,
8 miles from Yass. Jtigion, County Harden, on the Jugion creek,
which flows into the Murrumbidgee. Gundagai, County Clarendon,
district of Lachlan, on the Murrumbidgee, 244 miles irom Sydney.
Albury, County Goulburn, on the river Murray, 286 miles from
Sydney. Purnut, County Buccleugh, on the river lumut. Cooyia ,
* The whole of these counties are intermediate lands.


County Beresford, in the Maneroo district, on the Snowy river, 75
miles from Queanbeyan. Eden, County Auckland, at Twofold Bay.
East and West Boyd, County Auckland, on the south shore of Two-
fold Bay, the river Kiah or Towamba separating the two townsoff
this bay Captain Cook lay too on the night of the 20th April 1770,
after having first sighted the land of New South Wales. Bombalo,
County Wellesley, on the Snowy river, 50 miles from Boyd Town.
BAYS, GULFS, HARBOURS, &c., OF NEW’ SOUTH W’ALES,
Bays. —Port Jackson, Botany Bay, Wide Bay, Moreton Bay, Shoal
Bay, Port Macquarie, Farquhar's Inlet, Port Stephens, Port Hunter,
Lake Macquarie, Tuggerah Beach, Brisbane Water, Broken Bay, Port
Hacking, Lake lllawarra, Shoalhaven, Jervis’ Bay, Bateman's Bay,
Twofold Bay
Islands. — Great Sandy Island at Wide Bay, Bribie’s Island, More-
ion island, and Stadbrnke Island, at Moreton Bay. Goat Island, Cock-
atoo Island, Garden Island, Pinchgut Island, &c,, within the Harbour
of Port Jackson.
Capes. — Cape Moreton on the north of Moreton Island, Point
Lookout, on the north of Stadbroke Island, Cape Byron, in the County
Rous, Point Plomer, to the north of Port Macquarie, Cape Hawke and
Sugar Loaf Point, in Gloucester, Point Perpendicular, north of Jervis
Bay, Cape George, south of Jervis Bay, Mount Dromedary, in the
County Dampier, Cape Green, south of Twofold Bay, Cape Howe, the
most southerly point of New South Wales.
Mountains. — The Blue Mountains run nearly north and south
through the whole extent of the Colony, in some places approaching
within 30 miles of the coast, and in other receding to 60or 90 miles:
the country beyond descending to the west, generally in steppes or
plains, thus forming a vast dividing range for the rivers flowing from
their lofty summits, This immense chain of mountains is bounded
on the eastern side (commencing at Cape Howe) by the followir.g
counties, —Auckland, Dampier, St. Vincent, Argyle, Westmoreland,
Cook, Hunter, Phillip, Bligh, where it reaches its greatest divergence
from the coast; it (hen runs eastward, bounding towards the north
the counties of Brisbane and Hawes; about the centre of the northern
boundary of the County of Hawes, it again runs in a northerly direction
having towards the east, the counties of Vernon, Sandon, Gresham.
Drake, Duller, Churchill, Cavendish, and Fitzroy, after which, in the
unsettled districts, it takes a detour to the norm-west. On the
Western side, this chain of mountains is bounded, and in general
formsthe boundary of the counties Wellesley, Beresford, Murray,King,
Georgiana, Westmoreland, (passing nearly through the centre of this
county,) Roxburgh, and nearly through the centre of Phillip and
Bligh. At the point of intersection of the counties Bligh and Pot-
tinger, the mountain range branches off nearly east and west, the,
course to the west being as yet undefined, the counties bounding it
on the north during this divergence, being Pottinger, Buckland, and
Parry; it then turns towards the north, having for its western
boundary Hardinge, Gough, Clive, Bemincfe, Meriyalc, and Aubygny.


This immense range of mountains has, in different quarters, received
different names. Thus the most southerly portion separating Auck-
land, from Wellesley is called The Wanderer Range ; between the old
proclaimed counties and the new counties to the north, The Liverpool
Range ; the mountains branching off from the great central range
towards the north-west, and separating Hardinge from Inglis and
Dudley, The Macdonald Range and The Hardwick Mountains ; and
those running in the extreme north of the colony towards Buckland's
Table Land, The Carnarvon Range. The Pandora Range, and The
Arbuthnot Range branch off from the main range to the north of
County Napier.
The Principal Summits and Detached Mountains are, The
Brothers, in the south of Beresford; Mount Wellington, to the west
of Wallace ; Mount Huntley, Mount Mitchell, Mount Cordeaux, Mount
Stephen, Mount Melbourn, all to the north-east of Merivale; Mount
Salvator and Mount Faraday, to the south-west of Buckland’s Table
Land ; Mount Ogilhy, Denham Range, and Mount Kennedy, to the
south-west of the Carnarvon Range; Mount Riddell to the north of
the Hardwick Mountains; Mount Canobulus to the west of Bathurst.
Rivers to the East of the Blue Mountains. — The Hawkesbury
(native name Deeruhbun,) named by Governor Phillip after Lord
Hawkesbury, is a continuation of the Nepean, after its junction with
a considerable stream called the Grose river, issuing from a remaik-
able cleft in the Blue Mountains, in the vicinity ofthe town of Rich-
mond. Along the base of these mountains, it flows in a northerly
direction, fed by numerous tributary mountain torrents, descending
from narrow gorges, which, after heavy rains, cause it to rise and
overflow its banks as it approaches the sea. After passing Richmond,
Windsor, and Wilberforce, and receiving the waters of the Colo ami
the Macdonald, it falls into Broken Bay, 14 miles to the north of
Port Jackson ; This river is extremely winding, the town of Windsor
being only 35 miles distant from the sea, but by the river 140 miles.
It is navigable for vessels of 100 tons four miles above Windsor. The
Nepean rises in the northern boundaries of Camden, flows north-west
till it receives (he Warragamba, then north through Emu Plains
passing by Penrith, and fails into the Hawkesbury. The Wollondilly
rises near Mount Cullarin, on the Western boundary of Argyle, flows
through the town of Goulburn and the County of Argyle, separating
it from the counties of Camden and Westmoreland, and empties itself
into the Warragamba at its confluence with Cox’s River. Cox’s River
rises in the County Cook, and, separating that County from West-
moreland, joins the Wollondilly at its junction with the Warragamba.
The Warragamba is the name of the united snearns of the Wollon-
dilly and Cox, till they join the Nepean, and is in direct distance about
11 miles. The Colo rises in the County of Roxburgh, and,
dividing the counties of Hunter and Cook, falls into the Hawkesbury.
The Macdonald divides the Hunter from Norihmnbei land, and, flowing
south, falls intothe Hawkesbury. The Parramatta River, in the County
of Cumberland, can only be considered as a continuation of the harbour
of Port Jackson. Cook's River, in the County of Cumberland, falls into


Botany Bay. George’s Diver rises in the south of the County of
Cumberland, flows north, then east, passing by Liverpool, and falls
into Botany Bay. The Cataract River divides the counties of Cum -
berland and Camden, flows north-west, and falls into the Nepean.
The Shoal haven rises in a swamp at the foot of Mount Corrumburoo,
100 miles from Sydney, in the south-west of St. Vincent, flows north
and then east, dividing Murray, Argyle, and Camden from Sr. Vin-
cent, and falls into the sea at Cooloomgatta, 35 miles south from
Wollongong, passing through one of the Slmalhaven gullies : These
gullies are 2(J miles from Lake Bathurst, and are ravines from 500 to
1200 feet deep, and of tremendous appearance. The Clyde and The
M'Leay, in the County of St. Vincent, fall into Bateman’s Bay.
The River Hunter (native name Coquoji ) rises on the south side of the
Liverpool Range of the Blue Mountains, flows south til! it receives
the Goulburn, separating Brisbane from Bligh, passing by Scone,
Muswellbrook, and Merton; it then flows east, receiving the Pater-
son and the William, passing by Jerry's Town, S ngleton, Morpeth,
East and West Maitland, Raymond Terrace, and Hexham, and falls
into the Pacific Ocean at Newcastle, about 70 miles to the north of
Port Jackson ; it is navigable only for about 25 miles in a direct line
from the coast, or about 35 miles by water from Newcastle. The
Goulburn rises in that part of the dividing range which separates the
waters of the Goulburn from the Talhragar, and, after receiving the
waters of the Mummurra, Crui, Bow, Gmnrnum, Hall’s, Giants’,
Widdin, Wolar, and Bylong Creeks, empties itself into the river
Hunter at the south-western angle of the County of Durham. The
Paterson (native name Yimmang) rises in the county of Durham, flows
south, and tails into the Hunter at Hinton, passing by the towns of
Gresford and Paterson. The William separates Gloucester from
Durham, flows south, and passes by Dungogand Clarence Town, and
falls into the Hunter near to Raymond Terrace. The Manning rises
in the Liverpool Range of the Blue Mountains, divides the
counties of Hawes and Macquarie from Gloucester, and empties
itself into the Pacific Ocean in latitude 32 p by several mouths, with -
out affording any harbour except for boats. The Hastings rises near
Mount Sea View; flows east through the centre of Macquarie and
falls into the sea at Port Macquarie, about 220 miles to the north-
east of Sydney : The country bordering on the Hastings consists of
pleasing undulations of hill and dale richly clothed with timber. The
M’Leay divides Dudley from Vernon and Macquarie, flows east, pas-
sing by Kempsey, and falls into the sea about 80 miles north of Pott
Macquarie ; the extent of good land on this river is very considerable.
The Bellinger separates Raleigh from Dudley, flows east, and falls
into the Pacific Ocean. The Clarence rises in the north of Duller in
the dividing range, near to Benloraond, flows south, receiving the
Rocky river, the Man river, whose tributaries are the Mitchell and
Boyd, and the Urara river, then north-east, passing by Grafinn, and
falls into Shoal Bay. The Richmond rises near the Macpherson
Kdnge, separates Rous from Duller and Richmond, and falls into the
Pacific Ocean. The Logan rises near Mount Lindesay, separates
Ward fvom Stanley, and empties itself into the southern passage of


Moreton Bay. The Brisbane rises in the mountain ranges to the
northward, flows south, and then east, separating Stanley from
Cavendish, receives a number of tributaries, the principal of which is
the Bremer, passes by the town of Brisbane and falls into Moreton Bay;
Moreton Bay is 60 miles in length from north to south, and sheltered
by several islands ; the tide ascends 50 miles above the mouth of
the Brisbane, flowing also up the Bremer whose channel it raises
eight feet. The Bremer rises in the south of Churchill, flows north
through Churchill and Stanley, passing by Ipswich, and falls into the
Brisbane. The Mary rises in the north of Canning, flows north,
separating March from Lennox, and falls info Wide Bay. Ihe
Burnett, to the north of the unsettled districts of New South Wales,
flows north-east, and falls into the Pacific Ocean to the north of
Hervey’s Bay.
Rivers to the West of the Blue Mountains. —The Darling
(native name Gallewatta or Watta,) is formed by the junction of
numerous streams in the interior to the west and north-west ol the
thirty northern counties, pursues a course to the south-west, and
joins the river Murray near Mount Look-out. Its principal tribu-
taries are the Culba or Maranoa, the Balonne or Condamine, the
Karaula or Maclntyre, the Namoi or Peel, the Castlereagh, the
Macquarie and the Bogan. The Culba or Maranoa rises near
Mount Ogilby flows south and falls into the Balonne. I'he Balonne or
Condamine rises in the dividing range to the west of Cavendish and
Fitzroy, flows south-west and receives a number of smaller streams ;
it then separates into various channels, the first branch being the
Bulgoa, which falls into the river Darling abont 30 miles above Fort
Bouike ; the remainder, or Minor Balonne spreads opt into the
rivers Narran, Bokhara, Ballandoola, and Birvee; the three latter
again unite and fall into the river Darling about 40 miles above Fort
Bourke; the Narran terminates in extensive swamps, north from the
marshes of the Macquarie, which are drained by the Darling. The
Kaurala or Macintrye rises in the counties of Clive and Gough, flows
west and falls into the Darling, which is here called the Barwon.
The Namoi or Peel is formed by the junction of a number of streams
flowing through the counties of Darling, fnglis, Parry, Buckland, and
Pottinger, flows north-west and falls into the Darling The Castle-
reagh rises in the Arbuthnot Range, flows north-west and falls into
into the Namoi. The Macquarie (native name Wambool) is formed
hy the junction of the Fish and Campbell rivers after they issue Irom
the Blue Mountains, near the counties Bathurst and Wellington,
flows in a winding course to the north-west, and after loosing itselt
in the marshes of the Macquarie, again reunites and falls into the
Darling. The Malong or Bell, a tributary of the Macquarie rises
near Mount Canobulus flows north through Wellington Valley, about
170 miles from Newcastle, The Cudffegong, another tributary, rises
in the west of the County Hunter, on the opposite side of the divid-
ing range, flows west and falls into the Macquarie. The Bogan rises
in Hervey’s Range, to the west of Gordon, flows north-west and falls
into the Darling ; Mr. Cunningham the Botanist, was killed near the
banks of {his river. The Laqhlan (native name Calare,) rises in the


Cuilarin Range, which divides ilie counties King and Argyle, flows
iibrth-west separating Ashburnhatn, Bathurst, and Georgiana from
King and Moiiteagle, loosing itself in marshes in about 33° south
latitude, and joining the Murrumbidgee in 34£ 0 south latitude 143 J
east longitude. The Murrumbidgee has its source in the dividing
range to the soutli of Beresford, flows north through that county and
divides Murray from Cowley ; it then flows west receiving the river
Yass, separating Harden from Cowley and Buccleugh, bounding
Wynyard on the north, from which county it receives several s reams
and at last falls into the Murray. The Murray or Hume (native name
Millewa,) which divides New South Wales from the Colony of Vic-
toria, rises in the Australian Alps to the west of Wallace, flows west
receiving the waters of the Mitta Mitta, Ovens or Bui wang, Goulburn
or Bayungun or Twisden, the Murrumbidgee, and the Darling, and
empties itself into Lake Alexandrine in South Australia.
11. THE COLONY OF VICTORIA.
The Colony of Victoria, formerly known as Australia Felix or
the Port Phillip District, is that part of Auslralia situated on the
south east coast, between the Colony of South Australia and Cape
Howe. Its greatest extent from east to west is about 280 miles, and
from north to south about 180 miles, covering a space of 30,000
square miles, with a navigable coast from east to west of 500 miles.
It was named Australia Felix by the Surveyor-general, Sir T. L.
Mitchell,* and the Port Phillip District from the name of its principal
bay or habour.f
Counties.-— I. Pallet , the most westerly county of Victoria,
bounded by the Colony of South Australia. 11. Normanhy,
east from Follet. 111. Vundas, east from Follet and north from
Normanby. IV, Villiers, east from Nonnanby. V. Hampden, east
from Villiers, and north from Heytesbury. VI. Heytesbury, on the
coast, south from Hampden. VII. Ripon, north from Hampden.
Vll L Polworth, on the coast, east from Heytesbury. IX. Grenville,
east from Hampden. X. Talbot, east and north from Ripon, XL
Dalhousie, east from Talbot. XII. Bourke, south from Dalhousie.
Xlll. Grant, on the coast, on the shores of Port Phillip, east
from Grenville. XIV. Anglesea, east from Dalhousie and Bourke.
XV, Evelyn, east from Bourke. XVI. Murnington, on the coast,
on the west shore of Port Phillip. XVII. Bass, on the coast,
east from Mornington. XVIII. Douro, on the coast, east from Bass.
XIX. Haddington, east from Bass and north from Douro. XX.
Bruce, on the coast, east from Haddington. XXL Abinger, east
from Bruce. XXII. Combermere, east from Abinger. XXIII.
Howe, east from Combermere, and bordering on New South Wales.
* “We travelled,” says Sir T. L. Mitchell, “in two directions, with heavy
carts, meeting no other obstruction than the softness of the soil, and in return-
ing over flowery plains, and green hills formed hy the breezes of early spring, I
named this region Australia Felix, the better to distinguish it from the parched
deserts of the interior country where we had wandered so unprofitably and so
long.”
f Port Phillip was discovered and entered by Lieutenant John Murray, ia


The P, 'incipal Towns are,
M f.lbourne,* the capital of the Colony of Victoria, in County
Bourke, situated on the Yarra-Yarra, 587 miles from Sydney, and
formed into a city by Sir Richard Bourke 19th May, 1837. Brigs,
schooners, and small craft, can come up to the wharves at Mel-
bourne, while vessels of a heavy tonnage, anchor at Hobson’s Bay.
Population about 20,000. Geelong, in County Grant, on Port
Phillip Bay, between the bay of Corio and the river Barwon,
641 miles from Sydney, and 54 miles from Melbourne; this
is now a place of great trade, and promises to rival Melbourne
in importance. Albertan, on the river Albert, which flows into
Port Albert, the capital of Gipps’ Laud. Portland, in the
County Normanby, on the shores of Portland Bay; this town is
rapidly rising in importance. Belfast, in the County Villiers, at
Port Fairy, 779 miles from Sydney. Population, 2G9. I Vdrnambool,
in the same county, on the Merri river, at Lady Bay. MUcheUtown,
County of Dalhousie, on the Goulburn river, 80 miles from Melbourne
William's Town, < ounty Bourke, on the south shore of Hobson’s Bay,
near to Point Gellibrand, where the lighthouse stands. Population,
322. Brighton in the same county, on Hobson’s Bay, Population
509. St. Kilda, on the right of the road leading from Melbourne to
Brighton, and Bulla-bulla, both in the same county.
Gulfs and Bays. — Lake King, Port Albert, Corner Inlet, Western
Port, Port Phillip, in which is Hobson's Bay and Corio Bay, Port
Fairy, Portland Bay, Discovery Bay.
Capes, —Ram Head, Point Hicks, Wilson's Promontory, Cape
Liptrap, Cape Paterson, Cape Schenk, Point Nepean, Indented Head,
White Point, Cape Patten, Cape Otway, Moonlight Head, Point Camp-
bell, Cape Nelson, Cape Bridgewater.
Mountains. — The Australian Alps, Snowy Mountains, Granitic
Range, Alexandrian Range, Villanmarnartai Mountains, Hills of Lava,
Pyrenees, Grampians, Dundas Group, Victoria Range, the Sierra and
Rifle Range, Mount Kosciusko, and Mount William.
Rivers Flowing to the South. — The Snowy River rises near the
boundary of New South Wales, flows south through the County of
Combermere, and falls into the sea about 20 miles to the eastward of
Lake Tyers. The River Tambo or Thomson, rises in the north of
Abinger, flows south, and falls into Lake King. The Nicholson and
Macarthur or Mitchell rise in the Australian Alps, flow south, and
fall into Lake King. The Avon separates Bruce from Haddington,
flows south, and falls into Lake Wellington. The La TVoie-rises near
Mount Baw-haw, and dividing the Australian Alps from S'rzelecki’s
Range, flows east through Haddington and fails info Lake Welling-
ton. The Yarra-yarra rises near Mount Baw-baw, flows west
through Evelyn and Bourke, passes by Melbourne, receives the
ihe colonial brig Lady Nelson, January 1802, and was visited shortly after by
Captain Flinders in The Investigator.
* The City of Melbourne is incorporated and consists of a Mayor, Aldermen,
and Councillors, elected in the same manner as in Sydney. Gcolon; U also in-
eorporated.


Saltwater tiver, and falls into Hobson’s Bay. The Barwon rises in
Grenville, flows east through Grant, and falls into the Bay of Corio,
at Geelong, The Moorahool rises in the north of the County of Giant,
flows south, and falls into the Barwon at Geelong. The Taylor rises
near Mount Cole, flows south-west through Hampden, and falls into
the Hopkins about 10 miles from its mouth. The Hopkins rises near
Mount Cole to the north of Ripon, flows south through ilipon, forms
the boundary between Hardinge and Villiers, and falls into Lady
Bay. The Glenelg (native name Nangesla) rises at the foot of the
Grampians, flows west and south, forming the boundary of the
counties of Dundas and Normanbv, and enters the sea at the deepest
part of Discovery Bay, receiving the W ande, the Wannon the StaJce,
and the Crawford.
Rivers Flowing Towards the Interior.—The Mitta-mitta
rises at the foot of the Australian Alps, flows north, and falls into the
Murray at the town of Albury. The Ovens or Bunvang rises near
Mount Aberdeen or Buffalo, flows south, crossing the post road from
Sydney to Melbourne, and falls into the Murray. The Goulburn
rises to the north of Anglesea, flows north, and falls into the Murray.
The Carnpaspe rises to the north of Bourke, flows north through
Dalhousie and falls into the Murray. The Avoca rises at the foot of
the Pyrenees, flows north and falls into the Murray. The Wimmera
rises near Mount Cole, flows round the base of the Grampians, and
lalis into Lake Hindmarsh.
Lakes. —Lake Wellington in Haddington. Conewaire, into which
the Barwon flows, in the County of Grant. Lake Hodswarre, in the
County of Grant. Lake Koranganite, (salt water) in Grenville.
Colore, (fresh water)in Polworth. Balake, south of Ripon. Liii-
lithgow, in Villiers. Hindmarsh, into which the Wimmera flows.
111. THE COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Colony of South Au-tralia embraces the territory between
132° and 141 0 east longitude, extending from the sea coast as far as
26° south latitude, and contains 300,000 square miles,* This colony
has most productive copper and lead mines in active operation.
Counties.— I. Hindmarsh. 11. Adelaide. 111. Gaivler. IV,
Light. V. Stanley. VI. Russell. VII. Sturt. VIII. Eyre. IX.
Flinders. X. Grey.
Principal Towns.— Adelaide, f the capital of the colony, in the
* This district was erected into a colony under the following conditions,
“The whole of the territory to be open to settlement by British subjects ;
not to be governed by laws applying toother parts of Australia but by lawj
expressly qi acted (or he colony;—the colony in no case to be employed as a
place of confinement for transported convicts; —no waste or public lands to
beeome private property but by purchase:—all persons whether residing in
Great Britain or in the colony to he at liberty to acquire laud without limit
as to quantity or situation ; —the emigrants conveyed to the colony with the
purchase money of public lands to be of the two sexes in equal numbers,
The colony was tal-en possession of and the fh st governor, (Captain John
Hindmarsh) entered on Iris duties on 25th May, 183/.
f The city of Adelaide is divided into two unequal parts by a reserve of 209


County of Adelaide, about 6 miles from the sea, on the eastern coast
ef Gulf St. Vincent. Population, 12,000. Bowden, near the City of
Adelaide. Albert, near Adelaide. Hindmarsh, about 2 miles from
Adelaide. Walkersville, about 3 miles from Adelaide. Glenelg,
about G miles from Adelaide. Klemzig, county of Adelaide. Good-
wood, County of Adelaide. Gawler, County of Adelaide. Rapid Bay,
County of Hindmarsh. Balhannah, Willunga, Onkaparinga, Noai lung a,
Halindvrf, Mount Barker, all in the district of Mount Marker; Milner,
on the River Gawler; Kingscote, on Kangaroo Island, south-west of
Cape Jervis.
Mines.—Lead.— Wheal Gawler, Glen Osmond, Wheal Watkins,
M'Farlane’s, Finke’s, all situated a few miles from Adelaide ; Yatto-
golinga, at Rapid Bay. Copper. —Kapunda, 45 miles from Ade-
laide; Burra-burra, 90 miles from Adelaide; Mo ntacute, Yattogo-
linga, Barossa, Murkerta, Magill, Onkaparinga, Princess Royal,
Wakefield, KnnmantUo, Paringa, and Higher-Montacute.
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours. — Encounter Bay, Gulf of St. Vin-
cent, Spencer’s Gulf, Holdfast Bay, Hardwicke Bay, Port Lincoln,
Sleaford Bay, Avoid Bay, Coffin’s Bay, Anxious Bay, Streaky Bay,
Snowy Bay, Denial Bay, Fowler's Bay, Rivoli Bay, Guichen Bay,
Lacepede Bay.
Capes. — Cape Northumberland, on the south-east of the colony, to
the west of the river Glenelg. Cape West Banks, west of Cape
Northumberland. Cape Cannes , the south point of Rivoli ! ay.
Cape Jaffa, the north point of Rivoli Bay. Cape Bernouilli, dividt s
Guichen Bay from Lacepede Bay. Cape Willoughby, the eastern
point of Kangaroo Island. Cape Jervis, the southern point of the
Gulf of St- Vincent, opposite Kangaroo Island, from which it is
separated by Backstairs passage. Yorke’s Peninsula between Spen-
cer’s Gulf and the Gulf of St. Vincent. Cape Spencer, the southern
point of Yorke’s Peninsula. Point Riley, east ot Spencer’s Gulf.
Cape Catastrophe, the.east point of Sleaford Bay. Cape Wiles, the
west point of Sleaford Bay. Whidby Point, the west point oi. Avoid
Bay. Point Drummond, the north point of Coffin’s Bay. Gape
Radslock, the western point of Anxious flay. Point Bell, between
Powder’s Bay and Genial Bay. Cape Adieu, the most western cape
of the colony.
Islands. — Kangaroo Island, Althorp Islands, Mundo Island, Hind-
marsh Island, Wright Island, the Gambler Islands, Sir Joseph Bank’s
Group, Neptune Islands, Whidby's Island, Perforated Island, Rocky
Island, Investigator’s Group, and Nuyt’s Archipelago.
Mountains. — Hay’s Range which divides the waters of Lake
Alexandrina from Lake St. Vincent, the principal summits of which
are, Mount Lofty 2400 feet above the level of the sea, and Mount
Barker ; Mount Arden, near Lake Torrens; Moimt Brown, at the head
acres, intended tor a park through which runs the river Torrens.- The situa-
tion of the City is very beautiful whether you approach from the harbour or
Holdfast Bay, Approaching from Holdfast Bay is a slight eminence about
60 feet above the level of the plains forming a table land, on which stands the
southern and larger portion of the city—it is therefore nearly a dead level,
the four exterior frontages or terraces presenting delightful views of the ad-
jacent country


of Spencer’s Gulf, 3000 feet above the level of the sea. The Gawler
Range, between Streaky Bay and Mount Arden, consisiting of granite,
and stretching as far as the eye can reach ; the country around is pfthe
most arid and sterile character, consisting entirely of rugged rocks
without timber or vegetation. The Barossa Range, in the district of
Gawler; Mount Slurt the most prominent point ot the Gawler Range.
Mount Eyre, Mount Young, Mount Cooper,
Rivers. —The Murray, the largest river in Australia, after reciving
the Murrumbidgee and the Darling, (See page 45.) Boas west, and
falls into Lake Alexandrine. The Lindesay, a tributary of the Mur-
ray, falls into the Murray in longitude 140* 29' east latitude, 38° 58’
south, The Broughton and the Hill, flowthrough the County of Stanley.
The Wakefield flows through the County of Gawler, and falls into the
Gulf of St, Vincent. The Light flows through the County of Gawler.
The Gawler divides the counties of Gawler and Adelaide, and falls
into the sea at Port Gawler. The Finnis, in the County of Hind-
mttrsh, flows into Lake Alexandrina. The Torrens, in the County
of Adelaide, flows through the city of Adelaide. The Sturt rises near
through Mount Lofty, flows the County of Adelaide, and falls into the
Gulf of St. Vincent.
Lakes. — Lake Torrens, (discovered by Mr. Eyre) about 90 miles to
the north of Spencer’s Gulf, stretches in the form of a horse-shoe
round the head of that gulf. Lake Alexandrina, (native name Kay-
inga) to the cast of the Gulf of M. Vincent, about 60 miles in length,
and from 30 to 40 miles in breadth, extending south to the shores of
Encounter Bay, its medium depth being about four feet; the Murray
empties its waters into this Lake, and disembogues itself into the sea at
Encounter Bay by two mouths* called the Eastern and Western
entrances.
IV. THE COLONY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia includes the territory situated to the westward
of longitude 129° east; its greatest length from north to south being
1280 miles, and its breadth from east to west 800 miles, and contain-
ing 1,000,000 square miles.
Counties. — I. Melbourne. 11. Glenelg. 111. Grey. IV. Car-
narvon. V. Twiss. VI. Victoria. VII. Durham. VIII. Lands-
doivn. IX. Perth. X. York. XL llowick. XII. Beaufort.
XIII. Minto, XIV, Grantham. XV. Murray. XVI. Wellington.
XVII. Wicklow. XVIII. Peel. XIX. Hay. XX. Goderich.
XXL Lanark. XXII. Sussex. XXIII. Nelson. XXIV. Stirling
XXV. Plontaganet. XXVI. Kent.
Principal Towns. — Perth, County of Perth, thecapital of Western
Australia, on the Swan River; and in the same county, Freemantle,
on the harbour of Melville-water, at the mouth of the Swan River,
Gin!ford, on the Swan River, 7 miles to the north-east of the town
of Perth, and 4 miles from the foot of the mountains. Clarence and
Kelmscott, Bejoording and Toodyoy, both in the County Victoria, on
the river Toodyoy. York, County .of York, on the river Avon, about
60 miles east of Perth. Beverley, County of York. Northam, County


of York, at the confluence of the Matlock and Avon. Peel , on the
Murray, and Garbanup on the Harvey, both in the County of Murray.
Waterloo, County of Wellington, on the river Collier. Pieton,
County of Wellington, on the river Preston. Banbury, County of
Wellington, on Koombanagh Bay, Bannister and Williamsburg, in
the County Wicklow, on the William. Kojonvp, County of Goderich,
on the Great North Road, leading from Albany and King George’s
f-ound to Freemantle. Augusta, on Flinders Bay. Dunsboro’, near
Point Naturaliste. Busselton, on the coast of Bay-du -Geographe, and
Wonerup, on Vasse Inlet, Bay-dn-Geographe, all in the County of
Sussex. Albany, County Plantaganet, on King George’s Sound.
Wyndham, County Plantaganet, on the coast of Port Twopeople;
and Green-valley, County Plantaganet, on the high road leading
from Albany to Freemantle.
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours, —Experience Bay, Doubtful Island
Bay, Port Twopeople, King George's Sound, Flinders Bay, Bay-du-Geo-
graphe, Koombanagh Bay, Champion Bay, Gantheaume Bay, Freycincts
Harbour, Sharks’ Bay, Exmouth Gulf, Desault Bay, Carnot Bay, Roe-
buck Bay, King’s Sound, Colliers Bay, Brunswick Bay, Frederick's Har-
bour,Montague Sound, Admiralty Bay, Vansittart’s Bay, and Cambridge
Gulf,
Capes. — Cape Aird, the western point of the Great Australian
Bight, longitude east. Point Hood, the south point of Doubt-
ful Island Bay. Cape Vancouver, between Port Twopeople and St.
George’s sound. Gape Howe (west), in the south of the County
Plantaganet. Point D~Entrecasteaur, in the County of Lanark. Cape
Leeuin, the south-west point of Australia, Cape Mentelle, in the
County of Sussex. Cape Leschenault, in the County of Twiss. Steep
Point near Dirk Hartog’s Islands. Cape Cuvier, in latitude 24° and
13'south, known at a distance at sea by its deep red colour. Flam-
ing Head or North-west Cape, the north-west point of Exmouth Gulf.
Cape Bossut, situated in latitude 18° 42' south, !ongitudel2l ° 45' east.
Cape Levcque, the northern point of Dampier’s Land ; it is a red cliff
60 feet in height. Gape Londonderry, north-east of Admiralty Gulf.
Cape Rulhieres, to the east of Cape Londonderry. Cape Naturaliste,
north point of the Countv of Sussex.
Islands. — Recherche Isles, Bald Island, Rottennest Island, Hout-
man’s Abrolhos, Dirk Hartog’s Islands, Barrow's Islands, Dumpier's
Aschipelago, Buccaneer's Archipelago.
Mountains. —There are three distinct ranges of mountains, the
highest of which is called The Darling Range, running as in New
South Wales, nearly parallel to the coast, and varying in width
from 30 to 60 miles. The distance across the range is from 25 to 30
miles. One of the peaks Mount William, rises to the height of 3,0-00
feet. The land beyond this range is good and fertile.
Rivers. — King’s River in the County Plantaganet, flows into
Oyster Harbour, King George’s Sound. Hay, in the County Plan-
taganet, empties itself into Wilson’s Inlet. Denmark, in the County
of Stirling, flows into Wilson’s Inlet. Blackwood, to the east of
Cape Leeuin, flows into Flinders Bay, Preston, in the County of
Wellington, f»!!s into Port Leschenault. Collier, in the County of


Wellington, flows into Port Leschenault. Murray, in the County of
Murray, flows into Peel’s Inlet. Canning, falls into the river Swan
a little below Perth. Swan, in the County of Perth, receives the
waters of the Avon, Toodyoy, and Canning, and discharges itself into
Melville Water.
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA between Western Australia and
New South Wales. We have as yet but little information in regard
to the inferior of this immense tract of country. The principal
Rivers yet discovered are—Victoria, Marlow, Nicholson, Albert,
Yappa, Lynd, Burdekin, Isaak’s, and Boyne. The principal Bays &c.
are—Anson’s Bay, Van Dieman’s Gulf, Port Essington, Arnheim
Bay, Gulf of Carpentaria, Princess Charlotte’s Bay, Halifax Bay,
Edgecombe Bay, Repulse Bay, Broad Sound, Port Bowen, Keppel
Bay, Port Curtis. The principal Capes fyc. —Cape Van Diemen,
Cape Arnheim, Cape Keerweer, Cape Yorke, Cape Grenville, Cape
Weymouth, Cape Flattery, Cape Tribulation, Cape Grafton, Cape
Cleveland, Cape Gloucester, Cape Townsend, Sandy Cape, 1 ndian
Head. Islands,— Bathurst Island, New Years Islands, Goulburn
Islands, English Company’s Islands, Groote Island, Wellesley’s
Island, Prince of Wales’ Islands, York Island, Sir C. Hardy’s
Islands, Cumberland Isles, Northumberland Isles.
V THE COLONY OF TASMANIA OR VAN DIEMAN’S
LAND.
Van Dieman’s Island is situated on the south-east coast of Aus-
tralia, from which it is separated by Bass s Straits. It is shaped
somewhat like a heart, its greatest extent from north to south, being
about 210 miles, and from east to west 150, covering an extent of
about 24,000 square miles, being nearly the size of Ireland.
This island was formally taken possession of by Lieutenant Bowen
in 1803, with the view of forming a penal settlement for prisoners con-
victed in New South Wales Resdon or Restdown, on the eastern
bank of the Derwent, was the spot selected for the settlement, but be-
vond this little else was effected. Early in 1804, Lieutenant General
Collins, who had recently left England with a considerable expedition,
having in view the foundation of a settlement at Port Phillip, altered
his destination on account of the unsurmountable difficulties which then
appeared to attend the establishment of a colony at that place, and
arrived in the river Derwent, and after various surveys the present
site of Hobart Town was determined on as the Capital of the infant
colony. In the course of the same year a settlement was formed on
the other side of the island by Colonel Paterson of the 102nd. Regt.,
who arrived from Svdney, and in the first instance made choice of a
g.pot beyond Georgetown calling it York town, but which was after-
wards abandoned. Three years after the settlement of the colony
sheep and cattle were introduced, and till 1813 the island continued
as a place of transportation from New South Wales, all communica-
tion except with England and New South Wales being interdicted.
In 1813 Lieutenant-Colonel Davey, the 2nd Lieutenant-Governor
arrived, tberestrictions above alluded to were abolished, and the colony


placed on tlie same footing with respect to commerce as New South
Wales. He was succeeded in 1817 by Colonel Sorell who caused a
road to be formed between Hobart Town and Launceston. In 1821
the tide of emigration set in from England towards Tasmania. In
1825 Van Dieman’s Latld was declared by the King independent of
New South Wales, the chief authority being vested in the Governor
and Council. Prosperity followed these measures and the colony
has been gradually increasing in wealth and population. It is still
a penal colony to which prisoners are sent from Britain. As the
colony increased in numbers, the natives rapidly decreased until their
numbers having being reduced to about 150, they were some years
ago entirely removed from Tasmania'to Great Island in Bass’s straits.
Counties. I. Buckingham, on the north east coast, bounded by
D’Entrecasteaux channel, the sea, and Storm Bay to the mouth of
the Derwent. 11. Kent, on the coast, south of Buckingham. 111.
Monmouth, partly on the coast, to the north of Buckingham and west
of Pembroke. IV. Pembroke, on the east coast, to the east of Mon-
mouth, and south of Glamorgan. V. Glamorgan, ori the east coast,
to the north of Pembroke. Vf. Dorset on the north-east coast,
bounded by Banks’ Straits. VII. Devon, on Bass’s strait to the
west of Dorset. VIII. Cornwall, south of Dorset. IX. Somerset,
south of Cornwall. X. Westmoreland, south of Devon and west from
Cornwall and Somerset. XI. Cumberland, south of Somerset and
north of Buckingham.
Towns. —In Buckingham, — Hobart- town, the capital on the river
Derwent, about 20 miles from its mouth, 33, miles from Cape Pillar,
and 37 miles from Tasmania Head. Newtown, on the Derwent, 3
miles from Hobart-town. Rugby, on the Derwent, Bridgeivater, on
the Derwent, 12 milesfrom Hobart-town. Al'mont, on the Derwent,
40 miles from Hobart-town. New Norfolk, on the Derwent, 21 miles
from Hobart-town. Cookville, on the island pf Brune on the southern
shores of Adventure Bay. In Kent,— Ramsgate, on the shores of
Recherche Bay. In Monmouth. — Oatlands, on the Dulverton, 51
miles from Hobart-town. Jerusalem, 30 miles from Hobart-town.
Jericho, on the Jordan, 43 miles from Hobart-town. Piclon, near the
Jordan. Hamilton, on the Clyde, 43 miles from Hobart-town. Brighton
on the Jordan, 15 miles from Hobart-town. Risdon, on the Derwent.
Richmond, on the Coal river, 4 miles from the coast, and 14 miles
from Hobart-town. Rokeby, near Ralph’s Bay. In Pembroke. Port
Arthur, on Tasman’s Peninsula, 49 miles from Hobart-town ; Buck-
land. Tenby, at Spring Bay, 49 miles from Hobart-town. Sorell, on
Pitt-water, 14 miles from Hobart-town. la Glamorgan. Swansea,
on Oyster Bay, 74 miles from Hobart-town. Llandaff. Eastbourne,
on the South Esk. In Dorset. — Gsorge-town, on the Tamar, 4
miles from its mouth, 32 miles from Launceston, and 152 miles from
Hobart-town. Ringarooma, on the Little Booybala river which flows
into Ringarooma Bay. In Devon. — Exeter, on the Tamar near
Swan Point. York and Ilfracombe, also on the Tamar. In Corn-
wall. — Eauncesion, at the junction of the north and south Esk,
which here empty themselves into the head of the Tamar, about 40
miles from the sea ; a city next in importance to the Capital. Perth ]


on the South Esk, 109 miles from Hobart-town, and 12 miles from
Launceston. Beverly, on the Benlomond, 30 miles from Launceston.
Fingal, on the South Esk, 70 miles from Launceston. Evercrecch
on the South Esk. Saint Helens, on the George’s river. In Som-
erset, — Campbelltown, on the Elizabeth, 42 miles from Launceston.
Ross, on the Macquarie, 49 miles from Launceston. Lincoln, on the
Macquarie. Maitland and Auburn, on the Isis. Tierney and Den-
bigh, on the river Lake. Tunbridge, on Blackman’s river. Corn-
wallis. Andover, on Little Swanport river. In Westmoreland.—
Deloraine, on the Meander, 32 miles from Launceston. Carrick, on
the Liffey, H miles from Launceston. Chudleigb, on the Lobster.
Longford, In Cumberland. — Bothwell, on the Clyde, 43 miles
from Hobart-town; Ebrington, on the Shannon : Marlbro’.
Bays, Gulfs, and Harbours.— Rechercheßay, D’Entrecasteaux’s
Channnel, Adventure Bay, Storm Bay, Frederick Hendrick’s Bay,
Prosser’s Bay, Grindstone Bay, Oyster Bay, Port Dairympie, Port
Sorell, Emu Bay, West Bay, Macquarie Harbour, Port Davey.
Capes. — Tasman’s Head, the southern point of Brune Island,
Tasman’s Peninsula, to the east of Storm Bay. Cape Raoul, the
southern point of Tasman’s Peninsula. Cape Pillar, the south-east
point of Tasman’s Peninsula. Cape Lodi, to the north of Oyster Bay.
St. Helen's Point, the southern point of George’s river, on the east
coast of Tasmania, county of Cornwall. Eddy stone Point, the northern
cape of Tasmania, county of Dorset. Cape Portland, in Bank’s
Strait, county of Dorset. Table Cape, on the north coast of Tasmania.
Rocky Cape, to the east of the river Trent, between Table Cape and
Circular Head. Circular Head, on the north coast of Tasmania, 490
feet above the level of the sea, between Rocky ( ape and Cape Grim,
160 miles from Launceston. Cape Grim, the north-west extremity of
Tasmania, latitude 40° 47, south, longitude 144° 50, east. Point
Hibbs, on the West coast, latitude 42° 43, south. South West Cape,
the southern extremity of the island, latitude 43° 42, south. South
Cape, about 30 miles S.S.E. from South West Cape.
Islands. —Brune Island, Maria Island, Schouten Island, Swan
Island, Great Island, Barren Island, Hummock Island, Robbin
Island, Hunter Islands, Three Hummocks Island, Albatross Island,
&c.
Mountains. —The Western Mountains run through the centre of
the island extending from north to south, enclosing several lakes,
and forming the sources of the princ’pd rivers. Mount Wellington or
Table Mountain, 3936 feet high, to the west of Hobart-town. Ben-
lomond, 4200 feet, about 100 miles from Hobart-town. Peak of
Teneriffe, or Wylde’s Craig, 4,500 feet; Quatnby’s Bluff, 3500 feet;
Mount Field 3000 feet; St. Paul’s Dome 2,500 feet &c. &c.
Rivers.— Derwent, Tamar, North and South Esk, Macquarie,
Isis, Clyde, Lake, Benlomond, St. Pauls, Break-o’-day, Meander,
Liffey, Pipers, Rubicon, Forth, Dasher, Blythe, Emu, Hillyer,
Arthur, Macintosh, Donaldson, Montague, Cain, Anson, King,
Gordon, Boyd, Davey, Swan Port, Ouse, Dee. Nive, Florentine, Styx,
Jordan, Blackman’s, Coal, Wallaby, Huon.


Islands in Bass’ Straits, between Australia and Tasmania.
King’s Island, Rodondo Island, Sir. R, Cnrtis’s Islands, Moncur
Islands, Seal Islands, Hogan’s Group, Devil’s Tower, Kent’s Gronp,
The Sisters, Cragg Island, Pyramid Island, &c.
ERRATA.
Page 33. Line 5, for “ Notse,” read Notes.
Page 33. Line 31, for “ 1340,” read 1840.
Page 49. Line 8, for “ reciving,” read receiving.
Page 49. Line 18, for “ The Sturt rises near through Mount Lofty,
flows the county of Adelaide,” read, The Sturt rises near Mount
Lofty, flows through the county of Adelaide.




