

THE NATURAL LAW
OF RELATION BETWEEN
RAINFALL AND VEGETABLE LIFE,
AND ITS APPLICATION TO
AUSTRALIA.
WITH TWO DIAGRAMS.
BY
FRANZ A. VELSCHOW, C.E.,
OF COPENHAGEN.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS, S.W.
1888.
Price One Shilling.




THE NATURAL LAW
OF RELATION BETWEEN
RAINFALL AND VEGETABLE LIFE,
AND ITS APPLICATION TO
AUSTRALIA.
WITH TWO DIAGRAMS.
BY
FRANZ A. VELSCHOW, C.E.,
OF COPENHAGEN.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS, SW.
1888.


DEDICATED TO MY FATHER.


PREFACE.
If the object of this paper has been obtained, it
will appear from its pages why the regularity
of downpour depends directly on one particular
quality appertaining to vegetable life. It will
also be proved that vapour rarefies the atmo-
sphere instead of increasing its specific gravity,
as is now supposed, for which reason the baro-
metrical measurement of the height of mountains
has hitherto turned out a failure.
As to the hypothesis that dried-up land is
covered by an air-cushion, it may as such be open
to contradiction; but as it is a natural result of
my argument, it is not likely to fall to the ground
unless it can be replaced by some other hypothesis
which gives a better explanation of the peculiar
facts it deals with and whereon it has been
founded.
If the materials have not been arranged in so
orderly a manner as might be expected in a
printed essay, it must be my excuse that, owing
to the nature of my subject, I have had no one to
assist me, and also that the language has given


me some difficulty, English not being my native,
although for some years my adopted, tongue.
To my learned friend Dr. L. Foucart, of Sydney,
M.D., F.R.C.S., I beg to offer my hearty thanks
for the interest he has been taking in my re-
searches and the encouragement he has given
me to proceed with them while all was yet
in a mist.
London, March 1888.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
SECTION I.
Introduction ........ 7
SECTION 11.
General Principle . . . . . . .11
SECTION 111.
Rarefaction of tiie Atmosphere by Vapour . .14
SECTION IV.
The Air-cushion ....... 20
SECTION V.
Evaporation . . . . . . . .29
SECTION VI.
Application of the Principle . . . . .31
Concluding Remark ....... 37
Notes ......... 39




THE NATURAL LAW
OF RELATION BETWEEN
RAINFALL AND VEGETABLE LIFE.
SECTION I.
INTRODUCTION.
During eighteen months’ sojourn in the South Sea
and Australia, while engaged in schemes of irriga-
tion and similar works of improvement, I made
some observations as to the striking contrast
between the climate of Australia and that of
China, whence I had just come; a contrast which
naturally induced me to ponder over how it could
be that this country of Australia, favourably
conditioned in other respects, should suffer so
severely from periods of drought, against which
works of irrigation afford a very incomplete
remedy, as during the dry season there is often no
supply of water even in the rivers.
Having formed a general opinion on the subject
while merely listening to the voice of nature and
to some Australian explorers, and without having


any proper books of reference by me at the time,
I soon perceived that if my constructions were
not altogether wrong I was actually facing some
undiscovered truth. But it took me a consider-
able time to pierce through that veil of prejudice
which years of scientific investigation had heaped
upon it, and I was also obliged to let the question
rest for a while, my attention being called away
by other matters.
However, when I shortly after returned to
Europe I took up the question once more; and
having now compared notes with what the sciences
teach on the subject, without being able to detect
a single argument against my opinion, I shall here
try to set forth a theory of the formation of deserts
and to give an explanation of the real cause of
deserts and droughts, thereby at the same time
indicating how far it may become possible to work
against, and in many instances eventually over-
come, the serious evil of drought.
Ihe explanation is chiefly founded on observa-
tions made in Australia, but if it holds good there
it may be equally applied to the phenomena pre-
sented by other regions when suffering from
drought.
The tropical seas being rightly considered the
chief source of atmospheric moisture, the continent
of Australia must in several respects be said to be
most favourably situated with regard to the con-


ditions necessary for a copious and regular rain-
fall, as it lies so close to this source and is on
all sides surrounded by a vast expanse of highly
evaporating seas, besides being void of such lofty
mountain ranges, which in some other regions,
Himalaya for instance, completely extract the
moisture from the atmosphere, thereby confining
the downpour to a certain limited locality. It
seems strange therefore that this country should,
in comparison to other similarly situated countries,
suffer so much from drought, and one would
naturally suppose that there must be some hitherto
unnoticed cause why the downpour in Australia
should fall so irregularly.
If we compare Australia with some other simi-
larly located country, say China or the basin of
the Amazon River in South America, we find the
latter countries covered with a luxurious ve°*eta-
tion and favoured with an abundant and well-
regulated downpour, while Australia is almost
barren or covered only with a desert-vegetation
and suffering from great irregularity of rainfall.
How can we account for this difference ? That
the winds from the ocean should carry the mois-
ture across one of these countries and not across
the other seems highly improbable, and that this is
not the case will be demonstrated in the following
pages. Nor does the nature of the soil appear to
show any sufficiently marked difference. But a
most striking contrast is nevertheless shown by


the one country being covered with trees and
plants, while the other is almost barren.
What is therefore the function of trees and
plants in producing rainfall ? For surely they
must be doing something real and tangible to be
able to “ attract ” the rain, a power for which the
general opinion gives them credit, and which
experience shows that they possess.


SECTION II.
GENERAL PRINCIPLE.
As moisture or rain is absolutely necessary for
the maintenance of vegetable life, it is generally
acknowledged that absence of rain is the cause of
deserts; but if we should reverse this thesis by
saying that vegetable life on the earth’s surface
is an absolutely necessary condition for a well-
regulated downpour, and that it therefore might
be said with just as much reason, that absence
of vegetable life is the real cause of deserts or
absence of rain, we should hardly find many
followers.
However, that such is the case, and that it is
through the important part which is played by
the exhalation of moisture from vegetation in
the household of nature by promoting circulation
among the layers of the atmosphere, thereby
enabling the moist air of the upper regions to
approach the earth’s surface, and ultimately come
down as rain, may be explained in the following
manner.
For the processes to go on continuously, both
that of absorbing moisture from the sea and that


of restoring this moisture to the land, there
must be circulation among the layers of the
atmosphere. When moisture is absorbed from
the sea, a part of the heat which the sun com-
municates to the surface of the sea is given up
to the incumbent air, which thereby acquires a
tendency to rise, but it is still more the vapour
formed, “which by being lighter than the air
helps the latter to rise.”* The rising layer of air
gives room to other layers, which in their turn
become saturated with moisture, and the circula-
tion is thus seen to go on continuously over the
ocean.
When afterwards this light and moist air is
found extending over the land at a more or less
high level, circulation must take place in the oppo-
site direction to enable this moist air to approach
the earth’s surface. To be able to rise the surface
air must become lighter than the moist air above ;
the surface air becomes expanded by the sun’s
heat, communicated to it from the earth’s surface,
but the observations made in dry localities seem to
prove that this expansion is not sufficient to make
it actually lighter than the moist air above, and
that it would be necessary for it to receive the
final impetus to rise from the exhalations arising
from the vegetation, which vapour, as we have
said, by being lighter than the air, materially
helps the latter to rise.
* Prof. Tyndall.


Consequently, when the earth is covered with
an evaporating vegetation, circulation takes place
and rain comes down regularly; but when the
earth is void of vegetation the surface evapora-
tion soon ceases, the equilibrium between the
layers then remains undisturbed, and the dry
and heavy surface air stands motionless over the
land, covering it, so to speak, with a cushion
or curtain, which prevents the moist air above
from approaching the earth, and a period of
drought sets in.


SECTION III.
RAREFACTION OF THE ATMOSPHERE BY VAPOUR.
The explanation of the existence of such an air-
cushion is based on the property pertaining to
moisture in the invisible state of diminishing the
specific gravity of the atmosphere, in which it is
contained, by its power of expansion. This pro-
perty could hardly be demonstrated by physical
experiments in a laboratory, as it would be neces-
sary that the air experimented on should not be
confined in a vessel, but the theory here set forth
goes far to prove the correctness of assuming this
property by giving an explanation of some hitherto
incomprehensible phenomena.
As however the general opinion obviously
would be against my theory, unless I could add
some more tangible proof, I find myself suddenly
and quite unpreparedly opposite the tremendous
task of having to attack and, if I can, destroy
an old-established scientific rule of highest signi-
ficance, or the law of nature I am hereby helping
into the world would not live long.
That the invisible moisture should affect the


specific gravity of the atmosphere one way or
the other seems to he beyond contradiction. As
vapour is so exceedingly light compared with
the atmosphere, its specific gravity being only
about o*ol of that of atmospheric air, one would
naturally think that it would have the effect of
making the atmosphere lighter; and if such be
the case, the process also becomes as simple as
possible: the moisture rises in the invisible state
and gravitates towards the earth as soon as it be-
comes condensed. But it is strange how difficult
we find it to appreciate those things which we
do not actually behold. Nobody ever saw the
vapours when rising in the atmosphere, because
they are invisible. It is only in the condensed
state that we see the vapours, and as they are
then always gravitating through the atmo-
sphere towards the earth, even when carried
upwards by an ascending current, it is not to
be wondered at if the atmospheric moisture
has made a general impression of being some-
thing heavy. Supposing, however, that it made
the atmosphere heavier, the moist air could
not rise at all, but would remain on the earth’s
surface, as carbonic acid does. And also, if it
made the atmosphere heavier, how would it be
possible for a moist layer of air to travel all
the way from the equator to the poles, whence
we know the moisture returns in the shape of
icebergs, or would it not much rather soon gravi-


Itafe towards the earth, Jet the wind that should
carry it be ever so strong ?
The best proof of all would, however, be if we
could make some exact measurements of the
specific gravity of the atmosphere when it is
saturated with moisture and when it is compa-
ratively dry, and the readings of the barometer
urmsh us with this proof in a very striking
nanner. The barometer always reaches its minima
luring wet and rainy weather, and its maxima
™ en the atmosphere is clear and dry. As the
arometer indicates the weight of the atmosphere,
m can only conclude from this that the column of
ir above our heads is lighter when the atmosphere
saturated with moisture than when it is dry, or,
other words, that moisture rarefies the atmosphere !
It seems therefore a strange proceeding, when
ensuring the height of mountains by means of
barometer, to deduct from the result, instead
adding to it, when the atmosphere is moist •
d this is evidently the reason why such measure-’
mts have always proved more or less a failure
e procedure, as everybody knows, is not verv
nplicated. The barometers give the exact
'ght of the column of air between the top and
foot of the mountain. What more is required
obtain the correct height is to calculate the
chc gravity of the air column. This depends
n the pressure, temperature, and degree of
udity of the air. In the calculation appear


the following six functions or factors. Observa-
tions made by—
1. The barometer.
2. The thermometer.
3. The hygrometer.
and 4. Mariotte’s law.
5. Gay Lussac’s law.
6. The weight of vapour.
As the first five of these -factors represent, or
are in themselves, Laws of Nature which cannot
be touched and which do not change, the mistake
must necessarily cling to No. 6, or the manner in
which the weight of the vapour is introduced into
the calculation.
If this suggestion is worked out a little, it will un-
doubtedly yield a very satisfactory additional proof
of the fact that vapour rarefies the atmosphere.
The mistake introduced into the calculation is
sometimes very considerable. Professor Tyndall
has thus found the astonishing difference in alti-
tude of 500-600 feet when taking measurements
of mountains in the Alps, whose height had pre-
viously been exactly measured by trigonomical
survey. How is this enormous variation in the
result possible? Surely the instruments he used
were the best that could be produced, and would
show the difference in altitude, temperature and
humidity to a fraction of a degree; and also there
can be no doubt whatever that an observer of
Professor Tyndall’s acquirements would make
most careful observations, but still the result has
proved to be a failure.
c


In the latest English edition of the renowned
French scientist, M. Reclus’ work, ‘ The Ocean,’
1887, it is said, p. 188: “On an average the
barometer is slightly higher in the northern than
in the southern hemisphere. We must neces-
sarily conclude from this that a greater quantity
of air is accumulated over the half of the earth
where the continents are grouped.” How much
more natural would it appear to account for this
contrast by supposing the atmosphere of the southern
hemisphere to be moister and therefore lighter than
that of the northern, owing to the greater expanse
of evaporating seas in the southern hemisphere.
Then again M. Reclus says that the average
amount of rain which falls in the northern hemi-
sphere is about ten inches higher than that which
falls in the southern hemisphere; while on the
other hand the larger sea area to the south of the
equator must furnish the atmosphere with more
moisture than the northern seas, and consequently
a great part of the water which flows in the rivers
north of the equator has been absorbed from the
oceans to the south of the equator.
That this strange phenomenon does not exist in
reality may be explained in the following way :
As I have just shown, the lower average of baro-
metrical readings in the southern hemisphere
indicates that the atmosphere of the southern
hemisphere is moister than that of the northern
hemisphere. But the moister the atmosphere is,


the smaller is also the evaporation from the surface
of the sea per unit of area, and the amount of rain
which falls is in proportion less. In other words
there is less circulation or greater tranquillity in
the atmosphere of the southern Pacific hemisphere
than in that of the northern, owing to the absence
of the disturbing influence -of large continents.
On the other hand I should feel very much inclined
to doubt that there is any great difference in the
amount of rainfall in the two hemispheres. At
all events, on those South Sea islands which I have
visited, the annual rainfall was invariably upwards
of 100 inches, and to obtain a fair average of the
rainfall one ought in any case to leave the results
obtained on the continent of Australia out of the
calculation, owing to the peculiar effect of the air-
cushion which covers this country.
However, the barometer shows a slight difference
in the mean pressure north and south of the equa-
tor. To equalise this difference a circuit of the
aerial currents between the two hemispheres may
probably exist, but the moisture which in this way
is conveyed from the southern to the northern
hemisphere is not likely to amount to much, as
the difference in pressure, which has to be equalised,
is very small indeed.
After this digression, which all goes to prove
that moist atmosphere is lighter than dry, I may
return to my subject by describing some essential
features of the air-cushion.
c 2


SECTION IV.
THE AIR-CUSHION
Against the existence of such a cushion of
heavy air covering dried-up land it might be
urged that, the heavy air would soon run off
the land. This is without doubt generally the
case; the heat from the sun, however, making up
from day to day for the loss. But this movement
becomes exceedingly slow when the difference in
specific gravity between the layers of air is almost
imperceptible, and for the maintenance of equi-
librium it is only necessary that the surface air
should not become actually lighter than the moist
air above. At the same time it is strange to
observe how in all cases of real deserts or areas of
continuous drought, such as the Sahara, Arabia,
Persia, and Gobi in Central Asia,* this running or
flowing off the land is impeded or prevented by
mountain ranges, which surround the dry air on
nearly all sides, thereby making it, so to speak, an
inland sea of dry air. That the mountain-ranges
do not continue all round, does not signify very
* This long chain of deserts or air-cushions may in several respects
he likened to the mythical midgards-worm of our forefathers embracing
the whole world.


much, as the flowing off may be exceedingly slow,
as above stated, but the air-cushion of course only
attains its greatest development when the border
is continued all round, as in the case of the great
desert of Sahara, a large portion of which lies
below the surface of the ocean.
It might also be said that there is no such
cushion of air during clear nights, when the
radiation of heat is very considerable in deserts
and severely felt by its chilling effect on the
earth’s surface. But it has been proved, that this
effect diminishes with astonishing rapidity in very
short distances from the surface, it being at a
distance of six feet only one-twentieth of what it
is on the surface itself.
Another reason for the maintenance of the
air-cushion may be sought for in the extraordi-
nary amount of heat, unaccompanied by moisture,
communicated to the air from a non-evaporating
surface exposed to the sun’s rays. The amount
of heat required to convert one pound of water
into vapour is under other circumstances equal
to smelt five pounds of cast iron. When this
statement is compared with the measurements of
the actual quantity of water evaporating from
the surface of an ordinary tree during the day
(see Notes), the effect of the absence of evaporat-
ing vegetation from the earth’s surface can hardly
be over - estimated. A small calculation may
illustrate this. An oak tree of average size ex-


hales during twenty-four hours about twenty
gallons of water, thereby binding the heat that
would smelt two tons of cast iron. To smelt two
tons of cast iron there would be required all the
fuel from an average oak tree. Consequently, if
we arranged this fuel into a fire that would burn
down in twenty-four hours alongside of a growing
oak tree, the heat given off by the fire would just
be counterbalanced by the cooling effect produced
by the evaporation from the oak tree during
twenty-four hours.
The air-cushion may therefore be said to have
uninterrupted occupation of the land as long as
the drought lasts, and there are generally required
some extraordinary agencies, such as thunder-
storms, to put it in motion. Sometimes, however,
it is brought into violent disturbance, and is then
severely felt, as the Fohn wind in the Alps, or the
hot winds, the so-called southerly bursters on the
coast of Australia. Then a corner of the air-
cushion has been broken off or gone astray.
When by some means or other rain at last sets
in, it generally comes in torrents, which shows that
there is generally moisture in abundance in the
atmosphere above the dry surface-air. Another
proof of this is yielded by the Sahara, in the
middle of which desert lie the high mountains
called the Torsas; these enjoy a frequent and
abundant rainfall, while the desert all round does
not get a drop of rain for months together, which




Fig I.
Fig II.
Stanford's Geog[?]. Estab[?].


shows that these mountains reach with their
summits above the surface of the sea of dry air,
like islands in an ordinary sea.
If the simile can be used without giving offence,
the deserts of the earth may be compared to dead
spots or open wounds on the terrestrial body,
covered as they are with an insatiable layer of
highly inflamed air, and it is first after having
discovered the only herb that will cure them,
namely, an evaporating vegetation, that we may
have some hope of successfully curing at all
events some of the least acute cases of the disease.
Australia may, perhaps, aptly be characterised
as being a semi-desert. Over the interior of
Australia the air-cushion is generally well de-
veloped during the summer-time, being pro-
tected against flowing off the land by the low
coast mountains. The sketch (Fig. I.) may serve
as a graphic representation of how the cushion of
air would appear in section across the Australian
continent on a calm summer’s day, if not inter-
fered with by any disturbing influences. During
excessive drought the cushion increases in bulk,
and spreads over the entire coast-line, thereby
preventing rain from falling even along the
coast. Towards winter the cushion appears,
to diminish in diameter, as the sea-breezes are
then felt much further inland than during the
summer. It is often noticed by people living on


the low plains along the coast, that, during the
summer, the sea-breeze gradually ceases to be felt
when travelling inland, until, not many miles
from the sea, it is imperceptible. The movement
of the clouds overhead, however, shows that the
sea-breeze continues to move inwards, having
merely been forced upwards by the air-cushion.
The shape in the diagram of the upper border
of the air-cushion is of course symbolical. It
might be of interest to trace the exact shape
of this upper border, and it could be done by
means of barometers. According to my notion,
the air-cushion would be thickest in the central
part. If we therefore took the average of read-
ings along a line running from the outskirt into
the centre of a desert, there would be a slight
increase of the barometrical readings. However
this may be, there will always be a marked differ-
ence in the readings taken inside and outside the
air-cushion.
While rain may fall at any time of the year
along the coast-line of Australia, it is generally
towards winter that the rainy season sets in over
the interior, at least as far as the south-eastern
more temperate district is concerned; and we
may limit our attention to the district lying south-
east of a line from Brisbane to Adelaide (see
Fig. II.), while explaining how the air-cushion
gradually disappears towards winter.
Towards winter the temperature sinks, and the


moist air above the air-cushion gets by degrees
condensed into a collective layer of clouds. For
a cloud, however, to come down as rain, it
is not only requisite that it should be collected
into raindrops, but the atmosphere, through which
the drops travel towards the earth, must be satu-
rated with moisture or nearly so, or the drops
very soon become converted into vapour again, and
the well-known phenomenon of rain in the clouds
occurs. A layer of air containing moisture in the
invisible state does not appear to discharge much
moisture to the dry air below, but the case be-
comes very different when the moisture is con-
densed into clouds. Then a mechanical operation
sets in at once. It is hardly possible to imagine
a cloud of any extent from which it does not
constantly rain or snow, or, to put it less severely,
there is a constant precipitation from clouds
(all mountaineers will agree with me), the effect
of which has hitherto not been taken duly into
account. When, namely, the minute globules,
whereof a cloud consists, have attained a certain
size, they must follow the law of gravitation by
dropping out of the cloud into the dry air below,
there to be converted into vapour. The discharge
of moisture from a cloud received by the air below
it must therefore be supposed to be very consider-
able, and as the sky over the inner plains of
Australia is generally for weeks covered with
clouds before rain ultimately sets in after a


drought, it is hereby explained how, during this
time, the clouds are constantly engaged in dis-
charging moisture, until the air-cushion at last
becomes saturated. Then the clouds no longer
discharge moisture into the air, but on the earth’s
surface itself.
This explanation of the office of the clouds is
worth noticing, as it applies in a general way to
the clouds all over the world. To quote M. Reclus
once more (page 251): “Whence comes it that
the vapours imparted to the atmosphere by the
surface of -the waters mount thus into space ?
Such is the question which presents itself naturally
to all inquiring minds, and which has formed the
subject of many mythological fables. The dis-
coveries of modern natural philosophy have solved
this great problem in a general manner. It only
remains now,” so this Frenchman sarcastically
winds up, “ to elucidate certain secondary points.”
The difficulty was how to do away with the law
of gravitation. According to the explanation
given here this law has not to be infringed in the
least degree. Whenever we notice a cloud over-
head and perceive no rain it is because the atmo-
sphere between us and the cloud is not saturated
with moisture; but, whether the cloud is diminish-
ing or increasing in bulk, it is all the time engaged
in discharging moisture into the atmosphere
beneath it, by actually raining on the top of this
atmosphere, and this accounts beautifully for the


constant transfiguration in the clouds. The phe-
nomenon is well illustrated at the commencement
of any thunderstorm. The atmosphere beneath
the thundering clouds is at first very far from
being saturated with moisture; but the atmo-
spheric electricity causes a violent contraction of
moisture into raindrops,- which rush headlong
into the unsaturated air beneath the clouds.
Most of the first drops falling evaporate in this
atmosphere, but during the downward passage
some drops unite with others into larger drops,
and only these are able to reach the ground.
A thunder rain commences therefore always with
a few widely-spread and very large drops, but
afterwards when the air approaches saturation the
falling drops increase in number, and gradually
attain the usual size of raindrops.
These remarks contain perhaps nothing new,
but they serve to illustrate my subject.
The desert theory contained in the above may
serve to give an explanation of several meteoro-
logical phenomena, as for instance the rainy seasons
of the tropics. When the spell of the air-cushion,
which is likely to exist wherever a dry season
occurs, has at last been broken by the clouds con-
gregated above, the soil by becoming wet com-
mences to evaporate; circulation is then esta-
blished, and continues until the conditions for the
gathering of clouds cease. Then the air-cushion


gradually re-establishes itself and prevails until
another rainy season sets in. Of course the
monsoons are the chief causes of the rainy seasons,
but that it should hardly rain at all at other times
during the year can scarcely be explained unless
we suppose the ground then to be covered by a
layer of unsaturated air.


ECTION V.
EVAPORATION.
As to the amount of water evaporated from the
surface of different kinds of vegetation, experi-
ments have not been carried out to any great
extent, but it has been found that there is a
marked difference in this respect (see Notes).
The evaporation from soil, when wet, is very
considerable, and much greater than that from the
surface of water; but when, as in deserts, the
bare soil receives no rain for a long time and is
exposed to the sun’s rays, the surface soil soon
becomes a dry crust, often of many feet in thick-
ness, and then the evaporation ceases.
The amount of vapour exhaled by living plants
is as a rule very considerable, their effect being
that of conveying the moisture from the subsoil into
the atmosphere like so many pumps. The evapo-
ration from grass is very high, but when the grass
of the prairies withers, during the commencement
of drought, this evaporation stops, and the prairies
have therefore entirely the character of a desert,
as long as the drought lasts.
When, on the other hand, the land is covered


by trees, the effect is quite different, as the trees,
by reaching with their roots to a considerable
distance below the surface, are able to draw the
moisture from the subsoil, so as to maintain evapo-
ration during a considerable period of dry weather.
Trees are therefore the principal feeders of the
evaporating process, and the important part
played by wide tracts of evaporating forest trees,
in preventing drought, becomes evident.
That belts of forest should have the effect of
preventing or disturbing the formation of the air-
cushion seems therefore more than probable, and
it appears actually to be the case in some parts
of India, where the so-called “ rain-tree ” is to be
found, a tree to which the natives ascribe the
peculiar effect of attracting rain; that is to say,
it has been observed that tracts of land covered
by these trees receive rain, while all the surround-
ing country gets none. The evaporation from
this tree is said to be very considerable.


SECTION VI.
APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE.
Haying given above the general outlines of a
theory of the formation of deserts, we must next
consider, how far it is practicable to make im-
provements in the rainfall on a large scale. We
may confine ourselves to describing the case of
Australia, the peculiar conditions of which country
seem to afford special advantages in this respect.
Over the dry and warm tracts of Australia, the
general heath-like vegetation is marked by a per-
vading dead blue-green colour, with dull leaves
so arranged upon the plants as to afford but little
shade. The Eucalyptus, or gum-tree, and other
trees and shrubs bearing bright honeyed flowers,
together with thickets of acacia and marsh-oaks,
give a peculiar character to the forest lands. As
the foliage of these trees generally consists of
heavy leathery leaves covered by a thick cuticular
coating , the evaporation from them is exceedingly
small, and it is therefore strange, that the gum-
tree has been thought to possess the quality of
removing the moisture from marshy places by
being planted there. This is evidently owing


to the circumstance that gum-trees, when felled,
are generally found filled with water in abund-
ance ; but this is always the case with the
vegetation found in deserts or very arid zones,
more especially with the cactus plant, which has
been proved to give no evaporation at all, so to
speak; and they thereby become prepared to
withstand excess of dry weather. As the camel
before entering on his journey across the desert
stows away a large supply of water, so these trees
of the desert prepare themselves for the dry season
by taking in water; but, like the camel, they
economize this supply, being protected against a
too rapid evaporation by their cuticular coating.
It is to the small degree of evaporating power
of the Australian vegetation generally, that the
irregularity of the rainfall may be considered due,
and the rainfall could therefore be highly im-
proved, if by some means or other we could sub-
stitute for the present vegetation another possessing
a high degree of evaporating power.
Looking upon the subject at large, the question
before us may be defined thus: Is the want of
trees exhaling much moisture in Australia due to
the impossibility of their growth there, or is it
due to accident ?
It is well in this respect to notice how the
earth’s surface has been divided into six distinct
regions, each with its own peculiar flora and
fauna, more or less independent of latitude and


temperature, but principally caused by the unsur-
mountable barriers formed against their further
spread by mountain-ranges, deserts and oceans;
and that it has been found that trees transplanted
from one of these regions into another grow there
equally well, or even better, than in their ab-
original home. Among these regions Australia,
with the surrounding islands, forms one, and it
seems therefore highly probable that European
deciduous trees or any other kind of trees of high
evaporating power, would thrive equally well in
the south-eastern temperate part of Australia, as
in Europe. The desert theory now put forward
serves to prove that the climate would be changed,
if we could manage to establish forest-belts of
deciduous trees over this south-eastern part of
Australia. Along the coast deciduous trees grow
exceedingly well, as can be seen in the botanical
and private gardens, and there can be no doubt
that they will grow equally well wheresoever the
ground is sufficiently moist. It might therefore
be a practicable undertaking to commence planta-
tions at the coast, stretching thence further and
further inland, the effect being that of breaking up
the border of the air-cushion, so as to permit the
rainfall along the coast to reach further inland.
The difficulty would evidently at first be where
to find enough of moist soil to start the planta-
tions. But the various colonies have voted con-
siderable sums of money for the conservation of
D


water in general, and particularly for the irriga-
tion of the Murray-Darling River (see Fig. II.)
The evaporation from the country hereby brought
under cultivation would in itself he very consider-
able, and could be highly augmented by planta-
tions along this line of irrigated country. In
this manner the air-cushion, too, would be likely
to be broken along this line, the ultimate effect
of works of plantation on both sides of the district
being the entire change of climate in south-eastern
Australia.
To find out the most suitable trees for planting,
it would be necessary to carry out careful
measurements of the evaporation from different
kinds of deciduous and other .trees by planting
them in large covered boxes constructed for this
purpose. Among those which hereby show the
highest amount of evaporation, such must be
chosen for plantation as will grow most easily
in the colonies besides being useful as timber
trees.
It might then even be found, that the project of
establishing the growth of these trees in Australia
would be materially assisted by nature, according
to Darwin’s theory of the survival of the fittest,
as it of late years has been found that in northern
Furope the beech is gradually superseding the
oak, which was formerly the dominant tree.
Likewise in Australia, if trees of a more vigorous
growth than the native trees are introduced, the


ultimate extermination of the latter may be
anticipated.
From a geological point of view Australia is
recognised as the remnant of some former exten-
sive continent. By being situated in the central
most elevated region of this continent, Australia
would in ail probability have formed a desert
exactly similar in position to the desert of Gobi
in Central Asia. When afterwards the surround-
ing country became submerged, this central part
preserved the once-attained characteristic features
of a desert, namely, a non-evaporating vegetation
covered by an air-cushion, in spite of the oceans
which have gradually approached the borders of
this desert. In this way it is to be explained how
it has been brought about that we now-a-days find
ourselves opposite to this phenomenon, so extra-
ordinary to all scientific minds, of a large desert-
island placed in the centre of the largest expanse
of tropical seas. But the greater this absurdity
appears, the greater is also the probability that the
work of restoring this country to cultivation will
prove to be an easy and delightful one, so that if
the work is taken energetically in hand at once,
there can be little doubt that Australia, perhaps
even before another generation has passed away,
will have shown some marked signs of ultimately
becoming one of the most fertile countries on
earth.
This geological explanation is, however, a su«--


gestion which ought to be kept quite distinct
from the other parts of my argument, which
possess all but mathematical exactitude, being
based as they are on the number of gallons of
water exhaled by an ordinary tree during twenty-
four hours, and the proved effect of this evapora-
tion on the specific gravity of the atmosphere that
absorbs it.
European domestic animals thrive wonderfully
well in Australia, except during drought, when
they often perish by thousands from starvation or
want of water. Their death is then clearly owing
to the absence of their accustomed vegetable
environments; but if the animals will thrive in
Australia these environments ought to thrive
there equally well. If it has, therefore, been
proved that the methodical introduction of these
environments into Australia would totally change
the climate and rainfall of that country, such an
undertaking ought now, when Australia is enter-
ing upon a new centennial era, for the sake of
humanity seriously to engage the attention of the
authorities and all good men in Australia and
elsewhere. This would save the poor creatures
who have been dragged so far from their abori-
ginal homes from suffering a most horrible death.
The emu and the kangaroo both walk on two
legs, and are wonderfully swift, a quality quite
necessary to them when they are guided by their
instinct to pasture and water separated by a great


distance. In the quadrupeds from Europe this
instinct has not become sufficiently developed as
yet; they cannot follow so quickly either, and so
they sink down ; but the impression left on my
mind by the sight of the white bones of their
decayed carcasses lying spread all over the
Australian plains forms a'most unhappy feature
among my otherwise pleasing remembrances of
our antipodes. The sad fate of these animals also
preaches a warning to mankind, if the influx of
people to Australia should continue without any-
thing being done to adapt the climate to their
wants.
CONCLUDING REMARK.
As the task of an engineer sometimes induces
him to make inquiries into the fields of other pro-
fessions, where he does not feel himself on safe
ground, so I have on this occasion, by being placed
before the difficulty of irrigating a country where
the supply of water to be reckoned on is highly
uncertain, tried to trace the rivers back to their
ultimate sources in the sky by making an attempt
at solving the curious problem of how to “ make
the rain come down” regularly, and when it is
most wanted. Whether I have succeeded in this
must be left to the future and to my betters to
decide; but seeing my inability to carry the
question any further, I may here safely dismiss


the subject by recommending it to the meteoro-
logist to criticise and develop the principle laid
down; to the agriculturist and the grazier, as
the. parties most directly concerned, to invest
their surplus capital in works of plantation; and
finally to the botanist and forester to find out the
proper evaporating trees, and how to plant them
with success.


NOTES.
The following are some of the results obtained
by experiments on evaporation carried out in
Europe.
1. According to Hales a sunflower evaporates
daily 1* 25 lbs. of water; taking 4 square feet for
each plant, one acre will contain 10,000 plants,
and during 120 days evaporate 1,500,000 lbs. of
water.
2. A cabbage plant evaporated during 12 hours
1 lb. 6 oz.; with 5 square feet per plant one acre
evaporated during 120 days 1,200,000 lbs. of
water.
3. A dwarf pear-tree evaporated during 10
hours 15 lbs. of water; with 20 square feet per
tree one acre evaporates during 120 days
3,600,000 lbs. of water ; another third, evaporated
from the grass between, gives almost 5,000,000 lbs.
4. One acre of bops evaporated during 120
days, 4,250,000 lbs.
5. Sachs ’ ‘ Textbook of Botany,’ p. 598, says on
movement of water in plants : In contradistinction
to the above (speaking of deciduous vegetation)
the evaporation is very small from the hard ever-
green leaves, from cactus stems, &c., which are
covered by a thick cuticular coating.


6. Two plants, he says further, of same species
ma y grow equally well, one in damp soil and dry
air, the other in dry soil and damp air.
7. From birch, maple, vine, &c., the evaporation
is very high; these have a vigorous root system.
8. In conifers and dicotyledons a strong current
passes through root and stem, dividing in the
branches.
9. Cactus-like euphorbias, stapilias, &c., show
no exhalation, and can therefore live in most
arid localities. So far Sachs.
10. Professor J. Young, Glasgow, says: “The
observations of Von Pettenhofer on a growing
oak-tree show that there is an increase of evapo-
ration from May till July, a decrease hereafter
till October, and that the amount of evaporation
is 8* 33 times greater than that of rainfall. Hence
it follows that a considerable amount of moisture
is poured into the atmosphere by vegetation, and
that the water is drawn through the roots of the
plant from the subsoil. Vegetation thus not
merely retards the surface evaporation, but also
restores the moisture, which some months before
had sunk into the deeper parts of the soil.”
LONDON : PRINTED BV EDWARD STANFORD, 65, CHARING CROSS, S.W.




