

IT • * f »
I * ,
r*.
I mass evanoaism
D R - HYMAN APPELMAN




THE SOLUTION
LIES HERE!
♦
DR. HYMAN APPELMAN
OF U.S.A
A Challenging Address on Mass Evangelism
Reprinted from The Sword of the Lord
by permission of the author
»
I
I
J
I
f
■
PUBLISHED BY LUSH STUDIOS
BOX 738 F
G.P.O. ADELAIDE
SOUTH AUSTRALIA


4 1
•i y ■
J : '>,y -
-.% ■- ■
% ■- : - - ■ ■ ; ~


FOREWORD
THIS booklet is commended to the reader for the time-
liness and essential value of the great utterance it
records. Dr. Hyman J. Appelman herein gives a
token of that zeal for the furtherance of the Gospel which
is evidently the passion of his life. His vast conception
consists with the catholic commission of his Lord. He
yearns for the glory of the Lord as it will redound through
the repentance and salvation of men by the preached Gospel.
While the emphasis of this address is on Mass Evan-
gelism any method of bringing the Evangel to the ears
of men and women is honoured. That one has been raised
'up to touch the masses for God and His Christ is a real
joy to the Church of Christ. Where the reaching of the
masses succeeds, the reaching of the individual is assured.
As Dr. Hyman Appelman serves with us in the Gospel
in our Commonwealth every faithful believer will rejoice
to see the effectual power of the Holy Spirit using him
to the salvation of many of our wandering people.
J. Wiltshire,
Organizing Secretary,
Hyman Appelman Gospel Campaign


hr •
■
' •


But the world has faced times such as these before. There have
been other dark hours. There have been other generations swept
by the winds of iniquity and corruption. There have been other
generations bowed down by the weight and the burden of Hell-
born terrors. There have been other generations who seemed to
have come to the end of all of their resources. There have been
other times when the churches of God faced adversaries, contended
with obstacles that seemed to be insurmountable. But always and
even when the enemy came in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord
raised a standard against him.
It behoves us therefore to clear channels for the activities of
the Holy Spirit. If history has any sort of message, it is that in
times such as these, the Holy Spirit has driven back the hosts of
the Adversary through sweeping revivals of religion. Christian
and secular history will abundantly verify this contention. Evan-
gelism then becomes the weapon in the hands of God and of the
people of God for a defensive as well as an offensive campaign
against the Myrmidons of Tophet. It has been proved in Heaven
and proved on earth. It is of this invincible weapon of Spiritual
warfare that we want to speak in these minutes. May we discuss
it from the standpoint of its Meaning, its Motives, its Means and
its Methods.
T
JL HAT we are living in the world’s most critical hour is a
platitude. That the world has gone topsy turvy is declared to you
in the pages of every newspaper, in the articles of numberless
magazines, in the pronouncements of every commentator. The
forces of Tophet have organized in what some of us believe to
be one mighty concentrated attack against the things of God and
of good. They have taken over the high and the low. The best
laid plans, not of mice, but of men, have gone agley. The institu-
tions, the organizations, the principles that were considered as
steady as the North Star, as steadfast as the unalterable mountains,
have come to naught as though they were no more than so many
castles in Spain. They proved to have been built on air, hot air.


The Meaning of Evangelism
rpHE meaning of evangelism is written across the pages of Holy
Writ. Its examples abound in the Old Testament, in the New
Testament, in Christian history, in the experience of each of us.
The word Evangelism itself means the proclamation of good news,
especially the good news of some battle, of some campaign, of
some victory won. In the Christian sense, it means the proclamation
of the Gospel, the glad, good news of an incarnated, atoning,
resurrected, second coming Saviour who has conquered sin and
Satan, death and the grave, time and eternity. The public preach-
ing of the pastor and of the evangelist is evangelism. The pains-
taking explanations and illustrations of the Sunday School teacher
are evangelism. The passionate pleadings of the personal workers
are evangelism. The house to house witness-bearing of the warm-
hearted Christian is evangelism. The printed page of the orthodox,
evangelical, fundamental press is evangelism. The anxious distribu-
tion of the religious tract is evangelism. The sacrificial abandon-
ment of the missionary, in teaching, in preaching, in healing is evan-
gelism. There is therefore hardly any avenue of active Christian
service that cannot be included under the term evangelism. Every
effort aimed at the salvation of perishing souls is recognized in
this all embracing word. I am sorely afraid that in the mind of
the ordinary rank and file Christian the term has been limited to
mean the occasional revival meeting scheduled upon occasion in
the routine programme of the church. Evangelism is the work,
the foundational, the fundamental work of all Christians every-
where, at all times.
Mass evangelism goes one step further. It is the concerted attack
of a church, or of churches, or of any given group of Christians
against sin and Satan entrenched in a community or a city. It
launches a church or a group of churches in one spear point on-
slaught against the Serpent. It sends out the scores, even the
hundreds, to harvest, to bring in the sheaves to the feet of the
Master. This is the climax of all evangelistic effort. It is the
acme of every sort of evangelism. It is the most challenging work
of the church. It furnishes the most effective proof of the divinity
of our blessed religion. It serves most mightily to manifest the
presence and power of the Holy Spirit. It is most discomfiting
to Satan. It puts Hell into mourning. It teaches the angels new


songs wherewith to glorify the God. It revives Chiistians,
strengthens churches, silences the bitter tongues of the gainsayers.
In every sense of the word it is eminently worth-while. Without
it, our organizations, our endeavours, our efforts, our undertakings
are emasculated, effeminate, pink tea, slap on the wrist, Miss Nancy
propositions. With it, the robustness, the heroism, the world-wide,
all men including, vision of the church is brought to bear upon
problems that fundamentally are the same in America, Europe,
Asia, Africa, Australia, the islands of the sea.
Moses specialized in mass evangelism. Elijah magnified it. Ezra
used it for the glory of the Lord. Jesus was the supreme Master
of it. Peter exulted in it. Paul majored in it. Whitefield and
Wesley saved the English speaking world with it. The blessing of
God upon it gave Charles Finney fifty thousand souls in the city of
Rochester, New York, alone. Had Moody contented himself with
a local church programme, had he been satisfied with what so
many of us preachers seem to consider sufficient to-day, there
would have been no bringing of England and America closer to
God. A galaxy of star bright names, even in the day of some of
us, Billy Sunday, R. A. Torrey, J. Wilbur Chapman, Paul Rader,
M. F. Ham, Sam Jones, Gipsy Smith, are proof abundant that the
Holy Spirit honours mass evangelism as He does no other work
in the Christian calendar. With all my soul I believe that mass
evangelism is the force that can, and, by the grace of God, will
stop the tidal wave of infidelity, of immorality, of indifference that
is deluging our land. At least let us try it, let us give it the chance
that it so definitely deserves.
The Motives for Evangelism
'T'HE motives for evangelism that constrain us to this endeavour
are as wide and varied as the whole earth, as inclusive as the
needs of men, as lofty as the love of God, as deep as the pit of
Hell, as long as eternity, as broad as time. There is first the Great
Commission of the Lord Jesus Christ. Someone has well said,
“God had one Son, and He made Him a preacher of the Gospel.”
Jesus Christ sent out His disciples not as generals, not as educators,
not as reformers, not as statesmen, not as financiers, but as humble
witnesses to the saving grace of God. They were to tell the story
of a crucified, risen, resurrected Saviour offering abundant, eternal,


free salvation to all mankind on the simple terms of repentance and
faith. Surely the Son of God knew and knows the basic, ultimate
needs of a soul, or of a world of souls, better than we ourselves
do. His Commission has never been abrogated or changed.
The Redeemer sent the Holy Spirit into the world to empower
the children of God in and for the task of witness bearing. He
was to anoint them and appoint them, to energize them and employ
them as fishers of men. The further duty of the Spirit was to
convict a world of sin, of righteousness, of judgment. All this is
part and parcel of the Divine task of evangelism. We are never
more in the plan of God, never more in the purpose of Christ, never
more in the programme of the Holy Spirit than when we are
engaged in mass evangelism. Was not Paul anointed to bear the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ “before the Gentiles, and kings, and
the children of Israel”? Does not Charles G. Finney tell of the
spiritual experience that retained him as a pleader for the cause of
Christ? Have we not all read of the baptism from on high that
flooded the soul of D. L. Moody and used him as a magnet to draw
men to the Cross?
The Church was established as the evangelizing agency of the
Kingdom. The chief reason for the existence of the Church is
that it might be a recruiting station for the armies of Prince
Immanuel. Within its walls, in its services, the saints were to
learn the message of salvation, to be inspired by its ordinances,
its rituals, its songs, to go afield to batter down the gates of Hell,
to rescue precious souls from the doom and damnation, the curse
and condemnation of their sins. A church that is not evangelistic
cannot he in the full sense of the word evangelical. A church that
is not striving with all of its interests for the salvation of immortal
souls, no matter how fundamental its doctrines, how orthodox its
practices, is backslidden, disobedient, dishonouring, and dishonoured.
There is the second motive in the great need all about us. It
is true that this world materially is a vastly different place from
what it was in the days of the Saviour and of the apostles. Govern-
ment, science, culture, society, education, home life, material advan-
tages, travel, communication, literature, are all different. But,
basically, in the matters of the soul and of the spirit, we are in
exactly the same place in which Adam and Eve found themselves
when they were driven out of the Garden of Eden. Satan is


present, raging up and down the earth. Sin is prevalent. Worldli-
ness is the curse of the day. Souls, souls, immortal, eternal souls
by the myriads, are speeding on the road to everlasting destruction.
The bowels of our compassions must be kindled within us at the
fearful contemplation of the terrible thought that, after nineteen
hundred years of Christianity, the vast majority of this world’s
inhabitants are lost, lost, lost! There is no hope for them outside
of the message that is entrusted to us, outside of the Gospel of
which we are stewards.
The third motive is that every other effort of the individual
Christian, of the local church, of the great denominations is not
sufficient to turn the tide, to do the job. Do not misunderstand
me. Not for a single second would I be guilty of minimizing the
wonderful contributions, the sacrificial, heroic accomplishments of
the churches of the land, and of the world. Not for anything in this
world would I belittle the work of the conventions, the associations,
the institutions of our various organized activities. Thank God for
the Christian colleges, for the great seminaries, for the God blessed
Bible Schools, that dot our earth. Glory to God for the thousands
and hundreds of thousands of souls that are swept into the kingdom
annually by these various agencies. But, they are not enough. There
is something lacking. We are reaching most of those in our Sunday
Schools, perhaps, those immediately connected with the families in
our churches, some few, some very few outside of this ring, while
the unchurched multitudes never darken the doors of our sanctuaries.
The fourth motive is that God has signally honoured mass evan-
gelism in the past. Would you contend that this world would have
been better off had John Wesley remained the rector of some local
church? Would you quarrel with George Whitefield for turning his
back on his Church of England ordination; position; perhaps later,
preferment, to give himself to the itinerary of an evangelist in
England and in the colonies? Would you have had D. L, Moody
remain with his Illinois Street Church in Chicago, leaving the world
alone? Can you conceive of the bitter sin Billy Sunday would have
committed had he been contented to have lived out his life in a
local charge? Should R. A. Torrey have stayed with the Moody
Church and the Moody Bible Institute and turned his back on the
call of God to circle the globe? Think these men and their lives
and labours through carefully, prayerfully. Will you not agree with


me in the definite statement that their mass evangelism ministries
added something to the work of Christians and churches every-
where God used them, that brought untold blessings and victories
which otherwise might not have been achieved? Tell me, then, do
not these dreadful times in which we live, do not these unchurched,
unheeding, unheeded multitudes call for another mass evangelistic
venture ?
The Means for Mass Evangelism
Tj-jj? means to be used in mass evangelism are in our hands,
within our reach. There is, first of all, the Bible, the blessed,
eternal inerrant Word of God, the power of God, the revelation of
God, the Bread and the Water of life. It has never lost its attraction.
Its promises are still yea and amen in the Lord Jesus Christ. Men
are still hungering and thirsting for it, some consciously, some un-
consciously. It is still the best seller in the ocean flood of every sort
of literature that is pouring from the presses of a reading world.
It still works its miracles of transforming grace in the hearts and
lives of its devotees. It is still the pillar of cloud by day and the
pillar of fire by night. It is still the Sword of the Spirit. We have
the same Bible that Jesus and the apostles used, with the holy
New Testament added to it. We have the same pages that opened
the will of God to seekers after truth. We still have the same
blazing words that thundered from the lips of a Savonarola, of a
John Huss, of a Martin Luther, the burning warnings, exhortations,
appeals, that changed the course of empires. The Bible is pre-
eminently the Book of and for mass evangelism.
There is, second, the Church. Bear with me, forgive me i
seem in the very slightest to be criticizing. That is not my purpose,
nor my intention. Beloved, no great revival has ever started in the
church. Jesus and the disciples were pushed out of the
church. Luther and his group were forced out of the catholic
church Wesley, Whitefield, their coadjutors, were pressed out of
the Church of England. William Booth seemed to be too enthusi-
astic for the branch of the Methodist church to which he belonged.
D. L. Moody was compelled to organize a group of his own. Billy
Sunday’s greatest campaigns were held in halls, in tabernacles, in
tents in all sorts of outer places. It should not be that way. With a
of my soul, I am praying that our churches, the churches of to-day


might be different. One of the chief purposes of this humble article
is to plead with the churches to open their doors to mass evangelism,
to plead zvith the churches to forget their differences, to unite in
this one grand undertaking, the carrying out of the Great Com-
mission, in a great zmy. This is the time for it. There never has
been a riper, more opportune moment. We are all of one mind
in the matter of our believing that the greatest need of the world
to-day is a revival of religion. Let us then discard our prejudices
and unite our forces that the Holy Spirit of God may have a real
weapon of w r arfare in His mighty hands. The world is waiting to
see what the Lord can and will do in this our day with a church
that is wholly surrendered to the matter of evangelism, with a group
of churches banded together in the sacred bonds of compassion,
aiming towards the one purpose of‘evangelizing.
There is third, the newspaper, the religious periodical, the secular
magazine, the radio. The press seems to be as a whole closed to
the religious, to the spiritual, unless it spreads the yellow news of
some preacher’s defalcations, of some preacher’s immoralities, across
its front pages. It is almost unknown that a secular magazine
should feature aught of the things that concern Christianity. Even
the great majority of religious periodicals are taken up with the
activities of the various churches, with the appeals for missionary
or church contributions. It is not usual to find a sermon directed
to the unsaved. The radio is being monopolized by the commercial,
the educational, the political, the recreational, the social gospel, and
otherwise. Any man now on the radio, especially on the chains,
will tell you how much more difficult it is getting to obtain time
for real, New Testament, soul-winning-appeal. It would be different
in mass evangelism. The weight of the groups of churches organized
into one voice would make the lords of the air stop and consider.
Newspaper space was 'easily obtained in Philadelphia, in 1942,
when thousands of people, representing hundreds of churches, wrote
in, phoned in, visited editorial rooms and asked for recognition.
On top of all of that, should the Holy Spirit, in answer to prayer,
honour the plans of God’s people and really interest and win the
multitudes, the newspapers, the magazines, the radios would be
constrained to take note of these mass movements affecting entire
communities, cities, states, even nations. I speak from some ex-
perience.


The Methods to be Pursued in Moss Evangelism
rpHE methods to be pursued in mass evangelism are as old as
the preaching of the Gospel. They have not been changed.
They cannot be changed. They must not be changed. The need
is the same. Souls without Christ are still in their sins, on the
road to an everlasting Hell. The Gospel is the same. It is still
contained in the facts that Jesus Christ, the virgin born Son of God,
died for our sins, that He was buried, that He rose again the
third day. The conditions are still the same, repentance towards
God and! faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. These features cannot be
modified. They stand on the unshakeable foundation of God’s in-
errant revelation. Perhaps we need a restatement of these facts in
modern, twentieth century terminology, but outside of that, we dare
not trifle with them for our souls’ sake and the sake of the souls
of multitudes of others. With the Gospel in our hearts, with the
assurance of salvation in our souls, with the message of the Cross
on our lips, we must carry on and out the Great Commission that
has been passed on to us. The methods that the Lord Jesus Christ
used; the methods that were so successful in the lives of the
apostles; the methods that have made their mighty impact through-
out the ages must be our methods also.
First, we must AGONIZE in ceaseless prayer. We must tarry
before God in endless supplication. It is as true to-day as it ever
was that, no prayer, no power; little prayer, little power; much
prayer, much power. Jesus taught us the lesson, the value, the
importance of prayer. The disciples illustrated it for us. Whatever
else might have been the case with the giants of Christianity, prayer
every one of them. "W hatever their similarities, whatever
their differences, on this one thing they all agreed, that prayei
moved God, that in answer to prayer, God moved the world.^
We must agonize for ourselves, that our own sins be forgiven,
that our own lives be on the altar, that our own souls be charged
with the Holy Spirit, that our own minds be throbbing with the
Word of God, that we ourselves be instruments of righteousness
in the hands of the Master Mechanic. We must pray for each
other. Instead of bickering, scolding, criticizing, fault finding, we
must pray for each other. Instead of minimizing each other’s
virtues and maximizing each other’s faults, we must pray for each
other’s faults and praise each other’s virtues. Instead of using


microscopes to find out differences between us, we must diligently
search out the great verities on which we agree and abide by them
in brotherly love. Instead of spending our time belabouring each
other, while the devil, in high glee, divides to rule, we must unite
on the fundamentals, and as one army, of one purpose, with one
aim, attack the strongholds of Tophet.
We must pray for the unchurched and the unsaved multitudes.
Brethren, we all believe that God answers prayer. We all believe
in the promises of the old Book. We believe that prayer changes
things. The promise still is: “If any man see his brother sin a sin
which is not unto death, he shall ask, and He shall give him life
for them that sins not unto death . . .” It is utterly, physically, in
the matter of time, impossible for us to visit, to see, to invite to
our services, to witness to every person who needs a word for
Christ. It is just beyond one lifetime. I beseech you therefore
let us* pray so hard, so long, so often, so ceaselessly, that no man,
no woman, no child, no soul, in all the world, can say and tell the
truth, “No man cared for my soul.” Yes, we must agonize.
Second, we must ORGANIZE. This is a day of organization.
Every line of human endeavour is organized, most of them highly
organized. The children of this world know well the power in
organized masses. The wets beat the drys because of their superior
organization. The unions have been able to wrest rights and
privileges from the hands of capital because of their tight organi-
zations. The Federal Council of Churches is seemingly winning
the day because of organization. We must learn these lessons.
“In union there is strength,” is a platitude only too well known
to each of us. Let us apply it to evangelism.
Let us organize every activity of our local churches, the Sunday
School, the young people’s groups, the women’s work, the Brother-
hood, the finances, the preaching services into the one spearhead of
soul winning. There is no other programme that will so vitalize
the church. Win souls and your auditorium will be filled. Win
souls and your finances will increase. Win souls and your prayer
meetings will be well attended. Win souls and your Sunday School
will grow. Win souls and your church members will forget sin
and worldliness in this passionate, breathlessly exciting, enthusi-
astic, every faculty-enlisting task. Win souls and the pulpit will
flame with zeal for Christ and for the souls of men. Win souls


and the sermons will come red-hot from the throne of God. Win
souls and the community, the city, the country will be constrained
to turn aside to see this wondrous sight of a burning church aflame
for the Lord, yet unconsumed.
Let us organize our evangelical churches in group, a local com-
munity, or an entire city, attacks at this Divine task. We may not
all agree on the form of baptism. We may not all agree on the
procedure in the holy Lord’s Supper, We may not all agree on
the minutiae of ecclesiology. We may not all agree on every
detail concerning the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. We
may not all agree on everything concerning the manner of the work
of the Holy Spirit. We may not all agree on denominational
affiliation and connections. For as long as this world stands, until
the Lord Jesus Christ appears, until we shall know even as we
are known, there are bound to be differences' of interpretation. But
on this one thing we can agree. Lost men need Christ. Christians
need consecration. These two things are the very heart of mass
evangelism. If we really love the Lord Jesus Christ; if we really
believe the Bible; if our hearts are really moved for the souls of
men, nothing, absolutely nothing, stands between us in the matter
of organizing into massed onslaughts on Satan, into massed har-
vesting of souls.
Third, we must EVANGELIZE. I believe I have said enough
about it. Permit me to press it a little more into your consecrated
hearts. We must evangelise personally, in the undertaking of
personal soul winning. Whatever our churches may do, we must
do personal work upon all occasions. Whatever programme our
denomination may pursue, we must continually and continuously
give ourselves to the task of fishing for men with hook and line.
Whether churches get together in gigantic ventures, we ourselves
cannot, dare not, must not, use anything as an excuse to keep us
from going after the lost.
We must evangelise in the local churches. Nothing that I have
suggested in this appeal should be considered as taking the place
of the local, one-church revivals. Look about you. Study Christian
statistics. Consider the churches over all the land, regardless of
connection or affiliation. It is a burning, irrefutable fact that the
glowing, growing churches are the going churches who believe in
and practice evangelism. The great majority of them major on


THE SOLUTION LIES HERE! H
annual, or even more often, revivals. God’s blessing is upon them.
The churches which are losing their crowds, growing cold and
powerless, regardless of their oft repeated excuses and alibis, have
started on their downward path because they have relegated revival
campaigns into the experiences of the past. Try it, brethren! Give
God this chance. It will work because it has worked. If your
church is slipping, call upon God and give yourself into the hands
of God for an evangelistic campaign. See your people come back.
See the prayers begin to rise in holy incense to God. See the
crowds come flocking to your churches. Hear the shout of new-
born souls. See the cobwebs of dullness and unconcern brushed
out of the way. Watch the blessed Holy Spirit come in and take
charge.
We must evangelize in the massed group campaigns. It is not
in the slightest bias when I say that America, that the world,
that God and men are waiting to see banded Christian groups
challenge Satan to the death. There is absolutely no ulterior
motive in my heart when I plead with you to undertake the heroic,
the unusual, the extraordinary. The world will not be touched by
small attempts. This is the day of great adventures. The masses
are used to the gigantic, to the superlative. They are thinking of the
millions, even of the billions. The individual can go just so far, and
it is not a very long distance in view of the terrain to be covered.
The one local church can go quite a bit further, but it will not,
because it has not made much of an impact upon the myriads. With
all my soul, I believe that the engaging of large numbers of churches
in community-wide or city-wide enterprises, will startle, stir, and
by God’s grace, save the milling crowds who now are so utterly,
so hopelessly untouched and unmoved. There is nothing to be lost
in such a programme. Watch out for, pray out, by the Spirit’s
wisdom, kill out, such objectionable features as money pulls; as
high pressure methods in preaching, in the appeals, in the invitations.
What can there be wrong with such an unselfish essay, when the
sole purpose is to crown the Lord Jesus Christ Lord of all in the
hearts of many? These meetings will pay for themselves in every
way. They can do no harm. They will do incalculable good.
Brethren, how long more shall we wait? Hell is threatening to
devour the world. The forces of evil have banded together to
destroy every vestige of the holy, the righteous, the honest, the


pure, the honourable, the virtuous, the decent. Are we going to
let them have the field uncontested ? Are we going to grant
them the victory without a battle? Are we going to try to
stop them with a skirmish here, a pitched small battle yonder, the
defense of a beleaguered sector somewhere else? No, a thousand
times no! By every drop of Christ’s precious blood, by every
promise in the Holy Word, by every memory of every martyred
hero, by the blazing torch flung to us by the stalwarts of the
Cross who fought the bitter war to the glorious victory, we are
going to combat Satan to a standstill. The promise still is that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against us. The promise still is
that we shall inherit the kingdom. The promise still is that Prince
Immanuel, our Commander in Chief shall have the nations for His
inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for His possession.
With my face in the dust before God; with my heart burning
out in a pleading appeal to the hosts of the Cross, I beseech you,
brethren, let us call America, the Christians of it, the churches of
it, to a holy crusade. Let us agonize. Let us Organize. Let us
Evangelize. With some such intense and intensive programme, as
suggested in this humble message, let us marshal our forces, and
as an army with conquering banners, let us go out to war and to
win. God grant it. For Jesus’ sake. Amen.
Reprinted from The Szvord of the Lord, July 6, 1945, by per-
mission of the author.
Brown, Prior, Anderson Pty. Ltd., 430 Little Bourke St., Melb., C.l.


“ (*J\ 0 -■ t I .
A'H -- '
. • • • - -
y-;l


