

The "Prime Jllmister's
M^ssage to Ml at Home 1918
THE BEGINNING OF A NEW YEAR the
message I should like to send to all at home is an appeal
to do their utmost in these later trying days for the cause
for which the democracies of the world are now leagued
together. The sacrifices which the men—and the women
also—are making at the front we all know. Despite all
that they have gone through, they are still facing frost
and mud, privation and -suffering, wounds and death,
with undaunted courage that mankind may be freed from the tyranny of militarism
and rejoicfe in lasting freedom and peace.
NO SACRIFICE that we who stay at home are called to make can equal or
faintly approach what is daily and hourly demanded of them. So long as
they are called upon to endure these things let us see to it that we do not take
our ease at the price of their sacrifice. There is nobody too old or too young or too
feeble to play a part. If we cannot fight in person, we can fight by the vigour
and good will by which we do our work, the wisdom of our economy, the
generosity with which we meet the nation’s financial needs.
AT THE MOMENT lending and saving are specially important. Money
is essential to victory, and economy is the condition of financial power. It
is therefore the duty of all to save what they can and to lend what they can to
the community at this time. Every man, woman, and child ought to make it
a point of honour to increase his holding of National War Bonds as the year goes
by, bonds which have behind them the whole strength and credit and resources
of Britain itself. V
TO EVERY CIVILIAN, therefore, I would say: Your firing line is the
works or the office in which you do your bit; the shop or the kitchen in which
you spend or save; the bank or the post office in which you buy your bonds. To
reach that firing line and to become an active combatant yourself there are no
communication trenches to grope along, no barrage to face, no horrors, no wounds.
The road of duty and patriotism is clear before you; follow it, and it will lead ere
long to safety for our people and victory for our cause.
I
Issued by the National War Aims Committee.
